READER,
TO satisfy the importunity of some Friends, rather then out of any
presumption that my Testimony can prove any credit to this excellent piece, I
have ventured to give thee my poor judgment conscerning it. Upon perusal I
observed in the whole such a blessed marriage between Piety and Art, such a
sweet condescension to the meanest capacities, such a spiritual handling of
spiritual truths, such clear discoveries of the state of Nature, and the state
of grace; as I could not but conclude, the Author (though the work had not born
the name of Cotton) was a workman that need not be ashamed. Withal let me tell
thee by experience, such a blessed Gale of the Spirit of grace (who assisted
the Author in inditing) does accompany the religious perusal thereof, that I am
very confident, if there be the least spark of grace in thy heart, it will
make thy smoking flax break forth into an heavenly flame of Light and Love.
While I perused it to correct the many and manifold errors of the former
Impression, the heavenly matter therein contained, both poynted at, and I hope
corrected more and greater errors in my heart. If thou be bad The Reverend
Author is peremptory that the word read does not convert: In this I must at
least (...), if not dissent.
it may make thee good, but if thou be good, I am sure it will make thee
better, which is the hearty prayer of him who is,

Feb. 26. 1657. Thy souls Friend, and the Servant of thy Faith, Roger Drake.

Place this before the Title,

A Practical Commentary, OR AN EXPOSITION WITH Observations, Reasons, and Uses
UPON The First Epistle General of JOHN.

By that Pious and worthy Divine Mr. JOHN COTTON, Pastor of Boston in
New England.

The second Edition much corrected and enlarged, with the Addition of an
Alphabeticall Table not in the former Edition.

LONDON, Printed by M. S. for Thomas Parkhurst, and are to be sold at his shop
at the Three Crowns over against the Great Conduit at the lower end of
Cheapside, M.DC.LVIII.

TO THE READER,
CHRISTIAN READER,
THese following Notes upon the First Epistle of St. John, falling by
providence into my hands, I was unwilling to detain them by me, and make only a
private advantage of them, but delivered them into the hands of my Friend, Mr.
Thomas Parkhurst, a Bookseller in London, that if by the judgmenr of Reverend
Divines (to whom he intended to communicate the same) they might be found
useful for the Public, they might see the light: And having communicated
those accorddingly to such men whom the whole Nation may justly honor for piety
and ability, and finding their approbation, as to their worth, their
usefulness, and consequently their publishing, I have thought good to prefix
an Epistle; in which mistake not, I neither intend a commendation of the Author
or the Work; if I should undertake it as to the Author, I might be answered as
Antalcidas did in the like case, to one, who having prepared a Book, he asked
of him the argument of it, who answered, it was Herculis Encomium; to whom
Antalcidas, Quis illum vituperat? Supervacaneum existimans in eo laudando
sumere operam quem uno ore praedicarent omnes: And the like might justly be
retorted upon me, should I go about to magnify the Author of this following
Exposition. What needs this? Who ever dispraised, or durst under ^alue him* He
was a burning and shining light, famously (...) abroad and at home, as an
instrument of great glory to his God, great good to many souls; and (which is
an honor that all preachers reach not) with the expiration of his Ministerial
breath, he finished not his Ministerial work; for though he be dead, yet he
speaks, as in this, so in diverse other excellent Treatises.

And as not of the Author, so neither to the Work it self, shall I say ought
this way. I judge it sufficient to render it desirable, to tell you it was the
Work of that learned man; yet more, of that gracious man, and faithful Servant
of Christ, Mr. John Cotton, as is assured me by a reverend and godly neighbor,
Mr. Tho. Oresby Minister of Hackwell in Essex, who well knew him, and heard him
preach much of it: Such was the Author, that it commends the Work to attest it
his; and yet such is the Work it self, that though the Author were unknown, it
could not however but meet with reverent and ready entertainment for its own
sake. Had his own hand put it forth, doubtless it had been more polisht then
now it is, more enlarged and refined: But Christians know how to be charitable,
and to deal with the Works of Gods servants, brought into the world after
themselves were taken out of the world, as we do by little Orphans whose
Father is dead, if we see them any ways misused, or subjected to any wants, we
reproach them not, but pity them, because their Carers for, are taken from
them: And yet for the Work as it is, let me be bold to say, It may stand
amongst none of the meanest helps to saving knowledge.

It Is true, we live in a curious and carping age, an age wherein much
knowledge, but (shame and grief to speak it) little obedience. Oh England!
great are thy helps, thy means high, as to grace, and the things of thy peace,
as to the knowledge of God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, whom to know is
eternal life; but who is he (except he has bowels of brass, and an heart of
iron) that mourns not at thy requital? Are not unthankfulness, disobedience,
contempt, wantonness, together with other sins, (whose name put them together
is legion, for they are many) and at the best, a brain and notionall knowledge;
the fruits, that if God come to search thee with candles, he shall find thee
only laden with.

Take heed yet a little while, and you shall hear a voice, Give an account of
your stewardship; all talents and prizes of this nature must be one day
accounted for, with which no people stored like thy self. What week almost
passes thee, wherein God affords thee not some additionall supply or other to
thy old store? Lo here another price put into thy hand to get wisdom, in the
search and reading whereof thou shall not be distracted with vain, unnecessary,
and unedifying, controversies; but they are plain, sound, and saving truths
that here present themselves, and those stomachs that stand affected to such
meat, are invited.

But I have done, it being all my Work to attest whose Work this was; and being
credibly informed that it will come forth recommended to thee by a more
skillful and artificial hand, abler to judge, and judging to set forth the
worth and workman; therefore commending thee to him, and him with thy self to
Gods blessing, I rest

From my Study in Much wakering in Essex, October. 15, 1655. A Servant to both,
in Christ, and to the Church of Christ, Chr. Scott.

IT is sufficiently evident by the preceding Epistle, and by many other
arguments, that the ensuing Sermons were preached by Mr. John Cotton, whose
name is so deservedly precious among the Saints of God, that it cannot but
encourage them to read them, and has invited me to allow them to be printed
for the public good.

Edmund Calamy.

Books lately printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Sign of the three Crowns,
over against the great Conduit, at the lower end of Cheapside.
A Learned Commentary, or Exposition upon the first Chapter of the second
Epistle to the Corinthians, by Dr. Richard Sibbs, published for public good by
Thomas Manton, Folio,

There is newly come forth Mr. William Fenner, his Continuation of Christ's
Alarm to drowsy Saints, with a Treatise of effectual Calling: The Killing
Power of the Law: The Spiritual watch; New Birth; A Christians ingrafting into
Christ: A Treatise on the Sabbath, which were never before printed, bound in
one Volume, Fol. and may be he had alone of them that have his other Works, as
well as bound with all his former Works, which are now newly Printed in the
same Volume with this.

Truth brought to light, and discovered by time, or an Historical Narration of
the first fourteen years of King James, in 4o.

The Journal or Diary of a thankful Christian, wherein is contained Directions,
for the right method of keeping and using, according to the Rules of Practice:
a Day-book of National and public, personal and private passages of Gods
providence, to help Christians to thankfulness, and experience. By John
Beudle, Minister of the Gospel at Barnstone in Essex, large 8o.

Mr. Robinsons Christians Armor in large 8o.

Book of Emblems, with Latin and English verses made upon (Lights) by Robert
Farly, small 8o.

Grace to the Humble, as preparation to the Sacrament in five Sermons by D.
John Preston.

Picturae Louventes, or Pictures drawn forth into Characters, 12o.

A most Excellent Treatise containing the way to seek Heavens Glory, to fly
Earths vanity, to fear Hells horror, with godly prayers, and the Bell-mans
summons, 12o.

Johnsons Essays expressed in sundry Exquisite Fancies.

The one thing necessary; By Mr. Thomas Watson, Minister of Stephens Walbrook,
8o.

Sion in the house of mourning, because of Sin and Suffering, being an
Exposition on the fifth Chapter of the Lamentations, by D. S. Pastor of
Vpingham, in the County of Rutland.

Groans of the Spirit, or the Trial of the Truth of Prayer.

A Handkercher for Parents Wet-eyes, upon the death of their children or
friends.

The Dead Saint speaking to Saints and Sinners living, in several Treatises,
viz. On 2 Samuel 24.10. On Cant. 4.9. On John 3.15. On John 1.50. On Isa. 58.2.
On Exodus 15.11. Never published before. By Samuel Bolton, D. D. late Master of
Christ's College in Cambridgs.

Four profitable Treatises very useful for Christian practice, viz. The
Killing power of the Law: The Spiritual Watch; The New Birth; Of the Sabbath.
By the Reverend William Fenner, late Minister of Rochford in Essex.

Peoples Need of a living Pastor, at the Funeral of Mr. John Frost, M A. by Mr.
Zach. Crofton.

A Treatise against the tolleration of all Religions. By Mr. Thomas Edwards.

Chatechizing Gods Ordinance in sundry Sermons, by Mr. Zachary Crofton,
Minister of Buttolphs Aldgate London, the second Edition corrected and
augmented.

A Coppy-book methodized and engraven, by Thomas cross, wherein fair writing
is expressed, by which one may learn to write of himself, that can but read.

Dr. Stoughtens thirteen Sermons containing the form of sound words, and some
other Treatises.

The godly man's Ark. or City of Refuge, in the day of his distress, discovered
in Diverse Sermons, the first of which was preached at the Funeral of Mrs.
Elizabeth Moore. Whereunto is annexed Mrs. Elizabeth Moors Evidences for
heaven, composed and collected by her in the time of her health, for her
comfort in the time of sickness, By Ed. Calamy, B. D. and Pastor of the Church
at Aldermanbury.

Enchiridion Judicum, or Jehosaphats Charge to his Judges, opened in a Sermon
before the Right Honorable the Judges, and the Right Worshipful, the Sheriff
of the County Palatine of Lancaster.

Together with Catastrophe Magnatum, or King David's Lamentation, at Prince
Abners Incineration. In a Sermon meditated on the Fall, and preached at the
Funeral of the Right Worshipful John Atherton of Atherton, Esquire, High
Sheriff of the County Palatine of Lancaster. By John Livesey Minister of the
Gospel at Atherton.

There are going to the Press some new pieces of Mr. William Fenners, late of
Rotchford in Essex, never yet printed, preserved by a special Providence, one
of which is a Second part of his wilful impenitency; being five Sermons more
that he preached upon the 18. of Ezekiel and the 32. verse.

Now in the press. A Theater of flying Insects wherein especially the manner
of right ordering the Be is excellently described with discourses Historical
and Physical concerning them with a Second part of meditations and
observations Theological and Moral in 3 Centuries upon the same subject by
Samuel Purchase M. A. in 40.

The Gale of opportunity and the Beloved Disciple by Thomas Froysell, in 8o.

A COMMENTARY UPON The First Epistle general OF JOHN.
1 JOHN 1.1, 2, 3, 4. That which was from the beginning, which we have heard,
which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have
handled of the Word of Life, etc.


THE Children of God, as in the whole course of their lives they are exercised
with many conflicts of Conscience, so with this Doubt especially, at their
beginning to enter into a course of Christianity, Whether they indeed do
belong to the election of Grace, and are indeed amongst the number of those
that belong unto God.

And because Faith is very weak then in them for the most part, it comes to
pass, that their doubtings are strong, they doubt much of this their Estate:
And from doubtings, arises trouble of mind, and terror of conscience. When the
Sun is in its full strength, and shines brightly, there are no Clouds, or
Vapors, or Mists arise, but only when it is low, at rising or setting: so is
it with Faith and Doubting; for the removal of which, and for the settling of
our souls, in the assurance of Gods love, and for the pacifying of our
consciences with the Peace of God, and filling our hearts with joy in the Holy
Ghost, St. John moved by the Holy Ghost penned this Epistle, as Chap. 1. v. 4.

And because our joy cannot be full, except we enjoy union with him, and
communion with his Children; Therefore that end also he opens, verse 3. And
because these are both begun and preserved by, First, Receiving of the truth of
Doctrine; Secondly, Walking in holiness of life.

And Contrariwise hindered and interrupted, First, By Error in Doctrine;
Secondly, Wickedness and uncleanness of life; Therefore he every where
inserteth instructions, both for, First, Inlightning our minds with truth of
Doctrine; Secondly, directing our steps with precepts of holiness of life.

And from both he teaches us to gather marks to our selves of our Estate with
God, that so our joy may be full.

In the Text he instructs us in the knowledge of the Truth of this point of
Doctrine, what we are to think and believe, concerning the Doctrine of the
Apostles, whether preached or written. Concerning which Doctrine, two things
are here delivered.

First, The Subject of it, Christ Jesus; First, In himself, and that first as
God, as from the beginning eternal, secondly, as man, as being heard, seen,
and sensible. Secondly, As in himself to us, the word of life, verse 1.

Secondly, The end and scope of it; First, Subordinate, Fellowship with the
Apostles, and Saints, and with God, verse 3. Secondly, Supreme, our fulness
of joy, verse 4.

That which was from the beginning.] Here are two questions,

First, Why rather is it said here, that was from the beginng, then he which
was from the beginning?

Secondly, What is it here to be from the beginning?

First, It is here said, that which was from the beginning, to signify and set
forth unto us, a double nature in one and the same word of life, in one and the
same person of Christ; If he had said, he who was from the beginning, whom we
have seen, etc. It might have been thought that the same word of life was in
one and the same nature, both from the beginning, and seen, and heard, or else
that one person was from the beginning, another person seen, and heard, but
when he says, that word of life, which was from the beginning, and that which
we have heard, and seen, etc. he plainly insinuates, that there is (as they
say) aliud and aliud, in the word of life.

There was something of the word of life, that was from the beginning, as
namely his Godhead; And again, something in the same word of life that was
heard, and seen, etc. as his Manhood, and withal, that this was not another
person, but another thing, another nature in the same person. This serves to
confute those two Ancient Heresies of Eutiches and Nestorius, he confounding
the Natures this dividing the persons of Christ. Eutiches confuted, because
something there is of the word of life that was from the beginning, something
of the same word of life that was heard, and seen, etc. that which was from the
beginning, was not the same thing which was heard, and seen, etc. and that
which was heard, and seen, etc. was not the same thing which was from the
beginning.

Nestorius is confuted, because both that which was of the word from the
beginning, and that of the word which was seen, and heard, were both of the
same word of life, both the natures of one and the same person.

Secondly, Again, if something there be of the same word Eternal, and again
something of same the word Sensible, then there is no confusion of properties
in the person of Christ. The Apostles preach such a Christ, as of whom
something is from the beginning, something again heard, and seen, that of the
word which was from the beginning, that of the word was not sensible, and that
of the word which was sensible, was not that of the word which was Eternal.

And therefore such as teach the flesh of Christ to be every where (as the
Germans do) or every where in the Sacraments (as the Papists do) they do not
observe the distinction here observed by the Apostle.

This Phrase of speech (from the beginning) is ambiguous, and must be
interpreted according to the nature of the thing to which it is attributed.

First, Sometimes it signifies from the beginning of the story of Christ, Luke
1.2.

Secondly, The time of the delivery of the Law, 1 John 2.7.

Thirdly, Institution of a thing, Mat. 19.8.

Fourthly, Of the Fall, John 8.44.

Fifthly, Of the Creation, Joel 2.2.

But none of these meant here: not the First, nor Second; for before Abraham
was, he was, John 8.58. not the Third, Fourth, nor Fifth; for he himself
created all things, John 1.3.

There is another from the beginning, which is higher than all these, namely
from the beginning of eternity, which wanting beginning, implies he was before
all beginnings, Prove. 8.23.

Doct. And because there cannot be two Eternals, but one Eternal, and that is
God; therefore he also is Eternal, God with the Father, and Holy Ghost.
This is not to be omitted, because it is plain, but to be preached, because it
is certain; especially since some of late have been so far bewitched by Satan,
as to seal the contrary with their blood.

First, This is proved, first, by the Names and Titles given to him. 1. Very
God, 1 John 5.20. Romans 9.5. 2. Jehovah, Exodus 3.2, 4, 6. 3. Savior, Mat.
1.21. which none is but God, Isa. 43.11. Hos. 13.4. And who was able to save us
from sin by satisfying Gods wrath, but God?

Secondly, By the Essential Properties of the Godhead agreeing to him. 1.
Knowing the heart and reins, Rev. 21.23. yea all things, John 21.17. 2.
Omnipotency, John 5.19. 3. Omnipresence, Mat. 18.20. John 3.13. 4. Eternity,
John 8.58. and 17.5. 5. And here equality with his Father, without Sacrilege,
Phil. 2.6.

Thirdly, By his works of, First, Power, 1 Creation, Heb. 1.2. Col. 3.16. and
that for his glory. 2. Providence, Heb. 1.3. 3. Miracles, John 14.11.

Secondly, Grace, 1 Election, John 13.8. 2 Redemption, Gal. 3.13.

Thirdly, Giving of the Spirit, John 4.10. John 7.39.

Fourthly, Giving of eternal life, John 10.28. Romans 6. ult.

Fourthly, By the Worship ascribed to him, 1. Prayer, Acts 7. ult. 2. Faith in
him, for else how could we call on him? Romans 10.14. John 1.12. Jer. 17.5.
Takes no place in him, but contrary, Psalm. 2.12.

Use 1. To confute all those Blaspemous heresies, whereby Satan has labored
to overthrow the Truth of the Godhead of Christ; as that of the Cerinthians,
Ebonites, Arians, which taught him only to be pure man, to have no being
before the Virgin Mary, or at most before the Creation.

Secondly, To Terrify all such as are Enemies to his Kingdom, Psalm. 2.12.
Luke 19.14, 27.

Thirdly, To Comfort all such as are Christ's, John 10.28. Ps. 23.1. Isa. 43.1,
2. because they were elected in Christ, Ephesians. 1.4. and our life is hid with him,
Col. 3.3. Therefore it is both sure and unchangeable, for he is so.

Fourthly, To exhort us to worship him, Mat. 28.9. as an Eternal God, God from
the beginning; Moses reproved the Israelites for worshipping new Gods, Deuteronomy.
32.17. Gods whom their Fathers did not know, but him they knew and worshipped;
Moses himself, Deuteronomy. 33.16. Jacob, Hos. 12.4. Genesis 48.15, 16. Abraham, Genesis
22.11, 12.

Now his Worship consists in the duties of Faith and Repentance, for those
are the parts of Gods Worship which he has revealed to us, and requires of us.

First, In the Duties of Faith, John 14.1. and here

First, Do thou receive any thing from God? receive it in the sight of thine
own unworthiness in thy self, and so thou worshipest him, through whom God
does accept thee, and powers his blessings upon thee, Ephesians. 1.3. for none but
God could receive them for us from all eternity.

Secondly, Do thou give any thing to God? offer up any obedience? do it in
the sight of thine own weakness and imperfection, and so thou worshipest him,
through whom our lame sacrifices are acceptable, Col. 3.17. for none but God
could do this for us.

Thirdly, Do thou want any thing? seek unto God in the name of Jesus Christ,
and believe thou shall receive it, and so thou do honor him, John 16.23, 24.
for none but God can procure this for us.

Fourthly, Does Satan at any time tempt thee to doubt of thy reconciliation
with God? believe that Christ Jesus is God, and therefore has made full
satisfaction and propitiation for thy sins, 1 John 2.1, 2. for God can fully do
this for us.

Fifthly, Do thou doubt of the truth of any of the promises of God, through
unbelief? believe they are Yea and Amen in him, and so thou worshipest him, 2
Cor. 1.20. for God can call things that are not, as though they were.

Secondly, In Duties of Repentance, as

First, Do thou at any time (as thou ought continually) remember thine old
sin? O! remember withal, him whom thou crucifiedst by them was the Eternal
God, the Lord of glory, and that will work a godly sorrow, Zech. 12.10. to see
him to abase himself for my sake.

Secondly, Does Satan tempt thee at any time to commit any sin? O! remember
thereby thou should trample under foot the blood of the Son of God, who has
saved thee from thy sins, Heb. 10.29.

1 John 1.1. That which we have heard, etc.

As something of the word of life, was eternal from the beginning, so
something was sensible, which was 1 Heard, 2 Seen and looked upon, 3 Handled.

First, For the meaning of this, what is that of the word which first he says,
we have heard?

They heard of him not a word of rumor, but 1. His Doctrine, John 6.68. 2. The
Testimony which his Father gave of him, Mat. 17.5, 6. 2 Pet. 1.17.

Secondly, What is that of the word which he says, we have seen?

1. His Flesh, John 1.14. 2. His works, especially his Miracles, John 2.11. 3.
His Estate of, First, Humiliation, 1. His poor and despicable life, Mat. 8.20.
2. His Agony, Mat. 26.37. 3, His Accusation and Arraignment, Mat. 26.28. John
20.12. 4. His Death, John 19.26. 5. His Burial, Mark 14. ult. John 19. ult.


Secondly, We have seen the Estate of his Exaltation.

1. A glimps of it, or preamble to it, Mat. 17.2, 3. 2 Pet. 1.16. 2. His
Resurrection, John 20.8.20. 3. His Ascension, Acts 1.9, 10. 4. His Sitting at
the right hand of God, Acts 7.55.
Diverse of these things seen, St. John saw in a more familiar manner, than the
most of his Apostles; Christ taking only with him Peter, and James, and John,
to behold; 1. His raising to life Jairus Daughter, Mark 5.37. 2. His Glory in
the Mount, Mat. 17.1. 3. His Agony in the Garden, Mat. 26.37.


Thirdly, What is that of the Word which he says, we have handled, and that
with our hands? which adds an Emphasis of Certainty, as before.

1. Before his Resurrection as familiarly conversing with him, as when he
taught Peter by the hand, Mat. 14.31. When he washed their feet, Joh. 13.5.
When John leaned on his breast, John 13.15.

2. After his Resurrection, John 20.25, 27. Many observations might here be
gathered concerning the certainty of the Apostles Doctrine, who taught nothing
but what they had so sensible knowledge and experience of; but these I refer to
the third verse.

Doct. He that was from the beginning, truly God, was in the fulness of time,
true man.
A plain Doctrine you will say, and well known to the meanest in this
Congregation; be it so, yet it is fit to put you in remembrance of it, 2 Pet.
1.12, 13. Romans 15.14, 15. 2 Timothy 2.8.

But you will say unto me, Were it not much better to omit to speak of the
person of Christ, and rather to speak of the benefits we receive by him,
Justification, Adoption, Sanctification, by the Spirit of God, Faith, Hope,
Love, Repentance? etc.

Take heed this be not one kind of spiritual Harlotry and adultery. If you
should see a Virgin affianced to a man, to desire still to hear and speak of
the gifts and presents he has, and will bestow upon her, as Rings, Bracelets,
Jewels, etc. and to have no mind at all to hear or speak of his person, would
you not say she loved his gifts and his tokens more than himself? so here, if
we find our souls affected to Christ (I would to God, yea it were the joy of my
heart, if I could draw you to be in love with the Gifts and Graces of Christ,
our hearts are dead and dull even at the mention of them, how much more at the
mention of his person or nature) yet thou that have tasted of his bountiful
Gifts and Graces, be led on further, willingly to hear and speak of his person,
( Cant. 5.9 When the Daughters of Jerusalem had asked of the Spouse of Christ,
what her beloved was more than another beloved? she in 8 verses following,
enters into a long, and large, and lovely description, not of what he had given
her, but of his person) especially seeing this part of his person, his human
nature is an excellent gift of God to us, and the foundation of all the rest.
Yea what Doctrine soever John teaches us in this whole Epistle, tends to
this end, that our joy may be full, which is a special benefit arising from
all, Chap. 1.4. Now the manhood of Christ is proved by two reasons, First, By
the Titles given to him. Secondly, By the properties of a man agreeing to him.


First, By the Titles given to him, he being called 1 Flesh, John 1.14. Romans
1.3. Heb. 2.14. and this Flesh is not fantastical, but palpable, John 20.27.
2 Man, Acts 17.31. 3 Son of Man, Luke 19.10. Acts 7.56. 4 Seed of David, 2 Timothy
2.8. Abraham, Gal. 3.16. The Woman, Genesis 3.15. 5 Emanuel, Isa. 7.14 Mat. 1.23.

Secondly, By the Properties of a Man agreeing to him, 1 Born of a Woman, Mat.
1. ult. 2 Hunger, Mat. 21.18. and with it thirst, John 19.28. 3. Weariness,
John 4.6. 4 Grief and Sorrow, Isa. 53.3, 4, 10. Mat. 26.38. and from it
weeping, John 11.35. Sighing and groaning, John 11.33. 5 Bleeding and sweating,
Luke 22.44. 6 Dying, John 19.30.

Now for the Reasons why Christ became man, they are

First, That he might be a middle person, or of a middle nature, between the
persons offending, and the persons offended; if he had still remained God, he
had been the person offended with us; or if only man, then he had been the
party offending: and therefore that he might be of a middle condition, it was
needful he should take upon him our nature.

Secondly, That that nature of ours which had offended, might make
satisfaction; if he had not taken on him our nature, he could not have
satisfied for our sins, Heb. 2.16.

Thirdly, That he might be able to suffer death for us, Heb. 2.9. which God
could not do.

Fourthly, That he might be the better compassionate of our infirmities, Heb.
2.17, 18.

The Reasons why Christ became not an Angel, which the Schoolmen render, are
diverse, principally these;

First, Angels being created all at once, and not propagated one from another
by generation, though many of them fell, yet God lost not the whole kind,
because many of them stood: but men proceeding all from one stock or root, he
being corrupt, all his Offspring were in the same Estate; so that if God had
not provided this means of Christ's incarnation for him, he had lost the
Creature wholly.

But to this I answer, God might have made many men once, as well as Angels,
and so might have provided another means of saving some of them, as he did the
Angels, but that he would set forth the abundant riches of his love to man, in
saving them, by giving of his own Son.

Again, though all men had perished, they had had but their desert, and God
might have had more service, by one Angel redeemed, than by many millions of
men.

Secondly, The Angels fell of themselves, but man by their procurement.

To this also I say, That the greater the Angels sin was, the greater is their
misery, and the greater their misery is, the greater mercy had God showed to
have redeemed them.

Thirdly, The Angels conceiving things, not by discourse, but by a present view
of all things that any way pertain to those things they turn themselves unto,
they do all things with so full resolution, that they cannot alter their mind,
or repent; but man conceiving things by discourse, finds them in the event
many times to prove otherwise than he expected, and so may come to alter his
mind, and be fit to be brought to repentance.

To this take this answer, That the Angels being of a finite nature, must needs
conceive one thing after and upon another, which is discourse, and so subject
to error, and so of themselves capable of repentance; was not the Devil
deceived in Job? Job 1.11.

Fourthly, The Angels being pure, immateriall, intellectual Spirits, dwelling
in the presence of God, and in the light of his countenance, could not sin by
error or mis-perswasion, but of purposed malice, which is the sin against the
Holy Ghost, irremissible; but man fell by error and mis-perswasion.

For answer hereunto, take this, That though the Devils dwelt in the presence
of God (which cannot be proved) yet they received no more light than God would
communicate to them, and who can say that God communicated so much to them, but
that upon wilful not attendance to him, they might be deceived?

Fifthly, As men have a time, after which there is no place left for helping or
altering their Estate, so was it meet Angels should have the like; that time to
men is bodily death, which because Angels are not subject to, it was not unmeet
their time should be their first spiritual death, their first sins, hence
Damascen says, Hoc est Angelis casus, quod hominibus mors.

To this I say, That the Angels might have had another time, beyond which there
has been no place for repentance, namely not their first sin, but their
wilful rejecting of a Savior, if he had pleased to have offered them any.
Thus you see that all these (and so are the rest) but men's devices and
conjectures; the true reason you have, John 3.16. Gods love to us, which also
causes the Lord to say, as Jer. 8.4. God neither turns nor returns, Angels
turn, but return not, men both turn and return, through this unspeakable love
of God.

Use 1. To confute the Heresies of Eutiches and the Maniches, who taught Christ
had no true, but a fantastical body.

Secondly, To stir us up to some duties, 1 of Meditation, 2 of Practice.

First, Of Meditation, and that 1 Concerning God, and 1 Concerning his Justice,
so severe against sin, as all the mere men in the world could not satisfy for
it, and therefore Christ became man, and that is the reason why the damned are
tormented, because they cannot satisfy.

Secondly, His mercy and and love to us; the Father to abase his Son, the Son
to abase himself for us.

Thirdly, His Wisdom, to find out such a means to save us, when he passed by
the more glorious Angels.

Secondly, Concerning our selves, who were in so wretched a condition, as the
blood of Bulls and Goats could not save us, men and Angels could not help us,
only the Son of God must empty himself of Glory and Majesty, and become man
for us: if therefore thou have not part in Christ Jesus, the same sins which
plucked Christ from Heaven to Earth, will pluck thee from the Earth to Hell.

Secondly, It may stir us up to some duties of practice. 1. To teach us
Humility, Phil. 2.6, 7. Psalm. 22.6.

1. By Considering our own Estates, and the misery thereof, which caused him to
take upon him the form of a servant.

2. By Considering his example, who took upon him the form of a servant, to be
serviceable to us; so ought we to abase our selves to be serviceable to our
Brethren.

Secondly, To stir us up to labor to be united to his nature, as he was to
ours, 2 Pet. 1.4. he became the son of man, that we might become the sons of
God; we cannot answer the intent of his incarnation better.

Thirdly, To move us to an holy thankfulness and joyfullnesse in the Lord, as
1. Zachary blessed the Lord in this behalf, Luke 1.68. 2. Mary magnified him,
Luke 1.46. 3. John leaped at it for joy in his Mothers belly, Luke 1.41. 4.
Abraham long before, John 8.56. he saw it in the promise, and laughed, Genesis
17.16, 17. and hereupon called his Son Isaac. 5. The Angels, who have less
benefit than we hereby, Luke 2.14.


And sure if John wrote every Doctrine in this Epistle, that our joy might be
full, as chap. 1.4. then hence also let us raise up our hearts to this holy
affection, this is the fittest exercise for Christmas, otherwise usually spent
in carnal delights, because men have no part in this joy.

Doct. If the Apostles saw and heard these things of the word of life, then
blessed were they, Luke 10.22, 23.
Why? Because of his comely beauty, and goodly proportion? no, Isa. 53.2. and
then Judas had been an happy man, as happy as the rest of the Apostles. But the
Reasons are these.

First, By this means they had a greater measure of knowledge, Luke 10.22, 23.
he expounded to them the secrets of the Kingdom of God, Mat. 13.11, 16. Mark
4.34. hence is that of the Samaritan woman, John 4.34. hence it was that John
Baptist was more excellent than others, Mat. 11.11. So that as Solomon's
servants were happy, 1 Kings 10.8. so much more Christ's Disciples, who saw and
heard a greater than Solomon.

Secondly, Their Faith also by this means was more strengthened in the truth of
this great promise of the Messiah, which had been deferred so long, John 20.29.
It is many times an exercise to Faith, to be commanded, to believe what we see
not, but to see what we belive not, is a great strengthening to a weak Faith.
Again, a greater measure of knowledge, is a notable means of a greater measure
of Faith. And if you object against this, Heb. 11.2.

I answer, That the meaning of the place is this, that though things be not
seen, yet Faith makes them evident; not that whatsoever we believe by Faith is
not seen, Stephan saw and believed the same, Acts 7.55. There is a threefold
light, of Sense, of Reason, of Faith, when a thing is obscure to both the
former, Faith will make it evident.

Thirdly, Their Peace of Conscience also, hereby was more settled and
established, Luke 2.29, 30. for he saw now Christ was come to accomplish that
work of reconciliation, which before was promised, and to make up our Peace
with God; In these regards the glory of the second Temple was greater than that
of the former, Hag. 2.10. the second Temple wanted five things of the former,
Aarons Rod, the Pot of Manna, Vrim and Thummim, fire from Heaven, and yet it
was greater than the former, because these three, Knowledge, Faith, and Peace
of Conscience, were so much increased, not to a few, as it was before, but
generally, even to the simple.

Use 1. Hence we have just occasion to meditate of our blessedness also, above
that of the old Church, for all those grounds of the Apostles blessedness, by
seeing and hearing Christ, remain to us, as, 1 Means of Knowledge clearer to
us than to the old Church, by the Apostles preachings and writings, we even see
Christ crucified, Gal. 3. 2 Means of stronger Faith. 1. Because of greater
means of Knowledge. 2. Because that is already accomplished to us, which they
hoped for. 3. Means of settling greater Peace, seeing Christ is not only come
to make our Peace (as he was to Simeon) but has already done it; And therefore
a shame it were for us to be more Ignorant, Faithless, perplexed in
conscience, than they were, and therefore for

1. Knowledge, let us be no longer babes, 1 Cor 14.20. the times require it,
Heb. 5.12. Isa. 11.9. 2 Faith, let us strengthen it,

First, For Promises past, we have not now received them.

Secondly, For Promises to come of the resurrection he so long foretold, was at
last seen, and then belongs to us, that

1. Blessings, John 20.29. 2 Joy, 1 Pet. 1.8 3 Peace, let that possess and
rule us, Col. 3.15. in life and death, as it did Simeon.

Use 2. To Stir us up to pity the Estates of such poor people, as sit still in
darkness and in the shadow of death, having no means of Knowledge, of Faith,
of Peace, John 7.49.

Use 3. How great then is that blessedness prepared for us in Heaven? where we
shall see Christ as he is, and then

1. Our Knowledge shall be perfect, 1 Cor. 13.12. 2. Our Faith shall be joined
with Fruition, yea we shall see what we believe, 1 Cor. 12.12. 3. Our Peace
shall be passing understanding, Phil. 4.7. unspeakable and glorious, 1 Pet.
1.8. (a fortiori.)

It is good to feed on these spiritual joys, and then these carnal delights
will soon grow out of taste and relish.

Doct. Christ in himself, and to us, is the word of life.
Here is to be showed in what respects he is called

1 A word, 2 A word of life.

(...) Here is a metaphor, and every metaphor is a short similitude, and it
must not be expected that any similitude should agree in all points.

But Christ is called the word of God in four respects, as he is the wisdom,
image, interpreter, and promise of the Father.

First, The wisdom of the Father; as reason flows from the soul, or mind
of man, and is not any accident to it, but of the same nature with it, (though
there is an accidental wisdom in us, which is habitual, yet there is also an
essential wisdom in us, namely, our Reason which is natural) so Christ (who
is the reason and wisdom of the Father) flowed from the Father, was begotten
of him, and is of the same nature with him, hence he is called the wisdom that
dwells with God, Prove. 8.1, 22, 24, 25. 1 Cor. 1.24. and the Holy Ghost may
seem to have reference to this place, John 1.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. because the
description which he makes of the world, it seems he took from that
description of wisdom, if you compare these places. Prove. 8.1. with John 1.1.
Prove. 8.3. with John 1.2. Prove. 24. to 30. with John 1.3. Pro. 8.34. with John
1.4. Prove. 8.35. with John 1.5. and chap. 1.22, 24, etc.

Secondly, As the words or speech of the man, is a character of his mind, for
out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, a rotten heart begets
and streameth forth unsavory speeches, an holy heart breaths out gracious
words, so is Christ the character, or engraven form of the Fathers person,
Heb. 1.3.

Thirdly, As the speech or word of a man does declare the will and meaning, and
Counsel of the speaker, so does Christ of the Father, John 1.18. Mat. 11.27.

Fourthly, Christ may very well be called the word of God, or the speech of
God, because he it was of whom the Lord spoke from the beginning, that is, the
word of promise which he made to Adam, to Abraham, to Isaac, to Jacob, to
David, etc. hence Christ is called the Promise, Heb. 11. hence he who is called
a Servant, 1 Chronicles. 17.19. is called the word, 2 Samuel 7.21. that is, a servant
spoken of or promised.

Secondly, Christ is called a word of life.

1. Because he has especial life in himself, John 1.4. John 5.6.

2. Because he communicates life, and he communicates, 1 Natural life, which
to us men is the light of Reason, Joh. 1.4. this former we have from him as an
author, these following as an head or root.

2 He communicates spiritual life, and that he does, 1. By dying for us, for
his death is our life; as by his wounds we are healed, Isa. 53.5. so by his
life we live, now the life we live by Christ's death, is

1 Justification, that is forgiveness of sins, Col. 1.14. Ephesians. 1.7.
therefore he is called the justification of life, Romans 5.18. we without his
death were dead, mere Children of death, as condemned persons, and Christ's
death procuring us pardon, procured us life.

2 Mortification; it is the first part of spiritual life (inherent in us) to
die to sin; and that was procured by Christ's death, Romans 6.6. Gal. 2.19.

2. He communicates spiritual life to us, by rising for us, for as we have
been like him in dying to sin by his death, so do we live to God by his life,
Romans 6.5, 10, 11. now the life we live by his Resurrection, is

1 Vivification, or newness of life, Christ now living in us by his Spirit,
Gal. 2.20. 1 Cor. 6.17. Hence as living trees of Righteousness we bring forth
fruit unto God, John 15.5. 2 Resurrection to glory, Romans 8.11. hence he is
called a quickening Spirit, 1 Cor. 15.45.

Use 1. If Christ be a word of life, then men out of Christ have no life in
them, they have neither the life of justification, nor mortification, nor
vivification, nor resurrection to glory, but are stark dead men to grace and
glory.

2. If Christ be a word of life, then we who profess our selves to be
Christians, to be Members of Christ, are to live no life but this; now for the
better conceiving of this, know that we live a threefold life, 1. Natural, 2.
Spiritual, 3. Carnal; whereby we live the life, 1 Of Reason, 2 Grace 3 Sin.

The two former we may live, and are so to do, because we receive both these
lives from Christ the word of life; the last we are not to live, for the
Members can live no life but the life of their head, the branches live no life
but the life of the root; Hence Paul lived not, but Christ in him, Gal. 2.20.
Now that we may do this, we must esteem and carry our selves as dead men to
all things else; that we may wholly live, and move, and have our being to him:
and from hence arise three duties.

First, We are not to live to our old sins at all, but to be as dead men to
them, Romans 6.11. and therefore to have no Member to stir at their command, Romans
6.13. old lusts when they now call upon us, we are to lend the deaf Ear to
them; when we were dead to Righteousness, we did not one living action but
sinful; so now being dead to sin, let us do no li^ing action but righteous.

Secondly, We are no longer to live unto friends, to riches, honors, or
pleasures, but to the Lord; we once were wedded to such things, but now being
dead, we are free from them, Romans 7.1, 2. if these call for any motion or
action of a living man at our hands, not agreeable to the Will of Christ, we
are dead; hence Wives are to obey their Husbands in the Lord, Col. 3.18. and
Children their Parents, Ephesians. 6.1. and Servants their Masters, Ephesians. 6. so
Psalm. 45.10, 11.

3. We are to be as dead men to our own reason and will, and all the affections
of our hearts, and to yield to them only in the Lord, Luke 9.23. He that would
live to God when he is dead, must die to himself while he is alive.

Use 3. If Christ be a Word of Life, a living and a quickening word, then when
we find our hearts dead and dull, and indisposed to good duties, run we and
seek unto him for life and quickening, Psalm. 119.37, 40. If we be afflicted in
Conscience, and esteem our selves as dead men, in regard of the apprehension of
Gods Wrath, and the want of the life of Justification, then let us seek to him,
Psalm. 119.107. and 28. If we fear, that though we find some life of grace, yet
we shall be unfruitful, and dead unto God, except we be strengthened and
quickened more then ordinary, here again let us seek unto this Word of Life,
Luke 17.5. Mark 9.24. In the midst of our entertainment of many of our
acquaintance (as Hezekiah did) 2 Kings 20.13. who might have taken an excellent
opportunity of sanctifying Gods name, considering the occasion of their coming,
2 Chronicles. 32.31. he might have wrought on them to have embraced the true worship
of such a God, Deuteronomy. 32.31. And so indeed did Moses upon Jethro, Exodus 18.8, 9,
10, 11, 12. and in the liberal use of Gods Creatures, an easy matter it is to
forget God, and to be dead and unfruitful unto him; here then seek to this
Word of Life, but always seek we in humility, and consciousnesse of our own
weakness, and then God will delight to quicken us.

1 JOHN 1.2. For the life appeared, and we have seen it, and bear witness, and
show unto you that eternal life which was with the Father, and was manifested
unto us.


THis Verse contains nothing in a manner in it, but what you have mentioned,
either in the verse before, or else in the next after it. In it consider, 1.
The dependence of it with the former; the words come in by way of answer to an
objection.

Obj. If Christ was from the beginning, eternal, God, how then could he be
seen, and heard? John 1.18. No man has seen God at any time.

Answ. Yes, for that eternal Word of Life was in fullness of time made
manifest in the flesh, etc.

2. The order of the words in themselves; and in plain placing they stand thus,
For that Life, that Eternal Life, which was with the Father, and which we have
seen, and thereof we bear witness, and which we show (or declare) unto you,
appeared, appeared I say unto us.

3. The meaning of the words, which is best opened by handling distinctly five
Propositions, which are express in the Text, Three concerning Christ, Two
concerning the Apostles.

First, Three concerning Christ.

1. Christ is Life, Life eternal.

2. This Eternal Life, Christ, was with the Father.

3. This Eternal Life, which was with the Father, appeared to the Apostles.

Secondly, Two concerning the Apostles.

1. The Apostles and Disciples saw this eternal life.

2. The ^postles and Disciples bare witness unto, and declared this eternal
life to the Church of God.

Proposit. 1. Christ is life eternal.

Life] Therefore called the word of Life, v. 1. hence also, John 14.6. though
life there is not taken so largely as here, There the meaning is, I am the true
and right way to eternal life, as appears by that which goes before, from
verse 2. to 6. and the reason following verse 6. Here it is taken for him who
lives in himself, and is the Fountain and Author of all life to us, whether
of Nature, or Grace, or Glory. Eternal life] 1 John 5.20. and he is so called,
because,

1. Himself lives for ever, Rev. 1.17, 18. Prove. 8.23.

2. To us he is the Author of eternal life, Heb. 5.9. John 18.28.

Use 1. From hence the God head of Christ is argued; and that

1. From his Simplicity, comparing this place with John 5.26. see the like 1 John 1.5. and 7. He is therefore free from all composition, not only of matter
and form, universal and particular, but even of subject and adjunct, Ergo, He
is God, for these speeches are are no Hyperbolies.

2. From his Eternity, for no Creature is eternal, but all had their beginning
in time.

Use 2. Hence we see a reason,

1. Of that speech in Prove. 8. ult. All that hate me love death; such are all
they that will not be governed by him, Luke 19.14.

2. Of that speech, Ephesians. 2.1, 5. men out of Christ are dead.

3. Why ungodly and wicked men die eternally, they are out of Christ, John
15.6. where is to be translated, not Men, but Angels, Mat. 13.49, 50. the
Angels whomsoever they find out of Christ, they cast into Eternal death, not
so much because they have deserved it, for so have the godly, but because they
are out of Christ.

4. Why some for a time make a fair Profession, yet hold not out, their life
of grace is some Land-floud, a torrent for a time, but not fed by any living
spring, John 4.14.

5. Why the Children of God forsake all for him, Matthew 19.27. Job 2.4.

6. Why the Children of God live for ever, John 14.19. why has he that
believes Everlasting life? Because to believe is to lay hold, he that
believes on the Son then, lays hold on Everlasting life.

Use 3. This teaches every one to labor to find Christ, for in finding him
we find Eternal life, Prove. 8.34.

Proposit. 2. The Eternal Life, Christ, was with the Father.

1. He was with the Father as a nourisher to the Creature.

1 Sustaining all, Heb. 1.3.

2 His Church especially, preserving unto us that Spiritual life which he
conveyed unto us. Hence Ephesians. 1.3. all Blessings, as Election, verse 4.
Adoption, verse 5. but when were these? before the World was made, 2 Timothy 1.9.
hence Isa. 9.6. he is called, The everlasting Father.

2. He was with the Father as a delight,

1 To the Father, hence Joh. 17.24. For thou have loved, etc. Mat. 3. ult.

2 To the Creature, Prove. 8.31. (rightly translated, Vid. Jun. (...)) If the
Creature can fill and ravish us with servile delights, how much more can the
Persons of the blessed Trinity one another, yea and us also? seeing the
several delights which are scattered in the Creatures, as in Meats, Drinks,
Company, Recreation, etc. are not so delightful as Christ, Psalm. 4.6, 7. Psalm.
16. ult.

Use 1. Hence we learn,

1. Our Savior Christ's Conjunction with the Father.

2. His Distinction from him.

If this life was with the Father, then they were together from all Eternity,
and because there cannot be two Eternals, but one Eternal, therefore they must
needs be conjoined and united in the same Essence.

And yet because the one was with the other, there must needs be some
distinction between them, which because it cannot be essential, for their
Essence is one, neither can it be accidental, for no Accidents are in God, it
must needs be Personal.

Use 2. If Christ was with the Father in the manner before declared as a
Nourisher, and Delight, then here is an answer to that vain cavelling question
of Atheists.

Obj. If the World be but five thousand and odd years old, what did God so
many years before?

Ans. 1. They nourished, delighted, and solaced each other.

2. God ordained Christ to be a nourisher, and solacer of his Church, 1 Pet.
1.20. compared with places above mentioned.

Use 3. If Christ was with the Father, in whose presence is fullness of joy,
and pleasure for evermore, as Psalm. 16. ult. then how unspeakable was the love
of Christ to such wretches as we are, who for our sakes would leave his Father,
to take part of our miseries, that we might be partakers of his pleasures?
Would a man think that he whose delight was so unspeakable and glorious with
his Father, would say that which he does, Psalm. 16.3. for that whole Psalm is
meant of him, or of the whole Church, but principally of him; O where are our
hearts, that they can delight no more in him? our fool sh hearts can delight in
any thing more than him.

Use 4. If Christ was with the Father, then the Children of God may comfort
themselves in assurance of this point, that we shall also be with God too, to
behold the glory which Christ has with the Father; Christ is now where from
Eternity he was, John 16.28. and where he now is, he has prayed that we also
may be, John 17.24. and does so pray to this day, Romans 8.34, 35. now him the
Father hears always, John 11.42.

Proposit. 3. This eternal life which was with the Father, appeared unto the
Apostles and Disciples.

What is meant by appeared, (...) was made manifest, how was he made manifest?
in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3. ult.

True it is, that Christ was made manifest before the Apostles time unto the
Patriarchs, and that three ways.

1. By Apparition, in the similitude and shape of flesh, Genesis 18.17. and there
he is called Jehovah, and he afterward prayed unto him, Genesis 27.25. to Hagar,
Genesis 16.7.13. to Jacob, to Moses, Exodus 3.2.4.6. to whom Moses prayed, Deuteronomy.
33.16.

2. By Preaching, Genesis 3.15.

3. By Faith, which makes things appear which appear not, which makes things
evident which are not seen, Heb. 11.1. John 8.16. Genesis 17.17.

But not in the flesh, not by Incarnation, till the fullness of time was come,
which was the Apostles times, Gal. 4.4. Genesis 17.17.

Doct. 1. He who was from the beginning with the Father eternal living God,
became in the fullness of time truly man.
But of this we have spoken at large before, v. 1. and that upon the Feast of
the Nativity; now at this time, only such things are to be spoken of as
appertain to his Incarnation, so far forth as it was a manifestation of him.

Doct. 2. The Incarnation of Christ, and his conversation in the World, was the
manifestation of him to the Apostles and Church of God.
(...) is here called his (...) in 2 Timothy 1.10. it is called (...) which is a
Metaphor, as if it were the breaking forth of the Sun from under a Cloud; hence
also, John 12.46.

For the Reason of the Point, this incarnation of Christ, etc. was the
manifestation of him to the Apostles and Church of God.

First, To the outward man.

1. Because his Divine Person before that time invisible and sensible, by his
incarnation became sensible and palpable, John 1.18.

2. Because that person, though before he was known to the Church of God, yet
but obscurely.

Secondly, It was the manifestation of him to the inward man; for though they
knew him to be God, Psalm. 110.1. mark our Saviors urging that place, Mat. 22
44, 45. and Man, Genesis 3.15. to be of his Church, the King, Psalm. 2.8 9. the
Priest, Psalm. 110.4. Dan. 9.17. the Prophet, Deuteronomy. 18.18. John 4.25. yet how
these things should be, they knew not, Luke 1.24. hence Luke 10.22, 23, 24.
though they knew his benefits before, yet but obscurely, and darkly, as wrapped
up in a shadow, 2 Cor. 3.13. as things seen afar off, Heb. 11.13. but now are
brought to light by his incarnation, and coming into the World, 2 Timothy 1.10.

Use 1. For Knowledge, and 2 for Practice. 1. For Knowledge, and hence we
learn, 1 The meaning of that difficult place, Heb. 9.7, 8. why was that way
into the most Holy place shut up from the sight of Gods people? because the way
into Heaven was not manifested, that being a type of this; but what was that
way into Heaven? Christ, incarnate, living and dying amongst us, Heb. 10.19,
20. hence at Christ's death the veil of the Temple was rent in twain, and so
the way into the most Holy place was opened, M^t. 27.51.

2. The reason why the Apostles, and Saints of God that lived in those times
were endued with a greater and larger measure of gifts and graces than ever
before, or since, which was this, the King bestows many gifts upon his poor
Subjects, when he keeps retiredly in his Court, but when he comes abroad, and
manifests himself to public view, then much more abundantly, Joel 2.28, 29.
Christ then left his Apostles behind him; as it were his Almoners, to bestow
his Dole and Largess on the Church; we see also the reason why there was a
greater measure of light of the knowledge of Salvation shed ab oad unto the
World in those times than ever before, which was, because of Christ's coming in
the flesh, which was his manifestation, and then the Sun rising, how should not
the light break forth more gloriously than before? five thousand were converted
at two Sermons, Acts 2.41. and 4.4.

3. The reason of ceasing of Oracles in the Apostles time, which was, because
Christ then appeared, his light brake forth, and what Communion has light with
darkness? 2 Cor. 6.14. and because they were the Devils, 1 Cor. 10.20. when
Christ's Kingdom was partly outward in Solemn Sacrifices and Ceremonies, he
suffered the Devil to erect the like: but when Christ's Kingdom became in a
manner wholly spiritual, (as it did from the time of his appearing in the
flesh) he would not suffer his enemy to enjoy any other Kingdom but spiritual
in the hearts and souls of men.

Plutarch renders two other Reasons, Defectus Oraculorum, but both false, and
confuted by his own Doctrine; the

First was, because then many wise men might serve for Oracles.

Secondly, Because happily those spirits in time grew old and dyed, the Devil
himself made a true confession. See Suidas in vita Augusti.

4. Why all Ceremonies and Sacrifices were abolished at our Saviors coming,
Heb. 10.5. because they were but shadows, Col. 2.17. Heb. 10.1. and all
shadows vanish in the Sun shine, which is Christ manifest in the Flesh.

5. A difference of Sights, Christ was made manifest in the flesh, yet some
knew him not, John 1.5. 1 Cor. 2.8. when as others did, John 1.14.

And the reason why some saw him not, is Threefold.

1 They shut their own eyes, Acts 28.27.

2 The Devil blinded their eyes, 2 Cor. 4.4.

3 God blinded them, John 12. from 37. to 40.

Use 2. To reprove all such Christians as are yet ignorant of Christ, and know
him not, they are now without excuse, 2 Cor. 4.3. John 15.22. If the veil had
still lain over Christ, there might have been some pretense, now there is none.

Use 3. To exhort us to walk no longer in darkness, Romans 13.12, 13. John
12.46. 1 John 3.8. and that while we have the light, John 12.35, 36. which
seems not to be likely to continue long, the fulness of the Gentiles being
almost come in, Romans 11.25, 26. for is not the Vintage and Harvest of the
Gentiles gathered, when so few Christians remain? like Isa. 17.6.

Use 4. If Christ's first coming was such a manifestation of him, then the
Children of God should learn hence to meditate what a glorious manifestation
his second coming will be, 2 Cor. 3. ult. 1 Cor. 13. penult.

Proposit. 4. The Apostles saw this eternal life made manifest in the flesh.

The Truth it is apparent, John 1.14.

The Observations arising from hence are these.

1 The truth of our Saviors Incarnation.

2 The blessedness of the Apostles in seeing what others desired and could
not; but of these we have spoken before, ver. 1.

Proposit. 5. The Apostles bare witness unto and declared this eternal life
unto the Church of God.

For the meaning of this, to bear witness unto Christ, and to declare him to
the Church, is all one, they bare witness unto him by declaring of him, they
declared him by bearing witness unto him.

Hence it was, that when he appointed them to be declarers, and publishers of
his Gospel to all the World, he appointed them only to bear witness to him,
Acts 1.8. so also is witnessing put for declaring, Acts 20.21.

For the confirmation of this Proposition, not to heap many places in a clear
truth, take these two, Acts 10.30, 40, 41. Acts 5.32.

But how could the Apostles bear witness to Christ, seeing he receives not
the testimony of men? John 5.33, 34.

The testimonies of men are of two sorts, as all Arguments in Logic are of
double force.

1. For confirmation, such our Savior refuses, as having greater, John 5.36,
37.

2. For declaration, such our Savior embraces, as appointing his Disciples to
that end, and indeed if he would have had witnesses for confirmation, he would
rather have sent Solomon in all his royalty, and such others as he, men of
credit and honor, than poor Fishermen; if therefore the Pope and his Clergy
were not greater than Peter and the Apostles, they would not challenge to
themselves power to give authority to the Scriptures, for are not such men for
confirmation?

Quest. But why would our Savior have sush poor and simple men to be his
witnesses, and to declare and preach him, rather than Gamaliel, and the other
Rabbis of the Jews.

Answ. 1. To magnify his power, who was able to persuade the whole World to
embrace him and his Doctrine by such weak instruments, 2 Cor. 4.7. Acts 4.33.
Acts 4.13.

2. To take away and prevent a slander, which otherwise might have been raised
upon the Doctrine of the Gospel, that it had been the device of a man's brain, an
human policy devised by great men, to keep the rest in awe, 1 Cor. 2.8. and 6.
Many profane Atheists are ready now so to deem, and speak of it as it is, how
much more if these had seen great men and Princes embracing it, and setting it
forward at first? At the first Satan hindered Religion, by persuading the World
that the Professors thereof were enemies to the State, Acts 16.20, 21. but when
long experience proved none more faithful, now he goes about to persuade,
that Princes devised it for their own turn.

3. To teach all Ministers, both how to become most able, and sufficient
Preachers of the Gospel, and also to deliver the Gospel so as may be most for
Gods glory. If Learning, and skill in all Human knowledge would have made us
most able Ministers of his Gospel, he would either have chosen such to have
been his Witnesses, or have made them such, by instructing them thereafter in
that three years space when he abode with them; but he found them ignorant
Fishermen, and left them very raw and rude in the knowledge, yea even of the
Principles of Religion, Acts 1.8. and yet in one hour, fifty days after, by
the sending of the Holy Ghost, he made them more able Ministers than all the
Prophets before them, and their Fathers, Schoolmen, and the late restorers of
the Gospel since, to show us, that howsoever we must not neglect the help of
Studies of the Arts, and Tongues, for want of immediate revelation, yet these
are not the things that make us more sufficient, but we above all things are to
desire, and strive with God, for the annointment of his Spirit, mentioned 1
John 2.27. And Again, the Apostles being such simple men, were fitted to
deliver it so as might be most for Gods glory, not in excellency of words, but
in evidence of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 4.5. and therefore Paul, (though otherwise a
learned man) imitated their simplicity, 1 Cor. 2.12, 13. And here Chemnitius
his modesty is to be commended, who when he comes to speak of some points of
Divinity, carved out by the Schoolmen too curiously, is wont to say, Hac non
sapiunt Piscatoriam sapientiam.

Use 1. Behold then the great and fearful unthankfulness of the World, who
put most of these men to death, who did declare unto them Eternal Life.

Use 2. If the Apostles show unto us Eternal Life, it is easy to discern how
far they be from Eternal Life, who do not receive their Witness; alas, how
many poor souls through the greatest part of the World, Jews, Turks, all the
rest of the Pagans and Infidells are by this means cut off from all hope of
Eternal Life? how true alas is that speech of our Savior, Mat. 7.13, 14. many
there be who go in the broad way to destruction?

Use 3. Then how much to blame are the Wolves (rather than Shepherds) of the
Church of Rome, who shut and lock up from the people in a strange Tongue the
Writings of the Prophets and Apostles? is not this one way to bar them from
Eternal Life? how truly upon them is that verified? Luke 11.32.

Use 4. Then we all of us are to be exhorted diligently to be conversant in the
Writings of the Apostles, John 5.39. where what our Savior spoke of the
Writings of the Prophets, my Text speaks the very same of the Writings of the
Apostles, they bear witness of Christ, and show unto us Eternal Life; and as
the Apostle spoke unto our Savior, so may we to them, John 6.68. Ministers
most of all are to be conversant in their Writings, because they succeed the
Apostles in bearing witness unto Christ, and declaring of him, so little
differing from that of theirs, else we bring a curse upon our own heads, Gal.
1.8. which if the Church of Rome had remembered, they would never have thrust
out the Apostles from the Chairs of their Professors, and brought in the
Sentences of Peter Lombard; but we are to follow Timothies example, 2 Timothy
3.15, 16, 17. and all Christians are to imitate the forwardness of Christians
in Chrysostoms time.

Use 5. Then we are to praise the Lords goodness unto us, who has granted
unto us their Writings. Consider the like example, Psalm. 147.12, 19, 20. It was
a great preferment to the Jews to have the Writings of the Prophets, Romans 3.1,
2. but their witness of Christ is much more dark and obscure than this of the
Apostles; without their Writings, we should but have groped after God, Acts
17.27. and as for Christ, this Eternal Life, we should never have dreamed of
him: the Lord make us more thankful, and more careful to walk more worthy of
them, lest he take them from us.

1 JOHN 1.3, 4. That, I say, which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you,
etc.


IN these two Verses we have of the Apostles Doctrine,

1. The subject repeated, That which we have seen and heard.

2. And declared.

3. The end.

1 Subordinate, fellowship with the Apostles.

2 Supreme, fullness of joy.

The subject is repeated,

1. For Explication or plainness sake, for the Parenthesis of the second verse
would otherwise, by interrupting the course of speech, have obscured the
sentence.

2. For confirmation of what he had said before, he thrice repeateth, that
which we have seen, and doubleth, that which we have heard, to show, that he
doubted not of what he spoke, but was most confident and resolute therein.

Obs. Observe hence the certainty and undoubted truth of the Doctrine of the
Apostles.

Reas. 1. The Apostles taught nothing but what was manifest to their senses.
See 2 Pet. 1.16. Compare with him his Successor, who seeing great sums of Money
brought in by Indulgences, Pardons, etc. said to one of his Cardinals, O
quantum fabula ista de Christo nobis proficit! Again, sense took away doubting
even from unbelieving Thomas, John 20.25, 27, 28.

2. The Apostle again and again ingeminates here, that what they taught was
manifest to their sense; now ingeminations are for confirmations, Genesis 41.32.
Gal. 1.8, 9. Ezekiel. 7.6. this therefore does show again, how confident he was of
it himself, i. e. therefore no marvel of that speech, John 21. penult. We
know, etc. For,

3. The efficacy of that Doctrine, or the power of it, argues the certainty of
it; for that Doctrine which gives us union with God, communion with the Saints
of God, fullness of joy in our selves, must needs be a most certain Doctrine of
heavenly truth, there is no persuasion to settle a man's own Conscience
answerable to this.

4. And for a fourth Reason, consider another Branch of the power of this
Doctrine, the Apostles that declared it were for the most part poor and simple
men, and unlearned men, the Doctrine taught was but of a Crucified Savior,
harsh to carnal ears, 1 Cor. 1.23. the times were such, wherein it was not
only every where spoken against, Acts 28.22. but also grievously persecuted
throughout the Roman Empire, and that with exquisite Torments, and yet it did
so powerfully work, Plut in Apop. Pris. Regum.
that in Tertullians time (which was the next Age after Christ) there were more
Christians every where, than of all other Professions besides. Cyrus indeed
allured many to be his followers; but he sent out great men to make another
kind of Proclamation, Whosoever will come and follow after me, if he be a
Footman, I will make him a Hors-man; if he be a Hors-man, I will make him a
Rider in a Coach; if a Farmer, a Gentleman; if he posesse a Cottage, I will
give him a Village; if he have a Village, I will give him a City; and if he be
Lord of a City, I will make him Prince of a Region, or Country; and as for
Gold, I will pour it out to him by weight and heaps, and not by number: But
Christ's Proclamation is contrary, Luke 9.23. and 14.26. and yet had he
infinitely more followers.

All other Reasons, as the testimony of the Church, etc. are but like the woman
of Samaria, preparing us to believe, John 4.29. this convinces us so strongly,
that in comparison we reject other Reasons moving us to believe, as they did,
John 4.41, 42. How true is that of Picus in his Conclusions? as Faith, which is
but a bare credulity, is in a degree of perfection inferior to science, so that
Faith which is wrought in us by the work of the Holy Ghost is greater, and more
certain, than any science, gotten by demonstration.

Use 1 If the Apostles Doctrine were so certain, that they preached nothing but
what they had seen and heard, then hence we see a reason, why they were so
bold, and zealous, and diligent in preaching, Act. 4.20. 2 Pet. 1.15, 16.
Fables are best at first hearing, but comfortable, sound, and certain truths,
the oftener they are heard, the more profitable.

Again, hence we see a reason of their certainty and constancy in all their
ways, for they and their Doctrine; were of the same nature, 2 Cor. 1.17, 18,
19, 20.

Use 2 Then all of us are to receive their Testimony, for upon this ground our
Savior complains justly, for not being received, Joh. 3.11. the like, does
John Baptist, Joh. 3.32.

Use 3 Then the Children of God that repose their hopes upon the Apostles
Doctrine, we may hence comfort our selves, we build not upon uncertainties, as
they Isa. 28.15. if our faith and hope were built upon the Doctrines and
traditions of men, we might justly fear and stand in doubt, lest they might
fail and deceive us in the end.

Use 4 If the Apostles preached nothing but what they were most certain of,
then it must be our care also to preach unto the people of God no uncertainties.

And so in this we shall follow the Apostles, and this we may do by two means
especially.

First, By preaching nothing but what we have good warrant for from Scripture;
for the Scriptures are of certain Truth, 1 Cor. 4.6. Acts 26.27.

Secondly, By having our hearts established with Grace, Heb. 13.9. 2 Pet. 1.
two last verses, where he says, No Scripture is of any private motion of
interpretation, because being penned at first by the Spirit, by him best
interpreted; hence, 1 Cor. 2.11. and 2 last. If these means were sufficient,
how comes it to pass that the Children of God having these means, have yet
differed one from another by not attending to these means? but leaning to their
own judgment, or the opinions of men, are carried with some sinister respect of
their own credit and estimation in the world; see Luthers example of defending
Consubstantiation, and therein dissenting from others of his Brethren.

The end of the Apostles writings follows, which are

1 Subordinate, Fellowship with the Apostles and Disciples. 2 Union with God,
verse 3. 2 Supreme, Fulness of joy, verse 4.

Before we come to speak of these severally, some things more may be gathered
from all these jointly, touching the nature of the Scriptures, as

1 For the perfection of the Scripture; for if the Apostles declared what they
had heard and seen, to the end that we might have fellowship with God and them,
and fullness of joy, then either they failed of their end, or else we by their
Doctrine (written for that purpose, verse 4) may have all things necessary for
salvation, yea what is salvation it self, but these very ends? Our Savior
calls it (which was a good conclusion of the whole Bible, for the Gospel was
written last of all, to stop the mouths of Ebion, Corinthus, etc. who then
began to urge the traditions of the Apostles in time of his banishment, see
Eusebius) eternal life, to know him, and what more comfortable knowledge of him
than this? Joh. 17.3. hence also John 20. 2 last. 2 Timothy 3. 2 last; away then
with Popish traditions which the Papists allege, they are either false
Doctrines, as invocations of Saints images, transubstantation, etc. or
certainly true, as Baptism of infants, truth of Scripture, etc. and these may
be proved by Scripture; or such as seem not necessarily to procure us Felloship
with the Saints, as the perpetual Virginity of the Virgin Mary, whether the
Hebrew women's children had any Sacrament to initiate them into the Church, and
yet the Papists else where prove all these by Scripture.

2 The profit of the Scripture; that Doctrine by which we come to have such
comfortable and excellent benefits (such as than which none are greater) must
needs be of singular profit and commodity, yea no profit like to this, Mat.
16.26. Hence Psalm. 19.10. and therefore we are never to make account we have
profited by their Doctrine, when we can speak and discourse of it, but when we
have found it to have wrought these heavenly things in us, he that will be
conversant in it, to practice it indeed, must labor for these things by it.

2 And again, if the Word be so profitable, they lose not their labor, who
seek it from Sea to Sea, and from East to West, as Amos 8 12. if by seeking
they find it, Mat. 15.32. Luke 10. ult. it is no vain gadding humor this
desire to hear the Word.

3. The power of the Apostles Doctrine, of the Scripture; that which must bring
us from having fellowship with Satan, and the unfruitful works of darkness, to
have fellowship with the Saints, yea God himself, and to enjoy fullness of joy,
what admirable efficacy must it needs be of? Hence Romans 1.16. 2 Cor. 10.4.
this word must needs be stronger than Satan, Luke 11.21, 22.

Use 1 This reproves the practice of those who will profess that the Word of
God takes place in them, and has power upon them, yet they still keep their
old fellowship with Satan with the wicked of the World, with the unfruitful
works of darkness. See John 5.38.

Use 2 Then fellowship with God, and with the Saints, and fullness of joy may
be obtained, else why did the Apostles preach, and write of Christ to that end?
It is a let by which Satan keeps many from seeking these things, because they
think them impossible to be attained, as it was with the Jews, John 6, 52, 66.
so it is common in this case with many, but Nicodemus, though at first he
conceived not such a like mystery as this, yet at length having it explained,
he came to Jesus by night, and his Doctrine took place in him, John 3.9. and
John 7.50, 52. and John 19.39.

Use 3 Then great reason have we all to attend to the Doctrine of the Apostles;
art thou a man yoaked under the bondage of Satan, and can not free thy self
from his fellowship? attend to the Doctrine of the Apostles, it will give thee
fellowship with God, and the Saints, Acts 26.18. Art thou in the estate of
Grace, yet feel thy self in heaviness through manifold temptations? 1 Pet.
1.6. attend to the Apostles Doctrine, it will give thee fullness of joy, Psalm.
19.8.

Ministers also for the same cause are to be painful and diligent, 2. Tim. 4.2.
preach the Word, he in season, etc. Eccles. 21.6. in the morning sow thy seed,
etc.

1 JOHN 1.3, 4. That which we have seen and heard declare we unto you, that ye
also might have fellowship with us, etc.


IN handling these three ends of the Apostles Doctrine,

1 Communion with Saints.

2 Union with God.

3 Fullness of joy; is to be showed,

1 What each of them is in his order.

2 How the Apostles Doctrine procures them unto us.

3 Some consectaries for each one.

By fellowship with us, the Apostle means himself, and all the Saints of God.

The communion of the Saints is a Spiritual conjunction of the Saints with
Jesus Christ, and one another, wherein Christ partaketh of our infirmities, and
we in common partake of benefits, and communicate them one to another.

1 I call it [a Spiritual Conjunction,] to distinguish it from,

1 A Natural, as the three Persons of the Trinity are joined in one nature and
essence.

2 Personal, as the two Natures of Christ are in one Person.

3 Moral, as Man and Wife are in Law one flesh by Gods Ordinance.

For this is a Conjunction of men's Persons, not by an outward bond (such as
Gods Ordinance is to Marriage) but by an inward bond, one Spirit resting in
Christ above measure, and in the Saints according to their measure, 1 Cor.
6.17. 1 John 4.13. Romans 8.9. Hence it is that the same mind is in us which was
in Christ, Phil. 2.5. and all the members are alike affected, and disposed
toward God, Christ, their own sins, good duties, one to another.

2 I say [of the Saints with Christ, and one another] where by Saints I do not
mean only Saints Canonized by the Pope, nor only the Saints departed, but the
Saints also on earth, whose conjunction with Christ, and one with another, is
mentioned, 2 Cor. 1.2. Col. 1.2. Joh. 15 5. Ephesians. 5.30. 1 Cor. 12.13. Joh.
17.20, 21.

3 I add [wherein Christ partaketh of our infirmities.] And infirmities
wherein he partaketh with us are of three sorts;

1 Of Nature, Flesh, and Blood, Heb. 2.14. Phil. 2.7.

2 Of Corruption, all our sins imputed, 2 Cor. 5.21. 1 Pet. 2.24.

3 Of Condition, all our afflictions and miseries, Acts 9 4. Col. 1.24.

4 I add [we in this communion partake of Christ's benefits] which are Six.

1 Adoption, Gal. 4.4, 5, 6. hence we are said to have fellowship with God in
the text, the greatness of this benefit; See 1 Samuel 18.23.

2 Righteousness of Christ imputed, 2 Cor. 5.21. Papists do deride this,
thinking it all one to say, A man may be wise or learned by another man's wisdom
and learning, but Christ was not another man to us.

3 Holiness, 1 Cor. 1. penult. which stands in Mortification, Romans 6.6. and in
Vivification, or fruitfulness, Joh. 15.5. Worms that are dead all Winter, live
again, lying in the Sun at the Spring.

4 Protection of Angels, Psalm. 91.11, 12. Heb. 1. ult.

5 Dominion over the Creatures, Heb. 2.7, 8. 1 Cor. 3.22, 23. they hold in
capite.

6 Right to a glorious Inheritance, Gal. 4.7. Col. 1.12.

The means of further conveying and confirming these benefits unto us, (besides
the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles) are the Sacraments; hence 1 Cor.
12.13. 1 Cor. 10.16, 17.

5 I say [we communicate them one to another] and that.

1 In heart, mutually praying for one another, Ephesians. 6.18. Hence a Christian
man, as a rich Merchant, has Factors dealing for him with God, in every
Country.

2 In voice, by

1 Mutual instruction, 2 Timothy 2.25, 26. Act. 18.25, 26.

2 Mutual reproof, Gal. 6.1, 2. Levit. 19.17.

3 Mutual consolation, 1 These. 5.14.

3 For Action, by

1 Good example of Christian life, Matthew. 5.16. good example edifieth much,
Phil. 2.15. see Peter Martyrs testimony of Bucers Family in Epist. ad Ecclesiam.

2 Liberal bestowing of outward things upon them, Gal. 6.10.

In regard that this Communion is.

1 A Spiritual conjunction of the Saints with Christ, and one with another, it
is compared to the Conjunctions, Ephesians. 5.23.30. Joh. 15.5.

2 This his partaking of our infirmities, and ours of his benefits, it is
compared to a Marriage, Hos. 2.19, 20.

3 A communicating of our goods one to another, it is a Brotherhood, Coloss.
1.3.

2 How does the Apostles Doctrine procure and preserve this union and
communion? By these means;

Col. 1.21. Acts 26.18. Ephesians. 2.2. 2 Timothy 2.26. This fellowship which all
natural men have with Satan (to omit the fellowship which Conjurers have with
him by League, Psalm. 85.5. and that which Witches have with him by carnal
copulation) standing in three things.

1 In resemblance, both sin with one continued Act, 1 John 3.8. (sins) Joh.
8.44. Acts 13.10. and so all (...), have a fellowship one with another.

2 In subjection of the Natural man to the government and guidance of Satan,
Ephesians. 2.2. 2 Timothy 2. ult. all Gods children are led by his Spirit, Romans 8.14.
so are Natural men by that wicked Spirit, he first works upon the mind,
deluding and blinding them, 2 Cor. 4.4. John 13.2. and then he carries the
heart and affections whither it pleases him, John 13.27. Ephesians. 2.2.

3. In under-going the same punishment, Mat. 25.41.

Acts 2.37 (this word is used in a contrary sense, Romans 11.8. where it
signifies not compunction, but the deep slumber wherein Natural men feel no
compunction) Romans 7.9, 10. this is called a wounding, or the spirit thus
afflicted is called wounded, Prove. 18.14. brokenhearted, weary, Psalm 51.17.
Matthew. 11.28. This remorse is not alike to all, to some it is more terrible,
and makes a deeper impression, Job. 6.2, 3, 4, and cap. 13.24. to others it is
not so grievous, as in Lydia, Acts 16.14, 15. her readiness to entertain them,
shows that the Wound was made and healed in the Sermon-time. I conceive
Lydia's Conversion to be like the Thiefs upon the Cross, he first had fear of
God, Luke 23.40. yet assured of Salvation soon after, verse. 43. In the Jews,
Acts 2.37. to 42. at the next Exhortation. In John Glover, not for many years,
five in all, yet it is found in all, Romans 8.15. all do receive the Spirit of
bondage to fear, though they receive it not to fear again, Luke 4.18.

The Reasons of this are three.

1 To make us like unto Christ, he was so, Mat. 26.37. Luke 22.44. Mat. 27.46.
and we must be like him, Romans 8 29.

2 To make us value Christ and his benefits, at an higher rate, Mat. 9.12.
(need not) Prove. 27.7. the want of this is the reason why Christ is so little
esteemed of the most.

3 To tame our wanton hearts, and make us more pliable and tractable to the
yoke of Christ, and any course of obedience he shall show us, Acts 9.6. and
16.30. and 2.37. Our Savior can soon persuade heavy laden, and weary souls,
to think that his yoke and burden is light, when they have felt the burden of
sin; which how heavy it is, see Psalm. 38.4. but an hard matter it is to
persuade others to think so.

Mat. 5.6. and because Christ is not ours but by faith, John 3.16. and Faith is
not ours but by the Holy Ghost; therefore we rest not, till by pouring out our
earnest desires to God, we have obtained him, Luke 11.13.

Romans 10.17, Gal. 3.7.

The Consectaries, or the Uses are three,

Use 1. Hence then it is easy to discern what estate Natural men be in, out of
fellowship with God and his Saints; If by nature we had fellowship with them,
what needs the Apostles Doctrine to bring us unto it, they who defy the
Devil, and cannot abide to hear that they have had any fellowship with him,
have as yet none with God.

Use 2 Then fellowship with God and his Saints is a thing that may be attained.

The conceit of the contrary, Satan uses as an effectual means to keep men
from seeking it. See Fol. praeced.

Use 3 Then all have great cause with diligence to attend on the Apostles
Doctrine, it is Gods power to salvation. Romans 1.16.

1 JOHN 1.4. And these things write we unto you, that your joy may be full.


FOr the meaning of these word, we must show you

1 What is here meant by Joy: 2 How this joy is said to be full.

1 Some by Joy understand that glorious Estate full of delight and pleasure
which the Saints in Heaven enjoy, and we our selves hope for after this life,
according to that Psalm 16. ult. but here I suppose (though that be not
excluded, but follows upon the other) to be meant that joy in the Holy Ghost,
which such as have fellowship with Christ enjoy in this life,

The Reasons why I think so are two.

1 Because though in Heaven be fulness of joy, yet in Scripture phrase,
Heaven (to my remembrance) is no where called full of joy, nay in St. John's
course of speech there is another on this side Heaven which is called full joy,
2 John 11. Joh. 16.24. and 15.11.

2 What St. John means by this end of his writing, fulness of joy, we may
easily conjecture by the means he uses to procure it to us, now if you mark
it, the whole course of his writing is in a manner nothing else but a laying
down of certain marks, whereby we may examine our selves; and discern whether we
have fellowship with God or no, whether we be in the Estate of Grace or no, See
one, verse 6, 7. another, 8, 9. another, Chap. 2. verse 3. now these marks do
not so directly tend to procure us fulness of joy in Heaven, as to settle our
hearts in the assurance of this point, that we are in the Estate of Grace, and
so may reap and receive, true and sound Peace of conscience, and full joy in
the Holy Ghost.

So that by full joy, I here understand joy in the Holy Ghost.

For the better and more profitable handling whereof there is to be shown.

1 What this Joy is. 2 How it is said to be full. 3 Some Corolaries from
thence. For the first, What this Joy is.

Joy in the Holy Ghost, is a spiritual affection arising from peace of
conscience, whereby we rejoice in our union with Christ, with joy unspeakable
and glorious. Or joy in the Holy Ghost is a spiritual affection, whereby the
heart is unspeakably and gloriously enlarged and ravished upon the solid
apprehension of union and communion with Christ.

1 It is a spiritual joy] not only because the objects of it are spiritual good
things, union with Christ, and the benefits which we reap from it. (Adoption,
Righteousness, Holiness, protection of Angels, dominion over the Creatures,
right to a glorious inheritance) but also and that more principally, because it
is wrought in us by the holy Spirit, hence it is called Joy in the Holy Ghost,
Romans 14.17. hence he is called the Comforter John 15. penult. when God and
Christ are said to dwell in the hearts of faithful men, nothing else is meant;
but the Holy Ghost dwelling in them, and working this joy ( John 14.23. Rev.
3.20.) John 14.18. compared with John 16.7. and 22.

2 Arising from Peace of Conscience] Romans 14.17. Romans 5.1, 2, 3. now peace of
conscience is a work of the Holy Ghost, which arises from feeling of our
righteousness, or our justification before God, for to be justified before
God, is not enough to pacify the the conscience, unless it be felt. See
David's example, Psalm 51.8, 12. Hence arises that distinction of four sorts of
consciences, 1 Quiet, but not good, Luke 11.21. 2 Good, but not quiet, Psalm.
51.17. 3 Neither good nor quiet, Genesis 4.13, 14. 4 Both quiet and good, Luke
1.47.


Hence is that also, Prove. 15.15. it is a cause of continual joy in the Holy
Ghost, as a continual feast is of continual mirth.

3 Whereby we rejoice in our union with Christ] 1 Pet. 1.8. in whom we do
believe and rejoice, yea rejoice in him whose by faith you are; Gal. 6.4. this
is shown also, in that it arises from peace, and peace from righteousness,
but by union with Christ.

4 With joy unspeakable and glorious] these words may seem to express some
accidental things to this joy, but because the nature of it cannot be well
declared in it self, these words shadow out the nature of it, 1 Pet. 1.8. This
Joy is.

1 Unspeakable, because it is better felt than expressed, Prove. 14.10. like to
bodily health. 2 Glorious, both because it is a glimps of the Glory, and the
Joys of Heaven; hence the Spirit that works it, is called The earnest of our
inheritance, Ephesians. 1.14. and because it triumphs gloriously against all causes
of grief and sorrow, Romans 5.3. Acts 20.23, 24.
2 How is this joy said to be full?

1 In opposition to that joy which arises from the things of this life, this
is more full than that Psalm. 4.6, 7. those are empty joys to this, witness,

1 The variety of them, if there were full joy to be had by them, what need we
to seek for variety? Wherefore does the Be suck so many Flowers, if she could
find Honey enough in one?

2 The mixture in them of sorrow, Prove. 12.13.

3 The shortness of them, that which must be full joy to an eternal Soul must
be eternal, whereas these are not, Job 2.5.

2 In opposition to that joy which Christians have in Christ Jesus too, but yet
is often eclipsed, and in the wain, as I may so say, through manifold doubtings
of our estate, 1 Pet. 1.6.

Use 1. If by the Apostles Doctrine full joy may be had, then there is no need
of Traditions, if joy may be full by the Word written, what then can they add?

Use 2. Then they embrace an empty shadow of joy, that seek joy in earthly
things, which are like empty Pits, Jer. 2.13. though the stars should shine
always to us, yet if we should have no greater light, we should have a
continual night.

Use 3. Then the hearts embracings of the Apostles Writings, and finding the
fruits of them, brings not melancholy, and dumpishnesse, as the World thinks,
but fullness of joy.

Use 4. Then let us search the Apostles Writings, and enquire for full joy out
of them; but of that in the next,

1 JOHN 1.4. This last Use our Savior teaches us, to make in the like
business, Joh. 5.39.


How this joy is wrought at the first, in their Writings is showed before, as,

1 By knowledge of our communion with Satan by nature.

2 By remorse of Conscience in us, by the force of that communion.

3 By earnestly desiring, hungring, and thirsting after deliverance by Christ.

4 By peace of Conscience arising from the sense of that deliverance.

Now then we are to search their Writings, to see by what means this joy thus
begun, may be continued and preserved.

1 JOHN 1.5. This then is the message which we have heard of him, etc.


IN the four former Verses we had the Apostles Doctrine, or the Doctrine of the
Gospel described.

1 By the subjects of it, Christ Jesus in his Divine and Human nature, verse 1,
2.

2 By the ends of it; 1 Subordinate, Communion with God, verse 3.

2 Supreme, Fullness of joy, verse 4. Here the same Doctrine is described,

1 By a treble adjunct of it.

1 It is a Message, 2 Heard of Christ, 3 Declared to the Church.
2 By part of the matter of it, God is light, and in him is no darkness.

The second and third points before mentioned, have been spoken of at large,
verse. 1, 2.

The parts then of these words are two, the condition,

1 Of the Doctrine of the Gospel, it is a Message, etc.

2 Or Nature of God, he is light, etc.

That the Doctrine of the Gospel is a Message appears,

1 By the title of it, Evangelium, a good Message, Romans 10.16.

2 By the style of the Penmen of it, Evangelists, Bearers of good tidings.

3 By the style of the first Preachers of it, they were Apostles, Messengers,
Romans 10.15. Tiding-bearers of good things.

4 By the style of the after Ministers of it to this day, they are Angels, Rev.
2.1. that is, Messengers, so Job 33.23. Observations hence concerning Ministers
are these.

1 If the Gospel, or the Apostles Doctrine be a Message, then it has not its
Authority from such as deliver it, for it is not the Messengers part to judge,
or ratify his Message, but to bear witness to it, to declare it.

Use. Against the Papists, who make their Judge and Clergy, Judges of the
Scriptures: the Pope himself here is most faulty, who has left off his Office
of declaring his Message, and keeps himself to that which was never committed
to him, to judge of the Scriptures.

Obser. 2 The Ministers are not to run with the Gospel in their mouths, before
they be sent, Romans 10.15. Heb. 5.4. Exodus 4.10. to 13. Jer. 1.6.

Use. This is not spoken to quench the timely zeal of such as being furnished
and sanctified with gifts, underta^e the Function when they are called, for the
Prophet Isaiah offered himself when his lips were touched, Isa, 6.8. Paul
immediately, Gal. 1.16. but to stay the too soon ripe forwardness of such who
run on the Lords errand before he sends them.

Obser. 3. Then Ministers are to be well instructed in the knowledge of the
Gospel, Malach. 2.7. else we run without our errand, as Ahimaaz did, 2 Samuel
18.22, 23, 29. so we shall bring nothing but confused tumultuous Notions.

Use. Against ignorant Ministers, Hos. 4.6. they are not after Gods own heart,
Jer. 3.15.

Obser. 4. Then Ministers are to be faithful in the delivery of it, Prove.
13.17. and 25.13. which stands in two things,

1 In delivering their whole Message, so did Paul, Acts 20.26, 27. and no more,
Jer. 23.28. Prove. 30.6.

2 In applying it as the sender intended it; he is no faithful Messenger, that
having commission to denounce War against Spain, and to make peace with
France, should proclaim War against France, and peace with Spain.

Use 1. Of refutation of Papists, who add to their Message Traditions, such as
deliver no Message at all, such as preach not at all, such as make the hearts
of the righteous sad; see Ezekiel. 13.22. and 16.

Obser. 5. Then Ministers are to be diligent in carrying of it, Prove. 10.26.
the Lords Errand is his Work, which being negligently done, brings a Curse,
Jer. 48.10. though that be to kill, yet this to save. Sloth, makes waste, as
in every work, Prove. 18.9. so here especially it makes waste of souls, Prove.
29.18.

Use. Paul's Exhortation, 2 Timothy 4.1, 2.

Obser. 6. If the Apostles Doctrine be the Lords Message, then purity is
needful in the Messengers, the Lord expostulateth with an ungodly man for the
want of it, Psalm. 50.16, 17. that mouth should not be used to rotten and
unsavory speeches, which is the Lords Interpreter to the people; all the
Vessels of the ministration to the Lord were holy in the old Tabernacle, how
much more ought the Minister who is a chosen vessel unto him? Earthen vessels
we are indeed, 2 Cor. 4 3. yet when they are clean and sweet, we loathe not to
eat and drink out of them.

Use. Against profane and uncircumcised Ministers.

Obser. 7. Then the Apostles Doctrine, the Doctrine of the Gospel, must not be
received as the Doctrine of men, but as a Message from God, and that is

1 With attentive hearts, Psalm. 85.8. not then to be reading other Books,
though they be good, nor sleeping, for both these are a taking Gods name in
vain, but as those, Acts 10.33.

2 With reverence, Judge. 3.20 Psalm. 66.2.

3 With believing and faithful hearts, Acts 27.25. Heb. 4.2. Luke 1.45.

1 JOHN 1.5. God is light, and in him is no darkness at all, etc.


THe parts of these words are two; 1 The condition of God, he is Light. 2 The
perfection, or purity of that condition, in him is no darkness.


In opening the meaning of them, I must show you, 1 In what respect God is
called Light. 2 To what end it is added, in him is no darkness at all.


For the First, of Light there be three Attributes;

1 It is bright and shining; hence it is put for Knowledge, Mat. 4.16. Hence
also, Eccles. 2.13. hence Ministers conceiving Knowledge are called Lights,
Mat. 5.14. Romans 2.19.

2 It is pure and clear, thence it is put for purity and holiness of life, 2
Cor. 6.14. Mat. 5.16. your Light, that is your Doctrine and holy life; hence
also godly men in regard of their holy conversation are called Lights, Phil.
2.15.

3 It is pleasant and cheerful, Eccles. 11.7. hence it is put for joy and
comfort, Psalm. 112.4. Now God is said to be Light in all these three respects,
but the last is not here intended, a man may have fellowship with God, that
walks not always in joy and cheerfulness, but we cannot have fellowship if
we walk in ignorance and uncleanness.

He is said to be light,

1 Because he is so in himself; 1 He knows all things, Heb. 4.13. Psalm.
147.5. 2 He is holy, Levit. 11.44. Hab. 1.13.


2 He is said to be light, because he makes us so; 1 Men of knowledge,
scattering the darkness of ignorance, Psalm. 91.10. 2 Holy, Levit. 20.8.


Hence at our first Creation, Gods Image consisted in 1 Knowledge, Col. 3.10. 2
Holiness, Ephesians. 4.24.


And by our Regeneration we are again light, Ephesians. 5.8.

Furthermore, God is said to be Light, not tropically by an Hyperbole, because
these things are in him, but properly, because he is Light, that is, Wisdom and
Holiness it self, for God is Knowledge, and so his Holiness is Himself, for
either God understands all things by his own Essence, or by the Species, or
Images of things, this he could not, because he understood them before they
were, therefore he understood them by his Essence; Gods Holiness also is
Himself, or else it is in God, and so some composition will be found in God, at
least of Subject and Adjunct, then something will be found before God, for a
Simple thing is in Nature before a Compound: now in Nature nothing can be
before God, if it could, he were not God.

2 In him is said to be no darkness at all,

1 In way of confirmation of what he said before, for so St. John usually as he
affirms a truth, so he denies the contrary falsehood, Joh. 4.2, 3. and 7, 8.
as Pharaohs repeated Dreams, were for confirmation, Genesis 41.23. Gal. 1.8, 9.

2 In way of opposition to our 1 Knowledge, 1 Cor. 13.12. 2 Holiness, 1 John
1.8.


Use 1. Observe Gods Simplicity of Nature, he is in the Light, the Light is in
him: he is Light it self, which shows that whatsoever is in him is himself; the
Sun, though light be in it, yet it is not Light it self.

Use 2. Then no wonder if we cannot see the full Wisdom of the ways of God,
who can look on the Sun in its full strength? Yet the Sun is not Light it self:
whose eyes does not his glorious Light dazzle? 1 Timothy 6.16. Romans 11 33, 34.

Use 3. If in Gods Light there be no drams of darkness or ignorance, then he
knows all things, Joh. 21.17. Four things especially.

1 Events of things, Isa. 41.22, 23. and 44.7. and therefore is not subject to
after Counsels: hence we know, though God be said to repent, as of Creating
Man, and choosing Saul, yet both are said Humanitus, when he went about to do
otherwise, Genesis 6.6. 1 Samuel 15. ult. and Numb. 23.19. how needful then is it to
consult with him, and seek his direction in all our Counsels?

2 the most secret sins that are committed, Psalm. 139.11, 12. Job. 24.14, 15.
Isa. 29.15.

3 The inmost heart of man, Jer. 17.9, 19. how vain then is Hypocrisy, how
does it dance in a Net before God? Heb. 4.13. 1 Samuel 16.7.

4 The wants of his Children, Mat. 6.32. hence we are eased of destructful, and
distructful care, verse. 31.

Use 4. Then such as live in ignorance and uncleanness are without God in the
World, for he is Light, Ephesians. 4.18, 19. then we are to labor to be light, in
all manner of knowledge and holy conversation, 1 Pet. 1.15, 16.

Use 5 Then we are to seek to him to enlighten our darkness, he is the
Fountain of Light, Light it self, he alone scatters the mists of our
darkness, our ignorance, and pollutions, Psalm. 119.33. Psalm. 5.7.

Use 6. If no blemish of darkness be in God, then he is holy in all his ways,
Psalm. 145.17. well said Chemnitius, De causa peccati tenenda est haec veritas,
Deum non esse autorem peccati, etiamsi si non possimus omnes argutias, quae
contra opponuntur excutere.

1 JOHN 1.6, 7.
IN the Four first Verses Saint John had declared the subject of his Doctrine,
and the end.

The Subject was God-man, that which was seen and heard was Man, the Word of
Life, that is God-man; this is amplified by some adjuncts in the second verse,
of manifestation, and of declaration.

The end of his Doctrine was double;

1 Subordinate, to bring on Christians to fellowship with the Apostles, and
lest they should despise them, he tells them their fellowship was not base, it
was with the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ.

2 The supreme and main end was, that their joy might be full; fullness of joy
in the Spirit, is the main end of this Epistle.

Then Verse. 5. he comes to a particular of that Subject which he had handled
before in general, he tells them one thing that he had heard of Christ, and
that was, that God is Light, and in him is no darkness at all; this was, one
part of the Message he was to deliver.

Some understand it of Christ, so he is called, Light, Joh. 1.9. that
enlightneth every one that comes into the World; but Verse. 7. he speaks of
Christ the Son of that Light, therefore here he speaks of the Father, We have
heard how God is Light, and in him is no darkness.

Now we come to the application of it; he desiring to train them up in the
fullness of joy, he desires to clear all doubts; therefore this is his method,
he tells you of some things he heard from Christ, and then he gives signs of
their fellowship with Christ, that so every one might know what part he has in
this joy.

From this he gathers a double note of our fellowship with God, whereby we may
know it, that so our joy may be full, verse. 6. Negatively, for if God be light,
then he that says he has fellowship with God, and yet walks in darkness, is
a Liar.

Then on the other side Affirmatively, verse. 7. If we walk in the Light, we
have fellowship one with another, and so with God.

1 Then here is a sign of Hypocrisy, to say that he has fellowship with God,
and yet walk in darkness.

2 A sign of sincerity, he walks in the light, which brings a double benefit.

1 We have fellowship one with another.

2 The blood of Christ cleanses us from all our sins; If we say we have
fellowship with God, and walk in darkness, we lie, etc.

Doct. 1. Opinion and profession of fellowship with God, is no certain sign of
true fellowship with him, opinion of Religion is no certain sign of Religion.
If we say, etc. now saying includes three things; Oration est

1 Mentalis, to think, a man may say it in his heart, when he thinks so, and
that is his opinion, Psalm. 14.1. The fool has said in his heart there is no
God, Exodus 2.14. Psalm. 30.6.

2 Vocalis, to speak, to say in outward words, Genesis 22.7.

3 Vitalis, in outward carriage, to make show and profession in his walking,
Romans 1.22.

All these are meant here; to carry a man's self therefore as if he were a
Christian, and yet walk in darkness, is Hypocrisy, Prove. 14.12. Mat. 7.21,
22, 23. Not every one that says Lord, Lord; It is not thinking, nor saying,
that carries it, nor walking so outwardly, for we may do so, and have no
fellowship with Christ.

Reas. 1. Because opinion may spring from (...) even as Hamans opinion was,
that the King would honor no man so much as himself, H^st. 6.6. so many times
out of self-love, we think we wish well to God, and he to us, when there is no
such matter in truth.

2 Opinion may spring from common Graces, such as may be in Hypocrites, Matthew.
7.22, 23. they wondered why they were not received, because they had done many
good works, and Prophesied in his Name, and cast out Devils, etc. therefore
they doubted not of acceptance, so from these common Gifts it often falls out,
that we have a good conceit of our selves, that God will accept us.

And for carriage, a man may so carry himself, as if he were a good Christian.

1 A man may profess Religion for worldly respects, as many became Jews,
H^st. 8.17. it may be for fear of the Laws, or Friends, many love Christ for
Loaves, for Profit, because there is fulness in Christ, Joh. 6.16.

2 Common Graces may make us profess Religion; as a man that has been
enlarged at the word, he is willing to come to it, as those Joh. 5.35. and yet
were but (...), Joh. 4.20. and the stony ground.

3 Some are drawn on through mere compulsion of conscience, and yet live in
darkness; some have gifts in prayer, and preaching, and zeal, as Jehu had, and
joy in the word, as Herod, yet because they walked in darkness, they had no
Fellowship with God.

Use 1 A ground of comfort to such as are afraid that they are Hypocrites, and
are much discouraged, and think they have no fellowship with God, why this may
comfort them; if there be some that say* they have Fellowship with God, and have
not, so contra, some may think and say they have no Fellowship with him, and
yet may have.

Use 2 It confutes the Papists, that say we teach that men's opinion is Faith,
and a man is justified by persuasion; but we do not say that every opinion and
persuasion is a good argument of justifying Faith, but that kind of persuasion
and opinion, that is built upon Gods Testimony, upon the Testimony of the Word
and Spirit, that is a divine justifying Faith, otherwise we say many a man's
persuasion is built on self-love, or some Common Graces.

Use 3 It may exhort such as have a good opinion of their own estate, and make
a profession of it, it may teach all such, seriously to consider whether they
be well grounded, for a man may be deceived in it; if we say we have
fellowship, and yet walk in darnesse, we lie; a man would be loath to be
cozened in a piece of gold; why, what are thousands of gold and silver, to have
all his estate and body current, and strong, and to have his heart unsound and
counterfeit, all current but his own soul? what greater confusion than the
cutting off a man's hopes? for a man to live all his days in a good hope, and
at death to have his hopes to fail him, this confounds his Spirit; therefore
take not all for gold that glisters.

Use 4 It teaches us not forthwith to be deluded with the opinion of others,
but consider whether they be not deceived that he takes for good, or they be
not sound whom he takes for Hypocrites, do not easily take them for our
Brethren and Sisters that carry a show, the Church had never more wrong than by
false Brethren that have spyed out their liberty, and informed against them;
take not every Professor for a Brother; men may say they have fellowship with
God, and yet walk in darkness, therefore take heed of entertaining such into
thy good opinion and fellowship.

1 It will dishonor God, when such have been embraced by such and such people
of God, and now what is become of them?

2 It will bring prejudice to Gods Saints many times; they are more wronged by
them (than any) that carry it closely, and at length break out, 2 Cor. 11.26.
so David complains Psalm. 55.12, 13, 14. it was a commendable practice of the
Apostles, Acts 9.26. they would not easily admit of Paul, and it is commonly
said, if a man or woman carry a Bible, or come to good duties, why they begin
to be esteemed, but others that make not such a show are less respected.

Doct. A life led in ignorance and uncleanness is a certain sign of
Hypocrysie, to live so and profess Religion, or profession of Religion, joined
with a life led in ignorance and ungodlynesse, is a sure sign of Hypocrisy.
Darkness implies both ignorance and ungodliness; darkness has a fourfold
signification, sometimes it is put for Ignorance, the people that sat^ in
darkness, etc. Mat. 4.16.

2 It is put Profaneness and Ungodliness, every sin is called darkness, 2
Cor. 6.14. Ephesians. 5 8.

3. Sometimes it is put for horror of conscience and confusion of Spirit, Isa.
50.10.

4. For obscurity and dishonor, confusion and desolation, Pro. 20.12. for as
light is took four ways, so is darkness.

Light is put sometimes for Knowledge, sometimes for Grace, sometimes for
Comfort, sometimes for Glory, Col. 1.12, 13. so contrary, darkness is
sometimes put for darkness of ignorance of ungodliness, of discomfort, and of
dishonor and obscurity.

The two last are not here meant; a man may walk in much discomfort, and yet
have fellowship with God, Isa. 50.10. Matthew. 12.20. the bruised reed will he
not break, etc. a man in such a condition walks in darkness, and yet God will
not break and quench fuch.

2 Many a Child of God walks in much dishonor and baseness, and yet have
fellowship with God, 1 Cor. 4.13, Psalm. 22.6. David complains he was a worm and
no man, a reproach and scorn of men, and yet was a good man, and had fellowship
with God, therefore it cannot be meant of these two, for those that are in such
a condition, are ordinarily most sound and sincere, whereas others having more
comfort, walk more loosely and carelessely, but if we live in Uncleanness or
Ignorance, we have no Fellowship with God, Prove. 19.2. God is a God of Light,
omniscient, and how can he have fellowship with God, that has no light in him?
Hos. 4.6. my people perish for want of Knowledge; Ignorance is a certain note
of destruction, Prove. 29.18. where no vision is, the people perish, that is,
where there is no means of seeing, Matthew. 15.14.

Reas. Why Ignorance cannot stand with the fellowship of God, because where
there is no knowledge, the light of the Word is wanting, the Word is a light
and a lanthorn, now as one in an house cannot do work without light, especially
a stranger, he knows not what to do, so a man is a stranger within himself
that has no light, and how can he order himself, tell what to do, if he has
no light in him? He that knows neither himself, nor Christ, nor the way to
him, how shall he be saved by him? many do think their estate good, but if they
had light, they would not think so; others think their estate bad, but cannot
get out of this, they have no light to get out of it, and therefore cannot have
fellowship with God.

2 For Uncleanness and Ungodliness, that cannot stand with Fellowship with
God, 2 Cor. 6.14. implying an impossibility, Psalm. 94. ult. Psalm. 5.4. Heb.
1.13.

Reas. 1 God is of pure eyes and cannot endure to behold any iniquity.

2 From the power of all saving Graces, they do purify and cleanse the heart,
so Faith purifies the heart, Acts 15.9. so hope, 1 John 3.3. so love, ye that
love God depart from iniquity.

3 From the power of the Spirit in him that has fellowship with God, 1 Cor.
6.17. Ezekiel. 36.27.

Use 1 It shows that Ignorance is no Mother of Devotion, for what is Devotion
but a stricter and nearer fellowship with God? it shows therefore the
dangerous Estate of wicked Ignorant men, they think their Ignorance will plead
for them, but they are deceived, through want of knowledge my people perish,
God takes no pleasure in Fools, you may think you have Fellowship with God, and
yet live in Ignorance and Darkness, but you deceive your selves, can a man
live in the Sun, and have neither light nor heat? So what Fellowship has that
man with God, that has neither light of Knowledge, nor warmth of Grace from
him?

Use 2 It may be a Trial of our Estate, if we have no Knowledge of God, we
have no Fellowship with him, if you delight in Ignorance, and be unwilling to
be taught, as many Servants and Children are, how can these have any Fellowship
with God, that have no knowledge nor desire after it? it is true, many there
are that desire Knowledge, and cannot attain it, and such, God will accept of
their desire, or give them Knowledge, but such as please themselves in their
ignorance, have no Fellowship with God, 2 Timothy 3.11. they are sealed up to
damnation; if a man live in darkness of sin and ungodliness, and is convinced
of it, and yet will live in it, in idleness, and wantonness, and
Sabbath-breaking, etc. be not deceived, if you make a show of Religion you
deceive your own soul, if a man walks in darkness, and says he has
Fellowship with God, he lies.

Quest. Who can say his heart is clean? have not the best of Gods Children
their failings?

Answ. It is true, they have their failings, but do they walk therein? It is
one thing to step into a way, and another thing to walk in that way, David
stepped into the way of Adultery and Murder. but he walked not in it; a man that
walks in a good way, may be turned out of it by a wild Beast, or a Storm, or
Carelessenesse, but when he sees he is wrong, he turns into the right path
again; so is it with a godly heart, he may be carried out of the way, by the
violence of Temptation, etc. but he returns again as soon as he sees his error.

Use 3 To teach men, as ever they desire to have fellowship with God, to
cleanse themselves from Ignorance and Ungodliness; if you desire to have
Fellowship with God, you must, 1 Avoid Ignorance, and labor for Knowledge,
desire to know his will, and they that love light, God loves them.

2 Turn not aside to any dark crooked ways, Psalm. 125 6. the Israel of God
have no crooked ways to walk in, 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. with chap. 7.1. showing us,
if we would have fellowship with God, that God might ackowledge us for Sons,
and we him for our Father, we must look into all dark corners, and cast out all
uncleanesse, and if you do thus strive to reform your selves, you are not in
darkness; if you cleanse your selves from dark, and crooked, and unclean
ways, you may assure your selves you have fellowship with God.

1 JOHN 1.7. But if we walk in the light as he is in the light, we have
Fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from
all our sins.


THe scope of the Apostle St. John was to deliver what he had heard and seen
from Christ, and to this end, that their joy might be full.

His first Message was, that God is light, verse 5. and from thence he
descends to gather a certain sine of our fellowship with God, or want of it, a
sign of the want of it he lays down, verse, 6. he that walks in darkness
has no Fellowship with him; now in the 7th verse, he lays down a sign of
our enjoying this Fellowship with God.

In the Verse we have two parts, 1 A certain sign of our Fellowship with God,
namely if we walk in the light.

2 The privilege of such an estate, the blood of Christ cleanses us from our
sins; so that here is the mark of a true Christian (...) privilege.

Doct. To walk in the light, is a certain mark o^ true Fellowship with God, one
with another, that is. God with us, and we with him.
Light is sometimes taken for light of Knowledge, Holiness, Comfort, Glory.

1 It is taken for light of Knowledge, Mark. 4.16. Light is clear, and so is
Knowledge.

2 For Light of Holiness, Ephesians. 5.8. Light is clean, so is Holiness.

3 For Comfort, Psalm 97.11.

4 For Glory; now Darkness is contrary to all these; now therefore to walk in
the light, is to walk in the ways of Knowledge, Purity, Comfort, and Glory:
But what is it to walk?

It is commonly took for the whole course of a Christian life, but in borrowed
speech there are some significations therein.

1 It implies, That a Christian course is a voluntary motion, a man is not said
to walk that is pulled and haled, no motion more voluntary than walking.

2 It is a continued motion, not a step or two that makes a walk.

3 Walking gets ground, its motus progressivus, standing still rids no ground,
but walking does; so a Christian, he goes about Christian duties, not only
voluntarily and continually, but he grows up therein from time to time; so
that this sense of the Doctrine is thus much; To lead a Christian course,
voluntarily, continually, and increasingly, is a sign of fellowship with God;
now that such as thus walk have undoubted fellowship with God, appears, Ephesians,
5.8. Ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord, walk
therefore as children of light, that is, children of God, for God is light,
those that walk in truth and not in error and heresy, and in holy ways, they
are children of God, Psalm 1.1, 2. the Law of God is the way of holiness and
truth, and if he that walks in the way be blessed, then he has fellowship with
God (for in his fellowship stands all blessedness, Psalm. 119.1, 2.)

Reas. 1. From the insufficiency of our nature to walk in these ways, without
the Spirit of God in us, and directing of us, Ezekiel. 36.27. Joh. 15.5. without
Christ we can do nothing, Hos. 14.8. if any good fruit be growing in a Ch istan
it is from the Spirit of God, otherwise the fruit of a carnal heart is carnal,
Joh. 3.6. we cannot be holy without Gods Spirit, nor bring forth any good fruit.

2 As we cannot be good without his Spirit, so we cannot do good without him, 2
Cor. 3.5. and Christ thinks it an impossible thing for a Carnal man to speak
well, Mat. 12.34.

Reas. 2. Such as do walk in the light have recovered the Image of God, now his
Image stood in light Joh. 1.4. light of Knowledge and Holiness, Col. 3.10.
Ephesians 4.24. what fellowship Adam had with God in Paradise, the same have all
such as walk in the ways of truth and holiness.

Q Do you not see many true Christians that have true grace, and yet walk in
much darkness, how then have they fellowship with God? Isa. 50.10. he that
fears the Lord, and hearkens to the voice of his Servants, that walks in
darkness, and sees no light, etc. which shows that a man may fear the Lord,
and hearken to the voice of his Servants, and yet walk in darkness?

Ans. Such a one walks not in any gross ignorance, or error, and heresy, or
in darnesse of uncleanness, and profaneness, but he may walk in darkness of
discomfort, and dishonor, and yet have true fellowship with God; no Christian
walks more in light than they that walk most in darkness, those that walk most
discouraged, they walk more carefully and fearfully, whereas many that walk in
more comfort, walk more loosely, and scandalously.

Q. What need they walk in discomfort if they walk in the light? does not all
discomfort arise from ignorance, that they do not know their own estate, and
Gods nature and love toward them, etc?

Ans. It is true, they walk in darkness, and that is the reason why they walk
so uncomfortably, for if they were truly enlightened in the Nature of God and
their own estate, they would have more comfort; but yet this is no affected
ignorance, but of infirmity and weakness, and want of experience, it is one
thing to be in a way, and another thing to walk in that way, such a man does
not walk in that darkness because it is not voluntary, he does not desire to
walk in darkness; neither is it continual, but he at length grows to be
further enlightened.

Use 1. Of refutation of the Papists, that say we deny Works, and maintain the
Doctrine of the Solifidians.

Answ. We disclaim all Works as any cause or merit of Justification, Psalm
130.3. but we do not disclaim good Works in themselves, we do not discourage
any from good Works, but encourage them thereunto; is this no encouragement to
walk in the light, when we say such shall have fellowship with God, and be
cleansed by the blood of Christ? these are strong motives to good works; we
maintain good works (as the Apostle says) for necessary uses, Tit. 3.13. What
are these necessary uses?

1 For our own parts, that we may have fellowship with God.

2 To glorify God, Matthew 5.16. Let your Works so shine before men, etc.

3 To stop slanders of vain men, 2 Pet. 2.5.

4 That by our good Works others may be led on to a Christian course; a good
conversation is a good means of the conversion of others.

We further say, That good Works justify us, in St. James his sense, Jam. 2
14. There is a double Justification.

1 A justification of a man from sin in the sight of God.

2 Of a Christian from Hypocrisy in the sight of both God and Man; the first
way a man is justified only by the blood of Christ; the second way by good
Works; for we must know a man's Conscience has two burdens.

1 My Sins are great, and liable to Damnation, how shall I be acquit of that?
From this our own works cannot justify us, it is done only by the blood of
Christ.

2 I, but the blood of Christ cleanses only true Christians that are in
Christ, and have true grace, but you are an Hypocrite, how shall I now be quit
from the imputation of Hypocrisy? In that I am justified by my works let it
appear to my self and others, that I have lived in all uprightness, 2 Cor.
1.12. so that justification from Hypocrisy before God an Man, is from the
witness of my upright and unblameable life, so that I am justified from a
double accusation, from the one by one way, from the other by another way. I am
a sinner, that I cannot deny, my best works are sinful, therefore from that I
am justified only by the blood of Christ.

But Christ's blood belongs not to you, you are an Hypocrite, now how shall I
know the sincerity of Faith but from the fruits, which is an holy and righteous
life, so that if I walk so, I justify my self from that imputation. How does
Hezekiah help himself, when God spoke bitter things? Remember how I have waled
before thee with an upright heart, 2 John 3. Isa. 53.11. how do I know that I
know him? Why if I keep his Commandments; therefore we say, that an holy life
is an evident sign of our fellowship with God, it glorifies God, it stops
slanders, and brings on others; and besides all this, a godly life will
justify us from hypocrisy.

Use 2 For trial, whether we have fellowship with God or no: why if we walk in
the light we have fellowship with him, Col. 3.3. Isa. 50.10. if a man walk in
light of truth and holiness, in knowledge of Gods Will, and obedience to it,
if a man walk in such a way (I say) that is, if he do willingly give up himself
to the knowledge and obedience of the Will of God, if he continue therein, and
grow in grace, and go forward from step to step, from strength to strength,
Psalm. 84. it is a true sign of fellowship with God, there is no corrupt nature
that can have such desires, at least not continue and grow up in them.

Q. May not a Christian be carried out of his way as David into Adultery, Noah
into Drunkenness, Peter into Denial of Christ?

Ans. They were indeed ways of Darkness, but they did not turn into them
voluntarily, but through violence of Temptation and corruption, 2 They
continued not in them, 3 They grew not up in them, they took no pleasure in
them.

A man is not judged by a step or two, but according to his walk, what is his
course; a man may take a step or two out of the way, but yet if he recover
himself, we say that is his way, God judges not of a man's Spirit by a step or
two, for then who could be justified? No Christian, but sometimes he steps a
wry, and it may be three or four steps, as David, 1 Into Idleness, 2 Into
Adultery, 3 Drunkenness, 4 Murder, 2 Samuel 11. he went into four wicked steps,
foul steps, but you must not judge a man for two or three or four steps, for so
on the contrary, a wicked man may take a step or two into a godly course, he
may read some good Book, pray, hear the Word, this is to bring about some end
of his, he has another way to go, only he is turned out of his way for some
convenience as he thinks, so that there is no judging of a man, on either part
by a step or two, but we must judge of men by their walks; will you judge a man
to be good, that is good in good company? Many a man for company sake, will go
out of his way, so we must not judge what they do by a start, but what is their
constant voluntary growing course, what way they hold to, that is their way, a
good man in evil company, his heart is not quiet, it is no voluntary motion,
and so contra, we often fail in judging some men by some few steps, but observe
what is his voluntary constant course, ad what does he thrive and grow upon, if
a man's Christian course be voluntary, constant, and growing, it is not the
going out a step or two that will condemn us, the wise men they came a long
journey to seek Christ, and they went out of their way to Jerusalem to enquire,
but then the Star left them, but they staid not there, but went into their way
again, and then the Star appeared to them again, so a godly man goes to seek
Christ, and God gives him the light of his Word, yet upon some error, he may
turn out of the way, and then they leave Gods Word, but they stay not there,
but go into the way again, and then they have the light of Gods Word to direct
them.

Use 3 May teach men not to content themselves in any Ignorance, or
Uncleanness, or Wicked course, you cannot walk in Darkness and have
Fellowship with God, therefore as you would claim Fellowship with God,
disclaim Fellowship with sin, you cannot continue and grow up in any sin
voluntarily, but you disclaim Fellowship with God, yea and with the blood of
Christ, no Fellowship with Christ as long as you have any Fellowship with sin.

Use 4 To teach Christians, that it is not enough to be holy and true, but God
requires you should walk in Light and holiness, Ephesians. 5 8. Gal. 5.25. if you
would be men of Knowledge and Piety, it is needful that you walk in that
course, it is not enough to set an instrument in tune, but it must sound forth,
it is not enough to have our hearts in a good frame, but we must walk in that
frame, Psalm. 119. Thy Word is a light unto my feet, and a Lanthern to my
paths; Gods Word was a light to his feet; what, to look on? No, but to be a
guide to his steps; we should order our steps according to his Word; the Church
is compared to a Garden, Cant. 4.14. full of spices and flowers; is she content
that she has these? No, but verse 16. awake O North Wind, and blow upon my
Garden, that my spices may flow forth, and yield a fragrant smell; a Christian
must not only have gifts and Graces, but walk accordingly, a Christian that
has good parts and gifts, if he does not walk according thereunto, what good
does he? It is a gouty foot that dares not walk, so he is a distempered
Christian, that has the feet of a Christian, and yet walks not, he is only the
image of a Christian, an image has the exact parts of a man, but makes no use
of them, it has eyes and sees not, ears and hears not, feet and walks not,
Psalm. 115.4. so he is but the image of a Christian, that has parts and gifts,
and walks not accordingly, therefore whatsoever Spirit God has given thee,
walk in it, if thou have a Spirit of Meekness use it, if a Spirit of Humility,
Patience, etc. use it, if a Spirit of Prayer, use it, walk in it, else you are
but images and no true Christians. The more you walk in good duties and a
Christian conversation, the more you feel Fellowship with God, otherwise if you
go out of the way, you lose the Light, the Star, as the wise men did; when you
walk in the ways of Pride, and Impatience, and Covetousness, and
Uncleanness, you lose your way and your light too, which should direct you;
therefore what gifts you have, walk in them.

Use 5. Of comfort to such Christians, as are walking and doing, though they
cannot go on so fast as they would; a man that walks, goes not so fast as he
that gallops, but yet if you do but walk in a good way, you make a progress,
and shall come to your journeys end at last.

What if Judas gallop faster than the rest of the Apostles, as it is likely,
because they did least suspect him, he gallopped, but he soon stopped his
course, and turned into the way of perdition: Therefore it is no
discouragement, if in a Christian course you be but going on, though you go on
but slowly, yet if you rid ground and stand not at a stay, nor go backward,
that is comfort, for you surely have Fellowship with God.

1 JOHN 1.7.
THe main Scope of this Epistle, is to comfort tender consciences, that their
joy may be full, for this end he tells them certain messages which he heard
from Christ, the first message is, verse 5. whereupon he inferres a note of
Fellowship with God, Negatively, verse 6. Affirmatively, verse 7. If we walk in
the light, etc.

Doct. Such as walk in the light, the blood of Christ purges them from all
their sins.
The Verse sets down two Privileges of them that walk in the light, they have
not only Fellowship with God, but with Christ, and that in his mediation, and
that in cleansing them from all their sins.

Quest. 1. What is meant by the blood of Christ?

A. The blood of Christ, is here put, not only for that blood shed on the
Cross, but for his whole death, set out by blood, which was the effect of his
death, for blood powered out after his death, John 19.33, 34. for it is said of
the death of Christ, Romans 5.8. And the death of Christ is not all, for he
suffered many things beside, so that it comprehends all his sufferings, 1 Pet.
3.18. yet there is a further Synecdoche, sometimes his passion is put for his
whole obedience, Romans 5.18, 19. Luke 22.44. for that is attributed to his
obedience, that it makes us righteous, that is, free from sin; all his
Spiritual desertions, were sufferings of Christ, tending to cleanse u^ from
sin; blood includes all his sufferings and obedience; And indeed the very blood
of Christ, had it not been done in obedience and humility, it would have done
no good, for the promise is to him that does something, Do this and live, John
10.18. his passion was done in obedience, Phil. 2.7, 8.

Quest. Why is our cleansing from sin ascribed most to his blood, seeing it
reached to his whole death, and passion, and obedience? why is his blood most
instanced in, Mat. 26.28. Romans 3.35.5.9. Heb. 9.14. 1 Pet. 1.19. why is it most
attributed to his blood?

Ans. It was meet,

1. Because death was the wages of Sin, Romans 6. ult. Genesis 3.17. therefore we
must satisfy that or our Surety for us.

2. His death is most stood on, because the whole Covenant stands in that; the
Legacy is of no force, without the death of the Testator, Heb. 9.17.

3. Blood is most mentioned, because it is an evident Testimony of death,
because in blood is life; 2 because it accomplished all the legal types, Heb.
9.22.

Quest. 2. Why is it called the blood of Jesus Christ his Son?

Ans. Because that Christ that shed his blood, was the Son of God, and that
added efficacy to it, Heb. 10.4. not the blood of sinful man, Heb. 2.26, 27.
it must be therefore the blood of an infinite power, Acts 20.28.

Quest. 3. How is this blood said to cleanse?

Ans. 1 As it Justifies; 2 As it Sanctifies.

1. As it Justifies us, by his blood are we cleansed, Romans 5.9. Ephesians. 1.7. we
are justified by it, because it frees us from the guilt and punishment of sin.

1 From the guilt of Sin, guilt is that whereby we are liable to the Curse.

2 It frees us from the punishment of sin, so that now there is no condemnation
to us, Romans 8.1. Romans 4. ult. 1 Pet. 2.24.

2. We are cleansed from Sin by a sactifying power in the death of Christ, that
is it whereby our Consciences being sprinkled, we are freed from the stain and
lust of sin, Heb. 10.29. and are endued with supernatural grace, so that we
are afraid to commit any sin.

Q. What is meant by all Sin?

A. That is, from original, and actual sins, from sins of Omission, and
Commission, it cleanses us from the sins of our Birth, and of our Life, of
Youth, and of riper years, Romans 5.9. now we could not be justified, if any sin
were unpardoned, Heb. 9.14. if it be a dead work, or sin of Omission, our
Conscience is purged from it, for if the blood of Bulls and Goats cleansed from
all sins of the flesh, much more the blood of Christ from all sin; no sin but
we are cleansed from by Christ's blood, except the sin against the Holy Ghost,
Heb. 10.26. because, v. 29. they tread under foot the blood of the Covenant.
For the proof of this point, see Romans 8.1, 2. Romans 6.6.

Reas. 1. From the wonderful efficacy of Christ's blood, in respect of the
Divinity of his Person; the reason why it is so effectual is, because it is
the blood of the Son of God, Heb. 9.14.

Reas. 2. Because he stood in our Persons on the Cross, through the
acceptance of God, God accepted him as a Surety for us, Heb. 7.22. Isa. 5.
ult. 1 Pet. 2.24. therefore it is as much as if we had done it in our own
persons, John 10.11. He had no need to shed his Blood for himself, for he had
never sinned.

Use 1. To reprove the Papists, who teach that the Mass, being celebrated for
the dead and living, justifies from sin, but if the blood of Christ cleanse us
from all sin, there is no need of the Mass to cleanse us from any sin; and
they teach that the Mass is an unbloudy Sacrifice; now it must be a bloody
Sacrifice that must cleanse, Heb. 10.10. and 14. but if it be often offered, it
does not exceed the Sacrifices of the Law, Heb. 10.1. to 5.

Use 2. To refute the Popish Purgatory, if Christ's blood cleanse us from all
sin, what need a Purgatory to expiate any sin? This is a Blasphemy against
Christ's blood.

Q. Do not Temptation, and Affliction, and Word, and Sacraments, and Faith, and
other Graces, purge us from sin, and purify us? It is said of Afflictions,
Heb. 12.11.

A. It is true, there are many means to purge us from sin, but no efficacy in
any of them, except by virtue of Christ's Blood; therefore those in Hell have no
benefit, because Christ's blood reaches not thither, so that if any be bettered
by Afflictions, or Word, or Sacraments, it is from the virtue of Christ's blood,
and if Christ's blood be sprinkled on Purgatory, we will not reject it.

Use 3. Of refutation of the opinion of many godly Divines, that hold we are
purified from the sin of our Birth by the purity of Christ's Birth; from
Sins of Omission by his active obedience, from Sins of Commission by his
passive obedience, but we must know there is thus much in the purity of his
Birth, in his Obedience, in his Passion, that it makes us fit to be cleansed,
but yet we must hold the Blood of Christ cleanses us from all sin, that brings
this fitness to perfection. A Lamb defiled in the old Law was never accepted,
though it were slain for a Sacrifice, and if it had been without spot and
blemish, yet if it had not been slain it would not have been accepted neither;
so had not Christ been a Lamb spotless and undefiled, his death would not
have cleansed us from our sins, and though he were spotless and undefiled, yet
he must be slain, or else we could not be cleansed neither, the purity of
Christ's Nature does not cleanse us from sin; but we must take all jointly
together, all his active obedience was passive, and all his passive obedience
was active, Gal. 4.4, 5. that he was obedient to the Law was part of his
Passion, and by the obedience of Christ to the death, we are cleansed from all
sin.

Use 4. To refute some that say we are justified by faith, as it is a work in
us, they say we are justified not by the works of the Law, but by faith, Romans
11.5, 6. but if we be justified by faith, as it is a work in us, how does the
blood of Christ cleanse us from sin? but it is faith as it lays hold on the
blood of Christ.

Use 5. For comfort to all such as walk in the light, let them not be
discomforted; you will say, your hearts are full of impatience, and
coveteousness, and uncleanness, these are great sins indeed, but the blood of
Christ cleanses from all sin* there is no number nor measure limited.

Object. He cleanses not all men, how shall I know whether my sins be
cleansed?

A. Why, do you walk in the light as God is in the light? if you do, then his
Blood cleanses you from all sin; therefore if a man would have comfort, he
must consider whether he live in any sin voluntarily, and walk in darkness, if
he do, he has no part in Christ's Blood; but if there be no sin, but he is
willing to avoid it; no duty, but he desires to perform it, and amend all, it
is a sign he walks in light; if you see what is amiss and labor to mend it,
then you walk in the light, and then assure your selves the blood of Christ
will cleanse you from all your sins.

Use 6. For instruction, if Christ's blood cleanses from all sin, then no sin
is venial, is that sin venial that cannot be cleansed but by Christ's blood?

Use 7. To show us the reason why the blood of Christ is called precious, 1
Pet. 1.19. it is more precious than the blood of Bulls and Goats, etc. so all
silver and gold in the world cannot remit one sin, or save one soul from Hell,
Psalm. 49.6, 7, 8. Heb. 12.24.

Use 8. To teach Christians notwithstanding all former sins, to walk boldly in
a Christian course; we are much troubled in our spirits by reason of our sins,
the multitude and greatness of them; why in consideration of this, let us be
bold, Heb. 10.19. to 23. we may be bold to approach to Gods Throne, bold to
enter into Heaven, let no sin discourage us, for his blood cleanses from all
sin.

Use 9. If his blood cleanse from all sin, let us make use of his blood, Zech.
13.1. it is even this Fountain of Christ's blood, let us therefore bath our
selves often in this Blood, that we may be thoroughly purged from all sin, from
the stain and guilt of sin.

Use 10. All Ordinances, Word, Prayer, Sacrament, Communion of Saints, all holy
duties will do no good without his blood, therefore desire God that every
Ordinance may be sprinkled by his blood; as Water alone cleanses not without
Soap, so it is not all the waters of Jordan that can cleanse us from dead works
without the blood of Christ strike in with it; let us not rest in any Ordinance
or performance, in any Prayer, or Fast, or in all of them; if you would spend
your blood to cleanse your Souls from sin, all will be in vain, except it be
mixed with Christ's blood, therefore pray that the Word and Sacrament, and every
Ordinance may be sprinkled with Christ's blood to justify, and sanctify: the
blood of Christ has procured sentence of absolution from God, and virtue from
the Spirit of Grace, to wash away all our sins, therefore lay hold on it: this
is to lay hold on the Horns of the Altar, therefore in all Christian
consideration and duties, look chiefly and principally to him, or else all will
be in vain.

1 JOHN 1.8, 9. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the
truth is not in us, etc.


FRom the former Verse S. John gathers a twofold mark of our estate; First in
this verse, If the blood of Christ cleanses us from all sin, then they are
liars that say they have no sin, If we say we have no sin we deceive our
selves, etc. The second mark is verse 9. If we acknowledge our sins, etc.

The first in this Verse, It is a dangerous sign of an evil estate, if we say
we have no sin, for we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us.

Doct. Opinion, and Profession of perfect Holiness, is an error wilful,
pernicious and dangerous.
If we say, 1. In heart, Psalm. 14.1. where such a thought is.

2. To speak such a thing, to say, is to profess so, to carry our selves so,
as may manifest our opinion, Romans 1.22.

That we have no sin, that is, that we are perfectly holy and righteous,

1 It is an error; And

2 Wilful error, for he says so himself.

3 It is a pernicious and dangerous error, it roots out all grace.

First, It is an error, and delusion, for it is contrary to Gods express
Word, Prove. 20.9. Who can say he is clean? Eccl. 7.22. 1 Kings 8.46. James 3.2.
In many things we sin all, both in matter and manner.

Secondly, It is a wilful error, a man does not learn it from others, but he
persuades himself so.

1. Because if any read the Scriptures, he shall find it contrary, Psalm. 130.3.
Psalm. 143.2.

2. Though a man never read the Scriptures, he shall meet with daily crosses,
now a man's own heart will tell him it is for his sin, Job 14.1.

3. None but finds he has need of craving pardon for sin, Zech. 11.4. John
16.9. he shall convince the world of sin, not a man in the world but he is
convinced to be a sinner, therefore none can say he has no sin, but it must be
wilful Error.

Thirdly, It is a dangerous Error,

1. Because it evacuates all truth of Grace, where this conceit is, there can
be no truth of grace, because all truth of grace expresses it self in Three
things;

1 In something about sin, every godly man first renounceth all his own
righteousness, Phil. 3.7, 8.

2 He complains bitterly of sin, Romans 7.24.

3 He fights against sin to the death, Heb. 12.4. Now if every godly man do
thus, how can any truth of grace be, where a man either thinks or professes he
has no sin?

2. Where there is truth of Grace, it expresses it self in some things that
respect the blood of Christ.

1 He prizes it above all blessings in the World, Gal. 6.14. 1 Cor. 2.2. now
what need he prize it so much, if he have no sin?

2 Every godly man desires to bath himself daily in that blood, Zech. 13.1.
now what need that, if he had not sin?

3 Take a Christian man's carriage toward perfection of holiness. He strives
after perfection earnestly every day, Phil. 3.12, 13, 14. what need
Mortification, if there were no sin, or vivification?

Use 1. It convinces many sorts of people to be in a dangerous estate, devoyd
of grace.

1 Such were the Pharisees, that counted themselves just and holy. Such were
the Essaeans, that counted themselves strict observers of the Law of Moses.
Such a one was that young man that came to Christ, Mat. 19.20. but Christ
convinces him that he was not perfect. Such were the Catharists of old, a sect
in the Church that thought themselves pure from all sin.

It reproves likewise the Libertines, that counted themselves perfect keepers
of the Law.

Such are the Papists, that say the Virgin Mary was without sin, she does not
say it her self, she acknowledges a Savior, and therefore had sin.

And so all they are deceivers of themselves, that so live as if they were free
from sin, that conceive well of themselves in a carnal Estate; and such is the
body of the World, they will, it may be, say they are sinners, but why then do
they not repent and mourn for sin? why, they see no need of that, I have lived
honestly all my life, and I hope my Estate is good, and so deceive themselves.

Use 2. Hence we see a necessity laid on Ministers, to peeach the Law, or else
how shall people see their sins? by the the Law comes sin to be revived, Romans
7.7.

Use 3. If it be so wilful and dangerous an Error, then it behooves contrary
judgments, to carry themselves as those that are of another opinion; do you
believe you are guilty indeed of many sins, why then profess it, and carry
your selves so, and that by an inward renouncing of all your sins, mourn for
them, strive against them, otherwise you do not profess your selves to be
sinners, unless your hearts prize the blood of Christ, desire to be bathed in
it; and if you do think your selves to be sinners, daily get more hold of
Grace, you are yet sinful and miscrable, therefore need more Grace.

Use 4. If we be all sinners, then let us learn to bear Gods hand patiently,
Micah 7.9. is any froward and impatient in affliction? he professes he is no
sinner, he that practices Impatience, professes Innocence; for if a man be
Innocent, he will be ready to storm, if a man takes crosses impatienly, he
thinks they fall on him undeservedly.

Use 5. Learn not to be censorius, reject not others for sin; we ought not to
do so, but for wallowing and walking in sin, but despise them not for sin, for
in many things we sin all, and truly if we be over censorius, we profess our
selves to be no sinners, for if we were, we would pity them, and look most to
our selves, Mat. 7.5, 6.

If we say we have no sin, we have no truth in us.

Now on the contrary, Verse 9. we have a note of a good estate, If we
acknowledge our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to
cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

Doct. Unfeigned confession of our sins to God, is the ready way to the pardon
and healing of them.
Confession is the ready way to Justification and Sanctification, pardoning of
sin, and cleansing from sin.

This place is stood upon by Bellarmine for auricular confession, he says, it
is meant of confession, not to God, but to the Priest, and what is his ground
but this? to the confession here spoken of, is a promise made of pardon, but no
word of promise in Scripture to confession to God, but to confession to the
Apostles and Ministers of Christ, John 20.23. But

1. It is a notorious Falsehood to say, that no promise is made to him that
confesses to God. Prove. 28.13. we understand it of confession to God; he
denies it, because he speaks it of confession to him from whom sin may be hid,
which cannot be from God. But yet many a man hides his sin from himself, and
will not search into his own heart, and labors to hide it from God, Isa.
29.15. Ps. 32.3, 4, 5. And that that place in the Proverbs is meant of
confession to God, appears, in that he speaks it of confessing to him of whom
he might find mercy, but confession to man often brings ruin. I would yet
further ask them, if there be no place that expresses pardon to him that
confesses his sins toward the Temple? see Psalm. 32.5, 6. Job 33.27. and that
whole prayer of Solomon, 1 Kings 8. runs on promise of Pardon to him that
confesses to God, and God answers to that Petition, Chap. 9.3. and now that
Solomon's Temple is destroyed, we have a greater than the Temple, whereof that
was but a type; if we confess our Sins, and put up our Prayers in the name of
Christ, our Sins shall be pardoned and healed, and for that place, John 20.23.
we say there is no mention of Confession, but they have a power to remit them
without confession, according to Acts 9.17. Ananias comes to him without
hearing a word from him, Acts 22.16. his Sins were not remitted by confessing
them to Ananias, but by calling on the Name of the Lord; indeed if a man be
burdened in Conscience, it is meet he should confess his faults to the
faithful Ministers of God, and request their help and prayers, James 5.16.
which is meant of Ministers, as well as Laymen; of Christians in general, Mal.
2.7.

Q. But what difference will you make between Ministers and Laymen, if you say
we may confess our faults to Laymen in private?

A. When Christ says, those sins you remit are remitted, it is not me^^t that
they have judicial power to absolve them, and say, Ego absolvo te, in nemine
Patris, filii, and spiritus sancti: but he has given them a Ministerial power
to declare remission of sins to them that are penitent, if they see them
penitent and humble, they may declare some promise whereto pardon is annexed.

Obj. But common Christians may do thus, and is there no difference between
Ministers and them?

Ans. God is wont more usually to bless a Ministers discerning of the estate
of a man, and applying comfort than other common Christians, Romans 10.14.15. the
ordinary way of faith, and to get comfort by faith, is by the Ministry of the
Gospel, If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins; faithful and just, expressing the truth and righteousness of God, in
making good his promise to those that confess their sins.

To forgive Sin, is to free a man from Sin, and Punishment, and to remit it,
Jer. 31.33.

To cleanse from Sin, is to mortify Sin, and quicken Grace.

Reas. 1. In respect of God;

1. From the great Honor confession of Sin does to Gods Justice, no man
confesses his Sin to God, but he glorifies Gods Justice, though he should deal
never so hardly with him, yet his Justice should be magnified, Psalm. 51. Neh.
9.33. Dan. 9.7.

2. It sanctifies the name of Gods grace; why does the Apostle so set out the
sinfulnes of all, in Cap. 2. and 3. ad Romans but that he might magnify the
riches of Gods grace? it shows, that if they have any mercy it is from Free
Grace.

Reas. 2. In respect of our selves;

1. It exceedingly humbles us, and makes us willing to accept any hand of God,
Lev. 26.41, 42. how do these men come to be humbled? if they confess their
sins, and the sins of their Fathers, this will humble them.

2. Confession of sin to God, does restrain us from Commission of sin, for a
man considers he must come before God, and break his heart for it, and an
ingenuous heart is more ashamed of his sin before God, than before men, Ps. 51.
Against thee, against thee only have I sinned, that most affected him.

3. Confession of Sin makes us examine our selves, and that is very profitable
when a man comes and considers the frame of his heart and life, it afflicts him
much, as the searching of a Wound does anguish the Body, so examination of our
selves does much afflict our souls.

Now for the properties of this Confession, it must be serious and sincere, and
with a resolution to do so no more, when a man confesses his sins with grief
of heart that he has offended God, and resolves never to do the like again,
this is very effectual.

Use 1. It serves to teach us, that in Scripture phrase the repentance of an
humble Sinner goes before Justification, and Sanctification; many a man comes
to be humbled, and yet is confident his sin is neither forgiven nor his heart
sanctified: if Confession be the way to Pardon, what need a man confess his
Sins, if he be truly persuaded they be forgiven? we grant therefore that
Repentance is the way to Pardon, to the sense of it at least. It is a question
whether Repentance go before Faith, or Faith before Repentance. I answer, if
you take it practically, there is no man that either believes his sin
pardonned, or healed, till he brought to Humiliation, contrition, and sorrow.

Use 2. To teach all that stand either in need of pardon of Sin, or cleansing
from Sin, what course to take; the best have need to increase it; but did
thou not find pardon at all, or cleansing here is a plain Promise, If we
confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins; as if he
should say, If we should confess our Sins truly, and yet find no pardon, it
would violate the faithfulness and righteousness of God.

Obj. You will say, you have confessed your sins often before God, and yet have
found no pardon?

Answ. Have you confessed your chief sins, by which you have most dishonored
God? if you hold back any, no wonder if God hold back comfort; he that hides
his sin shall not prosper, Prove. 28.13.

Obj. You will say, you have dealt plainly with God, as far as you can tell?

Answ. I ask you, has your Confession been serious, heartily grieving for
dishonouring of God, giving him the praise of his Justice, that you have
deserved nothing but Hell, and do you magnify his Mercy, and humble your
Souls? why in this case God may suspend the feeling of pardon, but you are in
the way to pardon: would you commit those sins again you confess? do you hate
and abhor them? then you are cleansed from them; if sin be your greatest
burden, then it is pardoned: and you could not be cleansed from sin unless sin
were pardoned; for the same blood of Christ mortifies Sin, that justifies us:
Therefore as ever you desire to find pardon, go to God, confess your Sins,
deal plainly and seriously, that your hearts may be humbled, and you shall
find pardon; he does not indeed limit the time, he may make good this promise,
to some sooner, to some later; but there is none but he will make it good to
them, if they wait upon him.

Use 3. Of consolation to every Soul that does confess Sin to God, that does
truly and seriously confess, and grieve, and mourn for his Sins: that
confesses those Sins whereby he has most dishonored God and wounded his own
soul, 1 Samuel 12.19. if you do thus, God will certainly pass by all your
transgressions; God that has pawned his Faith, and Truth, and Justice on it,
will certainly do it: an honest man will not fail in such a case, therefore we
may build on Gods Promise, for it is as impossible he should deny pardon to
such a one as it is for him to be unfaithful or untrue; and though you shall
find many corruptions, yet you may conclude you are in the way to further
comfort and cleansing, therefore let every one, that desires to find comfort
in the pardon of his Sin and cleansing from it, confess his Sin to God; God
has promised to do it, therefore if you desire to find pardon and cleansing
increased, you must look up to him, that so you may have your Sins pardoned and
cleansed through Christ.

And cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

Doct. It is a filthy thing to lie in Sin unpardoned, or sin unpardoned is
filthiness and uncleanness, it is an unclean and filthy thing.
Ezekiel. 36.25. Zech. 13.1. There is a Fountain set open for Sin, and for
uncleanness, 2 Cor. 7.1. where we see he calls Sin, filthiness and
uncleanness; there are many other expressions in this kind, God is willing to
possess men with this truth, therefore he compares it to most filthy things.

1. To mire and dirt, which the Sea casts out, Isa. 57.20. which is meant of
casting forth sinfulness, 2 Pet. 2. ult. it is compared to a vomit, and a Sows
wallowing in the mire, which is loathsome, Ezekiel. 24.6. it is compared to scum
which is cast into the fire, or into ashes, Jer. 16.17. it is called the
carcass of detestable and abominable things; hence it is that our best duties
are sometimes compared to a menstruous cloth, Isa. 64.6. so it is called
uncircumcision, Col. 2.14. and therefore wicked men are compared to dung, Psalm.
83.10. and Mal. 2.3. God says he will cast the dung of their solemn Feasts
upon their faces, that is, their sinful carriage of holy Ordinances, so that
God counts sin, mire, and scum, and dung, etc. he would have us to look at sin
as a congeries of all filthiness, if you would put it all together sin would
comprehend all.

Hence it is, that the best performances of wicked men are unclean, Titus.
1.15. the sacrifices of the wicked are an abomination, Prove. 28.9. why is sin
so loathsome?

1. Because it is that which comes naturally from man corrupt, it is the
natural issue of corrupt nature, therefore loathsome; the excrement of a clean
person is loathsome, much more of a corrupt, now this is but the issue of a
corrupt nature, Lev. 15.8. That which is born of the flesh, is flesh, John 3.6.
Job 25.5. Job 14.4.

Use 1. A ground of reproof to any that boast in sin, if it be as mire, or
scum, or dung, or a vomit, how vainly do they glory, that glory in sin, they
glory in their shame, Phil. 3.19. they glory in dung, in their vomit, in their
base filthiness, Isa. 3.9. it is a woeful case to profess filthiness openly;
if men do thus, woe be to them.

Use 2. It should stir us up not to lie in sin, one day to an end; if a child
should lie in its dung, or if we should, we would think we were unfit for
civil company, yet such are we, as long as we lie in sin unpardoned; it should
therefore spur us on to repentance, and not to rest, till we get sin pardoned,
we shall then be washed from our filthiness.

Use 3. To move us to help one another out of sin, we should count it beastly
and sluttish, if we should let a Child lie in its filth, so are we, if we let
any that we can help, lie in their own defilements of sin; and were our minds
as quick to smell as our bodies, we should as much loath the smell or presence
of sin, as of filthy dung: it is for want of spiritual sense, that we are no
more affected with it.

Use 4. To provoke us to more earnest wrestling for cleansing from sin; when we
have defiled our selves with sin, none can help us out but God, others may help
the work forward, but none can effectually cleanse us but God, therefore we
should come before God as the Saints of God have done, Ezra 9.6. Jer. 31.18,
19. Dan. 9.7. we must not come before God with extenuation, like Adam; we
should be ashamed to come into company with defiled bodies, we should not say
it is our infirmity or a looseness we are subject to, we have our spiritual
looseness from God, from prayer, from our callings, from holy duties, this is
a loathsome thing to pretend loosnesse or infirmity in filthy things, therefore
let us take shame to our selves, and strive for cleansing, Psalm. 51.7. he would
be thorughly cleansed.

Use 5. It may stir us up to take heed of evil company without, and corruption
within; a man should loath to keep company with base filthy unclean fellows,
Drunkards, Swearers, etc. 2 Cor. 6.17. and the same Apostle exhorts to cleanse
our selves from all filthiness within, 2 Cor. 7.1. we would be loath to have
any filthy unclean thing about us, so we should cleanse our selves from all
sin, because it is a remnant of filthiness.

Use 6. It may show us the wonderful preciousnesse of the blood of Christ, and
the no less wonderful favor and love of God toward us; were not Christ's
blood of wonderful efficacy, it could not cleanse such base filthy sinful
lusts, so Gods favor, were it not wonderful, he would not take upon him such
an homely office: Women, if they were not Mothers, would not take such homely
offices up, as to cleanse their Children from their filth; why if God were not
of the like affection to us, he would not cleanse us from our filthiness, we
count it an homely office, to sweep sincks, and scum pots, etc, this is Gods
office, if he did not sweep the Sinck, and scum off the scum of our hearts, it
would never be done; and therefore it shows the tender affection of God toward
us, in that he is willing to take such an office upon him, to cleanse us from
our filthiness, he poures clean water upon us; all other means will do no
good without him; it is with us as it is with young Infants that would lie in
their defilements, if their Mothers did not make them clean, and so would we
even wallow in the defilements of sin, if God did not cleanse us, therefore
admire Gods love and mercy toward us.

Use 7. It is a good help to mortification, if we consider what a loathsome
thing sin is, and what pure eyes God is of, it would be an antidote against
sin, shall we commit such filthiness in Gods sight, to make our selves so base
and loathsome before him?

Doct. All sin is unrighteousness, (and cleanse us from all unrighteousness,
that is, from all sin.)
Sin and unrighteousness, the one explains the other, Romans 6.13. yield not
your Members weapons of Unrighteousness, that is, weapons of sin; sometimes
Unrightnesse is properly confined to the sins of the second Table, as
unholinesse to the first, but sometimes righteousness comprehends the whole
course of a Christian, and Unrighteousness comprehends all sins. (...).

Reas. Because every sin does either God wrong, or others, or our selves;
Righteousness gives every one his due; if we sin in temperance, we debase and
defile our selves, if we sin in theft or slander, we wrong others in their
goods or good names, if we worship not God as God, if we keep not his Sabbaths,
or profane his name, we wrong God.

Use 1. Shows the Error of those, who think if they pay every man his own, they
are righteous men; why, do you no wrong? are you not sinners? yes they will
say, why then you are not righteous, for every sin does wrong to God, our
selves, or others.

Others say, if they wrong any, it is themselves; why, it is unrighteousness
to wrong your selves.

2. As you love innocence, live righteously; do God no wrong, others no wrong,
your selves no wrong, otherwise you are unrighteous.

3. For Comfort to any that have their souls cleansed by the blood of Christ
from all filthiness, we are holy, set at liberty from all filthiness, and all
unrighteousness.

Doct. Sin pardoned is ever cleansed, sin pardoned is sin cleansed, what sin
God pardons, the same sin he cleanses.
Heb. 9.14. The same blood that pardons, cleanses us from sin.

Reas. From the power of the death of Christ, which serves not only to procure
pardon of sin, but likewise healing of sin, for his blood is offered up as a
ransom for sin, well then it is pardoned, but it is not only so, but it is a
means to kill and mortify sin, Romans 6.6. there is a destructive power to kill
sin, as well as meritorious power to pardon sin; now his death is said to
mortify sin in us.

1. Exemplariter, For if Christ be dead, we also shall die with him to sin,
Romans 6.9. and 11.

2. It has a natural Efficacy, as it is an object for us to look at as fearful
and formidable; when sin presents it self, we look at it as crucifying Christ,
and shall we look on it without mourning, Zech. 12.10. shall we wrong him so
much as to crucify him again?

3. His blood cleanses sin, in obtaining at Gods hand a Spirit of
Sanctification, which makes the death of the Head, reach to the lowest Members
of the body, as when the head dies, all the Members die, so the death of Christ
having obtained the Spirit of God from him, if he our head die, then we shall
die to sin: as the resurrection of Christ procures vivification, so the death
of Christ, mortification, Gal. 4.4, 5.

Obj: If sin be always mortified where it is pardoned, how comes it to pass
that godly men fall so often into the same sin? Does not David confess that
there was a way of lying in him, Psalm. 119.29: Remove from me the way of lying;
which implies it was not one act, but a way, a course that he walked in
sometimes; so Isaac, Genesis 26. told the same Lie, both to the Philistims, and
Abimelech; so it was with Jonah, he was froward before he went to Niniveh, and
froward afterward; how is it then, that sin may be cleansed and yet renewed,
and if renewed how cleansed?

Ans. It is with Sin in this respect as with Sampsons Hair, it may be cut, but
it will grow again; Sin may be mortified in some kind, and yet renewed again,
because Sin in this Life is mortified but in part; Pride, Wantonness,
Coveteousnesse in part are mortified, but in part alive, and if we neglect the
practice of mortification, that sin we had got some mastery of, we shall fall
into again: if Sin break out again it is because we neglect those means we
should mortify Sin by; he does not say, the blood of Christ has cleansed us,
but cleanses; Does cleanse, implying that cleansing is a continued Act, the
blood of Christ is a notable Medicine to heal Sin, and purge from filthiness,
but if a man neglect to apply this Plaster to his Soul, it may not be so
effectual as it would.

Use 1. For trial, whether our Sins be pardoned or no, would you know whether
your Sin be pardoned? why then it is also cleansed, if your Sin be not cleansed
in some measure, it is not pardoned at all; therefore look at your Sins if they
be healed, then they are certainly pardoned, for it is the same blood of Christ
that both heals and pardons Sin, Hos. 14.4. God does not only love freely, and
pardon graciously, but he heals them also; therefore consider, do you find
your Sins healed, that is, that they have not that power they had before, do
they seem loathsome to you, whereas before you delighted in them, now in heart
you hate them, and in practice avoid them, then those Sins are pardoned, and if
he pardons one Sin he pardons all, his pardons are universal; but if a man
live in Sin still, and love it as well, and is no more ashamed than formerly he
had been, but goes on in the same Sin, truly it is not healed, and then not
pardoned.

Obj. I feel my sin so far from being mortified, that it grows more strong and
vigorous, therefore what shall I think of my self?

Ans. It may grow stronger in our feeling, when it is not so in it self, it is
not because Sin is stronger, but our sense is more quick, a man that is in
extemity of Sickness, he feels no pain, but when be begins to recover, he
feels more pain, why then the Disease is not stronger, but he is more sensible.

2. Do you not find that Sin is more loathsome and bitter to you? then it is
in some measure mortified, for mortifying is a borrowed specch from a Surgions
mortifying a Wound: they use to bind the joint, and stop all spirit and blood,
so that it is made insensible of pain; so if we have stopped the freeness of our
spirits to Sin, we are not so lively and frolic to Sin, it is a sign
corruption is mortified, but if you see you are as lively, and ready, and
delight as much in Sin as before, Sin is not mortified, but if it grow
loathsome and bitter to us, it is a sign of mortification.

Use 2. Directs us how to make good use of the blood of Christ, not only to
pardon our Sins, but to heal them; we are not wont to make use of it for
pardon, but we must make use of it as well for healing, for else we take the
blood of Christ in vain, if we make use of it to pardon and not to cleanse, for
his blood was sent as well to pardon as to heal, therefore pray not to God to
pardon your sins through Christ's blood only, but lay his blood warm to your
hearts every day, that so you may have your hearts and ways cleansed; it is a
continued act, not of one day or two, but throughout our whole life we should
make use of Christ's blood to cleanse us.

1. Consider what great things he did for us, the just for the unjust, and the
meditation thereof will make us ashamed of sin.

2. Pray to God for the quickening work of his Spirit, that the same blood of
Christ that has procured pardon, may also procure healing for us.

Use 3. It may teach us all to labor to grow in cleanness of heart and life,
for the blood of Christ cleanses us, Zech. 13.1. a Fountain that runs into a
Channel that is muddy, it will by continual running cleanse it; so though
Christ find our spirits muddy and defiled, yet we should let it run daily on
us, and be ever rincing of our hearts at the fountain.

Use 4. Comfort to all Gods Servants, that have had any experience of the
pardon of their sins; you shall certainly in time feel and find healing and
cleansing from your sins; if you see a clear Fountain running into a filthy
Channel it is very muddy and the worse for the present, the mud being stirred,
but afterward it is cleansed and made pure and clean; so Christ's blood may run
into muddy spirits, and that blood at first may make corruption more stirring,
you find more pride, and vanity, and uncleanness; but will it hold so? no
truly, in cleansing it will cleanse, and go on till it has purged all
corruption.

1 JOHN 1.10. If we say that we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his
Word is not in us.


THese words are a repetition of the former, v. 8. but with some addition, he
aggravates this sin; they do not only make themselves liars, but they make
God a Liar, which is not only Blasphemous, but Heretical, it extirpates all
the truth of the Word.

Doct. Opinion and Profession of perfect righteousness even in those that are
cleansed by the blood of Christ, is not only an Error, but a blasphemous and
heretical Error, it is Sacrilegious and Heretical.
For having told us before, that if we confess our sins, God is faithful and
just to forgive us our sins, and that the blood of Christ cleanses us from all
unrighteousness, yet if after this we say we have no sin, we do not only
make our selves liars, but God a liar, for if he be not a true God he is no
God, and his word is not in us; that is, no part of the Word is in such a man.

Q. But why does St. John repeat this thing, had he not said enough before,
that he repeats it?

Ans. 1. Before it might be thought that he spoke of Carnal men, therefore to
make it manifest, that even those that had confessed their sins, and were
cleansed from unrighteousness, yet even those if they should say they had no
sin should make not only themselves liars, but God a Liar; therefore he
repeats it.

2. He saw that men were ready to cleanse themselves from sin sinfully; if we
can by any pretense, we will be ready to free our selves from such opinion of
sinfulness, therefore he presses it, that indeed we are so foul that if we say
the contrary we have no spark of Religion in us, not one spark of the Word
dwells in us.

3. Because it is a point of great necessity to believe the contrary truth,
therefore he takes up this conclusion again; To say, is either In Heart, In
Word, In Carriage:


Well, to say thus, is to make God a Liar, and so no God, for if he be not a
God of Truth, he is no God; for, Verum and bonum convertuntur.

Q. Why does he make God a Liar?

A. 1. Because God has given his Son Christ to cleanse us from all sin, and to
what end should he send Christ to cleanse sin, if we had no sin; he that says
he has no sin, overthrows the coming of Christ, and the cleansing virtue his
blood.

2. God has often said, all men are Sinners, in his Word, Romans 3.23. Gal. 3,
22. Job 15.14. What is man that he should be clean? Job 7.20. David an holy
man, yet professes, Psalm. 130.3. Psalm. 143.2. the perfectest of Gods Servants
have testified of themselves, that they are Sinners, therefore if we say we
have not sinned, we make God a Liar.

Q. What is meant, when he says, the Word is not in him?

A. 1. It is not in his judgment, when he is not persuaded of it.

2. It is not in his heart, when he trusts not in it, and receives it not in
love, and the saving efficacy of it; he that says he has no sin receives not
the word; he speaks of the Word here, as Verbum salutiferum, Acts 20.32. 1
These. 2.13. 2 Timothy 3.15. Now the Word is said not to be in a man when there is
not so much Word as will save; a man may be ignorant of some Divine truths, and
yet the Word of God may be in him, but if he want the Knowledge and Faith of
such Points, without which he cannot be saved, the Word dwells not in him; now
he that denies sin to be in him, there is not only a denial of that truth, but
he is empty of all other saving truths.

All the Saving Truths of God are comprehended; 1 In Repentance for Sin. 2 Some
lead on to Faith for pardon. 3 Some lead to Mortification of Sin. 4 Some tend
to Sanctification from Sin, to be accomplished in due time; now if a man be
without sin, to what purpose are all such exhortations to Repentance? To what
purpose are all Scriptures tending to faith in Christ? To what purpose are such
as tend to Mortification, or Sanctification; so that he that denies sin to be
in him, he not only sins against God, and makes him a Liar, but he does also
Heretically err in overthrowing all saving Truth; the Doctrine of Repentance,
of Mortification, of Faith, of Sanctification, all these are over-thrown.


If a man apprehend or profess perfection in himself, it is impossible a man
should have any truth of Grace, believing he has no need of Repentance, or
Faith in Christ, or Mortification, or Sanctification, this is a terrible point;
St. John may well be called Boanerges, a son of Thunder, for these are
thundering speeches; he that says he has no sin is a Liar, against himself,
against God, a Blasphemer, an Heretic.

Use 1. To confute perfect obedience to the Law, as the Papists hold, that
Justification is by Works, were there no other Errors but this, it is
Blasphemous, Atheistical, and Heretical, and overturns the foundation of
Religion, for what is the foundation of Religion but the Doctrine of
Repentance, and Faith? and if any be justified by Works, he has neither need
of Repentance, or Faith, if righteousness be by the Law, then Christ dyed in
vain, and his blood is of no effect, Gal. 5.14. therefore that opinion is vain,
that Popish Religion and ours may be reconciled, let St. John put in his
judgment, he tells you, that he that says he has no sin, that he has
fulfilled the Law, and is justified by Works, there is no truth, no saving
truth in that Religion that teaches so, therefore it is impossible he should
have any saving Religion in him, that holds Justification by Works, that holds
Merits, he makes God a Liar, and his Word is not in him; For,

1 God then should send his Son in vain, Gal. 2.19, 20.

2 Christ himself should be in vain, and should lie, for he teaches us to
pray, Forgive us our debts; now if we have none, Christ lies in saying so.

3 The Holy Ghost should be a Liar, when he was sent to convince us of sin, and
there is none in us, he should lie unto us.

2 It shows the wickedness of their Opinion, who say, the Virgin Mary had no
sin; if she had said so her self, she had been a Liar, and no truth had been
in her.

3 It reproves the Catharists of old.

Use 2. It shows us a necessity of taking up daily such a persuasion as this,
that this day we sin, this day we have need of Christ, and need of Faith; we
must daily take up this persuasion, or else we have no saving truth in our
hearts, and if every day we be possessed with a persuasion that we are subject to
sin, not only Venial but Mortal; that we have need of Christ, of Repentance,
of Faith, and that we can never say, This is the day wherein I have not sinned,
if we be thus possessed, it will lead us on to all that saving Knowledge of God,
and of the Word, as may keep our hearts always in an holy frame, such a man
will be ready to think I have need to renew my Repentance to day, I have need
to lay hold upon Christ, I have need of Mortification, therefore the Apostle
would have us take up a daily continual persuasion of this, that we are
sinners; therefore we are daily to consider with our selves wherein we have
failed, and to renew our Repentance, and to look up to God for pardon of such
and such sins, and for sanctification, otherwise we shall weaken our grace; and
Divine truth daily; if we daily take not up such a persuasion, we shall begin
to sit loose from the saving truths of Gods Word, and the power of it in our
hearts: not but that many Christians may sit loose from this truth, yet so far
as we neglect this, so far we dishonor God, and weaken our grace.

Use 3. It will serve to teach us, that whosoever walks in the sense of his own
sinfulness, is possessed of it, and conscious of it, such glorify Gods Truth,
and magnify the power of his Word in their hearts, God has said it, and we
witness it in our hearts, we bear witness that Christ was not sent in vain,
that the Holy Ghost was not sent in vain, Mat. 21.31. Publicans and Harlots
enter into the Kingdom of God before you; Why? because Publicans and Harlots
were sensible of their sinfulness, and so would soon be convinced of their
sinful estate, and so acknowledge their need of Repentance, of Faith, of
Mortification, and Sanctification, whereas the Pharisees that thought
themselves just, they were not sensible of their sinful estate, and so saw not
the need of Repentance, etc.

Use 4. And because St. John writes this Epistle, that their joy might be full,
that the joy of a Christian may be always like the Moon in the Full, never in
the Wain and Eclipse, as any Christian therefore desires such fullness of joy,
let him be daily sensible of his sin, what is the reason that many Christians
fail in their confidence, and fall into doubts concerning their estate? I would
ask you, whether you have walked in a sense of your sinfulness daily? If not,
no wonder though your joy be over clouded and Eclipsed; Saint John would have
us strongly persuaded of this, If we say we have no sin, we make God a Liar,
etc. therefore if any Christian can go all the day without any sense or remorse
for sin, his heart startles him not, if it be thus, no wonder though his joy be
eclipsed; On the contrary, if you go on continually in a sensible apprehension
of your sinfulness, and so renew your Repentance, and Faith, and
Mortification, this will make you still to cleanse your selves daily, and so
you would keep your joy renewed daily. We never had cause to complain of our
estate, but it was by reason of hardness of heart, and how come our hearts to
be hardened, sin gets within us, and we perceive it not, and so we are hardened
by it, and then our joy is overclouded, Heb. 12.13, 14. Heb. 3.13. therefore if
we would keep our hearts from hardness, let us labor to spy out our sins, and
be humbled for them daily, and so you will keep a soft heart, and a soft heart
is commonly peaceable.

1 JOHN 2.1, 2. My little Children these things write I unto you, that ye sin
not. And if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous.

And he is the propitiation for our sins: and not for ours only, but also for
the sins of the whole world.


Upon the former points delivered, might arise an Objection to encourage men to
sin; thus it arises, If Confession of sins be a means to have them pardoned,
and if the blood of Christ cleanse us from all unrighteousness, then it is but
going to God, and confessing our sins after we have sinned, and we shall be
pardoned.

2. Whereas he says, If we say we have no sin we deceive our selves, and there
is no truth in us, it might be Objected, To what end then should we strive
against sin, seeing do we what we can we shall still sin?

Against both these Objections he shows them in the Text, that he writes not
these things to embolden them in sin, but to discourage them from sin; These
things I write unto you, that ye sin not.

The Parts of these words are Three; 1. A loving compellation, My little
Children; 2. A declariton of the end of his writing, viz. their innocence, that
they sin not. 3. A consolation to them, who notwithstanding fall into sin, for
this he tells them, Christ was both an Advocate and an Atonement.


1. For the Compellation, My little children; he speaks not of Natural, but
Spiritual Children, such as are justified and sanctified; justified, as appears
v. 12. sanctified, as appears v. 13. when he calls them, My little Children; it
implies therein such as his Ministry helped to beget to God.

Doct. Such as are the Instruments under God of our Conversion, Justification
and Sanctification, they are to us as Spiritual Fathers, and we to them as
little Children.
It is a speech often used by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4.15. where he prefers
himself before all other Teachers they had, he begat them; so he calls
Timothy, 1 Timothy 2.2. Tit. 1.4. so he calls Onesimus in Philemon, Phil. 2.22.

Reas. From the resemblance betwixt them and Natural Parents, as they beget
Children of that seed they infuse, so Ministers beget Children of the Immortal
Seed of the Word, 1 Pet. 1.23, 24, 25. as in Natural Seed, so in Spiritual,
there is a more Material, and a more Spiritual part, the Material part is the
Letter of the Word, the more Spiritual part is the Spirit conveyed in it; now
because Ministers together with the Word convey the Spirit, therefore they
begetting Children of such a Word, they are called Fathers, and those so
begotten, Children.

Obj. Mat. 23.9. Call no man Father, etc.

Ans. He does not forbid to call such Ministers Spiritual Fathers, but he
forbids the affectation of such Titles, many affect to be called Fathers of the
Church, that never begat any to God, as the Pharisees did; Non appellatio, sed
affectatio prohibetur.

2. Non appellatio, sed denominatio prohibetur; If any one will be the Father
of such a Sect or Faction, to draw Disciples after them, 1 Cor. 1.12. as if any
affected to be called Calvinists, or Lutherans, because they affected their
Doctrine, the domination of Factions and Sects is forbid, but we should look at
all as Members of one Christ, and Ministers are but all Servants of the same
Christ, 1 Cor. 3.5. to 9. if men will be divided, and some will be of Paul, and
some of Apollo, etc. this is forbidden.

3. Non appellatio, sed fiducia interdicitur, not the call of such, but the
confidence on them, as when we trust more to their sayings, because they are
ancient; then to the Scripture, or to others of equal Grace and Gifts.

2. Ministers are not to affect such Titles, to be called Rabbi, or Master,
etc. this is forbidden, so then we see Christ did not simply forbid such Titles.

Use 1. Of direction to Ministers, or such as intend the Ministry, what is it
about which they are most to bend their endeavors? to be fruitful, to beget
Children to God: it is meet for a Minister to look at the good respect of the
people, and living, and maintenance, but he is chiefly to desire and bend his
endeavors to beget Children to God, to beget such to God whom he may respect
as Children, with like care and diligence; for a man to look at preferment, or
credit, or wealth, these are but husks of his employment, the true end of his
Calling is to beget Children.

How may that be done?

1. He is to look that he grow strong himself, for weak men in nature are not
prolifici, therefore Ministers must labor to grow strong in grace, a man
without grace seldom begets any to God, therefore they must first mortify
sin, and then increase in grace, Prove. 11.13.

2. There may be strength in Ministers, yet there may be a disproportion
betwixt them, and their people, therefore Ministers and people must strive to
keep a proportion and correspondence, he must see how he may accommodate
himself to the temper of his people, they must with Paul, become all to all,
that they may beget some: in any thing that is lawful he must acommodate, but
he must by no means comply to the evil humors of his people, Jer. 15.19. for
then he brings contempt upon his Life and Doctrine.

3. Look that your Seed be Spiritual, that is, the pure Word dispensed in the
Spirit and Power, mingle no Traditions or Tricks of your wit with it, if you
do, your Seed is corrupt, and wants vigor, a velvet scabbard dulls the edge
of the Sword, so the Word decked over with Human eloquence is like a Sword in a
velvet scabbard, it hinders the power of it, what has the Chafe to do with
the Wheat? Jer. 23.28, 29. you must not mingle the Word with the dreams and
fancies of men, but dispense the Word in the power and evidence of the Spirit,
and labor to have the Word sealed in your hearts, that you may speak out of
the heart and inward affection; that Word which comes from the heart, sooner
goes to the heart.

Use 2. It may teach Hearers how to hear the Word of God aright, if Ministers
are so to dispense the Seed of the Word that they may beget Children to God,
then Hearers must learn how to apply themselves toward their Ministers, not to
content themselves in having gotten good Ministers, and their respect to them
(though these be very good) till you be Children to him whom he has begot if
you were not so before, or if you were, yet Children to be nursed by him; suck
nourishment from him, grow in grace under him, labor to receive stronger meat
from him, that you may become Fathers to others, Heb. 5.12. it yields much
comfort to the spirit of a man, when he can say, the seed of such and such a
Sermon converted him, it often fills a man with many doubts, because he has
not discerned the power of the Word.

Use 3. It may teach both Ministers and people so to carry themselves one
toward another, as Fathers and Children; as many times a Mariner carries a
King over Sea, but though he be a Prince, yet in that case he must be ruled by
the Mariner; so a Minister may teach Princes and great men, and they in this
case must be as Children to him.

1. People are to give their Teachers such kind of respect as Children owe to
Parents, Gal. 4.14, 15.

2. Children owe to Parents imitation in any good carriage, and the more they
see the Image of God in them, the more they are to imitate them; so people are
to follow their Ministers in any good counsel or carriage, that is the duty of
Children to their Spiritual Fathers, 1 Cor. 4.15, 16. it will lie upon the
Consciences of people to imitate any virtues they see in their Teachers,
because they are their Fathers, as Children do imitate their Parents.

3. Obedience in the Lord is required of Hearers, Phil. 2.22. speaking of
Timothy, says he, Ye know the proof of him, how as a Son with the Father he
served with me in the Gospel, he makes it his commendation, he never commanded
any duty to him, but he readily obeyed him as a Child his Father, he showed
professed obedience to the Gospel of Christ; so people are to yield obedience
to the Gospel of Christ, which they receive from their Ministers.

Now on the other side, it also teaches Ministers wherein to show their
Fatherhood to their people, not only in begetting Children, for that is the
least part of Paternity, but they are not then to leave them, for still there
are some Corruptions cleaving to Children from the Womb, which if they be not
helped against, they will perish, Ezekiel. 16.4. so Ministers will be but
Murderers, if when they have begotten Children by the Seed of the Word, they
leave them to their rawnesse, and corruptions of their own hearts, and do not
help them against them, and help them to grow in grace, and make progress in
Christianity.

2. Parents train up their Children in all knowledge, they can help them to,
either in Learning, or Trades; Isa. 6.18. so Ministers are to adorn their
people with such Graces and Ornaments that they may give them up to Christ, as
Brides fitted for him, 2 Cor. 11.2, 3.

3. Ministers are to provide for them an eternal Inheritance, 2 Cor. 12.14.
Parents lay up for their Children, they labor to get an Estate to leave to
their Posterity; so Ministers are to lay up an eternal weight of glory for
their people, not only to get them into Heaven, but to load them with an
eternal weight of glory, fill them with patience and Humility, etc. and all
the graces of Gods Spirit, for the Spirit of glory rests upon such, he should
help them to grow in grace, that they might be filled with glory.

1. And first, labor to help them to grow in Humility, a man must lay down all
ambitious thoughts, or else he will never come to Heaven, Matthew. 18.2, 3. David
could not get a Kingdom till he had learned to be like a weaned child, Psalm.
131. Jer. 45. ult. however we shall get but a poor piece of glory; the means to
be exalted in Heaven, is to be humble here on Earth, an humble spirit shall be
a glorious Soul; before Honor goes Humility.

2. Labor to help them with patience and constancy, for if with well-doing
they grow patient in suffering, and be ready to run through all conditions for
Christ's Cause, and the Gospel, great is their reward in Heaven, Mat. 5.10, 11.
rest not when you have begotten them, and see some truth of grace wrought in
them, but lay up for them a plentiful treasure in Heaven; help them to be rich
in grace, that they may be rich in glory at length.

Three Graces especially go to the attaining of the excellency of Glory, Zeal
in doing Gods Will, Patience in suffering, and Humility in both; and Zeal
breeds fruitfulness, Luke 19.17. and 19. what was the reason, why he that
gained more had a greater reward? because he was more fruitful with his
Tallents, therefore it should be the care of Ministers to help their people
(what in them lies) to grow in these Graces.

We come now to the second part, viz. the Declaration of the end of his
writing, These things I write that ye sin not; now from this Declaration
observe this Point.

Doct. 2. The end of dispencing any promise or convincement of our sinful
estate, is not to give liberty to sin, but to prevent sin in us.
For here the Apostle answers an Objection which might arise, If the blood of
Christ cleanses us from all sin, then we may be bold to sin, it is but running
to Christ's blood and we shall be cleansed from our sins; but he says; I write
these things that ye sin not, therefore it implies that neither Law nor Gospel
should encourage us to sin, but restrain us.

The Law, that shows us the impossibility of not sinning, but does not teach us
how to sin, Romans 3.20. it shows us sin, and to show sin, is not to learn us
how to sin, but how to avoid it.

2 It shows us not only the nature of sin, but also convinces us of sin, and
the danger of it, Romans 7.14. Gal. 3.10.

And for the Gospel, that teaches that the blood of Christ cleanses us from
all our sins.

1 It shows a remedy against sin, the blood of Christ, and the means, If we
confess our sins, etc. but it shows withal that if we shall hereupon
willingly commit sin, we do most ingratefully, and profanely tread underfoot
the blood of Christ, Heb. 10.29. we account it prodigality to despise precious
things, how much more desperate is it to despise the most precious blood of
Christ.

2 The Gospel teaches us so to use the blood of Christ, as that we may
mortify sin, and not only get it pardoned, but cleansed, for the use of the
Gospel is to mortify sin, therefore it leads us not to the commission of sin.

3 The Gospel begets those graces that cleanse us from sin;

First, It begets faith, which purifies the heart, Act. 15.9.

Secondly, It begets hope, and that also purifies, 1 John 3.3. he that has
this hope purifies himself, as he is pure.

Thirdly, It begets love, and that love constraines us to good, and restrains
us from evil, 2 Cor. 5.14. so that both Law and Gospel dehort us from sin.

Use 1. Of direction to Ministers what course to take.

Two points of Wisdom are hence to be learned.

First, If any misconstruction may arise from your Doctrine, wisely to prevent
it, St. John saw there would arise an encouragement to sin, from one Doctrine
he had delivered, and a discouragement from fighting against sin from another,
therefore he tells them, These things I write, that ye sin not, but if any man
sin, etc.

Secondly, Another direction is, to frame your selves to dispense Milk to
Babes; Saint John was a Son of Thunder, and a Pillar among the Apostles, Gal.
2.9. yet he writing to little Babes, tells them thus, My little Children; these
things I write unto you, that you sin not; it seems a weak line for such a
man, but he tempers his Doctrine according to their strength; we should be
ready to think it poor homely stuff to say thus, who could not have said as
much?

Use 2. Of reproof to the Papists, who lock up St. John's writings from the
people, they may not be suffered to read them; why if he write them for this
end that they might not sin, then they give the reins to sin that deny leave
and liberty to read them.

Use 3. To teach us the poysonful corruption of our natures, that out of the
purest soundest Doctrine gathers poison, Saint John foresaw that from his
Doctrine they would be ready to gather false conclusions. So Romans 5.20. when
St. Paul had delivered the free Doctrine of Justification, see what use they
make of it, he had taught that as sin abounded, so did grace much more abound,
now he saw that they would be ready to gather false conclusions from this,
therefore he prevents it, Chap. 6.1. shall we then sin that Grace may abound?
God forbid; therefore it must make us out of love with our selves; the
commonest meats are most nourishing and good, other rare meats commonly breed
distempers, but some stomach will corrupt any meat, so the plainest points of
Religion, are the soundest and best, but such is the corruption of our nature,
that it is ready to gather poison out of them.

Use 4. To teach us when we have made a good use of the Apostles writings, viz.
when they divert us from sin if you be restained and kept back from any sin by
them, you make good use of them, St. John wrote this Epistle that they might
not sin, labor therefore by reading thereof, to be made more cautelous against
sin.

1. If we can, to do no sin.

2. If we do, to disallow it, and hate it, and so it will be as no sin to us.

We come now to the third point, viz. the consolation, If any man sin, we have
an Advocate with the Father, etc. as if he had said, how can it be that we
should not sin? he had taught the contrary, and told them he wrote those
things, that they might not sin, but yet for all that, notwithstanding their
best care and endeavor, it could not be but they would sin; but here is the
comfort, if any man sin we have an Advocate with the Father, etc. he does not
say any man has an Advocate with the Father, but I, and you, and such as we
are, we have an Advocate with the Father; now what is an Advocate? sometimes it
is applied to the Holy Ghost, sometimes to the Son; to the Holy Ghost, John
14.16. he is called (...), both because he is a Comforter, and because he is an
Advocate, how? not in pleading our case before the Father, but by pleading in
our hearts, in giving us the Spirit of Grace and Supplication, as the Apostle
says, Romans 8.26. as in Law, he may be said to be our Advocate that draws our
petitions for us; the Holy Ghost does not plead for us in heaven, but he draws
our petitions for us, so that they are accepted in heaven, Romans 8.27. he does
speak good things from God to us, and good things from us to God, 1 Cor. 2.3.
he tells us of our peace with God, and our comfort, and helps us to plead with
God.

But properly it is the office of the Son, to be Advocate; an Advocate in
Court, is a more special pleader in the behalf of another, whose person and
cause is there to be judged of, and so Christ is our Advocate in special
manner with the Father.

Doct. Every sinner has Enemies, that before the Father in heaven plead
against him.
If any man sin, etc. there were no use of an Advocate to plead for us, if we
had none to accuse us, and plead against us; we no sooner sin, but we have
accusations put up in heaven against us, and so our Advocate puts in for us;
what be these adversaries?

1 Our own sins, they plead against us, and accuse us day and night, some sins
do in a special manner plead against us, and those are crying sins, Genesis
4.10. the murder of Abel was a crying sin, Genesis 18.20. the sins of Sodom
cried, and Ezekiel. 16.49. there are four things of Sodom mentioned, which cried
to heaven for Vengeance, Pride, Idleness, Intemperance, Unmercifulness to the
poor; so sometimes detaining the laborers wages, James 5.4. so also
oppression, Exodus 22.22.27. these are special crying sins, because they will
give God no rest, till he has revenged them in this World, they will not stay
till the last judgment, but call for present judgment; but all sins do speak
in the Lords ear, and call for vengeance against us.

2 Another Adversary that accuses us, is the righteous Law of God, which we
have broken, that the word may not be in vain, Joh. 5.45.

3 The third Enemy is Satan, that accuses us night and day, Rev. 12.10. so he
did, Job Chap. 1.9, 10, 11. he accused him of hypocrisy, because he had no
real reason to accuse him, therefore he surmiseth one.

4 Our own conscience accuses us, and that is as a thousand witnesses, Romans
2.15.

Use 1 To take heed how we make bold with any sin, you may put upon them a
pretense of pleasure, or profit, or credit, but there is no sin we commit, but
pleads against us, yea and stirs up the Law and Satan, and our own consciences
to plead against us too.

2 It teaches us the miserable Estate of a poor sinner that goes on in sin,
and never takes any care to get Christ to be an Advocate for him, he may hope
that Christ pleads for him in Heaven, but this is a vain hope, so long as he
goes on in sin, but he may be sure that sin, and Satan, and the Law, and his
conscience accuses him, and he having none to plead for him, what a woeful
case is he in?

3 It may stir us up to get an Advocate that may plead for us against our
accusers.

Doct. Every Child of God has the Lord Jesus Christ in Heaven to plead his
cause for him.
If any man sin we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
Righteous, he does not say every man that sins has an Advocate, but we have an
Advocate, that is, I and you, and such as we are; the children of God, Romans
8.34. he makes intercession for us (...) interpellat pro nobis, he interrupts
the accusation, and strikes in for us, Heb. 7.25. because he has not only dyed
for us, and risen for us, but he follows the buisinesse to the utmost, till it
be accomplished.

How does he make intercession for us?

1 He does not fall down at his Fathers feet* but he acts the part of an
Advocate by his presence, at the Throne of Grace, so that his presence cuts off
many accusations, it being known he is our friend, and stands for us, they dare
not be so bold, Heb. 9, 24.

2 He not only pleads for us by his presence, but he intercedes for us by the
merit of his blood, and that pleads more powerfully for us, than either sin, or
the Law, or Satan, or our own consciences can plead against us, Heb. 12.24. His
blood speaks better things then the blood of Abel; that cried for
condemnation, this for absolution.

3 He pleads for us, in giving us leave to use his name for our help, and his
Spirit to plead for our selves, he sends his Spirit to draw our petitions for
us, and help us in his name to plead for our selves, he is our chief
Advocate, he sends the Spirit, Joh. 16.23, 24. and he promises, Zach. 12.10. so
that though the Spirit be an Advocate, yet he is sent by Christ, Joh. 14.16, 17.

4 He plays the Advocate in our behalf, by expressing his good will toward us,
to his Father, he declares his will to be, that we may be cleared from all
doubts and be where he is, to behold his glory, this he did upon earth, Joh.
17.24. and this very same does he express for us in Heaven, and the reason of
it is from Romans 8.34. where his mediation is made a distinct work from his
death, and resurrection, and ascension, and sitting at his Fathers right hand;
besides all these, he makes requests for us in his own person, pleading to God
for us for good things, as Moses did often for the people, Exodus 32.31, 32. and
as it was with Moses, so it is said it should be with Christ, Deuteronomy. 18.18. as
Moses being a Mediator, put in a word of Peace for the people, so does Christ.

But does he thus intercede for every sinner? no, he does not say every man
has an Advocate, but we have, he did not intercede for all when he was upon
the Earth, I pray not for the World, Joh. 17.9.20. for if Christ should have
prayed for all men, God would have heard him for all men, and then his death
had been effectual for all men, for he says thou hear me always, Joh.
11.42. Christ is not an Advocate for all, but only for the Children of God.

Use 1 Of direction to a Christian that does sin, what course to take for his
peace and pardon, to look up to Heaven for an Advocate that may stand to plead
for him, when sin, and when Satan and the Law, and conscience plead against
him; many a poor soul has his conscience pleading horror against him, that he
is proud and unclean, and Hypocritical, etc. why, look up to Heaven now for an
Advocate to plead for rhee; first, get into the estate of the children of God,
My little Children, if we sin, we have an Advocate; it is not any man, but we
that are as little children, lay down all pride, and emulation, and labor to
frame our selves to holy obedience, If we sin, we have an Advocate, etc.
therefore labor to become little children, begotten to God by the Ministers of
his Word, 2 Cor. 8.5. give up your selves to God, and to his Ministers, to be
taught of them according to his Will, and if we be such, we have an Advocate.

Use 2. Of consolation to all whose consciences strike and gall them, and they
are disquieted with the bitterness of their sins, when sin accuses, and the
Law accuses, and Satan and conscience accuses, what should comfort a poor
soul in this case? why, consider we have an Advocate with the Father, so that
though the Law, and conscience tell us we have been disobedient, yet Christ our
Advocate has fulfilled all obedience, though we sin, and our sins plead
against us, yet Christ pleads for us, his blood cries for us, and speaks better
things than the blood of Abel, and he sends his Spirit to help us to put up
our petitions, and he himself puts in for us, and performs our prayers for us,
Rev. 8.3. by the Angel there is chiefly meant Christ, he sweetens them, takes
all the corruption out of them, so that they are a sweet smelling savor to
God; let us accuse our selves to the lowest acknowledgment of our own
unworthiness, and then let us with comfort look up to our Advocate that pleads
for us.

How shall I know that he prays and pleads for me?

1 If you be little children to God, give up your selves to him, and to his
Ministers, to be obedient to his Ordinances.

2 If he send his Spirit into your hearts, and that helps you to draw your
Petitions, it is a sign that he himself is about the work, by our sins we
dampe his Spirit, but if God renew his Spirit in us, it is a sign that Christ
has our cause in hand.

1 JOHN 2.2: And he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only,
but also for the sins of the whole World.


IN these words we have Christ described by his function external, 1. Advocate,
2. Propitiation for our sin; and secondly by his inward qualification,
righteous; Jesus Christ the righteous.

We have done with his office of Advocation, we come now to the second, He is
the propitiation for our sins, and not ours only, but the sins of the whole
World.

Doct. Jesus Christ is the propitiation for the sins not only of believing
Jews, but likewise of believing Christians all the World over.
He is the Reconciliation as some translations render it, but that expresses
not the full meaning, we must know therefore that Propitiation (...) includes
Three things.

1 That he should expiate our sins, that is, make satisfaction for our Sins, a
man may be a means of Reconciliation without satisfaction, but he cannot be
Propitiation without offering satisfaction for the wrong done; now Christ did
make satisfaction for our sins, Heb. 2.17. and to make satisfaction, he did
offer a satisfactory sacrifice for our sins, 1 Pet. 2.24. he bearing the sin
and punishment due thereunto, it is as much as if we had done it.

2 To be a Propitiation it is required, that he make peace and reconciliation,
for though a man sometimes recompense and satisfy a wrong, yet the Party
wronged will not be at peace with him, and reconciled to him, but Christ has
taken upon him to reconcile God to us, so as that his wrath is turned from us,
and favor restored to us, Col. 1.21. now this reconciling implies Three things.

1 That sometimes we were friends with God.

2 That we fell out with God.

3 Being fallen out, we are reconciled again, and made at peace with him; Now
this is procured by Christ, whereas we were once friends with God in Paradise
and fell from him and his favor, Christ has come and made up that breach, and
reconciled us again.

Thirdly, When Christ is said to be a Propitiation for our sins, it implies,
that he has procured the manifestation of Gods favor to us, for suppose a
Friend make satisfaction for another, and reconcilement with another with whom
he is fallen out, yet if he know it not, his heart is as loose as ever, but
Christ has not only procured us Gods favor, but he tells us, his Father is
reconciled with us, and at peace with us, Job. 33.23. and 26. there is the
effect of Christ's propitiation, that we shall see Gods face with joy, we shall
pray to him with comfort, Joh. 14.21. He that loves me shall be loved of my
Father, etc. which shows, that he will bring rhem together, and there shall be
a mutual expression of love to one another, and ref^^shment in one another,
God shall take comfort in us, and we in him, Rev. 3.20. for that Christ goes
further in this case than any man can.

Absalom had offended his Father, in slaying his brother Ammon, well, he flies
away from his Fathers Court, Joab procures a Reconcilement, but yet he could
not satisfy for the blood he had shed; he procured indeed so much that he was
sent for home by the King but yet says the King, Let him return to his own
house, he shall not see my face, 2 Samuel 14.24. Joab could not satisfy for his
blood, and the King would not see his face, so there wanted satisfaction and
manifestation of the Kings favor; well, afterward manifestation was procured,
but yet there wanted Propitiation, because satisfaction could not be made; but
Christ has not only procured favor, but satisfaction, and has declared his
favor toward us. Now further, Christ has done this, not only for the
believing Jews, but all Christians all the World over, for to whom does he
speak here? why to little Children, and what were they? why they were Jews,
as appears, verse. 7. who from the first giving of the Law were commanded to
love one another; now besides these weak Jews, the Apostle says, He is our
propitiation, including the Ministers of the Gospel, and not only so, but for
the sins of the whole World. Now the World is diversely taken in Scripture;

1 World is sometimes put for the frame of Nature, as Act. 17.24.

2 It is sometimes taken for the pleasure and profits of the World, as 1 John
2.16.

3 It is sometimes put for the wicked of the World, Joh. 15.19.

4 It is sometimes taken for the Gentiles in opposition to the Jews, Romans
11.12.

5 It is sometimes taken for the Believers of the World, 2 Cor. 5.19. though it
may have further extent, but here it is taken in opposition to Christian Jews,
he is not only a propitiation for the Jews, but also for the believing
Gentiles.

But further, Christ is not only a Propitiation for his children, but for the
whole World, that is, the whole body of the Creation, for as by Adams fall the
whole World was cursed, Christ by his death renewed the blessing to the World
again. the whole body of the Creation, Romans 8.20. therefore it is said, the
whole body of the Creation waits for the liberty which the Sons of God have. A
type of this we have in Noah, Genesis 8.20, 21. Noah being a Type of Christ, and
making atonement for the World by Sacrifice, God smelt a sweet favor, and
does promise that he would no more curse the earth for man's sake, and that
which was done by Type in him, is perfectly procured by Christ, all the
creatures are encouraged to rejoice in his Redemption, because they are
Redeemed in him, Isa. 44.23. All the creatures are become the servants of
Christ, subject to the dominion of Christ, he has bought them all, Romans 14.9.
Christ is now Lord of all, he has bought not only us, but our Ground, and
Cattle, and Houses, and our Children, and he has so purchased it, that the
world shall be a blessing to the Church, the Tumults, and Agitations, and
Disorders, shall be for the good of his people.

Quest. Whether has Christ made any propitiation for the wicked? for
Reprobates? how else for all the World?

Ans. You must distinguish between such and the rest of the World, in this they
all agree, that Christ is Lord over all, wicked and good, he has bought all, 2
Pet. 2.5. so that they are vassalls to be ruled by Christ's Dominion, he has
bought them for the Churches service to do them good.

2 I say that Christ has laid down a sufficient price for all, and thus much
he has procured Gods patience to forbear them, and his bounty to lead them to
Repentance, Romans 2.45. yea he has procured for them, not only gifts fitting
them for Magistracy and Ministry, and the common Gifts and Graces of his
Spirit, but many sanctifying Gifts, see Heb. 10.29.

Quest. Is Christ then a propitiation for them?

Ans. To make^ propitiation is required, not only that such a satisfaction and
reconciliation be propounded, but that they lay hold on it, as the sacrifices
in the old Law, who are they that had an atonement made by the sacrifice they
offered? only those that laid their hands on the head of the sacrifice, Lev.
1.4. so then this is nothing for the propitiation of the Wicked, they do not
lay hold on the head of Christ, they do not take hold on him as an Advocate
and propitiation; therefore they are left inexcusable. This point is likewise
handled by Paul, Romans 3.25. 2 Cor. 5.19. the whole world was out with God, he
purchased something for all.

Use 2. It shows that it is a wicked opinion of the Papists that say, the bread
in the Sacrament is a propitiatory sacrifice for the sins of the World, as they
wrong Christ in his Advocation, so also in his propitiation, Heb. 10.10. if
there had been need of another propitiation, his had been insufficient, but
they ascribe this to the sacramental bread, to purgatory, and they say
afflictions are satisfactions for our sins, and their own voluntary devotions
are satisfactory, as whippings, and pilgrimages, and fastings, why if Christ be
the propitiation, there needs no more but him.

So also they wrong him, in adding other Advocates, as Angels, and Saints,
especially the Virgin Mary.

Object. You will say you allow one friend to pray for another here on Earth,
and to entreat God for him, and may not Saints in heaven pray for us, as well
as Saints on Earth?

Ans. 1. We have both commands and examples for the one, Jam. 5. and Paul often
desires the prayers of the church, but we have none for the other.

2 We desire none but such as know our cases to pray for us, but it is
uncertain whether the Angels, or Saints in Heaven knows us or our wants; it
is cartain they know not our thoughts.

3 And when we desire other men here on Earth to pray for us, we do not make
them Advocates as they do Angels and Saints.

1 We do not desire them to pray in their own merits and name, as they do the
Angels and Saints in Heaven.

2 They pray to the Virgin Mary for graces, miserere peecati, etc. and command
thy Son to grant such and such things, so they ask spiritual gifts of the
Saints, which is peculiar to God.

3 They do herein ascribe to them certain proper works, make them Patrons of
several Countries, and part among them several offices, they pray to one for
healing of one disease, and to another for another.

Use 2 If Christ be our reconciliation, then it shows us what we are without
Christ, enemies to God, and such enemies, then if all the Angels and Saints in
heaven should put in for us, they could not make propitiation for us, it is
only Christ's Prerogative, Col. 1.21. Romans 5.20. Ephesians. 2.3. we are enemies and
strangers to God, and all our imaginations of our hearts wholly evil
continually, we are ready to delude our selves, I hope I am not so far out
with God, I am not an enemy, but we are all so by nature.

Use 3. It should teach us, when we do find and feel that we are sinners, to
consider of Christ's Reconciliation, and Propitiation.

Q. I do believe that Christ has made an Atonement for sinners, and
reconciled all Believers, but how shall I know that I am of that number or no?

Ans. 1. Has Christ ever brought you to see Gods face with comfort? if you
have at any time beheld Gods face with joy and comfort, know that this could
not be, unless Christ had been a Propitiation for you.

Obj. I, but that comfort is all gone again?

Ans. No man that is brought into the Kings presence stands always before him,
but there is a time for the King to sequester himself from him, so there is no
Christian that stands always in the presence of Gods face, it is enough if
thou have been brought to kiss Gods hand, and taste of his favor.

Obj. But I have never felt any comfort or joy in Prayer, and other Ordinances?

Ans. 1. I would ask you, Are you fallen out with your sins? if you be, you
love God, and are beloved of him, Psalm. 97.10.

2 Do you find that you love God much, for you have been a great sinner, and
yet God has had mercy on you, if so, it is a sign much is forgiven you.

3 Do you find your hearts compassionate over other men's sins? it is a sign
yours are forgiven, Matthew. 17.23. to. 33. Ephesians. 4. ult.

Use 4. If we find that we are enemies to God, and our peace is not made with
him, it is our wisdom to pacify God, do as Adoniah did when he had offended
King Solomon, he ran and took hold of the horns of the Altar, 1 King. 1.15.
so we should run and lay hold on Christ, as he that had any benefit by a
Sacrifice, was to lay his hands on his head, so, would you have any benefit by
Christ? lay hold on him, confess your sins over him, entreat him to make your
peace with God.

Q. But how shall I know whether I lay hold on Christ?

A. 1. No man lays hold on Christ, but he takes him for better, for worse, he
takes him to be a Ruler, as well as a Savior, you must give up your selves to
be guided by his will, as well as to receive any benefit by him.

2 If you find your hearts wholly resting on Christ, and none but him, if this
be the frame of your heart, that there is none in Heaven or Earth that you
desire in comparison of him, Psalm. 73.25. then you have laid hold upon him.

Use 5. For Christians that have their sins pardoned, and are in Christ, though
it be thus with you, yet you are not to think that you have no need of Christ,
for were you as St. John, and the Apostles Pillars, yet you have need of an
Advocate, and Propitiation still, for in many things you sin daily, and fall
out with God, so that if God should fall out with us as often as we with him,
we should never have peace, therefore still go to Christ, entreat him to be
your Atonement from day to day, Christ is not only a Peacemaker, but a
Peace-keeper; we daily offend God, or others, or our selves, and therefore
stand daily in need of Christ's mediation.

We have much need of Christ's Spirit to help us in our prayers.

Use 6. Of consolation to every Christian soul, to consider in the midst of our
sins, that we have Christ for our propitiation, to keep our peace with God,
there is not a day passes over our heads wherein we fall not out with God, and
if Christ should not put in, what would become of us? but here is the comfort,
Christ is our propitiation, and therefore it is certain and sure that he is
more able to keep our peace than we are to break it; and besides, he has
taken it upon him, he has made it his Office to be an Atonement between God
and us; and here is also further comfort, that he has not only been a means of
reconciliation, but he has manifested it unto us, he has brought us to see
Gods face with comfort.

But this is not all, but here is matter of further comfort, in that he being
made a propitiation for the whole world, the whole World shall be at peace with
us, there is a reconciliation betwixt me and all the Creatures, I have comfort
from every blessing, from Christ's Propitiation, Job 5.19. and 23. so that
whatsoever a Christian meets with, whether good deeds or bad, persecution, etc.
why this is his comfort, that the whole world shall be for his good, though I
meet with crosses and afflictions it shall be for my good, from this ground,
that Christ is a propitiation for the whole world.

Use 7. Seeing God has made so large an Atonement for all, let us draw one
another to take heed of sin, to run to Christ, make use of Christ's Atonement,
and take he^d of sin; this use old Eli made, 1 Samuel 2.25. If one man sin
against another, t^^ Judge shall judge it, but if a man sin against the Lord,
who shall plead for him? If you fall out with God, and walk in sin, who shall
make your peace with him; that is a work no friend you have can do, no means
you can procure can make up that breach, none but Christ, and you must not
presume upon Christ's mediation, he will not be a baud to any ones sin that is a
sign of Reprobation to turn Gods grace into wantonness, Jude 4. and take heed
we do not offend Christ; it is notable counsel God gives to Moses to deliver
to the people, Exodus 23.20, 21.22. Behold I send an Angel before thee (that is,
Christ, the Angel of the Covenant) beware of him, provoke him not, he will not
spare your misdeeds, for my name is in him; if you do willingly sin against
him he will not pardon you, therefore encourage all the friends you have to
make use of Christ's Reconciliation, he is a propitiation for little children,
verse. 1. for young men, for old men, in the following verses, for all that are
willing to lay hold on him, this use Paul makes, 2 Cor. 5.19, 20, 21. this is
the chief point of the Gospel, that God has made Christ a propitiation for
sin, therefore we beseech you to make use of it, take not Christ's blood in
vain, beware to offend his grace and mercy, and labor to bring on all to
Christ, since the propitiation is so general, seeing there is such a Fountain
set open, let us draw at it for our selves, and for our children, let us teach
our children that Christ is made a propitiation for their sins.

We have heard Christ described from his external Offices.

1 He is an Advocate.

2 A Propitiation.

We come now to his internal virtue, or qualification; Jesus Christ the
righteous.

Doct. Jesus Christ is the righteous Lord, or, Jesus Christ, either in his
Office of an Advocate, or Reconciler, is Jesus Christ the righteous.
The Scripture much testifies this, Heb. 4.15. 1 Pet. 3.8. 1 Pet. 2.22. and
Pilate that condemned him gave him this testimony, I am innocent from the blood
of this just man, Mat. 27.24. yea from his birth he had this testimony, that
holy thing, Luke 1.33. in opposition to all others, who are sinners from the
very Womb, he was holy in his Birth, in his Life, in his Death, 2 Cor. 5. ult.
He knew no sin; that is, he had experience of none, but the Father made him
sinful by imputation, that we might be just by imputation.

It was meet that he should be righteous without sin; 1. That he might be our
Reconciler. 2 That he might be our Advocate, if he had had any sin, he could
have been neither of these.

1 For the first, had he been sinful himself, he could not have made atonement
for sin, it was required that all the Sacrifices should be without blemish,
Lev. 3. and 10 else it had not been accepted, as the Lord tells them, Mal. 1.8.
all things defiled with sin are abominable to God, Heb. 7.25, 26. unless some
atonement be made, now had he been sinful, he had stood in need of Sacrifice
for himself, and could not have been an attonnment for our sins, 2 Cor. 5. ult.
he that knew no sin, was imputed a sinner for us, that we might be imputed
righteous for his sake.

2 It was meet that he should be righteous, that he might be our Advocate, God
hears not sinners, Joh. 9.31. the blind man was not so blind, but he could say
so much, but God hears Christ always, and we should have such an Advocate, as
should continually prevail with God, look at all the parts of his advocation
for us, and it is meet that he should be righteous.

1 He appears for us in the sight of God; and had he been a sinner, his person
would have been odious in Gods sight.

2 He Advocates by pleading the merits of his own death, now how could it have
been meritorious, had he dyed as a malefactor.

3 He gives us his name and his Spirit to use in our Prayers, now to use his
name had been of no effect, if he had been a sinner.

4 He prays for us, makes known his will to his Father concerning us, but this
would do no good, had he been a sinner.

3 It is meet he should be righteous, that he might be our justifier, our
justification is by his obedience, his righteousness is imputed to us, now his
righteousness could not have been imputed to us, had it been imperfect, 1 Cor.
2.3.

Use 1 It is a ground of much consolation to such as lay hold on Christ, and
have him for their Advocate and Reconciler, for he is one that is just and
righteous, and therefore fit to prevail for us, what hinders the joy of a
Christian?

Object. 1 I much doubt the pardon of my sins, if I could be sure of that, I
should be joyful.

Ans. You have such a Reconciles as is Just and Righteous, and therefore will
procure pardon for you.

Object. 2 But I am still unjust and unrighteous.

Ans. But your Reconciler is Just and Righteous, and it is not required that
the reconciled should be righteous, but he that reconciles us, it is meet that
he be righteous.

Object. 3 I cannot pray, my prayers are heartlesse and faithless, etc.

Ans. Well, but we have an advocate that is holy and just, and that prays and
intercedes for us, and we shall find the benefit of his Righteousness, though
we fall daily into much unrighteousness, yet Jesus Christ our Mediator is
righteous.

Use 2 To teach us to be Righteous, as he is Righteous, God would have us
conformable to the image of his Son, Romans 8.29. and that consists in Holiness
and Righteousness, God would have us so to walk, that our Surname may be
Justus, Righteous toward God, to give him his due, Righteous to others, to
give them their due, and Righteous to our selves.

To be called Christians, and yet not to be righteous, is to be called
Christians, and yet to be no Christians. Why are we called Christians, but
because we are anointed with the Unction of Christ? If a man profess himself
to be a Christian, and is not Righteous, he is not a Christian, for he has not
the Spirit of Christ, and therefore is none of Christ's; not but that we may
fail, but it is required that the stream and bent of our hearts and ways be to
walk Righteously; we aim at Righteousness, though sometimes we miss the mark.

Use 3 May quiet us, if we fear evil in well doing, why? Because Christ was
most Righteous, yet he suffered much unrighteous dealing in a Righteous cause,
we think we have much wrong, if for righteous dealing we meet with unrighteous
dealing, if in innocence we meet with crosses and Fire and Faggot, we cry out,
O tempora, O mores, but it was the case of Christ, and therefore we must not
think it strange to suffer ill for well-doing, not only to be reviled, but to
loose our goods and our lives, if we should meet with them, it is no more than
Christ suffered, it was the ground of Atheists in old time, if they did see
Bona maelis, and maela bonis evenire, why is there a God that does govern the
earth? But we must consider God is patient as well as just, and therefore many
times forbears punishment.

1 JOHN 2.3. And hereby we know that we know him, if we keep his Commandments.


THe Apostle St. John having showed in the former Verses that Christ is our
Advocate, and Propitiation, here might his little Children reason, But how
shall I know that Christ is my Advocate, and Reconciler? though he be both, yet
how shall it appear that it is so to me? Why, hereby we know that we know him,
if we keep his Commandments.

Saint John here speaks of such a knowledge as we call acquaintance, and
familiarity; and fellowship, I know you not, Matthew. 7.23. that is, I have no
acquaintance and fellowship with you, hereby we know we have fellowship with
Christ, if we keep his Commandments, you may know whether you have fellowship
with Christ or no by this. This third Verse therefore shows our fellowship with
Christ in his mediation.

Doct. 1. A man that knows Christ, may, and ought to come to know that he does
know him, or has fellowship and communion with him.

Doct. 2. Such as do keep his Commandments may ceme to know that they do know
Christ, that they have true fellowship with him.
1 For the First, a man that knows Christ, may, and ought to come to know that
he knows him, or has fellowship and communion with him; hereby we know that we
know him, here is actio reflexa, the Senses they do not reflect themselves, the
eye sees other men's faces, not its own, but by reflection in a Glass, but in
our Spiritual knowledge we may more sensibly discern our Spiritual estate, than
our faces in a Glass, for we see not that, but in another Me^lium, but a man
knows his knowledge of Spiritual things directly, he not only knows, but knows
that he knows what is meant by these.

To know Christ, is not only to know his Nature, and Person, and Offices, that
he is God man, and that he is our Advocate, and Reconciler, and Propitiation,
the Devil knows thus much; so that a Spiritual knowledge is not superficial,
but such a knowledge as is opprative, not dead, but lively, not naked, but such
a knowledge as is joined with acquaintance, such a knowledge as works us to
obedience, Psalm. 9.10. Isa. 53.11. and that works us to Mortification, Gal.
6.14. such a knowledge as makes all the World dead to us; As a man that has
set his affections on a woman, it deads his affections to all others, 1 Samuel
2.12. the Sons of Eli knew not the Lord; and Exodus 5.2. Who is the Lord, says
Pharaoh, I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go; they knew not the
Lord, that is, they had not this lively operative knowledge joined with
obedience, so then true knowledge is operative, begets trust, and confidence,
and joy in God, Jer. 10.23. and is likewise joined with obedience, 1 Chronicles.
28.9. so then we see it is such a knowledge as makes us trust in him, fear him,
honor him, serve him, cleave to him, and yield obedience unto him; and no
wonder, for verba sensus accipienda sunt cum effectu and affectu; I have seen
the oppression wherewith the Egyptians oppress my people Israel, Exodus 3.9. I
have seen, that is, not only looked on it, but have compassion, and intend to
deliver them; so, Remember thy Creator, etc. that is, bend thy affections to
him, and honor him, so to know Christ is to affect him, to honor him, to
cleave to him, to obey him, to acquaint our selves with him, for by knowledge
is here meant acquaintance, and familiarity.

What is this Knowledge, to know that we know him?

It is an Act of Understanding, by which, upon good ground, he does discern
that he does know God, and has fellowship with him, no man calls that
Knowledge which is only a Conjecture, nay this Knowledge is more than a true
faith, for they are two distinct things though they stand together, 1 John
4.16. We have known and believed, etc. so that this Knowledge is more than a
true faith, for faith is a persuasion or trust a man takes upon the credit of
Divine testimony, if I take it upon man's testimony, it is credulity, but when I
take things on Gods authority, that is faith; but here is something more, we
know and believe, and we know that we know, which is an Actus judicii, and more
than opinion, or faith; Knowledge is such an acknowledgement as arises Ex
principiis scientificis, such as proceeds from certain Principles, as I know
that Fire burns from the light and heat, so then I know it by experience, all
knowledge arises either from causes or Effects, such effects as cannot delude
us, if it may, it is but conjecture, but what we know, it is upon sure grounds
and experience, that is Knowledge. So then we know that we know him, this
implies, that a man that knows Christ may not only think so, and have such an
opinion, and believe so, but he may know he knows Christ, and that by two
effects.

1 By feeling in his own heart, that having been oppressed with sin, he
finds his soul comfortably pacified, if he find Christ pacifying his soul, he
knows that he knows Christ, such a man whose spirit has been oppressed with
the consciousnesse of sin, if this man's soul be comforted and pacified, then he
knows that he knows Christ, he is now acquainted with Christ, one that was
never troubled with sin, knows not the worth and virtue of Christ, but a man
that has been afflicted in conscience for sin, and is now pacified, now he
knows that he knows Christ, he had hold of him before, but he now plainly sees
him, Job 42.5. I have heard of thee, by the hearing of the Ear, but now mine
Eyes see thee, as if all his knowledge before, had been but as the hearing of
him; but now he comfortably finds Christ's presence, he now sees his worth and
excellency, Cant. 5.10. a man knows that this is Christ, because he knows that
nothing in Heaven or Earth could pacify him but Christ.

2 He knows that he knows Christ, not only by the pacifying of his conscience,
but by the purifying of his conscience, Act. 15.9. purifying it from the lusts
of sin, whereas before we were covetous; we are now heavenly minded; whereas
before vain, now serious in serio, and look at Trifles as Trifles; before
unclean, now holy and chaste; before intemperate, now temperate; before
disordered, now our hearts are cast into another mould and frame, both the
inward man is purified, and the outward, the words and actions are purified;
thus we know that we know him, if we keep his Commandments, so that they that
know Christ, may say, I know that I know him.

Use 1. To refute that Popish Doctrine that teaches, that none can be certain
of his Salvation, nay they say it is Heretical presumption, and many worldly
men think it is impossible, and others think it is needless to be attained,
but such may be convinced from this Doctrine, and what says the Apostle Peter,
Give all diligence to make your calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. how
shall we make it sure, if we know that we know it? 1. Cor. 2.12. God gives us
his Spirit, that we may see the grace he has given us, Joh. 3. ult. St. John
speaks it here of little Children, that they may know it, so that this
Knowledge is both possible, necessary, and may be certain.

They say, we may have a conjectural Knowledge, but no certainty of faith; it
is a speech which implies a contradiction, if it be conjectural it is no
Knowledge, that which I only conjecture, I know not; we do not know that we
only conjecture, if I ask you if you know such a one? If you say you think you
know him, you do not know him; so that when they say, we cannot have knowledge
of faith, we do not say they may only believe it, but they may have certainty
of feeling, Faith may admit much doubting, but Knowledge excludes much doubting.

Use 2 To consider whether we can say thus, we know that we know him; do you
know that you have acquaintance and fellowship with Christ? do you believe it?
How do you believe it, on what ground?

1 Have you found Christ purifying your Consciences by his blood? If you have
found that, then you know that you know him, Phil. 4.7.

2 Do you find your Consciences purified? Do you find your Corruptions
mortified? Do your Lusts grow abominable? Do you find your hearts cleansed
from wrath and impatience? etc. certainly then you know that you know Christ,
for none else could have pacified and and purified your hearts? If it be so
that you dare not sin, you seek peace and ensue it, then you may know that you
have Christ, but if these signs be wanting, especially purifying, then you know
him not.

Use 3 To exhort us never to rest till you know that you have acquaintance with
Christ, if a man had all the knowledge in the World, what comfort would it
afford him, if he knew not that he had fellowship with Christ, never count you
know any thing if you know not Christ, Si Christum discis, satis est, etc. and
yet rest not there till you know that you know him; Beasts see, and hear, but
they know not that they do so, because they are irrational, and want the
faculty of reflection, and in sprituals a carnal heart is blind; but it is for
a Christian to know Christ, and not only so, but to know that he knows him, we
must not rest either in men's good persuasions, that they hope and are persuaded
well of us, or that they speak well of us, but we must never rest till we know
that Christ dwells in us, and we in him, which we may know by his pacifying and
purifying of our consciences.

Use 4 Of Consolation to such as do sin, and fall daily, and find their own
emptiness, their knowledge is but small, their experience little, their
outward comforts shallow, yet this is a man's comfort, that he knows Christ, and
not only so, but knows that he knows Christ; God never gives us a blessing but
he is willing that we should know it, if he set up a light in our minds he
would have us discern that light, and walk in the light thereof; therefore let
us thankfully acknowledge it, and comfort our selves therein.

We come now to the Evidence whereby we come to know that we know Christ,
hereby we know that we know him, if we keep his Commandments; for the
understanding of this, we must know that there is a perfect keeping the
Commandments without sin, and that St. John disclaimed before, Cap. 1. Verse.
8.10.

2 There is another keeping the Commandments, that is, not perfect without sin,
yet perfect without dissimulation or hypocrisy, and that is here meant.

Doct. Sincere obedience, or keeping the Commandments of Christ, is a
scientifical argument, and sign of our undoubted and known fellowship with
Christ.
Q. What is it to keep his Commandments?

A. The keeping of his Commandments is usually in Scripture expressed by diverse
comparisons.

1 Sometimes it is expressed by keeping his Commandments, as a man would keep his
way, turning neither to the right hand, nor to the left, Josh. 1.7. and then we
must look at the Commandments as our way, as a Travellor does not go out of his
way, if he does, it is besides his intention.

2 Sometimes it is expressed by keeping Jewels, we should keep them as our
Treasure, set our hearts on them, Prove. 6.20, 21. bind them about thy heart.
Which implies, they are to be looked at as our greatest treasure, and worn
about our neck, he would have us look at them as our Ornaments; many men would
be rich, but they would not always have it known, but a Christian is not only
to look at Christ's Commandments as his Treasure, but as his ornaments and
credit; a man is then said to keep the Commandments; when he looks at them as
his Treasure and Ornaments, he fears not to show himself, and let it appear
that he keeps Christ's Commandments, he is not ashamed to wear them about him
openly.

3 It is compared to the keeping of the apple of a man's eye, Prove. 7.1, 2. keep
them as the apple of thine eye; a man keeps the apple of his eye very tenderly,
every moat is ready to trouble him, therefore he would not have the least moat
come into his eye; so, that is true keeping of Gods Commandments when the least
offense or scruple against Gods Commandments is b^tter and noisome to him, as
moats to the apple of his eye, he cares not what the World thinks of it, if it
be against the the Law of God it is noisome unto him.

4 It is expressed by keeping the Commandments as a man would keep his Soul,
Prove. 19.16. as if it come to this pinch, either keep the Commandments or lose
your life; a Christian will lose his life, and keep the Commandments, nay of
the two, he would rather lose his Soul, Luke 14.26. a man must be willing to
sit loose from his life for Christ; now if we thus keep his Commandments, it is
an evident sign that we know that we know him.

Obj. But such a keeping is very strict, and hardly to be attained, who can do
this? in many things we offend all, and who is it that goes not astray?

Ans. A Christian may keep the Commandments as his way, when he intends to go
on, and if he be out it is besides his intention, he may keep them as his
treasure, though sometimes upon some temptation he may part with something
thereof, yet after he knows it he mourns for it, and it is the grief of his
heart; and though a Christian may sometimes be ashamed of his Profession, yet
afterward he is ashamed of his Fact, as Peter, and though a Christian may
sometimes offend the Commandment, yet he is never well till he has got out
this moat; sometimes a man may rather choose his life as Peter, but afterward
he grieves, and weeps bitterly, and would rather part with his life than the
Commandment; and if it be thus with thee, it is a sign thy keeping is sincere.

Quest. How is such obedience a certain sign of our acquaintance with Christ?

Ans. 1 This sincere keeping of the Commandments our Savior looks at it, as an
act of friendship in him, Joh. 15.14. then are ye my friends, if ye do
whatsoever I command you, as we take it for a point of special friendship when
a man is ready at our command, and willing to do what we would have him; nay,
Joh. 15.10. our Savior takes it not only as love, but as abiding constant
love, and if it spring from our love to Christ, it must needs spring from
Christ's love to us, for we could not have loved him except he loved us first, 1 John 4.19. 1 John 5.3. no man keeps any thing that is grievous, a man may have
fire about his house, or a moat in his eye, but he keeps it not, it is
grievous; a man may be out of the way, but it is grievous, but when he keeps
the Commandments as his way, his treasure, his eye, his life, this is not
grievous to him; every Office, be it never so bad, it seems easy, because he
loves Christ dearly; as Jacobs seven years service for Rachel seemed but a
little space, because he loved her, Genesis 29.20. if there be such mutual love,
it is a certain sign of acquaintance.

2 This keeping of his Commandments is a sign of our abiding in Christ, and so
of our acquaintance with him, Joh. 15.1. Hos. 14.8. upon me is thy fruit found,
otherwise we are barren, it is Christ that puts forth any fruit in us, Ezekiel.
36.27. how comes it to pass; a man keeps Gods Laws and Judgments, but because
he has his Spirit within him; he keeps us, and then we keep his Commandments?

Use 1 To refute that Popish Error, that a man may keep the Commandments
perfectly without sin.

2 That though he can thus keep them, yet he cannot be sure of his Salvation.
But this is contradictory, hereby we know that we know him, if we keep his
Commandments; so that it is either certain they keep not his Commandments, or
if they do, they may be certain of their fellowship with Christ, and so of
Salvation by him.

2 It refutes them in this, in that they say we are wont to discourage men from
good works; we say indeed, none can be justified by the works of the Law, but
we do not discourage them from good works; for we say thus, if men keep Gods
Commandments, which is to perform good works, hereby we say we may come to know
that we know Christ; we say more, not only a perfect keeping, but a sincere
keeping of them, though imperfectly, with respect and care, though this does
not justify us, yet we say, it does justify the truth of our Estate, and that
is no small matter; we challenge them for discouraging of men from good works,
for they will not grant that hereby we know that we know him, but still leave a
man in doubt, but we grant much comfort from good works, for though they do not
justify us, yet hereby we know that we are justified.

Use 2 To confute the Arrians, this shows a certain ground of the divinity of
Christ, because by keeping his Commandments we may come to know him; now this
would not hold, if he had not the same authority to command with God himself,
Iam. 4.12. there is but one Lawgiver: therefore if Christ be our Lawgiver, he
is one God with the Father, his Commandments are of like benefit and use with
the Fathers Commandments.

Use 3 Shows the cause why many men do not know that they know Christ, none can
know Christ but such as keep his Commandments.

1 Therefore such cannot know Christ that do not know his Commandments, for if
they do not know them, how can they keep them? Gods ways are too hard to be
found in the night, in Ignorance or Darkness.

2 Though a man do know them, yet if he divide them, some he will keep; and
some he will not keep: if he do thus, he cannot come to know that he knows
Christ, because he does not keep his Commandments: there are some Commandments
he does not keep, if you take liberty to break the Sabbath, and will not keep
it, though you know it is Gods Commandment, it is impossible you should come to
a saving Knowledge of your Estate in Christ: if you be content to live in the
least known sin, if you do not as gladly root out any sin as you would pull a
moat out of your eye, you cannot know Christ, or come to know that you know him.

3 There are others that know Christ, and yet do not know that they know him
why? because thy do not keep his Commandments as their way, do not look at them
as their Treasure, as their Ornaments, do not keep them as the Apple of their
Eye, but swallow many moats, this does very much hinder their souls: many would
do much for Religion, but would not have it come to life, then no wonder if we
see not our Estates, if moats be in our Eyes, we cannot see as otherwise we
might, so if sin lie on our souls, no wonder if we be so blinded, that we
cannot see our Estate in Christ, nor know that we know him.

Use 4 It shows a ready way to peace of conscience, would we have our
consciences pacified? Why, labor to know that we know Christ, and that will
pacify the conscience when we come to know that we are acquainted with
Christ, this being peace of conscience: but how shall we know that? Why, keep
the Commandments of Christ, as our Way, as our Treasure, as the Apple of our
Eye, as our Life, then we may know that we know him, that we have Fellowship
with him, and then our consciences will be at quiet both in life and death, if
we keep the Commandments as our way, and if we be out of the way it troubles
us: if we keep it as our Treasure, and if we loose any it grieves us, when we
grieve for the loss of it, as for the loss of our Ornaments; if we cannot
suffer any sin to be in our souls, but it afflicts us, then our consciences
will be at peace; if we keep the Commandments carelessly, we keep the peace of
our consciences loosely, as we keep the Commandments, so we keep the comforts
of our souls; it may be we walk in Gods ways, but not so closely and charily
as we should, this hinders our own peace; it was a speech of Jonah when he was
now in a good temper and dissembled not, Jonah 2.8. they that follow lying
vanities, forsake their own mercies; they that follow lying vanities, any
comfort of the World, if there be any way, any Treasure, any Ornament, any life
that we prize above the Commandments of God, these are lying vanities,
deluding things, and then we forsake our own mercies, that is, the portion of
mercy which God has appointed us, and he spoke it by woeful experience, he
clave to his credit, a lying vanity, and thought he would prevent his
discredit, but God found him out, and he found it by experience that they that
stick to any pleasure more than God they forsake their own mercies, he might
have had mercy if he had been obedient, but now he saw no hope of mercy, in
this world at least; therefore it may teach us to take heed of trusting to any
deluding vanity.

Use 5. Of consolation to constant keepers of Gods Commandments, sometimes a
man may keep them, and yet be in fear and doubts of his Estate, why, go on in
that way still, keep them as your Way, your Tresaure, and Apple of your Eye,
your life, that is the way to comfort: be it known unto you if you do thus
that you do know Christ, for did you not love God, you would never go on in a
constant course of keeping his Commandments, and you could not love him except
he loved you first, and you could not keep his Commandments but by his Spirit
dwelling in you, and that argues acquaintance with him, Psalm. 19 11. in keeping
of them there is great reward, greater than any gold or silver; a man may keep
that and yet want a quiet Conscience; but a man that keeps Gods Commandments
shall not want peace of Conscience, Psalm, 119.72. thousands of gold and silver
will not keep a man's heart warm and comfortable, but the keeping of Gods
Commandments will; and be it that you be about your calling, no business of
your calling will hinder your peace, no Commandment of God hinders your Peace;
indeed if you go about things without warrant from a Commandment, be it in the
World, in your callings; if you look at your profit and pleasure etc. and not
at Gods Commandment to set you a work, you lose your Peace, and you will want
your Peace in that days conversation, but if you go about things in virtue of
a Commandment, never fear, your calling will never hinder your Peace; keep the
Commandment and keep your Peace: we hinder our Peace often, because we go about
businesses without an eye to the Commandment, and so it is not acceptable to
God, he finds no savor of rest in it, and therefore no wonder if we lose our
Peace; but if any work, though never so mean, be done in obedience to Gods
Commandments, we shall keep and maintain our Peace.

1 JOHN 2.4. He that says I know him, and keeps not his Commandments, is a
liar, and the truth is not in him.


IT is St. John's usual course to propound the Truth Affirmatively, and
Negatively. Verse. 3. Affirmatively, Verse. 4. Negatively, Verse. 5. he amplifies
the keeping of Christ's Commandment, by a double benefit.

1 In him that does so, is the Love of God perfect.

2 Hereby we know that we are in him,

From whence Verse 6. he passes this conclusion of conforming our lives, to the
life of Christ.

Verse 4 He that says he knows him, etc.

To say, is either, in Heart, in Word, or in outward Carriage.

He that says I know him, he speaks not of an active understanding of him, but
of an affectionate hearty knowledge.

Knowledge is either speculative or operative; infused or acquired; Historical,
or Experimental, all come to one; but this Knowledge here meant is
acquaintance; so then, he that says he has acquaintance with God, and keeps
not his Commandments, that is, as his Way, his Treasure, his Ornaments, his
Eye, his Life.

1 He is a Liar, that is, he not only speaks false, but he knows he speaks
falsely, for that is the difference between an untruth and a lie.

2 There is no truth in him, not one true grace, not one true act of
Repentance, Faith, etc.

Doct. Opinion, or profession of the Knowledge of Christ, without keeping of
his Commandments, is an undoubted sign that he is a liar, and the best Grace
on him is counterfeit, he has no true Grace in him.
To say in the heart, is opinion; to say in the tongue or carriage, is
profession; and if he do thus, he is a liar, the truth is not in him, Tit.
1.15, 16. they profess they know God, but in their works they deny him; ssch a
one is abominable, disobedient, and to every good work reprobate, that is, he
goes about it untowardly, is unskilful in it, has no sincerity, and his work
is rejected of God, as reprobate counterfeit silver.

Q How is such a man a liar and no truth in him? A man may be a liar sometimes,
and yet have some truth in him, but this man has no truth in him, but 1 He
speaks falsely, 2 Against Conscience, 3 No truth is in him.

A. 1 He speaks falsely, which appears from the Efficacy of all true knowledge
of Christ, which brings forth obedience; if a man knows Christ, he loves him,
and affects him, and obeyes him, Mat. 7.22, 23. all saving Knowledge stirs us
up to obedience to God, to righteousness to man, if a man be a Son of Beliac,
such a man knows not God, those that obey him not never knew him, 1 Chronicles.
29.9. Know thou the God of thy Father and serve him, they that never served God
never knew him, Joh. 14.21. if any man love me, he will keep my Commandments;
and further, no man knows God but he has known the depth and danger of sin, he
has known his enstrangement and absence from God, if a man know not himself,
he knows not God.

2 After that he has known sin, he comes to know Christ and his mediation,
such a man is sensible of his former misery, and knows the excellency of
Christ, he has been so bitten with sin that he looks at it as the most heinous
fight, and the keeping of Gods Commandments he looks at it as the sweetest
thing in the World, 2 Cor. 6.14. Gods Commandments are not grievous to him,
such Knowledge springs from experience of our former misery, therefore they
that never come to this never knew Christ.

2 Why is such a man a liar that says he knows God, and keeps not his
Commandments?

1 From the conviction of the Testimony of that light which shines in his
heart, Joh. 16 9. there is a Spirit of conviction, in all those that live in
the Church, for others do not contend that they know Christ, but those that
thus profess, are convinced of their sins, of their unbelief, and
disobedience, and of the wickedness of their hearts and lives.

Obj. Are there not many that live carnally and wickedly, and yet are not
convinced of their sins?

It is true there are such, but then living in such a course, they do not
trespass against their Consciences, they think they keep the Law, and so think
well of themselves, and they are at peace and secure.

He that walks thus civilly and conformably, yet such a man's Conscience is at
uncertainty about his Estate, he is convinced that he wants something, but he
cannot tell what it is, till he be thoroughly convinced by Gods Spirit, thus it
was, Mark 10.19. Matthew. 19.18, 19, 20. the young man told Christ all these have
I kept from my youth, what lack I yet? his Conscience guided him to feel that
he wanted something, though he had kept the Law in the outward letter, yet he
saw he wanted something, and his Conscience was not at rest, so that such a man
as says he knows Christ, and keeps not his Commandments speaks against the
conviction of his Conscience, and therefore is a liar; I speak not of such
Christians who want Peace because they do not keep Gods Commandments, but of
such who when they have Peace think they keep his Commandments.

3 Why is there no truth of grace in such a man as says thus?

Reas. From the necessary conjunction of all graces with obedience, no true
grace of God but is either the cause of obedience, it breeds it, or else is a
companion of obedience, or else an effect of obedience, it sprang from
obedience; Faith works by love, Gal. 5.6. and love is the fullfilling of the
Law, Romans 13.10. 1 Timothy 1.5. and so hope, 1 John 3.3. patience is joined with
obedience, and meekness springs from obedience; and from the spiritual
experience of a man's weakness and experience of Christ's power, in him springs
humility; so that all graces either spring from obedience, or serve to it, or
accompany it; so that even these very graces that are more in the understanding
and speculation, they either spring from obedience, or help to obedience; the
Knowledge of a Christian is not unfruitful, 2 Pet. 1.8. which shows that a
Christians Knowledge brings forth fruits of obedience; no gift a Christian has
but he considers what good he may do with it, and if he see it not serviceable
he regards it not; so that if every grace do breed, or nurse, or accompany
obedience, then whosoever professes he knows God and does not keep his
Commandments, there is no truth in such a man, no true grace.

Use 1 For trial of the truth of our profession, would you know the truth of
your Grace, of your Repentance; of your Faith, of your Humility? You shall know
it by your fruitfullnesse; what use do you make of your Graces? would you know
whether your Repentance be sound? or your Love, etc. sound? would you know
this? Why consider, do they make you obedient and careful to keep Gods
Commandments? as your Way, your Treasure, your Ornaments, your Eye, your Life;
if any grace be fruitful, make you conscionable in the keeping of Gods
Commandments, that is a witness of the truth of that Grace: a painted Tree,
be it never so fair, yet it bears no fruit, but a living Tree brings forth
fruit, you have cause to suspect your Grace, if it make you not fruitful and
careful to please God; if Grace make you obedient, it is sincere, but if a man
has never so many Gifts and Graces; if they lead him not to obedience, truly
they are but counterfeit, and there is no true Grace in him, Isa. 47.10. if
they caused them to rebel, there is no truth in them, if any Grace leave you
more corrupt, or less fruitful, there is no truth in you.

Use 2 It exhorts us to a conscionable diligent keeping of Gods Commandments,
hereby we shall keep our profession true, our Consciences void of offense, and
shall have an evidence that we know Christ; if a man say he knows God and yet
keep not his Commandments, his profession is not true, but he that both says
so, and does so, his profession is sincere.

2 It will keep your Consciences in Peace; when your Conscience checks you not,
but bears you witness that you desire to do Gods will in truth, this brings
great Peace.

3 It keeps your Grace sound, the more fruitful, and the more obedient; the
more does Grace increase; a Christian that lets his Grace lie at rest, it grows
rusty, and he may doubt of the truth of his Grace; if any metal lie up and
rust, we may suspect whether it be right or no; but if it be kept with
continual use, we suspect it not; take a Christian that does not exercise
himself in Grace, he grows so rusty, that he suspects the truth of his Grace,
but put thy grace to employment, let it be in continual use, and thou shall
easily see it is good metal and current; the employment of Graces proves the
truth of them, therefore as we desire to keep our profession true, or our
conscience clean, or our graces sound, keep in a daily course of obedience,
always be doing good, and that from Gods Commandment.

Use 3 Of Consolation to all such as take a good course, and labor to keep
Gods Commandments, who may sometimes suspect all their grace is counterfeit,
and there is no sincerity in them; why if there be no sincerity in you, you do
not keep Gods Commandments as your way, but you cannot say, but you would
gladly find your hearts keeping them as your way, and you endeavor it, and it
is the grief of your souls when you go out of the way; do you keep them as your
treasure, and ornament, and apple of your eye, and life? Why then there is
truth of grace in you, truth of sincerity, though not of Perfection; you must
not look to keep them without sin, but if you desire to keep them as the most
precious thing, as your treasure, your ornament, your life, the apple of your
eye, though a man may sometimes have a moat fall into his eye; but in this case
do not say, your Graces are counterfeit, for if they were counterfeit you would
not keep Gods Commandments, Psalm 36.1. Wickedness says to the wicked, there
is no fear of God before his eyes; how does that appear to David? verse. 4. he
sets himself in no good way, he is in a bad way, and goes on therein, and such
a one, it is plain, he has no fear of God before his eyes, by their fruits he
knows them; if you set your selves in no good way, your profession cannot be
true, but if the way you take be good, and if not thou do not take it up; why
if it be thus, your profession is true, and your grace sound; it is a question
whether Solomon fell finally, or his graces were true or no; you may know his
repentance was true, because he found his lust to women as bitter as death,
Eccles. 7.6, 7. well then, if an Adulterous, or Idolatrous Wife were as bitter
as death to him, then it is an evident sign, if he looked at his transgression
as death, he looked at the Commandment as life, and therefore his repentance
was sincere; so then if a man find his sin as as bitter as death, it is a sign
his repentance is true. But yet we must here distinguish between the horror of
sin, and sin it self, the horror of sin may be as bitter to us as death, but
not the sin it self, as Judas, the horror of sin was so bitter to him that for
it he hanged himself; but had Judas been troubled with the sin of his
conscience, as he was with the horror of his conscience, he would not have gone
about to help one sin by another; had he hated sin for it self, he would have
hated Murder as sin. So would you know whether it be horror of sin, or sin
that troubles you? If it be horror, you will seek to drive it away by sin, as
some do by merry company and merry Books, this is a plain sign that sin
troubles them not, for then they would not seek to help one sin by another: but
if a man look at the breach of the Law as the loss of his way, it troubles him
as much as the losing of his Treasure, it is as a moat in his eye, he had as
lieve part with his life, if it be thus with thee thou may have comfort,
thy profession is true, thy conscience clear, thy profession sound and sincere.

1 JOHN 2.5, 6. But he that keeps his Word, in him is the love of God perfect
indeed, etc.


THe words do declare a double comfort that betides all those that keep the
Commandments of Christ Jesus.

1 The perfection of Gods love in such, In him is the love of God perfect.

2 The knowledge of their fellowship or abode in Christ, Hereby we know that we
are in him. So, that he that keeps his Commandments, if he look within him, his
love is perfect: if he look without him, he is in Christ: yea and more, he
knows it too: whence he concludes, verse. 16. that he that says he is in
Christ, ought so to walk as Christ has walked.

To keep his Word, or his Commandments (as I told you) is a borrowed speech
from many things which we keep with great care; as our way, our treasure, our
ornaments, the apple of our eye, our life. What is such a man's benefit? Why,

1 The love of God is perfected in him.

2 He knows he is in Christ.

The love here spoken of, is not the love whereby God loves him, but the love
whereby he loves God, and that is perfected in him.

Doct. The keeping of Gods Commandments is undoubtedly, and truly the
perfection of our love to God.
Q. What is here meant by perfection?

A. 1. There is a double perfection one complete without all want or
imperfection, and that is denied to any man in this World, Philp. 3.12. (...)
that is, not exempt from all weaknesses, our knowledge is imperfect, and our
love is imperfect, there is a continual reluctance, Gal. 3.17.

2 There is a perfection without falsehood, hypocrisy, dissimulation, or guile,
and such a perfection is found in all true Believers that keep Gods
Commandments, the love of God is perfected in them; that is, without
hypocrisy, dissimulation, or guile. Genesis 6.9. Noah was a perfect man, and Asa
1 King. 15 his heart was perfect; that is, sincere, though he had many and
great failings; 1 King. 20 3. Remember, says Hezekiah, how I have walked
before thee with a perfect heart. This phrase is usual in Scripture, to call
that perfect which is sincere and true.

Reas. 1. Sincerity of obedience is called perfection, because whatsoever is
wanting is covered in the blood of Christ, and if a man's sin be covered, it is
as if he had no sin, Psalm. 32.1, 2. Blessed is the man whose wickedness is
forgiven, and whose sin is covered; blessed is the man to whom the Lord
imputes not iniquity, and in whose spirit there is no guile; when there is so
much uprightness in a man's heart that he walks without any guile, to him the
Lord imputes no sin.

Q. Is there any in whose heart there is no guile?

A. There is none that they tolerate or justify, none that they nourish or
maintain, if they have any they strive against it, are not well till they be
rid of it, no guile but what their judgments disallow, and their wills consent
not to, blessed are such to whom no sin is imputed, in whose spirit there is no
guile.

2 Such are said to be perfect, because they strive after perfection, and if
they have a willing mind the Lord accepts of it, according to that a man has,
and not according to that a man has not, 2 Cor. 8.12. See how Christ approved
the two Mites of the poor Widow, because she had an heart to give all her
estate, Christ says, She gave more than they all; so if a man gives all his
heart to God, and if he had more he would give more, why, God accounts it as
perfect.

3 God accounts of any sincere truth of grace as perfect, because in time it
will be so, and he looks at things to come as present, he that has begun a
good work will also perfect it, Phil. 1.6. 1 These. 5.23, 24.

Q. But how comes it to pass, that such a keeping of the Commandments argues
love to be perfect?

A. A thing is said to be perfect three ways,

1 When there is Perfectio partium, a perfection of all parts, none wanting,
Genesis 2.1.

2 A man is called perfect, that is ready, and skilful, and nimble at any
business.

3 A thing is said to be perfect that will hold, that is constant, as we call
them perfect colors that will hold their hue in every weather, now such a true
perfection of love to God is in all keepers of Gods Commandments.

1 There is a perfection of all the parts of love in all such men, there is
none of the parts wanting; and the parts of love are,

1 An affection unto fellowship with Christ.

2 An affection to be doing good to him.

What we love completely, First, We desire communion with it.

Secondly, We desire communication of good thereunto; if we have it we rejoice
in it, if we want it we earnestly desire it; how does a man know his love to
his friend, but by desire of communion with him, and communication of good to
him, now such a man as keeps Christ's Commandments thus loves Christ.

1 He is broken off from the love of all other things, and he has an unfeigned
affection to have fellowship with him, and to get that, he keeps his
Commandments, and so dwells in him, and he in him, Joh. 14.21, 22.

2 For communication of good to him, our works cannot profit God, yet if we be
willing to do God any service, to be at his command at any time, then the love
of God is perfect in us, when we desire fellowship with him, and desire to do
him the best service we can.

2 Again in perfection there is a readiness to a work; so such a man as keeps
Gods Commandments, his love is ready, he is forward to every good duty, because
it is a Commandment of God. He is a willing person, Psalm. 110.3. 2 Cor. 8.12.
you need not stand urging him, he is willing to do Gods Will, His tongue is the
pen of a ready writer, Psalm. 46.1.

3 There is perfect love in him, because it is constant and durable, and will
not change, such a man's love is the same in health and sickness, in the Church
and at home, in prosperity and adversity, and if it be any way disturbed at any
time, yet it will return again to its former constant course.

Q. But how may I know, wherein does it appear, that if I keep Gods
Commandment, my love is perfect?

A. 1. From the contrariety of our tempers naturally to any Commandment, so
thnt if you see any one willing and ready to be at Gods command, you may say,
certainly the love of God has overcome him, the Commandments of God do cross
his will, cross his affections, cross h^s profit and pleasure, so that if you
see any one give himself up to keep Gods Commandments and cross himself, it is
an undoubted sign that there is the love of God in him, which constrains him to
do what Nature would not do.

2 You may know such a man's love to be perfect that keeps his Commandments,
because whatsoever weak beginnings of love you find in such as keep Gods
Commandments, that man's love grows perfecter every day, such a man still grows
in fruitfulness, he grows ready to every good work, Joh. 15.2. so that the
love of God is perfected in him by obedience; As a fruitful Tree, the more it
sticks his root downward into the ground, the faster it grows, so a Christian,
the more he sticks his root on Christ, the faster it grows. And so the
Husbandman will have more care of a fruitful Tree to prune it, he has no such
care of a sower barren Tree, but if a Tree be fruitful, he cuts off all
superfluous Boughs that hinder the increase of such a Tree, so a man that is
fruitful in Gods Commandments, he does not only stick his root, his faith and
hope deeper in Christ, but the Lord himself is willing to cut down all those
noisome Lusts that suck away the sap of grace; if God see a man set himself
fully to follow God, and keep his Commandments, the Lord will cut off all
cumberances, all corruptions, all things that hinder the growth of grace.

Use 1. For trial of our love to God, whether it be perfect or no, whether
sincere or counterfeit; how do thou find thy heart affected to Gods
Commandments? Do thou look at them as thy way? it grieves thee to be out,
do thou look at them as thy treasure, as most profitable to theee? Do thou
look at them as thy ornaments, as most honorable to thee? Do thou look at
them as the apple of thine eye, as thy life, most near, and dear, and precious
to thee? If thou do, thou have that love in thee that is perfect without
guile, perfect in every part of love, and in regard of readiness and
constancy; but if a man looks at Gods Commandments as a by-path, as if he were
out of the way; if he looks at them as unprofitable, and dishonorable, if he
can break them without any scruple, if he would rather part with them all than
his life, verily the love of God is not perfect in such.

Use 2. For direction to all such as desire perfection of love to Christ; do
any desire to love the Lord Jesus in perfection, not only of truth, but parts,
and degrees, if he could? Why this is the way, keep his Commandments, take heed
of breaking any one of them. What is the reason we deceive our selves in our
love to Christ? We think it is love to Christ, if we keep a solemn Feast to him
at this time of the year in memory of his Nativity, but is there no better
Argument, nor furtherance of thy love to Christ than this? Take heed of it, if
Christ has commanded us to deck our bodies and houses, if Christ has
commanded us to feast and be liberal, you will find that a great help to
further your love to Christ, and an evidence thereof; but if you go on in any
course without a Commandment, if you keep such Feasts, which end in all excess
and riot, and gaming and playing, they begin it may be, pretty well, but we
fall from Religion to civility, from civility to intemperance, and wantonness,
etc. and what is the reason? Because we have the custom of our Fathers for it,
not the Commandment of Christ; the Apostle does not say, he that keeps customs
his love is perfect, but he that keeps Christ's Commandments, therefore if you
would get your love to Christ perfected, it must not be by keeping of old
customs, but by keeping his Commandments: what is the reason why the most are
so ready to keep such Feasts, is it because it is Christ's Commandment? if it
were, the more you would find your love perfected, you would be more forward to
good, your spirits grow from one grace to another, but because men look at
customs, they begin in the Spirit and end in the Flesh. Take a Christian at the
beginning of the Sabbath, he finds his heart unlifty to holy Duty, but before
it be ended, he is so enlarged, that he is sorry it is done? Why, because he
obeys a command, but if we do any thing out of custom, it grows from better to
worse, so that Christ has not more dishonor the rest of the twelve Months
than he has these twelve days; but would you have your love perfected, then
frame your lives and courses according to Gods Commandments, and then the more
you practice the more you may, you shall find your grace growing, and your
love perfected to every good work; be doing Gods will, and the Lord will be
with you, blessed is that soul whom the Lord shall find doing his
Commandments; be doing, and your doing shall multiply your strength and growth
in grace.

Use 3 Of Consolation to all such as apply themselves to be doing of Gods
Commandments; does a man find himself ordering his ways according to a
Commandment? if you find it delightful to you, that you would still walk in
it, you look at it as your way, your treasure, your ornament, etc. why this is
your comfort, the love of God is perfect in you, and will grow more perfect, so
perfect that God covers all your infirmities, so perfect, that it grows up high
to perfection, even to all the parts thereof, so perfect, that God sees you
willing and ready to be doing his will; so perfect, that you resolve to hold on
and be constant, and if God see you thus molded to a Commandment, and not to
customs; God will uphold you, and help you, and strengthen you, till he make
you perfect, which is no small comfort to a soul.

1 JOHN 2.5, 6. Hereby we know that we are in him. He that says he abides in
him, ought even so to walk as he has walked.


IN Verse 5. you have an obedient Christian set out.

1 By his practice, he keeps Christ's Commandments.

2 By his privilege, which is double.

1 His love is perfected.

2 He knows that he is in Christ.

3 Verse 6. here is a duty enjoined to all men that would profess Fellowship
with Christ, namely, imitation of Christ; they ought to walk, as he has walked.

From the former part of the 5 Verse, we have observed,

Doct. The observation of Christ's Commandments, is the perfection of our love
to Christ.
Those next words show the right honoring of Christ and your selves together;
so as we may honor God, and he honor us; that is by Knowledge of our
Fellowship with Christ, and by our duty so to walk, as he has walked.

Hereby we know that we are in him.

By what? By the love in us? No, by keeping his Commandments, we know that we
have Fellowship with him, though both be coincident; so then here is a promise,
not only of their b^ing in Christ, but their knowing that they are in Christ,

Doct. Sincere obedience to the Word of Christ, is both a certain and evident
sign of our blessed Estate in Christ.
Hereby, that is by keeping his Commandments, we know that we are in Christ.

Quest. 1 What is it to be in Christ?

Ans. We are said to be in Christ, in Scripture Phrase by three degrees.

1 They are said to be in Christ, that do submit themselves to the ordinances
of God, hear the Word, receive the Sacrament, use prayer and other good duties,
and live unblameably before his people, 1 Cor. 7.39. where he gives liberty to
any Christian woman that makes profession of Religion, if her Husband be dead,
to marry with whom she will, but in the Lord, and 1 Timothy 5.11. he forbids
Timothy to receive younger widows; because when they begin to wax wanton
against Christ, they will marry; this is not here meant, though it be a part of
it.

2 There is a further being in Christ by a participation of some Graces, though
not sanctifying Graces; yet such as may fit them for many Christian Offices, as
may fit for Magistry, as Jehu, Ministry, as Judas, Joh. 15.2. Every branch that
bears not fruit in me, he takes away; as who should say there may be a
branch in Christ, and yet bring forth no fruit, but no man can be thus in
Christ, but he must suck some sap and juice from Christ; but this is not here
meant of common Graces, as Jehues zeal, Felix his trembling, Herod's joy, etc.

3 Men are said to be in Christ, when they participate of such Graces as
accompany salvation; such as make them true Members of Christ, as Faith, and
Humility, and Hope, and Patience; and of such St. John here speaks, by such
fruits we know that we are in Christ.

And thus we are said to be in Christ, partly from all eternity, in the purpose
of God, Ephesians. 1.4. not actually, but vertually, non actuali inexistentia, sed
virtuali continentia, God looked at us as Members, in time to be in Christ, and
notwithstanding this decree, yet these may not live in obedience to any
Commandment, have as yet no Fellowship with Christ.

2 There is another being in Christ, which is actual, namely, of such, who
being called out of the estate of Nature, bring forth the fruits of new
obedience, Romans 16.7. who were in Christ before me, not elected before him, but
called before him, he was a Persecutor when they were Professors; thus we are
said to be in Christ, when by faith we lay hold on him, John 1.12.

Q. 2. What is it to know we are in Christ?

A. It is more than opinion, or thinking so, for we are never said in any
speech to know that which we only think to be so, no man knows this to be gold
or silver, if he but think it to be so. No man grounds his knowledge upon
conjecture, and indeed opinion flows from contingencie, it may be so, or
otherwise, but Knowledge is on sure grounds; what then, is it Faith? No, they
go together, yet they differ much, there is as much difference between them as
between hearing and seeing, Faith comes by hearing, when we assent to any thing
upon Divine testimony, as if God has given us some word, we believe it, but if
we see a thing by sense, or by experience, or by some certain Arguments of Gods
dealing with us, that we do not now only believe it from Gods Word, but we
plainly see it by experience in our hearts from some love of God, from some
obedience and humility, etc. if we have found our consciences pacified after
much horror: Again, we find that our hearts have been proud and unclean, but
now down falls pride and uncleanness, and we begin to conform our selves to
Gods will, now we know that Christ is in us, or else we could not have turned
our selves to any good thing.

Q. 3. What is the reason that such obedience is a certain sign and evidence of
our good estate in Christ, that we know that we are in Christ?

Reas. 1. From the wonderful insufficiency of our natures to keep any
Commandment of God without this, 2 Cor. 3.5. Matthew. 12.34, 35. Romans 3.12. we of
our selves are altogether fruitless in the works of righteousness, till
Christ's love dwell in us, Ezekiel. 36.25. to 27. How come men to keep Gods Law but
from the Spirit of God which dwells in them? Look on men in the state of Nature,
and their fairest fruits are but the Vines of Sodom, and Grapes of Gomorrah,
Deuteronomy. 32.32, 33. they seem as fair as any, but their clusters are bitter, and
so the best fruits of all Natural men are bitter, our very Honey is like Gall,
and Wormwood, and our best actions full of corruption and bitter, so that if a
man find his Grapes savoury, his words, thoughts, and actions gracious and
sweet, so that now he is fruitful in obedience, it is an evident sign we are in
Christ, else we could not be enabled to any thing which is good.

2 Were it not for the love of Christ that constrains us, we should never be
willing to deny our selves; Do you see a man willing to submit himself to
Christ, to his Ordinances, it could not be but by the love of Christ, that
constrains us to deny our selves.

Use 1 Of refutation of that Popish Error, that think it impossible that any
should know his estate in Christ, or that he shall be saved; it is one of their
Canons. Why does the Apostle speak to little Children Babes in Christ thus,
they may know that they are in Christ, and that by keeping his Commandments in
sincerity, if it were impossible to be known? for them therefore to conclude an
impossibility for a man to know that he is in Christ, is against the Doctrine of
the Apostles, and against Christ,; if (I say) any man preach another Gospel
than this that St. John delivered, let him be accursed Gal. 6.7.

Aquinas concludes, that we cannot know we are in the state of grace,
certainly, but upon conjecture, which implies a contradiction, for opinion is
contingentium, scientia necessariorum and certorum, yet he makes some
Objections against himself.

Obj. Is it not said, Genesis 22.12. Now I know that thou fear me, etc. that
is, as he expounds it, Cognovi, i. e. Cognoscere te feci, I have made thee to
know that thou fear me, therefore says he, he might know that he was in the
state of Grace, because he was willing to deny his dearest Son for Christ. He
answers, it may be it was special Revelation, but it was not special
Revelation, to resolve to kill his Son at Gods command, he knew his own heart
well enough.

Obj. 2. 1 Cor. 2.12. Now we have received not the Spirit of the World but the
Spirit of God, that we might know the things that are given us of God; so then
says he, if we may know things that are given us by the Spirit of God, then it
is more than conjecture, it is a certain Knowledge. His answer to this is, it
is spoken of a state of Glory but it is manifest to be meant of a state in this
life; for he speaks of Princes that persecuted the truth, and that they knew
not these things, but we know it by the Spirit of God.

Obj. 3. If men may discern they are in darkness, when they are in darkness;
much more may we know we are in light, when we are in light, of the two, it is
the easier: now he that is in the state of darkness, knows it, Ephesians. 5.13.
Gal. 5.19. the works of the flesh are manifest.

4 He says those things which are in a man essentially, he knows they are in
him: now Graces are essential in a regenerate man, that is, the essence of them
is there, therefore he may know that Repentance and Faith, etc. is there: if
they be there, what is in a man, is known to be in him: if he have a judgment,
he knows he has it: if he has a will, he knows he wills: so if a man has
Graces in him, he may know that he has them, as a Woman with child, does know
that she is with child, Gal. 4.1. and takes it not upon others report, but upon
her own sure Knowledge: so if Christ be conceived in us, the stirring motions
of Gods Graces be in us, we may know it, thus Aquinas confutes himself.

Use 2 Refutation of an unjust complaint they do make against us, they say that
we discourage men from good works, this complaint is unjust, for though we do
not say they justify us, yet thereby we know that we are justified, and that
is no small encouragement; my good works do not justify me, but yet they
justify my justification, nay further, we say to them that they discourage men
from good works, who say, when a man has done what he can, and fullfilled the
whole law, yet he cannot certainly know that he is in Christ; and so what
profit will it be for a man to take pains, and do much, and suffer much, and
yet knows not whether God loves him or not? but we on the contrary say, if a
man walk in a constant course of obedience to Gods Commandments, he may thereby
know that he is in Christ, and this must needs be an encouragement to good
works.

Use 3 For trial, 1 Whether we keep Gods Commandments.

2 Whether we be in Christ or no.

1 Would thou know whether thou keep Gods Commandments as thou should?
do thou keep them as thy Way, as thy Treasure? etc. if thou do, I declare
to thee, thou art in Christ, and thou either do, or shall know Christ. And if
thou would know whether thou be in Christ, why, thou may know it, if thou
keep Gods Commandments.

Use 4 Of Consolation, to every such soul as keeps Gods Commandments; there is
a double benefit to such.

1 Thou art in Christ, 2 Thou know thou art in Christ, and this is fulness
of joy; for if thou be in Christ, thou have no condemnation belonging to thee,
Rom 8.1. and thou may also know it; how ill then do they deal with their own
souls, who know they are in Christ, and yet every discouragement puts them off
from comfort? it is a shame that Christians that have such a privilege as to
be in Christ, and know it, should be so discouraged; therefore those that would
keep a continual festival unto Christ, let them get into Christ, and learn to
know that they are in Christ, and this may be a comfort unto them against all
discouragements.

Doct. It is the duty of all such as profess Fellowship with Christ, to walk
as Christ walked; or the profession of Fellowship with Christ, ought to be
joined with imitation of Christ.
Q. What is it to walk as Christ walked?

A. Christ has walked in some ways as God, in some ways, as Meadiator, God
and man, and in some ways, as man.

1 Then he wrought some works as God, he fasted forty days and forty nights,
he fed five thousand with five loaves and two fishes, he walked on the water,
etc. God never calls us to imitate him in these works, but he calls, learn of
me for I am meek and lowly.

Q. 2. Does he call us to walk in those ways which he walked in as Mediator?

A. He does not call us to walk in the same kind, but in resemblance to them,
as he dyed for us and rose again, so in resemblance he calls us to dye unto
sin, and to rise again to the life of Grace, so to dye to the World as he dyed
to nature, and to rise to newness of life as he arose from the dead, Romans 6.16.

2 As he was a King, Priest, and Prophet unto God, so he would have us Kings to
overruled our temptations, to rule over our families, to rule over our Tongues,
to rule over our Hearts; he has called us likewise to be Priests, to offer up
sacrifices of prayer and praise, and alms, and to offer up our bodies and
souls, an acceptable sacrifice unto him, Hos. 14.3. Heb. 13.16, 17. Romans 12.1,
2. and to be as Prophets to teach our Children, and Servants, and Families, and
instruct them, Act. 2.17.

3 Some works he wrought as man, and so he was either a Minister of
Circumcision, or as a Servant of God, a good man; and in these we are to
imitate him, 1 As a Minister, so Ministers should follow him.

1 In undertaking his Calling from him, as he did his from God, he saw Gods
call, he was sent by his Father, so we should see his call, otherwise to
undertake it without a call from him, is the way to bring a curse upon our
selves.

2 In his Calling he performed his Ministry with all Faithfulness, he did
bring in the stray, heal the sick, instruct the Ignorant, etc. Ezekiel. 34.16. and
his inward care was, that they might have life, and have it more abundantly,
Joh. 10.10, 11. so should Ministers dispense the word of life, strive to beget
the life of Grace in the hearts of their people, to help the weak, comfort the
distressed, inform the Ignorant, etc.

2 As a private Christian, a good man, we must imitate him in his doing and
suffering.

1 For the matter of his doing, it was always Gods command, Joh. 14. ult.

2 The manner of his doing, 1 It was in obedience to Gods command, Joh. 5.30.

2 He did it with chearfullnesse, it was his meat and drink to do Gods will.

3 The end of his work was Gods Glory, Joh. 17.4.

1 So for his suffcrings, 1 They were all in Innocence, 1 Pet. 2.21.

2 With much patience, 2 Pet. 2.23.

3 He suffered with much profit, he learned obedience by his temptations and
sufferings, Heb. 5.8. he profited by his Agony, by his despising, by his
buffettings, by his crucifying, and in these things we should labor to imitate
and follow him.

Q. Why should we be like him?

A. 1 From Gods predestination, Romans 8.29. he has decreed that we should be
like him.

2 From the near Fellowship we have with him; it is meet the Members should be
conformable to the Head, the Branch to the Root.

Use 1 An evident conviction of that Popish Doctrine of the merit of works, and
satisfaction, and super-errogation; if so be when we have done all that we
can, and walked as Christ walked, as perfectly as he did if we could, then
we had done no more than our duty, God has no cause to thank us, and we
deserve nothing, Luke 7.9.16. Now what is our duty? We ought to walk as he has
walked; now a Servant looks not for thanks for his days work, so we have not
merited thanks for the works me have done; and if when we have done what we
can, we have done but what we ought to do, then we cannot do more than we
ought, and so are far from superarrogation; and for satisfaction, if our best
works be our debts, then we cannot satisfy for our sins by our duties; suppose
a man owed another a great debt, and besides owed him all service for some
great benefit, for redeeming him from Captivity, etc. the doing of his service
would not satisfy his debt, because he owed him that besides; so we were all
Captives unto Satan, and God through Christ delivered us, and for that we owe
to God all we have, and if we were in debt besides by our sins, all our service
will not satisfy for our sins, for we owe that besides, now one debt will not
pay another.

Use 2 Of direction and exhortation to all that desire to walk answerable to
that knowledge they have, do you desire to be in Christ and know you are in
Christ? Why, conform your selves to walk as Christ walked, if thou do so,
thou may keep a good Christmas all thy life, thou shall keep Christ's honor
all thy life in remembrance, if thou walk as Christ walked; therefore Christ
died; that we might dye unto sin, 1 Pet. 4.1, 2. whatever corruption is in you,
let it die in you, mortify pride, and anger, and uncleanness, and
covetousness, etc. learn to dye to these, and live to God; make it your
chiefest pleasure to do Gods will, rise from all deadness, and sluggishnesse
of Spirit; have you been unable to rule over your Spirits? Now put on the
Spirit of Kings, overruled your passions and corruptions, rule your Families,
be as Priests to offer up sacrifices of prayer and praise, and alms; to offer
up body and soul to Gods service, every work do it in obedience to Gods
Commandment, do it with chearfullnesse and meekness, do it to Gods glory, and
if you be called to suffer, suffer Innocently, not for any sinful carriage, not
for murder or theft, etc. but for Righteousness sake, and then suffer
patiently and meekly, and whatever you suffer, be sure that you profit by it,
by temptation, by crosses, by persecution, etc. learn obedience, and so you
shall walk as Christ has walked; be stirred up to walk in imitation of Christ,
1 Cor. 11.1. set this pattern before you, to imitate him both now, and all the
year; look upon Christ, aim at him. work as he did, suffer as he did: and so
for Ministers, walk faithfully, help the weak, bring back the stray, comfort
the distressed, walk as Christ has walked.

1 JOHN 1.7. Brethren, I write not a new Commandment unto you, but an old
Commandment, which you have had from the beginning, the old Commandment is the
Word which ye have heard from the beginning.


FRom the 6th Verse, the Apostle had taught, It is the duty of all Christians
to walk as Christ has walked, now this Commandment the Apostle amplifies,
verse 7.8.

1 By denying the newness of it, it is no new Commandment to press upon all
that will be saved; it is no new Commandment.

2 He admits it may be called new in some respects, verse 8.

In the seventh Verse we have these parts, 1 A loving compellation, Brethren.

2 A denial of the newness of this Commandment, I write no^ (...) you a new
Commandment.

3 The antiquity of it.

4 A declaration how it shall appear not to be new; all the Doctrine which you
have heard from the beginning is no other but this, that all must walk as
Christ has walked.

Doct. The Ministers of Christ are to acknowledge, even their little Children
as their Brethren.
Compare this Verse with the first, there he calls them, little Children, and
here Brethren; so Paul does express himself thus, Romans 15.14. 1 Cor. 2.1. 2
Cor. 3.1.

Reas. Because he and they do partake in all things wherein Natural Brethren
partake.

1 They have the same God and Father that begets them, Ephesians. 4.6. Jam. 1.17,
18.

2 They have one Mother, the Church, Gal. 4.26. and he speaks of Jerusalem on
earth, though he calls it Jerusalem which is from above, because it is above an
earthly condition, and John himself was a little Child to some, as they were
to him, Gal. 4.19. And so sometimes private Christians they do labor and
travel in begetting children to God; it is a wonder to see many times, how some
are put to pangs to beget their friends to God, sometimes by Prayer, by
exhortation, by reproof, by all means, they use much pains, therefore the
Church is called, The Mother of us all, because some in the Church beget us.

3 They all partake in one Immortal Seed, by which they are begotten unto God,
1 Pet. 1.23. this immortal Seed, for the Material part, it is the Word, for
the Spiritual part, it is the Spirit of God, Joh. 3.5. so it is not so much the
Letter of the Word, as the Spirit of God, whereby all are begot to God.

4 They are all begotten to the same eternal inheritance, 1 Pet. 1.3. and so
they are all, both Ministers and People called Brethren.

Use 1. To teach Ministers so to look at their Spiritual Fatherhood, as not to
forget their Spiritual Brotherhood, ver. 1. he calls them little children, not
that Ministers should show dominion over them, as Lords over them, 2 Cor. 1.
ult. 1 Pet. 5.2, 3, 4. so then their Fatherhood must not make them Lords, but
the name of Brotherhood must bind them to communion, they have indeed a kind
of power, but not to subdue their Spirits to them, not to believe as they do,
or walk as they do, only so far as they are like unto Christ, 1 Cor. 11.1.
otherwise Christians are not to be led by them.

Use 2 This must teach both Ministers and People to maintain brotherly love and
affection, if you be Brethren, Let brotherly love continue, Heb. 13.1. 1 Pet.
2.17. therefore what kind of desire and comfort there is in brotherly
Communion, what mutual joy when they meet, the same should be in Christian
Ministers and People.

Now the fruits of Brotherly love are chiefly three;

1 Unity, that they should keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace,
Col. 3.14. Ephesians. 4.3.

2 Equality, (not to take away different respects) but to make our selves equal
to others in affection, to conceive that though we have more gifts, yet they
may have less corruption, they may not have so much grace, but they may make
better use of it, Phil. 3.13. we should always conceive of others as equal, or
better than our selves.

3 Spiritual Communion, that is, mutual dispensing of help one to another, of
Exhortation, Admonition, Consolation, and Reproof, Levit. 19.17. 1 These. 5.14.
and for temporal things we should be helpful one to another, take up quarrels,
1 Cor. 6.5, 6. pardon one another failings, be helpful to the poor brethren,
Romans 15.15. we must not neglect, or despise one another, or carry our selves as
strangers one to another, is this brotherly love, to carry our selves strangely
toward them, or not care for their communion or company, never to help them?
this is not brotherly love. And indeed the Sacrament invites us to brotherly
love, for we are molded as it were up into one Loaf, and drink of the same
Cup, 1 Cor. 10.17. therefore if there be any strangeness, or quarrelling, or
contempt between us, it is to sin against this Ordinance; if God be the God of
peace, then Satan is the author of discord; how comely a thing is it for
brethren to live together in unity? Psalm. 133.1, 2, 3. he compares it to the
most precious Ointment that was poured on the head, and ran down upon Aarons
beard, and the skirts of his garments; and so what grace is poured on the
eminentest Christian, must run down to the lowest, and as the Mountains let the
drops of Dew which fall upon them to fall down upon the Valleys, so where God
has mounted any blessing, where God has bestowed eminent Gifts, every one
should so use his Gifts, as the lower Valleys may be the more fruitful, they
the more helpful.

Use 3. It reproves Ministers that dishearten, and make sad those that God
would not have made sad, many times Ministers are most bitter against their
best Hearers, Ezekiel. 13.22. nor let people make sad the hearts of their
Ministers, brethren should not thus carry themselves, but rather comfort one
another.

It also reproves the aptness of many to affect natural carnal men, their only
delight is in them, and they only hate the Seed of the Woman, that is contrary
to St. John's precept.

I write no new Commandment, etc.

Doct. The Ministers of Christ are carefully to avoid all suspicion of novelty
in all the Doctrines they teach, whether of faith or manners.
Thus St. John, he seeing that it might seem a new Commandment, to walk as
Christ has walked, he tells them; It is no new Commandment that I write unto
you, Jer. 6.16. Job 8.8, 9, 10. and Moses sharply reproved the Israelites for
serving new gods, Deuteronomy. 32.17. Act. 26.22. he continued witnessing no other
truth but what Moses and the Prophets had delivered before him.

Obj. Is it not said, Mat. 13.52. is it not the part of a good Scribe to bring
forth things both new and old?

Ans. True, he is to bring forth new things; but,

1. Such as may be new to the people, not new to the Word, such as they never
heard of, yet not new to the Word, for it is their duty to bring their sheep to
new fresh green Pastures, Psalm. 23.2. but it must not be new in it self, but
anciently delivered by the Prophets and Apostles.

2 A Minister that delivers an old Doctrine, and known to the people, yet he
must bring it in in a new manner, that it may affect them the more, being dressed
after a new manner; the appetite desires new dishes more, as for our Savior,
he taught no new Doctrine, but he spoke it in such a manner, in such Parables,
that it seemd strange to them.

3 He should have so much respect to newness, as to bring out all old Doctrine
with a new vigor of Spirit, not with the old Spirit, but with a new affection
and vigor, that so the people may be more affected therewith, he must deliver
the same matter with a new Spirt, he must drink a new draught of the Wine of
the Sanctuary, but a Minister must not teach any thing that is new to the
Scripture.

Reas. From the perfection of the Scripture, Psalm. 19.7. Gods perfection is
more seen in this than in any other works, the World is perfect in its kind,
verse. 6. but verse. 7. How perfect is the Law of God? Now, as it were a
Frantique thing to go about to create new Creatures, so to come with Nova
dogmata, and new Opinions; it is as if a man should come with new Creatures,
there is not any new Creature in the World, so let a man survey all Doctrins,
he shall find them to be the same which were from the Creation.

Use 1. To mortify a newfangled trick of Ministers and People, when the
Minister fits their itching ears with Newfangled Doctrine, and the people
affect new Doctrine, this is against the Apostles practice here, 2 Timothy 4.2, 3.
Act. 17.19, 20, 21. they thought Paul came in with new matters, and they were
affected with news, but though this Doctrine was new to them, yet it was not new
to the Word.

Use 2. To reprove the Popish-Religion, it is new, some are Franciscans, and
some Dominicans; these are new, we never read of them in the Scripture, neither
do we read of Jesuits, or Monks, or Abbots, they never had any footsteps in
Scripture; some of them confess that in their matters of difference from us,
they have no ground in Scripture for purgatory, or prayer for the dead; but
what says St. John, I write unto you no new Commandment.

Use 3 To Assemblies and Synods to take heed what they impose on the Church, no
new traditions must be thrust on us, if it be not from God, let it be abandoned.

But that which you have had from the beginning.

Doct. True Antiquity in all Doctrines of the Apostles or Ministers, is that
which fetches its original from the beginning.
1 That which has had its original from old times, is not always safe, as we
see, Mat. 5.27. and 35. and yet this does not make it true Antiquity, because
it was not from the beginning, Joh. 8.44. the Devil had his lying from the
beginning, but it was not from the first beginning, for he was not created a
liar, but he made himself so.

But the true Antiquity is twofold.

1 From the first Institution or Creation of a thing, Mat. 19.8. and that is a
good Antiquity, that is fetched from the first Institution.

2 That which fetches its beginning from God, though it were of later times,
for he is Alpha and Omega, Rev. 1.8. the beginning and end of all things.

Rea. 1 From the nature of all evil, which is an aberration from the first
good Estate, if any corruption be in marriage, as polygamy, or adultery; from
the beginning it was not so, if the Devil be a liar, from the beginning he was
not so.

2 From the nature of Truth and good things that come from God, they have the
nature of God stamped on them, and as he is the ancient of days, so is that
good; as Baptism and the Lords Supper, though they were not in the World
before Christ's coming in the flesh, yet being from God, they have true
Antiquity, they are derived from the ancient of days.

Use 1 It discovers the vanity of the Popish allegation of Antiquity, they will
bring you a thousand years alas, many errors concerning circumcision, and the
denial of the Resurrection, have been of six thousand years standing, yet that
is nothing; it was not from the beginning; that is true Doctrine which was from
the beginning, or else from God immediately, all other Antiquity is but vain;
therefore when the Papists pretend Antiquity, truly if it be not as ancient as
the Ancient of days, if it come not from him, it is not true Antiquity; they
will tell you that these Feasts that we celebrate in memory of Christ's Nativity
have great Antiquity, some four hundred years after Christ's time, but it is but
as yesterday, if it come not from Christ or the Apostles, for he has revealed
his whole mind in Christ, Heb. 1, 2. so that what comes not from Christ is
vain; Ignatius says, my Antiquity is Christ.

Use 2 To show the ungrounded confidence of Scholars in the Fathers, if it
come from the Fathers, it sinks deeply, truly if it have no higher rise than
the Fathers, it is too young a device, no other writings besides the Scripture
can plead true Antiquity; what ever it be, if it come not from Christ, or the
first Institution, it is too late, because it is not the same we have had from
the beginning, and indeed there is just cause to suspect them.

1 Many of them had no skill in the original, and therefore must see by other
men's eyes, by translations, for few knew the meaning of the Scripture in the
original, none knew the Hebrew, but Jerome and Origin.

2 Most of them were converted from heathenisme, and so brought in many errors,
as purgatory, and festivals, etc. which the Papists take from them.

3 They lived in such times, wherein many said they had their Doctrine from the
Apostles mouth, as one said, Antichrist should be a Jew, and live at Jerusalem,
and says he, was John's Disciple, a gross error, and from him came Peter's
supremacy.

4 They lived in those days when Popery came in, when the bottomless Pit was
opened, and Froggs arose; but later Writers lived when these were dispelled,
therefore take heed of them, not but that many spoke very well, yet there is a
great difference.

5 Observe generally, God did not give them the Spirit of Interpretation, but
weakly, and if they wanted such a spirit, how could they open the Scriptures?
whereas later Writers had a clearer discerning, therefore it will be of more
use to read wholesome later Writers.

Use 3 To teach Christians what kind of life and manners to take up; you will
say you love not new-fanglednesse, why then, Vive moribus antiquis, utere
verbis presentibus; live ancient lives; your obedience must be swayed by an old
rule, walk in the old way, walk not in ways of Superstition, of Covetousness,
of vanity, of uncleanness, every sin is a novelty, though it be never so old a
custom.

This Old Commandment is the Word that they had from the beginning.

Doct. The Commandment to walk after Christ's example is the old Doctrine that
was taught to the Church in all Ages from the beginning of the World.
He tells them, this was no new Doctrine, but such as they had from the
beginning, for in the time of innocence Adam was made after the Image of God,
and Christ is the Image of God, Col. 1.15. After he fell, the first Sermon that
he had was, That the Seed of the Woman should break the Serpents head, Genesis
3.15. and this Promise was renewed to Abraham, Genesis 22.18.

In after times, when the Lord led Israel out of Egypt, he sent the Angel of
the Covenant to go before them, Exodus 23.20, 21. Deuteronomy. 18.18. from the
beginning it was thus dispensed, to walk after the Lord, and whatever Pattern
they had from God, it was from Christ, the second Person in the Trinity; so
Joh. 1.18. Levit. 19.17. and he charged them to be holy as he was, that is the
same with this of St. John here, to walk as Christ has walked, Heb. 13.8. the
same before and under the Law, to day in the time of the Gospel, and the same
for ever, 1 Corinthians. 10.1. to 5. Acts 15.10, 11. they held to be saved by
faith, and by faith lived all the Saints of old, Hebr. 11. Hebr. 12.1, 2, 3.

Use 1 To justify the antiquity of Christian Religion, there is nothing in
Christian Religion but we have it either from Commandment, or Promise, or
Pattern of Christ, the death of Christ that was shadowed in the Sacrifices in
the Old Law, and promised in Paradise, and when Christ would convince them, he
does it from hence, Luke 24.26, 27. all our forefathers believed, and dyed in
the same Religion that we do.

Use 2 If the imitation of Christ be of so great antiquity, then it convinces
them that blame Christian Religion of new-fanglednesse* why there is no
Christian that walks as Christ did, but he walks as Abel, and Noah, and Abraham
did, therefore it is not a novelty, but from the Ancient of days, even from the
beginning.

Use 3 It may encourage every Christian to walk as Christ did, when they
consider all the Patriarks, and Prophets, and Apostles since the world began,
have gone before them in the same steps, and in the same faith; if we cannot
show an higher ground, and longer antiquity for our Doctrine, than the Papists
for any Popish tradition, we will renounce it, but we take up no other Religion
but that which came from the Ancient of days, and was from the first
institution. The care that any Christian takes to prepare himself for the
receiving of the Sacrament has been of old, the Apostle reproved the want
thereof in his time, 1 Cor. 11. and they set the Lamb aside three days before
the Passover, to prepare themselves, Exodus 12.3.14. so that this kind of
preparation has been of old, 2 Chronicles. 35.5. therefore let every one of us
examine our failings, humble our selves, entreat for pa^don and cleansing, for
strength of grace to walk as Christ walked.

1 JOHN 2.8. Again, a new Commandment I write unto you, that which is true in
him, and also in you, for the darkness is past, and the true light now shines.


IN this Verse he amplifies his Doctrine by a contrary Argument of newness.

1 He describes the Old Commandment by another adjunct of newness.

2 He sets down in what respect it is new, and in a double respect the Old
Commandment may be called new: 1 In respect of Christ. 2 In respect of them. 3
He propounds the reason of it, because Christ has scattered Light among them,
and Darkness (...), abigitur, is a driving away.


Doct. The Commandment and Doctrine of the imitation of Christ is a new
Commandment, both in regard of Christ, and Believers the Members of Christ.
1 It is new in respect of Christ.

2 Christ has expressly commanded it: Whenever Christ converted any to Grace,
this was his common speech, Follow me, Matthew. 4.19. (which if it were not a
word of Conversion, yet at least of new Conversion, Mat. 9.9.) and it is a
general rule, Luke 9.23. where by following of Christ in the last place is
meant imitating Christ, thus it is new in respect of Christ's Commandment.

2 In respect of Christ's efficacy and power working in our hearts, verse. 9. it
is wrought and stamped in us by a new work of Christ, in the spirits of his
followers, that they do indeed set their hearts to follow Christ.

2 It is new in respect of us Believers.

1 In regard of the outward hearing of the ear it is new, never so plainly
spoken before, Follow me, in all the Old Testament there is not such an
express letter as follow Christ, imitate Christ, walk as Christ has walked.

2 In regard of that new work wrought in the hearts of Christians, Ephesians. 4.24.
that is, but on such a frame of holiness and righteousness, wherein you may
lively resemble the new Adam, the new man Christ.

Use 1 As we ought not to affect new-fanglednesse, so we ought not to loathe
and reject newness; before St. John carefully avoided new fanglednesse, now he
commends newness.

The ground of this difference is;

1 Look whatever comes from God (the Ancient of days) is always new, and never
waxes old, and as it is new, so it is always old, yea old enough if it come
from God, Eccles. 1.9.

2 If it come from God, the newer it is the better it is, because our old
Natures, and Corruptions, and Courses should always be abhorred of us, but
grace, and that new man, and new ways of holiness should be acceptable to us.

3 If it be new, and come from God, it is a greater manifestation of God, we
may see a greater light in it than ever before.

Use 2 Never look to fulfill this Commandment of imitating Christ, until you
become new men, for it is a new Commandment, and a new Commandment requires new
obedience, and new obedience requires new spirits, and a new man, do not
therefore think to follow Christ with old spirits; thus much of the quality;
now follows the reason, For the darkness is past, etc.

Doct. The state of the Children of God in this Life, is as darkness passing,
and true light now shining.
It is an excellent description of a godly man's Estate from his first
Conversion forward, the word in the Original signifies passing, or a driving
away (...), it is not so well translated, past, For the opening of the point
consider, there is a threefold darkness, and a threefold light.

1 Darkness of 1 Ignorance, Mat. 4.16. 2 Uncleanness, 2 Cor. 6.16. 3
Affliction or discomfort, Psalm. 112.4.


2 Light of 1 Knowledge, Mat. 4.16. 2 Holiness, 2 Cor. 6.16. Ephesians. 5 8. 3
Comfort, Psalm. 92.11.


It may be spoken of all here, but chiefly of the two former, darkness of
ignorance and uncleanness is passing away in a Christian, and light of
Knowledge and Holiness is shining forth daily more and more in his heart, Romans
13.12. the day is at hand, i. e. not yet come, yet near at hand, and the night
far spent, i. e. almost gone and spent, yet not so spent as wholly gone, the
shadows of the night still remain, but the day begins to dawn, 2 Pet. 1.19. the
dawning of the day, is when the shaddows of darkness are not yet clearly
vanished; and he does not say the Sun, but the day star, which rises before
the Sun a good while; he there describes the State of the Church till the day
of resurrection, the light of the Gospel does not yet clearly and fully shine,
but is only dawning, Christ is in his Children, as a day Star, gives them
comfortable light, but the Sun is not yet in his strength, Prove. 4.18. it is
not yet perfect day with us, no, not with the best Christians under Heaven, but
it grows by degrees, till it be perfect day with them, which is at the day of
their dissolution, like to the earthen Pitchers of Gideons men, Judge. 7.16.20.
when they brake their Pitchers, the Lamps gloriously shone forth, and dazzled
their eyes, thus it is with a Christian when these earthen Pitchers, and
carcasses are broken, his light will shine forth gloriously, in the mean time
we have light, we have lamps, but they are in Pitchers, shining very dimly.

Q. If we had been perfected the first day, and the light had shined gloriously
forth at the first, had it not been better?

A. Yes, if God had been pleased so to have done, but God would not have it so,
and therefore it were not better, God rather sees it fit that we should carry
our light in earthen Vessels, wherein there is partly darkness, and partly
light, 2 Cor. 4.7. and that for these reasons.

Reas. 1 That God might show his power in our weakness, 2 Cor. 12 9, 10. we
should never have known Christ's vetrue, the power of Grace, or the depth of our
corruptions, if we had been perfected the first day of our conversion, as God
made the world by degrees, and described it so, because he would have us
discern his power, so God does display the power of his grace, by perfecting us
by degrees and not all at once.

Reas. 2 That God might teach us to war with spiritual enemies, as God left
Canaanites among those Isralites, that had not known, and were untaught in the
wars of Canaan, to prove them, and to know, if they would hearken to Gods
Commandments, Judge. 3.3. so God leaves his Children some imbred enemies still
in their souls, to humble us, and to prove us, and try if we will cleave to
him; besides Jesus Christ loves and takes delight in ruling especially at home,
in the midst of his enemies ( Psalm. 110.2.) in the midst of our corruptions; in
the midst of unbelief; Faith rules in the midst of pride; Humility rules; in
the midst of anger; Meekness rules; etc. Grace gets ground in the midst of
corruptions, which is to the glory of Jesus Christ.

Reas. 3 To prevent the multiplication of the Beasts of the Field amongst us,
as God left Canaanites among the Israelites, to that end, Exodus 23.29.30. if
there were not weaknesses in us, it were impossible for Gods people to live in
the World, 1 The World would not bear with us, you know it would not bear with
Christ who walked as meekly as might be, Joh. 14.30. i. e. Satan found no
weakness in him, no corruption in Christ for him to work upon; if christians
had a full and clear light of grace breaking forth at once, all would cry,
away with them, they are not worthy to live.

Use 1. See here a ground of the great difference between christians and
christians, differing in Faith, differing in manners, some are comfortably
persuaded of their own Estates, but others full of fears and doubts, how comes
this about? truly it is with christians as it is with mornings of the day, some
mornings are a great deal more bright than others, and some more dusky and
dark; you will say, why should not a soul come to some settled peace? true, but
it will never be perfect day with us. St. John was an old christian, and yet
you see what he says, the darkness was but going, and the light coming, so
that we by degrees get hold of God, and strength against corruption; you have
some Summer mornings more lightsome than all the days of the year besides, so
it is with some christians in this morning of their first conversion, they see
more clearly their own Estates by far, than others in their whole conversation,
and though all have partly darkness, and partly light, yet some get more light
in one thing, some in another, such a christian it may be, though he do not
get such hold of Peace, yet some corruptions, as Wantonness, Pride,
Covetousness, he subdues and gets greater hold of the contrary Graces; as it
was with the pillar of the Cloud, Exodus 14.20. unto which the Apostle alludes,
Heb. 12.1. just so is it with the spirits of Gods servants, something there is
in them that is cloudy, something in them that is lightsome; old Peter, John
21.18. would not have gone to Martyrdom, and yet he would, partly willing, and
partly unwilling, thus it is with the Spirit even of the best christian, he
has some unwillingnesse to some good duty that God calls him unto.

Use 2. To teach us somewhat the more to bear with one another infirmities and
eclipses, Jam. 3.1, 2. be not of an unruly, imperious, and censorious spirit,
over piercingly, and censoriously judging others; as we have streams of light,
so streams of darkness, vapors, therefore bear with, and succor one another,
and help one another out of this darkness, as in a Lanthorn there is a pane
of light, and a pane of darkness; so in every good quality, we have all some
darkness, Rev. 12.1. the church is compared to the Moon, which when she is at
the full, is fullest of spots; and yet we do not neglect the Moon because she
has spots, but make use of the Moon because she has light: so neglect not any
christian because of his spots, but make use of his light, of that good he
has, also be something forbearing of carnal men, for ye were sometimes
darkness as they are, Tit. 3.1, 2, 3.

Use 3. Let no man's life be an absolute patrern to you to follow; but so far as
they are light in the Lord, 1 Cor. 11.1. see how this in the Text proves what
the Apostle speaks of, follow Christ, why? because our perfection is but
imperfect, we are but darkness passing, if you follow us in all things, you
may take us on the blind side, and so fall.

Use 4. To teach us to be driving away darkness, and to be trudging out of it;
as it is with a Candle, the least snuff in a Candle does not only dim the
light, but does waste the Candle; so it is with our spirits, the least snuff
of Corruption does waste that oil of Grace which is in our hearts, and dim and
damp the light which is in us, therefore snuff we our hearts often, take we
the Thief out of the Candle, let us show forth the virtues of him that has
called us out of darkness into his marvelous light, 1 Pet. 2.9. Ephesians. 5.8.
Romans 13.12. away with darkness, all darkness of doubtings, of unbelief, of
pride, etc. this darkness is passing away from us, we must not call it back
again, do not again draw the curtains of darkness about us; when the Sun is
risen, and a man begins to sleep, and draw the curtains about him again, it is
a sign he means to slug it out; so when new light shines in our hearts, and we
draw our old corruptions about us again, it is a shame fot us, Gal. 3.12. 2
Pet. 3.18. help one another out of darkness, help thy Wife, and children,
and Servants, and Friends, and Neighbors out of it, 1 Cor. 13.9.12. we cannot
practice better than we know, but we know but in part, therefore pray,
admonish, exort, cleanse thy self, and cleanse others from the mist and shadow
of darkness, as much at may be.

Use 5. Of comfort to a Christian; 1. Against troubles which many undergo in
regard of darkness of Spiritual estate; it is a common thing for Christians
to complain of darkness, of pride, of unbelief, of dullness; fear lies upon
us, with what should we comfort our selves? we think no body is so, yes, here
is some comfort for thee, all are so in some measure, it is so with the best,
they have but a mixed estate, one crossing and thwarting another; the fairest
day has dark Clouds.

2 Is our darkness deeper than others? but do you not yet find it passing
away? do you not find more faith, more obedience? do you not make more
conscience of your thoughts, words, and actions? this is a comfort, your
darkness is going away, it wastes apace.

3 Here is a comfort against death; the time will come when all darkness shall
vanish away, Death will be but the breaking of our earthen Pitchers, and our
light shall break forth. Epictetus came forth one day, and saw a Woman
mourning for breaking her pitcher, the next day he came forth, and saw another
weeping for her Son, and he said, Yesterday an earthen pitcher broken, and to
day a mortal body dead; as if it were the same to have a Pitcher broken, and
to dye.

Use 6. Of trial of our estates; would you know whether your grace be true or
no? whether do you find your darkness passing away, and light shining? a man
may walk in a condition of darkness, and see no light, viz. of peace and
comfort, Isa. 50.10 I, but do you not then walk in a greater light of
innocence, and watchfulness and obedience? When a man is in the dark, he goes
slowly, and warily, and lifts up his feet high every step, Prove. 14.16. a godly
man is afraid of something in the way, but a wicked man goes on boysterously;
and confidently, he knows his way as well as you can tell him, but he is but a
fool for his labor.

1 JOHN 2.9, 10, 11. He that says that he is in light and hates his brother
is in darkness until this time.

He that loves his brother abides in the light, and there is none occasion of
evil in him.

But he that hates his brother is in darkness, and walks in darkness, and
knows not whither he goes, because that darkness has blinded his eyes.


THe custom of this Apostle St. John, is, after he has delivered any Doctrine
to make some application of it, for the joy of Gods children, for the end of
his writing to them was, that their joy might be full, cap. 1.4. and so he does
here, for having in the former verse said, that in the Children of God
darkness is passing, and true light now shining, here he gathers a sign
whereby he may know whether our darkness be passing, and our light springing,
and that is from brotherly love, in this ninth verse, and tenth, where you have
a description of him that hates his Brother, and of him that loves his Brother:
the first he describes by four things.

1 He is in darkness; He that says he is in the light, and hates his
brother, is us darkness.

2 He ever was in darkness; he is in darkness even until now; that is, as
yet he never was out of darkness.

3 He walks in darkness, verse. 11.

4 He knows not whither he goes; and that is amplified from the cause of it,
because that darkness has blinded his eyes.

Doct. He that hates his brother, whether he profess the light or no, he is
in darkness, and ever was in darkness, and knows not where he is, nor whither
he goes.
By Brother is here meant chiefly a Christian Brother, as verse. 7. it is
chiefly meant of Spiritual brethren, but there is a truth in it, even toward
natural brethren; such as are of the same Parents, as likewise those of one
Kindred, or of the same Country.

To hate here, is opposed to love, which stands in two things, desire of
communion, and communication of good to him whom we love; hatred therefore
desires neither of these, but consists in strangeness and enmity; in
strangeness, when they desire not communion with them, and enmity, when they
are not willing to communicate good to them; although for the most part it goes
further, to do ev^ll to one; yet, Levit. 19.17. Thou shall not hate thy
Brother; there hatred is not to communicate good to our brother, viz. wholesome
reproof; now he that thus hates these brethren, or his brother, any Brother,
though not all (for if a man should hate all that were Spiritual brethren, it
were manifest that he were in darkness; as it were strange for a man to hate
all his natural brethren) but if there be but one brother whom he hates, he is
yet in darkness, both of ignorance, and wickedness.

2 Such a one was always in darkness, He is in darkness even until now.

3 He walks in darkness, i. e. there is no action of his but is a work of
darkness, a sinful action; he makes not one good prayer, or one good Sermon,
etc.

4 He knows not whither he goes, (...), where he is, nor whither he goes, i. e.
he knows not what estate he is in before God, nor whither he goes, whether to
Heaven or Hell, nor what his end will be, whethet comfort or woe; now for the
proof of the point you may see it, 1 John 4.7, 8.

Reas. 1. Because God is love, 1 John 4.16. and therefore he that is not in
love is not in God; God is not only loving, but love it self, Psalm 145.9. God
communicates good to every creature according to his condition.

Reas. 2. From the distempet which hatred puts both upon our judgments, and
affections in every action, verse. 11. because darkness has blinded his eyes;
it blinds us that we cannot see that good which is in our brother, wherefore we
should love him, and it puts false opinions and furmises upon every thing we
see him do.

3 Hatred makes every duty we perform to God abominable to him, and therefore
such a man walks in darkness, Matthew 5.23, 24. James. 1.20. (...) non
perficit, he cannot bring a good work to an end, Genesis 4.4. Cain, because he
hated his Brother, his Sacrifice would not burn, it would not enter into Gods
acceptance.

Use 1. To refute an opinion of the Popish Doctors; they say, men may fall away
from Grace, and they prove it by the example of Saul and Judas, who they say
were in the estate of grace; this will be easily decided whether they ever were
in the estate of grace yea or no? for Saul, did not he hate his brother, did
not he hate David? if he did, then St. John gives here his judgment, he was
ever in darkness, and of Judas you may see Psalm. 109.5.8. which is applied to
Judas, Act. 1.20.

Use 2 From hence every one may take a scantling of his own Estate; whether do
we hate our Brother, any brother, whether spiritual or natural, or any other
man? then we are in darkness.

Object. But may not a man hate those that hate God, with a perfect hatred?
Psalm. 139.22. David makes it a sign of a Citizen in heaven, Psalm. 15.4.

Ans. If a man hates God, and malign goodness, we must consider two things, 1
Whether he does it of ignorance, or 2 Whether he does it of malice; if he does
it of malice, we may, and ought to hate him, Mat. 15.12, 13.14. and of these
did David speak; but if they sin of Ignorance, I must not hate them with a
perfect hatred, but so far as not to affect fellowship, and communion with
them, but yet to communicate good to them, that I may and must do upon all
occasions; I must pray for them; and admonish them; Luke. 23.34. Christ prayed
for those that crucified him, so did Stephen, Act. 7.60. and it is thought by
learned Divines, that prayer was a means of Souls conversion; and for
admonishing such an one, read 1 These. 3.14, 15. but if a man sin of malice, we
are neither to pray for him, nor admonish him.

Use 3. This teaches us, that as we would have a sign of our good Estate in
Christ, so to love every Brother, every Brother in Christ, every Brother in
nature, or civil society, Gal. 6.10.

Object. May not good men sometimes be bitter against some Brother?

Ans. It may be so, but first, they know them not to be Brethren.

2 They do not hate them with the whole heart, but partly, as far as they are
unregenerate, and they will repent of it when they know it; but howsoever, if
we do not hate any brother, hereby we shall certainly know that we are in a
good Estate.

Use 4 This is a ground of comfort to Gods servants, God will not have one of
them ill beloved, the World hates them, Joh. 15.18. and if God should suffer
his servants to hate them, who should love them? nay, God would have every man
love his Brethren, for as verse 9. the Apostle speaks of professors, he that
says he is in the light, etc. so verse 11. he restrains it not, but he that
hates his Brother is in darkness, whosoever he be, whether he profess the
light or no? now therefore this should be out comfort, and this should make us
careful to walk so as to be beloved.

Doct. He that loves his Brother, walks constantly, and inoffensively in the
state of Grace.
That they walk constantly, and persevere, you may see, 1 John 3.14. Joh.
13.35. Heb. 6.9, 10. that they walk inoffensively appears, in that love covers
a multitude of sins, 1 Pet. 4.8.

Reas. 1 Is the contrary to the first reason of the former Doctrine, God is
love, therefore such as dwell in love, dwell in God, and God in them, 1 John
4.16. now if God dwell in them, and they in God, they must needs walk on
constantly, and inoffensively.

Reas. 2 There is a power in love, to fit us to dispense Gods ordinances
willingly, and likewise willingly to have them dispensed to us, which does
exceedingly help us to walk constantly, and inoffensively, 1 These. 3.12, 13.
love is apt to interpret all things well, 1 Cor. 13.7. and for want of this it
is, that men withdraw themselves one from another, and so exort not one
another, and therefore are they subject to fall away, Heb. 10.24, 25, 26. every
good duty establishes us in grace, now love is strong in good duties, and
therefore it is, that he that loves his Brother, walks constantly and
inoffensively, in the state of Grace.

Reas. 3 Because there is an holy light that shines about love, now in the
light one may see, and avoid all stumbling blocks.

Use 1. To remove a false slander cast upon godly men, that they are the most
bitter envious, and malicious men, the veryest cutthroats that are: you see
that they that are in the light, are of another temper; such envious and
malicious men may say that they are in the light, but if they were they would
love their Brethren; therefore these you speak of, either are not so
uncharitable as you say, or if they be, they are not as yet the children of
light.

Use 2. This shows us a way to help forward the setlednesse, and
inoffensivenesse of our Estate; if we be unsettled or offensive, it is for want
of love, Prove. 13.20. if we keep love and communion with Gods Children, we
shall find Grace secretly increase to establishment, if we ever were in the
light, and now find our selves as it were in darkness, we are at a loss, we
know not where we are; let us consider the first rise of it, and we shall find
it was want of love, Romans 13.10.

Use 3. Of comfort to those that love God and his Children, if we cannot
discern any other Grace in our selves, yet if we know certainly there is never
a brother but we love him with all our hearts, this is an evident sign we are
in the light, and that we shall walk constantly and inoffensively in the state
of grace, we shall abide in the light.

1 JOHN 2.12. I write unto you little children, because your sins are forgiven
you for his names sake.


BEcause your sins are forgiven you for his sake, for whose sake? there is no
name mentioned either before, or after, till we come to the sixth Verse, this
Verse therefore has reference to verse. 6. I write unto you, because your sins
are forgiven you for his names sake, that is, for Christ's sake, so that the
Commandment of walking after Christ, to walk as he has walked, he now
amplifies by the motive to stir them up to it, and that is taken from pardon of
sin, Little Children, (...) not (...) not Babes, as verse. 13. he calls Babes,
(...) so that this word, (...) is of three sorts, some Fathers, some Young Men,
some Babes.

1 In the Verse we have, First, a loving compellation, Little Children.

2 An office of love, I write unto you.

3 A reason of his former exhortation, (Walk as Christ has walked) because he
has forgiven you your sins.

Doct The Children of God, of what growth or strength soever they be in Christ,
they must be as little Children, whither (...) or (...)
As this benefit reaches to all, your sins are forgiven you, so this title
also.

Why as little Children?

1 You must be like them in modesty; Children are free from ambition, therefore
our Savior to wean his Disciples from ambition, tells them, they must be as
little Children, or else they should never inherit the Kingdom of God.

2 We must be like them in innocence, free from malice and revenge, 1 Cor.
14.9. vex a child never so, and he tell you, I will tell my Father, and will
not do so without great cause, but if he do, that is all; so should it be with
christians, they should not easily complain, if they do, let this be all, make
known your wrongs; we see children, though they be angry, yet they will not
seek to revenge themselves.

3 Like them in simplicity, affecting simple plain meat, Milk, 1 Pet. 2.1. so a
Christian should not affect varnishing, but the sincere Milk of the Word.

4 Like them in weanednesse from the World, Psalm. 131.1, 2. he could be content
to be without his Kingdom which before he had affected; so should we be.

5 They are content with promises and hopes; tell a child of some thing; let
but his Father say, he will buy him such a thing at London, or he has it laid
up for him, he rests well pleased; so would God have us contented with promises
and hopes; when we cry to God for this and that blessing, or grace, he tells
us, we shall have it when he sees fit, it is laid up for us in heaven, and in
the mean time we should sit down content, Psalm. 131.2.3.

Use 1. Of examination of our own estates, whether we be children of God or no,
if we be, we are as little children, for outward honor, not ambitious of it,
more careful how to use it, than how to get it, and if we have not honor we
will not contend for it; and for innocence, we will be like (...) children; for
revenge, we will lay it down; and be without malice; till you be thus framed
you cannot enter into Gods Kingdom; if you be covetous, or ambitious, or
malicious, if you rise up either with ambition, or malice, you shall never
enter into Gods Kingdom; and for simplicity, do you not affect curiosity? so
for weanednesse, is your heart murm^ring and repining? if you cannot get such a
thing? why then truly you are not as little Children; Can you be content with
promises, and hopes, and that is laid up in Heaven for us, or in Christ, our
life is hid in him, Col. 3.3. if we can be thus content, it is a good sign we
are Gods children.

Use 2. If Saints be as little children, then take heed how you offend them.
Parents will be more offended if you hurt their little children, than if you
hurt their bigger, because a little hurt does them more harm, Mat. 18.6. to 11.
the Angels are ready to come from Heaven presently to help them.

I write unto you, etc. it was the greatest desire of the Apostles to be
present if they could, but if absent, they helped them by writing, Gal. 4.20.

Doct. The Apostles of Christ, when they could not be present with the Children
of God, they were willing to advertise them by writing of things behoveful.
So Paul writ his epistles when he was absent, and Peter, and James, and Christ
himself to the seven Churches.

1 They write first to help their knowledge, to make them wise, 1 Timothy 3.15. to
know their duties, 2 Timothy 3.15.

2 They wrote to them to help their memories, 2 Pet. 1.12, 13.14.

3 To establish them in knowledge received, and to confirm them.

4 To stir them up to practice those things they knew, and remembered, and were
established in, 2 Pet. 1.12, 13.

5 Moses gives the reason, Deuteronomy. 17.19, 20. he would have the King to read the
book of the Law, that he might learn to fear God, and keep his Commandments,
etc.

6 That by this means their joy might be full; when they thus understood and
remembered, and practiced, it would increase their joy, which was the end of St.
John's writing this Epistle.

Use 1. To refute the Papists, who withold these writings from the
Common People; to what end did they write them, if little children might not
read them? Fathers, Young Men, Babes, St. John wrote to all, and would have all
read them.

Use 2. To stir us up to constant reading of the Scripture daily; how often?
why the greatest man in the Kingdom must read them once a day at the least,
Deuteronomy. 17.19. it will help our knowledge, our memories, establish us, stir us up
to practice, help us to fear God, to grow in joy, and fullness of consolation;
what an help was it to the Bereans, that they read daily? it wonderfully helped
their faith and comfort, therefore many of them believed, and were confirmed in
Grace; what if we be in a Journey, or Sick, what then? why in this case we must
mediate in the Law of God, Psalm. 1.2.

I write unto you because your sins are forgiven.

Doct. All the children of God have their sins forgiven them.
Acts 10.43. Ephesians. 1.7. sometimes remission of sin is called the covering of
sin, Psalm 32.1, 2. if sin be forgiven it is covered, it is not imputed unto us.

Sometimes it is called the throwing of them into the bottom of the Sea, Micha
7.18, 19. God when he forgives iniquity and sin, drowns them as deep out of
sight, as things in the bottom of the Sea.

Sometimes it is called a changing of them, Isa. 1.18. Come let us reason
together, though your sins were as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow;
they are quite changed, though they were deep scarlet sins, yet they shall be
made as white as snow.

Sometimes it is called, a washing away of sin, Psalm. 51.8. Sprinkle me with
Hysop, it is an allusion to the Blood in the Law sprinkled with Hysop; so when
we are sprinkled with Christ's blood, our sins are washed away.

Sometimes it is called, a blotting out of sin, as a thick Cloud have I blotted
out your sins, Isa. 44.22. As when the Sun appears in its brightness, the
Cloud is suddenly vanished, and cleared, so our sins when they are forgiven,
Isa. 43.25. Jer. 31.34. I will remember your sins no more, Jer. 50.20. when God
pardons sin, he does so utterly blot it out, and it so vanishes, that it is no
more to be found, there is no such thing extant.

Q. How comes it, that when your sins are forgiven, they are so througly purged?

Reas. Because all are washed away in Christ, our sins are imputed to him, and
his righteousness is imputed to us, Isa. 53.5. 2 Cor. 5. ult. our sins are
his, and his righteousness ours.

Use 1. To reprove the Popish opinion, who teach, That the sins of the godly,
though they be forgiven, yet they are not utterly forgiven, but with
reservation of a Temporal punishment, partly here, and partly in purgatory:
but it is a false Doctrine; for if he cover them, if he wash them away, if he
throw them into the bottom of the Sea, if he blot them out as a thick Cloud, if
he remember them no more, they are thoroughly forgiven, without any reservation
of punishment.

Use 2. It reproves their Doctrine that say, The afflictions of Gods children
are punishments for sin; but we must know, if sins be not accounted ours,
punishments are of another nature, if sins be changed then punishments also;
all the sins of Gods Children are not accounted as sins, but diseases of the
soul; and so all the afflictions of Gods servants are not as punishments, but
as medicines and purges to root out distempers, Dan. 11.35. so that now
afflictions do not come out of Gods justice in way of revenge, but in mercy,
in way of cure.

3 It confutes purgatory; If God pardon sins so as he remembers them no more,
then what need of purgatory, to punish the relics of sin in Gods Children?

Use 4. It may teach all that desire to have their sins forgiven, to be of
Child-like dispositions, free from ambition, and malice, and revenge, to frame
themselves to humility, and innocence, and meekness, and simplicity, and
contentment, and resting on promises and hopes; if it be thus with us, God will
forgive us our sins; what is the reason why we doubt of Remission, but because
we fail in this condition?

5 It may comfort all Gods Children, they have this white stone, that is,
Absolution for sin, and in that a new name written, that is, Adoption; and if
we be of a meek, humble, innocent, simple frame of heart, we have this comfort.

Use 6. Of exhortation, and 1. If God has thus freely forgiven us, let it
teach us freely to forgive others, and it is an argument of our own remission,
Mat. 6.11, 12.

2 It must stir us up to be careful that we offend God no more; if God when
he pardons our sins remembers them no more* let us be careful not to offend
him any more, 1 John 5.18. As a woman when her clothes are washed very white,
she would be loath that they should be spotted, or mired; so after God has
made us white like snow, let us take heed of polluting our Consciences any
more; it is a good argument our consciences are pure, when we are afraid to
spot them.

3 It must teach us to walk fruitfully, and be abundant in Gods service,
Luke. 7.47.

Lastly, It must teach us to be exceedingly thankful to God, that has thus
forgiven us, Psalm. 103.

Doct. God forgives the iniquity of his Saints for his name sake, Isa. 43.25.
For his own sake he blots out our sins:

1 For his own glory, that his name may be magnified and feared, Psalm. 130.4.
Psalm. 103.1, 2, 3.

2 For the honor of Christ, he does it, that he may be honored through
Christ, Ephesians. 1.6, 7.

3 For his own sake, that is, without any desert of ours, yea sometimes without
any desire of ours, Isa. 43, 22, 23, 24, 25. Thou have not called upon me, nor
offered sacrifices unto me, etc. yet I, even I am he, that for mine own names
sake puts away thine iniquities, and will remember thy sins no more.

Use 1. To teach us to be abundantly the more thankful to God, to fear him
the more, to serve him the more, to honor and praise him the more, that for
his own sake has blotted out our iniquities; if we had run further into a man's
debt than we were ever able to get out, and he freely forgave it, we would be
loath to offend him, we would honor him, and be ready to do him the best
service we could; so we should be careful, seeing God has forgiven us so
great a debt, to take heed that we run not into further Arrerages, that we
dishonor not, nor offend that God who has so freely for his own sake forgiven
us.

Use 2. It must teach us all that have any comfortable experience of the
forgiveness of our sins, to walk even as Christ has walked, for even upon
this ground does St. John here press it, it should be our meat and drink to
do his will, to glorify him in all our course, as it was Christ's care, Joh.
17.4. and that is the end that God ayms at in forgiving our sins, that we
should walk as Christ walked.

Use 3. For Consolation; If our sins be forgiven for Christ name sake, then we
need not fear the continuance of them, for had he forgiven us for our own sake,
we might justly have feared that he might yet afterward through our defaults
lay them again to our charge, but he has forgiven us for Christ's sake, he does
not forgive for thy Prayers sake, but thy sins were pardoned before thou
calledst on him, Isa. 65.24. God was answering before, and your prayers grew so
zealous because your sins were forgiven, Isa. 43.22. and therefore God will
cancel our acquittance, because he did it for his names sake, for the glory of
his own grace.

1 JOHN 2.13 I write unto you Fathers, because you have known him which is from
the beginning, etc.


VErse sixth, he commended this duty to all Christians, to walk even as Christ
walked; which duty and Commandment, verse. 7. he amplifies by the antiquity of
it, verse. 8. from the newness of it. Thirdly, instanceth in one special duty
of it, that is, love of our Brethren, verse. 9, 10, 11. verse. 12. he amplifies
it by a benefit or motive to walk as he has walked; and that is from the
pardon of sin generally granted to all christians, therefore walk as Christ
has walked, because he has forgiven you your sins; now verse. 13. these (...),
or little children, he distinguishes into three sorts, Fathers, Young Men, and
Babes; little children is the quality of all christians, but Babes are newly
born to Christ; now all these should walk as Christ has walked.

In the Verse we have these three parts.

1 An Enumeration, or distribution of the several ages of christians, to whom
he commends this duty.

2 A Ministerial duty of love he tenders to them, that is, he writes unto them.

3 He propounds to every one of them a several Reason why he urges this duty
upon them, I write unto you Fathers, because ye have known him that is from the
beginning; I write unto you Young Men, because you have overcome the wicked
one; I write unto you Babes, because ye have known the Father.

What is meant here by Fathers, Young Men, and Babes? some think it is meant
of the several statures of Grace that Christians grow to, some are Fathers,
some Young Men, some Babes, but we never read these distinct; but that an old
man in Christ is a strong man in Christ, for grace does not grow weaker but
stronger, and the eld^r in Grace the more wise, the more fruitful; the more
gracious; therefore I think by Fathers he means ancient Christians, yet old men
too; he therefore has respect to their natural age, and by young men he
understands men young in years, yet stronger in Grace: By Babes, such as are
tender in years, and so Babes in Christ too; therefore it may well be
understood of the natural difference of ages, and this interpretation may be
confirmed from the reason he gives, taken from the several inclinations in
Natural ages: take old age, that takes pleasure in study, and rehearsal of old
things that have been long past; so, you have known the ancient of days, you
have known how Christ has been dispensed from the beginning, so that your
natural desire of old things you have turned to the antiquity of Christ.

And for young men, they have natural strength, and strive to put it forth in
Fightings, or Combats: why, I write unto you young men, because you have
overcome the wicked one, because you have turned your strength to fightings
against Sin, Satan, and the World, and have overcome them; and for Babes,
though they know little, yet they first discern their Parents, and express
their joy in them; so, I write unto you Bahes, you that are very young in years
and young in Christ, because you have learned to know the Father; First, in
that he writes to all sorts of Christians, Fathers, Young men, and Babes, and
all well seasoned with Grace, Obedience, Knowledge, etc. observe thus much.

Doct. God has his children among all sorts of Ages of men, some of them are
aged, some young, some Babes in Nature, and in Grace.
He has his Children out of old age, Youth, and Childhood, out of all he has
elected some to do him service: these old men, he does not tell you when they
came on, but whenever they came they had strength of grace; so Young men, he
tells you not when they came on, whether in Childhood or no, but they had
strength of grace, sure they had overcome the wicked one; and for Babes they
came on in childhood, and yet had strength of grace, and it may be some old
men might in their old age come on to the knowledge of the ancient of days, so
that there is strong grace found in all sorts of men, Wisdom in Old men,
Spiritual vigor in young men; and he speaks of Babes, as knowing their Father
in heaven, as well as their Parents on earth; God has a company of all ages
calling on him, justified, and sanctified: Amongst old men and women we read of
Abraham and Sarah, an old couple stricken in years, of Isaac and Rebecca, an
old couple also, and knowing the promises made of Christ, Joh. 8.56. Your
Father Abraham saw my day and rejoiced; so did Sarah rejoice in the promised
Seed. We have also the examples of Moses, and David, and Zachary, and
Elizabeth, that continued till they were old both in age and grace; there were
some such among the Priests, as Aharon, and Hojadah 2 Cron. 24.15. some among
the Soldiers, there were some old Soldiers of Christ, old Kings, old Nobles,
etc. which knew him which was from the beginning.

For young men, famous is the example of Phineas, Numb. 25. in his youth he was
full of zeal; such was Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 34.1, 2, 3. we read that at sixteen
years of age he sought the Lord God of his Fathers, and at twenty years he grew
so strong that he wholly carried before him the whole State, though they were
then strongly corrupted, and given to Idolatry, yet being strong in the Spirit,
he carried them on to Justice, and reformation strongly, he cleansed the Land
from Dan to Beersheba; a notable encouragement to youth, to be vigorous in zeal
and grace.

And for Children, Samuel, when he was but a child ministered to the Lord, 1 Samuel 2. so John the Baptist was filled with the holy Ghost from his Mothers
womb, Luke 1.15. and of Timothy it is said, that he knew the Scripture from a
child, 2 Timothy 3.15. and 2 Timothy 1.5. so that in this Family there were in
degrees, his grandmother Lois, an old woman, his mother Eunice, a young woman,
and Timothy almost a child, Lois teaches Eunice, and both teach Timothy, (...)
from a very Babe he knew the Scripture.

But why will God have some of all sorts to be servants to him, old men, young
men, and children?

Reas. 1. That the grace of Christ might be as largely extended to all sorts of
men, as the sin of Adam was extended to all degrees and ages, Romans 5.12. to 18.
if Adam had defiled all sorts and Christ had restored but some sort of men,
only young men, then Adams sin had been more powerful to destroy, than Christ's
righteousness to save; it was meet therefore that as Adam defiled all Ages,
all conditions, so Christ should restore all Ages, all conditions, and
sanctify them: as there are of all sorts that are defiled, Jer. 7.17, 18. all
Ages wholly corrupted, the Father kindles the Fire, the Women kneads the Dough,
and the children gather sticks, to make cakes to the Queen of Heaven; now as
there are of all sorts thus corrupted, so it is meet there should be of all
sorts sanctified; why should not God have all sorts to serve him, as well as
the Queen of Heaven?

Reas. 2. From the honor that is returned to God by the several ages.

1 For old men, they bring this honor to God, whether they be called in old
age, or before, and hold on.

1 Herein God glorifies the truth of his promise, that length of days is in
the right hand of Wisdom (by Wisdom is meant the fear of the Lord) on this
ground he encourages his Son to Wisdom, that it will be a means to lengthen
his days, Prove. 3.16. therefore that God might justify this promise, he will
have some old men stand up before him, it does not make them so melancholy
that they shorten their days, Religion distempers no man, godly sorrow never
wasted our days, but worldly sorrow: Haman the Ezrahite, was wonderfully
addicted to godly sorrow, yet he grew up to his old age, Psalm. 88.8. Riches,
and honor, and long life are the reward of godliness, Prove. 22.4. Wealth and
credit, and length of days happen often to them.

2 When you see old men continue in their profession to their old age, they put
an honor on Religion; if young men and children only should profess Religion,
you would take it as indiscretion and hotnesse of Spirit, but do you see any
grave wise old man take up a Christian course? none do it but young Punies
that know not what they do, this would be a great disparagement, but that God
may make it known, that wisdom and discretion is to be found in the ways of
grace, therefore he will have some old men walk in those ways, Prove. 16.31.
that gray hairs may honor Religion, and Religion may be a crown to them;
Eighty six years, said old Ignatius, have I served God, and yet never found him
a hard master; so when Christians can say, so many years have I served God, and
if it had been such a wearisome course they would have shaken it off, but when
we see they hold out in it, it implies they find some comfort and joy therein,
and if old men come on, it will be said, they now see by experience the vanity
of all other courses, they see it is best dying a christian, and spending our
last days in christianity, old men would never fall into it, unless they saw
there is no way so comfortable and peaceable as that is.

2 For young men, it is a great bonour to Religion if they come on, they make
the power of Christ's grace manifest, that is able to overcome the heat and
violence of youthful lusts, no age so violent and boisterous in corruption, so
headstrong, so indiscreet and rash, so that what for unrulinesse,
stubbornness, vanity, pleasure, they are most indisposed to grace, and will not
hold on: if God therefore take hold of their Spirits, and stablish their
Spirits, when they by Gods Grace shall be able to rule their Spirits, their
lusts, to rule their hearts, this argues the strength of grace, in that, when
neither wise counsel, nor Magistrate can rule them, yet the grace of Christ can
rule them, rule their passions, so that they can put forth their strength
against the enemy, either against their own corruptions, or abuses of others,
so that when the Elders sit still, sometimes a young Phineas rises up, and
shows his zeal for Christ, what an honor is this to Christ's grace? Psalm.
119.9. Eccles. 11. ult. Childehood and youth are vanity, so that if Gods grace
can lay hold on them, and restrain them, the power of Gods grace is hereby
magnified, Psalm. 110.2, 3. 2 Cor. 12.7. youth is only strong in weakness, if
Gods grace therefore shall be so strong as to subdue all these, and make them
like unto Josiah, who at sixteen years of age set himself to seek God, and
compelled the whole Land to do so, 2 Chronicles. 34.33. (he compelled them at least
to outward Reformation) it is a great glory to God, when young men thus give up
their young days to God

2 Another Honor they bring to God, is by their boldness and courage in a
good cause; old men sometimes, though wise yet are too cautelous and backward,
but young men, what is wanting in experience they have in zeal, they are
forward in any service for God.

3 And for Babes and Children, if they be brought to grace, God hereby casts
shame on elder men, Psalm. 8.7. when they see Bahes come off with more savoury
words than old men, sometimes God confounds the folly of ancient men by the
wisdom and grace in Children; when Christ came riding to Jerusalem, the
Children cried out, Hosanna, and praised him, the High Priests disdained it;
but, Mat. 21.16, 17. Christ told them, have ye not read, that out of the
mouths of Babes and sucklings thou have perfected thy praise? This is to still
the enemy and revenger; they shame you that are Elders and Priests; in regard
of your backwardness. Thus we see, God will have of all sorts and ages of men
stand up to do him service.

Use 1. May serve to teach all sorts of men.

1 Old men; If God has his number among all ages and conditions of men, then
God looks to have his number amongst you that are old men; say not, I have now
long lived in another course, but come on to a Christian course, or if you
began before, go on; I write unto you Fathers* because you have known him that
was from the beginning; it may well beseem you to talk of the ancient Promises
and Mercy of God; God looks that you should take away the reproach of Religion,
that they may not say, none but young he^ds take up this course; do you this,
remember that Religion is no point of indiscretion; no, an hoary head is a
crown of glory if it be found in a way of righteousness; would you not think
it a great misery if it should befall a Mariner after all Tempests, to suffer
Shipwreck in the very havens mouth? so is it with old men, when you have run on
through all the difficulties of this Life, in your last days, when you should
arrive at the Haven of Peace, and Hope, and eternal Happiness, if you should
sink and fail, what a misery were it? Tit. 2.1, 2. (...), Paul did consider
that old age was an old crazy time; their he^ds unhealthfull, their stomachs
unhealthfull, their hearts unhealthful, how should old age get healthful hearts
again? why get an healthful spirit, a sound heart, an upright spirit; what a
staff would this be to weak age? to have sound faith, to be sound in love,
sound in meekness and patience? what a support will it be to them, to uphold
all diseases and distempers? how will they be able to bear al^ the Sicknesses
of this age, when their spirits are lively, and their hearts comfortable, and
Gods Spirit upholding them? that will be the staff and crown of old age; as
therefore you desire to honor God, to support your old age, as you desire to
go to the Grave with a Crown, give up your selves to God, that so the Apostles
and Elders may acknowledge you as Fathers in Christ.

Use 2. For young men, think it not too soon for you to enter on a Christian
course, and if you have begun, grow up in grace; what an honor will it be, As
you have been strong in outward strength, so now to be strong in Grace, strong
in the Spirit? what an honor will it be to see you strong, to subdue your
corruptions? what an honor will it be to see your zeal and courage, stirring
up old men's discretion, so that what is wanting in them, may be supplied by
you? how many strong temptations are incident to young men, from evil company,
from beauty, from pleasure, etc. what an honor will it be to Gods grace, to
see your strength turned against sin and lust; to see you sober, and temperate,
and chaste; to see you zealous and quickened in Grace? I write unto you young
men, because you have overcome the wicked one. Remember thy Creator in the
days of thy youth, Eccle. 12.1. God takes pleasure then in thy service; if you
remember him then, he will be most ready to remember you in your old age.

Use 3. And for little children, if God have his number amongst Babes, then you
that are Parents say not, it is too soon to learn them any thing, they are too
young, they cannot understand, why, cannot you learn them to know their Father?
you learn them nothing, till you learn them to know you, and express joy in
you, but teach them to know what an happy thing it is to have God for their
father; tell them, that he is able to do more for them; and give them better
things than you can do. Levit. 23.10. to 15. take no comfort in them, till they
take comfort in God; train them up to know God, to know his ways, that they may
be able to rejoice, and solace themselves in God and good things, that the
first fruits of their age may be consecrated to God; and if you do so, you
consecrate the whole lump, if the first fruits be holy, so will the whole
Vintage be, if the root be holy so will the branches; consider, these Babes are
flexible and easily bowed; it is far more easy to train them up to good things
now, than in their youth and riper years; therefore labor now to incline them
unto God and good things; take special care to train them up to know God their
Father, train them up to come to the ordinances with reverence and diligence,
and this will be their honor, God will make them instruments to confound
elder, stronger men.

Thus we see God has among all sorts and ages of men, some that belong unto
him, whose sins are remitted, whose spirits are sanctified.

2 Now in that St. John applies himself to all their conditions and ages,
observe,

Doct. That Ministers of Jesus Christ, are to apply themselves and their
Doctrine to several sorts and ages of men that they have to deal with.
So St. John here carves out several portions for Fathers, for young men, and
for Babes, so Paul, Tit. 2.1. to 10. so when John the Baptist had pressed a
necessity of Repentance, first came the people and asked, Master, what shall we
do, and then the Publicans, and Soldiers, what shall we do? and he answered
them; according to their several conditions, Luke 3.10. to 14.

Reas. From those offices God has put Ministers in; he looks that they should
be as Stewards to give every one his own portion, Luke 12.42. they are to be
Physicians, Jer. 8.22. now they must not dispense one salve to several sores;
so sometimes he calls them Shepherds, now they are to dispense themselves
according to the Estate of the sheep.

Use 1. To teach Ministers, in all their studies, to provide a several portion,
for the several conditions of men's souls; one thing may be fit for Fathers
which will not be fit for young men and Babes; they should therefore labor to
provide every one a portion; Ministers should look at their people, not as if
they were all of one mould and frame; people come to the Congregation, as men
to a market, they come not to buy all things that are good, but what may be
most for their use; so Ministers may set down many good things before people,
but if they do not seem to belong to them, they regard them not, but in a
special wise will retain that which particularly belongs to them; therefore let
Ministers be exhorted, to cast such Precepts, Exhortations, Admonitions,
Reproofs, before the people, as may suit with their several conditions.

Use 2 To teach all hearers, as to listen to all, so especially to listen and
attend to those things, which more especially concern them, and belong unto
them, old men to what belongs to them, young men to what is their portion; it
is true, no Doctrine but may fit every one present; as a young man may become an
old man, and so have use of what belongs now to old men, but especially attend
to those things which for the present belong unto you; and you must not think
it too much, if Ministers come to particularize, it is your Crown to be
particularized, you take it kindly when you are bidden to a Feast, and the
master of the Feast, not only sets on the whole lump before you, but carves
out a particular piece for you, so you ought to take it kindly, and as a
careful part in the Minister, if he dispense a particular portion to you; yea,
you ought to make known your estate unto him, or else you fall in your duty.

3 From the duty he tenders unto them, he writes unto them all, I write unto
you Fathers, I write unto you young men, I write unto you Babes; from hence
observe this point of Doctrine.

Doct. It is the duty of all sorts, and ages of Christians, to be conversant in
reading of the Scripture.
To what end does he write to old men, if old men do not read what he writes?
and so young men and Babes, it was the charge put upon the very Kings of
Israel, Deuteronomy. 17.19. that they should read the book of the Law all the days of
their lives, and when they have not opportunity to read, then let them meditate
on the word, Psalm. 1.2.

Reas. There is great use of reading of the Scriptures.

1 It helps Knowledge much, 1 Timothy 3.15.

2 It helps to make a right use of what we hear; yea it sets such an edge on
the Word heard, that though the preaching did not so thoroughly affect, yet by
reading, they come to quicken Faith, Act. 17.11, 12. though the Word prepared
their hearts, and made them attentive; yet till again they read, and revised,
and meditated on what they had heard, their Faith was in suspense, but after
they saw the agreement of his public Doctrine with the word, then many of them
believed, not that God does ordinarily beget Faith by reading, without hearing;
but when we have heard, reading exceedingly quickens our spirits and Faith.

3 There is a further benefit from reading the Word, Deuteronomy. 17.19.20. a man
shall find himself thereby framed to the fear of God, to humility, etc. that
day a man neglects reading of the Word of God, he shall find his spirit more
loose and unbridled, less conscionable, he does not stand in awe so much.

4 It is a means to confirm us, and establish and help our memories, and stir
us up to holy duties.

5 It makes the Word more ready in times of temptation, what a mavelous use
our Savior made of the Word, when Satan tempted him? Ephesians. 5.17. a man in
temptation, will find need of many passages of Scripture.

6 Lastly, another use of reading the Scriptures is, that our joy may be full,
1 John 1.4. reading does fill our hearts with comfort and consolation, not that
reading is sufficient to salvation, no ordinance roots out another, Romans 10.17.
Faith comes by hearing, but though that especially begets faith, yet for sundry
other Graces, reading is of special use, at least to quicken and stir up
grace; we do not read that God ever blessed reading alone to beget Faith, for
God does not usually bless it alone, but when it is joined with hearing the
Word preached; in any congregation where there is only reading of the Word,
what one soul is begot to God, comes on to Faith, to Gods fear, to humility, to
patience, etc. not but that in such places be found good Christians, but it is,
because they go abroad, otherwise it fares with reading, as with the Eunuch,
that knew not what he read, Act. 8.30, 31. till Philip declared the
interpretation. But yet I say, you old men read, and you young men read, and
you Children read, and it is a great fault to neglect it, and put it over
wholly to little Children, as a petty childish exercise; but what, does St.
John write only to Babes? no, but he writes to young men, and therefore they
are to read what he writes; and to old men, and therefore they are to read what
he writes, when God laid the charge upon the Kings of Israel, Deu. 17.19. he
did not impose it only upon Babes, but whatsoever their employment be, whether
they be in war, or sitting in the seat of Judgment, they must let no day pass
without reading the Law; no person, but let him read; we shall understand the
Word better, and the better remember it, we shall be more stirred up to fear
God, to keep his Law, we shall be the better furnished against many
temptations, which otherwise will prevail against us; In a word, seeing he
wrote to them that they might learn to walk as Christ walked, hence you may
comfortably expect, by reading the Word, by laying it up, by praying for a
blessing, you may be helped to walk even as Christ walked.

I write unto you Fathers, because you have known him that was from the
beginning. Who are these Fathers? they are such as are opposed to young men and
Babes; therefore he speaks of old men, 1 Timothy 5.2, 3. why does he call them
Fathers? not that they were his Fathers to beget him to God: for before he had
called them Brethren; neither is it meant of his natural Father, but he calls
them so, even out of very reverence to their age.

Doct. It is the duty of all Christians, yea even of Ministers, to carry
themselves to old men as their Fathers.
For this duty belongs to all christians, as well as Ministers; God has
special care to the reverence of old age, for he would have ministers to
rebuke with all authority, and yet he would not have them easily rebuke an
Elder, Tit. 2, 15. much less is a private person that has less authority and
commission, to deal roundly with elder years, Levit. 19.32. he gives special
Commandment to all men to rise up before the hoary head, and reverence the
person of the old man, and dread thy God; implying, that the fear of God
requires this duty, as who should say, there is no fear of God in such men as
do not reverence the persons of old men.

Reas. God has stamped on old men the image of his Eternity, as on Magistrates
the image of his Soveraingty, God himself is called the ancient of days, so
that an old man bears a blush of the image of God; rich men carry the image of
Gods Allsufficiency, Magistrates of his Sovereignty, old men of his Eternity.

Use 1. To teach us to honor old men as our Fathers.

2 It proves the rudeness of some young men that look at old men as base and
contemptible, he speaks of it as a sign of confusion, ( Isa. 3.5.) to those
persons, when they see the hoary head pass by, rise not up, nor reverence him.

3 It may stir up all young men to reverence old age, and that by a threefold
respect.

1 In rising up before them, Levit. 19.32.

2 You must show them reverence in speech, as St. John here calls them Fathers.

3 In silence, in their presence not to put forth your selves, Job 32.6, 7. but
to be silent, till at least they have spoken.

Use 4. This should teach old men, seeing God has put such honor and respect
upon them, how much the more should they think themselves bound to God? Shall
he be so respective to thy honor, and wilt not thou honor the ancient of
days? would you have all to rise up, and express reverence in speech and
carriage to you, and ought not you then to come before God with reverence, and
speak reverently of his name? would he have others be silent in your presence,
much more should you subject your best gifts to God, and take heed that you put
no dishonor upon your selves, by any unseemly carriage; old Noah had no sooner
committed that shameful sin of drunkenness, but his own child mocked him,
Genesis 19.17. Prove. 6.11.

Doct. It is the honor of aged men, of fathers, when they know him which was
from the beginning.
When they know the Father of eternity, the Ancient of days, this is that
which is an honor to old men, both before God and man, viz. the knowledge of
Christ dispensed from the beginning, as 1 John 1.1.

From the beginning is not to be understood in relation to time, but Eternity,
he does not say, That was with the beginning, but from the beginning, before
the beginning, Joh. 8. Before Abraham was, I am; he was before the World; now
the knowledge of Christ is the honor of aged persons.

There is a twofold knowledge of Christ.

1 A Speculative Historical Knowledge, only of the understanding, Act. 9.15.

2 There is a practical saving Knowledge of Christ, and there is a threefold
difference, between that knowledge that rests in the understanding, and this
practical and saving kno^ledg of Christ.

1 The knowledge that rests in the understanding, is only by hearing or
reading, but the other is got by the Spirit of Christ infused into us, 1 Cor.
2.9. partly by inlightning our minds, partly by feeling the work of Grace in
our hearts, Phil. 3.10. hence it is, that this experimental knowledge excells
the best knowledge that is got by reading, or hearing, he knows the worth and
virtue of Christ.

2 They differ in their effects, that knowledge that rests in the understanding
breeds pride and carnal confidence, Isa. 47.10. and scandal and offense to
the weak, 1 Cor, 8.12. but this saving knowledge breeds.

1 Prayer, Joh. 4.10.

2 Faith, Psalm. 8.10. They that know thy name will trust in thee.

3 Justification, 1 John 2.2.

4 Obedience.

5 Innocence toward our brethren, Isa. 11.6. to 9.

6 It works eternal life, John 17.3.

3 They differ in the adjuncts; saving knowledge is joined with an high esteem
of Christ, Phil. 3.7, 8. yea a man has liberty to rejoice in this knowledge,
which he may not in any other, Jer. 9.24, 25.

There are two things in the knowledge of Christ, which old men have more than
other men, Jacob expresses them both, Genesis 48.6, 7. he did now by much
experience know the goodness of God, that he had provided for him at home, in
Labans house, in his journey, he had supplied him in all his wants, and
delivered him out of all his dangers; a young man cannot say so much; it seems
not so savoury in a young man's mouth, but when an old man comes out with a
recital of Gods favor, this is the honor of old age.

Use 1. Of direction to old men, to take notice of their own Estate, whether
they know him that was from the beginning; has Gods Spirit brought you to
pray, to humble your selves, to obedience, to innocence, etc. if it be so,
happy are you, you are truly honorable.

Use 2. Not to satisfy your selves with any knowledge, till you know him that
was from the beginning; the study of antiquity is pleasing to many, especially
to old men; no knowledge like this, when you are able to speak of Gods old
mercies to you, that he has fed you all your life, when you are able to tell
your children of their duty to God; could you tell of all Antiquities, it is
nothing, till you know him that was from the beginning.

1 JOHN 1.13. The middle Part. I write unto you young men, because you have
overcome the Wicked one.


WHy does he call them young men, and not Brethren, as before he called old men
Fathers?

Ans. Because then he had not distinguished them from others, for all
Christians are brethren one to another.

1 Observe here, First, their Adversary, the wicked one.

2 Their Victory, They have overcome the wicked one. This wicked one is Satan,
1 John 5.18. Mark 5.37. Mat. 13.19. Mar. 4.15. he is called Satan, he being
once one of the noblest creatures, nobler than man.

Doct. The chiefest of the glorious Creatures of God, may become the chiefest
wicked one.
He is called (...) that wicked one, (...), and it implies.

1 That he excells in wickedness, his Understanding most blind, his will most
rebellious, his affections most corrupt.

2 It implies, he is the Father of all sin, Mat. 5.37. Joh. 13.2. Joh. 8.44. he
is called the Father of Liars.

3 It implies, That Satan takes pains to do evil, is industrious to do
evil, (...) a (...), labor, he traverseth the World, goes about continually
doing evil, 1 Pet. 5.8. Job 1.7. he is insigniter improbus.

But how comes it to pass, that he that was a glorious Angel is now become
that wicked one? The causes of his deprivation were partly accidental and
outward, partly inward; accidental, as

1 God did not elect him to stand, as he did ordain some Angels, 1 Timothy 5.21.
so that he was left to a possibility of falling, though not to a necessity.

2 His condition being a creature gave occasion to his fall. God being
infinitely good, his will is the rule of good; now he being a creature, Gods
Will is his rule, and he may not attend to the rule, and then he does evil.

3 But thirdly, There was an inward cause that led him to sin, and that was the
pride of his nature, not made so, but he exalted himself, 1 Timothy 3.6. which
implies; that he saw man made after the Image of God, and he was a glorious
creature attending on God himself, and was puffed up with his glorious condition,
and despised man, that was to live on the earth, and dress the Garden.

Use 1. May teach young Scholars, not to please themselves in any gifts of
Nature though never so excellent, for even an Angel that excelled in Wisdom
has fallen away, and become that wicked one.

Use 2. It may teach them to take heed how they enter into the calling of the
Ministry in their young years, especially before they be humbled, it was the
cause of Satan's fall, that he was puffed up with his office; it is a wonder to
see, when Scholars are admitted into the Ministry in their young times, how
they despise the people, think themselves unmeet to condescend to Peasants, but
they will rather exercise their Gifts in the University, and so fall into the
condemnation of Satan.

3. Hence you may see part of the Image of Satan, why was he called that wicked
one? because he excells in wickedness, and is the Father of sin, and takes
pains to do evil; so, do you see men excel in wickedness, lead on others to
sin, take pains in mischief? such a one bears the Image of Satan upon him.
When Paul saw Elimas hardened in mischief, leading on others, and taking pains
to keep the Deputy from the faith, he calls him, the child of the Devil, Act.
13.10.

4 Hence we learn, If the Devil have got this Name by excelling in wickedness,
and drawing on others to sin, and taking pains to do mischief; then on the
contrary, b^ how much the more any excel in goodness, strive to draw on
others to God, and take pains in it, they are the more like God their Father.

Because ye have overcome the wicked one.

All overcoming implies a fight, so that when you read of their overcoming, it
implies that young men have strong wrestlings with Satan.

Doct. Satan, as he is an enemy to all mankind so especially to young men.
He does not write to Fathers or Babes, that they have overcome the wicked one,
as if it were not so proper to them, but he chiefly incourages young men, I
write unto you young men, implying, it was a proper work for them. Observe all
the temptations of Satan in Scripture, and where you shall read of one old man
tempted by Satan, you shall read of ten young men; when did Satan set upon Eve,
was it not presently after her first creation? our Savior was not above thirty
years old when Satan tempted him; Peter when he was tempted was young: we shall
find few falls of Gods Saints, but it was in their young days, except two,
Noah and Solomon, who fell in their old days; and less shall we read of
Children, 2 Kings 2.22. but Satan, chiefest assaults have always been against
young men.

Reas. 1. Why Satan chiefly sets upon young men, it is from the vigor of their
nature and parts which God gives them, their courage, their strength, and
fervency; therefore Satan strives to draw them on, and he knows, that if they
get loose from him, they will do him least and do God most service, more than
either old men or Children; therefore he strives chiefly to draw them on;
indeed God sometimes makes use of the weakest, but Satan always makes use of
the stirring, quickest spirits among men.

2. Because he has most advantage to surprise them; no age so subject to
temptation, 2 Timothy 2.22. Fly youthful lusts, yet he was not more subject to
lusts than others, nay, he was of a weak abstemious nature, 1 Timothy 5.23. yet
Paul charges him to take heed of youthful lusts; if such a weak abstemious
nature was subject to youthful lusts, then it implies, that no age is so
subject to be led into lusts, as youth.

3. From the counsel of God, whose purpose it is then to magnify his Grace
when corruption is strongest, therefore God himself, who is that (...), to
magnify his Grace, lets loose Satan upon young men; so it was with our
Savior, Mat. 4. It is the purpose of God, that where sin abounds, Grace should
much more abound, Romans 5.20. therefore it is, that young men are most strongly
assaulted, that God may magnify his Grace.

But why do the temptations of young men exceed all other ages?

Why, Children are not yet come to the lusts of youth, and old men are past
them, so that young men are most liable to temptations and discouragements.

Use 1. It may therefore teach young men to fear their Estates; if they have
not strong temptations, it is a sign the Devil has strong hold already, and
so is in peace, but otherwise they are subject to spiritual assaults.

Three Temptations Satan commonly assaults the Sons of men with.

1. Against their effectual Callings; their repentance, he persuades them it is
yet too soon to look toward repentance; and they are more liable to evil
company, given more to pleasures and delights than old men, and impatient of
Counsel; and if God break through this,

2. Then he puts them to question their Faith and Adoption, whether they be
Gods Children or no? their strong lusts make them doubt of it, and if Gods
Grace break through this,

3. He tempts them about their sanctification, he will fill their hearts with
unclean lusts; and if a man break through these, he has much cause to magnify
Gods Grace.

Use 2. To teach young men, seeing Satan's aim is chiefly at them, to strive to
grow strong against him, watch warily against him, that the evil one touch you
not.

And there are three especial Graces to help young men against the assaults of
Satan.

1. Sobriety; watch to Sobriety, be sober and vigilant, 1 Pet. 5.8. take heed
of intemperancy, and inconstancy.

2. Stand steadfast in the faith, 1 Pet. 5.9. not trusting to your own strength
or courage, but rely upon God; while young men are confident of themselves, as
Peter, they fall, but if you stay your selves upon God, he will support you.

3. Treasure up the grace of Humility, that you think not highly of your
selves, which is the folly of youth; God resists the proud, and gives grace to
the humble.

And there are three Duties which I commend to young men.

1. Diligence in your Callings: the want of which overthrew David; when he was
idle, Satan took advantage to tempt him to uncleannes, 2 Samuel 11.12.

2. Frequency in Gods ordinances, in reading and hearing the Word, v. 14. the
more you treasure up the Word, the more power and strength you have against
Satan, and the more you receive the Sacrament, the more strength you get, for
this is the end of receiving the Sacrament, to get strength against your lusts.

3. Be frequent in Prayer, and that will help you much, James 4.7, 8. Draw near
to God, complain of the slipperinesse of your nature, of your weakness to
withstand Satan's assaults, and entreat God to give you strength that you may
hold out.

Doct. Satan may be overcome, and is oftentimes overcome, and disappointed of
his hold, even by young men, against whom he had most advantage.
I write unto you young men, because you have overcome the wicked one.

Q. 1. What is it to overcome Satan?

A. It is a borrowed speech from the Victory of Soldiers in War, and Soldiers
overcome either by killing their enemy, or spoiling, or captivating, or putting
to flight their enemies, now Satan cannot be put to death, he is a Spirit, and
so is not capable of death, only of the second death.

And to lead him captive, that Victory is only peculiar unto Christ, Ephesians. 4.8.
He led captivity captive.

But for the two last, so young men may overcome Satan, they may spoil him,
and put him to flight, for spoiling, Christ has done the worst, Col. 1.15. he
has spoiled Satan. But,

1. For putting him to flight, Young men may do this, James 4.7. which
implies, that there is a possibility in young men, and a power to stand, and
not to yield to his temptations; for though he has a power to delude our
Senses, and may hurry a man's body about, yet he cannot captivate our Wills,
therefore stand, resist, give no place, and if you do so, he will fly from you
for shame, he has no power longer to hold out, when he sees a man stand out
against him; God has not given him liberty to pursue us unto death, but if we
stand out against him, he will fly from us. So it was with our Savior, first
he tempted him about his Sonship, If thou be the Son of God command that these
stones be made bread; then he tempted him to presumption, to cast himself down
from the Pinnacle of the Temple; and then he tempted him with the glory of the
World, All these will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me; but
because our Savior still resisted his temptations, and Satan could not
prevail, he departed; if a man stand out strongly, Satan flies indeed, if a man
yield never so little, he makes use of the least advantage, and will press it;
but if you stand fast, and yield not, he will be gone from you, his very pride
and insolency makes him scorn to trouble himself with any Creature, he
disdains to be overcome by him, therefore he will depart. Thus Joseph was
strongly assaulted, Genesis 39.9. but he resists and answers with much affection,
How can I do this great wickedness and sin against God? He had long resisted
and stood out against the temptations of his Mistress, and therefore she no
more solicites him with that thing, but takes another course, falsely to accuse
him to his Master, and so caused him to be cast into prison.

2. A Young Man may not only put him to flight, but he may also spoil Satan,
that is, he may take advantage by his assaults, to grow more wary, more holy,
more obedient, more fruitful, and so he spoils Satan; if a Christian enrich
his spirit by the temptations he meets with, he makes a spoil of Satan; the
riches of the Soldier is the spoil of the Enemy: when young men stand fast,
and make a spoil of Satan, and grow more humble, and meek, and obedient, they
shall so much the more overcome Satan; Job was strongly tempted by Satan to
blaspheme God, but yet he stands fast, and not only so, but takes occasion to
bless God, Job 1.21. so when Satan tempts him by his wife, see how he answers,
Job 2.10. Michal tempts David by deriding him, when he danced before the Ark,
but he grew more zealous by it, 2 Samuel 6.20, 21. so John 3.26. They would have
stirred up John to emulate Christ, but that stirred him up to magnify him more
than ever he did before, and give the most honorable Testimony of him.

Q. How come young men to overcome Satan?

1. By the blood of the Lamb, his power is queld by the death of Christ.

2. By the power of the Word that dwells in them, v. 14.

3. By the power of the Spirit, that is stronger in them, than he that is in
the world, 1 John 4.3, 4.

Use 1. Since young men may, and do so overcome the World, it must teach young
men to make this their glory, to be fighting this spiritual battle; there is
no gifts they should so much please themselves in, as in this, Prove. 20.29.
What a shame is it for young men to show their strength in pouring down strong
drink, and spend their strength upon women? what a pitiful thing is it, for
young men to strive to overcome one another in drinking and gaming? etc. nay,
were they valiant in war, yet how much more honorable is it to fight the Lords
battles, to over-wrestle our lusts? when a young man shall single out that
grand Captain the Devil, and foil him in war, that is truly honorable; if
Satan in a special manner strive to overcome you, then strive you most against
him, stand out against him, resist him, and yield not to him; and examine what
spiritual battles you have had with Satan, if none, then your case is not
good.

Use 2. May hearten the feeblest Christians not to be discouraged with
conflicts; many a soul says, my corruptions are so strong, and my lusts so
powerful, I shall never be able to stand out against them, and overcome them,
why St. John writes here to young men, whose corruptions were strong and
violent, and yet he says, You have overcome the wicked one.

Use 3. Of reproof to old men and children, if they do not overcome; children
are not come to, and old men are past the dints of lusts; therefore they may be
the more ashamed, if they be given to voluptuousness, and gluttony, and
gaming, and lying, and company-keeping; Children and old men, their bodies are
dead to such lusts.

Use 4. It exhorts all, though we cannot put Satan to death, or captivate him,
yet what we may do, let us do; in every temptation, let us stand fast, and
put him to flight, and labor by temptations to spoil him, let his temptations
make you more humble, and fruitful, and obedient: this is the greatest honor
of a Christian, thus to put Satan to flight and spoil him.

1 JOHN 2.13. The latter end. I write unto you Babes, because you have known
the Father.


WE have heard of old men, and young men, now we come to his Apostolical
writing to Babes.

Doct. Little Children, even Babes, may know God as their Father.
For the proof of this,

1. I will show it by Examples, 1 Samuel 3 1. though at first he knew not, yet
from that time forward he knew God, 2 Chronicles. 34. see it in Josiah; so Timothy,
it is said that he knew the Scripture of a child, 2 Timothy 2.15. Luke 1.15. and
our Savior bears testimony of little children, Suffer little children to come
unto me, for to such belongs the Kingdom of Heaven. Mark 10.14. and that they
were little ones, we may see, in that he took them in his arms, as we use to
do infants, and whereas the Anabaptists say, he means not of these, but of
such as are of years but little children in grace, this cavil is vain, for
otherwise his reason had been in vain* for he might have said it as well of
Sheep as little Lambs, for such are Gods Servants, but yet he never mentions
such, but only these little ones, that is, little children.

There are Three grounds of the Regeneration of little children.

1. From the Original Sin that they are born in, for they that are capable of
sin are also capable of grace, for no subject is capable of sin but it is
capable of grace, and the greatest part of their sin is the privation of grace,
which they are capable of, Luke 1.15. Psalm. 58.3.

2. From their interest in the Covenant, they enter into a Covenant with God
even from their childhood, as we may see, they brought their young Babes to
enter into a Covenant with God, Deuteronomy. 29.10. to 14. and so are capab^e of
grace, Joel 2.15, 16. In times of great dangers in the Land, God required
little children and B^bes to humble themselves for breach of the Covenant,
which implies they were in a Covenant; indeed the Ninivets made their Beasts
fast, and their Children, but they were Heathen, and were not within the
Covenant.

3. Children are capable of the seals of the Covenant of Grace, Genesis 17.7, 8.
therefore capable of the righteousness of faith, Romans 4.11. so that we see
little children may know God as their Father.

Q. How soon do children come to be capable of this grace, to know God as
their Father?

1. They are capable of the habits and gifts of grace from their first
Conception, Luke 1.15. he was sanctified from his Mothers womb, and the reason
is, as soon as capable of sin, capable of grace.

2. They are capable of the acts of grace, as soon as they are capable of the
use of reason; yea Grace is subject to work more silently than Reason, though
there be no act of grace, but it is from reason, yea they are capable of
exercising grace and reason with it, sooner then we discern it, even as soon as
they can discern their Natural Father, so soon may they discern God to be
their Father; you see Children sooner than they can well use reason, they
content themselves much with looking on the light, and Looking glasses, and
other toys; so these little Children, something they have in their hearts
which pleases them, though they know not what it is, and as you can still a
Child sometimes by some gesture, so can God refresh the spirit of a Child by
some silent consolation which pleases the Child, though it cannot exp^esse
it, but so soon as they begin to know their Natural Parents, so soon they
begin to know God their Father; nay, no object so easily known as God, seeing
he infuseth some light into all, especially to know that there is a God, and if
the Holy Ghost strike in, they may discern that he is their Father.

Q. But how do these express their knowledge of God to be their Father?

A. 1. They express it in their silent thoughts, in some inward comfort, which
they cannot well express, but something they feel which chears their spirits.

2. In their affections, they will show you some love of God, joy in God, fear
of God.

1. Love of God, so that they are not averse or froward to good duties, but
listen to them, though they know not the meaning, and have some delight in
them, and some fear of God, that tell them of God and his Judgments, they will
be broken off from evil courses, and they will be well pleased in God, and
delight in his way, and fear him; these things may be found in a Child; I call
them Children till they be grown up to young men: and as a Child soon discovers
that he knows his Parents, by smiling on them, by crying after them, and joying
in them, so they will show you their knowledge of God by delighting in him,
longing after him, and fearing his name.

Use 1. To reprove the sinful vanity that is in that Proverb, A young Saint
and an old Devil; for if St. John acknowledge it as a great matter, I write
unto you Babes, because you know the Father, then surely it is no ill presage
of their future miscarriage, because they begin to have the knowledge of God;
no, it is a sign that in old age they will know him that was from the
beginning; nay rather on the contrary, if he be a young Devil, it is likely he
will prove worse, a young Devil an old Beelzebub, but a young Saint an old
Angel; you do not use to think that it will make a vessel fusty if you season
it well at the fi st; so if a Child be well seasoned at the first, he will
keep a good savor to his old age; a straight twig makes a straight tree, so if
a Child be well set, and straight in Childe-hood, he will grow more strong and
compact when he is elder. Our Savior was much moved, when they forbad little
Children to be brought unto him, and when the chief Priests and the Scribes
took it ill, that the Children cried out after Christ, Hosannah, thou Son of
David, he told them it was written, Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings
have thou perfected praise, Mat. 21.15. therefore let not such a Proverb pass,
if they prove old Devils they were never young Saints, but young Hypocrites it
may be.

2 It refutes an error of the Papists, that think it a point of presumption to
say, that a man knows his state in grace, why St. John writes it to all sorts,
to old men, to young men to Babes, that they know their Father.

If it were extraordinary it would not be so common; and this indeed may justly
discourage us from Religion: that woman that holds it impossible that her
Child should know his Father, is a Strumpet; so that Church that holds her
children cannot know their Father, is an Harlot, because they worship so many
gods, they know not of what seed they be, for if they were begotten of the Seed
of the Word, hereby we might conclude, we know that we know him, because we
keep his Word; neither let them put it off, and say, We have a conjecturall
knowledge, but not a certain knowledge, for when we say we know such a thing,
we do not say we think it; Opinion breeds conjecture, but Knowledge breeds
certainty; Contingentium est opinio, necessariorum and certorum est scientia,
whether it be a causis or effectis.

But say they, This Doctrine breeds presumption.

I answer, No Doctrine makes us more circumspect than to know that God is our
Father, and if we grow secure, God will show he is a Father as well to correct,
as to show indulgence.

Use 3. To confute the Anabaptists, that exclude Infants from Original sin, and
so from capability of Grace, and so from Baptism, therefore they rebaptise men,
because, say they, till then they are neither capable of Sin, nor Grace; how
does David then say, that he was conceived in sin? how is it here said of
Babes, that they know their Father? and why were infants Circumcised under the
Law the eighth day; if they did but as well know God as some of these little
Children, they would not hold such an opinion so contrary to Scripture.

4. It reproves elder people, if they do not know God to be their Father, if
even Babes may know God to be their Father, if they know him so soon why do we
neglect it? St. John writes it as an ornament to Children, that they know their
Father, and it may shame elder people, if Children in this point go beyond
them, Heb. 5.12.

5. It may teach little Children, that God looks at it as their duty, to know
God their Father; you have known your Natural Fathers thus long, and why
should you not know God the Father of Eternity? you might hereby honor God,
and confute elder men; you have entered into Covenant, therefore fly not back;
you have received the Seals of the Covenant, therefore give up your selves unto
God, and labor to know him to be your Father.

6. For Parents, and Governors of Children, if little Children may know God
their Father, then learn them to know him to be their Father, and the Church
their Mother; fill their heads with knowledge of God, learn them to love God,
and rejoice in him, and delight in his ways in some measure.

Motives hereunto.

1. In respect of God.

First, From Gods command, Ephesians. 6.4. Deuteronomy. 6.7. take all good occasions, dull
them not, a little and often will bring them on; the water falling drop by drop
hollows a Flint, so by dropping now and then a little, you will learn them the
knowledge of God.

2. From Gods acknowledgement of it, and his Promise to reveal himself to such
Parents, Genesis 18.19.

Secondly, In respect of Children, they are capable either to scoff, as the
Children that mocked Elisha, 2 Kings 1. or to cry Hosannah, Matthew. 21.15. though
they be not so easily brought on to that which is good, yet they are not so
corrupt then, as when they are grown up to more years.

3. In respect of Parents, it is an irrecompensible injury you offer to your
Children, if you have begot them into the World sinful and wicked, as we are
by nature, and do not seek by all means to redress this evil, they will cry
out against you for Judgment; therefore that they may not curse you at the
last day, let it be your care to bring them up in the knowledge and fear of the
Lord.

What course may we take thus to redress young Infants?

1. Teach them the Principles of Religion, their Baptism, that will teach them
they are unclean by Nature, and that they are cleansed by the Blood of Christ;
they were Baptized into the name of God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
therefore learn them to know God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy
Ghost, and that will make them think of it, when they see others baptized,
Prove. 22.6. Train up a Child in his way wherein he should walk, and he will
keep it to the end; nurture him, or initiate him in the trade of his way, in
the original it is, in the mouth of his way, that is, at the beginning of his
way, set him right at the first in his way, and he will keep to the end; if a
Travellor be set right in his way at first, it will help him the better to keep
his way all his Journey; so set a Child in a good way, learn him to cease from
evil, and to do well, and he will the better keep that way in his age, as
David teaches, Psalm. 34.11, to 15.

2. Learn them to read the Scriptures, and be conversant therein, 1 Timothy 1.4,
5. and 2 Timothy 3.15. reading brings much benefit to little Children.

3. Bring them to Church, and help them to remember something, and tell them
the meaning of it, and take a little in good part, and encourage them, and that
will make them delight in it.

4. Give them a good example, let them learn no wickedness, no disorder, or
miscarriage from you, 1 Chro. 29.9. Know the Lord God of thy Fathers, etc. know
him, and serve him, as I have served him.

5. God has sanctified seasonable and wise correction to Children, Prove.
29.15. Prove. 22.15. it is a means to give wisdom, which is the fear of the
Lord, and drive away folly, and more, to deliver his soul from Hell, but if you
use correction without instruction, it is b^utish, Prove. 6.23. therefore
instruct them also, and withal use Prayer, and still wait on God for a
blessing.

1 JOHN 2.14. I have written unto you Fathers, because you have known him which
is from the beginning; I have written unto you young men, because you are
strong, and the Word of God abides in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one.


VErse Sixth, the Apostle had exhorted all Christians to walk as Christ had
walked, and he amplifies this duty, from the antiquity of it, v 7. and from the
newness of it, v. 8. and then he instanceth in one special duty of loving one
another, v. 9, 10, 11. and v. 12. lays down a Motive, because their sins were
forgiven them, and then v. 13. he distributes those to whom he writes into
three sorts, (...): now in this fourteenth verse he repeats the same words
almost; some think it a fault of the Copy, it being a vain tautology, but this
is not likely; Sometimes repetitions in Scriptures imply certainty, but I think
this is not here intended chiefly; but I think the Apostle being to press them
to another duty, v. 15. namely, Not to love the world, he makes this a ground
to urge them to it.

Why does he not reckon Babes too here? why? because they were not so easily
carried away with the world; but he writes to old men, and young men, who
seeing they knew God, and had overcome the wicked one, they should not love the
world; but to little children he writes, v. 18. to beware of seducements of
false Doctrins.

Doct. The saving knowledge of him that is from the beginning, of the Ancient
of days, or of Jesus Christ, is able to wean even old men from the love of the
world.
To know Christ, and his worth, and our need of him, is a sufficient motive to
wean old men from the world.

Two things there were which made wise, ancient, cautelous men, not to embrace
Christ, and his Gospel.

1. The antiquity of the Heathenish Religion; Jesus Christ seemed a new God,
but of two or three and thirty years, hated of all men, and Crucified, now to
commend such a God to them against their ancient Doctrine, and that all must
subject themselves to him, seemed strange.

2. The Authority of Heathen Emperors that gainsaid it. Now to remove these
impediments, the Apostle lays down this as a means, Love not the world,
implying, that it was love of the world that made them to embrace that ancient
Religion, and reject Christ, therefore he writes unto them, Love not the world;
and that they might do this, he tells them, that they knew him that was from
the beginning, the Ancient of days, and all other Religions are but novelties.

Use. It shows a preservative against deluding our souls, against embracing
false Religion, either from grounds of antiquity or authority; if old men
follow it, yet it is no good ground, for St. John writes to them, Love not the
world, which you may be kept from, if you know him that was from the beginning;
and if the Authority and Laws of man should go that way, yet if you rightly
know Christ, and him that was from the beginning, you will be kept off from the
love of the world, and then no worldly things will keep you from embracing
Christ and his Gospel; I have written to you young men, because you are strong
and the Word of God dwells in you, and you have overcome the wicked one.

Here are two Causes of their Victory over the wicked one, that is, their
strength, and the abiding of the Word in them. For the first,

Doct. Spiritual strength in Young men, it is a grace highly acknowledged of
Gods servants.
Prove. 20.29. The glory of Young Men is their strength; but the Apostle speaks
not here of bodily strength, but such strength whereby they overcome the wicked
one, and this he acknowledges in them.

Q. 1. What is this strength?

A. 1. It is the power of Gods Spirit, whereby a Christian is enabled to do all
Spiritual duties in the power of Christ.

2. It is a power of Gods Spirit, 2 Timothy 1.17. 2 Cor. 3.5. Gal. 6.10. and
hereby he is enabled to do all spiritual duties, Phil. 4.13.

A Christian man, younger or elder, is able to perform every Christian duty, he
is able to do all duties, and suffer for Christ, with power.

1. It inables a man to do every Christian duty with strength, and so to do
implies three things.

1 When a man performs a thing in strength he performs it cheerfully, Psalm.
19.5. The Sun rejoices to run his course, etc. if a man runs through his work
with cheerfulness it is a sign of strength, John 4.34. Christ accounted it his
meat and drink to do his Fathers will, he took as much delight in it, and it
was his strength that made him do so.

2 Doing the Will of God with strength implies a spirit of boldness and
courage, that they are not fearful, but go on with courage and boldness, 1 Timothy 1.7. Acts 4.13. and 19.20. they were strengthened by Christ's power.

3 Strength makes a man do Gods Will diligently, and constantly; an old man is
soon wearied, and slacks, but take a strong man, and he does his business
diligently and constantly, 1 Cor. 15.10. and painfully, he does things with
dexterity, and he that has strength does things constantly, with constancy and
perseverance. Let a Child shoot an Arrow with a weak hand, it waggles, but if
a strong man shoots it, it goes evenly; so if a weak man take a duty in hand,
he begins to lagge, and fail, but a strong Christian he does duties constantly.

2. For Sufferings; strength of grace appears in bearing all things patiently,
and joyfully, Phil. 4.11, 12, 13. Col. 1.11. when a man therefore is able to
do duties with cheerfulness, and suffer with patience, he is endued with the
power of the Spirit.

3. There is a strength required for the overcoming and standing out against
Satan, when a man is not only able to do and suffer valiantly, but is ready
and able also to hold out, and resist all temptations, James 4.7. and makes
advantage thereof, 2 Samuel 6.20. John 3.26. this argues much strength, when a
man can go on in power and vigor, notwithstanding Satan's temptations.

Q. 2. Why does God vouchsafe Young Men this strength, and not old men, and
children?

A. 1. Because they are to wrestle with stronger Lusts, which old men are past,
and children are not come to; young men are sure to be transported with strong
lusts, 1 Timothy 5.23. even those who are of a weak and abstemious nature, much
more those that are of a strong constitution, therefore God gives young men
such strength to resist against these strong lusts.

2. Their Temptations are stronger from without, they are more apt to be
carried away with company, and worldly business, and pleasures, old men are
not fit, but young men are more strongly carried with profits and pleasures;
therefore that God might show his might in them, he strengthens them, and
indeed the Devil loses more by one young man that breaks off from him, than by
six or seven old men, or twenty Children; for lustful strong youths to break
off, weakens Satan most, and does God most service, and therefore Satan
assaults them most; therefore the Apostle writes unto them with honor, I write
unto you young men, because you are strong.

Use It may serve to exhort all young men, to labor for this Spiritual
strength; the strength of young men is their honor, to be able to overrun,
and out-wrastle others, but what is that, if he be not able to outrun the
World, and his Lusts? what is it to out-wrastle his Adversary, if he cannot
out-wrastle Satan, and his Temptations, and his own Corruptions? for a young
man to overcome the world, and himself, is a greater Victory than Alexander the
Great could reach unto; what a comely and honorable thing is it for a young
man to out-wrastle Satan, the World, his own Lusts? and God to this end has
made his Ordinance strong, his Spirit is strong, the Lords Supper is Meat
indeed, and Drink indeed to strengthen us, and shall we have such strong means,
and shall we be led away, and overcome with every company? no, it is the honor
of young men to be strong against temptation, to do Gods Will, to suffer
patiently, to hold out constantly; what an honor is it for a young man when
his Bow abides in his strength, etc. Genesis 49.24. for a man to suffer valiantly
for the Truth, this is a sign of strength.

Means to help a young man to this Spiritual strength, and grow in it.

1 Truth of grace; no man by any outward performance only can be strong; a
shadow of a man may be like a man, but it has no strength; truth of grace and
power go together, but where there is no truth there is no power, 2 Timothy 3.5.
therefore as we would be powerful in godliness, let us do duties with hearty
affection, do all things in obedience to God, and to do him service, and this
very truth and sincerity will grow up to such strength, as you may go further
conquering and to conquer.

2 To get strength, we must get wholesome and good diet, and feed heartily on
it; so if we would get Spiritual strength, we must feed on the Ordinances of
God, the Word of God, 1 Pet. 2.1, 2. no man that receives the Word and
Sacrament with a good heart, but he grows strong thereby, they are meat and
drink indeed, and it is not enough to hear, but especially attend to it, and
apply that which belongs to you; this is a means whereby you may grow strong,
and put forth your strength to it: water it with Prayer, and look up to God for
a Blessing: thus if a young man feed on these wholesome meats he will grow
strong; indeed if a man feed on windy meats he will never grow strong: so if
men affect tricks of Elegancy, and Wit, and Speech, such will be filled only
with vain empty Notions, but he that feeds on wholesome food, on the purity and
simplicity of Gods own Ordinances, will grow in strength.

3 Exercise increases strength: let a man daily exercise himself, let a man
exercise himself in Grace, and he will grow up in the Lord, and increase in
Spiritual strength, Gal. 5.16. Col. 2.6, 7. a tree, the more deeply it is
rooted, the more fruit it brings forth, and so they that walk daily in a
Christian course increase in strength: it is not every duty that will
strengthen us, though it be often renewed, but walk in Christ, that is, walk
not in your own strength, in your own gifts and parts, Without me you can do
nothing: even Paul of himself was not able to think a good thought, 2 Cor. 3.5.
therefore let us exercise our gifts in Christ, that is, to wait on Christ daily
for the renewal of strength, according to our daily employments, Isa. 40.30.31.
shall change his strength, renew it according to the necessity of his
business, that so he may walk in obedience to him, and depend on him for
strength, and aim at his glory.

4 Because we often contract Crudities, and ill Humors, therefore if we would
increase strength we must purge out these, so if we would get Spiritual
strength; we must purge out our corruptions, Rev. 2.3, 4, 5. there is need of
daily repentance which may cast out all noisome lusts and weaknesses, and make
us able to perform duties in strength; as you desire therefore to be strong,
and to have your strength acknowledged by God, and good men; as you desire to
do the will of God cheerfully, diligently, laboriously, and constantly; as you
desire to suffer with boldness and patience; as you desire to stand out
against all temptations, this God requires of you, to grow true hearted, to
feed heartily on every ordinance, to exercise your graces in Christ, to depend
on him, to deny your selves; and if you find you have committed any sin, cast
out all before God by confession, and purge it out by repentance, and then you
shall find your selves to increase in strength, as becomes young men.

1 JOHN 2.14. The Word of God abides in you.


WE have heard of the strength of Young Men.

The second cause of their victory is, because The Word of God abides in them.
Verse 12. he had called all (...), and he testifies that their sins were
forgiven, and of those, the Fathers knew him which was from the beginning, and
Young Men had overcome the wicked one, and were strong, and the word of God did
abide in them.

Doct. Such Young Men as have their sins forgiven them, have the Word of God
abiding in them.
Q. What is meant by the Word of God abiding in them?

1 He means not part of the Word, but the whole Word abides in them, both
Promises, Commands, and Threatenings; Commands to bind them, Threatening to awe
them, Promises to comfort them; good examples to encourage them, bad examples
to discourage them; therefore for men to be carvers and choosers of the Word,
is not to have the Word abiding in them. Herod would have some of John's words
abide in him, hut not all, but this is the commendation of good young men, that
not only every kind, but every parcel of the Word abides in them.

2 When he says, the Word of God, it implies, that they receive it as the Word
of God, and not as the word of man, 1 These. 2.13. and a man then receives the
Word, as the Word of God, when he looks at the Commandments, as Gods
Commandments, and so the Promises and Threatenings as Gods, he looks at them as
of highest authority, so as no word of man shall stand against it, all falls to
the ground before it; it swayes all.

3 When he says, the Word abides, it implies, that this Word did not only
flash in suddenly, and continued for a time, but it abides in them
continually, Joh. 5.35. Heb. 2.1, 2.

4 (In you) that implies the whole man, in their judgment they understood the
word, in their wills they embraced it, in their affections they rejoiced in it,
in their lips, the law was in their mouths, in the whole man the word of God
abode, and that not for a time, but continually.

Q 2 What is the reason why those that have their sins forgiven them, have the
Word of God abiding in them?

Reas. The ground of this is, because whose sins soever are forgiven them,
their eyes have been opened to see the weight and danger of sin, the Word has
opened and affected the heart, and has made such deep impression, that it
cannot be rooted out, Psalm. 119.93. those promise that have comforted his soul,
he shall never forget, Psalm. 119.129. and hence he looks at them as sweeter
than the honey and the honey comb; and those threatenings that have awed his
soul, he still trembles at them; because he has found the Word wonderful to
humble him and to comfort him, therefore he still keeps it.

Use 1 Of trial unto us, whether our sins be forgiven us or no; nothing more
necessary to know, nor nothing more comfortable; how then shall I know this?
Why, onsider what place the Word of God takes, if the Word of God abide in you,
the whole Word, there is no Commandment but you would obey it, no Threatening,
but you humble at it, no Promise, but you look at it as the Word of God; do you
find your whole man submitting to it, your minds understanding it, your wills
embracing it, your affections rejoicing and delighting in it, as the Word of
God? it is an evident sign of the remission of your sins; this could not have
been, had not the Word of God been wonderful to humble you and comfort you.

Obj. I have a brittls memory and cannot retain the Word, therefore how can the
Word be said to abide in me?

Ans. Do thou remember other things well, and not the Word? then it is
dangerous, but if thy memory bebrittle in other things, then it argues the
less danger, though the Word do so also; but though it slip out of thy memory,
does it not abide in thine heart? do thou not delight in, and desire more and
more after it? if it be so, it may be said to abide in thee.

Use 2 Of exhortation to young men, whosoever have found your sins forgiven,
this God requires of you, that you give up your hearts to the whole word of
God, to be wholly guided by it for ever, if you sit loose from the word, you
shall find the pardon of your sins sit loose from your souls, he will take away
the comfort of the pardon of your sins; therefore let the Word of God abide in
you richly and plentifully, that so you may have the comfort of such a benefit
as pardon of sins.

Doct. Such young men, as have the Word of God abiding in them, are strong
young men, they are connexed together.
Reas. 1 They are strong, first, because the Word of God wheresoever it abides,
abides not in the letter, but in the power and efficacy, and the Word of God is
mighty and powerful; and therefore where it dwells, it conveyes strength and
power, Romans 1.16. 2 Cor. 10.4. it is mighty to cast down the strong holds of
Satan, mighty to overwrestle lusts, mighty to overcome the World, Psalm. 119.9.
and 11.

Use 1 May serve to show you, what poor weak young men they be, that have not
the Word of God abiding in them, if you see such a young man, write on him, he
is a weak young man, if if the Word of God abide not in him, every company,
every temptation will carry him away.

2 Learn hence, if you desire to be strong indeed, to let the Word abide in
you; thus Joseph, though he was much tempted to uncleanness, yet he did not
consent, but looked at it as a breach of Gods Word, how can I do this
wickedness, and sin against God? none so able to resist temptations, as
those that have the Word of God abiding in them; therefore if you would
overcome pride, wantonness, etc. let the Word of God dwell in you, receive it
in your Judgments, in your wills, memories, affections, do not think it
weakness for men to have the Word abiding in them, they are strong; he that
fears God, fears not any Commandment or threatening in respect of Gods, he that
is affected with Gods promises, regards not all the flatteries of the World.

Doct. Such young men as have the word of God abiding in them, they overcome
the wicked one, this is one reason of their victory, the abiding of the Word in
them.
There are three special temptations of Satan, either against Repentance, or
Faith, or Sanctification, now the Word of God is mighty through God to repel
all these.

1 Against the temptation of repenting so soon, there is a Word that binds him,
Eccl. 12.1. a Word that threatens the contrary, Eccl. 11.9. there are promises,
Prove. 8.17. there are comfortable examples, as Josiah, Timothy, and these
resist this temptation.

2 If a man do give up his heart to God and will set on a good course, yet he
will make him live in pensiveness, and fears, and doubts; now against this the
Word is powerful, there are Commands to believe, 1 John 3.23. 1 John 5.1. Mat.
11.28. there are Threatenings if a man believes not, Joh. 3. ult. and there are
notable Promises to him that believes, Joh. 3. ult. many Examples, Paul
believed on God, and he was pardoned, so Mary Magdalen, and others.

3 If a man's heart be satified in the pardon of sin, then Satan will tempt him
with some base Lusts that may defile and wound his Conscience, now against this
the Word has.

First, Commands, 1 These. 4.3. 1 Pet. 1. Be ye holy as I am holy, Mat. 5. ult.

Secondly, Promises, Romans 2.6, to 8. and Threatenings to discourage him, and
Examples to encourage him, as Paul, Act. 24.16. I exercise my self to keep a
good Conscience.

Q But how comes the Word to be thus powerful, to overcome all the enemies of
Salvation?

A. 1 Because it is the sword of the Spirit, to cut asunder all lusts and
temptations, Ephesians. 6.17. No man has more need of a sword to defend himself,
or offend his enemy, than young men have of the Word to defend themselves, and
resist Satan, and it is not so much the Letter of the Word, as the Spirit of
the Word that does this, the Word cuts off all temptations, there is no place
for invasion.

Use 1 To teach us, as we desire to walk in the World as Masters of the Field,
so as not to be beaten out, and kept off either from Repentance, or Faith, or
Sanctification, let this be our care, to have the Word of God ingrafted in us,
this is all our strength against temptations.

Q. But how shall I get the Word of God to abide in me?

A. 1. Be sure you keep your hearts broken and clean, and if it be broken and
clean, the Word will abide there, and will have the rule and dominion, for the
Word of God dwells in a trembling heart, Isa. 66.2. if we receive it with fear
and reverence, this very reverence will overruled us; Psalm 119.161. what is the
reason why Princes could not prevail against him? because his heart stood in
awe of Gods Word; so that is an antidote against all temptations, and
persecutions; What if Princes rise against you, that Prince of Darkness,
Satan, and his Angels? if the Word dwell in you, it will help you to resist
them; what if evil company come against you? if the Word dwell in you it will
help you; How shall I do this great wickedness, etc. the Word of God dwells in
broken vessels; and withal keep the Vessel clean, keep your hearts pure, come
to the Word resolved not to keep any Lust, that is the reason why Herod came
not on, because he clave to his Lusts, to his Herodias, wherefore lay aside all
filthiness and superfluity, and receive with meekness the ingrafted Word of
God, Jam. 2.1. if you come to the Word with a broken and clean heart, it will
abide you.

2 Look at the Word as wonderful, as very effectual to do great things, and
that will make thee keep the Word in thee; thus says David, Psalm 119.129. the
sense of the great efficacy of the Word, to humble you, and cleanse you, etc.
will make you keep the Word.

3 Another means is, to look up to God to send his Spirit, that may bring to
mind those things which you have need of, and fasten them to your hearts;
though you forget the Word for the present, yet when you are tempred to any
Lust, the Spirit will bring it to your remembrance, Isa. 30.21. You shall hear
a voice behind you, saying, This is the way walk in it.

4 Ponder the Word of God in your hearts, which was Mary's practice, Luke 2.19.
and this made her an eminent Christian.

5 Confer of the Word, it is a great help to make it abide in you, teaching it
to others, searching the Scripture, Act. 17.11, 12.

6 If you would have the Word abide in you, give up your souls to a
conscionable obedience of whatsoever you hear, if you resolve to keep it, it
will mightily keep you against the World, against Satan, against your Lusts; he
that would keep his heart in a good frame, let his heart stick close to the
Word, and the Word to it, let them be riveted together, that you may love the
Word, and rejoice in it, this is the very way to have the Word abide in you; as
therefore you desire to be Conquerors, Let the Word dwell richly in you, Col.
3.16. Isa. 11.9. that so you may grow up to abundance of knowledge; look at it
as a wonderful Word, and submit your souls to it; ponder on it, confer about
it, and this will help you against all Temptations.

1 JOHN 2.15. Love not the world, nor the things of the world, etc.


THe Apostle having exhorted to many Duties, as keeping the Commandments, and
walking as Christ walked; here he removes an impediment which might hinder
all, and that is, Love of the world; and he writes here to young men, and old
men chiefly, to little Babes he writes, verse 18. In this verse we have a
prohibition of Love in respect of a double Object; 1 The world. 2 The things of
the world. This prohibition is grounded on a threefold reason; 1 From the
removal of the love of the Father from such. 2 Love not the things of the
world; because whosoever is in the world, is either the lust of the flesh, the
lust of the eyes, or the pride of life, and is not of the Father, verse. 16. 3
From the transitoriness of the World, and the contrary permanency of the love
of God, v. 17.


Q. 1. What is the World?

A. The World is taken Four ways, and all incident to this place.

1 For the frame and fabric of Heaven and Earth, and all the Creatures, Act.
17.24. So love not the world, that is, not the Creature.

2 The wicked of the world, Joh. 15.19. and though he does not here intend
them, yet we are to separate our selves from them.

3 The World is taken for the Fashions and Customs of the world, Be not
transformed after the world, Romans 12.2.

4 The world is taken for those endowments and benefits the World affords, as
Riches, Honors, Profits, and Pleasures, etc. Jam. 4.4.

These three are chiefly aimed at, Love not the Creature, love not the Fashions
and Customs of the world, love not the Profits and Pleasures of the world.

Obj. May not we love the Creature? are not all the Creatures very good? Genesis
1. ult. are we not exhorted to do good to all? must we not then love all? Gal.
6.10. what then is the love of the world which is here forbidden?

A. Love is such an affection of the heart, whereby a man affects communion
with the Creature, and communion of good to it, as the love of Money, is when
we love it for it self. This love is double; 1 Amor concupiscentiae, when a man
covets the thing for the thing it self, for the gain of it. 2 Amor amicitiae,
which is, when I not only desire communion with it, but communication of good
to it.


The first is chiefly here forbidden, when I affect the World, or the things of
the World for themselves, for its own sake, and not for Gods, that it may be a
furtherance to Gods service, when we love the world rather than God, when we
desire it though we be without God, and rejoice in it for it self; this is the
love of the world here forbidden.

Q. What is meant by the things of the World?

A. 1. Not the Creatures, for that is included in the world, Act. 17.24. and it
appears by verse 16. that by the things of the world, he means the lusts of the
world, not only lusting after women, but such an affection whereby we are
carried after any Creature inordinately, that is lust, Romans 7. Gal. 5.17. and
again the Creatures are of the Father, but he speaks of such things as are not
of the Father. Love not the World, he writes to old men and young men, such as
are most subject to it.

Doct. The World is not to be beloved of young or old.
I write unto you Fathers, love not you the World; I write unto you young men,
love not you the World; St. James is sharp in this p int, Jam. 4.3, 4. where he
reproves them as Adulterers that love the World; those that are friends to the
world, are enemies to God.

Obj, Are not all the Creatures of God good, and ought we not to be merciful to
our Beasts?

Ans. He does not forbid mercy or love to Beasts or Creatures, but he would
not have your love terminated in them, bounded in them, he would not have you
rejoice or delight in the Creature, before you have part in the Creator, for if
you affect these things for themselves, the love of God is not in you.

Reas. 1 From the enmity that is in the Creature it self, against the Creator,
ever since the fall, there lies this vanity on the Creature, that it emptyes
our souls of Grace, and love to the Creator, and from all Gods ordinances.

1 In hearing the word, if it be possible, the world will keep you back; let
God propound a Feast of fat things, One makes an excuse he has hired a Farm,
and he must go see it; another has bought yoaks of Oxen, and he must go try
them, a third has married a Wife, and he cannot come. Luke 14.19, 20

2 If a man break through this, and come to the ordinances, he shall find that
the world is a great enemy to him there, Ezekiel. 33, 21, 22. his heart is drawn
after profits and pleasures, it may be it will make you despise what you hear,
as the Pharisees did, they scoffed at Christ, as a poor man himself who had
not felt the sweetness of the world; and this is the enmity of the world.

3 If you should hear the Word and attend to it, and delight something in it,
yet the World will so damp you, or choke you, that all the seed will be
smothered, Mat. 13.22. while we busy our selves here and there in the World,
the Word is gone, and Grace is gone, this is the enmity of the World.

Use 1 It may serve to teach all, young and old, to take up this exhortation,
love not the World; no man is addicted to the World, but he is in more slavery
and bondage, than any gally-slave, whose hands may be bound, and his feet
shackled, but his heart is free, and he desires freedom from that slavery; but
a worldly man is employed and busied in the World, and his body is a slave to
it, and not only so, but his very mind and heart is a captive to the World, he
cannot be free to any good and spiritual employment, neither can he so much as
desire freedom from this slavery; what a miserable thing is it, to see a man
employed altogether for his body and estate, and have no heart at all to that
which is good? O! they may not be suffered to come to sermons, they have other
things to attend to; for men to be thus inthralled it is a misery; and if they
come to the Word, yet the World fills their heads, that either they cannot
attend to it, or if they do, after they are gone, the World steals all away;
therefore I say again, love not the World, if riches increase, set not your
hearts upon them, nor count them your chiefest good, but be sure first to seek
the Kingdom of God, and if God bestow any worldly blessings upon you, take it
as a pledge of his love, and be thankful to him, and acknowledge your own
unworthiness, Genesis 32.10. as Jacob there did, and make them a means to help
you forward in Gods service: as it is with Seamen, the deeper and wider the Sea
is, the more free they are, and less careful, so if you have abundance of
wealth to swim and wallow in, you must use more liberty in good courses, and
take no care for winds and storms, you have Sea-room enough, set not your
hearts on them, but go on in a more speedy course of Christianity.

Use 2 A sign of trial, whether thou love the world or no; Do thou love the
world for it self? Do thou think it well with thee if thou have the world,
and not well if thou have not the world? does all thy content rest in the
world, like the rich man in the Gospel? then thou love the world; but if thou
regard the world no further than it may help thee on in a Christian course,
then it will never hinder thee in the ways of God, and thou love not the
world, but the love of God is in thee.

Doct. There is in our corrupt nature not only a love to the world, but also a
love to our own lusts.
Love not the world, nor the things of the world, that is, our own Lusts,
implying, there is in us by nature a love to the world, and the things of the
world, the lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the eye, and the pride of life.

The lust of the flesh is such a corrupt inclination, whereby our bodies do
affect sensual lusts, and sensual objects, as meat and drink, that is,
intemperancy, or women, that is Incontinencie, or Pastimes and Pleasures; and
that is Voluptuousness; and they are called the Lusts of the flesh because our
flesh sets us a work to them, what are the lusts of the eye? there is a good
eye, a bountiful eye, but an evil eye is called a covetous eye, Pro. 23.6. Deu.
15.7. so then the lusts of the eye is Covetousness, and it is called the lust
of the eye, because the eye stirs us up to it; and that is all he has to
behold them, Eccles. 5.10, 11. the very beholding satisfies.

The pride of Life, is the affecting of a man's own carnal excellency, when as
he does look at himself only, whether he does it in heart by high conceit, or
worldly boastings, or in outward carriage, now all these we are ready to love,
we are ready to love our own wantonness, our intemperancy, or to be carried
away with the lust of the Eye, the profits of the World, or else to be puffed up
with our own excellency: whatsoever the heart lusts after, it is either honor,
or profit, or pleasure: now, love not the World, nor the lusts of it: why,
would you think a man should be so wicked as to love Voluptuousness, or
Profit, or Honor? Yes, St. John else would not so carefully have forbidden it.

Reas. 1 Now that this is so, appears, 1. From our aptness to take part with
our own lusts, when they are either discovered or reproved; thus Herod loved
his lust, his Herodias, which appears in that he took part with his lust
against John Baptist, and took it hainously that he should reprove him for it,
Matthew. 14.3. he will rather restrain John than restrain his lust, when a man
would rather restrain the Ministers than his lust, that is a sign of his love
to his lust. So Asa, 2 Chronicles. 16.10. he not only affected his security, but he
loved his lust, which is manifest, in that he took it so hainously when the
Prophet reproved him for it: so for pride of life, it was Jonahs greatest lust,
love of his own credit, which appears, in that he was displeased exceedingly,
because he was crossed in it, that the City was not destroyed: he had Prophesied
destruction to Niniveh, and God upon their repentance spared them, and he
thought he should be counted a false Prophet, and lose his credit, and
therefore he was much displeased, yea, he was displeased that God should
reprove him for his frowardness, Jon. 4. so that he loved this pride and anger
in himself, because he pleaded for it, when God asked him, Do thou well to be
angry? Yea, says he, I do well to be angry even to the death. If a man plead
for his Lust, and stand out against reproof, that is a sign he loves that lust.

Reas. 2 From the slight regard we give to exhortations against our Lusts: if
Ministers exhort, Love not the world, nor the things of the world, if we slight
them, and search not out our lusts, and put them away, and mortify them: if we
favor our selves therein, it plainly appears we love them. If a Prince should
send to a City, not to harbor such and such Traitors, but to seek them out
and punish them, if they never look after them, never seek them out, is it not
a sign of their love to those Traitors? so if we hear of sinful lusts, that we
should not love them: if yet notwithstanding we go home, and never regard them,
it is a manifest sign that we love these lusts.

Use 1 May show us the wonderful depth of the wickedness that is in our
hearts; one would think it were wickedness enough to have Voluptuousness, and
Covetousness, and Pride, and vanity in our hearts, but this is nothing in
respect of our love to them, we not only have these lusts, but we love them;
therefore this should learn us to abhor our own carnal estate, that we are not
only full of pride, and covetousness, and intemperancie, but that we should
love these lusts, that is a depth of wickedness; that a man should stand out
against any friend, or counsel, or reproof, or exhortation, and take part with
his lusts, this is a sign that the heart is desperately wicked, Jer. 17.9.
therefore let no man have an high conceit of himself, but labor to see the
depth of the wickedness of his heart by Nature, in that he not only is filled
with these lusts but loves them.

Use 2 May serve to teach us, whenever we renew our repentance, and find out
any covetousness, or pride, or intemperance, go but a little lower, and you
shall find a love of those lusts in your hearts; and as God said to Ezekiel,
Ezekiel. 8.6. Turn thee, and thou shall see greater abominations than these, so
shall we find in our own hearts; whence else comes all extenuating, and
mincing, and hiding of sin? whence else comes disputing, and pleading for our
lusts? it is made manifest, that rather than we will be acccounted proud, or
wanton, or covetous, we will bid defiance to all; alas, what is this but to
love the world, and the the things of the world?

Doct. The Lusts of the world, young and old are to be weaned from.
The love, of Christians is not to be set on the lusts of the world.

The Holy Ghost dehorts from this by Scriptures that enforce restraint from
these lusts, 1 Pet. 2.11. 2 Timothy 2.22. Fly youthful lusts, and St. Peter wishes
them to abstain from them, as if they were some deadly poison, that would stain
and infect our souls; it implies some great danger, Romans 13.14. fly from them,
make no means to accomplish them.

2 There are other words which show more enmity, as mortifying; Col. 3.5. there
he calls Lusts the members of the body, implying, there is a body of sin; now
this mortifying is a metaphor taken from Chirurgions, who when they would cut
off a Member, they mortify it, by binding it, and hindering the recourse of
the blood and and spirits, and so benumb it. Secondly, They apply Corrosives to
stupifie it, and then cut it off, lest it fret and kill the whole body; so we
ought to mortify our lusts, by restraining and binding our hearts from delight
in any pleasure, Psalm. 119.101. my feet, that is, the inclination of my heart,
he had bound up his spirit from them, and restrained it from any fellowship
with them.

2 As Chirurgions apply Corrosives, so Christians to mortify their lusts apply
such Corrosives may subdue their lusts, Romans 8.13. If ye walk after the flesh
ye shall dye, but if ye through the Spirit mortify the deeds of the body, ye
shall live; either kill your lusts, or else you will kill your souls, therefore
mortify your lusts through the Spirit that you may live; which is a notable
Corrosive to mortify them by the Spirit of God; so another Corrosive is, when
a man applies the threatenings of God to his soul, and against his Lusts; if you
shall lay to heart all the dangers of your lusts, it will eat out the
corruption of the flesh. Another special Corrosive is the Death of Christ, when
we consider Christ dyed for us, and we are dead in him, how then should we live
any longer to sin, Romans 6.1 to 6.

3 As Chirurgions cut off that Member that is thus mortified, so Christians,
that they may not love their lusts, must cut off those lusts, and cast them
away, Matthew. 18.8, 9. were our lusts as near and precious to us as our right
eye, were they never so convenient or necessary, even as our right hand, though
we should dis-inable our selves in our Callings, yet cut them off, it is better
you should be lame in your business, better you should go with reproach and
shame in the world, than at length be cast body and soul into Hell fire; cut
off the members of sin, which are as near, and dear, and necessary unto you, as
right eyes and hands, in regard of your worldly employments, yet away with
them, mortify them.

Like to this phrase of Mortifying, is the Crucifying of the flesh, with the
affections and lusts, Gal. 5.24. they that are in Christ have crucified the
flesh, with the affections and lusts, they have crucified the whole body of
sin, partly in the affections, which are not sinful in themselves, but as they
are inordinate, but they keep in their affections and passions in such order,
that they sin not in anger, or joy, or love, etc. and partly their lusts of
the flesh also, covetousness, pride, vanity, wantonness, they are crucified;
they look at all their lusts as Crucifying Christ, and they look up to Christ
for the pardon of sin, and so also for the healing of sin, for pardoning and
healing goes together, Hos. 14.3, 4. 1 John 1.7, 8. they that are Christ's
looking up to the virtue of Christ's Death, they find their lusts not only
pardoned, but healed; crucifying of our lusts, has some resemblance with
Christ's Death; as, 1 They attach Christ, seek him out, and are content to give
money rather than to find him; so will a Christian do in regard of his lusts.
2 He lays them open as enemies to Caesar, to the great God, and desires
vengeance on them. 3 He considers that Christ is dead for him, and he is
crucified with Christ, therefore what has he to do to live to the world, or
the lusts thereof?


Reas. 1. Why, all should be weaned from lusts, from the enmity which these
lusts have against God, which is a sufficient motive to weane us from the
world, Gal. 5.17. if they be enemies to God, then a Christian has reason to
hate them as enemies to his best friend, and indeed he cannot love God, and
those lusts too, He that loves the world, the love of the Father is not in
him; he is not fit for any duty, he that loves the world cannot accomplish the
will of the Father; every lust hinders spiritual duties, hearing of the Word,
Prayer, receiving of the Sacrament; any one lust tolerated, or lived in,
hinders all Spiritual duties.

Reas. 2. From the enmity they have against our souls, 1 Pet. 2.11. Dearly
beloved, as strangers and pilgrims abstain from fleshly lusts which fight
against your souls; they fight against your souls, and so fight, that either
you must kill them, or they will kill your souls; either mortify them, or they
will mortify your souls; either captivate them, or they will captivate your
souls. Therefore seeing they are so contrary to God, and any Spiritual life,
and our own souls, as we would not have our lusts hinder our peace with God,
and eat out our grace, as we would maintain our communion with God, and the
life of our souls, Love not the world, nor the lusts of the world.

Use 1. To teach us, it is not enough for us to abstain from outward gross
sins, but love not your lusts: thou may refrain from the outward acts of
sin, but yet thy heart may be strongly affected toward sin, and thou may
delight therein; if thou do, thou love the world, and the things of the
world; therefore labor to cleanse your selves from secret lusts. Circumcision
was the cutting off the foreskin of a secret member, and yet God would have
another Circumcision more secret, and that is of the heart, we must not content
our selves with outward reformation, but circumcise our hearts: Levit. 3.3, 4.
God took special care that he might have all the Kidneys and Fat; the Kidneys
and Fat are our strongest desires and lusts, why, when we come to offer
Sacrifice, we must bring them before the Lord, and burn them, there is no
savor so sweet in Gods nostrils as the burning of our strongest lusts, the
more our lusts stink in our nostrils, the more sweet smelling savor it is to
God, so long as our lusts smell sweet in our nostrils, so long we are loathsome
to God.

Use 2. It must teach us, it is not enough to cut off some lusts, but those
that we love most; a good husband that hates prodigality, you shall not need to
exhort him to frugality; so prodigality cannot endure covetousness, it hates
baseness and pinching, he cannot abide it, it is not his own lust; so another
he cares not for this pride and bravery, so he may ly close at the pot, or an
Harlot; why this is no great matter to cry out against those lusts that are not
ours, but it is a Christian duty, not to love our own lusts; covetousness is
not thy lust, but if prodigality be thy lust, do not thou cry out against
covetousness; and thou which art covetous, do not thou stand out against
another man's prodigality, but strive against thy own covetousness; there are
lusts which are to us, as Eves apple, fair to the eye, such lusts as our souls
lust after, Rev. 18.14. look thou to these lusts which thy soul lusts after,
let them depart from thee.

Use 3. This reproves our aptness to cherish and nourish our own lusts; when
we are commanded not to love them, to mortify them, not to make provision for
them, if we then provide for them, we are justly to be reproved, Job 24.15.
Prove. 7. Woe be to them that draw iniquity with the cords of vanity, and sin as
it were with Cart-roaps, Isa. 15.18. that take occasion to fulfill their sins,
that draw them on with Cart-roaps, that give way to such reasons, and such
intentives as draw on a lust, woe be to them that put away all fear of
judgment, and so draw on lusts with the cords of vanity.

Use 4. To teach us all to wean our selves from these lusts. Young men I write
unto you, love not the World, nor the things of the Werld; and old men have
nothing to do with them, refrain from them, apply such corrosives, such
threatenings, such promises, Christ's death, and cut off all occasions of sin,
root it out, challenge your hearts, arraign them before God, bring them as
enemies to your souls, and labor to cut them off utterly.

If any man love ^he world the love of the Father is not in him.

Doct. It is not the having, but the love of the world, that keeps our hearts
from the love of the Father.
It is not the having of the World, for David's mountain was strong, Joseph had
his will in Egypt, Abraham was rich, but though they had the World, yet they
had not the love of the World, Jam. 4.3, 4. whosoever is a friend to the World,
is an enemy to God; it is not the Lordship of the World, but the friendship of
the World, that is enmity against God, for the time shall come, that they that
take the Lambs part, shall be Princes of the World; and Saint James calls the
love of the World Adultery; as a woman that makes her self a friend to another
man, and bestows that love upon him, which her Husband only should enjoy, is an
enemy to her Husband, so a man that is a friend to the World, or to the lusts
of it, is an enemy to God, alienated from him, and he would have them know,
that there is no worldly covetous man, but he knows that his love of the World
is enmity against God, it is the World that hinders you from the Word, and
Prayer, and good duties.

Reas. 1 From the amplitude of that love which we owe to God, which cannot
therefore be divided to others; Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and all thy soul, and mind, and strength, Mat. 22.37. then we must love
the World no further than it may help us in his service, and we may employ it
to his advantage, if we love it more we sin against the great Commandment; if
we must love the Lord with all our heart, and mind, and strength, then what
sorry weak affection is due to the World; even an heartless faint love; all
our love and vigor of our spirits is to be set on God, now if a man love the
World, he cannot thus love God, for if he love the World, his first and
chiefest care is for wealth and riches, and then it may be he will a little
look toward God; first let me bury my Father; first let me stock my Farm, and
try my Oxen, and then if I have any time, I will come to the Feast.

2 A covetous, or a lustful, or a proud man, when he has the World, and the
lusts thereof, he is fully satisfied with his portion, without God, Psalm. 17.8.
so Luke 12.19. Soul take thine ease, thou have goods laid up for many years; he
wraps up the comforts of his soul in these outward things; if he have wealth,
or pleasure, he is content without God, the more he has of the World, the
less he cares for God; as the Moon when it is at the full, it is most opposite
to the Sun, so is it with a worldly man.

3 The love of the World, will make a man part with God, rather than with the
World, he will rather part with Grace and Heaven too than leave the World, he
will rather part with eternal life than his wealth; as the young man in the
Gospel, Mat. 19. from 16. to 22. he had rather part with Christ, and an
express promise of heaven than part with his possessions; so we see how the
love of the World keeps us from the love of God. Notable is that speech of
Christ, Mat. 6.24. No man can serve two Masters, etc. God and this World are as
two Masters, such is the amplitude of Gods service, that he that serves God as
he ought, has no time to serve the World. No man that has a servant but he
looks that his whole time should be spent in his service; so if we spend any
time in the service of the World, we cannot be servants to God. Indeed if
services be subordinate, we may serve many, so we may seek and take pains for
the World, but be sure it be in subordination to Gods service, look that it may
make you more free to Gods service.

Use 1. To discourage any man from the love of the World; there is no greater
discouragement than to say, If we love the World, the love of the Father is not
in us. As if a Father come to a child and say, if you love such a young man or
woman, you cannot love me, and I shall take you for my utter enemy, and you
shall never make it up again, would not any ingenuous child rather than he
would be an enemy to his Father, part with any? so when God says, If you love
the World, you cannot love me, I shall look at you as my enemies, were not this
enough to make any christian out of love with the World? therefore choose
whether you will love God, or the World, if you love the one, you cannot love
the other; therefore it is not a matter of frugality or providence to love the
World, for I say, If any man loves the World, he makes the World his God:
therefore covetousness is called Idolatry, Col. 3.5. a man's belly may be his
God, the love of the World is directly against God, the love of God requires
all your hearts, souls, and strength, therefore no part to be set on the World.

Use 2. It may exhort Christians to mortify their love to the World, you must
either crucify your love to the World, or to God, If you love the world, you
cannot love God; if you love God, you cannot love the world, you cannot serve
God and Mammon. Motives.

1 If a man can but withdraw his mind from the World, he may be Master of the
field in any temptation, that befalls him; what is the World? all that is in the
world, is either profit, or pleasure, or credit, and we regard the World no
further; so that if thou be weaned from thy profit or pleasure, in meat or
drink, or Pastime; if thou be weaned from credit thou shall bereave Satan of
the weapons he fights against thee with, for how does he keep men back from
Religion, but that it will not stand with his credit, and applause in the
World? what hinders them from holy duties, but love to their profits and
pleasures? therefore could but a man wean himself from them, he might easily
overcome the wicked one; how did Joseph's Mr. work on him? was it not from
pleasure? and if Joseph be content to leave the lusts of the flesh, he
over-masters that temptation; what made David fall, but the lust of the flesh?
what made Peter deny his Master? was it not fear of death? what made D^mas
forsake Paul? was it not love of the World? so that there is no temptation, but
it is headed with the World: if it be not pointed with the World, it can do
little, so that if the Prince of the World come and find nothing of the world
in us, or love to profit, or pleasure, or credit, he can do nothing: as Christ
when he saw he had no love to these things, he had nothing to do with him.

Use 3 Of consolation to every soul, who though he be busy in the World, yet
loves not the World, it is not the having of the World, nor the having of the
lusts of the World, that makes you enemies to God, but the love of them, so
that you may have the World, and the lusts thereof, and yet have God too, so
that you love them not, but desire to mortify them, and crucify them, let God
see that your heart, and strength, and the vigor of your spirits be toward
God, not for your own lusts, but for Gods service, and then though a man have
the World, and many lusts in him against his will, these do not separate him
from the love of the Father.

1 JOHN 2.16. For all that is in the World, the lust of the flesh, the lust of
the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the World.


IN the former ver. the Apostle diswaded both old and young from the love of
the World, and the things of the World, that is, the lust of the flesh, the
lust of the eye, and the pride of life.

And he diswades them from this, from a threefold reason.

1 Love not the World, for it evacuates the love of God in us, verse 13. latter
end.

2 The lusts of the World are not of God, but of the World, verse 16.

3 The third reason, why we should not love the World, and the lusts thereof,
is from their nature and original, they are not permanent, but pass away.

Doct. All the sinful dispositions, and courses of the World, are of these
three sorts, either the lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the eye, or the pride
of life.
This Text is a sufficient warrant, though there be no other such division in
Scripture, for every Word of God is perfect; therefore all the sinful
dispositions and ways of the World, are either the lusts of the flesh, of the
eye, or pride of life.

Lusts of the flesh, are such as are stirred up by the flesh, which being
obtained, our bodies find comfort, such pleasure as we find in meat and drink,
or women, in intemperancy, or incontinency.

Lusts of the eye, are such as satisfy the senses, and that is called
covetousness, and they are called lusts of the eye, because the eye is only
satisfied with them.

Pride of life, is the affecting of a man's own carnal excellency, when he
looks, only at himself, and has an high conceit of himself.

Reas. 1 From the observation of what the heart is set upon, when it is drawn
aside to any concupiscence; either credit leads a man, or profit and pleasure
leads him, Jam. 1.14. every man is drawn aside of his own concupiscence; if to
credit, that is pride of life, if to Profits, that is lust of the eye, if to
Pleasure, that is lust of the flesh.

Reas. 2 From the answer of such objections as might be made against this.

Obj. 1 You may say there are many sins which fall not under this division, as
when a man grows contentious, it may be neither for profit, nor pleasure, nor
pride.

Ans. No contention but springs from pride, Prove. 13.10. a carnal affecting of
his own excellency makes him contend.

Object. 2 Atheism or superstition, no profit or pleasure, or credit in it; so
profaneness, what profit or pleasure or credit in swearing?

Ans. All the sins against the first table, fall either under Atheism, or
Superstition, or Profaneness, and all these proceed from disobedience, which is
want of fear and reverence of God, which is nothing else but pride; do you
see any Creature neglect Religion? surely it is from pride of heart, Psalm.
10.3, 4. The wicked, through the pride of his countenance, will not seek after
God; so superstition comes from pride, though it seems to be done in humility
and devotion, Col. 2. ult. Micah 6.6, 7, 8. do not come before him with your
own inventions, and think to please him for it is nothing but pride; so for
profaneness, as swearing or Sabbath-breaking, it comes from pride? so when
Pharaoh said who is God? I know him not; it proceeded from pride, Exodus 9.17.
so whenever men break off the bonds of Gods service, and will not be held
in, this springs from pride of heart, that they will not be subject to the Lord.

Obj. Indulgence to Children, as in David and Eli, when they cannot find in
their hearts to give them a bad speech, does this spring from pride, or profit,
or pleasure, is it not rather meekness and mildness?

Ans. Such indulgence always proceeds from pride; thou have honored thy
children above me, 1 Samuel 2.29. when a man should rather see God dishonored
than his Children, or his Children honored than God, this is a great measure
of pride.

Object. 4. What say you to timerousnesse when out of very fear a man neglects
Religion, as Peter denied his Master for fear, it was neither for pleasure, or
profit, or pride; or whence comes Cains or Judas his despair, comes this from
pride?

Ans. This springs from pride of heart, when a man grows so timorous; for was
it not for his self confidence, that God left Peter to such baseness of
spirit, and when he preferred his own pleasure and safety, was not this a lust
of the eye? so Pilate, what made him afraid of Caesar? was it not love of his
own safety? did he not honor himself before God, and was not that pride? and
from whence came Cains despair? was it not from his pride against his Brother?
he envied his Brother, and what was that but pride? and for Judas his despair,
it is from pride of heart, in that God is not in a man's heart; if he find not
comfort in himself, he will not seek it in God, but seek it rather in an
halter, this is pride, this is pride that he cannot brook such horrors of
conscience as God inflicts; had he had an humble soul; he would have contented
himself, and looked up to Christ for pardon, as well as many that crucified
him; all baseness of spirit, and timerousnesse proceeds from pride; that makes
a man afraid to offend such great men, it is because they would not loose their
credit and honor, and is not this pride? aut servit humiliter, aut superbe
dominatur, ejusdem spiritus est, basely to serve, or proudly to domineer. Let
us survey the whole Law of God, and all sins will fall under Atheism,
superstition, or profaneness, and all from pride; Sabbath breaking, that is
from neglect of Gods honor, that is from pride; murder, that is from
contention, and contention from pride; Adultery is the lust of the flesh,
stealing the lust of the eye, bearing false witness, either from profit or
credit; covetousness in the tenth Commandment, is the lust of the eye.

Use 1. To show the great change of the World, for in the creation, God looked
upon all the World, and all was good, but when Solomon comes and surveyes, and
looks over all the World, he cries out vanity of vanities, all is vanity and
vexation of spirit, and St. John he comes after him, and cries, Love not the
World, for what is in the World, is either the lust of the flesh, and that is
vanity, or lust of the eye, and pride of life, and that is vanity and vexation
of spirit; the whole world lies in wickedness, 1 John 5.19. there is no man by
nature but his whole course is carried this way, either to his credit and then
he is proud, or to his profit, and then he is covetous, or to his pleasure, and
then he is voluptuous and licentious.

Use 2. Hence every man may learn what sin he is most given to, what corruption
most defiles his heart, and which way his heart is most inclined, which is a
needful thing; it is a pity a man should know strange Countries abroad, and
be ignorant at home, pity to be sensorious abroad, and careless at home;
would thou know then what sin most swayes thee? it is one of these, either
lust of the flesh, lust of the eye, or pride of life, or all of them, but one
must overruled us; if thou be not born of God, they reign; if born of God,
yet they may captivate thee, therefore see which of these bears most sway in
thy heart: if it be intemperance, then your hearts will be addicted to
Gluttony, or Drunkenness, or Pastime, or Frolicks, and Jestings; if your hearts
be carried toward Women, that is a lust of the flesh; if you find that you
stand not much on your pleasure, but you can fare hardly, and lie hardly, that
you are not given to Women, or Lust, how then are you affected to profit? does
not thy soul covet after wealth, and when thou art rich, thou considerest not
so much what thou have, as what thou have not; when thou have it, there is no
care to employ it in Gods services, for God, or his Church, or his Children, to
do the more good, but thou carest not how thou come by it, and contentest
thy self only with looking on it; this is a lust of the Eye; but what if thou
be a Prodigal, he hates covetousness, but yet all Prodigals are proud, for
pride thinks it baseness to keep within compass, but lives above his estate;
so, do thou affect thy credit, or outward applause? that is pride of heart;
that we will not deny our credit and so we dare not look after God, because of
the loss of our credit, or honor, why this is from pride of heart; and if
thou be Regenerate, yet one of these lusts it is that puts thee to
distempers, and discouragements, if any thing discourage thee, and vex thee
sinfully, so that thou growest discontent, it is from one of these three; nay,
are thou inwardly affected with thy sin, that it carries thee to unbelief, or
distrust, that thou can not look up to God with comfort? it is one of these
lusts that has damped thy comfort and enlargement, because thou can not
find so much comfort and enlargement, thou growest discontent, this is from
pride, or sometimes we are so carried to our profits or pleasures, that it
damps our grace in us.

Use 3. May exhort us to humiliation when we find all these lusts working in
our hearts, because he that is addicted to pride may be given to the world too,
and look to pleasure, and many sensual objects, this should unfeignedly humble
us, that such a mass of sin should be in us, that not one sin of the world but
is in our hearts: so that when St. James calls the tongue a world of iniquity,
Jam. 3.6. what a world of mischief is in our hearts, when there is no sin in
the world but is in our hearts? What is the reason why men are so vexed if they
be hindered from their credit, or honor? it is from pride, if they be cast in
their profits and pleasures, it is from the lust of the flesh, and the lust of
the eye; therefore do not say, I find no great power in my self to abstain
from such and such sins, but I have a good heart to God: alas, there is no lust
but is found in thy heart, all that is in the world is in thee.

Use 4. A cause of much thankfulness to God, that he has restrained any of
these lusts in you, and that you have not run into it, with as much extremity
as any in the world; when you see any punished for Adultery, or Murder, we may
see it in us, we have hearts within subject to the like, had not God held us
back, therefore we ought to be thankful unto God.

Use 5. If there be such a world of wickedness, let us get an heavenly measure
of grace, that may countervaile all these corruptions, look for a new world of
grace that may humble our hearts against our pride, that may make us liberal
against covetousness, chaste and pure against lusts of the flesh, that so this
world of wickedness may not reign in us. We come now to show, that we must not
love these lusts, and that from their Nature and Original, they are not of the
Father, but of the world.

Doct. There is no lust in the world, can challenge or claim God for the
Author or Fountain of it.
He does not mean the Creatures of the world, but the Lusts of the world; Take
it in particular, David when he had committed Adultery, which was a lust of the
flesh, 2 Samuel 11.3. this was evil in the sight of the Lord, therefore it was
not pleasing to him, he pleased himself, but not God in this; in other things
he was a man after Gods own heart, in this after his own heart. So what made
Joseph abstain from the like sin, but because he considered it would be a great
sin against God? so for Covetousness, a lust of the eye, God abhors it, Psalm.
10.3. he is so far from loving it, that he hates both it and the covetous man,
Isa. 57.17. For the wickedness of his covetousness I was wrath with him; and
for pride of life that God hates, Prove. 6.16, 17. it is one of the most
loathsome things in the sight of God, 1 Pet. 5.5. (...), God wars against a
proud man, he sets an army against him, and therefore seeing God hates these,
he cannot be the Author or Fountain of them; it is manifest that they spring
not from God, for he abhors them, hates them, punishes them, Job 34.9 10, 11,
12. Romans 1.18, 19. Gal. 5.17. the flesh lusts against the Spirit of God,
therefore God is against them. But what is the reason why they cannot challenge
their Original from God.

Reas. 1. From the purity of God, Hab. 1.8. he is of pure eyes, and so abhors
all sin; What fellowship has light with darkness? what fellow ship has
filthy lusts of the flesh with a pure God? what fellowship has a ^^vetous
heart with a liberal God, a proud heart with the great God? a proud man will be
his first cause, and last end, and therefore hateful to God, Psalm. 5.4, 5.

Reas. 2. From the baseness, and indisposednesse of sin to the service of God,
Jam. 1.13, 14. there is nothing in sin, for which God should desire it, or
respect it, or make use of it.

Obj. Does not the Scripture manifest that there is no sin, but God has a
great hand in it? why did Joseph's Brethren fell him, was it not from envy, and
from pride? and yet he says it was God that fold him, Genesis 45.7.8. was it not
from envy that the Pharisees crucified Christ? and yet it was but what God fore
ordained; and for Judas, was it not from covetousness that he betrayed him?
and yet God had decreed it; and for the lusts of the flesh, does not God speak
plainly, That he would give David's wives into the hands of Absalom? so that no
sin but it is from Gods hand, nor pride, nor covetousness, nor
voluptuousness, how is it then that no lust can challenge its Original from
God, they are not of the Father?

Ans. They are of the Father as of the World, but not in that sense as they are
of the World; they are not from him as an Author, or Fountain, or causa per
se, for the good God can work no evil, but yet there is no sin but he is the
occasion of it, though the cause of no sin; all good things come from God as a
cause, all evil as from an occasion thereof; as the Gospel is a Gospel of
peace, and from the God of Peace, yet it is made a firebrand of contention, to
set men at variance and strife, Mark 10. but it is not the proper work of the
Gospel, but of the corrupt distemper of men that abuse it to the contrary end,
there is no work of sin that does per se propagate by God, but by occasion.
Now, the accidental work of God in sin stands.

1 In a leaving men to themselves. 2 In leaving them to Satan. 3 In propounding
good occasions, and objects which they pervert to sin.
First, So God would hearden Pharoahs heart; How? by leaving him to himself, as
wax left to it self will grow hard, how much more the stony heart of man? God
not ruling and working in his heart, it grows hard.

Secondly, He left him to Satan, he suffered Satan to help his South-sayers to
do the like miracles as Moses did, Exodus 7.13.22. and because he saw his
Enchanters could do so much, he thought they were no better than his Magicians.

Thirdly, He hardens our hearts often by many comforts, mercies, and outward
blessings, and these often harden our hearts, as respite from Judgments did
Pharaohs, Exodus 8.15. when it should lead us to repentance, Romans 2.4, 5. yet by
occasion it hardens our hearts, so for other lusts.

How did God tempt Absalom? First, by leaving him to his lustful heart.

Secondly, By leaving him to ill counsel.

Thirdly, By giving the Kingdom into his hand, so that he took liberty to
commit that wickednesses to lie with his Fathers Concubines. So, how did God
work Joseph's selling into Egypt?

First, By turning his Fathers love toward him, above his other Brethren.

Secondly, By his dreams which stir them up to sell him, so that God, only
gives the occasion, and propounds objects; which they abuse to sin; so God
stirred up the Pharisees, and Judas, to Crucify and betray Christ, God left
him to himself, then

1 Satan filled his heart, Joh. 13.2.27. and God gave a fit opportunity to take
him; so the Pharisees they envied him, they saw he would take away their glory
and credit, therefore they envied him, but those were but such occasions as
they might have resisted, he laid them by them, but rhey needed not have taken
them up, he tried them by it, but he did not tempt them to do it. So Adams
sin, God led him into a Temptation, but it was but of trial, not of seducement,
it was Temptatio probationis, not seductionis, he propounded a goodly tree to
him, and the fruit fair to the eye, but the cause of all was their own
consent, and mutability, which they might have resisted.

And for Gods Decree, though they did nothing but what God decreed, Gods
purpose never decreed any sin should be wrought otherwise than as it is wrought
by the propounding objects and occasions, and leaving them to themselves and
Satan, but he never decreed to force any to sin, therefore let God and his
Throne be guiltless, let iniquity rest on the wicked, but Gods hand is not
with it.

Use 1. Is a just refutation of the Papists, that impute it to us, as if we
made God the Author of Sin, whereas we teach and believe, that there is no sin
in the world that is from the Father, but from the world, let no man when he is
tempted say, he is tempted of God, for he finds nothing in sin to desire it,
but his care is to show the wisdom of his Providence and Justice; we say there
is no sin but God gives occasion to; if Shimei curse David, the Lord bid him;
that is, gives him opportunity; so the Lord stirred up the Pharisees to
Crucify Christ, but all this was not from God as a proper cause. Suppose a man
were Master of many Horses, and one falls lame, what, shall not the Master ride
on him because he halts? it is not the Masters fault that the Horse halts, but
from some distemper, or disease in the Horse, and he knows it too, yet he will
not leave off using him for that; what if God know if he send showers there
will grow as well Weeds as good Corn, and Herbs, what then, must he therefore
restrain the showers? no, it is meet his Providence should be fulfilled; what
if the dunghill stink by the Sun beams, shall not the Sun therefore shine? the
Sun causes not the stink properly, but the filth in the Dunghill, so there is
nothing but Gods Providence works; what if his Providence turn many things to
sin, the fault is not in Gods Providence, but men's corruptions, but he is as
far ftom the Sin, as the Sun from stench.

Use 2. To reprove all such foolish men as wrong Gods Providence, that if they
fall into any sin, they impute it to destiny, and if it be it is from God hand,
or else it had not been, Deus impulsor fuit; what a profane thing is this for
a man to impute his sin to God? God is no more the cause of any sins than the
Sun is the cause of the stench of a Dunghill, God forbids it, hates it, and
punishes it: was Absalom therefore innocent because God gave his Fathers Wives
into his hands; No, God punishes his sin before all the people, because be
committed his sin openly before them all.

Use 3, To teach every man and woman to abhor all these sins, all Pride,
Gluttony, Adultery, Covetousness; detest them; why? because they are not of
the Father, God takes no pleasure in high looks, what pleasure takes he in
unclean lusts, in covetousness? he detests them, and abhors them; therefore if
they be not from God, what should good men have to do with them? what should
we meddle with that which we have no Word or Commandment for? abhor these
lusts therefore, and detest them, let those follow them whose chief good is in
the World, but live you as become Gods Servants.

Use 4. May teach us to cloth our selves with the contrary Graces, if those
lusts be not from the Father, then surely contrary Graces are; therefore deck
your seves with humility, God resists the proud, but gives grace to the
humble, Mat. 11.28. Learn of me, for I am humble and meek; Humility is of me,
but Pride, that is not of the Father, but of the world; so for
heavenly-mindednesse, Col. 3.1. If ye be risen with Christ seek those things
that are above; heavenly mindedness that is from Christ, therefore be of an
higher mind than the world; Alas, are these worldly things your highest
things? it is a sign you are not risen with Christ; and so for the lusts of the
flesh, there is other meat than bodily food, John 6.29. John 4.34. we may make
use of our bellies, but we may not make them our gods, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. deck
your selves with sobriety, chastity, temperance, liberality, humility; thus
walk, and you shall find rest to your souls.

Doct. That which is not of the Father, the love of young men, and old, is to
be weaned from.
The Syllogism stands thus, Whatsoever is not of the Father, the love of old
and young must be weaned from. But these lusts are not of the Father, Ergo.

All the comforts of this world, if they come not from the Father, our love
must be weaned from them; if honor come not from God, and people affect it, it
hinders their Faith, they cannot believe, John 5.44. what kept Joseph from the
lusts of the flesh, but Gods providence in withholding his Mistress from him?
if God withold a thing, it is not for us to put forth a reaching desire to
it; this satisfied Jacob, Genesis 30.2. If God withold such a blessing, why
should our desires be set upon it? Shall we take it unkindly that Gods hand
withholds it? so for profit, this was the claim that Jephtah made, when the
King of Ammon contended with him, Judge. 11.24. he told him, What God gives us
we will possess, if God had not given it he had usurped it, as did the King of
Ammon; so if our God give us not a thing, let us not reach after it, and to
this a promise is made, to him that shakes his hand against any unjust thing,
Isa. 33.15. and verse. 16, 17. such, though they have less, yet they shall be
confirmed in it, it shall be like strong foundations.

Obj. What is there that any man receives but it is from Gods hand? good and
evil come from him, 2 Samuel 12.7, 8. I gave thee thy Masters house, and thy
Masters Wives into thy bosom, and I gave them up to their hearts lusts; so
Zech. 11.16. Lo, I will raise up a Shepherd in the Land, which shall not visit
those that be cut off, etc. So that we cannot be given to our lusts, but it is
from God.

Ans. It is one thing when God gives us a blessing in his Providence, another,
when he gives us a blessing in his Ordinances, we may have many things by way
of Gods providence, and yet have little comfort in them; it was his providence
to give them up to their lusts, it was Gods providence that sent Monarchs
against Nations that they had no right to; so Gods providence you will say,
sends a Bribe, I never fought after it, but we must not reason thus, for these
are but trials of our obedience, and not for seduction; so if a Bribe comes,
God tries whether you will shake your hands against it; so if an Harlot press
on you, God tries your chastity by this, this is Gods providence; but if God
offer us a thing in an Ordinance, that is either by his Command, or our
Calling, that we may safely take, Heb. 5.4. so that Gods Command, and our
Calling are Gods Ordinances: whatsoever he calls us to receive, he ordains, and
whatsoever he calls us not to receive, he ordains not: so that whatsoever is
ordained by God in his Ordinance, that we may take, but what comes not thus,
let us shake it off.

Use 1. To teach us to take heed of all unlawful Honors and Riches, for
though they may comfort us a while, yet they shall do us no good, if they come
not from God; all lawful Honor and Riches come from God, 1 Chr. 29.12. and
that as a Father. We need not be afraid to receive any lawful Honor; so for
pleasures, 2 Cor. 1.3. he is the God of all comfort, if it be a lawful
comfort, so that these we are not to be weaned from, but from all the lusts of
the World; though we may receive Honor, yet we must not be ambitious; so
Riches they are Gods gifts, but let us not use ill means to come by them; so
for Pleasures, if we cannot come by them but by violating Gods Command, why let
not your hearts reach to them; and this should be a notable motive to mortify
all lusts, because they come not from the Father of Lights, but from the Prince
of Darkness; if no Ambition, or Pride, or Covetousness be from God, mortify
it, so if there any love to pleasure and wantonness, root it out, for it is
not of the Father, therefore what should Christians have to do with it? Men's
Children may lawfully take gifts from others besides their Fathers, because
they are not able to give us all kind of blessings, but Gods Children must
take nothing that comes not from their Father, whatsoever is not from him is a
lust, and our love must be weaned from it; and the reason is, from the
amplitude of Gods bounty, there is no good gift but comes from God, and that in
his Ordinance, and God will bestow upon his Children whatsoever is good and
needful for them.

Use 2. May quiet our hearts in the want of all such blessings as come not from
God, as God gives us not; you see you cannot have such riches, or such
pleasures or profits, but Gods Providence or Ordinance withholds them; why
wean your hearts from them, and be content without them; it is the wisdom of
men to follow an occasion, when they see Gods providence leading them to it,
but if thou see Gods providence hindering it by lawful means, that thou can
not have Children by lawful means, or Riches by lawful means, if it come not
from the Father it is not good for us, and therefore we must be content without
them.

Use 3. Shows Gods Children what they may lawfully enjoy, such things only as
come from the Father in his Providence, and Ordinance, that you may love and
comfortably enjoy.

Q. How shall I know whether I had all my blessings, as from my Father, my Wife
or Children, or Riches, or Calling?

A. 1. Whatsoever you have obtained by Prayer, it is a good sign you have had
it from God, as a Father hearing prayer, 1 Samuel 1.27. so whatsoever profit or
pleasure, or credit you have, if you have obtained it by prayer, it is a sign
you had it from God as your Father.

Obj. I have many things which I never prayed for, I have it may be Wife, and
Friends, and Honor, and Calling, that I never prayed for, may I have comfort
in them?

2. In the second place therefore a man may say, he has a thing from the
Father, when he has it by fellowship with Christ, Ephesians. 5.17. many times God
gives us things out of his love in Christ, that we never thought of, for our
hearts are shallow, and empty, and not able to comprehend what God is able to
do, for he is able to do above all we can think, or ask, therefore let us get
hold of Christ, and then we need fear no blessing.

3. Whatsoever you receive by Faith, that is from the Father, Mat. 8.13. if you
believe, God will do whatsoever he sees needful; and we believe he is able to
do above what we are able to ask; now we receive it by faith, when either we
reach it and bring it by faith, or if not so, yet we have it, and receive it by
lawful means as a pledge of Gods love, and when we have it use it to his
glory, for though we get it not by Faith yet we hold it by Faith, now Faith is
adequate to our calling, the just lives by his Faith in every several calling,
so that if we come by it in a lawful calling, any credit, or profit, or
pleasure, Faith gives us to see that it comes from Gods ordinance, so that we
may comfort our selves in it; therefore be exhorted, whatsoever God gives not
in his ordinance, let us not reach to it, so that we are to be weaned from all
pleasures, and profits, and honors, if they come not from Gods providence by
lawful means.

2 You must be quiet and content without them; and Thirdly, whatsoever you
receive from God in his ordinance, you may use it comfortably.

Doct. All the lusts in the World, are of the World.
1 John 5 18. The whole World lies in these lusts, Gal. 1.4. that he might
deliver us from this present evil World, James 3.15. this wisdom is not from
above, but earthly.

Object. But God made the World, and therefore that which comes from the World,
comes from God.

Ans. The World is taken for the systeme of heaven and earth, Acts 17.24.
secondly, for sinful men, Gal. 4.4. John 15.19. thirdly, corrupt customs and
fashions of the World, Romans 12.1. fourthly, for indowments of the World, as
honor, riches, etc. the first and last, wisely used, are from the Father, but
here he understands the second and the third, corrupt men, and corrupt
customs, and the fourth ill used, 2 Pet. 1.4. having escaped the corruption
that is in the World, through lust; these are from the World.

1. As a corrupt Principle or Fountain; the heart being empty of Gods image,
and not able to attain it, it does subsidere in outward things; If God does
vouchsafe his Grace, it attains above the World; being not thus assisted, it
falls below it self; the soul we see contented with earthly things, is woefully
corrupted.

2. As a Pattern; when men accomodate themselves to the lusts of other men,
some to this man's covetousness, others to that man's pride, this is the
conformity to the World, which Paul forbids.

3. As an Object; the Object is often the cause of its adjunct, ex visu
nascitur amor, so Achan saw a wedge of gold and coveted it, so these endowments
of the World falling upon our corrupt hearts, work in us these lusts; these
lawful honors, and pleasures, and profits, by accident effect lust in us,
they abuse us, when we look at them as subsisting of themselves, not tending to
Gods Glory; our desires must not be confined, or terminated in them.

Use 1. All Gods Children, old and young, are to be weaned from these lusts,
they are of the World, and not of the Father; in the World, we must live above
the World; the darkness is past, the light now shines, when the Sun shines,
men call one another to the heat of it, so let us; these lusts make us unholy,
unmeet for this heavenly offspring; the Holy Ghost lays a base imputation
upon the dug of the World, to wean us from it; it would discourage a noble
spirit, to match with a base-born Creature, let us not therefore strike matches
with the World, which is so base and odious.

Doct. What comes from the World, the Children of God are to be weaned from.
This is the Major, the Minor was before, they must be weaned from all things
that look not at God as the Fountain and end.

1. We may make use of the Creatures, they were made for our sakes; God put all
into man's hand, Psalm. 8.6. Nehem. 12.10. Eat the fat, and drink the sweet, 1 Chronicles. 29.12. Riches and Honor come from thee, 2 Cor. 1.3. He is the God of
all comfort, Eccl. 9.7, 8, 9 Live joyfully with the wife of thy youth. God
would have us to live comfortably in the World, and use all the lawful
comforts of it, we shall need them all against the discouragements of the
World; but may we conform to the civil customs of the World, common to good
and bad? there is a lawful use of the civil customs, Phil. 4.8. If any thing
be of good report, think on these things; these words contain civil customs
in men's commerce.

Reas. Civil customs spring not from the corruptions of men or their
customs, but from the law of nature, from the rudiments written in the heart,
Romans 2.15. not remnants of an old, but rudiments of a new nature, John 1.9.
Christ inlightens every man that comes into the World; Civil Prudence,
Learning, all comely things are from him, so that we should not shun these.

Q. How are these distinguished from the other?

A. 1. Customs that spring from the World are corrupt, they flow from a
corrupt heart, as vain customs of apparel usually flow from pride and vanity
of mind, and not from civil prudence, or moral virtues; when thou do well
to thy self, men will praise thee, this springs from the general
coveteousnesse in men, so Drunkards praise Drunkards, Gluttons, Gluttons, look
at these as fashions you are to be weaned from; but civil customs spring from
the light of Christ shining in us, in moral, oeconomicall and political
virtues.

2. When there is a lust in Gods children against them, though many receive
them, their hearts are secretly set against them, this is a sign they are
carnal, and we must turn from them.

Reas. 1. These cannot satisfy our souls, they are transitory, and our souls
eternal, what should an high soaring Eagle meddle with such flies? an eternal
soul must be set upon an eternal object.

2. These are corporal, and feed the body only, in the midst of these the
soul is blind, carnal, foolish; these are disproportionable to the nature of
it, and therefore cannot strengthen it.

3. They are not of the Father, and therefore lead us not to the Father; a man
cannot work above the sphere of his calling, so give up your hearts to these,
and you will never reach higher.

Use. 1. Shows, we may conform to the civil customs of the World, the Holy
Ghost does not forbid those, 1 Cor. 9.20, 21, 22. Paul became all things to all
men, so that in pretense of mortification we must not fill our spirits with
morosity and rusticall rudeness, good manners, and civil respects, stand well
with Christianity.

2. This shows that we may have a lawful use of honors, and pleasures, and
riches, we are to use them as from God and to God.

3. It teaches us what is in the World, and of the World, that we are to be
weaned from, viz. from corrupt Customs, they are of the World, and are
transitory and corporeal, and lead us not to the Father.

Thus much for the General; now because these lusts before mentioned are the
springs of all the lusts in the World, therefore we will speak of them in
particular.

Doct. Old-men and Young Men are to be weaned from the lusts of the flesh.
For he writes to Old-men and Young Men, Love not the World, nor the things of
the World, for all that is in the World, the lust of the flesh, etc.

Quest. 1. What are the lusts of the flesh?

The lust of the flesh, is an affection to satisfy the flesh, as Col. 2. ult.
whatsoever therefore the flesh, the body of man (not taking it for the whole
corrupt nature, for that includes all these sins) but these lusts are bodily
lusts, such as the body desires to be satisfied with.

Now the body stirs up first to intemperancy, whereof two parts, Gluttony, and
Drunkenness.

2. The body tends to Incontinency, Whoredom and Adultery.

3. The body desires ease and pleasure: Gluttony and Drunkenness in meat and
drink, Wantonness, Whoredom, love to Idleness and pastime, all these are
included here; and to Children he does not speak, for they are not usually
given to eat much, or drink more than needs, but when they have enough, they
cease; and for inconstancy, they are not tempted to it; and for ease, it cannot
be Idleness in them, though they spend much time in pastime and play, Zech.
8.5. for their bodies are too weak to labor, and their minds to study are too
shallow, but when they come to riper years, let them be employed, but even the
first seven years are spent in pastime, and God looks not much at it; but you
young men, and old men, love not intemperancy, incontinency, or idleness.

1 The body distempered with meat is Gluttony, with drink, is Drunkenness.

Now a man may sin in Gluttony, and Drunkenness, or Intemperancy, either when
his appetite is carried to an unfit object, as,

1. When a man has a longing desire to those things which are hurtful unto
him, as if by the Physician Wine be forbidden, or salt meats to some bodies,
yet there is a lust in men's natures to affect these; it was a lust of
intemperancy in the old Law, to desire after any unclean meats forbidden, Lev.
8. and God reproves it, Isa. 65.4. they lusted after Swines flesh, and
abominable things, so that though a man exceed not in the measure, yet in the
object, this is intemperance, such a lust was that in our first Parents, Genesis
3.6. here was lusting after a meat forbidden, because she saw it was fair.

2. This lust shows it self, not so much in the nature of the meats or drinks,
as in the the measure of it, for a man may exceed measure in eating and
drinking.

1 Beyond health, when it is not for strength, Eccl. 10.16, 17. it is a lust
forbid to eat in the morning excessively, and glut themselves, this is beyond
the strength of the body; the same may be said of drinks in excessive manner,
Luke 21.34. when the Lungs and Liver are distempered and inflamed, and health
hurt, Prove. 23.26. this is an excess.

2 When we covet meats and drinks beyond the measure of our estate, when we
lust above our means, Prove. 23.20, 21. when by costly meat and drink he weakens
his estate, Prove. 21.17. if a man be given to costly fare he shall surely come
to poverty.

3 A man may exceed, when he exceeds the measure of due order, when they
compel men to eat and drink more than willingly they would.

4 When we exceed the bounds of reason, when we so eat and drink that we forget
our business, and reason is quite disturbed, as Lot was so drunk that he
defiled his Daughters, Genesis 19.33, 35. and Noah was so far drunk that he could
not cover his nakedness; in Lot, his reason was wholly taken away, in Noah
partly; and now whether reason be disturbed in part, or in whole, it is a lust
of the flesh.

5 He may exceed the bounds of his Calling; when he eats or drinks so much as
makes him unfit for his Calling, this is a lust of the flesh that hinders
either our general or particular Calling, Luke 21.34. and for particular
Calling we read, Exodus 32. They ate and drank, and rose up to play; so that
the meat and drink that should strengthen a man, utterly disables him to follow
his Calling.

3. If we be carried to meat and drink with no other end but to eat, and drink,
and satisfy our appetite, this is a lust of the flesh, a satisfying of the
flesh, and looking no further than to serve the body, this is often the failing
of many that abhor Gluttony and Drunkenness, yet ask them why they eat and
drink, it is only to satisfy their appetite, this is only to fulfill the
lusts of the flesh, Col. 2. ult. 1 Cor. 10.31. Whether ye eat or drink, do
all to the glory of God; therefore not only to please Nature, but to make you
fit for Gods service, either in your general or particular callings. Let this
be the last end of all your meat and drink, to glorify God, to make you more
cheerful and strong about the business God calls you to, not that it is a sin
to satisfy the appetite, for God has not made the appetite frustrate, and it
is of God to be hungry and thirsty, and we may cheer our bodies, but we must
not terminate all this in eating and drinking, for then it is a lust of the
flesh, Genesis 27.3, 4. Go and take thy Bow, and take some Venison, and make me
savoury meat, such as my soul loves, What, did he only look to please his
appetite? no, but that I may eat and bless thee, that being refreshed by thy
provision, I may be strengthened to bless thee, a lively Pattern for all
Christians so to eat savoury meat, as that we may be fitted for prophecy if God
call, fit to pray if God call, fit to hear, fit for any duty God shall call us
to, and not to make us more dull and heavy.

Thus we see intemperance is a lust of the flesh, and wherein it consists.

Next to that follows incontinency, which is an affection to women, which is
inordinate, Mat. 5.28. and that is a lust to be avoided of all; And this lust
expresses it self in three kinds.

1 When it is carried to a wrong object, 2 When it exceeds measure, 3 When it
aims not at a right end.

For the first, Sometimes the heart is carried to beastly unnatural lusts
against nature and order, as with beasts, Lev. 18. secondly, If it be carried
to kindred, as when Ammon defiled his Sister Tamer; and this lust lies in
carrying it self to a wrong object; thirdly, When it is carried in women to
men, or men to women before consent of Parents, though it may be a fit match,
yet it must be with consent of Parents, though the Angel prospered Abraham's
Servant in his way, yet he durst not ask Rebeccahs good will before he asked
the good will of her Parents.

2 It is a lustful affection in conjugall affection, when it exceeds measure,
as when for it he omits his duty to God, or denies his profession; sometimes a
man has a good affection to Religion, but the love of his wife carries him
away, Luke 14.26. a man may be so transported to his wife, that he dare not be
forward in Religion, lest he displease his wife; and so the wife, least she
displease her husband: and this is an inordinate love, when it exceeds measure.

3 It is a lust of the flesh, when they are so transported with affection, that
they look at no higher end than marriage it self, to have conjugall affection,
1 Cor. 7.29. the meaning is, let such as have wives look at them not for their
own ends, but to be better fitted for Gods service, and bring them nearer to
God, and then we so have wives, as if we had them not; every man is to look at
his wife, as a Talent sent from God; and therefore he must look to restore it
better by twofold at least, that I may say, Lord here is the wife thou gave
me, and I am the more wise, and humble, and gracious; and so Children and
Servants, when we affect them only to do our business, and look at no higher
end but our selves, this is a lust of the flesh, when in any thing we enjoy, we
look no higher but to please our selves therein.

4 There is a lust of the flesh, which is a lust of pastime or pleasure
inordinately, and this God threatens with poverty, Prove. 21.17.

There is a threefold lust in pastime, 1 When we are set on unlawful Objects,
unlawful Games, 2 In excessive Manner, 3 To a wrong end.

1 Our pastimes are unlawful in respect of the Object, if we make a pastime of
every thing, of such things as should be matters of devotion, and sorrow, and
humiliation, we may not jest in Scripture phrase, neither may we make shows and
pageants of Scripture stories, as of Christ, or other holy men, this is
unlawful, to make pastime of holy things; when Moses drew near to God, and God
called to him, I am the God of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, Exodus 3.5. God
bid him put of his shoes, for the place whereon thou stand is holy ground;
when men come into the presence of God, you should put off your shoes, that
is, your unclean affections; if we come near to God, we must not come with
common ordinary affections, we must not come with our old shoes; so cards and
dice, we may not make a pastime of them, if they be lots, it is an ordinance of
God, and therefore not to be made a pastime of.

Obj. There are some religious lots, some civil, some indifferent, if we
should deal with divine lots, we should use more devotion, but the other a man
may take more liberty in.

Ans. I say all lots are religious, whether they be about holy things, as
choosing Apostles; or civil, as casting lots about division of lands, or any
other thing to determine a controversy, or the like, as they cast lots on
Christ's Garments; for it is not the object that makes a thing lawful or
unlawful, as whether we swear in Religious or Civil matters, or Lusory;
because whatsoever we swear about, we call God to be a witness; so in all
kind of lottery, whatsever it be about, we appeal to God, who is disposer of
all things, Prove. 16.33. for man being but causa per accidens of the event of
the lot, there must be some cause per se, and that is God; so that whatsoever
it be about, though matters of pastime or lusory, it is a religious ordinance,
because it appeals to divine providence, and therefore to be avoided.

2 It is a wrong object, when we set our pastime on other men's sins, which
should be matter of grief and sorrow, 2 Pet. 2.3. it was profaneness in Cham
to make a mock at his Fathers nakedness, so it is profaneness to make others
drunk, and then make a pastime of it, and so for stage plays, to put on women's
apparel, to make pastime; so to make pastime by them, who live without a
calling.

3 When men play with the Judgments of God, Psalm. 119.120. if you see Gods
Judgments on another, make not a pastime of other men's infirmities, in this
regard it has been thought unmeet for great men to keep fools and madmen to
make them pastime, 1 Samuel 21.14, 15. he thought it unmeet for the gravity of a
King, to make pastime of his folly, not but that a man may smile at the
simplicity of an Idiot, but yet he should see Gods hand in it, and be thankful
to God that he is not such a one; so it is unlawful to make a mear recreation
of hawking and hunting, seeing the enmity between the Creatures came for our
sins, and therefore it should be a matter of compassion.

2 Pastime is unlawful when it exceeds measure. 1 Of time, Ephesians. 5.16. when
men spend whole nights and days in pastime.

2 When men make an occupation of recreation, as stage players, and musicians,
men should have a calling besides; so then it is profaneness for a man,
altogether to follow his pastime and recreation, according to the Proverb, What
has a Gentlemen but his pleasure? six days should be employed in the works of
our callings.

3 When we abuse it in excess of our affections, that our hearts are
overwhelmed therewith.

4 When we look at a wrong end, when as in our pastime, we look at no higher
end than our own pleasure, whereas Paul says, Whatsoever ye do, do it for the
glory of God; we should hereby be the better fitted for Gods service.

Lastly, When we abuse our pastime in regard of gain, though carding were
lawful, yet to make a gain of it, Aristotle could reprove it as (...), for
pastime should be for our delight, and not to make a gain of; it is not a
vendible matter to pay for our pastime, that a man should sell his pastime, is
filthy lucre; indeed if you play for no more than you would spend betwixt you,
or give to the poor, it is not unwarrantable, but to make a gain of recreation,
is an abuse of the pastime.

The last lust of the flesh, is the lust of Idleness, or ease, or sleepiness,
for it is the body that craves sleep and ease, and is satisfied with it; sleep
begets drowsinesse, and case begets Idleness; now these, both young and old
are to be weaned from.

Q. 1. How is a man carried inordinately to ease or sleep?

First, Either in unseasonable objects; or secondly, In excessive measure; or
thirdly, when we use them not to a right end.

1 When we sleep at such times as are unseasonable to sleep and be drowzy.

1 In holy duties, when we are so drowzy that we cannot attend to them, the
very inclination to sleep is now a sinful lust; this lust fell heavily on
Eutiches, Acts 20.29. an heavy sleep fell on him, and an heavy hand of God
followed it, which showed his judgment, though he restored him, because he
would not have such assemblies scandalized, but always some hand of God or
other falls on them, either in body or soul; however the spirit gets such a
cold by such sleepiness and drowsinesse, that a man finds it lustful.

2 So in the duties of a man's calling, if a man be drowzy, this is a lust of
the flesh, Prove. 10.15. He that sleeps in harvest is a shameful Son, he shames
himself and his Master, and indeed the fitness of his work implies, that in
harvest he should be at it early and late, not but that a man may take a little
sleep to fit him for his work, but when the Sun is risen and calls him to his
business, he loves his bed, this is a lust of the fl sh, and this is called
deceitful working; Cursed is he that does his work deceitfully, that is, with
such deceit as comes from slacknesse, for so it is interpreted, Prove. 10.14.
and the Metaphor is taken from a bow that is slack bent, which deceives, Psalm.
68.57. a man never reaches the mark he aims at, because it is not strongly
bent, so when a man's heart is not strongly bent to his business, he will never
reach to his business thoroughly to purpose, and so it is a deceitful work;
cursed is he that aims at any business with a slack bent hand, Prove. 29.9. He
that is sloathfull in his business, is Brother to a great waster; a sloathfull
man and a prodigal, are both of one womb, bred of the same lust of the flesh,
and so wastes that which he might have increased, Eccl. 4.5, 6. Better is an
handful with ease, etc. says the sluggard, but such a one shall come to
beggary, Prove. 26.21. Idleness will cloth a man with rags, rags will be their
raiment, Prove. 19.15. he does not only mean that an Idle person shall want
outward means, but were he of better means yet he shall find his body shall be
so distempered, that he shall have no stomach to his meat, so that an idle
person, shall either want meat, or a stomach to eat it, when as a diligent
shall have both, but that is not all, for it may be extended to the soul; by
rising late, and being drowzy, he is so distempered, that he either omits good
duties, or else he finds no favor, nor life, nor strength in them.

In Gods ordinances we complain of sluggishnesse, but is not the fault in our
selves? better fares a sluggish soul with an handful with ease, etc. so a
sluggish man rosteth not that which he catches in hunting, it has no warmth,
no spirit in it; our bodies and souls should be as a burnt sacrifice, therefore
must not be cold; and to this end, he exhorts us not to be sluggish in
business, Eccl. 9.7. whatsoever thou do, do it with all thy might;
therefore when we have any work to do that requires diligence, yea though it
were to slaughter the enemy, as he understands it, Jer. 48.10. Cursed be he
that does the work of the Lord deceitfully, that keeps back his sword from
blood.

2 It is a lust of the flesh, when a man is carried to sleep above due measure,
Prove. 5.9, 10, 11. poverty comes on such a one suddenly and strongly, most men's
natures require seven hours sleep, some eight, and that is the most; and if we
observe it; we shall find the same distempers arise from too much sleep, that
arise from want of sleep, it makes the body drowzy, and the brain dull, and
makes a man unfit for any thing.

3 This love of Sleep and Rest is a lust of the flesh, when we use it not to a
right end; now the end of all Sleep and Rest, is to refresh the Spirit and
strengthen the body, and help digestion, like the unbending of a Bow to make it
stronger, if a Bow stand always bent it weakens it; therefore so much Sleep as
may help digestion and comfort and refresh a man's body and spirit, God allows;
God knows all the Comforts of this life are little enough to uphold us against
vexations and discouragements, but when a man is grown to love Sleep and Ease,
a little more Sleep, a little more Slumber, one ease after another, and never
looks how to employ it to Gods service, now he propounds no right end, but we
ease our selves that we may be eased, and never look further than Ease and
Sleep, and so we rest in the Creature, and never look up to God, to whom all
our Ease and refreshment should tend, otherwise its a Lust of the Flesh,
because we look no further, but to satisfy the Flesh, Prove. 26.14. As a door
sometimes turns this way and that way, but is never off the Hinges; so a
sluggard would toss himself from one side to another; the door has some end
in turning upon the Hinges, to open and shut, but a Sluggard does no good by
it, but rowls himself from one side to another, after he is satisfied with
Sleep, but cannot get up, and then when he is up, he does nothing but roll
himself from one thing to another, he has no settled business to employ
himself about, but takes care what to do, he goes from one Company to another,
from one Game to another, till he shuts out the day, and then he returns to his
Rest and Ease and sleep again, as it was with Peter, James, and John, Mat.
26.41. when Christ called on them to watch and pray, he comes and finds them
sleeping, what says he, the spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak;
even then when he had most need, and themselves also, of watchfullnesse, they
fell into drowsinesse, and so fell into Temptation, that they all left Christ,
and Peter especially; Simon sleep thou, whom Satan desires to winnow? For
thee now to Sleep is a Lust of the Flesh. Let us therefore so look at Sleep and
Ease as that we must give account of; Its a common fault of Gentlemen that live
of their own Means, they may Live at Ease and rest they think, what is a
Gentleman but his Ease and Pleasure, God forbid that we should be like that
Fool in the Gospel, Soul take thine Ease, thou have Goods laid up for many
years, you must not think that God has given great means and estate to live at
ease, the glorious Angels are ministering Spirits, doing their duties with all
agility and chearfullnesse; Adam who was Lord of the world, yet was set to till
the ground, from the highest creature to the lowest, all have employments
appointed them by God.

Dangers of Idleness.

1 It will bring you to poverty, that you shall be suddenly Beggars, and that
without remedy.

2 It distempers your Bodies and Stomachs.

3 It will make your Souls naked and ragged; that is plain, the field of the
sluggard is overgrown with Thorns and Thistles, all your impatience, vanity,
idleness, all your dullness, unprofitablenesse in your life, it springs from
your sluggishnesse of heart, you have not stirred up your spirits.

4 It will make you a Brother to a great waster, you waste your outward
patrimony, and your patrimony of Grace; when Peter was once fallen into
drowsinesse, how woefully was he bankrout, how poor and naked? Simon sleep
thou? and we see Temptation came on him suddenly, and strongly.

5 Such as do their business with a slack unbent hand, cursed be that man; if
you see a sluggish hand, God leaves him to himself, he curses both himself and
his business; therefore be diligent and fruitful and strengthen your selves,
you shall find the blessing of God going along with you, prospering your
estates and Souls.

Thus we see what are the Lusts of the flesh; they are such as the body affects
and is satisfied with, as intemperancy, incontinency, love of pastime, and love
of idleness and sleep, these are the lusts of the flesh.

Now for the Reasons why we should wean our selves from these Lusts, which may
be as so many motives to dissuade us from them.

Rea. 1 All these Lusts are so many Enemies to our Souls, 1 Pet. 3.11. they are
the diseases of our Spirits, now if we satisfy any disease in our body, we
feed the disease and make it worse; So we cannot satisfy any of these Lusts,
but the more we feed them the stronger they grow: They are like the Dropsy,
the more you drink the more you may, so satisfying increases the disease, the
more you obey a Tyrant and submit your selves to him, the more authority he
claims over you, and the more will be Lord it over you: so if you once give up
your selves to obey these lusts and let them reign, they will Lord it over you,
and keep you in greater subjection, Romans 6.12. so that when a man pleads for
his Lust, but this once that I may fulfill my Lust, and I hope I shall never
do it again, but I will bid farewell to it: if I now take leave to go into evil
Company for one merry meeting, I shall hereafter deal with them no more, why
take this course against a Lust, do but once give way to any Lust, and instead
of satisfying it, you will add fuel to it, this will be a way to engage you
to a further commission of that lust; many have a conceit, may I but now tipple
with a customer and get a good bargain I will give it over; why, give but once
way to a lust, and it will make such a gap, that all the lusts in the Forest
may break in, make but one little crevise in the bank of the Sea, thinking to
abate the rage of the Sea; why it will make it wider and overflow all, so if
you give but a little way to a lust, to a little Gluttony, or Intemperancy, you
will never give over, modo and modo, non habent modum, the more fuel you give,
the stronger the fire of lust burns.

Reas. 2 The heavy distempers that bodily lusts put upon the soul of man, they
do aggravate the diseases that Christians most complain of, it is the common
complaint of Christians, oh the deadness, and dullness, and hardness, and
coldness of my heart and spirit! oh that I could but get a soft heart! why the
lust of the flesh so overcharges our hearts, and makes them so heavy, that we
have no desire to good, Luke 21.34. take heed that your hearts (...), you shall
find that whereas our spirits have been enlarged and comforted in Gods
ordinances, and in his service; it is strange how little affection or comfort
we find in these, if our hearts be overcharged with Intemperancie, or
Wantonness, or Voluptuousness, or Idleness, it is like lead at a Birds
heels; what we feed on, we grow into the nature of it; let a man feed on
earthly things, he grows earthly and unsavory, so if a Christian gives way to
any sensuality; he shall find his spirit grow so sensual and worldly, that it
is made very unfit for spiritual things.

Reas. 3 From the end of these lusts, if we affect any pleasure of the World
for it self, it is a lust of the flesh to cleave to the Creatures; now we shall
find that none of these lusts commend us to God, neither meat nor drink, nor
pastime, nor sleep, if we affect any thing for it self, it never commends us to
God, or makes us draw near to him, though we had all these pleasures in the
largest measure, as Paul says of them, 1 Cor. 8.8. now if these draw us not to
God, but many a poor soul that wants these, has far more fellowship with God
than such as enjoy abundance thereof, why then a Christian should thus reason,
am not I a whit the nearer God for these? why then should my heart affect them?

4 Nay as they do not commend us to God, so 1 Cor. 6.13. Meat for the belly,
and the belly for meat, they are all corruptible, both the cheer we affect, and
our bellies, both corruptible; therefore let us set our minds on eternal
incorruptible things.

Use May dehort both old and young from affecting the lusts of the World, you
see from the Father they are not, but from the World: and the means to help us
against these lusts are,

1 Abstain from fleshly lusts as Peter speaks, Romans 13.14. make no provision
for the flesh, take heed of all occasions; I have made a Covenant with mine
eyes (says Job) not to look upon a Maid, Job 31.1. so for drink, Prove. 23.31.
Prove. 4.15. it is a notable means of mortification, to withhold the blood and
spirits from flowing into that member, thereby in a good measure they stupifie
it. Secondly, Use some course to stupifie that part. Thirdly, Cut it off; would
you mortify lust? Beware of all occasions, if such meats or drinks wilt make
you Gluttons or Drunkards, meddle not with them, and so you shall hinder
influence to these lusts: apply the death of Christ, the threatenings of God,
and so when it begins to stupifie, cut it off; better it is to want all the
sinful pleasures of this life, than having of them to be cast into Hell.

2 Refrain from bringing forth fruit of these lusts, the more fruitful a Tree
grows; the more sap and strength it draws, and strikes deeper into thee earth;
so let sin once grow fruitful, bring forth acts, it will get deeper hold, and
grow so rooted that it will reign in you; if you avoid all occasions; and yield
not to satisfy the least of them, it will soon be gone; if a strange Dog
comes in, if you feed him, he stands waiting for one piece after another, but
if you beat him he is gone, where he may find better entertainment; so if
lusts find, that they can have no entertainment, they cannot get one morsel,
no yiedling to them, but repulsing, they will be gone from you, where they may
find better welcome.

3 When thou find any lust of the flesh arising in thee, turn the strength
of it to a Spiritual end; A man has an affection to meat or drink, what says
Christ, I have meat and drink that ye know not of; though he were very faint
and hungry, yet when he saw a company come, he attended not to his meat and
drink, but there was Spiritual food, and that comforted and refreshed him; so,
art thou troubled with lust after Women? and God calls thee not to Marriage,
why turn the strength of thy affection to another, that is white and ruddy, the
fairest of ten thousand. The more you set your heart to consider, how amiable,
and beautiful, and excellent he is, you shall find he will so satisfy your
heart, that you will find little content in any other thing besides: As the
Sun, if it shine hot on a fire it puts it out, so the love of Christ, if it
once shine in your hearts, and fill your souls with light; and joy unspeakable
and glorious, you shall find all base Kitching lusts were they never so
vehement, the Sun of Righteousness will soon eat them out; so for love of
idleness and rest, let but a Soul consider what comforts he ever found in the
favor of God when his left hand was under him, and when God held him up in his
everlasting Arms, do but consider how sweet was one hour of that inward peace
you found then above all outward comforts, you shall easily see, that though
your body should never find rest more, yet this inward peace will so satisfy
you, that you will be ready to say with Paul, I have enough, I have learned in
all these to be (...) self-sufficient, that I need not more, Phil. 4.11, 12.

4 Walk faithfully and constantly in your general and particular Callings; the
reason why a Christian grows carnal and sensual is, because either in Gods
Ordinances, or his particular Calling he was not spiritually minded, walk in
the Spirit, and you shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh, Gal. 5.16. be
spiritual and heavenly, in Prayer, in hearing the Word, in your Calling, and
you shall find your lusts decay; otherwise, he that rusheth into occasions of
sin needlessly, he tempts the Devil to tempt him, so that whereas the Devil
might otherwise be much weakened, and not so able to overcome, if we invite
occasions, and rush into such places where Satan reigns, we thrust Weapons into
Satan's hand, and a man never ordinarily leads himself into temptation but he
falls; let Peter go into the High Priests Hall, he shamefully denies his Master
before he come out, therefore take heed of running into occasions of sin.

2 Refrain from the fruits of sin, and grow Spiritually minded, look after
Spiritual objects, when we are carried to Sensual objects, when we are carried
to delight in pleasures, and pastimes, why let us remember, Blessed is the man
that has not walked, etc. Psalm. 1.1, 2, 3. but his delight is in the Law of
the Lord, he recreates himself, his Soul in that, such a man shall be as a tree
planted by the rivers of water, ever sucking sap and grace from the Ordinances,
that so he grows up; but contrary, such a one as runs into occasions, and
fullfills his ^^sts, he shall be as a barren Heath, and parched Wilderness,
his leaf and fruit blasted.

We come now to the second sort of lusts.

Doct. Young and old are to be weaned from any lusts of the eye.
By the lust of the Eye is meant Covetousness, or inordinate desire of profit.

1 Because the Eye makes us covet it, as Achan, Josh. 7.21.

2 Because the eye in some measure is glutted with the sight of it.

Obj. Why does he not speak of lusts of the Ear? for 2 Timothy 2.4. there is an
itching Ear; thus the Athenians, Acts 17 21, and so some have a strong
affection to Music, and never well without it; this is a lust of the Ear, and
why is not this reckoned as well as the lust of the eye?

Aquinas makes this Objection, and answers it thus, That these lusts stand not
so much on the bodily eye as the imagination, but the man may as well desire
curiosities by the Ear, as the Eye make us covet what it sees?

Answ. The answer therefore is, the Eye is the seat of sundry Faculties.

1 It may be referred to the Understanding and Imagination, for that is in the
Soul, Psalm. 33.18.

2 The hope of a man is translated to his Eye, 2 Chronicles. 20.12. sometimes pity,
Thine eye shall not spare, Deuteronomy. 13. sometimes disdain expresses it self in
the eye, sometimes pride, Prove. 30. in a lofty look, and the eye is put often for
the desire of the heart, when the eye looks long after it, Matthew. 5.28. there
is a desire that reaches to something, Psalm. 54. Psalm. 92.1. Mine eye also
shall see my desire upon mine enemies; not only hopes, but desires are ever in
the eye.

It is true therefore that the desire of Melody is a lust of the flesh, desire
of news to satisfy curiosity, affection of vain preaching tends to satisfy
the pride of life, for the lust of all outward senses as far as they satisfy
the Senses and Body, they belong to the lusts of the flesh; but a longing
earnest desire after profit is Covetousness, which is a lust of the eye.

Q. 1. Wherein stands the lust of the eye?

A. Either when it is set on wrong objects, or in excessive measure, or to a
wrong end, and these the Scripture aims at; if the eye be set on wrong objects,
this the Scripture calls, an hasty eye, that have it he will, per fas nefasque
Prove. 28.22 23. a man of an evil eye hasts to be rich, never staying on Gods
Providence, such was Achans lust, and Ahabs after Naboths Vineyard, he made
have to obtain it; so a man makes haste when he pursues some gain not lawfully,
but by Symony, or Sacrilege, or Bribery, or Deceit, Isa. 33.16. so that a man
looks at his gain, and not at God, Quaerenda pecunia primum est, Virtus post
nummos, so that a man hastes so much after wealth that he cannot stay Sermons
or Prayers, he must follow his gain, and he will have it by hook or by crook;
this lust is against Piety, because our love to God should make us affect
nothing but what we may lawfully enjoy, and in subordination to his will, and
to employ it to his service.

2 This lust of the Eye is expressed in excessive measure, and this is called a
greedy eye, a man perhaps will not get it but by honesty, but when he has laid
hold on goods he is never satisfied, Eccl. 4.8. so Eccl. 5.9, 10, 11. like a
Dropsy, the more a man drinks the more he desires; so, the more a man has,
the more he desires, Prove. 27.20. there a greedy eye, or covetous heart is
compared to Hell and the Grave, you may as soon satisfy Hell as a covetous
heart, you may sooner fill his Land, or Houses, or Barns, than fill his eye,
that is never satisfied.

This greedy eye offends against that inward contentment that a man owes to his
Soul, when he is so covetous that his heart is never satisfied.

Q. When should a man think himself satisfied, and how far may he desire those
things?

A. In our Callings we must be diligent, and we may desire Wealth of God,
partly for our necessity, and expediency, and partly to leave to our Posterity,
thus far a man may desire Wealth, but we are never to desire more than we have
good use of, and glorify God by, a man must be content as well to want as
abound; but when a man is insatiably craving, when he has much he would have
more, and when he has most he is not satisfied, that is a greedy eye.

3 There is a lust of the Eye that fails in the end, as it is insatiable, so it
is an unprofitable desire, and when a man craves Wealth for Wealths sake, and
never takes care to use it well, and this I call a needy eye, when God calls
him to bestow some on Church, or Commonwealth, or Family, or Friends, what
says he? what know I whether I may have need my self? and so for fear of
future need, he will not provide seasonably for Family, or Church, or
Commonwealth, he will part with nothing willingly, unless he see it be for
his profit, Deuteronomy. 15.19. this needy eye is therefore reproved, and this was in
Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.11. he was afraid his Servants should want; and therefore
would not supply David's necessity.

This needy eye trespasseth against Liberality and Charity.

The ground of this evil eye is an evil judgment; it springs from a blind eye,
whereby it is possessed that wealth is good in it self, and he places his
happiness in his riches, and his safety and life stands in it (contrary to the
assertion of our Savior, Luke 12.15. A man's life consists not in the
abundance of the things which he possesses, and therefore he desires wealth
above all things.

Use 1 It discovers the true nature of Covetousness, you will say, I hope
frugality is not Covetousness, and providing for Children, and Family; true,
but do thou see thy heart carried after wealth, though by unlawful means, by
Symony, or Deceit, or Sabbath-breaking? then thy heart is covetous, because
thou hastest to be rich, thou art so hasty that thou can neither stay for
Sermons, or Prayer, or grace, certainly then Covetousness transports thee, the
first born of Hell.

2 When thou art diligent, if gain come not in, thou art not content, or if
much come in, yet thou art not satisfied.

3 When thou have wealth, thou take no care how to use it, thou grudgest to
give any thing to Church or Commonwealth, or poor Friends; thou say, what if
thy self and thy Children should want? why truly this needy eye is
Covetousness, but when thou take lawful pains, and it hinders thee in no
good duty, if God cross thee thou art content, if God bless thee, thou art
forward to be helpful to do any good, then thou art not covetous.

Use 2 Of exhortation to Young men, and Old-men, Love not the World; nor the
things of the World; you see how such trespass against Piety, and Liberality,
and Charity; it is the root of all evil, 1 Timothy 6.10. not so much the breeding
root, as the feeding root of all evil, and it is called the root of all evil in
three respects.

1 It separates from God the fountain of all good, Col. 3.5. and therefore it
is called Idolatry, because he blesses himself in his riches, Psalm. 49.18.
Prove. 18.11. Mat. 6.24. wealth makes him serve Mammon rather than God, Deuteronomy.
13.18.

2 It choaks the best seed of the Word, sometimes keeps him from coming to the
Word, Luke 14.14. or distracts him there, or choaks the Word afterward.

3 Covetousness exposes a man to every temptation of Satan, lays him open to
Satan, to be a slave unto him, makes him to Apostatize, Swear, Lie, Deceive, if
he propounds wealth to himself as the chiefest good.

2 If you belong to God, you shall seldom find your hearts straightened, and Gods
face turned away, but it is for your Covetousness, Isa. 57.17, 18. he sees you
neglect him, and his Ordinances for wealths sake,

Remedies against Covetousness.

1 A contented desire, Heb. 13.5. if you can say once, I have enough, I am
full, I am content to part with any thing.

Q. But how shall the content?

2 Godliness is both great gain and contentment, and till God gives grace the
Soul is never satisfied, when the Soul is endued with grace it is content in
regard of these outward things.

There are two things in godliness that breed content and satisfaction.

1 It makes God our portion, and then dry bread and cold water, with Gods
favor and mercy, is a sufficient portion to us, and our Children, Psalm. 16.5,
6. this made Paul content, Phil. 4.

2 It does not only fill our hearts with God, but it turns the desire of the
Soul to Gods Ordinances, godliness will make a man look at the Word, as more
precious than gold, 119.27. and as an hidden treasure, that he will part with
all for, Psalm. 36.6, 7. Psalm. 63.13. Now we come to the third sort of Lusts,
the Pride of life.

Doct. Pride of Life, Young and Old are to be weaned from.
Pride of Life is an inordiate affection of our hearts unto Carnal excellency,
i. e. to be great in our selves, and for our selves; a proud man contends with
God about the cause and end of his life, he will depend on himself, and makes
himself the end.

1 As he depends on himself, makes himself the cause of all, so it is self
dependence.

2 As he affects and aims at excellency in himself, so it is called
Self-seekings.

When he depends on himself, he throws off the Crown from Gods head, there are
four parts of it.

1 Self-conceit, Romans 12.3. when a man thinks soberly of himself, he is not so
blind as not to see himself, nor so proud, but he is willing not to think
above that which is meet.

2 It is expressed in Carnal confidence and presumption, he does what he does by
his own strength, and wit, and pains, this is called Arrogance; when a man
undertakes to carry through business by his own strength, Jer. 10.23. Isa.
10.7. to 11. Isa. 37.12, 13. he boasts of his Wisdom and Power to do great
matters.

3 Curiosity flows from Self-dependance, when a man will thrust himself into
that he ought not; so it was vain curiosity in Eve to affect Knowledge, so Col.
2.18. Paul reproves the Colossians for prying into secrets.

4 It is expressed in Self-fulnesse, he is full of himself, and rests himself in
his present condition, Rev. 3.17. and thanks God it is well with him, and he
desires to be no better, all these are several lusts of pride.

This sin is against God, as one, from whom, to whom, and in whom are all
things.

A Second Branch of this pride of life is Self-seeking, He seeks not God in all
his ways, Psalm. 10.3, 4. so he seeks not Gods glory, but his own, Prove. 25.27.
It is not good to eat much Honey, so for men to seek their own glory, is not
glory; as much Honey turns into choler, and bitterness, so he ^^ks up too
much of his own glory, but it turns to his shame and confusion.

This Self-seeking show it self;

First, In pursuing of his own glory, he looks no further than his own glory,
which is showed.

1 In Ambition, when they aim at their glory, and primary, this St. John
reproved in Diotrephes, 3 Epist. 9. so Judge. 9. this was ambition in affecting
a Government God did not appoint them, the modester sort of Trees did think
they should lose their fatness, and sweetness, as if he should say, for them
to be ambitious of an unappointed Government, it would turn to bitterness, and
harshnesse, and loss of fatness, and comfort, and this comes all ambition to,
it makes the soul lean, and lose all comfort from God and man.

2 Hypocrisy is another lust of pride in Self-seeking, when a man in religious
duties seeks his own credit and applause, to be seen of men, Mat. 23.5. this is
pride in Hypocrisy, Matthew. 6.1, 2. to 16. hence comes self rejoicing, when he
rejoices in his own praise and glory, as Amos 6.14. so Herod rejoiced in the
applause of the people, Acts 2.3.

3 There is another lust of Self-seeking, which is, contemning and despising
others in respect of a man's own excellency, Luke 18.11. and this proceeds from
making himself his own end.

4 There is another lust of pride which is expressed in boasting of himself,
either in words, or carriage, Prove. 27.2. that is boasting, when a man
magnifies himself, boasting in words, in great and false promises, so in
gesture in the eyes. Psalm. 141. Prove 30.13. so in stretched-out necks, Isa.
3.23. when a man struts, and prides himself in his carriage.

So there is pride in Work^, when men build to make themselves a name, Genesis
11.14. Dan. 4.27. so in strange fashions and apparel, Isa. 3.18. to 24.
because they took pride in their bravery and gay clothes, therefore he would
send baldness instead of beauty, etc. so pride is showed in Feasting, to show
their own Magnificence and Riches, and they aim only at that, as Nabal, 1 Samuel
25. when he feasted as a King.

There is another pride expressed, when a man is crossed in his pride, and this
shows it self.

1 In discontent, when a man has made himself his end, and if he be crossed in
it, he is discontented, as Achitophel when his counsel was crossed, 2 Samuel 15.23.
he was so discontented at it that he went and hanged himself: and so some,
though they do not grow so desperate, yet they so vex and fret, as that they
can neither eat, nor sleep seasonably, whereas if we made God our end, we
should be willing to want what God denies.

2 He falls into contention, Prove. 10.13. all contention comes from pride.

3 Indignation flows from being crossed, when others take away their applause,
they disdain and loathe it, Mat. 21.15. as the Pharisees did, when they saw
Christ took away their praise.

Use To exhort us all, to wean our selves from this lust of pride.

Motives.

1 The proud man is an abomination to the Lord, Prove. 16.5. as if God had
resolved, what wicked man soever escapes, he should not, and shall we live in
such an estate, that God cannot look at us but with loathing and indignation?
and no wonder, because they contend with God, they depend on their own
strength, and seek themselves, and their own glory: and if they be crossed they
are discontent and envious, let such a man use all the means he can he shall
never prosper, God resists the proud, (...), he will cross him at every turn,
march against him and cross him.

2 Pride of all other sins cuts a sunder the sinews of Grace, whereas the whole
duty of Christianity consists in Repentance, Faith, Obedience: Repentance
consists in loathing, abhorring, and being ashamed of our selves, Job 42. Dan.
9.7. now a proud man is far off from this: so for faith, Hab. 2.4. as if he
should say, a faithful man goes out of himself, and depends on God: and for
obedience, we see how it is expressed, Micha 6.8. He has showed thee, O man,
what the Lord thy God requires of thee, etc. now a man of an high spirit cannot
bend to humility, and self-denial, Luke 9.23.

Means to wean us from Pride.

1 Meditate on what you are, do but know your selves what you are, what you
must tend to, Dust you are, and to dust you must return, you have no dependence
but on God: shall we then be full of our selves? 1 Cor. 7. God made all for
himself, therefore we are not to aim at our selves, especially consider there
is nothing but you have despised and perverted, therefore consider your own
insufficiency.

2 Exercise your selves in those graces that are most contrary to Pride, if you
see your hearts grow ambitious, and vainglorious, and discontent, why weed out
this lust, renew your repentance in dust any ashes, loathe your selves, judge
your own unworthiness, learn to live by faith, know you are nothing of your
selves, but depend wholly on Christ, learn to be obedient, to be at Gods
Command, we are servants, and therefore not for our selves: it is not for us to
look at our own ends, but to do all for Gods glory, and use all we have for
Gods service.

1 JOHN 2.17. And the world passes away, and the lusts thereof, but he that
does the Will of God abides for ever.


TO dissuade them from the love of the World, and the Lusts of it, the Apostle
uses three Arguments; 1 Verse. 15. 2 Verse. 16. 3 From the contrary disposition
of them that love the World, and them that keep the Word: as if he should say,
That which is eternal ought not to addict it self to transitory things, but you
that have your sins forgiven, etc. are so, Ergo. So then this third Argument is
taken from the frailty and fickleness of all these outward things, and the
constancy and perpetuity of heavenly things, therefore be weaned from the one,
and affect the other. By the World is meant all the Creatures, all the fashions
and courses of the World: the condition thereof, Honor, Credit, Profit,
Pleasure, all these pass away.

Doct. The World, and all the Lusts thereof are of a transitory and fading
condition.
So says the text, very inconstant, now here, presently gone: the things of
the World are transitory, and transitory they are in three respects.

1 The world passes away, 1 Cor 7.31. (...), etc. the shape and fashion of the
world passes away, the word is taken from the presentation of the world, as
upon a Stage, a man seldom acts the same part a week together; you shall never
see the world, or the Creatures in the same state long, now in one state, then
in another; come now and you shall see a man married, come again, and you shall
find him a Widower; sometimes joyful, sometimes doleful, crying, Have pity on
me, O my friends; sometimes again in abundance of sorrow overnight, and joyful
in the morning.

2 In respect of the fleeting and fading condition of the estate we do enjoy
whilst we do enjoy it, fleeting and passing away by little and little, even
while you rejoice in it, Isa. 40.6, 7. where he compares them to flowers,
which whilst they flourish, decay; what are all the comforts of the world, but
a Nose-gay? which for the present thou smellest sweetness and comfort in, yet
even as a Posie, whilst thou smellest at it, fades, and dies; so are all the
comforts of this World, even fading, and decaying whilst thou enjoyest them.

Again, All the sorrows and vexations of the world pass away, sorrow abides
not ever, nor cares, yea in the midst thereof we may find some joy; Psalm.
94.18, 19. yet many times we add sorrow to sorrow, we think we shall go on
in the bitternesses of our souls all the day, but he was deceived, Isa. 38.15.

3 In regard of the passing away, and fading of all worldly things, Eccles.
1.4. one generation passes after another, and so do all other comforts, yea the
World it self shall be consumed, 2 Pet. 3.10. the individuals consumed, the
Elements changed, Psalm. 102.6, 7.

Q. 2. How do the lusts of the World pass away?

A. The lusts of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and pride of life, which are
the sum of all the ways of the sons of men, all his time is spent either in
pleasure, or profit, or credit, and now all these pass away.

1 Because they are often disappointed of those objects which they aim at, a man
pursues pleasure, but he finds sorrow; another Profit, but it fades away;
another in ambition seeks Honor, and Glory, but Psalm. 112.8, 9. The desire of
the wicked shall perish, it shall be as the house of the Spider.

2 These pass away, because when a man does enjoy them, they fade and wither
away in it; a man strongly desires a thing, but as soon as he has it he is
weary of it, 2 Samuel 3. as David that desired the water of Bethlehem, or as
Children soon weary when they have that thing they desire, so Gal. 4.15, 16.
see how their affections to him were dead, Psalm. 26.2. and 139.23, 24. when
David looked at the ways of his own lusts, he desired God to winnow him, and
see if there were any way of wickedness in him, implying, though sometimes he
had lusts in his heart, yet now he found none, 2 Samuel 13.15. Ammon had a strong
lust to his Sister Tamar, but when he had fulfilled it, he hated her more than
he loved her, so when we have fulfilled a lust, we are not satisfied with it,
but say to it, arise be gone, as a Be, when it has sucked something from one
Flower, goes to another, and then to a third, so we are soon weary of lusts,
there is an emptiness in the Creature, no way able to satisfy the desires of
man's heart, but they are soon weary, and therefore desire variety.

3 From the perpetual destruction of these lusts and our selves with them;
when we dye, all our lusts dye with us, all our pride and wantonness, yea in
Hell there are none remaining, but such as come from disappointment of hope, as
discontent and murmuring, and obstinacy, and Blasphemy, and despair, but all
other lusts, gluttony incontinency, ambition, dye with us, therefore well says
the Apostle, the World passes away, and the lusts thereof, they are all but
for a season.

Use 1. Is it so, that they all pass away, all the Creatures, and all the
lusts of the World are transitory? then it may be a strong ground of
exhortation to old men and young, love not the World, nor the things of the
World, this is the counsel of an aged Apostle, when he was near a hundred
years old, he spoke it out of experience of heavenly things, and vanity of the
World; do but consider the things themselves in their own estate; love not the
World, nor the things of the World, for they all pass away; on this ground
Solomon exhorts us not to set our hearts on the World, Prove. 23.4, 5* on
riches, which is the way to honor, cease from thine own wisdom, you think it
wisdom to provide a large Estate, but it is folly: Will thou set thine eye on
that which is not? riches certainly make themselves wings, and fly away like an
Eagle; suppose one of you should invite your friend to dinner, and lead him to
your Garden or Orchard, where he finds a company of w^ld foul, and you tell
him, be of good cheer, yonder is good store of wild foul we shall have, but
when you go to take them, they fly away, how will his expectation b^
frustrate? so it may be thou have thy fields well stockt, thy houses well filled
and thou say now, soul, eat, drink, thou restest refreshed in them, and
set thy heart on them, but God says, O fool this night thy soul shall be
taken away, and then whose shall all these things be? or else sheep rot, and
Cattle dye; casualties by Sea, heavy losses take away a man's Estate suddenly,
never did wild foul more deceive them that set their eyes upon them, than
riches do the owners thereof

Use 2. May teach all that desire perpetuity and constancy in any condition,
trust not in riches, honor, no nor in life it self, for they are all
transitory, but entreat God to set your hearts on everlasting things, on
everlasting life, and enduring riches and pleasures, for from him they flow,
Psalm. 16. ult. these are an abiding inheritance, and will stick close to us;
this is the vanity of earthly things, the fullness of them breeds
loathsomeness, and fulsomnesse, and a man is duld with them, they seem full of
comfort, till we get them, and when we have them, we are weary of them: but
grace on the contrary, seems hateful till it be got, but when it is once got;
the more a man has the more he desires; godly sorrow breeds repentance never
to be repented of, 2 Cor. 7.10. neither by God, nor by them, never did
christian repent of his repentance, or Faith, or godliness; Riches profit not
in the day of wrath, Prove. 11.4. therefore love not those things which cannot
comfort us when we have most need, Joh. 6.26, 27. Labor not for the meat that
perishes; so labor not for the riches, or honor, or pleasure that perish,
but labor for that profit, and pleasure, and honor which endures for ever.

We come now to the opposition, that which is opposed to the transitoriness of
these things, the World, and the lusts thereof, viz. He that does the will of
God abides for ever.

Doct. Such as do the will of God, are not as the World and lusts of it, of a
fading transitory condition, but they stand in a permanent abiding Estate.
Q. 1 What is it to abide for ever?

A. 1 It implies, he is not of an unsteady fleeting temper, but of a constant
and even frame of spirit and life, not now in and now out, and never of a
constant frame, but of an even temper, as mountains are not easily shaken, or
driven to and fro, but remain in their strength and place; why so, such as
trust in the Lord shall be as Mount Zion, that shall not be moved, Psalm. 125.1.
and he gives the reason, verse. 2. without any changing or removing.

2 He is said to remain for ever, because he does abide in that Estate for
ever; there is a difference between constancy and perseverance; a man may be
said to go to London, though he keeps not even on, but goes out and in; so
such a man as aims at heaven, and goes on as evenly as he can, and if he goes
out, he gets in again, such a one perseveres in his way to heaven.

Q. 2 What is it to do the will of God?

A He that does the will of God, stands in opposition to the World, and the
lusts of it, and by this will is not m^ant only the will of Gods pleasure, but
the will of Gods Commandment, for all the Creatures do the will of Gods good
pleasure, for they all do things, so far as God wills; so that if a man do
his own will, he sh ll not go besides Gods will; but here he means the will of
Gods Commandment; Not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into
Heaven, but be that does the will of my Father, Mat. 7.21. that is, the
revealed Will of God, Joh. 8.51.

For the ground of the point, why they abide for ever?

1 Because they are born of the unchangeable Will of God, of his own Will begat
he us, Jam, 4.18. and he means that Will, which is not dependant on the
Creature, but free, Romans 9.15. There is no cause moving, but the only Will of
God, he will have mercy, because he will have mercy; therefore when God bestows
any mercy on the Creature because he will do it, it puts the Creature on an
unexchangeable condition.

2 From the vigor and strength of doing the Will of God, no man does the Will
of God, but the more he shall be enabled and caused to do it, the doing of
Gods Will, is the ground and strength of a Christian life, Joh. 4.34. he means
not only he did it cheerfully, but it was that which refreshed his soul, and
strengthened his body, so that he felt neither hunger nor thirst, but it was
strength and freedom of spirit to do his Fathers Will, so that though he was
thirsty, yet his words to the woman did so refresh him, that it was his
strength and refreshment; now if it be so, that the more a man does the Will of
God, the more strength he has to do it, nay it conveyes not only strength to
the soul, but also to the body, as a Tree, the more fruit it brings forth
upwards, the deeper rooting it takes downwards, so a Christian, the more fruit
he brings forth to God, the deeper he strikes his root in Christ, John 14.21,
22. if it be thus, I say, well may he abide for ever.

3 From the near union which such have with Christ, that do the Will of his
Father, Christ came for that end, to do his Fathers Will, Joh. 6.38 therefore
he that does the Will of his Father, is near to Christ, he is Father, and
Mother, and Brother, and Sister, Mark. 3. ult, because they are born of the
same Father, of the same Spirit, and they do the same work, if therefore we
do his Will, not as Servants, but as Children, then we are as heirs, and
remain in the house for ever, Joh. 8.35, 36.

4 From Gods readiness ever to hear the prayers of such as do his Will, as
the blind man said, Joh. 8.34. If any man do the Will of God, him he hears,
wherein he shows that suitable to our hearing of God, God hears us; if we hear
God in his Commandments, he will hear us in our petitions, if we take up Gods
Word, he will take up our prayers that they be not lost; if we be sinners God
hears not us, why? because we hear not him, God is as ready to do our wills,
as we are to do his, Mat. 7 2. with what measure we meet to him he will meet
to us; if we be careful to attend to his Word, and industrious to do his Will,
God will certainly do our wills, as we have done his, Psalm. 139. ult. he
desires to be led in everlasting ways, that is the Will of God, for that is
only everlasting, and a Christian praying to do Gods Will as the Angels, God
will fulfill his will, and his Will is to abide for ever, and so it is Gods Will
that he should abide for ever.

Obj. Does not David complain, I am tossed to and fro as a Grasshopper? Psalm.
109.22.

Ans. He speaks not there of his inward estate, which was constant and even,
but his outward estate, which was very unconstant, sometimes pulled from the
Ordinances, he hopt from one place to another, from Mountains to Woods, and
Caves, from place to place like a Grasshopper, but his inward frame was constant
and even.

Obj. But was not David's inward frame s metimes very uneven? he that had
sometimes showed much kindness to Mephibosheth, after took away his Lands; he
that sometimes was smitten for cutting off Saul's skirt, after sticks not to
commit Adultery, and slay Uriah, and after that to number the people.

Ans. He may err through infirmity, as a man in a Journey, he propounds no
other end but to go on, but yet he goes out of the way sometimes through
ignorance, and carelessness, but then when he knows it, he makes the more have
to get in again; so a Christian, he aims at a good course, even ways, but
sometimes through heedlesness, or ignorance, he falls into by ways, but when
he knows it, he makes have to recover himself, and the cause why he goes
aside, is because he does not the Will of God, but his own will.

Use 1 Justify the Doctrine of the perseverance of the Saints, and confutes
the contrary opinion of their Apostasy, for every Christian does the Will of
God, now he that does the Will of God abides for ever, such make Gods Will
their meat and drink, and so they lead an everlasting life, they feed on
everlasting food, Joh. 6.26. they have near union with Christ, they are such as
fulfill Gods Will, and therefore he will fulfill their desire.

Use 2. A ground of direction to all such as would find comfort in Life and
Death, if you follow the lusts of the World, they will not last always,
Conscience accuses, God will judge you, Eccles. 11.9. Rejoice O young man in
thy youth, etc. so Riches endure not always, nor Honor, therefore though a man
now pride himself in his youth, or riches, or lusts, why these will not hold,
time will come when you shall be weary of all these, but would you abide for
ever? why this is the way, do Gods will, and then thou chusest that part which
shall never be taken from thee, Luke 10. two last verses Psalm. 125.1, 2. let a
man be doing Gods Will, he shall never dye, there is no man but would have his
Estate confirmed to perpetuity, from age to age; why all the lusts of the World
continue but for a while, but would you turn all to perpetuity? be doing Gods
Will, and then you shall abide for ever; so, would you heal all the fleeting
unstablenesse of our spirits? sometimes you are much enlarged, sometimes as
much straightened; sometimes you have vigor of Spirit, and sometimes you are
dull, and quite out of frame, what is the reason? all this is because thou art
out of the way, and therefore the Star has left thee as it did the Wise men,
when they went out of the way to Bethlehem to go to Jerusalem; even so when
thou art in the way to Bethlehem to seek Christ, and give up thy self to such
courses as leads to him, why all this while the comfortable power of the Spirit
shall go with thee, but when thou consultest with flesh and blood, to satisfy
any lust of the World, the Star will leave thee, till thou come into the way
again; so if you walk in the even ways of God, you shall find your selves
always enlarged, though sometimes more, sometimes less, yet always so much as
is sufficient for your present condition.

Use 3 Of consolation to every obedient Christian that breaks off from his own
will, and sets himself with all his power to do Gods Will, and is grieved when
he does any thing against it; why this is your comfort, that is an everlasting
way which leads to eternity, He that does the Will of God, shall never see
Death; that is, with fear or danger; nay he shall stand as a Mountain that
shall not be shaken, which is a great blessing for a poor Christian.

Obj. May not mountains be shaken and removed, are they not shaken by
Earthquakes? so may not Christians be shaken and removed; are they not tossed
up and down in the World, and never in a settled condition?

Ans. Mountains may be shaken and removed, Isa. 54.10.11. and Christians may be
tossed in their outward Estate, but yet though Mountains remove, and hills be
shaken, yet Gods loving kindness shall never depart from them.

Now from the scope the Apostle aims at, observe thus much.

Doct. The disproportion that is betwixt the World, and the lusts thereof, and
the Children of God that do his Will, ought to weane them all from the love of
the World, and the lusts thereof.
John 6.27. Labor not for the meat that perishes, as who should say, this
meat is corruptible, and you corruptible, but that meat I give you is eternal,
and will nourish eternal life in you.

Quest. Wherein stands the disproportion between the World, and the lusts
thereof, and those that do Gods Will?

1 The World and the lusts thereof are transitory and fading, neither continue
at a stay, nor last long, but all perish, But he that does Gods Will, the more
he does it, the more he is strengthened, and confirmed, and supported to
everlasting life.

2 The World it self and all the things thereof, are ordinarily bodily, and
sensual, and not heavenly; take all the frame of the Creatures, they are
bodily things, and all the comforts of them, tends to sensual life, What will
it profit a man to win the whole World, and loose his own soul? implying, a man
may have all the World, and yet loose his own soul; it never feeds a spiritual
heavenly life, but there is a spiritual eternal bread, that feeds to
everlasting life, it is not for a body to nourish a spirit, nor earthly things
heavenly, not can a transitory thing feed everlasting life.

Q. 1. Why should this disproportion wean us from the love of the World, and
the lusts thereof? what is the ground?

1 From the vanity that is found in all these things, they are bodily and
transitory, it is impossible they should nourish heavenly and permanent life;
therefore godly men should withdraw their affections from them inordinately,
Isa. 55.2. why do you lay out your money for that which satisfies not? and
for that which is not bread? why do you spend cost and pains about that which
is not bread? which will never satisfy your souls, but your souls in the midst
of them may be as Pharaohs lean Kine, hungry, and empty of grace, void of good
things.

Reas. 2. From the corruption these things will put upon our spirits, if we set
our love and lust on them; it will be as a running Issue which will empty us of
all goodness, either they will draw us from coming to the Ordinances; I have
married a wife and cannot come; or secondly, they will fill our hearts with
cares when we come, Ezekiel. 33. ult. or else after we are gone, they will choke
the Word of God, so that they draw away our hearts from spiritual food.

2 There is a power in them, to assimilate us to themselves, what we feed on we
are like unto, feed on wild meats, you will be wild men, feed on gross meats,
your spirits will be more gross and dull, feed on light meats, your spirits
will be more quick and agill; so if a man feed on the World, glut himself with
the World, he can relish nothing but the World, his spirit is made carnal, and
stupid, and worldly, and can arise no higher, therefore when Solomon gave
himself to seek pleasure, Eccl. 2.3. to try what was in them, though he did
not neglect Wisdom, as Eccles. 1.8. yet he found by experience, deal as wisely
as he could, in the end they did so stupifie him, that he was led away by them
to Idolatry, 1 King. 11.4. then is a man become stupid, when he is serious
about trifles, and trifling about serious things; by pursuit of these, his
judgment was quick in earthly matters, but in matters of Religion he began to
grow very weak and ignorant; how much more then they that wholly give
themselves to the lusts and pleasures of the World.

Reas. 3. Ever since the fall of our First Parents, there lies a Curse of God
upon all the Creatures, Genesis 3.17, 18. now in cursing the ground he Cursed all
the Creatures with it, so that now there is a disproportion and unsuitablenesse
betwixt the Creatures and man, for whom they were made, so that the whole
Creature is subject to vanity, Romans 8.19, 20. Eccles. 1.2. Vanity of vanities
all is vanity. Now if they be all accursed, you shall find that there is a
venomous corruption in them all, which withholds us from that chief good for
which we were made; so that let any man put upon you any Profit, or Honor, or
Credit, continually you would think your self engaged to him, and set your
selves to be serviceable to him, and should not we deal as kindly with God?
should not we be more obedient to God, for his following us with his blessings?
one would think we should; but what is the reason of it? the more we have of
Profits, and Honors, and Credit, the more full we are of our selves, and the
more loose from God, so that the more he blesses us, the more we neglect him;
the more he comforts us, the more we grieve him; how comes this, but from a
secret curse that lies upon all the Creatures? otherwise it could not be, that
we should grow so careless and stupid; as the Moon when it wants light, it
draws nearer to the Sun, but when it is at the full, and has most Light, it is
furthest from the Sun; so when God fills us, we sit furthest from God, our
spirits become empty of grace, and regardlesse of God, therefore this should
move us from affecting the World, and the lusts of the World.

Use 1. A ground of strong exhortation to both old men and young, Love not the
World, nor the lusts of it; for there is no proportion betwixt the World and a
Child of God, what proportion betwixt transitory and everlasting things? fading
and permanent? these are bodily and carnal, your hearts are spiritual and
heavenly, therefore it is for you to look out for other things that will ab de;
nay, why do you spend your strength for that which will not profit? all will
not help your souls; why should a man swear, and toil for that, which when he
has he may loose his own soul? he may get credit in the World, and yet may be
base in Gods eyes, it is that which will not satisfy the soul, the immortal
soul will not be contented with transitory fading things, these are but as
dreams, they dream of abundance, but their souls are all this while empty and
starving, and if these be so transitory, why do we feed on meats that are so
unsuitable to our souls? if we have once made the World our Element, if we be
lifted up out of the World to heavenly and Spiritual things, we are like a
Fish out of the water, we faint and gasp, and are weary, and must return to our
mud again, we have no comfort at all, is not this a woeful disproportion? Nay
further, seeing all the things of this World are vanity, and folly, even
lawful pleasures, I said of mirth it is madness and folly, Eccl. 2.2. why
therefore let us be exhorted to wean our affection from them, walk among them
as snares, take heed you be not trapt by them; all the Blessings of this life
are but Curses, if you use them for themselves, and then they weaken your
spirits, and corrupt your hearts, therefore love not the World, nor the things
of the World, for these all fade away; there is a disproportion betwixt the
cursed things of this World, and spiritual Blessings; indeed they are not
Curses, if you receive them as coming from God, and use them to him, otherwise,
if you set your hearts on them, and use them for themselves, they will prove a
curse to you.

Use 2. Let us be exhorted to lift up our hearts to more heavenly and
spiritual things, let us lift up our souls to those pleasures and profits that
endure for ever, Joh. 6.26. labor for those pleasures that may truly satisfy
your souls, desire God to lift up your hearts from worldly to spititual things,
and then we shall find the Word of God sweeter than Honey and the Honeycomb;
therefore feed not on Husks and Chaff, but feed on Spiritual things, which may
nourish you to eternal life, and for earthly things, use them as helps to
Spiritual things, to make you more vacant for religious exercises, more
fruitful in good works, so you shall find them helpful to you, and you shall
draw near to God by them, when we look not so much at honor, or pleasure, or
profit, as Gods hand giving them,

1 JOHN. 2.18, 19, 20. Little Children, it is the last time, and as ye have
heard that Antichrist shall come, even now are there many Antichrists, whereby
we know that it is the last time, etc.


SAint John writing to all sorts of Christians, Old, Young, and Children, he
speaks particularly to them all; to Young Men, and Old, he wrote, Verse. 14, 15.
Love not the world, but for Babes, he writes not to them about the love of the
World, for they are not easily subject to it; but no age so flexible as young
Children, so that if they be once set in a right way, and live under faithful
Instructers, there is no great danger of them, therefore he writes to them
here, to make them beware of false Teachers, and cleave to sound Doctrine.

First, now he describes and sets out these false Teachers.

1 By their coming in the last time, verse. 18. 2 By their Apostasy, they went
out from us. 3 By showing the cause of it, they were never of us, verse. 19.
Secondly, he gives them signs, whereby they may know them, and discern them,
and that is from their Unction they have received, verse. 20, 21.

Thirdly, He gives a mark of Antichrist, he is a Liar, who denies Jesus is the
Christ is a liar, etc. verse. 22.

Fourthly, He lays down some means to help them.

1 By looking to their Doctrine, Keep close to sound Doctrine. 2 Cleave to your
holy Unction, have a special care to live righteously.
Verse. 18. In this verse he plays the Trumpeter, and warns the Church, Little
Children, now is the last time, and look to it; there are many Antichrists come.

These words afford these Points.

1 These times were the last times.

2 That the Church was then warned beforehand of Antichrist.

3 That many Antichrists were already come in that time.

4 That the Prophecy of the Antichrist to come, was partly fulfilled in the
Antichrists that were then come.

5. Such is the condition of the last ages of the church, that the Church
cannot be long without some Antichrist, for so be makes the last Times
reciprocal with Antichrists; there are many Antichrist, whereby we know that it
is the last Time. For the first,

Doct. 1. The days under the New Testament are the last Times.
The times one thousand six hundred years since have been called, (...), the
last seasons, and this is no singular Phrase of St. John's, but common with
other places of Scripture, 1 Pet. 4, 7. Acts 2.17. 1 Cor. 10, 11. as if he
looked at himself as living in the very last Age of the World, Heb. 9.26. Jam.
5.8, 9. Phil. 4.5.

It may be wondered that the Spirit and inditer of the Scripture, should give
out that these were the very last days, when there have been so many changes
since, the ten persecutions, the flourishing of the church under Constantine,
and after it, a great mist of Ignorance, and since the light of the Gospel; how
then did he call them the last times, since there have been so many changes
since?

There is a double reason of this, in regard of the Apostles sense and scope
that they aimed at, for they did not mean that the last judgment should
presently come, for whereas some Christians began to grow slack in their
callings, because they thought it would be in vain, the last judgment being so
near, he seriously diswades them from such sudden expectation of it, 2 These.
2.1, 2, 3. so that though he had said that day is at hand, yet he would not
have them conceive, that it should presently come upon them, for first, there
must be an Apostasy; therefore we see they were not deceived, or spoke
uncertainly.

1 Therefore they are called the last times, because they are the last period
of time, before the last Judgment.

The first period was from Adam to Moses, 2450 years, Romans 5.4. the second
period of time was from Moset to Christ, Luke 16.16. Mat. 11.13. for in the
first age the Church was not national, nor any writings of the word, only they
delivered the law and promises from Family to Family; many years after Moses
time, he collected a National Church of the Jews, and excluded the nations by
a partition wall of cetemonies which the Gentiles would not conform to, then
did he give them the Law written, and this continued till Christ's time.

The third Period of time, or third age, is from Christ's time to the end of the
World, Heb. 1.1. in these last days, etc. It is the last time of the
Revelation of Gods Will, and we must expect no further Revelation to the end;
for though the Church has seen many differences, yet there is but one uniform
Doctrine, that God has set up for all that will be saved, Heb. 9.16, 17. now
whilst Christ lived, that is before he was crucified, he might change the form
of the Testament, but now there is no more opportunity of changing, he has
delivered his last will, which shall not be reversed, if now there comes any
and declares a new Doctrine, let him be accursed, he is an Antichrist.

2 The Apostle had some respect to their particular Estate, stirring them up to
many duties on this ground, because the end drew near, 1 Pet. 4. and this would
not be an argument of patience, unless be had some respect of their
particular, Jam. 5.8, 9. Phil. 4, 5.

Q. In what sense shall we understand that the coming of Christ was near in the
Apostles times?

1 In opposition to former ages which were far off.

2 In Gods account a thousand years are but as one day, 2 Pet, 3.8, 9. yet God
will come so, that when the day of accomplishment is come, he will not stay a
day longer, for that were as much to him as a thousand years.

3 Such is the Faith of many christians, that what they see in a promise, it is
as much as if it were presently fulfilled, Joh. 8.36.

Use 1. If this time of the Gospel, he the last time, then hence we may
certainly conclude, that not so much time by much, shall pass from Christ to
the end of the World, as was from Adam to Christ, for then how can they be
called the last times? and if it were the last time then, what is it now?

Use 2. If these be the last days, we must not wonder if we meet with perilous
times, for such should they be, 1 Timothy 3.1. now are the dreggs of the last
times; wonder not therefore if you see haters, and scorners, in these last
times; when men once grow aged, they grow cold and distempered, and if they
have any spirit, it is a spirit of morosity; such is the spirit of these times,
froward against good, teasty and malignant, wonder not at it, these are the
last times.

Use 3. If these be the last times, then how vain is it to deliver or expect
any new kind of revelation; if any teach any other Doctrine than Christ has
already revealed, he is Antichrist.

Use 4. Of exhortation, first, to patience, Jam. 5.7, 8. on this ground, for
the coming of the Lord draws nigh. He exhorts to a double patience, to be
patient in bearing evil, and patient in forbearing revenge; be patient a
while, the Judge stands at the door that will right all.

Obj. This is a cold encouragement to patience, to say, The day of the Lord is
at band, how long has that been promised: and yet it is far enough off?

A. When his Will is accomplished he will not stay a day, and get you but
faith, and you shall look at it as present, so that you dare do no injury, no
more than if Christ were presently to come.

3 There is another patience required on this ground, and that is, patience to
expect the promises God has made, we have need of patience for this end, Heb.
10.37. therefore, Heb. 11.1. he says, Faith is the evidence of things not
seen, faith sees things afar off, and so did all the Patriarchs.

2 It exhorts us to watchfulness, 2 Pet. 4.7. and there is a double
watchfulness required.

1 Watchfulness against false Teachers, that you may stand fast against all
Errors, be sober minded, look narrowly to your ways, the last times are
perilous and dangerous.

2 Watch unto Prayer, that is, because the times are the last times, and the
days are perilous, watch unto Prayer; that is, watch every occasion, that you
may stand fast in evil times, and walk safely in dangerous days, you will
have need of Prayer, in regard of many perils, and evils in these days.

Doct. That the Church of God was forewarned of Antichrists aforehand.
Q. When, or by whom were they forewarned?

A. Our Savior forewarns them of Antichrists, and false Teachers, Matthew.
24.24, 25. unto which words Saint John seems to have reference; so also the
Apostles were careful in fore-warning them, 2 These. 2. from the third Verse to
the tenth, 1 Timothy 2.3, 4. 2 Pet. 2.2, 3. which was expressly spoken of Rome,
Rev. 18.13. so we see by the mouth of two or three witnesses this truth was
confirmed.

Reas. 1. To prevent the mis-conceit that the people had, that the Day of the
Lord was near at hand, and thereupon began to think it was no time to settle to
their Callings, but to give themselves to vigilance and prayer, 2 These. 2.1, 2,
3. to prevent this conceit, he tells them expressly, Antichrist must first come.

2 That they might be the better fore-armed against such false Teachers, for
there should be damnable Herisies, 2 Pet. 2.2. and not as points of curiosity
only, but contra dogmata fidei, therefore that they might prepare themselves
against such heresies, Christ and his Apostles were careful to fore-warn them,
Mat. 24.24, 25. 2 Pet. 3.17, 18. unless you be well established in the truth,
they will carry you away into error.

3 That they might quicken the Pastors of the Church to lay sound foundations,
that they might establish them in sound Doctrine, Acts 20.28, 29, 30.

Use 1. Shows the great faithfulness of the great Shepherd of our Souls,
Christ Jesus in foretelling himself of Wolves coming, and stirring up his
Apostles to do the like.

Use 2. It may teach both christian Ministers and people to practice such
duties, for which end he writes these things, one main end is, to establish
them in sound Doctrine, that so whatsoever false Teachers say, yet christians
may not be seduced, for if they gave warning so long before, much more, now we
know this to be come to pass; therefore let not Women, or little Children
excuse themselves, for God looks that you should be so grounded in the truth,
that no Seducers may carry you away.

Doct. 3 In the days when St. John wrote this Epistle, many Antichrists were
then come into the World.
1 John 4.1, 2, 3. This is the first place that mentions Antichrist expressly.

(...) which signifies, first opposition, as (...); secondly substitution, as
(...), pro consul and (...); thirdly, it signifies equality, (...).

Now Antichristos includes all, as one that is opposite to Christ, so he is
called (...); secondly, he is (...), that is, substitute or vicar of Christ,
hence the beast that came out of the Sea, had the horn of a Lamb, as if he had
the power of Christ; thirdly, he is Antichrist, that is, one that carries
himself as equal to Christ; therefore he dispenses with those laws, which no
mortal may dispense withal, as incestuous marriage, and he binds the
consciences of men, Jam. 4.20. now it is proper to the law of Christ to sit in
the conscience, therefore he may well be called Antichrist; but yet of these,
he is properly called Antichrist in the former sense, that is, one that
opposes himself against God, and Christ, and all Emperors and Kings.
Bellarmine excuses the Pope from coming to the Nicene Council saying, indignum
est caput membra sequi. Secondly, lest he should sit beneath the Emperor, which
he thought unmeet, therefore he may well be said to exalt himself, (...) 2
These. 2.4. above every Caesar, and yet here is the misery, that he carries
himself as a Vicar of Christ, yet can oppose himself against Christ.

Q. But how were many Antichrists then come?

A. In ecclesiastical Histories, we shall find that St. John lived about an
hundred years after Christ, and was born about the same time with Christ, now
about the year 26 after Christ, Histories report there was Simon Magus, who
seemed to be the great power of God, and to be he that gave the Law in Mount
Sinai.

2 He gave out that it was he that was crucified under Tiberius Caesar, here was
an Antichristian spirit, and I was, says he, that Holy Ghost, that descended
on the Apostles, so that he denied both the Father and the Son: after him
sprang up Menander, that affirmed that it was he that died for the World, and
that all that believed on him should be saved. In those times Ebion taught that
Christ was but a mere man, and held circumcision necessary, and in his time
lived Cerinthus, who retained all the Judicall Law, and denied Christ to be
God, Act. 15.1. and he is held to be one of those that held the World to be
made by Angels, and he was the root of the error of the Chiliasts, all these
lived in John's time.

Use 1 It shows us the marvelous enmity of that wicked one, that as soon as
ever Christ had sowed good seed, that evil one sowed tares, this was the
subtilty of that old Serpent to sow errors, before the truth could take firm
rooting.

Use 2. Hence we see the impudency of Heresy, especially, when opposition is
set on fire of Hell, that such monstrous opinions should be broached in St.
John's time that envied against them, and wrote against them; and therefore we
must not wonder if Heresies sine pudore, broach themselves in the Church, for
even in St. John's time a s^n of thunder that shook them down mightily, yet even
against him were these Darts shot; it must therefore stir up Christians to
ground themselves in the whole Counsel of God; do you think if such Heretics
did not blush before St. John, they will blush before us?

Hence we see the truth of God, is of more power than the spirit of Error, for
though there were so many heads of Error, yet they all fell down before the
Doctrine of St. John, so that this writing remained, when all they were lost,
magna est veritas and prevalebit, therefore such is the power of truth, that it
dispells all Errors.

3 It confutes boasting of Antiquity; every ancient thing is not true, for then
these false Heresies had been true, but yet there is Antiquity, which springs
from the first institution, and that is prevalent; there is a secondary
antiquity, that is, Tares that are presently sown after the good Seed, yet
though they were sown the very same day, yet secondary antiquity will not
justify their Doctrine, but that which comes from the institution by God.

Doct. In the coming of these many Antichrists, that which was told aforehand
of the coming of Antichrist, is in some measure fulfilled.
For otherwise St. John's discourse would be somewhat impertinent, to what end
does he say, Ye have heard that Antichrist shall come, and that Antichrists are
come already? And again, he does argue from the last times to Antichrist, and
from Antichrist to the last times, reciprocally, which reason were not of
strength, unless it were grounded upon this point.

For proof, see 1 John 4.3. 1 Timothy 4.1, 2.

Obj. Does not the Apostle say, that Antichrist shall not come until there be
a general Apostasy, and until that which withholds him be taken away? 2 These.
2.3. what is that (...) which hindered him?

A. That (...) was not the Roman Empire, for that was not taken fully away many
hundred years after, and it is still not wholly taken away, but stands upon its
two Legs, the Emperor of Turkey and Germany, but the things which withheld
him was indeed the Emperor himself, when the Emperor Constantine, removed from
Rome to Constantinople, then the (...) was taken away, the luster of the
Emperor, that Monarch of the World, and that Antichrist could not stand
together, but so soon as the Emperor was departed from Rome, Antichrist began
to be revealed, when as all the Bishops of the Christian World did meet
together at the Council of Nice, the Bishop of Rome (requested by Letter) came
not, pretending indeed the weakness of his body, and Old Age, but Bellarmin
plainly tells us the reason: It was not meet, says he, the Head should follow
the Members, the Members were rather to follow the Head, and if the Emperor
were present, it was likely he would take his place above the Pope, which was
not meet, the Pope being the Spiritual Head, therefore because of this, and
some other inconveniences, the Pope in his discretion thought it meet to absent
himself. At this time Antichrist began to be revealed to the full, for though
after that time some godly men were in that Seat, as Gregory the Great, and
some others, yet the question is not of the Person, but of the place.

Obj. But the Apostle says, that Let must be first taken away which withheld
Antichrist; and St. John says here, that many Antichrists were come already,
how can these two stand together?

A. Though the Antichrist was not then revealed, yet the Mystery of Iniquity
did then work in many men, when St. John wrote this Epistle; and Saint Paul his
second Epistle to the Thessalonians, for then men began to observe the
Traditions of men, and the Laws of the Church must be as well kept as Gods
Laws, against whom St. John wrote in his second Epistle, verse. 5, 6, 7.
besides, some then exalted themselves above their Brethren, as you may see in
his third Epistle, and so did put out their Brethren; this was the Spirit which
made way for the Bishop of Rome, exalting himself above other Bishops, as the
Emperor was above Kings and Princes: this Mystery by degrees increased, now as
the King may be said to come when he is yet in his Chamber, but some Parliament
men go before, and the King follows soon after; so it is here, because
Antichrist was not to come nakedly, but with Pomp, therefore way was made, and
the Apostle wrote against the spirit of Antichrist then working, though
Antichrist himself was not so fully revealed till afterward, and so it is
plain that which was spoken of Antichrist is in some part fullfilled.

Use 1 Confutes a conceit of the Church of Rome, that cannot yet discern
Antichrist, but say, Antichrist is some singular person.

But we say, Antichrist is a state that has many forerunners, and followers,
and the Pope himself is one of them.

Obj. But the Article ^ signifies a certain singular person?

A. Sometimes it does so, yet not always, for sometimes it signifies a State, as
we say, (...) the King made this Law; here we understand the Kings before, or
present, or them that shall come after, Mat. 13.3. (...) The Sower went forth,
here it is not spoken of one singular Minister, Paul or Peter, but of every
Minister of the Gospel.

Obj. 2 These. 2.8.

A. True, he shall continue till the coming of Christ, and shall be abolished
by the spirit of his mouth, and therefore it cannot be said of one singular
person, no man lives such an Age as is from the Council of Nice to the coming
of Christ.

Use 2 Learn hence the near fellowship that is betwixt Antichrist himself, and
all that make way for him, as all Heretics do, Simon Magus, Menander, Ebion,
Pelagius, Arius, etc. they all wrought the coming in of Antichrist, and though
himself has condemned many of those Errors, yet he so corrupts the lives of
men, that Charity waxes cold, and false Doctrins are received: some of those
Errors this Antichrist still holds, when the King himself comes, the people
will give more room than for the Noblemen that went before; so when Antichrist
comes himself, the people most of all yield to him, though formerly they had
received many Errors; and therefore it must teach us, not to keep any error or
superstition, for there is a strong Combination betwixt Antichrist and
Heresies, that we cannot separate one from another; though we use many strokes
at a Tree before it falls, yet every blow makes way for the fall of it; so
every error makes way for Antichrist, and corrupts the true Religion, and
godliness is not seen: when the Church was infected with many Errors, even
then Antichrist arose, the way was ready for him to corrupt all.

Doct. Such is the condition of these last times, that they cannot be long
without an Antichrist.
For the Apostle argues reciprocally from the last times to Antichrist, and
from Antichrist to the last times, Antichrist is come, therefore it is the last
time, and it is the last time, therefore there must be Antichrists, 1 John 4.3.
2 John 7. for his relation to the last times, 1 Timothy 4.1. in these latter
times, the Spirit speaks expressly.

Q. What is the condition of the last times, that is so prepared for an
Antichrist?

A. This mutual reference proceeds;

1 From the state of the times in the Apostles times, there was an itching ear
after new Doctrine, inwardly loathing the truth, and affecting any new Doctrine
they can hear, 2 These. 2.10. 11, 12. 2 Timothy 4.3, 4. so that the radical cause
of the arising of Antichrist, is the itching humor of men after new Doctrine,
therefore God would send such as should deceive, and if you survey the whole
Body of Popery, it consists either of curious speculations of the Schoolmen,
whereby they deceive Scholars, and the Secular Priests fill the common people
with idle Fables, and so deceive the whole people.

2 From the abundance of knowledge that shall be revealed in the last times, as
Isa. 11.1. to 9. now where there is much knowledge, and emptiness of Grace,
and Faith, there is a world of pride in such, 1 Cor. 8.11. 2 Timothy 3.1. to 8.
for want of faith with their knowledge, the time was fit to receive new
Doctrins, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2. men of knowledge, but no conscience, and then no marvel
if men entertain Errors, 1 Timothy 1.19. Hold faith and a good Conscience, which
some having put away, have erred from the faith; whilst some have neglected to
keep their Conscience clean, their judgment is unsound; a corrupt Conscience, a
corrupt Judgment.

3 From the disposition of men; and aptness then to catch the greatest cold,
when their spirits have been most warmed and heated; no man so apt to take
cold, as they who are very warm and hot; so in the days of the Apostles, they
did not only fill them with Knowledge, but warmed the Church with Zeal, and
Heat: zeal toward their Ministers, zeal in their liberality, they loved not
their own lives in respect of Christ, now their spirits being so warm, they are
more subjesh to get cold and distemper; every Christian in particular finds it
so; when he has been most enlarged at the Word, or Prayer, ere long he will be
more straightened, there being a secret pride in the experience of Gods favor,
and to rest in our selves, thinking that we have sufficient grace in our
selves, when we see our need of Christ, we depend only on him, but when we are
full, we depend on our selves, and so by sitting loose from Christ we get a
great cold; we are cold in Prayer, Word, Sacrament; thus it is with the Church,
when God sheds his Spirit abundantly in the Church, they grow secure, and
depend upon themselves, thus we see, Josh. 1.9, 10, 11. so that one would have
thought that that generation would have been more zealous, yet none so
Idolatrous till God quickened them by their enemies: so in the Apostles times,
the Church was very forward and zealous, a few Generations after, their spirits
were carried away with errors.

4 From the disposition of Satan, he has great rage because the time is short,
Rev. 12.8. and we shall always find that the Devil has imitated God, if God
have Sacrifices from his people, so the Devil from the Pagans; so if God set up
a Christ, Satan will have an Antichrist set up, that may be, not only a
substitute, but an enemy to Christ, that as God had won the world by Christ, so
he would delude the world by Antichrist.

5 From the wise and just dealing of God, if God reveal more means of
knowledge, he will use many means of trial, he will have them winnowed, that so
the good may remain as Wheat, the Chafe may be blown away, if God give more
Tallents, he will put them upon more employment and exexercise.

Use 1 To teach Christians not to be offended, if they find variety of
seducing spirits in these days, a man would wonder in such peaceable days, when
Religion is maintained, there should be so many opinions and agitations, how
comes this about? you must know that God never dispensed generally more
knowledge since the revelation of Antichrist than now; now where there is most
knowledge, Satan will be seducing and corrupting their wisdom; where there is
more wisdom there is more curiosity and pride; so much knowledge, so much want
of truth many times, and so putting off the truth, men run into several errors,
and it is just with God, seeing they put away a good Conscience, and would not
give heed to sound Doctrine, therefore God gave them up to follow lies, 2 These.
2. and their longing desire and zeal in former times, will end in such a cold,
that there will be a defect of all warmth and heat, and wheresoever you see the
truth not held in a good Conscience; they run their faith on Rocks, some split
on a rock of Arminianism, some on a rock of Popery; so that it must needs be
that in these last times many Antichrists must be.

Use 2 Since many Antichrists are, and will be in these last times, let us
labor to be so established in the truth, that however the times be, we may
keep our faith and religion.

Q. How shall we be thus established?

A. 1. Get contrary spirits to the former, give not up your selves to
curiosity, and vain speculations, if the Lord find you humble, he will teach
you in his ways; if when you are warm and hot, you have a care that you get not
cold, 1 Chronicles. 29.18. Pray to God to keep your hearts always in that frame, or
at least in such a frame as may befit every days business, and then whatsoever
the times be, our hearts and judgments shall be established in the truth, but
unless God give you a good Conscience with your knowledge, you will be soon
perverted, and therefore I say, as Paul to the Ephesians, Ephesians. 2.12. continue
in a firm love of the truth, as well as in the knowledge of it.

1 JOHN 2.19. They went out from us, but they were not of us, for if they had
been of us, no doubt they would have continued with us, etc.


THe Apostle, Verse. 18. had instructed Babes of the coming of Antichrist, now
in this Verse he first discribes them;

1 By their Apostasy, they went out from us:

2 Their condition before, They were not of us, he amplifies both, the latter
he proves by an Argument, They were not of us, for if they had been of us, they
would have continued with us.

The former he amplifies by the reason, why God gave them up to Apostacy,
which was, that these Seducers might be made manifest that they were not of us.

Q. 1. What is meant by this, They went out from us?

A. 1. They departed from their Doctrine in Judgment, and from their Fellowship
in Practice.

Acts 2.42. Now these men departed from both, they forsook the truth which
before they professed, 2 John 9. and not in circumstantial points, but in such,
whereby they denied both the Father and the Son, as verse 22. 1 Timothy 1.19.

2 In their fellowship, they declined from them in communion of Ordinances, and
mutual help, Heb. 10.25.

They went out from (us) from whom? who are they from us? Apostles, and
Ministers, from us, that is, from Old men, Young men, and Children, they went
out from all the true Members of the Church.

They were not of us.

That is, they were never true members of our Body, they were with us, and
amongst us, but they were never of us, 1 John 4.4 5. as the Children of God are
in the world, yet not of the world, their minds are not on this world, their
inheritance is not in this world; so on the contrary, the Children of the
Church are in the Church, but not of the Church.

Doct. 1. Some may be in the Church, which after do depart from the Church.
Doct. 2. Such as do depart, were never Members of the Church. Doct. 3. Such as
are Members, continue always in the Church. Doct. 4. Those that depart,
manifest themselves, not to be of the Church. Doct. 5. This departing from the
Church, is a note of Antichrist.
Doct. 1. There are some in the Church, which may depart from the Church.
That may leave the Doctrine, Fellowship, and Practice of the Church, Heb.
10.25. 2 These. 2.3. 1 Timothy 2.4.

Q. How comes it to pass that men in the Church, and in some measure affecting
the ways of Religion, depart from the Church?

A. 1. This comes from want of through and entire fellowship with the Lord
Jesus, for though they may have much joy and comfort in the Members of the
Church, yet it is but a Land-flood, all that joy and grace may be dried up,
unless they partake of that Fountain which never fails, and as the Lord told
Samuel, They have not rejected thee, but me they have rejected; so, see you any
departing from the Church, they departed from Christ, and union with him first,
Dan. 11.34, 35. many cleave to him but feignedly, Heb. 12.13. when a man haults
between falsehood and truth, or God and his lusts, he will be turned out of the
way.

2 From the stumbling blocks they meet with, in

1 The Church, first persecution, Matthew. 13.21. that makes some offended.

2 Hard Doctrine, Joh. 16.66. the Doctrine of Purity seems harsh Doctrine to them,
so the Doctrine of Predestination offends some.

3 There fall out some admonitions, or reproofs to be dispensed to the Members
of the Church; now if they come with proud unmortified spirits, they will be
offended at them, and fly back again; this was the cause of Simon Magus his
Apostasy, when Peter reproved him sharply, he could not brook it, but fell off,
and set up a false Doctrine, and lying miracles, to subvert the Apostles
Doctrine; some depart from others, because they think themselves more holy than
others, Isa. 65.5. either they give offense to others, or others to them.

Use Shows us our duty, not to rest our selves satisfied, in that we are
Members of the Church; we may live in the Church, and partake of the ordinances
yet after fall off; therefore be sure that you give up your selves first to the
Lord, and then to the Church, otherwise keeping any pride or covetousness in
our hearts, it will make us fall off, pride will make us take offense at
others, and others at us; and covetousness will make us fall off when we meet
with persecution, and loss of goods, and liberty, for Christ; therefore come
with humble and mortified hearts, and give up your selves to Christ, and then
you shall not easily give offense to others, and will be content to part with
any thing for Christ, and so will continue Members of the Church.

Doct. 2 Such as depart from the Church, were never Members of the Church.
They were not of us, that is, of the Apostles, nor of us, that is, of such
whose sins are forgiven them, either old men, or young, or Children.

Q. What is the Church, or who are the Church?

1 The Church is called a company of Saints, because they are holy in heart and
practice, 1 Cor. 14 13. 1 Cor. 1.2.

2 The Church is called an elect people.

3 They that are indeed of the Church, are such as shall be saved, Acts 2 ult.
as all those that were in Noah's Ark were saved, so all those that are true
Members of the Church.

Grounds

1 From the near fellowship such have with the Catholic Church, and so
certainly are of the number of the first born, written in heaven, Heb. 12.23.
therefore Christ says, all his sheep hear his voice, Joh. 10.2, 3, 4.16.27,
28. and none shall pluck them out of his hand. Those that are truly Members of
the particular Church, are likewise Members of the Catholic; my finger which
is a part of my hand, is a part of my whole body.

2 From the fellowship such have with the head Christ, all the true Members
receive nourishment from the head, Col. 2.18, 19. therefore they not holding to
the head, fall into vain speculations; therefore those that depart from the
head, fall from the Church, Ephesians. 4.15, 16. and being knit to the head, they
are joined with such bands of the spirit, and bands of ordinances, that they
all partake of one spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17. so 1 Cor. 12.13. 1 Cor. 10.6, 7. and so
in all their prayers, they pray for the whole Church, Our Father, thy Will be
done of us, we have a tender care of all the Church knit together in one Love,
one Faith, one Hope, one Baptism, so that those that are truly knit, cannot
fall off.

Use 1 To reprove an Error of the Romish Church, that do maintain that wicked
men may be true Members of the Church, but we say that those that fall off,
were never true Members of the Church, and yet they hold that many fall off,
and yet were true Members, but they might indeed depart from their Church, but
never from any true Church; if they do depart from the Church, they were never
true Members of the Church, they were not of Christ's sheep, for he will keep
them that none of them shall fall off.

We say therefore that such were not true Members, but ill humors, and
superfluous excrements of the body, and therefore no wonder though they fell
off. But you will say, some there are that continue faithful friends to the
Church, and never fall off from them; are there not some that are ornaments,
and maintainers, and supporters of the Church, yet have no truth of Grace in
their hearts, are not they Members of the Church?

They have the place of Members, but are not true Members, a glass eye may be
an ornament to the body, and a wooden Leg a support to the body, yet are no
true Members, so such may be ornaments and supporters of the Church, yet no
true Members, but as a glass eye, or a wooden leg; these though they cleave
to the body, yet they are not joined by nerves and sinews, neither animated by
the head, so these are not tied to the Church by the spirit of God, or bond of
Faith and Love, but some external ligaments, as honor, or profit in the Church.

Use 2 It may teach us what to judge of such men as have been sometimes very
forward and zealous Professors, but afterward they sit loose from Religion,
and fall off from the Saints, and grow enemies to the Church, they were never
true Members of the Church, Stella cadens, nunquam stella, cometa fuit, never
any Star fell; the Church is compared to Heaven, Christians to Stars, when we
think we see a Star fall, it is no Star, but a meteor drawn up by the heat of
the Sun, which when the heat of the Sun is withdrawn, falsl, so if you see any
Stars fall from the Church, they were some sluggish meteors, that by the heat
of Gods ordinances were raised up and inflamed, but after the heat was a little
dissolved, they fell away; if any fall, they were never any true Stars in
heaven, but blazing meteors.

Use 3 It may teach us, never to rest in any fellowship or society of the
Church, till we are knit by the spirit to God and Christ, so that every
ordinance knits you nearer to Christ, and to his Members, and every conference
quickens your affection to the Church, and theirs to you; come not therefore to
the Fellowship of the Church for custom or credit, or to satisfy friends,
these are but as glass eyes, and woden legs; how little good will it be to
that person that lives in the Church like a noisome humor, hurtful, and
pricking the Church, troublesome to the Church and Members thereof? such a one
is but an evil humor, and it were better it were cast out; nay content not your
selves in being an ornament and supportance to the Church, liberal for any good
use; and so Ministers, you must not rest in this, you are but as wooden legs,
and glass eyes* and you lose by it, unless you draw juice and nourishment
from the body by the spirit; rejoice not therefore in this, that you cleave to
the Church, and they to you; but rejoice that you are of that number, whose
names are written in heaven; rejoice in this, that by the spirit and Faith, you
are knit to Christ, rejoice that you do any good office to the Church, not for
any by-respect, but naturally.

Use 4 Here is a direction to all societies, what society to follow, even the
highest society, that is, even of the Church, the company of Saints; therefore
if you would aspire to the best society, you must not be such as are noisome
humors, hurtful one to another, such will break off, but be knit together in
love, with one consent join together.

So for all Members of the Congregation, be doing good one to another, be knit
together, you are all Members of the same Church, let no outward respect
dis-joyn Members, you would think it a woeful thing, to see a convulsion of the
Members, one limb pulled from another, so let no external respect hinder
fellowship, therefore contend not for your profit or ease, and so fall off from
one another, but contend to be helpful one to another, and grow up in love.

Use 5 Of consolation to such as find their hearts knit to Christ by his
ordinances, and one to another, this is good comfort; you shall never depart
one from another, no true Member shall ever fall off, either from Christ, the
Church, or heaven, 1 John, 1.4.8. being one of the Church, and added to the
Church, you are such a one as is appointed to salvation; they that are in Gods
Tabernacle, shall one day dwell in his holy hill, Psalm. 15. and he tells you
what they are; they that are Members of the Church militant here, shall be
Members of the Church triumphant in heaven, your name is entered amongst the
general assembly of the first born, whose names are written in heaven.

Doct. Such as are true Members of the Church, do keep continual fellowship
with the Church, and do never depart from the Church.
If they had been of us, that is, of our fellowship which is with the Father,
they would have continued for ever with us, Psalm. 125.1. They that trust in the
Lord, shall be as mount Zion, which shall never be moved; God gives a man true
fellowship with him by trusting in him, and such stand as a mountain, or rock,
that cannot be removed, an the cause of it is, because God in a special manner
protects them; Gods protection stands as an hill about him, so that none can
climb over God to come at them, 1 Timothy 2.19. The foundation of God stands
sure, etc. the foundation, some take it for election, some for their faith,
such a man does set to his seal that the Lord is true.

Q. How comes it to pass that they always thus keep communion with Christ, and
his members?

A. 1. They keep fellowship with Christ, from the nature of that Covenant which
Christ makes with all Believers, it is opposed to a Covenant that may be
broken, Jer. 31.31. to 35. so that this Covenant cannot be broken, where he
opposes this new Covenant to the first Covenant made with Adam, which he
brake, but this cannot be broken, for what should break it but sin, but God
will write his Law in their hearts, etc. and they shall not depart from him.

This Covenant is either expressed without condition, or else such a condition as
he will give us power to perform, or else such a condition as Christ will
perform for us, therefore cannot be broken.

Obj. Is it possible that any Covenant should be without condition? Is it not
the nature of a Covenant, to have a condition on both parts?

A. It sometimes requires none, as Genesis 9. to 17. the Covenant God made with
Noah, he made a Covenant never again to destroy the whole World by a flood, and
yet there is no condition expressed on man's part, but all the world knows, that
whatsoever the lives of men be, be their sins never so great, even as the sins
of the Land, yet God will keep this Covenant with them, and not destroy the
World by waters any more; now this Covenant of Grace is likened to the Covenant
he made with Noah, that as that Covenant was without all conditions, so the
Covenant of Grace that God makes with us, is absolute without condition, so
that he will remember us with everlasting mercy, Isa. 54.8, 9, 10. so that
whosoever have made a Covenant with God to cleave to him in Christ, he will
never cast them off, no more than he will drown the world.

2 Though he do require a condition, yet it (...) such as he himself will
perform, so that I shall never forfeit his Covenant, Jer. 32.40. God will never
depart from them, I but we may depart from him; no, God will put his fear in
our hearts, that we shall not depart from him, so that though God requires
faith, and repentance, and obedience, yet he gives it to us, or else we have
Christ as a Surety, that has fulfilled all righteousness for us, Heb. 7.22.
if therefore I, or my Surety pay, as he has done here, no breach of Covenant
can be made on our part, because Christ has fulfilled all righteousness; so
that though we be unfaithful and disobedient, yet Christ has undertook for us.

2 From the Spiritual vigor, and efficacy of that Grace which the Lord gives
to every true member of the Church, that Spirit which knits us to Christ and
his Members, 1 Pet. 1.23. is an immortal seed, it is that spring which springs
up unto everlasting life, Joh. 4.14.

Obj. True, if we drink, but we may cease drinking, and so thirst?

A. But then it should not differ from Jacobs Well, for as long as we drink of
that we shall not thirst, but this is opposed to that, Heb. 10.39. he opposes
(...), so that whosoever draws back from Christ had never true faith.

Nay, this grace is expressed, as overcoming all the enemies of Salvation,
Satan, the World, and the Flesh, 1 John 1.4. 1 John 5.4. Romans 6.14. Sin, that
is, your corruption, shall not reign in you, it may be remanent, but not
regnant, it may Tyranize over us, and lead us Captive, but it shall not carry
us willingly, but it is a captivity to us very grievous and hard, and we strive
to get loose from it, it may (...) but not (...) now if sin have once dominion
over grace it should be superior, which cannot be.

2 As they never depart from Christ, so they never depart from the Fellowship
of the Church.

Q. What may be the ground of it?

A. 1. From the sweetness of that grace, life, and power they have felt in the
society of the Saints, sweeter than which they shall not find in any other
company, or in a solitary condition, that sweetness which they have found in
Christ, and his Ordinances, and his Members, will make them cleave close to
them, and not depart from them, Joh. 6.66, 67. Whither shall we go, thou have
the words of eternal life? where can we mend our selves, this is the House of
God, and the Gate of Heaven, so that they intend to dwell here for ever, Psalm.
84.1, 2, 3, 4. and 8, 9, 10. they find such sweetness and fullness in Gods
House, that they had rather to be Door-keepers in Gods House, than to dwell in
the Courts of Princes without, Heb. 11.26, 27. he that has once seen Gods face
in his Church, he regards not the wrath of men, and for the pleasure of the
World, he accounts the very reproaches of the people of God to be sweeter, and
if they be better and sweeter, what are the consolations and Promises, and
Hopes of Gods people, the true Church of Christ that have found conjugal
society with Christ, what should move them to turn aside to other companions,
Cant. 1.6, 7, 8. therefore up to Jerusalem, and rest there, there you may find
me, Psalm. 16.3. My delight is in the Saints.

Q. If Christians cannot fall off, what needs there so many exhortations and
threatenings to back-sliders? 1 Cor. 5.1, 2. 1 Cor. 10. Romans 8.13.

A. These are not Arguments of Apostasy, but means of perseverance, they are as
means to keep us from Apostasy, for he that has appointed the end, has
appointed the means.

2 Though true Members cannot fall off, yet there are many Hypocrites that seem
to have fellowship with the Church, and they may fall away.

Obj. This Doctrine breeds security, seeing they cannot fall off, what need
they care how they live?

A, This is no doctrine of security but only to carnal men, for we shall find
that no Christian is more careful to please God, and fearful to offend him,
than those that have got most assurance of Gods love, and fellowship with
Christ and his members, 2 Cor. 5.4. Genesis 39.19.

2 If Gods Children do wax wanton, yet he has means to scourge them soundly,
though he does not take away his loving kindness; and we say, though he cannot
loose grace wholly, yet he may loose the strength of his grace. And Secondly,
Corruption may grow strong; and Thirdly, He may loose all the comfort of his
grace; Fourthly, he can make them meet with such afflictions from men as David
did, though he cast him not out of Heaven, yet out of his Kingdom, after he
had committed murder and Adultery, he raised up his own Son to rebel against
him; so that David saw the bitterness of his wantonness against Gods grace, As
if a Physician should give a man such a Drugg, and say it will not only free
you from your sickness, but also preserve you that you shall never dye;
therefore should he say, What need I care what enemies I meet with, or what
diet I use? no, it implies that he must have a care of such things; so though
God give us a Wel-spring of eternal life, yet if you look not to your selves,
but rush into danger, you may be so wounded and unsettled, and so terrify your
Consciences, that you shall feel the smart of your wantonness all your days.

Obj. Did not Lot depart from the fellowship of Abraham, and pitch his Tents in
Sodom? Genesis 13.9. to 13.

A. 1. This was dangerous to Lot.

2 It was not without the consent of Abraham, and there was some necessity of
it, for they could not well live together, they had such great estates.

3 The church was not then in Congregations, but in Families, etc.

Obj. But what say you to the Ten Tribes, did not they renounce fellowship with
the Church? 2 King. 12.16.

A. Herein they did reject the Covenant of Grace, and so had no fellowship with
the church.

Obj. Were there no good people there?

A. The good people of the Land left their possessions and went to Jerusalem,
with the Priests and Levites, 2 Chronicles. 11.13. to 17. so that rather then they
would leave the Fellowship of the church, they would sell all that they had to
purchase such a Pearl.

Use 1. To reprove the error of the Pelagians and Papists, that do teach,
that the true Members of the church may fall away, not only for a time, but
finally, and for ever, contrary to this Doctrine, for though they may be as
ornaments, or supports, yet they are no true members, for if they had been of
us, they would have continued with us.

Use 2. May show us the wonderful eminency of that Grace, and that Covenant
that we have in Christ, above that grace and Covenant that Adam had, Adam had
that Grace which he might keep, and he might loose, and that Covenant which he
might break, or not break, but we have such grace as we cannot loose, and
such a Covenant as we cannot break, so that true christians have no cause to
complain of Adams fall, for they have a more sure Covenant, such a Covenant as
we can no more hreak than we can Noah's Rainbow; and according to the state of
the Covenant, God has given several Sacraments to confirm it, he had a
Sacrament of Death, but we have no Sacrament of Death, but both are for our
confirmation in Life; therefore had there been a possibility of Death, he would
have given us a Sacrament to put us in mind of it.

Use 3. Be not offended, because of all these Antichrists, and Back-sliders,
there are thousands fallen away within these few years, why understand this,
they were not of us, but as noisome Humors, and the body is better without
them; such as have true fellowship never depart, such as do depart never had
true fellowship, 2 Timothy 4.15. Demas forsook Paul, an evident sign he was an
Hypocrite, if his heart had been right, he would not have left Paul for the
whole world.

Use 4. Would you have good company (as most men desire to have) why as you
desire company that may be for your perpetual comfort, then use this
fellowship of the church, there was never any that once got into true society
of the Saints, that would ever be pulled from them; Whither should we go thou
have the words of eternal life? what company so sweet as christian communion?
Moses that had trial of Princes courts, yet he found the sourest bit of
christian communion sweeter then the sweetest pleasures of Egypt; you that
delight in the company of Drunkards, and Whoremongers, and Harlots, at length
when you are consumed, and your estate spent, you must be glad to leave them,
and wish you had never kept them company; but on the contrary had you but once
got into a near communion with the Saints, you should never depart from them,
it was the saying of a late faithful Servant of God, Dr. Preston, Though I
leave my life, yet I shall not leave my company.

Use 5, Of consolation to any soul that ever had true fellowship with Christ,
and his church, having once loved you, he will love you to the end, 1 Cor.
10.13. 1 These. 5.23, 24. Psalm. 37.23, 24, 25. though we do fall, yet the Lord
puts under his hand, Romans 8.25. Romans 5.10. 1 Pet. 1.5. we are kept by the power
of God to Salvation he embraces us with his everlasting arms, so that if we
have once got fellowship with God, and his Church, fear not, you shall not
fall, and if you do start aside, and feed on ill Diet, you shall find the
smart of it, he will humble you, that he may save you at the last day.

Doct. It is a note of seducers, or Antichristian Teachers, to depart from the
fellowship of the Church.
They went out from us, because they were not of us, and so such were never
cordial or hearty to the church, therefore when you see any fall off, know it
argues an Antichristian spirit, 2 These. 2, 3. 1 Timothy 4.1. Many (...) shall
depart from the Church, so that all Antichristian spirits have a corrupt spirit
of separation.

For Explication.

Q, 1. What is this separation?

A. 1. A separation Local, such was that practice of the Tribe of Gad. and
Manasses. Josh. 22.9, 10. it was not separation in fellowship as they profess,
verse. 26, 27, but that is not a separation that makes an Antichrist.

2 A departing in fellowship, which yet falls short of an Antichristian spirit,
though it deserve blame and reproof, Gal. 2.12. not but that his judgment and
affection was with them, yet he withdrew from their society in Ordinances, for
this Paul blamed him, but yet it was not an Antichristian spirit, though he
were a man of great zeal and courage, yet none so subject to be carried away
with fear as he was, let christians therefore most suspect themselves there
wherein they least suspect themselves, and think themselves strongest, but this
was an infirmity in him.

3 There is a departing from the Faith of the church* or sitting loose from
them in Spirit, judgment, and affection, their Doctrine contrary, and hearts
contrary, as Paul says, In the latter days certain shall depart from the
Faith, Heb. 10.25. to 29. so that such fall off not only in place, or
fellowship, in ordinance, but in judgment, heart, and affection, that is a mark
of an Antichristian spirit, Jude 4.5. 3 Epist. Joh. 8, 9, 10.

It is said of the new converts that were added to the church, that they
continued in the Apostles Doctrine and fellowship, Acts 2.42. therefore when
they break from the fellowship of the church, they depart from the Apostles
doctrine.

Q. What be the grounds?

A. 1. From the fellowship the true Members of the church have with Christ, 1 John 1.4. therefore when you see a spirit of withdrawing from the fellowship
of the church, they depart from the Apostles Doctrine, and if from them, then
from Christ, for surely our fellowship is with God, and with the Son, therefore
to prevent that denying of Christ, he gives them charge that they do not
forsake assembling themselves, etc. Heb. 10.25. to 29. A finger cut off from
the hand, is not only cut off from the hand but from the head too; so if men
fall off from the Members, they will also fall off from Christ the Head.

Use 1. Seems to inform our judgments what to think in case of separation, for
this place is much abused; The Papists they build on this place that they that
separate from their church are Antichrists. That company, say they that break
off from the fellowship of the church is Antichristian* as it is plain here;
now what were Calvin and Luther, but such as brake off from the fellowship of
the church, therefore they were of Antichrists spirit, and forerunners of him.

We must therefore know, it is not every separation from that which is called a
church that is a note of an Antichristian spirit, but it must be known whether
that were the true church; now this church St. John speaks of was the true
Church, for it was from such whose sins were forgiven; now if it be not a true
Church that they break from, it is no sign of Antichrist, 2 Chro. 11.16. such
as set their hearts to seek the Lord, separated themselves from those that
followed Jereboam, and came to Jerusalem; so the Apostles were feign to
separate from the Church of the Jews which persecuted Christ, and them, and so
constituted a Church by themselves, a Christian Church; so then it is not a
separation from a false Church, but a true, that is a sign of an Antichristian
spirit.

Obj. But what pretense, or just ground had such Divines to fall from the
Romish Church, or we in England? for we, only upon the falling out of Hen. 8.
with the Pope fell from him?

A. True, that matter of Divorce did move him to fail off from the Pope, and
indeed, that cause was enough to fall off from the Pope, who would bind a
Prince to an unlawful Marriage.

But the whole body of Christendom had a Threefold ground of separation which
may be just, when a Church is heretical; that is, hold an error contrary to
the foundation obstinately, yet that is not a sufficient ground; as the Church
of Corinth denied the Resurrection from the Dead, yet he calls them Saints; so
though the Pharisees had charged that none should profess Christ, which was an
obstinate denying of Christ, and taught false Doctrine, yet Christ charges them
to obey them because they sit in Moses Chair, and therefore fundamental
erroneousnesse is not always a just cause.

1 Therefore that is a just cause of separation, when a Church is infected with
Blasphemy, and Contradiction, and Blaspheme the ways of God, Acts 19.19. Acts
13.45, 46.

2 Idolatry is a just ground of separation, 2 Cor. 6.16, 17, 18.

3 Persecution is a just ground of separation, Mat. 10.23. Acts 8.1.

Now all these have met in the Church of Rome, they have blasphemed and
condemned as Heretical, Justification by Faith, and other fundamental truths.

2 They worship Images, as of the Virgin Mary, yea with Divine honor, as the
Bread in the Sacrament, what greater Idolatry?

3 The World knows, and the blood of thousands of Martyrs can testify their
horrible Persecutions, that as long as we were subordinate to them, we could
not profess the true Religion without loss of Goods and life, therefore we have
just cause to separate our selves from them.

Use 2. It may teach us what to judge of the Seperatists, or Brownists, are
they of Antichrist?

Surely their practice is blameworthy.

1 Because they separate, where Christ keeps fellowship, Rev. 1.18. and that he
walks with us, we argue, because he is still pleased to dispense to us the Word
of Life, and edifies many souls thereby, and therefore surely Christ has
fellowship, and shall man be more pure than his Maker? where Christ vouch.
safes fellowship, shall man renounce it?

If they be converted, where had they their conversion?

2 Have not many of Gods Servants heretofore kept company with Churches as
corrupt as ours are? Did not Peter and John keep company with them and shall
they be more pure and curious?

3 Christ commands, If thy Brother offends admonish him, Matthew. 18.17. if he
hear thee not, take two or three more, if he hear not them, then tell it to the
Church, and if he hear not the Church, let him be to thee as an Heathen, or
Publican; but if the church hear not thy complaint, he does not say let the
church be as an Heathen, or Publican; now there are many of our Seperatists
never admonished their Brethren, nor made their complaint to the church, and if
they did, and the church heard them not, must they therefore Excommunicate the
church, and renounce it? therefore unless you find in it Blasphemy, or
Idolatry, or Persecution, there is no just ground of separation.

Therefore this sin is very dangerous, it draws men from the Members of the
Church.

1 They say, our Worship is corrupt. 2 Our Government is Antichristian.
For the first, you cannot maintain it, for in sundry Congregations you shall
not find much corruption, as for reading of Prayers, if it be lawful to read
Psalms, why is it not lawful to read Prayers? therefore that is no just
ground, it is that which all Protestant Churches have used.

2 Suppose there were and are sundry abuses in the Church, yet that is no safe
ground of separation, Ezekiel. 5.11. Ezekiel. 9.4. so when the Sons of Eli corrupted
the Sacrifices of God, their Sin was great, yet it was a sin for the people to
separate and abhor, 1 Samuel 2.17.

2 They say our Government is Antichristian, we say it is that Government that
expeld Antichrist sometimes, and sundry have witnessed it with their blood; and
I say further, there is no such corruption in our State as was in Jerusalem,
when Christ and his Apostles kept Fellowship with them, as two High Priests,
etc.

3 They say our Ministry and Calling is Antichristian, we say we do not
profess our selves enemies to Christ, and for our Callings, many of us are
elected by the peoples approbation, or by such as are set up by the King and
State, and if God bless our Ministry to convert thousands to God by that
means, it is an evident sign God approves our Calling, for, if it were
Antichristian, they would not convert souls to God.

4 They say our people are corrupt, and some such as Paul bids not to have
communion with, 1 Cor. 5.11. as Drunkards, Whoremongers, and therefore you see
what evil such do, they make Gods people abhor the Offerings, and break off
from fellowship with you.

We cannot deny but there are very many corrupt and scandalous persons in our
Church, but private Christians have no authority to root them out.

1 For Ministers, if they see that it would turn to the dissipation and
destruction of the F^ock, it were better to forbear, 1 Cor. 5. Mat. 13.29, 30.
Ezra 4.20. they ceased from building the Temple, when there came a command
against it; therefore they had better forbear, when it cannot be redressed
without greater prejudice to the Church.

2 The corruption of such do not corrupt the Church, or the Ordinances of God,
He that eats and drinks unworthily eats and drinks damnation to himself, not to
the whole Congregation, and you shall find many Churches as corrupt as the
Church of Corinth, yet the Apostle would not have them renounce it.

Lastly, they say we were never truly constituted, our Church had no true
constitution.

A. That constitution which they themselves require has not been wanting in
ours.

1 They say there must be entering into a Covenant, that was done in King Edward
and Queen Elizabeth's days; and whereas they say our Church is but a Parliament
constitution, that does not weaken, but establish our Church.

2 But they say that our Church consists of a mixed multitude, so was that 2 Chronicles. 20.13. when Jehosaephat assembled all Judah before the Lord, Number. 11.4
there was a mixed multitude, and they did it out of fear, and yet it was a true
Church, and so is ours, though there be a mixed multitude. And yet this falling
off, because it is not from the main Doctrine, but from the skirts, and some
circumstantials, therefore they do not fall utterly from Christ, but yet it is
not possible but they weaken their faith.

3 This refutes the Anabaptists, that fall off from our Church, because we
baptize Infants before they come to knowledge.

1 We say, though there were no Baptism, it were no cause to make it no church
as Israel in Egypt without Circumcision.

2 We say our children have as much right to Baptism, as Isaac to
circumcision, but they were circumcised the eight day, and if the Covenant
belong to them, then the Seals of the Covenant, Act. 2.39. Mark 10.

Use 4. Lastly it may teach us all, if it be a sign of Antichristianisme to
withdraw from the church, then it is a mark of true Christianity to stick close
to the fellowship of the Saints; in love, in Christian duties, in admonishiog
one another, in counselling, in comforting, in reproving one another; therefore
take heed you forsake not this fellowship, for so you loose your grace and
strength, if you sit loose from them, They that follow lying vanities, forsake
their own mercies, all that ointment that was powered on Christ's head, descends
to the lowest skirt of his garment, Psalm. 133. to the meanest Christian,
therefore if you sit loose from Christ and his members, how can you look for
any drops of his oil, the valleys receive the showrs from the Mountains, there
God has commanded a blessing, and it comes with power and authority; a man
that gets a blessing any where else, gets it but precario, and as it were by
stealth, but in public communion, God has commanded a blessing.

Now we come to the last point, the end of the departing of these men out of
the church, they went out, that it might appear they were not all of us.

Whose end was this? who propounded this end? it was not their intention to
manifest themselves, not to be of the church, but all heretics pretended that
they aimed at a better church, they never intended it to manifest themselves to
be enemies to the church, neither was it the end of the church; the church did
not cast them out, but it was voluntary defection, they went out of themselves,
therefore the church did not look at that end, whose end was it then?

Surely it was Gods end, who overruled their Apostasy to the benefit of his
church, when he saw them warp from the Fellowship of the church; God gives them
up to Apostasy, that he might make it appear they were not of the church, 1
King. 12.24. fight not against them, for this separation is from me, so this
Apostasy of these first teachers is from God, and his end is to manifest that
they were not of the church.

Doct. 5. It is the holy end that God aims at, in giving up seducing corrupt
spirits to Apostasy from the Church, that he might discover them that they were
Hypocrites whilst they lived in the Church.
God punishes Hypocrites with Apostasy.

What should move God to discover the Hypocrisy of men by Apostasy? a fearful
sin to forsake the Ordinances of God, the Covenant of the church; and what
should be the cause moving God thus to work?

1 By this means God manifests the integrity, and sound-heartednesse of his own
servants; God would have his name sanctified by his servants, and it is never
more sanctified, than when their sincerity is approved, when others fall off, 1
Cor. 11.19. it is needful that heresies arise, that those which are approved,
might be made manifest among you; as in winnowing time, when there comes a good
wind, it carries away the chaff, but the wheat lies on a heap more clean, Mat.
3.12. so Christ has a fann to winnow his church and cleanse out the chaff,
that it may be more clean.

2 That so he might prevent the corrupting and seducing of his weak servants,
least any should be mislead by them, therefore God timely discovers them, 2 Timothy 3.9. they shall proceed no further though they had led away some simple
women, laden with many lusts, yet they shall proceed no further, they shall
glean no more then some weak judgments, or corrupt hearts, but they shall be
discovered, their folly shall be manifest to all men, so careful is God, that
when his church is negligent in casting out such, why God in a special care to
his Vineyard, gives up such to defection voluntarily.

3 He gives them up to Apostasy, that he may preserve the purity of his
ordinances and law, Mal. 3.3, 4, 5. as if he should say, as long as corrupt
teachers live among men, they so pollute Gods Ordinances, that they are not so
pure and sweet, therefore God takes a course to refine them from their dross,
that is, not only Ministers, though when their spirits are refined, their
Ministry is more savoury and fruitful, but further he will make a difference
between Hypocrites, and those that are sincere that so his ordinances may be
refined, and this was fulfilled in John Baptists time, who came before Christ,
Mat. 3.7, 8, 9, who discovered the Pharisees to be Hypocrites that should
renounce Christ; and Christ himself said, Mat. 23. Woe be to you Scribes,
Pharisees, Hypocrites; so that by their defection, the Christian Congregations,
and the Ordinances, were more pure and refined, Prove. 25.4, 5. so take away the
dross from the Ordinances, they come forth more pure.

4 To exempt his people from many scandals and aspersions, that would be cast
upon the Church, if these corrupt persons should live among them, Jude 12.
therefore that these spots might appear to be corrupt humors, and not members
of the body, it pleases God that they depart, and so carry away these spots
and scandals with them, that so his Church may not be defamed.

5 A fifth end is this, it tends to the just punishment of Hypocrisy; it is a
just judgment of God to leave such spirits to be discovered and revealed;
Matthew. 12 33. it is more acceptable to God, to have things seem as they are;
God will have the Tree known by his fruit at length, there is no great
difference between the Crab and the good Apple Tree, by the leaf or the
blossom, therefore it must be known by the fruit, Rev. 3.16. I would thou were
either hot or cold, that I might know what thou art.

Use 1. It may teach us, that even the falls of the sons and daughters of men*
are managed and ordered by the wise and good hand of Gods providence; so you
see here is a hand going quite beyond all the ends of men, they went out that
they might be manifest, and God has always challenged this, to have an hand
in the sins of men, not to work, but to punish one sin by another, if God sees
envy in Joseph's Brethren, he stirs them up to sell him into Egypt, and God
challenges it, Genesis 47. Genesis 50.20. 2 Samuel 11.12. Ezodus 7.3. so Act. 4 28. 2 Chronicles. 32.21. Isa. 10.5. the worst evils that have been in the Church, God
has had an hand in it, 2 Samuel 24.1. not as an Author, but by accidental
occasion, he gives them up to take such courses; if David be Idle, God gives
him up to Adultery; if Pharaoh vex Gods people, God leaves him to hardness of
heart; if David commit Murder and Adultery, he gives up his Son to fratricide
and incest; If Judas be covetous, he gives him to betray his Master; if they be
his own Servants, he does it to cleanse them; if wicked, he does it to punish
them, therefore let us fear that God that is not only able to cast both body
and soul into Hell, but also into sin, which is worse than Hell, by propounding
^uch temptations as may leave a man to run into desparate courses; therefore
give not way to any sin, thinking to recover your selves, but fear God will
leave you to run into worse.

2 It may teach Gods people not to admire* and be offended at it; first, if
they see men of good esteem and profession fall off, wonder not, such were
never of the Church, 2 Timothy 2.17, 18, 19. Prove. 10.25. the righteous are as an
everlasting foundation, which God has founded, and every one of them has this
seal, The Lord knows who are his, and therefore be not discouraged, when you
see others whom you thought better of than of your selves fall, for the
foundation of God stands sure; 2ly, let not other men be offended, if they
see some that were professors fall off into vile courses, say not they are all
of one Sect, they are all of the same Spirit, none better than other, this is
the course of them all; say not so, for God gives them up to these b^se courses
to manifest it, that they were not true Members of the Church, God would have
it thereby manifested, that these spots of the face of the church are not spots
of the Body of the church, but spots in the Vizards of the church; but God
keeps his church unspotted and undefiled, so that even Balaam could say, How
goodly are thy Tents, O Jacob; therefore if you see any in the church grow
corrupt, and defiled, it implies they were never members of the church, God
has nothing to do with such, therefore he turns them out that it may appear
what they are; if God at any time leave his people to any scandalous course,
that God casts shame on them (which is very rare) if he do, he gives them such
unfeigned humiliation, and broken-heartednesse, and such castisements that they
recover themselves, that all the World may see, neither does the church allow
it, nor God, but as they were patterns of sin, so they shall be patterns of
Repentance, 2 Samuel 12, 11, if David do fall into scandalous sins, God will
follow him with such chastisements, that God will manifest he is no approver of
such courses; and David himself shall proclaim, that he repents unfeignedly, so
that he was not so careful before to cover it, as he is now to divulge it, and
declare that it was the cause of bitter anguish to him, so that neither God,
nor the church, nor themselves approve of their sin, but are against it.

Use 3. It may teach Gods servants to make an holy use of other men's falls;
Do thou see Professors fall into loose wicked courses, and give no testimony
of their repentance, why God hereby would manifest that thou art sincere and
upright, God hereby prevents thy mis-leading by their evil counsel, or
practice; bless God that hereby he purifies his Ordinances, and wipes away the
soil of his church, he wipes their face by casting out such; and especially
make this use, Be not high minded, but fear? fear that God that is able to cast
men from one sin into another, Isa. 6.2, 3. Why did the Angel there sing (...),
Holy, Holy, Holy? etc. why, because he was to send the Prophet on a Message, to
harden the wicked, and make their hearts fat.

Use 4. To exhort all in a special manner to take heed of Hypocrisy, if we
take up a course of Religion, and good duties at home, and abroad, we think
that God will be merciful to us; but let us see that what we do, we do in
spirit and in truth, Heb. 12.13. Lev. 10.3. God will certainly discover us,
scarce ever any lived that dyed in Hypocrisy, but he was uncased before his
death, there is nothing so secret but it shall be revealed. Hypocrisy must be
manifest to all men, though there were good hopes of them, yet God washes off
the spots of his church, and not only at the last day, but in this World,
therefore let it not suffice you to live in the church, for you may be as ill
Humors, and so annoy the church of God, and it will be well that you be cast
out; or at the best, though you be ornaments and supporters to the church, yet
you are but as glass eyes, and wooden legs, why God may stay long for the
good of his church, but certainly he will lay you open to some corrupt
Doctrine, or way, that you shall be manifest, 2 Timothy 3.9. why, verse. fifth he
tells you what they were, They had a form of godliness, etc, implying, it is a
mad course to be an Hypocrite, for by his outward profession, he gets the ill
will of wicked men, and for want of sincerity, he gets the ill will of God.

There are sundry signs of this Hypocrisy.

1 If thou find in thy self an hatred of admonition, Mat. 14.4. Herod was
impatient of admonition, therefore he put John in prison, and thereby
manifested his hypocrisy.

2 If thou be given to praise wicked men, and accompany with them, Prove.
13.20. Prove. 28.4. that is a forerunner of forsaking of the Law.

3 When a man makes no conscience of his tongue. but lets his tongue run at
random, to passion, oc railing, or slandering, Jam. 1.26.

4. If you see any man living in any known sin, and delighting in it, it is
such a link as the Devil will chain him fast by.

5 When a man shall make use of Religon to any other end than for Gods glory,
if you make Religion a stalking-horse to your own ends, certainly you will fall
off* Joh. 6.26.60.66. those that followed Christ for the Loaves, not one of
them continued with him, 2 King. 10.29. Acts 8.17. to 23. When Simon Magus
would make use of Spiritual gifts to get money, he was in the gall of
bitterness, and bond of iniquity, his heart was not right; therefore as you
desire to have fellowship with God, be sincere and upright.

1 JOHN 2.20. But ye have an Unction from the holy one* and know all things.


THe Apostle having instructed little Children that Antichrist would come, and
described him, verse. 18, 19. in this verse and the next, he propounds some
means to help them.

1 An Unction within themselves, whereby they know all their seducements and
snares, verse. 20, 21.

2 The second means is, from the corrupt and false doctrine of these Teachers*
who is Antichrist but he that denies the Son? whose doctrine perverted that
unction which they had received, verse. 22, 23.

In the first means observe,

1 A benefit received, an Unction.

2 The Author, from Christ.

3 The virtue of it, whereby you know all things, you know the truth, and that
no lie is of the truth.

To begin with the first, the benefit, Ye have an Unction.

Doct. There is not the least of the Children of God, but they are partakers of
an Ointment of Christ, you little Children have it, Verse. 27.
There were three sorts of Functions in the Old Testament, into which they were
instituted by Ointment, Kings, Priests, and Prophets; Kings, 1 Samuel 13.10, 11.
so Priests, Exodus 29.7. so Prophets, 1 King. 19.16. now Christ being ordained
to be King, Priest, and Prophet, therefore he is called the Anointed, (...)
Joh. 12.15. Luke 1.32, 33. Heb. 6.20. Heb. 7.24. Acts 3.22, 23. all other
Unctions were but types of him, therefore he is said to be anointed with the
oil of gladness above his fellows, Psalm. 45.7. he was not only gladded
himself, but all the ends of the earth were made glad by him therefore he is
called (...); now because he was not a type, but the person typified, he was
not anyonted with material oil, but with the Spirit of God which is the true
Unction, Acts 10.38. Luke 4.18. Dan. 9.24. hence called Messiah, in Hebrew, the
same with (...) in Greek; from this Ointment of Christ, we are anointed by the
same Unction, as Psalm. 133. so that spirit which was poured on his head,
descended to his lowest members, 2 Corinthians. 1.21, 22. yea to the skirts of his
garments, so then we are anointed by the Spirit.

Now fitly are we laid to be anointed by the Spirit, as it were by Oil, in a
Four fold respect.

1 As Oil has been used for healing Wounds, Luke. 10.34. so when the Spirits
of men are wounded by the sense of sin, God poures in such an Oil of his
Spirit, that he heals and binds them up.

2 Oil has a suppleing, softning, and lithni^g power; so Gods Spirit makes us
nimble, and agile to every good work; in the East Countries they used to
annoint Wrestlers, and Runners, to make them more nimble and quick; such use is
the Spirit of, to make us quick, and ready to run the ways of Gods
Commandments, Ezekiel. 36.27. and fight and wrestle against our Spiritual
enemies, Sin, Satan, and the World.

3. Oil cheareth the hearts and countenances of men, so the Spirit is an oil of
gladness, Isa. 61.3. so that they are anointed therewith, are no more afraid
of Hell, or Satan, but walk on cheerfully before God; so the graces of Gods
Spirit, Wisdom makes the face to shine, Eccles. 8.1. takes away Pride, rough
looks, wanton looks, and so smoothes and makes the countenance amiable; such a
soul is anointed with the oil of gladness.

4. There was an use of Oil, to consecrate all Vessels, no Consecration but Oil
was a part of it, Exodus 33.23. whether to consecrate Vessels or Officers; this
use of oil is in the Spirit of God; from him it is that Gods Children are no
longer for themselves, or the world, but consecrated to God, and dedicated to
him, as Kings, Priests, and Prophets, Act. 2.17. Rev. 1.6. so that that
Ointment which was poured on Christ above measure, descends to every Member of
his Church, healing their Wounds, softning and suppleing their souls, chearing
their hearts and countenances, and consecrating them to be Kings, Priests, and
Prophets to God, and therefore as Christ was called (...) so every Member of
Christ is called (...), Acts 11.26. that is, one anointed, so that every
child of God has in some measure a Kingly, Priestly, and Prophetical Office,
1 Samuel 8.28. Kings were chosen to be Judges, and to fight the Lords
Battles; why so in some measure every Christian has a power to judge, 1 Cor.
2.15. and fight the Lords Battles; such an Unction he has, that whatsoever
case he is called to, he has a spirit of judging and discerning what is good,
what bad, so that he stands not at any man's judgment; if it be of matters
concerning Salvation, God has given him a regal spirit; so Secondly, he is
able to fight the Lords Battles, not against flesh and blood, for they are but
typical and shadowy battles, but we fight against Principalities and Powers,
Ephesians. 6.12. to 18. and so their wars are far above Princes, Rev. 12.1. these
are great Battles with Satan, and the World, and our own corruptions, 1 Pet.
2.11. so we should all fight the good fight, 2 Timothy 4.8.

2 As a Priest, he performs the Priestly Office, which stood partly in praying,
partly in teaching, partly in sacrifycing; so God has given to every Christian
a Spirit of Prayer, an Teaching. Romans 8.15. Jer. 31, 32, 33. so also they offer
up to God a sacrifice of a broken heart, Psalm. 51.17. a sacrifice of praise, a
sacrifice of righteousness, Psalm. 4.5, 6. Romans 12.1, 2. nay, sometimes the Lord
gives them to sacrifice whole Towns and Cities unto God, as Paul, and Peter,
offered three thousand together, he takes them from sin, and brings them to
God, so that they bring in heaps upon heaps to God, so that they are not poor
Kings and Priests, but truly if Christians knew their worth, they would not be
so discouraged and cast down in respect of the World.

3 For Prophets, it was their office to Preach and Pray, but this was
principal, they had a special revelation of Gods secrets, and this is
verified of poor Christians he reveals his secrets to them, Psalm. 25.14. Matthew.
13.11. so tha^ many a poor Christian is able to discern more than his Minister,
Apollos wa^ an eloquent man, and mighty in the Scripture, yet he found Aquilla
and Priscilla, Tent-makers, they were able to instruct him more perfectly,
Matthew* 11.25, 26, 27. the great mysteries of Election, Vocation, Justification*
which are hid from the world, God reveals these to poor Fishermen, and to
Babes; and as it was a spirit of prophecy to interpret obscure mysteries, so
God many times helps poor Christians to see more clearly into Scripture than
many great Scholars, Rev. 3.18. they have received an Unction from the holy
one, that is Christ, he is often called (...), Luke 1.95. Psalm. 16.10. Dan.
9.24. he is the Holy one, the Holy head of the Church, and from him it is that
we receive this Unction.

Holiness is that whereby we give God his own due, Holiness is the fulfilling
of the first Table, righteousness of the Second; now Christ is called the Holy
one, because he was set apart, not only from all unclean but common uses, and
dedicated to the Lord.

Two things make a thing holy, a setting apart from unclean and common uses,
and dedicating to Spiritual and Holy uses, so the Sabbath and the Sacraments
are said to be Holy: now Christ was properly called, the Holy one, for no
Ordinance so separate from community, as Christ, nor so wholly dedicate to God
as Christ was, therefore we see how these little Babes should help themselves
against Antichrist; as there is an Antichrist, so there is a Christ, as they
have a spirit of seducing, so he is an Unction, a Box of Ointment which is able
to confirm you, and help you against all these.

Use 1 Of trial to every Christian, whether he be a true Christian or no, for
he is a Jew that that is one outwardly, Romans 2.27.28. we would think our selves
deeply wronged if any should deny us to be Christians; why what is a Christian?
one that is anointed to be King, Priest, and Prophet; do not thou know the
things that belong to thy peace, or heavenly knowledge? Do thou find that
thou can not war against thy Spiritual enemies? Do thou find that thou
can not pray, or instruct others? and as for judging, thou say, God forbid
that I should meddle with other men's matters, the secrets of God are not with
thee; why, if it be thus with thee, thou may pretend Christianity, but thou
have none in thee; but on the contrary, if thou know how to discern things
that differ, if thou know how to fight the Lords Battles, if thou know
how to pray, and instruct others, and bring in others; if thou be able to
discern the mysteries of God, to subdue Satan, the World, and thine own heart;
if it be thus with thee, thou art a Christian, and thou have that Unction that
will never forsake thee: if thou have received no more then thou have by thy
Book, or thy education, thou want these infused gifts; there is never a
Christian but he now knows better what Sin is, and what Grace is, then he did
before; he is now able to see what he never saw before, he knows the Wrath of
Christ, and the excellency of Gods favor; why if thy graces come from this
inward annoynting thou art a Christian, such a one whose praise is of God, and
not of man.

Use 2 Would you know where the Church is, every company says, It is in me,
the Papists say, it is in me, and the Separists, it is in me; the Protestants
say, it is in neither of you, but in me; why where you have a Company endued
with this holy Ointment, why there the Church is, and he that departs from it,
is of Antichrist; so then, the question is, Where is this Spiritual Unction?
alas, it is an hard thing for blind natural men to know, but yet as the
Ambassador of Persia said, Quot Senatores, tot reges, so where you see a
company of Christians, Quot Christiani, tot reges, so many Kings, Priests, and
Prophets, Psalm. 45.16. the children of the New Testament shall be answerable to
the Fathers of the Old, and shall be endued with suitable graces; they are
Princes in what part of the World soever they are, Princes judging of things in
difference; endued with a Princely spirit to overcome the World, and Satan,
and their own Corruptions; they have a Priestly Office, to pray and instruct to
sacrifice themselves, and their Families to God, etc. therefore if you find
such a company, verily there is the Church of God; and let not the Separatists
say, you have profane persons among you: We say, though they be amongst us,
yet they are not of us; and therefore that hinders us not from being the
Church: therefore whither should we go to seek the Church, but where this
Unction is?

Use 3 For all you that have received this Unction, it is not for Kings and
Princes to be digging in the earth, it is not for Priests and Prophets to be
ignorant, and blind, and dumb. 1 Cor. 6.1. to 7. Paul is confident that the
meanest Christian is a Judge. What a shame is it, for a Christian at every
temptation to be carried Captive? What a shame is it, for Kings to soil and
besmut themselves, for Saul to cast away his shield was a vile dishonor; so
for Christians to be soyled, and carried away with every temptation, for you to
cast away your shield, as if you had not been anointed is a great dishonor.
It becomes Christians to fight like Princes, and to be victorious, and to judge
like Kings; so walk as Priests of the high God, know how to pray, how to
instruct your Families, how to offer all your ways to God, all your Families,
you are not to be only holy day Priests, but daily Priests.

Use 4 It may teach every Christian that stands in need of healing or suppleing
your stiff spirits, you need balm and oil for healing the wounds of your
souls, and suppleing, and softning your stiff spirits, why here is an unction
that will heal thy wounds, and soften thy heart; entreat God that he would shed
abroad his spirit into thy heart, that he would heal thy spirit, soften thy
heart, and cheer thy soul; look up to the holy one, he is able to power floods
of consolation on thee, and establish thy soul in peace; do we find our
spirits hard, and stiff, and bound, our spirits very straight, and stand in
need of a great deal of alacrity? why yet this spiritual unction will so
enlarge thee, and supple thee, that thou shall find thy self helped and
quickened, that thou may do things not weakly, but with power and life; so if
we find corruptions so strong, that we know not how to overmaster them, there
is an unction from this holy one, able to strengthen us against them, entreat
God therefore to power it down upon thy soul; so do you want power and life in
Gods ordinances? why in any need look up to him.

Use 5 Here is a ground of much consolation that God is pleased to bestow such
a mercy, such a blessing as this upon us, how are we bound to Christ, that is
pleased to annoint us with the same ointment wherewith himself was anointed?
it is a ground of much consolation; Christians are often called to great
employments, which if they look on themselves, they see themselves altogether
unfit for, such as Moses said, send by whom thou will send, but is not this
unction able to make us Kings and Priests? we know where to find supply, and if
God call us to more employments, that is our comfort, that we have an unction
which is able to fit us for every work, and employment God shall call us to.

Use 6 Of exhortation to every Christian, not to rest contented in an empty
name of Christianity, ^^ll you get this spiritual unction; rest not in any
known strength, but what you receive by this spirit, otherwise you shall find
much want of help, Matthew. 25.1. to 10. the wife Virgins had their oil
continually ready and prepared, whenever Christ came; but the foolish
Virgins, some oil they had, some common gifts and graces, but they were spent,
and it was too late to seek for oil when the Bridegroom came, so do not only
hear the Word, but labor to find some oil dropped into your souls, that so in
storms, you may find the life and comfort of the spirit.

1 JOHN 2.20. But ye have an unction from the holy one, and ye know all things.


IN these words the Apostle prescribes a means to preserve them against
seducements, and the first means is the unction they had received from the holy
one, which is a comparison from the legal ointment; this spirit of Grace
should be as an Antidote against all Antichrists.

Now we come to speak of the virtue of this unction.

Doct. The little Children of God, by virtue of the ointment of the spirit of
Grace, they know all things.
So Verse 27. so that there is an abiding ointment, and so sufficient, that
they need not be taught more or better things than it will teach them.

For Explication,

1 Consider the subject, ye know all things. This universality of Christian
knowledge is amplified by the subject, ye know all things.

1 For the desire of their hearts, they desire to know all things necessary to
salvation, Acts 10.33. this is the frame and disposition of a converted heart,
to know all things, and so great is the desire of Gods Children to know this,
that they desire to know those things that are most against them, 1 Samuel 3.17.
Eli knowing by Samuels lingering that he had some terrible message, yet he would
know it, and urged him by a curse to declare it, and when he had told him, yet
says he, Good is the Word of the Lord; so that a godly heart desires to know
all the Will of God, especially if it belongs to him, though it be never so
bitter, it is contrary with a carnal heart; few are willing to know all
things, especially if they be against them, and cross their lusts, they would
not know it, so Mark 6.12. in Herod, so Isa. 13.10. they were men of that
frame, that would have the Prophet speak pleasing things, Mal. 2.11.

2 As in their desire, so in the preparation of their hearts they know it, so
that if God reveal his Will at any time, they have hearts ready to hear it, and
apprehend it better, Joh. 10.4, 5. there is a virtue in them, whereby they
discern betwixt the truth of Christ, and false Doctrine, so the noble Bereans
were more noble, because they received the truth with all readiness and fear,
Acts 17.11, 12. they searched the Scriptures, so that the Word falls into their
hearts like good seed, but on the contrary, if any man consent not to wholesome
words, but makes questions and contention about them, he knows nothing, 1 Timothy,
6.3, 4, 5. because he has an heart unprepared to receive it, therefore contra,
he that is ready to receive it, knows it; such a one knows all things.

3 In regard of their humility and meekness of spirit, whereby they think they
know nothing, and more foolish than any, Prove. 30.2, 3. Agur says, I am more
brutish than any man, and have not the understanding of a man, yet as foolish
as he was, and debased himself before his Scholars, yet he exhorts them to
fetch their knowledge from the high one; therefore the Holy Ghost seeing such a
deep self-denial in him, he ranks him with Solomon for his wisdom, and puts
his Proverbs among his, 1 Cor. 8.2. such a man as thinks he knows any thing,
knows nothing as he ought to know; therefore he that thinks he knows nothing,
as weak Christians do, such a one knows all things, which God sees meet for
him, and this sense of their own Ignorance, makes them still thirst the more
after Knowledge.

2 For the Act, ye (know) all things, other men may know much, yet knowing they
do not know, and understanding they do not understand, Prove. 9.12. he that
knows not for his own souls good, is not wise, Prove. 24.5. a wise man
increases in knowledge: the difference is

1 His knowledge is more clear, one man sees a thing by Candlelight, another
by daylight, but he sees most clearly, that sees at noonday; so a Christian
sees things not only by the dim light of nature, nor the daylight of the
Word, but by the bright clear light of the spirit, that clearly manifests
things.

2 His knowledge is more certain, he knows by his own experience the misery of
sin; the excellency of Grace, he knows how Christ was formed in him, he has
conceived him in his soul, and so knows all the motions and operations of his
spirit. Gal. 4.19.

3 It is more particular, he can apply all he hears and reads to himself, how
far this promise belongs to him; he thinks the command belongs to him, the
threatenings to him, the promises to him, he thinks the Word was pend for him;
another man he reads and hears, and never applies it to himself, nunquid ego
talis, when he hears a Christian may be assured of his salvation, am I so?
Christ's death is not only sufficient but effectual to them that believe, but
do I believe? he hears that young men overcome the World, but do I so, aad
overcome? thus it is with a Christian another man rests in the Theory.

4 Their knowledge is effectual, it makes them ready to obey, the law is a
light to my feet, and a Lantern to my paths, says David, it is not a light
to the understanding only, but it a light to my steps, to my practice, all the
understanding they have, is true knowledge, if a man should walk in such a soil
where he should certainly sinck in, and be swallowed up, would you think he
knows the danger? it is a sign he knew it not; so we say, if we meet with one
of our acquaintance, and he passes by us without observing, we say, he would
not know us.

3 For the object (all things) that is, all things pertaining to life and
godliness, 2 Pet. 1.3. for they do not know the motions of the Heavens, the
influences of the Stars, the nature of the Creatures, but they know all things
belonging to life and godliness.

1 They know all things necessary to Salvation, no fundamental point but God
reads it to them, which is necessary to Salvation, Joh. 17.3.

2 They know all things that are expedient in their Callings, and places to
know, and there is a manifold expediency.

1 It is expedient, some men in some Callings should know more than others, as
Ministers, Jer. 3.15. Mal. 2.7. it is fit that they should know more than
others, and God has promised their lips shall preserve knowledge; so it is not
enough for a Magistrate to know as a private Christian, but he should know how
to administer Judgment, 1 King. 3.9. and 12. as Solomon prayed for Wisdom, so
Husbands should know more than Wives, 1 Pet. 3.17. so Parents than Children
Ephesians. 6.4.

2 There is an expedience and meetnesse in regard of the present condition of
Gods people, if God see that his Children he puffed up with knowledge, he is
pleased to leave them in much ignorance; but if he finds their hearts humble,
and prepared to hear, he does delight to pour out his Spirit on them, Ps.
25.9. as long as the Woman had an empty Vessel, the Oil run, but when it was
full, it ceased; so as long as we come with empty hearts this Oil runs upon
them, but as soon as they think they have enough, and rest content, their
knowledge stands at a stay.

3 There is expediency for the present practice in any business, a man that
has present need of direction, in some present business that must presently
be done, if men have humble hearts, and look up to God why the Spirit is
pleased to whisper into their hearts, there is your way walk in it, Isa. 30.21.

4 There is a further expedience for the present condition of the Church, for
sundry things are expedient in sundry Ages, it had been an hindrance of many
providence of God, had they known the sinfulness of Poligamie in the first
ages of the world; so, many Christians were ignorant of the Death and
Resurrection of Christ, but after the Ascension of Christ they had the clear
knowledge thereof, 2 Pet. 1.18. the days of the Old Testament were but as a
dim light, now it is more clear: the Fathers of the Church of Old had little of
the Revelation of Saint John, and as the Church has now need to know more than
at other times, so God reveals himself accordingly: had those seven thousand
in Israel which bowed not their knee to Baal, been endued with the spirit of
Elias, certainly the Church had been dissipated, had they spoken with the same
spirit and power that he did, they had been dissipated: but they knew as much
as God saw fit for their present condition, and so what God sees meet for you
to know, as far as you stand in need to know the spirit of Antichrist in
th^se times, so far shall knowledge be revealed to you, so that you may be
preserved.

For the Reasons of the Point.

Reas. 1. From the object of their Knowledge, and in him all things needful; 2
Cor. 2.2. in Christ they have enough, Col. 2.9, 10. therefore having got
Christ, will he not give you all other things needful? since God has given us
Christ, our head understands all things, and the head will be sure to guide the
foot, when it has need to go.

2 From the excellency of their Teacher, John 6.45. thy Children shall be
(...), Isa. 48.17. and if God undertake to teach us to profit he is able to do
more than any other teachers; they may teach, but they cannot give a dullard
wit, but God can open our understandlngs, and enlarge our hearts with wisdom,
so that he will clear the object, the Medium and the faculty, Psalm 119.13. I
have more understanding then my teachers, so verse. 97.

Use. 1 A ground of singular comfort to any poor Christian, that whatsoever is
needful for him, expedient for him, he has a teacher; every poor Christian
has a Counselor within him; that teaches him all things, and this is better
than the Vrim and Thummim, and Ephod; to counsel at, we have an unction which
is worth all, we have an oracle in our breasts, which if we would but rub up,
would reveal all things to us.

2 Here is ground of trial to all, art thou a true Child of God? thou may
know it by thy knowledge, do thou find thy heart prepared to receive Christ's
voice? and do thou discern of things that differ? and do thou still think
thou know nothing? is thy knowledge clear, particular, and effectual? does
God give thee knowledge according to thy calling, and present employment? why
then certainly thou art a Child of God, and have received an unction from the
holy one; but if it be contrary with thee, thou can not be assured that thou
have received an unction from the spirit, and so the least in Gods Kingdom is
greater, and has received more knowledge than thou.

Use 3 May teach every Child of God, what course to take to get knowledge, and
use it, and increase it; if you want knowledge, give up thy heart to God,
labor for that spiritual eye salve; that may inlighten thine eyes; one days
teaching in Christ's School, is able to teach thee more than thou can learn
all thy life time from other teachers, if you neglect this; though you should
spend much time in Schools, and Universities, you shall not find so much, as
the poorest Christian can teach you.

And for you that have received this unction, make use of it, it is not for you
to hide and smother this light, it is for you to consult at this oracle; and
take heed by all means that you grieve not this spirit by any vanity, or sin
you cleave unto, for then you shall find this ointment very much straightened, and
you shall be put to great straights; therefore keep your hearts empty and
humble, hungring after the ways of God, and gladly receive his motions, he
will be ready to fill empty Vessels, and to guide an humble soul in his ways:
Lead me O Lord in thy ways, says David: he speaks as a blind man, that wants
some body to lead him; such souls are sensible of their own blindness, and
depend upon God, and are ready to walk according to the counsel he gives, the
Lord will be ready to reveal all things to them, necessary and expedient, and
yet think you still have need of help, but yet take heed of trusting to any
motion, but what comes from the spirit.

Use 4 Here we see of what use it is to consult with Christians in cases of
difference, 1 Cor 6 1. to 6. for the weakest Christian is more able to discern
than the greatest heathenish Philosophers or Counselors; God does provide that
there shall be some differences in the judgments of his Children, but in the
main, they shall hold no error hurtful; therefore let us search more into this
ointment* and labor for it more than ever; we never had more need of
knowledge, than in these days, and our Children will have more; therefore let
us labor to establish them and our selves in the truth.

1 JOHN 2.21. I have not written unto you, because you know not the truth, but
because ye know it, and that no lie is of the truth.


THese words are an answer to an objection that might arise from the former
verse, why might they say, if we know all things, what need you write to us
concerning such and such things? or thus, if we know all things, what need you
write to us? if we know not, how can we be said to know all things? to this he
answers in this verse. I write unto you, not because you know not the truth, etc
wherein we have the cause of his writing.

1 The Negative, not for their Ignorance.

2 The Positive cause, because ye do know, and because veruw est Index sui and
obliqui, therefore ye know likewise what is not of the truth, that no lie is of
the truth.

Doct. The Apostles writings were rather directed to such as know the truth,
then such as know not the truth. Or thus, It is not the ignorance of the truth,
but rather the knowledge of it, that occasioned the Apostles writings.
Observe all the Apostles writings, they were never written to any Country, or
Town or person that did not know the truth before, but they were already
brought on to the knowledge of the truth, Romans 15.14. so the Corinths, he
speaks to them, as to a Church of God, 1 Cor. 1.1.2 and 8, 9. so Gal. 2, 3, 4.
and chap. 3. so Ephesians. 4.21. Phil. 1.6. Col. 1.12, 13. so the Thessalonians, he
blessed God for their election, 1 These. 1.9. so Timothy and Titus he writes to
them, as to his natural sons in Christ, Heb. 6.9.10, 11. so the Apostle James
chap. 1.2, 3. so 1 Pet. 1.2, 3, 4. so this Apostle St. John, I write unto you,
because you know the truth. 2 Epist. 1. and third Epistle, 2.3. so the
Epistles, Christ wrote to the seven Churches of Asia, he wrote to them as such
as knew the truth of Christ, and professed his name; so that this is an
universal truth, that not the Ignorance of the truth, but the knowledge has
occasioned the Apostles writings.

Reas. 1. From God, who has not sanctified their writings to this end, to the
conversion of the Gentiles, but to their establishment, the Apostle here speaks
of them that knew the main truth, though they were Ignorant of many particular
truths; if men be converted to the truth; and brought to prize Christ and walk
in obedience, there may be great use of the Apostles writings to establish them
in the truth, we never read that they wrote to any Kingdoms where themselves
had not been or sent; they wrote not to Persia, or Spain, or France, but to
such places as they had been at, and if God had sanctified their writings to
the conversion of the Gentiles, it had been more fit to write to such places,
where they were not likely to come, rather than such places as they came at, 1
Cor. 1.2. but we see that God has so ordered it, that men should be called by
the foolishness of preaching, Romans 10 13, ^4, 15* and not of writing, it is
not his writing to them, but he must be sent to them, so that the work of
conversion is wrought by the preaching of the Gospel.

Reas. 2. From the accompanying of their preaching of the Gospel with mighty
signs and wonders, but we never read that God accompanied any of their
writings with miracles, their writings laid upon any disease, healed none, but
their presence healed many, and did many wonders, Heb. 2.2, 3, 4. 1 Cor. 5.22.
tongues are not for them that believe, but them that believe not that is, the
miracle of speaking with diverse tongues, is not for them that believe, but for
them that believe not; therefore we never read in any History, that their
writings did work any miracle, and so he never intended that they should
convert.

Obj. What then, is their writings in vain, seeing they are of no use to
convince?

A. No, there are singular uses of their Writings.

1 Sometimes to put men in remembrance of what they have heard, Romans 15.14. 2
Pet. 1.15.

2 That they may be established in the truth, and confirmed in the knowledge
thereof, 2 Cor. 13.1. Phil. 3.1. To write the same things, to me it is not
grievous, but for you it is safe.

3 To stir them up to the exercise of such truth as they knew, but were slack
in performing thereof; sometimes in liberality slack, sometimes in dispencing
of the Ordinances, 2 Pet. 2.13. 1 John 1.4. 2 John 8. Revel. 2.4, 5. to stir
them up to their first Love, to stir them up to take heed of false Doctrine.

4 To inform them in some particular truth which they were ignorant of; some
were afraid that the Day of the Lord was so nigh that they neglected their
particular Calling, 2 These. 2. so some were ignorant of the Resurrection, so he
tells Timothy how to behave himself, 1. Tim. 3.15. so he informs the
Corinthians how Husbands ought to carry themselves toward their Wives, in case
of desertion, or present persecution.

Use. 1. It shows a reason of that little good which has been done among the
Papists, by any Writings that have been writ in defense of the truth, they have
been means of much good to them that have known the truth, but amongst Millions
of Papists, it is hard to know whether any have been converted to the true
Religion, after such evidet demonstration and conviction, the reason is,
because Writings do not profit them that know not the truth, but such as know
the truth, for else why did not Saint John write to Cerinthus, or other
Heretics in that time? but he tells them, I write to you, because you know
the truth, had he writ to Cerinthus or Menander, his labor would have been
lost; not but that it has done much good, not only to them that have known the
truth, but those that have not known the truth, it has stirred them up to like
the truth better, and some to seek out the truth in other Writings; but never
to convert them to the truth; God has many times blessed sudden speeches to
convert some that have come to hear the truth, but it has never been so
effectual to them that have only read it in writings, for God never sanctified
the Apostles Writings to the conversion of the unbeleeving Gentiles.

Obj. Why then do not our Divines spare their labor in writing?

A. Though they do not prosper to conversion, yet to establishment of many in
the truth, and to stir them up to stick closer to the truth.

Use. 2. You may hence see the reason, why such as read the Word of God
diligently, it may be once or more every day, yet notwithstanding not being
accompanied with the preaching of the Gospel, few, or none such as are
converted and brougt to the true knowledge of the truth, but such people are
fit to be led into Popery or Heresy; no wonder, for God never blessed the
Apostles Writings, while they were living, to the conversion of unbeleevers,
therefore we see the necessity of preaching to every Congregation, or else the
body of the pleace will sit in darkness and shadow of death; therefore it is a
false Assertion of those that say, Reading and Preaching are of like efficacy,
for it is certain, had the Apostles Writings been as effectual to conversion as
their presence in preaching, they would have wrote most to such Churches as were
most remote, 2 Chronicles. 15.3. a long time they were without a God, and without a
Teaching Priest; implying, they that are without a Teaching Priest are without
God, 1 King. 13.33. the reason, because he set up base fellows, that wanted
both learning and grace, and so only read, but they had not a Teaching Priest,
and therefore lived without God.

Obj. But you will say, what can be more said of pagans?

2 And what then, will you judge that all such as live under dumb Ministers are
cast a-wayes?

A. Whether do you think it greater charity to tell them that they may be
without a Teaching Minister, or to tell them, that without a Teaching Minister
they live without God, and without the Law? we know, that many that live in
such places go abroad, and light on good Sermons, and to Christ is found where
he was not sought, and then they either remove themselves, or go many miles to
hear the Word abroad, and God often blesses private conference and helps, to
do much good, Neh. 8.12. but men that go home from bare reading, their hearts
go home as dead as their Minister was dumb, so that you shall find many people
as ignorant as Pagans and Turks.

V 3. It may serve for direction to such as God has given a gift of writing
unto, to know where their Writings may be of most use; if you writ to some,
thinking to convert them, it will be labor in vain, but to writ to them that
know the truth, may be of much use, to inform them, to reprove them, to stir
them up, and so you may write with comfort to them.

Use 4. May serve to encourage all Christians to be frequent in reading; to
what purpose did the Apostles write, if others read not? it is good to be
reading; put more fuel to fire and it grows hotter, so let people read after
they have heard, and it will be very profitable; therefore we see the great
abuse of the Papists, that deny the reading of the Scriptures in a Vulgar
Tongue.

Let us therefore be stirred up, not to forbear the reading of the Scriptures,
though you do know the truth, Deuteronomy. 17.19. if Kings might not be excused, much
less private men.

Doct. 2. Such as have received from Christ the anoyntment of the Spirit, they
know the truth.
You that have received the Unction of the Holy one, I write to you, not
because you know not the truth, but because you know it, 1 Timothy 4.3. where he
puts Believers and knowers together, now Believers are anointed with the Spirit
of faith, John 8.31* 32. so much sincerity of truth, so much Discipleship, the
stronger faith, the stronger knowledge of the truth, the weaker our faith the
weaker our knowledge.

For Explication.

Q. 1. What is the truth?

A. The truth might be taken for the Lord Jesus Christ, and he is not to be
excluded, but he is not principally meant here, Jhon 15.6. and it is true, that
they know Christ that have received this Unction, John 6.69.

But here by the truth is meant the Doctrine. of the Gospel, Ephesians. 4.21. which
is called the truth in Jesus, that truth which teaches us to find Christ, to
prize Christ, and you know it in a special manner, as it is in Jesus in a
Crucified manner, you know it as it is in Jesus which raises you from death to
life; it is sometimes called the word of truth, Col. 1.5. Gal. 2.4, 5. so then,
you that know the truth, you know the worth of Christ, the means to find him,
yea you know him in a Crucified manner, in his Death and Resurrection.

Q. 2. What is the knowledge of the truth?

A. Three things make up the knowledge of the truth.

1 The understanding of it.

2 Approving of it, and consenting to it.

3 Because a man may consent to it, either as probable, or as certain and
evident knowledge, therefore it is not only an understanding of the truth, but
a consenting to it, and that not as a probable thing, but as an undoubted
certain truth, Judicium contingentis axiomatis est opinio, necessarii scientia,
if it be from the causes, then it is scientia, if by the effects, cognitio.

And thus these Babes know the truth, you understand it, you consent to it, you
yield to it as a certain and undoubted truth; and that all those concur to
knowledge, we may see by Scripture.

1 For understanding, see Luke 24.45.

2 They approve and consent to it, and follow it, John 10.4, 5, 27.

3 They do not only understand it clearly, and approve of it, but receive it as
a certain undoubted truth; so John 6.69. We know, and are assured, that thou
art the Christ.

There is as much difference between knowledge and faith, as betwixt hearing
and seeing; if I hear a thing from an undoubted testimony I believe it, but
when I see it my self, I know it more evidently; Stephen believed that Christ
sat at Gods right hand, but when he saw it, he knew it certainly; so that
these Babes by some sight and experience know those things that they believe,
Heb. 11.2. this knowledge is one of the chiefest things that perfects the mind
of a man, Isa. 11.2. what spirit is a spirit of wisdom and understanding?
understanding apprehends it, Wisdom judges of it, and discerns of the truth
hereof; Knowledge sees that they are most certainly true, and then he believes
it, John 6.69. we know, and are sure, for none can know a thing but those that
are sure of it.

Q. What is the reason, that by virtue of this Unction babes come to know the
truth?

Reas. 1. Because this Spirit is an eye salve to make them understand: by
nature we are flow and dull of understanding, but as soon as God has dropped in
some of this Spiritual eye salve, we strongly see the deep things of God, yea
even those which were dull to understand before.

2 He vouchsafes to them Wisdom, whereby they embrace and approve the truth,
as the very truth of Christ, and they have a spirit of faith to believe it,
therefore have knowledge of it.

3 He gives them experience, that their hearts do as plainly feel, as their
understandings know; nay these Babes, they fetch their understanding from the
feeling of their hearts, they know the danger of sin, and the worth of Christ,
and this puts them to reach after Christ, and look at him as the most excellent
of a thousand, and so they come to find true fellowship with Christ, by putting
into them a spirit of peace, 1 Pet. 3.8. so that they know it not only by
faith, but by experience, and so they know the truth as it is in Christ; you
may have men by hearing and study, come to know very largely of the ways of
Grace; the Doctrins and points of Divinity; nay, they may come to approve of
them, and may convince an adversary, but yet this is not properly a knowledge
of these things, but an understanding of them; a man that wants this Unction
may say, he understands these, and believes them, but he cannot say he knows
them by any sensible work of God on his own soul.

Use 1 May exhort all (in the name of the Lord) that intend to receive the
Sacrament, to a conscionable care and endeavor to get knowledge, it is not a
privilege of Scholars, but even of very Babes, if they have received this
Unction, therefore let none excuse themselves, for if the Apostle acknowledge
it in Babes, it may shame elder people, if they be ignorant of the rudiments of
Religion, therefore labor to grow up to a knowledge of the truth, there is no
hope that you should either find comfort in Gods Ordinances here, or in the
life to come, if you be ignorant of the truth, Isa. 27.11. it is a fearful
judgment, These people have no understanding, therefore their Maker will show
them no favor, that is, no gnace in Christ, they shall neither find mercy,
nor favor; and mark how he prevents an Objection: He that made us will surely
save us; no, if you be ignorant he that made you will not save you, therefote
if you would ever get any good to your souls, above all gettings get
understanding, for without it look for no mercy, and above all understanding
get this wisdom, which is infused by the Unction of the Spirit.

And so Parents and Masters, as you desire to get favor of God for your
Children, and Servants, be careful to instruct them in the ways of truth, and
for such as have got knowledge, labor to grow up in this Spiritual knowledge,
Col. 2.2, 3. Three things did Paul conflict for;

1 That their hearts might be comforted, nothing more useful for a Christian
than comfort, but when Christians have got comfort, it is easy for Christians
to fit loose one from another, and not to regard one another; therefore,

2 His conflict was, that they might be knit together in the bond of love.

3 That they might grow up to fullness of knowledge, etc. so that we see it is
matter of great Conflict to the Apostles, with God, that they might be brought
to the riches of full assurance, and shall Ministers thus Conflict for their
people, and shall not people themselves labor to grow up to fullness of
knowledge, and not be remiss, and know some pieces and parts of the truth, but
to come to the riches and fullness of understanding? It would be a great
conflict to a faithful Minister to see people poor in knowledge, to have only a
few remnants and shreds of knowledge, some superficial kind of knowledge,
therefore let people labor for the riches of the full assurance of
understanding, which is properly true knowledge; we see therefore how much
Parents and Masters are to blame, that are so far from having conflicts for the
knowledge of their Children* and Servants, that they have no care at all to
help them on; you are merciless Parents, and Masters, that do not labor to
bring them on to the riches of knowledge, for without this they shall find no
mercy, nor favor from God.

Use 2 It may serve for a sign of trial of our knowledge, whether we have
received the Unction of the Holy one, if you know the truth in a right manner,
then you have partaken of the Unction of the Holy one; this differs from all
other knowledge: For the cause of it, it is from God, Isa. 54.4. the means of
getting it, is to attend diligently to the Word* private conference may bring
on men to understanding of the truth; nay, where other means fail, it may bring
them to the knowledge of faith, Joh. 4.42. when we come to public Ordinances,
we arise to higher and full understanding, and riches of full assurance, they
perceived Christ so speaking to their Souls, that they believed on him now by
experience.

First, Therefore listen to private Christians, but frequent the Ordinances,
whereby you shall grow up to fullness of knowledge.

The Second Means, is, frequency in prayer, Prove. 2.13, 14.

Thirdly, Obedience is the way to get knowledge, If any man do my Fathers, Will
he shall know the truth; if you pray to God, and come to the Word, with a
desire to do what you hear, and resolve that what the Lord speaks, you will
hear and do it, and not only such resolution as is extorted by some
Thunder-shakings, as the Jews, Exodus 20. but when you have a settled resolution,
to obey what you know to be Gods Will, God will increase your knowledge.

2 This knowledge differs from other knowledge in the effects, for this
knowledge humbles men, Prove. 30.2, 3. and this knowledge works faith, Psalm.
10.9. They that know thy name will trust in thee; and obedience, Col. 1.5, 6.
that knowledge which brings not forth obedience* is no true knowledge; none but
this kind of knowledge brings forth sincere obedience.

1 JOHN 2.21. Because ye know the truth, and that no lie is of the truth.


THese words afford us Three Doctrins.

1 That every Antichristian Doctrine is a Lie, for of that he speaks.

2 That no Lie (that is, no Antichristian Doctrine) is of the truth, that is,
flows from the truth of the Gospel.

3 Such as have received the spiritual Unction, and do know the truth, they
also know that no Lie is of the truth. For the first,

Doct. Every Antichristian Doctrine is a Lie.
Q. What is a Lie in Doctrine, for that is the lie that is here meant?

A. Three things make up a Lie.

1 That the Proposition do not agree with the thing we speak of.

2 That it agree not with the Notion that we have in our minds.

3 That we speak it a purpose to deceive, all these are found in every
Antichristian Doctrine.

1 These enunciations do not agree with the word of truth, for else they could
not be a lie; the word (...) shows they agree not with the truth of Christ.

2 These Doctrins are contrary to the Judgments of them that deliver them, and
this may appear from the definition of an Heretic, Tit. 3.10, 11 an Heretic
is one that is subverted in his error, and is condemned of him. self; Heresy
therefore is all subversion by error, and maintaining of the same with
obstinacy; a man may be an erroneous man, but he does not come to be an
Heretic till he be condemned in himself, that is, speak contrary to his
judgment, which may appear, when rather then he will depart from his error,
he will contradict himself, as when he is convinced, he falls to wranglings, or
blaspheming, these are signs of such as speak contrary to their own judgments.

3 They deliver them with a purpose to deceive, Ephesians. 4.14. They lie in wait
to deceive, they plot how to deceive the consciences of men, and this kind of
Heresy is called (...), that is, Cheating every way: or they are as Coggers of
Dice, so that their trade is but to deceive and cheat men, so that we see,
there is a Threefold Lie in every Antichristian Doctrine.

1 It is materially a Lie, the Doctrine it self is contrary to the truth. 2 It
is a Lie formally, they speak against their judgment. 3 It is efficiently a
Lie, they breed lies in others, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2.
Q What is the reason why every Antichristian Teacher is a Lie, and his Doctrine
a Lie?

A Because it springs from a lying spirit, not from a Spirit of truth, but of
lies; so the Devil describes himself when he seduceth false Prophets, 1 King.
22.22. to be a Lying spirit, as if there were no more effectual way to seduce
Kings than by false Teachers, acted by the Lying Spirit; I will put error in
their hearts, and make them obstinate in it, and unanimous in it, so that four
hundred false Prophets shall easily out-bear one Micaiah; the like does the
Devil in all false Teachers, he comes, and is a Lying Spirit in them, with
such seemlinesse and show of truth, that it deceives them, they take it for
truth, 2 These. 2.6. they shall come with deceitfulness of Doctrine, and many
false lying wonders, whereby they shall seduce many.

Rea. 2. From the corrupt end that these false Teachers do evidently aim at in
all their Doctrine, Acts 20.30. some do it in ambition to draw Disciples to
themselves, and not to Christ* such was Simon Magus, that gave out that he was
the Christ that suffered, and so drew many after him; after him, Menander.

2 Some aimed to fill their bellies, and to get gain and pleasure from their
followers, Romans 16. whose belly is their God, so that they serve not Christ,
but their own bellies, and for that end with fair flattering speeches, they
beguile for filthy lucre; Tit. 1.11, 12. so that all the lust of the world,
they aim at, ambition, sensuality, and filthy gain, are the ends they aim at,
and if their ends be so corrupt, their Doctrine must needs be corrupt and a lie.

Reas. 3 From the sport and jest they make at deluding people, one would
think there should none be so desperately wicked, to come into congregations,
and obtrude false Doctrine, and delude men, and then make a sport of it 2 Pet.
2.13. it sports them to see how handsomely they circumvented such a man, at
such a conference, this is matter of sport to them, to see how at feasts and
meetings they could carry the whole Table before them, Gal. 6.12, 13. what is
their end? they desire to make a fair show in the flesh, and they glory in it,
and triumph, and they themselves regard not many things that they obtrude on
others, they make no scruple of it themselves, they know they are empty things,
so that this is manifestly a lie.

Use. 1 May teach us how to conceive of Popery, and stir up in our selves an
holy indignation against it; you see that Popery is a lie, and has deluded
many; Mahivell did clearly discern, that their religion was but mere juggling,
to fill the Popes Coffers, and keep his Kiching warm by purgatory and pardons,
etc. therefore let none trust them; but indeed this was his wickedness, though
he discerned this, he sought not the true Religion, and this is the evil of
their Religion, it leads simple men to superstition, and understanding men to
Atheism; and if Popery be but cheating, and juggling, and lying, it must kindle
in us, an inward loathing of that Religion; Bellarmin does directly bring that
for his defense, which was palpable and ex instituto, writ against them, and
therefore it is plain, that every Antichristian Doctrine si a lie; not only
against the truth, but against their own judgment to deceive, Psalm. 119.128.
let it be our care to look at every law of God as just, nnd to hate every
false way, nothing so odious to man, as to be cheated; men take it most
indignely to be made a fool of, why truly that is the end of Antichristian
Doctors to cheat and beguile men.

Use. 2 It must teach us how prone our natures are to receive such false
Doctrins, Psalm. 58.3. Romans 3.4. every man's judgment is apt to take up that
opinion which suits with his understanding; now because by nature we are prone
to lies, and errors, therefore let us take heed to our selves, and watch more
exactly; Heresy is a fruit of the flesh, Gal. 5.19, 20. and therefore no
wonder if carnal hearts be ready to take it up, seeing by nature the truth
seems harsh to us.

Use. 3 It must stir us up to embrace the Doctrine of the Gospel, the more your
spirits loath falsehood, the more are you to cleave to the truth, do they make a
sport to juggle and deceive? do you see they aim at corrupt ends? do they speak
by a lying spirit? if this be the fruit of Popery, that the whole bulk of it is
but an heap of lies, then as we are to detest that, so we are to love the truth
of the Gospel, it comes from the spirit of truth, the ends of it are contrary
to Antichristian, they aim to bring on Disciples to Christ, they look not at
their own belly and gain, but to edify and do good to the Church of God,
seeing therefore the Religion of Christ is so pure, so peaceable* so
self-denying, so free from cheating and juggling, therefore let us be more
enamoured on it, embrace it, study it more, practice it more.

Use. 4 If every antichristian Doctrine be a lie, then they that are born of it,
are not born of the truth, and the Doctors of it are liars, so that if it be
asked whether it be a true Church, we say it is a lying Doctrine they hold,
those that are the Doctors and teachers of their Church are liars; and take the
body of the Church, it is a bulk of lies, a company of liars, deceiving the
World, and sporting themselves in their deceivings.

Doct. No lie, that is, no heretical Antichristian Doctrine, is of the truth*
Out of false things we may sometimes conclude falsehood, and sometimes truth,
but out of a true principle, you can never gather falsehood; so St. John here
out of the truth you cannot conclude any lie, any false Doctrine; so that no lie
is of the truth.

For Explication.

A Doctrine may be sid to be of the truth, or not of it, in a double respect.

1 Of the truth, as the cause of it, John 8.37. he that is born of the truth, 1
John 3.19. so to be of the truth, is to be a Child of the truth, so that when
it is said, it it not of the truth, that is, it is not born of the truth, and
it is not bred of the truth.

1 Because it springs not from the Gospel of truth.

2 It springs not from the Spirit of truth, but from a lying spirit.

3 It springs not from the truth of their own hearts, not from the very moral
civil truth; they neither spring from the divine truth of the Gospel, nor from
the Spirit, nor from the moral truth in their own hearts; a man may speak not
from the Spirit of truth in the word, and yet speak from an honest heart, but
an Heretic speaks not from the truth of his own heart, Tit. 3.10, 11. so
that these men's errors are not from ignorance or infirmity, but merely from
the spirit of falsehood.

2 It is not of the truth, that is, it keeps not correspondency, or fellowship
with the truth, and the reason is, because no Antichristian Doctrine, but it
comes from the spirit of lying and murder, and such a spirt is the Devils
spirit, John 8.48. Satan's intendment is to lie, and deceive, and murder men's
souls; and that proceeds from the enmity betwixt Christ, and the seed of the
Serpent, now the seed of the Serpent is not only Heretics, but Heretical
Doctrine, and they strive to root out one another, Amos 7.10, 11. which shows
what little fellowship falsehood has with truth, 2 Cor. 6.14, 15. and therefore
they would not suffer Christ to live, and so they persecuted the Apostles,
because they spoke the word of truth.

Use. 1 May exhort all professors of the truth, to take heed of lying; if no
lie be of the truth, then if you speak falsehood or lies, you walk not like your
selves, such words come not from the Spirit of truth, but from the lying
spirit, the spirit of wickedness and falsehood; and therefore what have the
Children of the truth to do with falsehood, with false words, and false dealing?
and especially take heed of false Doctrine for it is not of the truth, but lies;
therefore have nothing to do with the spirit of falsehood, the spirit of Popery,
or the spirit of separation, to draw you from the truth of Christ, from the
communion of the Church.

Use 2 If no Heresy be of the truth, then certainly it will never be for the
truth; no stream rises higher then the spring from whence it comes; if such
Doctrine comes not from the truth, it will never rise so high as the truth;
never look for true dealing from an Heretic that lies against the Gospel, and
against his own conscience, never believe any Doctrine of theirs, for they aim
at subverting; if they deal not truly with God, they will not deal truly with
man, it is a conclusion of the council of Constance, fides non est servanda
cum Haereticis, why? because they are Heretics; but you should know they were
Heretics that swore it, and therefore they show such false dealing; therefore
you shall never find any true honest dealing with Antichristian states in any
negotiation.

Use 3 It may teach us, there is no safe reconciliation with these Doctrins,
nay, no safe toleration, for no lie is of the truth; how can you reconcile
night and day? light and darkness? there is as wide a difference between the
truth, and Antichristian Doctrines; therefore there is no safe toleration of
them, but one of them will be rooting out the other, either lies or the truth
will be banished.

Use 4. It may refute an Error of some, that say, As Anabaptisme sprang from
Luther, and Libertinisme from Calvin, so Separation from Puritanism; but this
cannot be, for no lie is of the truth, therefore these could not spring from
any truth of Luther, or Calvin, or Puritanism.

Doct. Such as have received the unction of the Spirit, they know no Error, no
false Doctrine is of the truth.
They know it, not only think so, but know it, and they know it.

1 From the contrariety that they see betwixt that unction of the Spirit which
they have received, and that Doctrine; the Spirit of God in them teaches them to
be humble, 2 Pet. 2.18. but the spirit of these false Doctors is ambitious,
they speak great swelling words; this suites not with the Spirit of God, to
look at their own ends, at their bellies, at their gain.

2 It is contrary to their experience; a true Christian knows that the Doctrine
of Antichrist is contrary to that experience he has found; if they come to
speak of Free Will, his own heart tells him, he was fain to be drawn out of
himself, he found that he could very hardly be pulled out of his Natural
estate, so that a Christian heart knows this is contrary to the truth. Let
another say, we are justified by works, you cannnot persuade a Christian to
that, for he knwows his best righteousness is defiled, Isa. 64.6. and when he
has done what he can he is but an unprofitable servant; when they tell him,
there is merit and satisfaction in his Works, yea supererrogation, no Christian
but he knows this to be a lie, and that he deserves wrath for his best
performances, he knows he is no way able to satisfy Gods Justice, or Gods
Law, but only Christ satisfies for him. When they shall come to a poor soul and
bid him confess his sins, and tell him they have power to absolve him from his
sins, he knows it will not quiet his soul; tell a Christian, that going on
Pilgrimages, and scourging himself will satisfy for his soul, he knows that
is false; tell a Christian, he may fall away finally, he knows that is a lie,
2 Timothy 1.12. 1 These. 5.24.

3. They know the truth, because they have received it from a Messenger of
truth.

4 They know the truth by the effects, by the peace and grace they find from
the truth; and on the contrary, no Antichristian Doctrine ever brought peace to
their souls, and there is no truth where no peace is, where you cannot find
peace of Conscience, that Religion has no saving truth in it; if they find
not the fruit of peace, they know it is not of the truth.

2 Another fruit of the true Religion, is, it brings liberty and freedom of
spirit to come to God from Satan, from his Lusts, from the World, John 8.32.
therefore if Religion do not make us free to come to God, and free from the
World, and our own Lusts, surely that Religion is not of the truth, 2 Pet.
2.19. he speaks of these false Teachers, that they promise liberty, themselves
being servants of sin.

Use 1 May serve to reprove all such as are at an uncertainty in their
Religion, they know not which Religion to take, they say they find Reasons on
both sides so probable, and there are some on both sides so corrupt, that they
know not which to take; why, if it be so, you have not received the unction of
the Spirit, for there is not the least of these little Children which have
received this unction, but he knows the truth, and that no Lie is of the truth.

Use 2 For you that have took up your Religion, and the true Religion, but do
you know your Religion to be the truth, and that it is no Lie? why they hope it
is true, because the King and State follow it; but do you know it to be true,
and do you know every contrary Doctrine to be a Lie? if you do not; you do not
know what you should, Psalm. 119.30. I have chosen the truth, he does not say
the State has chosen it, or orhers have chosen it, and therefore I will follow
it too; No, but I have chosen it, let others choose what they will; let every
Christian know that he has chosen the truth, and that no (...)

Use 3. It may teach all to grow up in discerning the truth, and that will
discover all falsehood; as suppose you should have some come to you, and tell
you, you frequent the ordinances, and perform good duties only in the Letter,
but you ought to do nothing but when the Spirit moves you; but let a Christian
examine if this be not a lie, and contrary to the truth, and to that experience
I find, for we ought to pray continually; so if one come and tell you, you
ought not to read the Scriptures, your own spirit tells you, you have as much
need of the Word, as a Child of his daily Milk; therefore let Christians learn
to discern of the Spirit of Truth and Error.

1 JOHN 2.22. Who is a Liar, but he that denies that Jesus is the Christ? he
is Antichrist that denies the Father and the Son.


THe Apostle, verse. 10, 21, 22. propounds some means to help them against false
Teachers.

1 By something in themselves, that Unction in them.

2 By the grosnesse and falsenesse of their Doctrine, which is called a Lie, and
the Teachers Liars; who is a Liar if they be not?

These false Teachers in this verse are 1 described by an adjunct of lying, and
that so grossly, that if they be not Liars, there are none in the Worid, it is
as gross a Lie as any, so that these Liars may stand in comparison with any.

2 Their lie is set out by their Doctrine, who is a liar, but he that denies
that Jesus is the Christ?

3 He expresses it by their name and nature, he is the Antichrist, and their
Doctrine is, to deny the Father and the Son, for if they deny the Son, deny they
then the Father.

Doct. Antichrists Teachers are as gross Liars as who are the worst.
Who is a Liar if not these? let none be accounted Liars if not they; they are
as great Liars as any, equal to the worst; these words come home; and no wonder
Christ called James and John Sons of Thunder, for they speak plainly and
boldly.

Two things make a man a gross Liar, equal to the worst.

1 The perniciousnesse of his Lie. 2 The evidence of it.
1 The perniciousnesse of it; It is a pernicious Lie, to speak against the
Government of an house or Family, or good of others, but no lie so pernicious
as Popish Lies, none do so much harm as the Lies of Antichristian Teachers,
they lie not only against their own souls, but also to the hurt of others, 1
Pet. 3.2, 3. they shall bring in damnable Heresies, such Doctrins that if men
live and dye in them, they shall be damned, and many shall follow their
pernicious ways, and so they sell the souls of men, and so one part of the
merchandise of the Romish Whore is the souls of men, Rev. 8.12, 13. and
therefore if any pernicious Liars, who more pernicious than they that lie
against the souls and salvation of men? no greater Cheaters than to cheat us of
our Savior, of our Father, of Salvation.

2 The evident falsehood of them, A man lies when he mistakes the truth which he
might easily see, or though it were more hard to see; but if a man know it to
be false and pernicious, yet to lie against his knowledge and Conscience, this
makes the Lie palpable and gross; now these Lies are not only contrary to the
truth of the Word, and experience of Christians, but also contrary to their own
knowledge and Conscience, and they must needs be gross Liars that lie in such
weighty matters as Salvation, and that so evidently that he that runs may see
their falsehood.

Use 1. Let us see the damnable estate of all Antichristian false Teachers, for
they that shall not only hold, but thrust on others damnable Doctrins, whereby
they hasten their own, and others destructions, must needs be in a damnable
estate; it is their tenent, that no Church so safe to live and dye in, as their
Catholic Church, and their reason is, because among Pagans, and Infidels you
shall find nothing but horrible lies,, and blasphemies; and it is true; and
among Christians, there is the safest living, for they are confident that
salvation is found in their Church, and all out of their Church cannot be saved
and therefore it is safest for all to live in their fellowship; but though
there may be some that in that Church may be saved, yet whosoever they be that
do know the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, and that do believe, and obey,
and practice that Doctrine, not one of them, but they have sucked in damnable
Heresies, and bring on themselves swift damnation; so that if thete be any
liars among Turks and Infidels, these Antichristian teachers shall carry away
the prize in lying, and those that are saved among them, it is* because they
secretly renounce their Doctrine. therefore let them not boast of our charity
to some amongst them, for none more pernicious and evident Liars than they;
therefore let us be dehorted from their Doctrine, and cleave close to the
profession of the truth.

Use 2. Let us take heed of Antichristian Doctrine, if ever they come among us;
these are described to be the Frogs that go about the World to seduce poor
people; be not deluded then, when they profess themselves to be Patrons of the
truth, the Spirit condemns them to be Liars; and none more gross and evident
lies than theirs.

They are likewise cunning Liars, 2 These. 2.10. none ever, by cunning deceit,
so circumvented the World as they have done.

Use 3. It may serve to teach men not to be mealy mouthed in speaking plainly
and home; the Spirit we see puts the grossest term on them; who be Liars, if
they be not? therefore we must not be offended at the plainness and simplicity
of the Scripture, none so plain as this Apostle, he calls them Liars and
Froggs, in the Revelations, and Beasts, and the Whore of Rome; he deals even as
an old Father, when he would deteine Children from any evil, they use to put
homely names on them.

Use 4. It may serve to teach us all to be abundantly thankful to God that
has delivered us from this lying false Doctrine, wherein many of our Fathers
have perished; for there is no Religion more gross; and no blessing greater
than to be delivered from such a gross lying Religion; to be delivered from a
gross sin, is no such great matter, for the Publicans and Sinners came into
the Kingdom of Heaven sooner than the Pharisees, and yet theirs was the
strictest sect, and Paul blesses God that delivered him from that Religion,
when he was a strict Pharisee, yet God was pleased to call him to the grace of
Christ, and such a mercy is it to us, as none can be greater to any Nation, to
be delivered from this lying Religion, and on this ground God urges obedience
to the moral law, because, he was the God that had brought them out of the
Land of Egypt, out of the house of Bondage, Exodus 20.1. and on this ground, we
should stick close to God, and that Religion he has set us in, that God may
see that we are sencible of this great mercy, that we are delivered from such
gross pernicious evident lies.

Doct. 2 Antichrist denies Jesus to be the Christ, or, he that denies Jesus
to be the Christ, is Antichrist.
1 John 4.3. 2 Epist. John 7. the name of Antichrist shows he is such a one as
is against Christ, an enemy to Christ, 2 These. 2.4, he is called (...).

A man may deny Jesus to be the Christ, either grossly and assertively; or else
cunningly and fraudulently; of ancient Heriticks, some denied the manhood of
Christ, and some the Godhead, and some palpably denied his Office of mediation
and redemption. But that false Antichrist did not deny him palpably and grossly,
2 These 2.2. for first, Antichrist is said to work in a mystery. Secondly, that
he should sit in the Temple of God, 2 Timothy 2.4. so that he should keep some
correspondency with Christ, and his, and sits as a Member of Christ, otherwise
no Church would suffer him; so that he should not openly and grossly deny
Christ, but he should deny him to be that Christ that is anointed of God,
anointed to be King, Priest and Prophet; therefore if you shall find any in
the Church to deny Christ to be King, Priest and Prophet of his Church, that is
Antichrist; therefore observe how their Doctrine cuts asunder the whole work of
Redemption.

1 For his prophetical office, the Church of Rome denies it; Christ is anointed
to be a Prophet to teach his Church by his Word, and by his Spirit in his Word;
they deny his Prophetical Office.

1 By adding other unwritten traditions to the Word of God, as necessary.

2 By preferring the Vulgar Translation to be more authentical than the
Original languages.

3 By denying the use of the Scripture to the common people, and telling them,
it is obscure and dangerous for them.

4 By suspending the authority of his Word, not upon the Testimony of his
Spirit, but on the Church of Rome; so that if you ask a Papist, why they
receive the Gospel of St. Matthew, and deny that of St. John, they say, because
the Church has received the one, and renounced the other; and so they make the
Scripture to depend on general councils, especially on the Pope.

2 The Lord teaches his Church by his Spirit, which they evacuate.

1 By confining this Spirit to councils, and Clergymen, and not to the common
people.

2 They evacuate this teaching of the Spirit, by making it a conjecturall
thing, and probable, but not of any certain knowledge, and thus Antichrist
denies his Prophetical Office.

For the Priestly Office of Christ, which consists, first, in offering
sacrifice; secondly, in intercession, for the application of his sacrifice.

Now the Church of Rome evacuates his Priestly office, first, in his sacrifice.

1 By adding other sacrifices, and so they make his not to be sufficient, and
they add two Sacrifices, first, the Sacrifice of merits, and they say they
merit, first, by works done, as building of Churches, Monasteries, etc. which
they say satisfy for men's sins; and secondly they merit by suffering, as
Pilgrimages and Purgatory, and so by indulgences and Pardons.

2 They evacuate the Sacrifice of Christ, by evacuating the Redemption of
Christ.

1 By making it not plentiful; whereas the Redemption of Christ is a plenteous
redemption both for body and soul, they say he redeems us from eternal pains,
but not from temporal, from Purgatory.

2 By making it not gracious; for they say the grace of Redemption is applied
to us not invincibly, but according to the will of the Creature.

3 By applying it not by faith, but works.

4 They say a man cannot know his Redemption by Christ, surely and certainly,
but probably.

5 This grace they dispense not spiritually, but elementally, by imposing it on
Sacraments; so that without Sacrament, no grace; and some grace is given ex
opere operato.

3 They evacuate his Sacrifice, by making it not eternal; so that this grace is
not certainly eternal, but he that has been washed in Christ's blood, may
finally fall away, and become a reprobate.

4 In making it not necessary in respect of some, as the Virgin Mary.

2 They say it is not necessary, in respect of temporal punishments.

2 They evacuate his Priestly Office, by discouraging people from coming to God
in the name of Christ, but to approach to God by the mediation of the Virgin
Mary, and some Saints; they would have us direct our prayers to some Saint, and
so deny the sole mediation of Christ.

3 For his Kingly Office, they deny it, partly by denying his Head-ship; they
deny his absolute Sovereignty, they will not make the election to be of Free
Grace.

2 By setting up another Head in the Church, the Pope which God never
appointed; as he that sets up another King without his consent, does as good as
deny the other King; so here is as much dishonor to Christ, in setting up a
new Head, as in cutting off the true Head, to set up one that may rule all
Nations, have the deciding of all Causes, etc.

3 They deny his Kingly Office in his great work of Conversion, by making it
not to depend on the Sovereignty, or prerogative of his Kingly Office, but on
the liberty of our wills.

4 They deny his Kingly Office, by defacing his Kingdom, which is his Body,
his Church; they deface his Church, his Body, and transform it not into a
christian state* but Antichristian, and so make it no Church of Christ, and so
deny his Kingly Office.

They deface the Church of Christ, whether Militant, or Triumphant.

The Church Militant, whether you look at it as a Catholic Body, for that,

1 They teach that the most erroneus, notorious livers, are truly Members of
the Church, but we see Christ's Kingdom consists of spiritual people; they are
but ill humors.

2 They give false notes of the Church, antiquity, universality, prosperity
which may agree to some Heathenish places.

3 They make the Church infallible, and this they confine to the church of
Rome, so that if Rome fall, the church of Christ falls.

2 For the parts of the church, either in a council.

1 They say a council is incapable of error. 2 Subject to the Pope. 3 That
they may make Laws to bind the consciences of men.
Or else in the several parts.

1 For the Head the Pope, they set two heads on the Body, and so make it a
Monster.

For the middle Members, the Priests.

1 They say, they may not marry, and so are unclean.

2 Exempt them from the power of civil Magistrates, and so are an inordinate
generation.

2 Their regular Priests, as Monks and Friars, they are all of them abominable,
not planted by God, and profess poverty and chastity, which exposes them to
uncleanness.

For the lowest Members, the Laymen, whether Magistrates, or private men.

1 For Magistrates they make them not heads, no not in their own Kingdoms, but
subject to the Pope, and he desposeth them.

2 For the people, he can dispense with their Oath of Allegiance.

3 From both, they withold the Scripture in the known Tongue, and the cup.

For the Church Militant in Purgatory, they make a Church God never
acknowledged.

For the Church triumphant, they make the Saints as so many Idols, in praying
to them, visiting their Relics, making them partakers in Christ's mediation;
such a Kingdom as this Christ would loath, and any true christian derest. So
that we see, though they do not deny his Manhood, nor his Godhead, yet they
deny him to be the Christ, that is, the anointed, for they wash off all his
Unction.

Use 1. It may discover to us the depth, and the danger of Popery; the Doctors
of their Church say, it is impossible any should be saved out of their Church,
but you must know, you cannot give up your selves to an Antichristian Doctrine
but you turn an enemy to Christ, you take away his Offices, make him no Christ,
no Savior; therefore let none say, Popery and the true Religion may be
reconciled, they may as well combine Light and Darkness, as Christ and
Antichrist.

Use 2. It may be an use of thankfulness to God, that has delivered us from
this darkness, and brought us to know the truth as it is in Jesus, the true
King, Priest, and Prophet of his Church; therefore let us sanctify God in our
hearts, let us walk as men that are redeemed, and taught of him; learn we to
rest on him for pardon, for teaching, for direction, and guidance.

Doct. 3. Antichristian teachers deny the Father, and the Son.
Before, he had said they deny the Christ, but he goes further, and says, They
deny the Father, and the Son, because he that denies the Son denies the Father;
the reason is because of that near relation that is betwixt them, verse. 23. and
so contrariwise; the truth of this appears in Saint John's time, for some made
themselves the Christ, and some God the Father, as Simon Magus, and Menander
made themselves the Christ, and so took away the Father-hood, and the Sonship;
some again taught, that the Father came down and took flesh, and was buried,
and so often descended into cloven Tongues, so that they denied the several
Persons.

But that great (...), the Antichrist of Rome, he denies the Father, and the
Son.

1 He denies the Son; if you speak of the Godhead of Christ.

1 They say we are in an error to say Christ is (...), but from God, from the
Father, and they will not take the true sense, but say, Christ has a derived
Godhead, but so they make him no Godhead, though Bellarmin blame them for it,
yet some of them vehemently accused him for it; so that we say the Person of
Christ is from the Father, but his God head is the same with the Father, There
are not three Gods but one God; and if you make it a derived Godhead, you make
three Gods.

2 They as much wrong his Manhood; for when they say the Priest has a power
to create, so they take away his Manhood; whilst they say the Priests makes
Integrum Christum, in truth they abbrogate the very Manhood of Christ, for it
is incompatible to Humane Nature to make any living Creature; and when they
say, Hoc est Corpus meum, they make the body.

2 Whilst they say, that the whole body of Christ is in a Thousand Churches
together, now every Communicant receives whole Christ, they say; now if Christ
have so many bodies, he is a Monster; nay, they say still his Body sits at Gods
right hand, a strange Lie; are they not the great Liars? so that the Pope said
to Cardinal Bembus, Vide quantum fabula ista de Christo nobis prodest; and when
he was dying they comforted him with the consideration of Christ, but he said,
Quanta in his fabula, and no wonder, for that Christ they describe is no better
than a Fable, and so they deny the Son, and in denying him, they deny the
Father, for uno sublato, alterum tollitur.

3 When they take away all assurance of favor with God through Christ, and
say, it is presumption to be ascertained to the favor of God, as a Father
through Christ; I ascend to my Father and your Father; if he be the Father of
Christ, he is the Father of all his Members, and therefore if they take away
all assurance of Gods love, as a Father, they deny the Father.

Use 1. It may teach us something concerning God, it shows us a reference
between the Father and the Son, and first, if there be a reference betwixt
them, then,

1 It is manifest they have a living and reasonable nature, for Father and Son
is compatible only to rational beings, not to Beasts and Trees, therefore if
we that are Fathers, and Children, have reasonable nature, much more God the
Father, and the Son.

2 If there be this relation, then they are both of the same nature: a Man does
not beget a Beast, but one of the same nature, and therefore when the Father
begets the Son, it implies the Son is of the same nature with the Father, each
of them an eternal being, Joh. 10.32. to 36. when as Christ did deliver
himself to be the Natural Son of God, they conceived that he made himself
God, which they thought Blasphemy, so that being the Son of God, he is the same
Divine essence.

3 If Christ be the Son of God, then he is equal with the Father; if he be the
Son, he is God, and if God, there is not one superior, and another inferior,
but he must be equal with the Father.

Obj. But the Son is often greater than the Father, and the Father than the Son?

Ans. True, amongst men, but in the Godhead no person can be superior to
another, there are no distempers, nor misery, Pater and Filius in Divinis sunt
aequales.

2 As there is a Reference* so there is also a Distinction, for the Father
cannot be the Son in the same relation; nor contrarily, the Son in the same
relation cannot be the Father, which cuts off the error of Sabellius, which
said, the same God the Father took upon him, and was the Son; but this is an
horrible error, for the Father cannot be a Son to himself, nor the Son a
Father.

Use 2. If such be Antichrists as deny the Father and the Son, then the Ancient
Heretics, Simon Magus, and Menander are convinced.

3 The same Doctrine condemns the Antichristian Teachers, for though they say
they teach the same with us, yet it is manifest they deny the Son, for he that
makes him a derived Godhead, makes him no God, and so when they say his body
is in diverse places at once, they deny his Manhood, for one cannot be many,
and many cannot be one.

4 It may teach us to magnify the mercy of God, that has delivered us from
this lying Doctrine which our forefathers lived in, and we it may be should
have followed as greedily; therefore let us abhor their Doctrine, and cleave to
the truth, and walk in the truth of Christ.

1 JOHN. 2.23. Whosoever denies the Son, the same has not the Father.


WE have heard Three Points out of the former verse; now because he had said
before, that he that denies the Son denies the Father, he proves it from the
near relation betwixt them, so that he that denies the Son, denies the Father;
and contrarily, he that acknowledges the Son, acknowledges the Father.

Some doubt of these words, whether they be in the Canon, but Beza testifies,
he has found these words in four old good translations, and the Syriack
Translation reads it, and the Vulgar Latin, and it is a common thing in this
Epistle, to show one thing by the contrary to it.

Doct. According to our acknowledgment, or Confession; or Denial of the Son, we
either have, or have not the Father.
He that acknowledges the Son, has the Son, and the Father also; and he that
denies the Son, wants both.

For Explication.

Q. 1. What is it to confess, and to deny the Son?

A. To deny the Son, is not only a dogmatical denying in Doctrine or word,
neither is confession only a dogmatical confession of him with the mouth, and
yet if in Doctrine you deny the Son, you deny the Father also, and if you preach
Christ in a true manner, you preach and confess the Father also. But there are
more denials and confessions of the Son than in word, so that it includes
having not the Son and the Father, and not having the Son and the Father, as
verse. 24.

Did not Peter deny Jesus, and did he deny God? did not many confess Jesus,
and yet at last day he will deny them? did not Judas and Demas profess Christ,
and yet denied both Father and Son?

Therefore in Scripture Phrase there is a threefold denial; and so a threefold
confession.

A denial in heart, in word, in practice.

1 In heart, Psalm. 14.1. The fool has said in his heart there is no God; he
does not mean natural Idols, for he speaks of them that eat up Gods people as
bread; etc. Luke 9.23. let him deny himself, he does not mean in word, he must
say he is not himself, but he must deny all worth, all parts and gifts in
himself, he must deny all pleasure and gain; this is to deny a man's self,
though he do not express it in word; so there is a denial of Christ in
heart, when he does not prize Christ and magnify him, nor see the worth nor
want of him, this is to deny Christ.

2 Some deny him openly in word, 2 Pet. 2.1.

3 Some in carriage, 1 Pet. 5.8. Tit. 1.10. they profess they know Christ, but
in their works they deny him, 1 Timothy 3.5. one that does thus, denies Christ,
and so the Father.

Suitable to this there is a confession

1 In heart, Prove. 3.5.6. In all thy ways acknowledge him, trust not in thy
own wisdom, so that in a man's heart to trust on him, and depend on him is to
confess him.

2 In words, Joh. 1.20.29. and this kind of confession is mixed with holy
boldness, and holy humility; he is so humble that he denies all his own credit
and life, and so bold, that he dares confess Christ before Kings and Princes:
we read of some that professed Christ, but it was secretly for fear of the
Jews; here was want of humility and boldness, such want of humility was in
Peter, for want of christian courage, and leaning to his own strength, he
denies Christ in word, though in heart he did confess him.

3 There is a confession of Christ in our lives and practice, Prove. 3.6. in all
thy ways acknowledge him, not only in word, but in thy outward course, that so
in thy whole walking thou may acknowledge him, and depend on some word of
command or promise, Tit. 2.11, 12, 13. the grace of God has appeared to all
men, teaching us to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, etc. A man
confesses Christ, that denies ungodliness, and walks soberly, righteously, and
holily, as one that looks for the hope of his appearing; so that in his very
practice and life, he acknowledges Christ.

Q. 2 What is it to have the Father, or to want the Father?

A. To have the Father is to have him for my Father, and to deny him, is to
renounce him for thy Father; to have him, is to have fellowship with him, as
with a Father, to continue with him; when God commands us to have him for our
God, and says, thou shall have no other God but me, he would have us to trust
in him, and depend upon him, and to set him up as the God of all our Peace, and
comfort, and help; when we think we have enough, if we have God, though
nothing else; so then he is said to have God, that has fellowship with him,
that has God for his portion; to have the wisdom and righteousness of God,
and not to have God, is to live without God in the World, without fellowship
with him: what is the reason, that according to our confession or denying of
the Son, we have, or not have the Father? a Testimony of this we have in those
poor Gentiles; Ephesians, 2.12. that heard of God, yet not having him through
Christ, they were (...) but why does such a man want the Father?

Reas. 1 From the dreadfulnesse of Gods wrath against all such as are out of
Christ, Joh. 3. ult. if we do not confess Christ, and show forth the virtue
of Christ in our lives, the wrath of God is gone out against us, for sin makes
God our enemy; therefore if we have not a Mediator, woe be unto us.

2 From the near relation that is between them, I and my Father are one, Joh.
10.30. Joh. 14.11. they are wrapped and folded up, one within another, deny one
you deny both.

3 From the great ordinance of God, in setting up Christ, that we might have
access through him to God: Christ is the only way to come to the Father, Joh.
14.6. so that if we would get God for our Father we must get Christ for our
elder Brother.

Obj. Some of Gods own Servants have denied Christ with their lips, and had not
they the Father? as Peter.

A. Even at that time that Peter denied Christ with his lips, his Faith did not
fail him, Luke 22.31, 32. and if his Faith remained, then Christ dwells in our
hearts by Faith, and if he had Christ, he had the Father; as a Tree in Winter,
though you see neither leaf nor sap, yet there is life in the root; so, there
was faith in Peter's heart, even then when he denied Christ with his lips: so
that this is not meant of a vocal denying of Christ, for a man may in mouth
deny Christ, in some sudden temptation, yet in his heart confess him, and in
his mouth will confess him again, and in his life, as Peter did, and so
contra: so that his was not a total, but a partial denying in lips only,
neither in heart, nor life.

2 That denial of him was but for a time, which afterward he repented of, and
professed him constantly: and according to his threefold denial he professed him
three times, so that this was but for a time, afterwacds Peter and John when
they were charged and threatened to speak no more in his name, they would not
smother him any more, but confessed him to the death; otherwise, if it be a
constant denial in word, that is a fearful thing, Matthew. 3. ult,

Use 1. Shows the desperate danger, not only of all such Heretics that have
doctrinally denied Christ, but also of the Heathen that never knew Christ,
there is none of them have God for their Father; it is a woeful conceit of
some, that hold a man may be saved in any Religion, but if we have not Christ,
we have not the Father; and so says the Apostle, Ephesians. 2. Remember ye were
Gentiles and lived without Christ, and so without God in the World. See then
the danger of the Turks that deny Christ to be their Prophet, and of the Jews,
who though they hold one God, yet in their Liturgy they pray, pereat nomen ejus
and memoria, speaking of Christ: what a woeful case are they in? denying
Christ they deny the Father; take God out of Christ, out of the Trinity, he is
a mere Idol, and it might move us to pity their Estate, who have lived without
Christ many Generations.

2 Hence you may see how much the Church of Rome is without the Father; they
charge us for holding Christ to be (...), God of himself, they say he is Deus
de Deo, but not (...); they deliver him to be such a Christ, as whose body is
in an hundred places at once, and so they deny the Son, and so they entrench
upon all his offices, and so in denying the Son, they deny the Father.

Use 2. It may teach us what to think or believe of all the Saints of God
before Christ; does God say, I am the Father of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob? then
you may certainly conclude they had the Christ, John 8. your Father Abraham
rejoiced to see my day, he saw Christ to come of his Son, and therefore he
rejoiced; so Moses wrote of Christ, so David knew Christ, Psalm. 110. quoted
Matthew. 22. the Lord said to my Lord, etc. so that David knew Christ, the Lord;
God the Father, said to my Lord, that is Christ, so Christ expounds it, so Dan.
9.17. he prays God to be merciful to his people, for the Lords sake, that is,
for Christ's sake, Act. 15.11. there is no other way to be saved, they saw
Christ in all sacrifices and types; there is no other name under heaven to be
saved, but by Christ.

Use 3. It may be a ground of trial, whether we have God for our Father or no,
we say daily Our Father, etc. would we know whether he be so or no? if we deny
the Son, we have not the Father, if we confess the Son, we have the Father;
let us enquire therefore whether we acknowledge him in our hearts, if we do, we
will deny our selves to entertain him, you will deny your own wisdom, that
his wisdom may take place, your own honor, that so his honor may take place;
so if you trust in him, depend on him, choose him, cleave to him, then you have
the Father also; if contrarily you choose the World, and prize it above all
things, why the Fool has said in his, heart there is no God, if it be thus
with you, you do not acknowledge Christ and so have not the Father; so if you
be ashamed to confess him in your words, for fear of disgrace, or if you be
afraid of danger, Christ will be ashamed of you, or if in your works you deny
him, you care not whether your ways please him or no, if you walk unholily, or
unrighteously, you have neither the Father nor the Son, and so lose your own
souls; but contrarily, if you acknowledge him in your hearts, trust and depend
upon him, choose him, prize him, then in thy heart thou do profess Christ,
and so the Father; so, art thou not ashamed to be known to be a Christian? are
thou bold and constant to profess his name before wicked and cruel Tyrants?
and if in thy life thou walk as one that expects the coming of Christ, and
do all things by a call from him, if thou walk thus soberly, righteously
and holily, thou have the Father.

Use 4 Of consolation to every such soul as knows and professes Christ; there
is no poor Christian, but he confesses Christ, and would profess him, desires
to live as may please him; why if thou walk thus, thou have both the Son and
the Father, the Son for thy Savior, thy King, Priest and Prophet, and thou
have God for thy Father, and if so, he will provide for thee, thou shall want
nothing, Psalm. 23.1. to 4. therefore here is comfort in sickness, you have the
God of health, Exodus 15.26. I am the Lord that heals thee, God is the life
and length of our days, Deuteronomy. 30.29. so that if you should bury your Children,
yet having the Father, they shall have length of days; God is no weak keeper,
none can pluck them out of his hands, 1 Pet. 1.5. 1 Pet. 5.10, if we have God,
we have life, and health, and peace, and grace, he is the God of all grace
whatsoever we want: therefore if we want any thing, get Christ, and with him we
shall have all things; Romans 8.32. If a man gives himself to a woman, he gives
her the use of all things he has: so if we have God, we have enough, The Lord
is my Shepherd, I shall not want.

Use 5 Reproves Christians, who acknowledge Christ, and so have the Son, and
having the Son, have the Father, yet they walk as if they had not received
Christ, walk scandalously and dully: if we live thus, we either never knew
Christ, or walk very unworthy of him.

Use 1 Lastly it should stir up Christians to walk in a daily acknowledgement
of Christ, we have him, and with him the Father: and therefore have enough, we
shall have a supply of all our wants.

Now there are three graces whereby we walk in an acknowledgement of Christ all
our days.

1 Faith in Christ: walk by Faith in him: I live, yet not I, but the life I
live in the flesh, is by the Faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2.19, 20. this Faith
is a grace much known, more talked of, but very little practiced: so much as we
live besides Faith, so much we live besides Christ: therefore live by Faith in
Christ, look at your selves as unable to do any thing without him, depend on
him, walk as such as live not for your selves, but for Christ, do all by his
strength and for his glory, and so you shall acknowledge him.

2 Mortification, or self-denial: when a man denies his own lusts, his own
honor, profit, and credit, and is content to be all in Christ, he looks at
outward things as Talents he is to employ to Gods service, he looks at them in
a crucified manner, he is weaned from them, regards not much how they go, so he
can get Christ, Contra if every profit or pleasure withdraw us from Christ, we
do not deny our selves, Luke 9.23. Christians should make it appear that their
profit, and pleasure, and honor, is not of this World, but in Christ, they
should deny all these; as faith makes you acknowledge Christ as your Savior,
so Self-denial as your Lord,

3 Zeal, when a man does not only desire to do good duties, but to do them with
life and power, walk in power and zeal, which may show in us the power of the
Resurrection of Christ; God requires that we should be zealous, Tit. 2.11, 12,
13, 14. zeal is the life, and strength of grace, 1 Cor. 15. ult. if at any
time you find your selves straightened, then think you want the might of the
Father, and if you want him, then you want the Son, therefore you must seek to
Christ, and then you shall find a new spring of help: therefore in all your
ways acknowledge him.

1 JOHN 2.24, 25. Let that therefore abide in you the fame which you have heard
from the beginning, etc.


We see the Apostle instructs them against Antichrists coming, 1 By
foretelling his coming. 2 By describing him. 3 By the means, which is double.


First, Their Unction. Secondly, The grossness of Antichrist Lies.

Now we come to his Exhortation of them, to use a special help against
Antichrist, and his exhortation is that that Doctrine which they heard from the
beginning should abide in them, he presses this exhortation from a double
benefit.

1 Continuance both in the Son, and the Father. 2 Obtaining the promise of
Eternal Life.
Doct. Perseverance in the Doctrine of the Apostles, is a certain pledge of
perseverance in grace, and attaining of glory.
Both these benefits are joined together; perseverance in the Doctrine of the
Apostles, is an undoubted pledge of our fellowship with the Father and the Son,
and of Eternal Life, 2 John 9. he that abides in the Doctrine of Christ abides
in the Father, and the Son; Acts 2.42. and 47. It is said of the Primitive
Christians; that they clave to, and continued in the Doctrine of the Apostles,
and 47. he tells us, they were such as should be saved; (That which ye have
heard from the beginning) that is, the Doctrine that was preached at first by
Christ, and after by his Apostles, Luke 1.2.

There are three Graces especialy whereby Gods Word is said to continue in us,
for it is not enough for a Christian to have it rest in his judgment and
assent, the Devil himself knows and believes that Antichristian Doctrine is a
lie, and he knows the truth, yet because he continues not in the truth, he has
neither fellowship with the Father, nor the Son, nor any hope of Salvation;
therefore there are some more special Graces, whereby the Word is said to
continue in us, as David says, I have hid thy word in my heart, Psalm. 119.11.

1 By faith, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. when ye received the Word, ye received it not as
the word of man, but of God, etc. men then receive the Word aright, when they
believe it, and when they think it effectual to Salvation able to save their
souls, Jam. 1.21. when we receive it as the word of life, when we receive it as
our stock and portion, then it dwells in our hearts by faith; let a man receive
the Word as true only, and not as good, it will not continue in him; the Devils
receive it as true, but do not receive it as good, but think it mischievous to
them, and therefore they get no good by it.

2 It dwells in our Consciences by an holy awe and fear of this Word; unless the
Word awe us, and rule in our hearts, we have no fellowship with it, Psalm.
119.161. the heart is taken for the Conscience; in the Old Testament we read
not of the word Conscience: although his heart stood in awe of Princes, as when
he cut off Saul's skirt, yet it was the Word that overawed him that he would
not hurt him; this awe of the Word, over-awes that authority we might use to
evil, so Job, when he had it in his hand to do wrong, yet the fear of God kept
him from doing any wrong, Job 31.13, 14, 15. even to the least servant or maid
he had, Jer. 32.40.

3 Obedience keeps the Word in our lives, and our lives in the Word; Teach me O
Lord the way of thy statutes, and I shall keep it to the end, Psalm. 119.32. if
a man take liberty to live, sometimes by the Word, sometimes beside it, he will
break off from fellowship. Herod for a while kept an awe of John, but in his
life he would not exercise it, therefore he shakes off John, and his word, and
cleaves to his lust; so that the Word abides in us, by faith, fear, and
obedience.

Q. What is meant by continuing in the Son, and in the Father?

A. 1. It implies communion with them: a man cannot continue in them without
communion with them.

2 It implies perseverance in them for ever, so that he that has the Word
abiding in him, has fellowship with the Son, he has Christ for his Savior,
his Brother, his King, Priest, and Prophet, and he has God for his Father, an
All-sufficient God blessing him with all blessings.

He shall persevere in this estate for ever.

What are the Reasons why such continue in the Son, and in the Father.

Reas. 1 From the intercession of Christ, Joh. 17.20, 21, 22. without which we
neither could have fellowship, with them, nor eternal life. Christ himself
has prayed for this, and does, and he was heard always, Joh. 11.42. therefore
when he prays, that all they that believe in his Word may be one with him and
with the Father, they shall have union with them, and glory everlasting, and so
verse. 24.

Obj. You will say, Christ's intercession for himself was not sometime heard;
did not he pray that the Cup of his Passion might pass from him?

A. He prayed against it, and yet did drink it, but he prayed conditionally, if
it might stand with his Fathers Will, therefore he had his desire, because he
fulfilled Gods will, Hebr. 5.

Secondly, He prayed not so much that he might not taste of it, as that he
might not be overwhelmed by it, and so he was supported by his eternal
Godhead, so that he was saved in death, and from death: therefore Christ
having prayed for our union with him, and eternal glory, we shall attain it.

Reas. 2 From the effectual power of found heavenly Doctrine: it is the power
of God to Salvation, it is called the arm of the Lord, Joh. 12.38. it is called
the glorious ministration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.8. 2 Corinthians. 10.4, 5. Jam.
1.21. so that this Doctrine, is the Ministration, the mighty power of God to
conveigh to us the Spirit of God, which gives us fellowship with the Father,
and the Son, and eternal life, the breath of the Word, breathes the Spirit of
God into us, and makes us live spiritually here, and gloriously hereafter.

Use 1 May show us what an hard thing it is to persevere and abide in the
Doctrine of the Apostles, which appears from this strong exhortation: one would
think that the honesty and purity of the Word should prevail with us, to cleave
and abide in their Doctrine, but yet we see that is not enough, but the Holy
Ghost uses as strong motives here as any can be, he knows the World might
overreach us: some come and tell us, if we continue in the Word, we shall lose
our Friends, and Goods, and may be our Life, and why then will you be singular?
now seeing that the World offers so largely to withdraw us, therefore he gives
a far larger offer, such an offer as all the World cannot give, he out-bids
the World, and even promises Fellowship with the Father, and the Son, or
Eternal life: therefore that we might be established against all the
subtilties of the World, he offers us such Promises as may eternally establish
us in the truth.

Use 2 Exhorts us to take hold of this Doctrine while we may have it: if we
preach no other Doctrine, but what has been delivered from the beginning; why
then, if you would have fellowship with the Father, and the Son, and eternal
glory, cleave to this Word, abide in it, receive it with Faith and fear, and
express it in obedience; Lord thou have the words of eternal life, therefore
whither should we go from it? Prove. 19.16. he that keeps the Commandment,
keeps his own soul, but he that regards not his ways, whether he walk
according to this rule, or no, he shall dye. What encouragement would it be to
keep a Pill, if the Physician should say, keep this, and you keep your life,
cast it up, and you dye? why truly such is the Word of Christ, keep it, and you
keep your life, but if you despise the Commandment, care not how you live, you
shall certainly dye; this is the promise, that if, we receive and keep this
word, we shall not only keep a long life, but even a life for ever and ever;
that is a promise God has given you, even eternal life, why this is more than
all the World can give; this is an argument that countervails all other
Arguments.

Use 3 Of consolation to all such as lose any thing by keeping the Apostles
Doctrine; whether they lose goods, or friends, or life, or liberty, here is a
comfort that over-ballances all discomforts.

Two things chiefly discourage a Christian, he may either loose fellowship with
the Church, and be excommunicate, or else he may lose his natural life; here
is comfort against both these, what though you be excommunicated from society
with the Church, you shall yet notwithstanding keep fellowship with the Father
and the Son; Joh. 9.34. the blind man gave such a strong Testimony to Christ,
that the Pharisees cast him out, (that is, excommunicated him) well, when
Christ heard that he was cast out, he found him out; and so though this poor
man, was cast out of the Church, by a clavis errans, wrong excommunication, yet
he had fellowship with Christ; what if a Christian be cast out? why here his
comfort, a man is no sooner shut out from Fellowship with the Church, but he is
sent to Christ, this poor man, Christ came and instructed him; though he were
cut short from instruction in the public ordinances, yet Christ instructed
him, and he never spoke more powerfully and effectually, so that he gave him
Faith to believe, and Grace to worship him; so that though a man in a good
cause should be cast out from the society of the Church; yet he shall find more
near communion with Christ.

2 A man by professing Christ may be delivered up to the powers, and so may
lose his life; why this is the promise, even eternal life, he may lose a
temporary life, but he shall gain an eternal life.

Doct. Primary Antiquity is a certain note of divine and Apostolic verity.
Prime Antiquity, because he says here, it was from the beginning, and he
appeals to the Doctrine that was delivered from the beginning of his time, that
is, from the first promulgation of the Gospel, If that which you have heard
from the beginning abide in you, etc.

So that Prime Antiquity, that which the Apostles first taught, is a note of
the truth, Jerm. 6.16. enquire for the old way, that is, the good way, Jerm.
18.15. he complains that they strayed from the ancient ways, and were run into
by-ways, and he complains of it, as if thereby they had forgot God; therefore
when St. John would describe the Gospel, he calls it an everlasting Gospel,
Rev. 14.6. and contrarily when God would confute the people for leaving him, he
convinces them of novelty, Deuteronomy. 13.7. they followed other new Gods.

But why is Prime Antiquity the note of divine and Apostolic verity?

1 Because Antiquity is the image of God, and every truth is an image of God,
whilst Satan stood in the truth, he had the image of God; when a Doctrine
reaches the truth, it comes to the image of the ancient of days, it is the
same truth now, that was from the beginning of the world.

2 From the special care God takes to plant and water the Church with pure
Doctrine. Satan is up early to do mischief, but God is up before him to do
good; as soon as God made a World, he made a Church, and gave them truth;
though Satan was a Liar from the beginning, yet God taught him truth before he
was a Liar, the good seed is first sown, and then comes the envious man and
sows tares.

3 From the nature of all errors, they are abberrations from the way of truth.
What are errors but deviations from the first way? therefore there was some way
of truth before; when our Savior would tax the error about divorce, he says,
from the beginning it was not so.

Use 1 May serve to be a sign of trial between the Popish and Protestant
Religions, they boast much of Antiquity, that they can fetch it from the
Apostles times; why, but yet if they fetch it from the prime Antiquity, from
the times of the Apostles, we will not yield it them; for John himself would
not fetch his Antiquity from the latter part of his days, but from the first
promulgation of the Gospel, Matthew. 5. our Savior says, it has been said of
old, and yet was not truth: that is prime Antiquity, that comes from the
ancient of days, from the first Institution, vetustas consuetudinis, est
vetustas erroris; Ignatius said, my Antiquity is Christ; Error may come as soon
as the truth is sown, but yet it has not prime Antiquity, for Satan was a Liar
from the bginning, and yet that will not serve to prove that a lie is the
truth, it is a false Antiquity that comes not from the ancient of days; for
our Religion, if we cannot fetch it from the Apostles first Doctrine, and from
the Prophets and Apostles of old, we will renounce it, but when we can bring
for all our Doctrine, the seal of the Prophets and Apostles, we have a sure note
of the truth, we preach no truth, but what Christ and his Apostles taught; our
Antiquity stands not on Monuments or writings; though all records were burnt,
our faith depends not on them, but on the prime Institution.

Use 2 It confutes the Common cavil against Professors, they accuse them of
new fanglednesse: they say none of your Fathers or Ancestors walked in this way,
why, it is the way of Christ, and his Apostles: sin is a new way, a new strange
thing.

1 JOHN 2.25. And this is the Promise he has promised us, even eternal life.


THis eternal life is said to be promised.

Doct. Eternal life is given by promise.
Gal. 3.18. Heirs of eternal life are called Heirs of Promise, Heb. 6.17.
because they are Heirs of that Promise was made to Abraham, Romans 4.13, 14.

Reas. 1 From the grant of eternal life to Christ, and through him to us, Gal.
3.16. that therefore eternal life might be by Christ, it is needful it should
be by promise, 2 Cor. 1.20.

Reas. 2. That it might procure those two great benefits, first, Honor to God,
secondly peace to his Children: had we pleaded it by the Law, we had pleaded it
of debt, but God provided, that what grace should come, should be free, and
therefore by Promise.

2 From hence follows peace of Conscience: had we been under the Law, every
failing would make us doubt, and therefore that our hearts might be settled, he
has given it us of Promise, Romans 6 16.

Use 1 A strong refutation of Popish merits by the works of the Law, and that
in their own persons: why then it is not of grace nor promise; that is the true
reason why they deny certainty of Salvation, because they hold it from the
works of the Law; therefore there is no peace of conscience in their Relion; if
it be of the works of the Law, then not of grace, if not of grace, then not of
promise, if not of Promise, then not of Christ, for if they be bound to obey
the whole Law, they are in doubt to break it; if they keep it, yet they know
not whether they shall persevere to the end and so no peace; it is as
impossible for a man to attain Salvation by Works, as to be his own Savior.

Use 2 Hence learn the way of attaining peace of Conscience, and assurance of
Salvation; why, claim it by promise, and it is sure to thee; what makes thee
doubt of thy Salvation? why, thou see this Corruption, and that Rebellion,
and thou see the want of this and that Grace, and therefore thou art in
doubt, why thou should claim Salvation by promise, thou would have thy
Works more perfect; why, that which makes us doubt, is a secret cleaving to the
Works of the Law, but we must not so much look at what we do, as what we
believe, what we work, as what Christ has wrought for us, therefore take heed
of sticking to any Works of the Law; and as you desire to maintain peace of
Conscience, and to dye peaceably, claim Salvation by promise, there is no more
required of you than to lay hold on Christ, he does not look for perfection of
faith, but truth of faith; be thy faith never so weak, if true, it gives thee
Christ, and he gives thee the Promise, and that gives thee eternal life.

Q. But how shall I know whether I have this faith?

A. If God has given thee an heart ot distrust self, as gifts, and parts of
Nature, and Education, and to be humbled, and look after Christ, if thou
prizest Christ, and desire him above all blessings, this is true faith, if
thy faith has emptyed thee of thy self, to go out to Christ as thy Portion,
as the most sweet and comfortable thing, I say, thou have that faith that
conveys Christ to thee, and Christ the Promise, and the Promise eternal life;
say not therefore as some do, I thank God I never doubted of Salvation, neither
have I cause, I have always lived honestly, etc. if thou fetchest thy
persuasion from the Works of the Law, then not from Jesus Christ, nor the
Promise, therefore do as Paul, touching the Law, says he, I was unblameable,
and yet I count all these as dross and dung to win Christ, Phil. 3. therefore
distrust all these, go out out of your selves, and lay hold on Christ.

Use 3 May teach us to magnify the grace of God, that has thus devised a way
for our Salvation, he has therefore given it us of grace, that it might be
sure.

1 JOHN 2.26. These things have I written unto you, concerning them that
deceieve you.


TO help young Children to beware of Antichrist, the Apostle had given them
some instructions, and some means; now in this Verse to the end he rehearses
the two special means he had prescribed.

1 Was his Writings, verse. 26.

2 Their Unction, verse. 27. therefore verse. 28. he exhorts them to abide in
Christ.

First, In verse. 26. we have set out, 1 Saint John's writing to these Babes, and
the Argument of it. 2 A descripition of false Teachers, Seducers. 3 A
description of their Act, and Work.


1 Their Sin is a seduction and deceiving of men.

2 The vigor of it.

3 He passes them by, calling them Seducers, without naming their persons.

Doct. There is good use to be made of the Scripture against false Teachers,
even of those that want not the unction of the Spirit.
These things I have written unto you; you that have received the Spiritual
Unction; otherwise Saint John's writing had been in vain, and their reading, if
there had not been use of them; 2 Cor. 11.13. he informs the Corinthians of
false Teachers, Gal. 5.12. Phil. 3.2. Col. 2.8. all these show that the Spirit
thought it meet to instruct even Christiaas against false Teachers.

Obj. If this annoynting teach all things, what need the Scripture be written?
is it not to give light to the Sun?

A. No, there is a double use of the Scriptures.

1 For the confirmation of the witness of our own Conscience; a Christian man's
heart witnesses against false Doctrine, but when the Holy Ghost not only
witnesses in our hearts, but in his Word too, In the mouth of two or three
Witnesses every truth is established, 2 Cor. 13.1.

2 There is use of them to help our own spirits; what though my spirit rise up
against such false Teachers, yet I might be deceived, therefore that I might
discern the truth of my own spirit, I must try it by the Word; a good man may
know what spirit he is of, Luke 9. 55. in some things; therefore that we may
discern the truth of our own spirits, we must try them by the Word; the Word,
and the Spirit of God in Conscience, are like to Tallies, they answer one
another in every line.

Use 1 May teach us to discover the corruption of their spirits, who say, after
they have once received the spirit of regeneration (which is indeed but common
illumination) they need not the Scriptures, therefore they neglect reading of
them, as Enthusiasts, and Annabaptists, that will neither read, nor pray, but
when the Spirit moves them; and to this purpose they abuse a notable place, 2
Pet. 1.16. they say, we do well to attend to the Scripture till the day dawn,
and the day star arise in our hearts, but afterward there is no further use
thereof: but (until) is not always a word of restraint, but ye do well to do
it before, and to do it after, as when it is said, Michol had no Child till
the day of her death, it implies not that then she had any, but that she never
had any, so that it is a vain collection to reason after this manner, 1 Timothy 4.
Give diligence to reading and exhortation till I come: would he have him leave
off when he came? No, but he would rather have him always continue so doing so
that place rather exhorts them to attend to the Scripture, after the day dawn
in their hearts, rather than restrains from it.

2 The Scripture there opposes not the Law and the Gospel, but he would have
them now attend especially to the Gospel.

3 This word until, is not limited to the attending to the Prophets, but to
the words day dawn, meaning their hearts are a dark place, until the day dawn,
and the day star arise in their hearts, therefore such men as these, are not of
Saints John's spirit, who exhorts those to whom he wrote to attend to his
Writings, as an help against false Teachers.

Use 2. It may exhort us in these seducing days, to be diligent and frequent in
reading the Scriptures, because they are written to help us against Seducers;
if a Friend should write to us beware of such Cheaters, we would give heed to
what he wrote, and observe his Counsels; why we have letters sent from far,
even from heaven, to warn us of Seducers, and our friend sets down their Notes,
and Marks, and means to avoid them; therefore let us be perusing them, and
observe what they direct us to.

Doct. 2 The Children of God are to look at false Teachers as Deceivers, 2 John
7. 2 Cor. 11.13. Romans 16.17, 18.
Q. What is meant by Deceivers, why calls he them so?

A. A Deceiver is such a one who upon pretense of that which is good, and true,
puts us off with that which is counterfeit and naught.

So these false Teachers deceit is in their Doctrine, and in their persons.

In their Persons, 2 Cor. 11.13.

In their Doctrine, they make us believe it is the Doctrine of Christ in, but in
truth it is empty, windy doctrine, Ephesians. 4.14.

Use 1 May serve to stir us up so much the more to hate and detest them, and to
a more serious watchfulness against them; a man hates a Deceiver worse than a
Robber, a man had rather lose his Purse by violence, than be cunningly cheated
of it, the reason is, because a man that takes your Purse only wrongs you of
your Money, but the other deprives you of your Money, and also befools you, and
makes a mock at it; so these Deceivers do not only deprive us of the truth, but
through cunning delusions they overreach us, and laugh us to scorn, 2 Pet.
2.14.

Let us therefore try all things, and hold fast that which is good, 1 These.
5.21. If we heard that there were counterfeit Money abroad, and cunning Fellows
that would undermine us, we would look narrowly to our selves; why there are
cunning Deceivers abroad, which will not only deceive you of your Purses and
Goods, but of your Faith, and the Gospel, and Salvation, therefore how
circumspect and careful ought we to be? it is a wonderful sluggishness of
spirit, when we know there are so many false Teachers now in the Land, and yet
it is a wonder to see how raw we are in the Scriptures, how unapt to answer any
thing out of the Scripture if we were put to it; therefore do not only receive
the truth from the credit of Ministers, or our own spirits, but warranted from
the Word, that we may be ready to render a Reason of the hope that is in us.

Doct. 3. Sometimes in reproving and confuting of false Teachers, it is
seasonable to conceal their names.
Saint John does not say, These things I write unto you concerning Corinthus,
or Ebion, but he passes by their names, and says, These things I write unto
you concerning Deceivers, 2 Cor. 11.13. 2 Cor. 15.12. Gal. 1.7. Phil. 3.2. Jude
4. he does not there describe them, he names none, yet sometimes we read he
names them, 1 Timothy 1.19. 2 Timothy 2.18. 2 Timothy 4.14, 15.

It is seasonable to conceal their names.

1 When there may be any hope of their conversion; we should not too much
exasperate them, because the contention is not so much against their persons,
as against their Doctrine and practice.

2 When it were good, that both they and their Doctrine should utterly perish,
and be forgot, Gal. 5.12.

It is seasonable to express their names, 1 When they are excommunicate,
Hymeneus and Philetus. 2 That others may beware of them, 2 Timothy 4.14, 15.


Use To teach us to forbear personal invectives in our writings: a wound in a
man's good name, is a wound in the apple of his eye; a man that has his eye
hurt, he sees you not, so if you strike a man on his good name, it is hard if
ever he hear any thing after from you.

He writes to them, about them that seduce them, yet they did not seduce them,
but only did endeavor it.

Doct. 4. The desire and endeavor to deceive, is deceit.
Such as have a desire and purpose to deceive, are indeed deceivers, though
they actually seduce not, 2 John 7. Romans 16.17, 18. 2 Cor. 11.13. as he that
looks after a woman to lust after her, commits Adultry. Matthew. 5.28. because in
his heart he desires it; so because a man has a long look in his heart to
deceive, he is a Deceiver; you read of some that trod under foot the blood of
Christ, Heb. 10.29. now that is impossible, for Christ is in Heaven, yet if a
man do what in him lies, it is as if he did it.

Reas. From Gods acceptance of the will for the deed, whether in good or evil,
2 Cor. 8.12. therefore it was provided in the Law, if any man did bear false
witness against his neighbor, it should be death, because he would have taken
away his Neighbors life; so if there be a will in a man to deceive, it is as
if he did deceive. And as the poor Woman, Luke 21.4. is said to cast more into
the Treasury than they all, because she had a will to do it, and put forth her
self to her utmost ability: so if a man put forth himself in what he can to
deceive, though he never reach it, yet he is a Deceiver: for though it be
impossible the Elect should be seduced, Matthew. 24.24. yet it is his desire and
endeavor to do it, for God has communicated to men more will and desire many
times then power to accomplish it; therefore if there be will to it, the
hinderance is not on man's part, but on Gods.

Use 1. Must teach men to make as much conscience of their wills and desires,
as of their acts; men are apt to excuse themselves in respect of the will, if
the act be not done; but did thou desire it, and go about it? if thou had a
mind to it then it is done, because God sees that which was in thine heart as
done, there was the desire of thy soul, and the endeavor of thy hand, but that
it came not to pass is from Gods hand.

Use 2. This may be a singular comfort to Gods servants that cannot do what
good they would; they have a mind to profit by the Word, to read, and pray as
they ought; but they cannot; I say, if there be a willing mind, that the
desire of thy soul is toward God, if thy c^re and endeavor be to do it, it is
certainly done, though thou can not reach it, Genesis 22.12. Abraham did spare
his Son, why true, but that was because God held his hand; but because he went
three days journey, and came to the place God had appointed, and built an
Alter, and bound him, and would have slain him (though upon Gods calling from
Heaven to him he spared him) ye God accounts it as if he did it; so, had a man
many corruptions in his heartt that were as his Isaac, darling lusts, if thou
use all means to mortify and crucify them, though thou can not get the
Victory over them as thou desire, yet God accounts it as if they were
Mortified; if God will have it rest there, and say it is enough, it is an
acceptable sacrifice to God; when David had a mind to build a Temple to God,
and prepared abundantly for it, though God forbad him, yet says he, it was
well it was in thine heart, and I will therefore build thee an house, 2 Samuel 7.
he accepted the will for the need; so if thou set thy heart to build Gods
House, to be doing good to the Church* and reform the Town where you live, if
in authority, though you fall short of it, if your souls desire it in good
earnest, God accepts of it as done; so for your Families, if you instruct them,
and strive to build them up, you say it is in vain, no truly, God will be your
reward. So it may be a stay to Ministers, that desire by all means to convert
some, and yet find no fruit of their labors, yet thou shall have thy reward
with thy God: for if false Prophets, that go about to seduce, though they
seduce not, yet God accounts them seducers; so God accepts of thy good will and
endeavor, as much as if thou had effected it.

Obj. Then we may easily flatter our selves, and say, I desire that my soul,
and all mine might do well?

A. If a man have a willing mind to a thing, it will much comfort him if he do
it, and grieve him if he cannot perform it; thou say, thou would have thy
self, and all thine do well, is it thy greatest grief that thou can not
effect this, and would it be thy greatest comfort if thou could? then God
accepts thy desire: but if a man have only some lazy desires, if it go well,
well and good; if not, he is not much troubled, there was no right desire.

1 JOHN 2.27. But the annoynting which ye have received of him, abides in
you, etc.


Doct. EVery Child of God, even the least and the meanest have received the
Unction of the Spirit, of this we heard, verse. 20.
But something is to be considered in the varying of the words, verse. 20. he
said, they had it; here he says, they have received it of him.

Doct. The Children of God receive this Unction of the Spirit from God, from
the Father, and from Christ.
John 14.16, 17. John 16.13. Gods sending, and our receiving are relata, 2 Cor.
1.21, 22. Gods giving, and our taking mutually agree one to another; and
sometimes God the Father is said to send the Spirit, and sometimes God the Son;
it is God that sends it, but Christ that has prayed that he would send it,
John 14.16, 17. and by his Death and Ascension has he purchased and procured
the Spirit for us, Acts 2.32.33.

The Reasons why we must receive this Unction from God, and from Christ.

Reas. 1. Because of our selves; what we have by Nature is a spirit of error,
and falsehood, and corruption, and therefore because we have no Unction from the
first Adam, no spirit that heales us, and softens us, and chears us, we have no
spirit that does annoint us, but rather besmear us, and daub us with base
lusts; therefore if we have any Spirit of Grace, it is needful that we should
receive it from the second Adam

2 We receive it from the Father, because by Christ we are made Sons and
therefore have need of the spirit of Sons, Gal. 4.4, 5, 6. all of us like
Christ his eldest Son; Gods Spirit is the mark whereby he owns us, it is the
earnest penny that we have, Romans 8.14. that we might be comforted, therefore
called the comforter, John 16.13. the earnest penny, and first fruits of
eternal glory; an earnest penny is part of the payment, of the same nature with
the whole, this Spirit is part of the payment which we shall then receive in
abundance, now in a small measure; we have now little love, and faith, etc. but
he will make perfect love, perfect knowledge, perfect strength.

3 That Christ should give it, is from his death whereby he purchased it, Gal.
3.13, 14. and by his Ascension he shed abroad his Spirit in our hearts; as when
Elias was ascending into Heaven, he spread abroad his Mantle upon Elisha,
whereby he was clothed with a double Spirit; so when Christ ascended into
Heaven, he spread abroad his Mantle as it were, his Spirit, which every
Christian taking, is clothed with the Spirit of Christ, with the Spirit of
gladness and holiness.

Use 1. Shows the wonderful love of God, even to the least and meanest of his
Servants, that not only gives us his Son to be our Redeemer, but his Spirit to
be our Sanctifier, so large is God in his bounty; no wonder then if he give us
health, and peace, and friends, and means, and maintenance, for he that gives
us his Son, and his Spirit, will he deny us lesser things? so that this is not
only an expression of his love, but an argument of our faith and consolation,
he that gives us his Son, and his Spirit, will give us all things, Luke 12.32.
Fear not little flock, etc. and no wonder, for he has given us the earnest
here.

Use 2. To teach Gods Children, not to be proud of any Spiritual gift that God
gives us, 1 Cor. 4.7. if all we have we have received, what have we to boast?
And let us not insult over others, for they may receive the Spirit of Unction
as well as we, as Paul did, though he were a persecutor; so, much less should
we despise weaker Christians than our selves, what if they have received but a
little measure of faith, and love, and patience, etc. why that little is so
much that it seals them up to eternal happiness, they have received so much
that they are invested with the garment of Christ; therefore let there be no
striving, or contention, or contempt among Brethren, seeing all have received
this Unction.

Use 3. Have you received the Spirit? then so walk in him, rooted, and
established in him, Col. 2.6, 7. why have you received it, but that you may
pray, and preach, and buy and sell in this Spirit? therefore let every one so
walk that he may express that he has received the Spirit of God, Gal. 5.25.
as ye have received the Spirit, so walk in him, put forth the life of the
Spirit in every employment, not your own spirit, but show forth the grace of
him which has called you out of darkness into his mavelous light.

Doct. 2. The Spirit which the Children of God have received of him, dwells in
them for ever.
John 14.16, 17. it is an in-dwelling and abiding Spirit, 1 Cor. 3.6. and 6.29.
Ephesians. 2.20, 21, 22. the Spirit of God builds a Tabernacle in you, and dwells in
you.

Reas. 1. Now the Spirit is said to abide in us, because having knit us to
Jesus Christ, we are become of his flesh and bone, now it were both a dishonor
and unseemly for Christ to have any livelesse dead member, therefore that God
might make us serviceable unto him, he continues his Spirit to us, that may
inliven us.

2 God that gives us this earnest penny, would have it continue with us till
the payment be complete.

3 The same reason that moves God to give us his Spirit, moves him to continue
it to us, we have as much need to be like God in our whole course, as at first,
and have as much need of assurance of Glory, Phil. 1.6. the same God that
begins the work, will also continue it to us.

Use 1. A ground of trial of our estates; if we have no spirit but the spirit
of the old Adam, the spirit of pride and malice, and covetousness, truly this
is not the Spirit of Christ that makes us like him, this is not that Spirit
that Christ purchased for us by his Death, and Ascension; but suppose we had
some of the Spirit of God, the spirit of Wisdom, as Achitophel, the spirit of
joy, as Herod, the spirit of Zeal, as Jehu, the spirit of fear, as Felix had,
yet we have not this Unction of the Spirit, unless it dwell in us. What is it
to be wrapped with a spirit of a Balaam, or a Saul? it was only for a fit, and
what comfort was it to them? it was a shuttle spirit by starts, and did not
abide in them, therefore let us try whether we have received the Spirit, if we
have received a dwelling spirit, it is a true spirit.

Obj. But some may say, Alas, what then will become of me; it may be now I
pray, but ere night wholly unabld; now enlarged, then straightned; I have now a
spirit of zeal, and courage, soon after all cold, and weak, and dead;
wonderful was the zeal and courage of Elias in slaying four hundred of Baals
Prophets openly, 1 Kings 18.40. he went through it with such zeal and speed, as
if he had been sent from Heaven, yet Cap. 19.1, 2. when Jezabel sent to him he
fled for his life, and was so weary of his life, that he wished death; now his
Spirit was cold, and discontent, aad weary of his life. So David, Psalm. 119.24.
David said, he had made the word his delight, yet ver. 25. he says, his soul
cleaves to the dust, and prays to God for quicking.

A. This Spirit that is so to abide, does not always abide in the same measure,
nor in the same measure of expression; but we must know, though there be
several garments, yet the Soul is never naked; a man has not always his
Holy Day garments sweetly perfumed, but sometimes homely, mean garments; so
Elias when he slew Baals Prophets was clothed with zeal, and Holy Day
garments, afterward he remitted of it, and yet had he the Spirit of God on
him, he was not naked, though he was not clothed with the Spirit in such a
measure; even so sometimes we have even poor ragged homely garments, and much
of our nakedness appears, and sometimes again may be, when God has greater
business for us to do, clothes us with better, richer garments, a greater
measure of the Spirit; but yet consider, though we have not the same measure,
yet always some garment of the Spirit rests on us, be it but the spirit of
love, to our Brethren, or grief for the want of it, yet we are not left naked.

Use 2 May exhort su, if we have this Spirit dwelling in us, then let us use
him honorably, and courteously as an in-dweller; he is come from far, even
from Heaven, sent from our Father, and he brings joy and comfort with him,
therefore let us give him honorable entertainment; he is sent to guide us in
all our ways, to be a pledge of our eternal inheritance, therefore let us not
entertain him like some guest that we are weary of in two or three days; you
must know this guest came not for a day, but to dwell with us for ever, John
14.16. therefore take heed of grieving him, Ephesians. 4.13. he comes for your good,
and benefit, for your redemption. When a man keeps a Ward, and for keeping him
keeps a great estate, a Kingdom, he would be very careful; so the Spirit is
such a Guest, that if you keep him, you keep Life and Salvation, you keep an
eternal Kingdom by him, therefore take part with Gods Spirit, join with the
Spirit of God quench it not; what an heavy complaint made Stephen? Acts 7.51.
Isa. 63.10. the Spirit may be so grieved and vexed by men, that he will depart
from them.

Q. How shall we keep our selves from grieving the Spirit?

A. As God has given him to guide you, so look that you be guided by him; if
you entertain him kindly he will comfort you, if you grieve him, he will grieve
your spirits.

2 Be careful to nourish him; do not strave this Guest, neglect not the Word,
and Ordinances, which are the food of the Spirit; Quench not the Spirit,
despise not Prophecy, 1 These. 5. as if the despising of Prophecy, were the
quenching of the Spirit; therefore feed the Spirit of God, withdraw not food
from it, prefer not outward things before it, it is a wonder how lean our
souls will grow, if we do not nourish the Spirit.

3 Take heed especially of living in any known Sin, for that damps and deads
the Spirit, therefore David woefully camplains, Psalm. 51.8. to 12. Restore, etc.
as if it were quite gone, his very bones were broaken, that is, not of his
body, but his soul, i. e. the strength and staff of his spirit, the Spirit is
like fire, every gross sin is like water cast on it, it quenches it.

Use 3 A ground of much consolation to Gods servants; you can never say you
dwell alone and want company, you cannot want good company if the holy Spirit
dwell in you; I am not alone says Christ, but the Father is with me; so may a
Christian say, I am never alone, the Spirit of God dwells in me, he is an
in-dwelling and abiding Spirit.

Doct. 3 The annoynting of the Spirit, teaches us all things, of which you
heard, verse 20.
It teaches all things needful to salvation, needful to life and godliness,
2 Pet. 1.3. and not only so, but needful to our places, and callings, and ages.

Doct. 4. The anonytment of the Spirit is so plentiful and sufficient, that we
need not be taught better things, nor in a better manner, than the Spirit
teaches.
Jerem. 31.32. not that we need not Magistracy or Ministry, but he speaks
comparatively, you shall not be so helped by any Instuctions without the
Spirit, as with the Spirit, the Spirit shall declare the Truth in Jesus.

For Explication.

1 The Holy Ghost teaches fully, 1 Cor. 3.9, 10, 11. the spirit of a Christian
is inquisitive concerning all things, now the Spirit helps him to search even
into the deep things of God, so that the Spirit is a full teacher.

2 The instruction of the Spirit is plain and clear, 1 Timothy 4.1. Joh. 16.25.
Christ spoke in parables, but after his ascension, the Spirit revealed things
clearly.

Three things go to clear discerning, the object must be clear, the medium
clear, and the eye clear, and then we may clearly discern; now the Holy Ghost
plainly reveals the Counsels of God, and then opens our judgments to discern
it, and then cleares all the mediums, so that a Christian may plainly discern;
so that the Tpirit is a clear Instructor, no men need be taught more clearly, 1
Cor. 2.4, 5.

3 The Instruction of the Spirit is a certain Instruction; scarce any truth,
but a Christian can tell it by experience; as a woman that is breeding a Child
feels such qualmes and distempers, that she knows thereby she, is with Child;
so they that have had the breeding of the Spirit in their hearts: and have
perceived his motions, they know more clearly than any other, verse 20. Ye
know all things, it is a scientificall Instruction about certain experimental
things; they know the danger of sin, the sweetness of Grace.

4 The Spirit teaches us most profitably; for that is the dexterity of the
Spirit, that it tells you what use you are to make of such a Scripture, such a
Sermon, such a Providence, such an Affliction; I am the holy one of Israel,
that teaches you to profit, Isa. 48.17. let the Minister speak never so
powerfully, and plainly, yet the heart of man cannot discern it, and profit by
it; unless the Spirit strike in with it, we shall do little good.

Use 1 May descover the vanity of the Popish Doctrine, that would not have men
trust their own spirit, but follow the judgment of the Church; this is a poor
Instruction; what if the Spirit of the Church become Apostaticall? what is
become of all the famous Churches of Asia and Grecia; have not they warped from
the truth? therefore if men should follow the Spirit of the Church, they might
fall from the truth, but you see how St. John magnifies the Instruction of the
Spieit; you need not that any one teach you otherwise than the Spirit within
you witnesses.

Obj. May not a man's Spirit be a delusion, must we trust every private spirit?

A Though it be in a private man, yet it is not a private Spirit, but the same
Spirt common to the whole body of Christ; his Spirit is not limited to public
persons or Ministers, but to all generally that are the Members of Christ; so
that we do not maintain it to be a private spirit, though in a private man, for
it is a public spirit; the Spirit breaths where it lists, and wherever it
breaths, none need teach more or better.

Use 2 If Gods Spirit be so sufficient, then let us make use of the Spirit, to
discern falsehood, and to know the truth; not to rest in what Ministers, or
Parents, or Masters teach, but what the Spirit teaches, that follow; one days
Instruction of the Spirit, will lead you into more knowledge than a hundred
Sermons.

Use 3 Look that you keep the Spirit in good order; if you grieve the Spirit,
he has no comfort to teach you, as Parents or Masters take no delight to teach
their Childreen or Servants, when they take no heed to what they teach them;
but if the Spirit see you be willing to hear and listen, and reach after what
he reveals, the Spirit teaches us with delight, but if you grieve Gods Spirit
by sensual lusts, the Spirit is so discouraged, that you shall find his
Instruction very thin and weak; if Gods Spirit see you do not intend to make
use of what he teaches, he will have little delight to teach you.

Use 4 Reproves such as content themselves in Ignorance, by saying they are not
book-learned, and therefore there is not much expected from them; why, if you
give up your spirits to Gods, his Spirit will teach you all things, he will
teach you without book, as much as shall be needful for you.

Use 5. Of consolation to Gods Servants, that have always a Teacher within
them, they carry a Prophet about them, a Minister about them: every man desires
to have the best Teacher for his Child, you cannot put your Child to a better
Teacher than the holy Spirit, Isa. 54.14. John 6.45. your children shall be
taught of me, therefore pray to God to teach you, and to counsel you, he will
give you that counsel and direction, none can give. Vide plura verse 20.

Doct. 5. The Spirit of God in the hearts of his servants is not a spirit of
delusion, but of truth.
They might say, every man will boast of his own spirit, we know there are many
lying spirits abroad; how shall I know that I have the true Spirit? why, he
says it is not a lying, but true Spirit, so our Savior calls it a Spirt of
Truth, John 16.13. John 14.16, 17. and it is a sure Spirit.

1 Because it makes us true men, whereas by nature we are full of falsehood and
lies, Ron. 3.4.

2 It reveals the Truth of God in a true manner, it teaches such things as
agree with the Scripture, the word of truth.

3 It is given by the God of Truth, therefore must needs be true.

4 Because it teaches nothing but what it receives from Christ, and Christ
teaches nothing but what comes from the Father, the God of Truth, Joh 12.49,
50. therefore must needs be true.

Q. But how shall I know that my spirit is not a spirit of Error and delusion,
but of truth? 1 Kings 22.22, 23, 24. when went the Spirit of the Lord from me
to speak to thee? yet there was a lying spirit amongst them, we see here was a
lying spirit in four hundred Prophets, and he cunningly conveyes himself like
an Angel of Light, how shall a Child of God discern the true Spirit from a
Spirit of delusion?

A. They that have received a Spirit of Error, may be deluded by a Spirit of
Error, but they that have received the Spirit of Truth, cannot be deluded by a
Spirit of Error. But how shall I know that I am not deluded, and that my Spirit
is a Spirit of Truth?

1. By the Testimony of this Spirit; there is such a clear light in the Spirit,
that he will reveal himself plainly enough, 1 John 5.3. The Spirit bears
witness that the Spirit is Truth.

2. You shall find the Spirit of God is ever suitable to the Word of God; that
Spirit that teaches you other things than the Word, or withdraws you from the
Word, that Spirit is a delusion; the Word begat us, and a Christian loves to be
sucking at it.

3. It is a Spirit of Truth, if it make you conformable to Christ; meek and
lowly as Christ was patient, and going about doing good as he did, where ever
we come; that is the proper work of the Spirit, to make us holy as he is holy,
meek as he is meek, pure as he is pure.

4. We may discern the Spirit by his fruits, a tree is known by the fruit, good
fruit comes not from a corrupt spirit, take any corrupt spirit, it so confounds
and troubles the spirits of men, that they cannot bring forth good fruits, but
the holy Spirit is so meek and plain, that it does not disturb nature, but
perfect it, but a bad spirit does not perfect, but corrupt nature, Gal. 5.22.
But the fruits of the Spirit are, Faith, and love, and meekness, it is a sign
an evil Spirit was upon Zedekiah, 1 Kings 22. because he was so boisterous,
and rude, and impatient, he struck Micaiah on the face, but Gods Spirit is
meek, and humble, and lowly.

Use. 1. May teach us to see the excellency of a Christian, above other wicked
men, Prove. 12.10. the way of a Christian is the way of Truth and goodness, but
the ways of the wicked are deceitful, and will certainly seduce us, but a
Christian has fellowship with the Spirit of Truth.

Use. 2. It must therefore stir up men to labor to be partakers of this
excellent Spirit, this Spirit of truth, the way of righteousness will not
deceive us

It may be many times by following the Spirit, we run into dangerous ways. the
way of truth is a straight narrow way, but it is a safe way; keep your way, and
it will keep you; the Spirit of Christ will carry you on strongly, Jer. 20, 10.
men think that Christians walk in dangerous ways, set like Christ on the top
of a pinnacle, but we shall find that these ways of truth will not fail us, but
lead us on to eternal happiness, therefore get this Spirit of Truth.

Use. 3. A ground of comfort to all them that have received this Spirit, this
Spirit will not deceive you; if Gods Spirit were not in you, you were of all
men most miserable; but we have a Spirit that will not fail us, as Policarpus
said, These eighty six years have I served Christ, and he never deceived me,
therefore now I will not leave him.

Doct. 6. The anoyntment of Gods Spirit teaches us our perseverance in Christ,
i. e. does assure us that we shall abide in him.
Romans 8.16, 17. The same Spirit bears witness with our Spirits; two Spirits
bear witness, Gods, and ours, and both co-witnesse our adoption; our spirit,
that is, our renewed, regenerate Spirit, for Gods Spirit would not join with
our corrupt Spirit, but with our renewed Spirit, and this makes us become the
Sons of God; for there is a manifold difference between the fruits of the
Spirit and the flesh; but besides this renewed Spirit of ours, Gods Spirit
witnesses, the other indeed was the fruit and effect of Gods Spirit, but Gods
Spirit it self is some lively and comfortable witness, which speaks more
clearly and fully, than the created graces of God in us; if you would speak of
an immediate work of the Spirit, it does it by such peace of Conscience, and
joy, as passes understanding, Phil. 4.7. (...) it shall so guide your hearts;
this peace that Gods Spirit immediately poures into the heart, is without
understanding, and the witness Gods Spirit gives to our spirits, makes us that
we never doubt more as formerly.

2 It works in us joy unspeakable, and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1.8. there is such
a witness as fills our hearts with glorious Consolation, Romans 14.17. and this
fills our souls, so that a man tastes of the first fruits of Heaven, in his
light we shall see light, Psalm. 36.8, 9. there are certain times when God sends
this into our spirits, and that is usually in the end of many Conflicts, God
abundantly recompenseth our work.

3 Sometimes when we are preparing for some great trial, then God sends some
more special help of his Spirit; as it was with our Savior, when he was to be
tempted forty days, immediately before he had a testimony from Heaven, Thou
art my beloved Son, etc. presently after he was led into the Wildernenesse to
be tempted of the Devil, Matthew. 4. and as the Angels rejoice at our
conversion, Luke 15.10. so when God has any great Temptation for us, he poures
down more enlargement and comfort of the Spirit; so when Christ was to be
Crucified, he was a little before gloriously Transfigured, and when he came
riding to Jerusalem, exulting and rejoicing, presently after he went to be
Crucified, Romans 5.8. and often in the midst of tribulation, so often after
Afflitions and Conflicts, God comes to comfort us with happy enlargements, 1
Pet. 4.14. not only a spirit of grace, but a spirit of glory* as it did on
Steven, Acts 6. ult. 1 John 3. ult. hereby we know that we abide in Christ,
even by the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.9, 10, 11, 12.

Reas. 1. From the names and titles given to the Spirit in Scripture; three
names, all which witness this truth.

1 It is called the Comforter, Joh. 14.16, 17. not so much comforting us in
outward Crosses, but specialy because he comfort our hearts, by assuring us
we are Sons, and Daughters of God, and Heirs of life, for else it were not
above the world, for the world can comfort us in temporal things, but here is
a comforter that far transcends the world.

2 The Spirit is called the seal and earnest of our inheritance, Ephesians. 1.13,
14. Ephs. 4.30. 2. Cor. 1.21. now a seal has a threefold use.

1 It has an use to keep secret, or distinguish.

2 Not only so, but to confirm us in all Leases, Bonds, Covenants; so the
Spirit not only keeps us sure, and distinguishes us from all Hypocrites, but
seals us by confirming the happiness of our estate present, and future.

3 It is a seal alluding to the seals of Princes* wherein their person is
pourtrayed; so this Spirit is the very Character of Gods Image, and fashions us
after the Image of God, and hereby he confirms and establishes all the
Promises to us, 2 Cor. 1.20. and Ephesians. 6. the Article: shows, that not only
the gift of the Spirit, but the person of the Spirit witnesses.

3 He is called the earnest, whereof three Uses.

1 It binds and asures a man.

2 An earnest is part of the payment, though small in regard of the whole; so
the Spirit of grace is part of the payment, and shall remain with us till the
full payment.

3 Because it abides with us after the whole payment.

Use. May serve to comfort the hearts of all that have received the Unction of
the Spirit, they have an assurance of their state of Grace here, and Glory
hereafter.

Obj. How comes it to pass then, that so many Christians are so troubled?

1 There is a double Reason;

First, Sometimes by imaginary causes, when there is no such cause; as,

1 In case of desertion; we think we have quenched and grieved the Spirit, and
therefore it has left us, but God does not assure us that the Spirit in a full
and glorious measure shall abide in us, but some fruits of it shall always
remain.

2 Sometimes outward Crosses and Afflictions make us doubt, as David, Psalm. 73.
surely, I have cleansed my heart in vain.

3 Sometimes Melancholy may so distemer us, that we will hardly be persuaded of
that whereof we have no cause to doubt.

Secondly, There are some real Causes; as,

1 If we live in any known sin, that breaks the very bones, Psalm. 51.8.
deprives us of the vigor of the Spirit.

2 The high prizing of earthly contentments; when we exceedingly delight our
selves in Husbands, or Wives, or Children, which much benumbs and dims the
light of the Spirit, Matthew. 13.44, 45. when a man so prizes this Pearl, he
keeps it with him in comfort.

3 The proud frame of our spirit hinders our peace; we are all naturally of
proud ^ofty spirits, and if God see not in us an humble meek spirit, Gods
Spirit will not so freely converse with us, Isa. 57.15.

4 Impediment of our peace, is suspending of our peace upon our own
performances, because we cannot pray so enlargedly, nor hear so profitably as
sometimes we have done, but then we deceive our selves, Romans 5.1. because then
we do not look for peace and justification from grace, but from the works of
the Law, whereas we should depend wholly on the Merits of Christ; and thus by
these means we grieve the Spirit, and blur the seal, and so dim and dull our
peace and comfort.

Use 2 It may confute a Popish error, who say, it is presumption, and
dangerous to think we may have assurance of Gods favor; but we se we may know
it by the witness of the Spirit

1 JOHN 2.28. And now little Children abide in him, that when he shall appear,
we may have confidence, and not be ashamed before him at his coming.


THe Coherence stands thus; he had written to several Ages several
instructions, verse. 27. to Babes he had said, they had received an Unction,
whereby they did abide in him.

In this twenty eighth Verse, he turns his speech to all Christians in general,
for here it is (...) not (...), having promised they should ^bide in him.

Two Parts.

1 An Exhortation to all to abide in Christ.

A Reason, or encouragement from the comfortable benefit that shall arise from
it.

Doct. 1. The promise of perseverance in the state of Grace, does not open a
gap to carnal liberty, but rather gives us cause of encouragement to abide in
Christ.
Now he had promised they should abide in him, verse. 27. he does not say,
therefore take your ease, take no care, you are safe; no, he says not so, but
abide in Christ. In other places of Scripture, when the clearest promises of
grace and perseverance are laid down, there is exhortation to careful
obedience, 1 Cor. 10.12, 13. though thou can not fall finally, yet let him
that stands take heed lest he fall, Phil. 2.12, 13. not a carnal fear, but
such a fear as is opposed to carnal confidence and pride, though God work both
the will and the deed; Paul a man most confident of his good estate, so as he
triumphed in his estate, Romans 8. ult. Did this make him carnally secure? No, he
is now more vigilant and careful than before, 1 Cor. 9.26, 27. so we see
confidence breeds not negligence, but rather diligence: so we read he renounced
all for Christ, Phil. 3.7, 8, 9. yet ver. 12, 13. the more assurance he had,
the more vigilant he was; and now little Children even now you have a promise
to abide in Christ, abide in him.

Reas. 1. For the nourishment of those Graces (by these kind of promises)
whereby we most cleave to Christ, Faith feeds on these Promises, as it is bred
by them, so it is nourished by them, now the more Faith, the more do you
purify your hearts, Faith purifies the heart, Acts 15.9. no Promise promises
perseverance to us in our own strength, but all are made in Christ, and
therefore make a Christian by Faith to cleave the faster to Christ.

2. These Promises breed Hope in us, and this Hope makes us purify our selves,
as Christ is pure, 1 John 3.1, 2, 3. A Maid that knows she shall be married
such a day, will it make her the less careful to adorn her self? no surely,
so have any hope to meet the Bridegroom at the last day as their Husband? do
they go and soil and defile themselves with base lusts? no, they adorn and
beautify their souls the more. When Pharaoh sent and called for Joseph, and he
had now hope to make his suit known to the King, does he now come in his poor
Prison garments? no, he shaves himself, and puts on other garments; so those
Maids that were to go in to King Ahasuerus, they spent twelve months in
purifying themselves, Esther 2.12.

3. These Promises increase love in us; the more beautiful God is in his
Promises, the more does the love of Christ constrain us.

Use 1. To confute Popish spirits, that say, The doctrine of perseverance
breeds security; to what purpose say they do you press people to abide in
Christ, when they can do no other: we see St. John's practice here; it is true,
if these new Promises were put into old Bottles, it would breed security in us;
but a Christian spirit that is taught to believe in Christ, he is made the more
watchful by it, 1 Cor. 15. ult.

Use 2. May stir up all to abide in Christ, and for that end, to make use of
these Promises to stir you to it, Psalm. 116.9. to 12. seeing God has freed
your souls from darkness, and ignorance, and bondage, why, walk holily
therefore in the sight of the Lord, none more dissolute and careless then
those that are uncertain of their Salvation.

Doct. 2. It is the duty of all Christians to abide in Christ, John 15.5.
Reas. 1. If ye abide in me, ye shall bring forth much fruit; no fruit without
Christ.

2. If you abide in him, it keeps you from sin, 1 John 3.6.

3. Abiding in Christ, is the means to have all our petitions heard, John 15.7.

4. Abide in Christ, and abide in eternal life, verse 24, 25. hujus capitis.

Use 1. To reprove the Apostasy that is found sometimes in Professors, though
many dead branches be cut off, yet the Vine is perfect, but not without living
branches: some are Members, some only unperfect, so some may adhere to Christ
by the redundancy of some graces, as Judas and Jehu, these may be cut off, and
we see how woeful their case is, they wither and are cut down, John 15.6. and
are cast into the fire. Jer. 2.13. This people have committed two evils, etc.
Jer. 18.14. It had been better they had never ^asted of Christ or known him.

Use 2. Let it exhort us, as we desire to be faithful, to abide in Christ.

Q. How may we abide in Christ?

A. 1. If his Word abide in us, Christ abides in us, 1 John 2.24. 2 Chronicles.
25.16.

2. Know that all your strength depends on Christ, live therefore in his Grace.

3. Be fruitful in Christ, make use of him to grow in Grace.

4. If at any time you turn from him, return to him speedily, that so by
repentance you may renew your Covenant, Jer. 3.1.

Doct. 3. Such as do abide in Christ, do with boldness expect, and without
shame receive him at his coming.
It is plain in the Text (...).

First, From the causes; what makes men afraid of his coming? either knowledge
it shall go ill with them, or not knowing it shall go well with them, as the
Cardinal said, he had rather have his part in Paris, than his part in
Paradise, the one he was certain of, the other uncertain; but now such as abide
in Christ, they know that it shall be well with them at that day, Ps. 23.3, 4,
5. doubtless mercy and favor shall follow them all their days, and therefore
they are confident, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. what makes Paul thus bold? because he knows
he shall receive a Crown of Righteousness at his appearing.

Secondly, From the effects of their confidence,

1. They love the appearing of Christ, and therefore manifest, they look for it
with confidence, 2 Timothy 4.8.

2. As they love Christ's appearing, so they pray for it, Cant. 8. ult. and
therefore it is a sign with confidence they expect it, Rev. 22.20. Did you ever
know any Malefactor write to the Judge to hasten his coming to the Assizes? No,
but they would rather prevent his coming, but if they hasten his coming, they
are confident it shall go well with them, the Prison is a burden to them, and
at his coming they are confident to be freed. Many Afflictions, as so many
bolts lie on Gods children, many vexations, therefore they desire the Lord to
hasten his coming, to rid them out of all their misery, and revenge them of
their enemies.

3. As they are confident, so they are not ashamed, they profess his name here
without shame, and therefore Christ will not be ashamed of them at that day.

Use 1. It reproves and refutes a Popish Doctrine of uncertainty of Salvation;
how could Christians love and pray for Christ's coming, if they did not know it
should be well with them at that day? this love and desire after it, shows they
are confident of their good estate.

Use 2 Of trial, whether you abide in Christ or no; why see how thou stand
affected to the coming of Christ; art thou bold, and confident at the hearing
of the last day? art thou reverently bold, and lolvest, and prayest for his
coming? then it is a sign thou abidest in Christ; but if the hearing of it
strikes terror into thee, and thou would gladly put it off, surely thou art
not in Christ; the Day of Judgment to the Godly is a day of Marriage, and
therefore the Spouse longs for it; to the wicked it is a day of Execution, and
therefore they tremble at the thought and hearing of it; it is a day when he
will show himself mavelous in mercy to every Christian, and in flaming fire
to the wicked and ungodly: consider then how thou art affected to this Day, is
it a day thy soul desires? Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, even so, Amen. But is
the consideration of it dreadful to thee, that thou know not how to meet it?
then thy spirit is corrupt, and not upright before God.

Obj. How comes it to pass, that many a godly soul fears and trembles at
death? was not Hezekiah and David afraid of it? Psalm. 30.9. Did not he say,
that though he walked in the shadow of death he would not be afraid, and he is
now afraid?

A. In two cases Gods children may be afraid to die.

1. When they have loosly and negligently laid up the evidences of their
estate, as a man at the Assizes, that is to try his Evidences, if he have them
to seek, he desires the Assizes were put off.

2. Sometimes he is fearful, when he knows he had lived somewhat loosly, and
his heart has run a Whoring from God by some carnal delights, so that he
would gladly gather up himself better, before he go hence and be no more seen;
because our hearts have gone whorishly from God, we are afraid, not that he
will cast us off, but that we shall not find that welcome which otherwise we
should, if we had time to recover our selves. So David Psalm. 39. ult. he was in
some grievous Disease, and somewhat conscious his spirit was not perfect, but
he had much weakened his grace, therefore he prays, O spare me a little, that I
may recover my self, before I go hence and be no more seen. Hence, often
Christians at their conversion are afraid of Death and Judgment, because their
Evidences are not so good, and others afraid, because they have blurred their
Evidences by some sinful delight, and sitting loose from God, but yet their
fear differs from wicked men's, wicked men tremble, because they have no
evidence at all, but a godly man knows he has evidences, but he has them not
so ready, and therefore desires to be deferred.

Use 3. It may stir us up all, as ever we desire to live comfortably, and dye
gloriously; so to have a care to abide in Christ, otherwise you will dye both
with fear and shame; but if you abide in Christ, you may with boldness look
Death in the face, therefore abide not in your Natural estate, Civil honesty,
but abide in Christ. It is a profane and false speech of some Politicians,
that say, Religion makes men cowards, and never famous Warriors; no, does that
make us cowards that makes us look Death in the face, and Judgment also? were
those cowards that have looked Fire and Faggot, and Torments in the face?
therefore it is not Religion, but want of Religion, that makes men cowards;
therefore strengthen your Faith, and so you shall expect Christ's coming with
confidence, and boldness, and courage.

1 JOHN 2.29. If ye know that he is righteous, ye know that every one that does
righteousness is born of him.


IN the former Verse he had exhorted all to abide in Christ, and that from an
Argument of boldness and confidence at the day of Death, and Judgment: In his
Verse he proves that such may have boldness; they that are born of Christ are
children of God, may lift up their heads with joy at his coming; a Child is
not afraid, but glad of his Fathers coming, but such as abide in Christ are
born of God, Ergo. But how do they know they are born of God? why they that
do Righteousness are born of God, but those that abide in Christ do
Righteously; how appears that? they that know that Christ is Righteous, they
know that such as do Righteousness are born of God.

Doct. 1. Jesus Christ is Righteous.
Isa. 53.11. Mat. 27.19. and 24. That just one, Acts 22.14. 1 Pet. 3.8.

Reas. 1. From his Righteousness, and innocent Conception, and Birth; he was
not begot as other men, but the Holy Ghost over-shadowed the Virgin.

2. From his innocent Life, he fulfilled all Righteousness, Mat. 3.15. Heb.
4.15. John 14.30. Satan could find no sin in him to take advantage of.

3. From the necessary use of his Righteousness, he must be Righteous.

1. To overcome the sorrows of Death, one sin would have kept him under death,
Acts 2.24, 25. but by his innocence he overcame death.

2. That he might be an holy High Priest to us, and a perfect Sacrifice for us,
Heb. 7.26, 27. had he not been innocent and harmless he could not have been
so; the Priests in the Law were to be without blemish, Lev. 2.17. to show, that
the great High Priest should be so; so was the Offering to be without blemish,
Lev. 27.7. and therefore requisite Christ should be so, Heb. 9.4.

3. It was needful he should be righteous, for the use and end of his
righteousness, his righteousne is imputed to us for righteousness.

4. That he might work inherent righteousness in us, that we might do
righteousness, had Christ been blemished in one sin, he could not have begot
us righteous to God.

Q. What is it to be righteous?

A. Holiness gives God his due, Righteousness, man his due: but
righteousness put alone, implies both giving due to God and man; so Christ, he
gave to Caesar what was his due, to the Pharisees their due, and every one
their due.

Use. A ground of wonderful consolation to every poor soul, that is burdened
with his own unrighteousness, though we are unrighteous, yet Christ is
righteous, and what is wanting in our parts, is supplied on his: this comfort
Elihu gives to a man in extremity of body and soul, Job 33.23. to declare
where his righteousness is to be found, that is, it is not to be found in
himself, God will say of such a soul, deliver his soul from going into the
pit, for I have received a recompense: what though we have cause to complain as
the Church? Isa. 64.6. yet if we know Christ is innocent, and pure, and holy,
why then his righteousness is imputed to us: what though we were born sinful?
yet Christ was born without blemish: what though our lives be unclean and
wicked? yet Christ's life was innocent and harmless: what though we should
have dyed for our iniquities, as the good Thief said, Luke 23.41. yet this man
has done nothing worthy of death, verse 47. certainly this is a righteous man;
so every soul that is sensible of his own unworthiness, as the good Thief
said, verse 40. Fear thou not God, etc. if a man fear before God and tremble
at his wrath, in such a case, Christ will say as he did to the good Thief,
this day shall thou be in Paradise, or at least have right to it.

Obj. Christ is righteous, but what is that to me? do all wicked men receive
righteousness from him? alas, I have nothing to move God to impute his
righteousness to me.

Ans. If thou can but find this in thine heart, that thou fear God because
of thy sins, and art humbled, why then if Christ be righteous, thou need not
fear his coming, for his righteousness shall veil thy unrighteousness, and
thy estate shall be happy.

Obj. Was not Judas afraid of the horrors of Hell, when he had betrayed Christ?
did not he fear sin, and it was a ^^rror to his soul?

Ans. Judas was afraid of that sin, but he was not afraid of all sin, for then
he would have been as much afraid of hanging himself, as betraying his Master;
therefore he feared the horror of that sin, but not of all sin: but take a man
fearing God for all sin, and fearing other men's sins, as the good Thief,
afraid least Children and Servants should sin, and looks at Christ's
righteousness; this is a supersedeas of all danger at death, we may expect
death and judgment with comfort and joy.

2. It is a ground of comfort likewise to such as having found comfort
heretofore in the righteousness of Christ, are now in that case that they
doubt of their Estate, why? what though you fail in many things, yet look up
to Christ? he is pure and righteous: and so being clothed with his
righteousness, we may lift up our heads with comfort, and this Paul comforted
himself in, Phil. 3.7, 8, 9. in that, he counted all dress and dung in
respect of the righteousness of Christ: here is the comfort of a Christian, he
should not look to his own righteousness, never think to get any thing by your
own works, but if you lay hold on Christ's righteousness, you may know that you
are born of God, and so may expect the last day with joy and comfort.

Doct. 2. Such as work righteousness are born of Christ.
1 John 3.10. The manifest difference between the children of God, and of the
Devil, is working of righteousness.

Reas. 1. From the weakness and impotency of nature to bring forth a righteous
work, Romans 8.3, 4. Romans 7.18. and 3.10.12. none of the famous Heroes among the
Heathen, but their best actions were splendida peccata. Deuteronomy. 32.32, 33. Gods
people had corrupted themselves, and the Spirit of God was not upon them; their
sweetest works were like the Grapes of Sodom and Gomorrah, which are fair to
the eye, but if touched vanish away; there is a fair outside, but no
nourishment: none so opposite to Christ, as men of best natural abilities,
Acts 17.32.19.20. Romans 11.17.20. Phil. 3.6. though Paul was clean in his own
and others eyes, yet did he persecute the Church of God, there is no power of
nature, can reach to a supernatural work, Romans 6.16, 17, 18, 19.20.

2. From the impotency and weakness of common Graces, Mat. 12.33. Heb. 9.14.
until Christ's blood has sprinkled our consciences, all our works are but dead
works, every work that is spiritual, must

1. Spring from Faith, Gal. 3.14. Romans 14. ult.

2. The end must be the glory of God, 2 Cor. 10.13. nature never works higher
then its own glory. Brutus when he heard his Sons conspired with the Tarquins,
he sent for them and cut off their heads, whereof the Poet spoke thus, Vivit
aemor patriae, laudumque immensa cupido, had this been bounded in Gods glory,
it had been good: let Saul Prophecy, let Jehu set upon reformation with great
zeal, let Herod hear John Baptist gladly, yet all these detain the truth in
unrighteousness.

3. From the necessity of abiding in Christ, to the performing of every duty,
John 15.5. he does not say without me ye can do no great matter, but without
me ye can do nothing.

4. From the resemblance that is between Christ and such as work
righteousness, there is such a resemblance as is between Father and Son, John
3.2. we are the seed of Christ, and are made like him; as a child is known to
be born of such a man, by his look, speech, carriage: such as work
righteousness, their works will own them, Isa. 61.1, 2, 3. Isa. 9.6.

Q. How are we said to be born of Christ?

A. He is sometimes (though he be our elder Brother) called our Father, we are
born of his Seed, his Word and Spirit, and we resemble Christ as well as the
Father, Romans 8.29.

Use 1. This reproves the Jesuits and Franciscans Doctrine, that hold, that by
strength of common graces a man may receive justifying grace when it is
offered, a man must be born of God, that will do so good a work; it is
therefore a Doctrine contrary to the Word of God.

Use 2. Those that are in state of nature or common grace, should not rest
there.

Use 3. Such as are born of God should make use of their new birth; walk in the
life of the new birth, else thou do nothing, Gal. 2.20. we must do all out
of the strength of the new birth: if the Sun should shine into our houses, and
we shut up all the doors and windows to keep it in, we shut it out; so we must
keep the windows of our hearts open to Christ.

Use 4. Have respect to works of righteousness: it is injustice to sell places
of office, and suffer men to sell them; if men buy dearly, they must be forced
to deal hardly.

Obj. A man that buys dearly, may sell so.

Ans. A man may sell what he bought justly, a man may but his own right, yet
not sell it; it is injustice to sell what is not our own, as places in free
election.

Doct. 3. Such as know that Christ is righteous, they do know that every one
that does righteousness is born of God, a Child of God.
Q. What is it to know Christ to be righteous?

A. It does not consist in the understanding of it, conceiving it, and
acknowledging it; for Pharaoh could say, The Lord is righteous, Exodus 9.27. and
yet he could not come to say, that Gods people were righteous, and born of God,
he did not see that God afflicted him for oppressing his people, this he was
convinced of, that God was righteous, but yet he would not say, you Moses and
his people are born of God. Luke 23.47. certainly says the Centurion, this was
a righteous man, and yet we do not read that he joined himself to the
Disciples of Christ; but this Testimony was extorted by the wonderful works of
God.

To know therefore that Christ is righteous, is to acknowledge him by divine
Faith; and they know, that he that does Righteousness is born of God.

There are three things employed in it.

1. No man knows Christ to be Righteous, but he that is sensible of his own
unrighteousness, otherwise he cannot know that Christ is Righteous, Phil. 3.6,
7, 8. Paul before his calling, thought himself Righteous, and unblameable, but
when he saw that Christ was Righteous, he saw that himself was unrighteous;
therefore he thought all his own Righteousness loss in respect of Christ's,
his education, his profession, his wisdom, his zeal, his privileges, he
counted all loss to win Christ.

2. It implies a sensible experience of the Righteousness of Christ, pacifying
our consciences, and purging them from dead works, Heb. 10.22. for Christ's
Righteousness does both; none know Christ to be Righteous, but they that know
that in his Righteousness, they have their consciences quieted and purified,
they are freed from the guilt and uncleanness of an evil conscience, they
know that they are such grievous sinners, that if Christ were not Righteous,
they could never look for pardon.

3. They find the power of Christ's Righteousness, purging their consciences
from dead works, Heb. 9.14. all our works before were dead, but now by the
blood of Christ we are purged from them, and quickened to do him lively
service, though a man may have a good opinion that Christ was a good man, and
may have a general belief that he was so, and that he was both God and Man,
yet none know it, but those that know they have so woefully provoked, that if
Christ their Mediator were not Righteous, they could have no hope of pardon or
mortification, such only know it certainly by experience in their own souls,
for Scientia est rerum certarum and necessariarum.

Q. How do such know that they that work Righteousness are born of God?

A. 1. They know him by experience of their own spirits, they know themselves
that they never wrought a work of Righteousness, till they were born of
Christ; all their works before, were for the World, or for self-love; therefore
if they find a man denying himself, not looking at his own ends, going out of
himself, not relying upon himself, nor aiming at his own ends; they know such
are born of God, or else they could not do so, Romans 3.10.12. not one natural
man comes off with a good work.

2. They know it from the life of Christ that breaths and works in every work
of Righteousness, and the works of it, they know their own spirits would not
reach it.

Two things make our conversion to be called a new birth, for in it self it is
but only an alteration, not in substance, but in qualities, which is properly
called alteration, but it is called a new birth, or regeneration.

1. Because it changes the whole man: as in generation, there is a whole change
from one thing to another; so in regeneration, there is an alteration of the
whole old man, into the whole new man, a new heart, new judgment, new
affections.

2. It is the mighty power of God, as in generation, there is more in it than
any work of Parents, it could not be without a special concurrennce of Gods
mighty power: so in conversion, there must not only be a change of some
qualities, but a mighty power in changing us wholly, from our old Estate to a
new.

Use 1. Discovers the fond Paganish Ignorance of such that know not that they
that do Righteousness are born of God; we would account him no Christian, but
a very Pagan, that should deny Christ to be righteous, why if thou do not
know that they that do Righteousness are born of God, thou know not that
Christ is righteous, therefore this shows their great Error that malign Gods
Servants, for surely if they knew they were the children of God, they would not
oppose them, or injure them, but because they conceive them to be newfangled
persons, and likely to prove hurtful to the State and Kingdom, therefore they
cast them out, but thereby they manifest that they do not know that they are
born of God, and if they know not that, they do not know that Christ is
righteous, Isa. 66.5. they cast them out in pretense of Gods glory, but they
shall know that they are born of God, and they shall be ashamed that they did
not know it before; therefore there lies a Paganish Ignorance on the hearts of
all oppressors.

Use 2. May serve for a ground of trial; do thou know that they that work
Righteousness are born of Christ? as many a poor soul can testify it of
others, that will not say it of himself; but thou could not have known that
others were born of Christ, unless thou had known it thy self, thy own
unrighteousness, and Christ's Righteousness, pacifying and purifying thy
conscience; therefore let it comfort thee.

Object. May not a carnal man see plainly by common illumination, that such
are Gods Servants? they see a broad difference between them and others.

Ans. So far as they know Christ is Righteous, so far they may know, that those
that work Righteousness are born of Christ; they have no true knowledge that
Christ is Righteous, but only an opinion, and this opinion aftewards they may
doubt of; therefore it is no knowledge, but if thou know it, then thou see
it by experience of his Righteousness pacifying thy conscience, and purging it
from dead works; and if thou know that Christ is Righteous, thou know
also that they that do Righteousness are born of God, but if thou know not
that Christ is Righteous, thou can not know experimentally that those that
do Righteousness are born of God.

Use 3. Here is a notable encouragement to all that are born of God, to work
Righteousness, for if you work Righteousness, not one Righteous man but shall
know you are born of God, and testify it of you; not that I would have men
practice Righteousness for their credit, that they may be known, etc.

Object. May not a man do many works of Righteousness, of Prayer, and Alms,
and yet do them out of his own ends, so that others may be deceived in him?

Ans. Though Christian Charity is apt to think the best, yet none will say they
know thou art born of God, till thou deny thy self, and thine own ends, and
thou do things in virtue of Christ, and walk constantly in a Christian
course; therefore walk humbly before God, do things in the power of Christ;
and if it come, that your ends, and Christ's ends cannot stand together, if they
see that you willingly leave your own way, and take Christ's, though it cost you
much, why, this will be your encouragement, every one that does Righteousness
will know that you are born of God.

Use 4. May discourage every man from evil ways, from doing unrighteousness;
for if Christians know, that they that do Righteousness are born of God, then
they will know that they that do unrighteousness are born of the Serpent; if
they see that you work for your own ends, and by your own gifts, not by virtue
of Christ, they may wish you well, but they know, that you are not born of
Christ; as in nature, the spirit of a noble man and a peasant, will much
differ, though they should be educated both alike, yet a noble man's spirit,
will be rising to higher matters; so if you see a Christians spirit reach
higher than the World, he cannot confine himself within the limits of the
World, but he is lifted up to heavenly spiritual matters for Gods glory, and
he does things from Christ's virtue, this makes it evident he is born of God; a
worldly man cannot rise higher than his own ends: a thing rises no higher than
the original it comes from; therefore let it discourage you from working
unrighteousness, from looking at your own ends, and gifts, and abilities, for
if you do, you will be known to do unrighteously, and so are not born of God;
therefore walk (...) as you would be known to be indeed, you cannot be hid; if
you would be counted Righteous, be doing Righteousness, and then you shall be
known to be born of God.

1 JOHN Chap. III. Verse. 1. Behold, what manner of love the Father has
bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Sons of God; therefore ehe world
knows us not, because it knew him not.


THE Apostle having delivered this as a truth, that they that work
righteousness are born of God, and knowing how apt we are to pass over such a
mercy without serious and humble acknowledgement, he stirs them up to consider
of this mercy

The Apostle removes a double objection.

Obj. 1. We meet with none that acknowledge us the Sons of God.

Answ. To this John answers: Not every one ackonwledgeth this, but they that
work righteousness; not the world, because they know not Christ.

Again, from some doubts Gods Children make within themselves; partly for
corruption, partly for affliction.

Obj. 2, What with corruptions and afflictions, we have much ado to be
persuaded that we are the Sons of God.

Answ. To this the Apostle answers: now we are the Sons of God. Take us in our
strongest corruptions and afflictions, we are Gods Sons; but it does not appear
what we shall be; when he appears, we shall be like him, free from corruption
and affliction, expressed by the reason, we shall see him.

Then he informs them of their duty, He that has this hope, etc.

1. The manner of Gods love to us, we are called his children. 2. The
exhortation to behold and look at this love. 3. The removal of an objection.
Note. It is a great and wonderful love of God, that we are accounted and
called the Sons of: Behold, what manner of love! such a love as cannot be said
how much, Matthew. 8.27. Luke 1.29. Ephesians. 2.4, 5. where speaking of quickening
us to our new birth, he says it is a rich mercy, great love, Tit. 3.4, 5. 1
Pet. 1.3. abundant mercy.

Reas. From our wonderful unworthiness of such a favor. We have a fourfold
unworthiness.

1. Prodigal riotous waste of original righteousness, Luke 3. ult. Adam was
the Son of God by Creation, but he sold it for an apple; more profane then
Esau, because he sold it for necessity and hunger, Adam not so; now for God to
give us a new stock, to set us upon our legs again, argues wonderful love and
mercy. Luke 15.21. The Prodigal his father had bestowed a portion upon him, he
spent it rioutously, now he freely and rightly acknowledges, I am unworthy,
etc. Might not every Son of Adam say as much.

2. Our estrangement from God, and enmity against God, before we be called the
Sons of God, Col. 1.21. If a man should adopt a child, would he adopt a
stranger or an enemy?

3. There is no child of God, but time was when he was as an enemy to God, so
an Harlot: suppose a King should marry his first born to an Harlot that were
his enemy, and press him to take her; would not this seem strange? We were
Harlots, running a whoring after our pleasures and profit; What a depth of love
is it for God to offer us his Christ, his only Son in marriage to us; what
manner of love is this?

4. There is nothing that God could expect from us, but what is naught; many a
man will match his daughter with one that has not so much means, but he is an
understanding man, able to manage his estate* A man will say, Had I such a man
in hand, I could set him in such a course, that he should thrive and do well;
but how much shame and dishonor have we been to God? 2 Samuel 12.12, 13. Noah's
drunkenness, Lot's incest, Abraham's dissimulation which an heathen King could
check him for: What a discredit has God by us?

Reas. 2. From the little need God has of us. Men use not to adopt, unless
they have none of their own. God had a natural Son, Christ; and the Angels
are his Sons by Creation, Christ was Gods Son, in whom he had pleasure. Men if
they have children of their own, and adopt others, it is because they are
unthrifty.

Reas. 3. From the great difficulty ere we could be the Sons of God, Christ
came from heaven, and must be humbled even to the death, Gal. 4.4, 5. God
denies his natural Son, abaseth him.

Reas. 4. The excellent benefits we are called to hereby.

1. We call God Father, 1 Samuel 18.23. Is it a light matter for the God of
Heaven and earth to be called your Father, since you are but men?

2. Christ is your Brother, Heb. 2.11, 12.

3. You partake with him in the Spirit, the Comforter, John 14.16, 17. Romans
8.14.26, 27. Ezekiel. 36.27. Whereas before you had but rough hewn spirits, God
sheds his own Spirit abroad in us, makes us partakers of the divine nature,
that we should have high thoughts of a Kingdom, eternal life.

4. Provision for a Son here, provision for an Heir hereafter: God provides
spiritual and temporal means, Deuteronomy. 8. God nurtures us, washes us Ethiopians,
and has given us an inheritance, 1 Pet. 1.3, 4. If a man should sit down as
David did, 2 Samuel 7.18. and consider what God has done for such mean men, etc.

Use 1. To refute all good opinion that men have of themselves, they know not
that God has no need of us, they know not what Christ paid for us, they know
not what a great mercy it is to have God our Father, 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. They
never knew what manner of love it is.

2. To reprove a great unworthiness of Gods Children, and a shameful
dishonor they put upon him, when they are ashamed to call him Father. This is
the case of many of Gods servants, when they come in bad company. they cover
themselves with a veil of carnality. What do we lose by calling God Father,
does not God rather lose by calling us children? This Peter's sin cost him many
a bitter tear, Matthew. 26.75.

3. This should teach all the children of God to love God with all heir
strength and might. We can never abound too much in love, 1 John 4.19.

Here we may learn how much we are bound to love our Brethren, let us enlarge
the bowels of our affections, and think we can never sufficiently love them. If
the King favor any man, every man will be looking at him, and ingratiating
themselves with him.

5. This teaches worldly men how much they wrong themselves, to deprive
themselves of this manner of love, when they content themselves with other
things.

Note. God would have every child of his to behold his love in calling us his
children. Behold implies presence, evidence, eminency. There Is some thing in the
object, and in the act.

1. For the object.

1. What we behold is present, we cannot behold what is absent.

2. It is evident and sensible; none can behold a spirit, or the wind.

3. It is a thing of weight; excellent and eminent, John 1.29. Psalm. 133.1.

2. In the act, beholding implies;

1. A looking with the eye.

2. To consider a thing.

3. To fix our eyes upon it.

Reas. 1. For his own glory. There is nothing wherein God does more show his
glory, Romans 9.23. Ephesians. 2.4, 5.

2. That we might the better support our spirits against the discouragements we
meet with, from the world, which knows us not.

3. That so we may be persuaded to love God, and strengthened to doing and
suffering, 2 Cor. 5.14.

Use 1. To reprove men's squint-lookings, they do not look at Gods love, but
into themselves, Lam. 1.12. and their own corruptions and afflictions; it is a
wonder Gods children should pore only upon corruptions, and not consider what
love it is for God to discover them to a man, and pardon them; so when Gods
children look at great matters in the world; if they look a squint at gain, do
you look that your sins are subdued, Luke 10.19, 20.

2. It reproves a Popish opinion that looks at our adoption and spiritual
estate as doubtful and uncertain, Eccl. 9.2. Why then are we bidden to behold
it? Can a man behold that which cannot be seen? If a man be bidden to behold,
the thing is present and visible.

3. To lift up the hearts of all Gods people, to fasten their meditations much
upon the love of God. We read such speeches, as, who works righteousness is
born of God, but we are ready to pass over such things, therefore St. John
says, Stand still, and behold, look at it as a present benefit, and rest not
till you see it present and evident; look narrowly at this; when you do find
it, stand and behold what God has done for you, wonder to behold it, so shall
you honor God wonderfully. What though you meet with a world of corruptions,
temptations, discouragements; this above all; God will not suffer those he
loves to want spport.

Against this point of Gods wonderful love, that it is evident, sensible, and
present, an objection may arise.

Obj. The world knows no such matter?

Ans. The Apostle confesses it, and renders a reason, The world knows not you,
because it knows not him.

Note. The world knows not the children of God, John 16.2. Did they know them
to be children, they would not kill them. It is not good service to a Father to
have his children killed, 2 Cor. 4.8. 1 King. 18.17. A sign he did not know
him, for he was the chariots and horsemen of Israel, their strength, stay, and
protection under God.

Q. What is meant by world?

Answ. Not the whole body of the Creation, nor only reasonable men, but that
part of the world that is destitute of Gods Spirit.

1. These are called the world, because born of the world, as in the world,
John 8.23. 1 John 4.5. born of corrupt nature, defiled whith the world.

2. They have their portion in this world, as a man is said to be of such a
place where his means lies, Psalm. 17.14.

3. The world is the object of all their thoughts and affections.

4. They are the greatest part of the world, 1 John 5.19.

5. The world is called by the name of wicked men, it borrows its name from
them, 2 Pet. 2.5.

Q. What is meant by this, that they know not Gods children?

Answ. 1. Knowledge is taken for discerning, and many times they do not discern
who be the children of God, as appears by the former reasons.

2. They do not ocknowldge them. As if a friend of old acquaintance should
pass by, and give no testimony of acknowledgement; we say, such a one would
not know me.

3. They are ready to do ill offices to them, John 16.2.

Reas. Is taken from the second Doctrine, because they know not Christ, they
know not you, 1 Cor. 2.8. Acts 3.17. John 16.2, 3. and 15.21. In reason, if a
man know not the face or head of a man, he knows not the hand or any other
part, no part so easily discerned as the head: Christ is the head of his
members, if they knew not him the head, they know not us the members. John had
told us before, that if we know Christ to be righteous, then we know that they
that work righteousness are born of him; the world is ignorant of Christ's
righteousness.

1. They look at God as righteous, yet as merciful, and to save men out of
Christ, therefore they think God requires not so much as is found in the lives
of Gods people, but think it superstitious.

2. The world does look at God as righteous, yet a respecter of persons: As,
take a righteous judge, yet if that men put forth themselves, and many of them,
they will sway him. So men think that learned men and wise, God must needs
accept, and they cannot go wrong, John 7.48.

3. It is the conceit of men, that God blesses the good with prosperity and
the wicked have want and adversity: So did Job's friends.

4. They measure Gods righteousness to reach no farther then the second Table.

5. It any be so enlightened, that they know God requires service to himself,
they content themselves with performance of duties, without engaging of their
hearts and lives, Psalm. 51.6.

6. Some that are of the best discerning, they find some desires after the
Word, some affections in prayer and fasting, Romans 10.3.4. They perform duties,
not only to men but God, and they do God service zealously, where is the
defect? They being ignorant of the righteousness of Christ, go about to
establish their own righteousness; they know God requires righteousness with
zeal, and yet they know not the righteousness of Christ, they think that the
doing of good duties, and that zelously, will serve them at the day of
judgment; they never knew what need they had of Christ to cover their
imperfections, and to help them to perform good duties; hence those did
persecute Paul, who knew the righteousness of Christ better then they, Acts
21. etc.

Obj. But does it not fall out oftentimes that evil men know good men? Herod
knew John.

Answ. Sometimes a hypocrite may discern a righteous man, but then they are
more then mere worldly men, 1 Cor. 12.1, 2, 3. There must be some works of the
Holy Ghost.

2. There is a defect in all such men's knowledge, they cannot discern them of
weak grace, and many corruptions, but eminent men they may. Herod reverenced
John, and despised Christ.

Use 1. Of refutation of two Popish opinions.

1. They say that the Church of God is a visible Church always to the world.
If we say that the Church is not visible to the world, we say no more then St.
John speaks.

2. They say none can know himself to be born of God. St. John makes it the
property of a worldling not to know the children of God, much more not to know
himself to be a child of God, Gal. 6.10. If a man could not know one from
another, how should he make this difference? Gods own servants many times have
but little discerning, as an old man naturally has a very bad discerning* can
hardly see his friends, unless he be nigh them, and look upon them. Many times
a man is able to give a fuller testimony of another, then of himself.

Use 1. It reproves all the uncertain walks of Gods servants, or such as
profess themselves so to be. You shall have them many times to walk so
unevenly between God and their own souls, between themselves and men; either
you are worldly, or your brethren, else they would know you to be the children
of God, or of the world, 1 These. 1.4.

Use 3. It is a ground of trial of a man's estate. If thou know not that
they which fear God are born of him, thou art yet of the world, and do not
know Christ, if thou love them not, nor affect them, nor lend an helping hand
unto them.

Use 4. To teach us, that Gods children are hidden and unknown to the world. A
man that is wealthy and carries things meanly, we say such a man is an hidden
man, he is worth thousands. Gods people are worth millions, but they are hidden
men, the world knows them not. If a pearl fall into the dirt, you cannot
discern it but wash away the dirt, and you shall see it sparkle.

Use 5. It should teach Gods children to moderate the affections of carnal
excellency and acceptance in the world. It is a leven of hypocrisy and pride
that infects many times the hearts of Gods people, they would be somewhat. The
world knows you not. Be willing to go as unknown men in the world, John 5.44. A
Prince that comes among his subjects disguised, he cares not though they justle
him, and take place of him, and speak hardly of him; a Prince would smile
within himself, he knows how they would respect him, if they knew him. Shall the
hand or foot take it ill, that it is not known, when as the head was not known?

Use 6. It should work in Gods children an inclination to forgive wrongs and
injuries; if they knew you better, they would use you better, Luke 23.34. Acts
3.17.

Obj. They speak most unjustly and undeservedly.

Answ. Pity their malice, and envy them not.

Use 7. It may teach the world not to flatter themselves in doing ill to Gods
servants; you think it is out of wisdom, it is indeed out of ignorance, and
because they know not Christ and his righteousness.

1 JOHN 3.2. Beloved, now are we the Sons of God, and it does not yet appear
what we shall be: but we know, that when he shall appear, we shall be like him;
for we shall see him as he is.


IN the former verse the Apostle exhorts Christians to a serious consideration
of the love of God which he has showed them, in calling them his children.

Against which dignity, he answers an objection.

The Objection is taken from the misprising of the world, The world knows no
such excellency in them. To this he answers; that this ignorance of theirs
arises from the ignorance of Christ.

In this verse he answers a second Objection, from the doubts that themselves
have of their estates, by reason of those sundry temptations and afflictions
they meet withal in the world.

To this he answers: Even now they are the Sons of God.

2, Though now their estate be hid, yet it shall appear.

3. He confirms this, that they shall appear when Christ appears. And that he
confirms from their own knowledge, For they shall see him as he is.

1. Consider we their estates, Sons of God.

2. The hiddennesse of their present and future estates.

3. What they shall be like, viz. Christ, which is set out by the testimony of
their own knowledge; and he insinuates all by a sweet compellation, Beloved.

Doct. That the Sons of God ought to be the men of our love and delight, 3
Epist. Joh. 1.2, 5. 1 Pet. 2.11. Phil. 4.1.
Where we see his deep affection toward them, he looks at them as born of God,
and therefore he styles them Beloved, and Dearly beloved.

In those things we love, there is first an affection of desire to be united to
them: Secondly, a communication of good unto them.

For the first. Pfal. 119.63. and 79, If he be to choose company, he will make
choice of such as fear God. And this is called, amor concupiscentiae.

Secondly, there is a love with desires to communicate good to the thing
beloved. And this is Amor amicitiae, Psalm. 60.1. 2 Pet. 1.7. Do good to all,
but specially to the household of faith. Such as are born of God. So that
whether we desire union or communion of good company to any, we should chiefly
desire it to the company of believers. This was David's grief, that he could not
enjoy the company of good men, Psalm. 120.

Reas. 1. For Gods singular love to them, verse 1. What manner of love. And if
God love them so dearly, we ought also to love them.

1. From their love above all others back again to God: when others sit loose
in their affections, Christians should love them that love God, who has loved
them so dearly, Psalm. 139.21, 22.

3. From the truth that is in every Christian believer, 2 John 1.2. If a man
loves Gold, he loves to have true Gold, so if we love any, let us love them in
whom is truth; of other men, not one of a thousand that has truth in them, you
shall find them no further loving then may be to their own ends; in latter
times men shall be lovers of themselves; for in former times God did enlarge
the worlds affections, many brethren would have hazarded their lives for their
friends; but now no further love then they shall find aliquid jucundum, or
utile. But Christians love one another for the loves sake that is in them. Many
complain much that true friendshiip is gone, it is an hard thing to find a
faithful friend, Prove. 20.6. This faithfulness in friendship is a proper
badge of the Son of God, John 13.35. and 15.19.

Use 1. This should teach Ministers with what affection they should speak to
their people, when they call them Beloved. This ought not to be a word of
complement, but their hearts should go with it. How can such call them Dearly
beloved, when they come at them but once a year? how do they love union with
them, or communication of good to them?

2. This may be a direction to us all, as we would approve the truth of our
hearts before God, to love all that are born of God, as St. John he calls them
Beloved. Look at all believers as the Sons of God, and look at them as beloved,
if they walk in the truth.

3. This may be a reproof of all such as estrange themselves from Christians;
yea, many there be that are glad of any advantage to trouble them that are born
of God, they are far from St. John's spirit. There are some that will not
malign and oppose them; but yet if they be such as are poor, from whom they
can get neither pleasure nor profit, they estrange themselves from them. But
St. John calls any Beloved, in whom he finds the truth of grace. There is no
Christian but has something for which he ought to be beloved, there is
something in them worthy our imitation. You shall find more comfort in your
love to poor weak Christians, then if you fasten your love upon more eminent
persons, and greater in place.

Doct. 2. That the ignorance that the world has of Gods children, and our
obscurity and weakness in the world, does not hinder our present good estate
in the world.
Now we are the Sons of God, now that we are afflicted in the world, Isa.
54.11. which shows you, that though the children of God be afflicted and
weather-beaten, yet God has promised such blessings to them as may make them
blessed in the world, verse. 13.14. Isa. 43.3, 4. Though we be led through the
water and fire of affliction, yet in the midst of all our troubles; when we are
passing through, the Lord promises that he will be with us, and that he will
be our comfort in the midst of persecution and temptation.

Thus you see how dear and precious Gods children are in his sight. David when
he saw the prosperity of the wicked, that all went well with them, then he
began to think that he had cleansed his herat in vain; but soon afrer, when he
went into the Sanctuary of the Lord, then he saw that the Lord set them but in
slippery places. Therefore howsoever it seem in our eyes, that it goes well
with the wicked, yet let us not despair, God will guide his children by his
counsel, and afterward receive them to glory. You may hear Job complaining of
his poor and miserable estate, Job 19.18, 19, 20. he had now no more comfort
left him then he had skin on his teeth, and therefore he cries to his friends
to pity him, verse. 21, 22. And what do you think was the rejoicing of his soul
in the midst of the anguish of his spirit, and affliction of body, being all
consumed away with misery? he tells you, verse. 25. to v. 27. Yet, I am sure my
redeemer lives. So that what though his present estate be miserable, and his
future happy estate be obscure to the world, yet he knows when Christ shall
appear, he shall be like him, Col. 3.3, 4. as the Apostle speaks, Our life is
hid with Christ in God.

Reas. 1. Taken from our likeness to the Son of God, Christ Jesus, who was in
such a poor condition, as that though the birds of the air had nests, yet the
Son of man had not where to lay his head, yet all this while he was the Son of
God, in whom alone he was well pleased, Mat. 3.17. And as it was with Christ
our head, so may we look it should be with us his members, Romans 8.29. If God
did see it meet that his Son should be thus afflicted in the world, and drink
of such a bitter portion of Gods wrath; let us not think we shall go to heaven,
and partake of those heavenly mansions which Christ has prepared for us, but
we also shall drink of the same cup that he drank of, Let us account our selves
happy, that God will so esteem of us to make us his Sons.

Reas. 2. From the freedom of Gods love to men.

And first, that he does not esteem of them according to their outward luster,
1 Samuel 16.7. God sees not as man sees Ps. 22.6. This is meant of Christ. So
Isa. 53.3. Secondly, That he does not esteem of them according to their inward
estate, Ezekiel. 16.16. Deuteronomy. 7.8, 8. So that though there be much pride and
stubbornnes of heart found in Gods children, and oftentimes in a great measure
against God, yet all these inward corruptions do not hinder our future glorious
estate.

Use. 1. This should teach the children of God to be content with their
estates. They are indeed apt to think, that if the world do not esteem of them,
but are ready to put many injuries upon them, and to persecute them with
hatred, that they are not Gods children; or else they murmur and grieve within
themselves. And if the world do sometimes esteem of them, yet if their health,
liberty, and maintenance be taken away, then they think surely they have
cleansed their hearts in vain, and washed their hands in innocence, Psalm.
73.13. As for the men of the world, they are in prosperity, they suck water out
of a full cup, their eyes start out with fatness, and they have more then they
can wish. But David can tell them, when he went into the Sanctuary, that he saw
that God had set them in slippery places. And then verse. 22. he condems
himself for his ignorance.

2. This should teach the children of God not to misjudge of themselves, in
regard of their inward estates; for some of them will be ready to doubt, and
say, Surely I am not a child of God, because I find much of pride in my heart,
and much rebellion and corruption in my spirit. Surely, if I were born of
Christ; I should be like him. But what says St. John here? we are the Sons of
God, even now, though there be much unbelief in our hearts, and much weakness,
and many corruptions in us.

But how shall I know that I am the child of God? The answer is laid down in
v. 3. Every man that has this hope in himself, purifieth himself as he is
pure. So that though he sees much filthiness in his spirit for the present,
yet he labors to purge himself from time to time, and is ashamed of his
hardness of heart, and unbelief, that he has so long stood out with God; and
now he being sensible of his own misery, and wretched estate which he lies
under by nature, he does strive daily to get out of it; and therefore he
laboring to purify himself as Christ is pure, he is the child of God.

But it does not appeer what we shall be.

Doct. 3. That the future glorious estate of Gods children is for the present
an hidden estate, Col. 3.3, 4.
It is therefore said to be hidden, because it is hidden with the veil of
corruption, temptation and affliction, which do overshadow our future glorious
estate. A Christian many times has many desertions in his spirit, and has
many temptations from the world, the devil, and his flesh; many corruptions in
his nature, as hypocrisy, lukewarmnsse, etc. And many carriages which are
unbeseeming the Gospel of Christ. And therefore in regard of all these, well
may their present estate be said to be an hidden estate.

Reas. 1. Is taken from the convenience betwixt Christ the head, and us his
members, Heb. 4.15. Though Christ was without sin, yet he was counted a sinner,
yea a conjurer, a friend of Publicans and sinners. But as for Gods servants,
they are often times overtaken with many gross sins, and God will have them to
be overshadowed with much weakness, that so the glory of his grace may be seen
in their weakness, and also that they might not be too much lifted up with the
conceit of their own worth, 2 Cor. 12.7, 8. If God should have purged and
cleansed us from all our sins, then we should not have believed that our hearts
were so desperately wicked, as indeed they are, and as we in process of time
do find them to be, in that we see God ever going along, and taking pains from
day to day to purge and cleanse our hearts: As God did not make the whole
fabric of the world at once, though it was not impossible to him, being a God
Almighty, but in the space of six days: So does God deal with his children, in
creating in them a clean heart; first he suffers their hearts to be as a rude
and massy lump, full of darkness, and then God sends his holy Spirit into
their hearts, and it does illuminate them; and drive away those black clouds of
darkness and ignorance, and then breaths in the sweet air of his Spirit, that
a man may perceive the gracious providence of God, leading him along in his
Christian course.

Reas. 2. Why God suffers his children to be veyled over with many infirmi^ies
in this life* is, That so they might have a better tolleration to live in the
world: If God should suffer them to be perfectly holy in this world, the men of
the world would not suffer them long to live amongst them, Deuteronomy. 7.22. As our
eyes cannot endure to behold the light of the Sun, so wicked men cannot endure
to see the candlelight of grace in Gods children.

3. That God might keep his people in exercise. God will have the Canaanites to
remain among the Israelites, that so they may be stirred up to stand upon their
guard and watch, that so he may have their graces exercised.

Use 1. To teach the children of God not to judge of their spiritual estate by
outward appearance, but to judge righteous judgment; that is, to judge as the
thing in it self, and not according to what befalls a man in his outward or
inward estate, for oft-times a wicked man meets with lesser temptatitions then
many of Gods childrens; and hence the proud Pharisee judged his estate to be
better then the poor Publicans, Luke 18.8, to 11. But God judges not according
to the outward appearance, but he judges the heart, Luke 16.15, 16. What
though there be a lust of pride or arrogance in the best of Gods children? what
though the Canaanites be powerful within him and he has much ado to get from
amongst them, so that he begins to think he has cleansed his heart in vain?
yet if he do but endeavor to keep himself pure and unspotted of the world, to
purge himself as Christ is pure, he shall at length come to a blessed and
happy estate in the heavens.

Use 2. Of consolation to all Gods children. What though our future condition
be hid, yet it is safe enough, for it is laid up with Christ in the heavens. If
in this life only we had hope in Christ, then we are of all men most
miserable. If the Christian should have no more joy and happiness then he has
in this life, then the vilest wretch in the world should be more happy then he.
But our happiness does not depend on our present condition.

Use 3. This should teach the children of God to sit down contented with their
present estate* though a hidden condition. What though they do not enjoy so
much pleasures, riches, honors and esteem, as many men of the world do? Let
them be content, it will appear what they shall be. They shall be Kings and
Princes, and therefore it must be their daily care and labor to be fitting and
preparing themselves for that Kingdom, to be purging themselves as Christ is
pure.

Doct. 4. That when Christ shall appear in glory, then shall our glorious
estate appear with him, Col 3.4.
This our glorious estate, which consists in our likeness to Christ, does
appear, 1. In our bodies. 2. Our souls. 3. Our outward estates.
For in all those Christ shall be glorious, so shall we see him as we are
capable, 1 Cor. 13.12.

1. For our likeness to Christ in our Body. The Apostle says, the body is
sown in corruption, and is raised again in incorruption. Our bodies while we
live in this world are subject to many sicknesses, diseases, agues, etc. But in
the life to come there shall be no noise of corruption heard of, our bodies
shall then be so hardened and strengthened, as that they shall be no way
capable of corruption or change; yea, the bodies of wicked men shall be so
hardened, that they shall not again return into the matter of which they were
first made; but they shall be so hardened ad poenam, as to subsist under
everlasting torments: But the bodies of the godly shall be so strengthened as to
receive an eternal weight of glory.

2. Our bodies are sown in dishonor, but shall be raised again in glory, when
we are dead; Though in our life time our bodies were made so come y and
favorable, yet then they are changed, and subject to putrefaction, so that we
cannot endure to have them long above the ground unburyed, by reason of the
unsavaory smell that comes from them. And you may read that Abraham bought a
field to bury his dead, Genesis chap. 23. verse 4. But in the world to come, we
shall be as the Sun in the Kingdom of our Father, Matthew. 13.43.

3. Our bodies are here sown in weakness; but they shall be raised again in
power You see old men here need a staff to sustain their feeble joints, but at
the day of Judgment then we shall need no staff, for then we shall be
stronger then the strongest man that ever lived, stronger then any of David's
Worthies, one of which slew 300 men. 2 Samuel 23.18.

4. Our bodies are sown natural bodies, but they shall be raised spiritual
bodies Our bodies here must be sustained with meat and drink, else they cannot
continue; but there we shall stand in need of none: Our meat and drink there
shall be to do the will of our Father which is in heaven. Our bodies now are
subject to descend, but then they shall be made so light, that they shall
ascend and pass from place to place even in a moment, we shall be quick to
dispatch the business we are sent about. As the Sun does now move with much
celerity, so fast, that it does in the space of a day, run over many millions
of miles. Now if a natural body be so quick, shall not then a spiritual body
be endued with much more celerity?

2. As our bodies shall be then changed, so also shall our souls, now our souls
are much stained and polluted with ignorance, pride, wantonness, impatience,
and full of infirmities, but then we shall be perfect in strength and
knowledge, 1 Cor. 13.12. Now whilst we live here, our souls are as it were
drowned in sin, Ezr. 9.6. But then we shall not have any combating or striving
between the flesh and the spirit, but then the flesh shall in all things be
subject to the spirit. We are now full of imperfections, so as the good duties
that we perform even in the best manner we can, are full of much humane frailty
and weakness. Now our natural affections do whirle us about and carry us away
from the performance of good duties oft-times, but then it shall be our
constant course to be performing of good duties, we shall then know our
Christian friends and acquaintance, and rejoice mutually together, John 4.36.

3. We shall be like Christ in our estates; And first, Then will our Savior
say, Come ye blessed, etc. Math. 25.34, to 41.

2. Then will our Savior lay open before our eyes, all our good performances,
Luke 12.2. Eccl. 12.14. 2 Thessalonians. 1.10. Matthew. 6. from 1. to 16. 1 Cor. 4.5.

3. We shall sit on the throne of God, and shall judge the world and the
Angels, 1 Cor. 6.2, 3.

4. We do now count it a great mercy, and matter of great joy to see the face
of Christ in the Gospel, in his ordinances, how much more will it be joy
unspeakable to see Christ face to face? And if the seeing Christ in the Gospel,
in his ordinances, does in some manner transform us into his likeness, then
how shall we be transformed into his image, when we shall feer him face to
face? Heb. 12.23. It shall then be our meat and drink to do our Fathers will.

Reas. 1. From the day of Christ's coming to judgment. It shall be our Marriage
day, now we are but betrothed to Christ, we are now so coy that Christ has
much ado to get our good will; the Ministers of Christ travel in birth of us;
and when they have got us to give our consent, it is their labor to fit us and
trim us against that day, 2 Cor. 11.2. For we are now full of whorish and
adultrous lusts, wherefore the Apostle exhorts the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 2.7.1.
and in them all us, to cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and
spirit.

2. Although when we have done all we can, we are but unprofitable servants,
Luke 17.10. yet Christ at that day will give us a Kingdom, 2 Thessalonians. 2.6, 7, to
10. 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. 2 Cor. 4.17, 18. Romans 2.6, to 9.

Use 1. This may be a matter of great consolation to us, when we shall know of
our departure hence, it shall be for the better, and not for the worse; then
shall we be every way perfect, then shall we receive our rewards according to
our deeds, Rev. 20.12.

2. This should exhort us all to be fruitful in every good word and work, 1
Cor. 15.8. as knowing our labor shall not be in vain in the Lord.

3. This may exhort us to patience, For what though we do meet with much hard
dealing here, let us yet gird up our minds with patience, for there will a day
come shall pay for all, when Christ shall reward every man according to his
works, Rev. 2.16, 17. 2 Timothy 2 11.

4, To exhort every one that would see a joyful and a comfortable end, and
receive a crown of glory in the world to come, to have a care that he become
the child of God here, Romans 8.11. and not to set our affections on the things
of this world. Jam. 4.4.5. You that are to choose, make your choice now,
whether you will have Christ, and a poor, base, miserable life, or cleave to
the world, and be in endless torments for ever hereafter. If those Virgins
that were brought to the King, had twelve months time for their purifying, six
months with oil, and six months with odours, Ester 2.6, to 12. Then how ought
we all our life to be decking and purifying our selves, that so we may be taken
up into the Presence chamber of the King of heaven?

Doct. 5. We know we shall know him, because we shall see him, and this seeing
of him shall make us like him.
Job he is confident of this, Job. 19.27. This thing was much desired of
Zachariah, Luke 19.4. John 12.21.

Reas. 1. Is taken from the prayer of Christ, John 17.24 and whatsoever he
prayed for, his Father heard him, John 11.41, 42.

2. From our estate here, We are now but espoused to Christ, as Princes send
Ambassadors into far Countries, to make matches for their Sons and Daughters;
so the Lord Jesus does send his Ministers to us, to win us to him, and to get
us to be betrothed to him, and at his coming to judgment shall be our
marriage, 1 Thessalonians. 4 17.

Use 1. This may be a ground of much comfort to all the servants of God, in the
midst of temptations and distresses, Job 19.25.27

2. This may be an use of encouragement to all those that think they shall
never see good days, after they have set foot into the ways of God, and
fellowship of Christ. Certainly you shall have one good day, here is one
promised in the Text. We shall see him when the Marriage day comes, and so see
him as he is in great glory. Wherefore strive we after perfection here, for if
we become not the children of God here, we shall never see his face with
comfort in the world to come.

Use 3. This should exhort us to prepare to meet Christ in Person, If a man
were come to speak to a Prince, what care would he have to make himself
handsome? therefore what care ought Christians to have that are to come into
the Presence chamber of the King of heaven?

Doct. 6. That the beholding and seeing of Christ face to face, shall fashion
us to be like him, for we shall see him as he is, 1 Cor. 13.12. Heb. 11.27.
This seeing of Christ did invest Moses with such glory and strength, as that
he feared not the fierceness of the King; and so should the full assurance of
seeing Christ in his Kingdom, arm us against all discouragements, or
whatsoever the world would lay upon us.

Q. What is it to see Christ face to face?

Answ. The clear and perfect knowledge of God, which proceeds only from
Christ Jesus, for no man has seen God at any time, 1 Timothy 6.16. Joh. 4.12.
Tit. 1.8. opposed to the sight of Christ in the world, 2 Cor. 3.13, to 17.

1 Under the old Testament they saw Christ through a veyl of ceremonies, 2 Cor.
3.13.

2. In the New Testament we see Christ as in a glass of Gods Word, Sacraments,
Christian communion; afterward we shall not only see him without ceremonies,
but without ordinances also, we shall then see Christ more immediately.

3. Then shall we see Christ's Manhood, and all the glory he had before the
world, 1 Cor. 13.12. Joh. 17.24.

Q. How shall this make us like him?

Answ. We shall see him in the glass of the Gospel, 2 Cor. 3, 18. and so grow
from one measure of grace to another. If the Gospel will do this, much more the
presence of Christ's body, and view of Christ.

2 Look as Moses, when he saw Gods back parts, his face did shine, Exodus 34.29.
So our face then much more.

3. As Peter, James and John, when Christ was transfigured, Matthew. 17.2, 3, 4,
5. Prove. 27.17. A man may learn something from the countenance of a Christian.
When Christ did but look at Peter, it was enough to work him to repentance.

Use 1. As ever you would have comfort on your death bed, labor to be like
Christ, by seeing him in the glass of the Gospel. If you be the worse by
seeing him in the ordinances, what will you then be by seeing him face to face?
Labor to feel a powerful change by the Ordinances.

2. This may be an use of comfort to such as find benefit by the ordinances. If
thou find good by the ordinances, then how much better shall thou be, by
seeing Christ face to face? That which makes a Christian fear death, judgment,
distresses, is because he does not see Christ.

Doct. 7. Gods children do know thus much, that when Christ shall appear, they
shall be like him, and that they shall be made like him by seeing him as he is,
Psalm. 17.15.
Q. How know ye this?

Answ. Partly by the testimony of the Spirit of God, that reveals the deep
things of God, 1 Cor. 2.9.

2. From the sensible experience of the efficacy of Gods ordinances in this
life. If they be the better for seeing Christ in his ordinances, then how much
more when ye see him face to face?

Use 1. This refutes the Doctrine of Doubting. We shall not only persevere,
but we know it. This assures us of perseveration, that we shall never fall
away. They know they shall persevere: Now knowledge is of a certain conclusion.

Q. How may we come to such a knowledge?

Answ. Labor to be like Christ in his Word, Sacraments, Christian communion.
If we find that every ordinance does make us like Christ, then the sight of
Christ much more.

Use 2 This should encourage us to bless God, who has redeemed us from
darkness of error. If they that write against this Doctrine, had seen Christ
in his ordinances, they would have believed it.

Use 3. Those which have seen God in his ordinances, let them take up such
meditations as these: That though they be obscured with the veil of affliction,
temptation, persecution, yet they shall hereafter be made like Christ. Zacheus
by seeing Christ was made the Son of Abraham, and was ready to part with all.
Moses saw Christ in a bush, and feared not Pharaoh.

1 JOHN 3.3. And every man that has this hope in him, purifieth himself, even
as he is pure.


IN these words you have; A description of a child of God. He is such a one as
has hope in Christ.

2. This hope is set forth by its proper work and efficacy, purging.

3. The pattern or rule, according to which it purges, even as Christ is pure.

Doct. 1. That every child of God has hope in Christ, to be made like him at
his appearing.
Every man that is begotten again, is begotten to a lively hope, 1 Pet. 1.3, 4,
5. An hypocrites hope is dead, it has neither comfort, nor power in it to
cleanse or purge. A child in the womb, when they doubt of the life of it,
though the parent be very wealthy, yet has not lively hope of his possession;
but if the child be born alive, then there is a comfortable hope: so if we be
not born again, all our hopes of eternal life are but vain, 1 Cor. 15.19. It Is
the property of the Israel of God to hope in their God, Psalm. 130.7.

Q. What is this hope?

Answ. It is a patient, certain, and grounded expectation of all those promises
in Christ, which by faith we believe to belong unto us. It Is a sure and patient
expectation.

There are two acts of hope: 1. Expectation. 2. Waiting.


This is not an expectation of mere opinion, but a sure expectation. The
Apostle puts both together, Romans 8.25. Heb. 6.11, 18, 19. An anchor is a sure
and steadfast stay to the ship, that though it waves up and down; yet it has a
certain stay. And so a Christians hope, it is like an anchor to stay the soul,
the object of hope is the accomplishment of the promises to come, and so
differs from faith; no man hopes for that which is present or past, but that
which we see not, promises that belong to us in reversion. Tit. 2.13, 14. Heb.
11.1. Faith looks at all promises as present, faith believes that all the
promises are true, and then hope stirs up it self to look for accomplishment,
and if God tarry long, it waits, Romans 5.5. It Is a sure hope, never was any man
disappointed; and yet hope, though it be sure, it is not without all doubting.
No true Christian but has this hope.

Reas. That Gods children might not be tossed and hurryed up and down the
world. A child of God is never carried far, an anchor sticks in the
foundation, Heb. 6.18, 19. While he hold on our hopes, and they are fastened to
Christ, we have strong cansolation, hereby are we kept from dashing against
rocks, and sands, and shoars; here is the difference between an anchor and
hope, an anchor is fastened in the earth, and hope in heaven.

Use 1. This may show you the dignity and honor of a Christian. He is a man of
great hopes, he will not give his hopes for the best man's estate in the world,
he has a steadfast hope of being like Christ when he sees him; though the
clothes he now wears be mean, yet he hopes to be clad with Christ's
righteousness; and though his house be mean, yet he hopes for an house not
made with hands; this is his anchor, and this will hold whithersoever we sail:

2: This may be a ground of trial, What be the hopes you build upon? There is
a double difference between the hopes of a godly and wicked man.

1. The wicked man's hopes are groundless, he has no grounds but hopes:

2. It is fruitless, Job 8 11. The hope of an hypocrite that is without
ground, is like a rush or flag without water or mire. Grass if it have got
head, will do well enough without much moisture or water. Hope without a
promise wants water to nourish it. A spiders web looks like a curious work but
it is drawn out of its own bowels, and is soon swept away; so a hypocrite has
no hope but what he spins out of his own bowels, he builds upon present or
future duties, his hope is fruitless, it neither yields comfort nor
selfe-purging. A true Christian rejoices in tribulation, but an hypocrite is
overthrown with it, Romans 5 2, 3. The hope of an hypocrite makes him careless,
he takes no pains with his heart, Prove. 14.23. Take an hypocrite while he is in
prosperity, and he has great hopes; takes away prosperity, and perhaps it may
hold still, for he may hope that friends will do something; when he is sick, he
hopes to recover; when he fears death, he hopes for another life, but when
death comes, all his hopes are crushed: But a godly man, he hopes in death, he
hopes for Gods goodness, his hope will never fail him, nor make him ashamed.

3. Hence learn, that hope and knowledge of the same thing may well stand
together; In the former verse; he says, We know, here he hopes. A man's hope
cease not in order to another world; for do not the Saints believe that their
bodies shall rise again? and do not they hope for it; They know the
perperpetuity of their estates, and they hope for it, 2 Cor. 13.13.

4. This should stir us up, as we would have a comfortable death, and safe, not
to go to Sea without this anchor of hope. The world is full of perplexities,
carry your anchor about with you, see your hope well wrought, and you shall be
safe. Mariners go not to Sea without an anchor, but perhaps sometimes though
they have pitched their anchor in the bottom of the Sea, yet the storms may be
so great, that they may be forced to cut the cable; woman in childebed may be
put to distress, but hope in heaven will carry her through.

Q. How may we get this hope?

Answ. 1. We can never come to it, till we be out of hope of any goodness in
our selves.

2: We must attend upon God in his ordinances, that so he may work faith in us;
and where there is faith, there will be strings of hope, hope is built upon
faith.

Q. How shall we carry it about with us?

Answ. Look at it as a mercy that you have it, stay your selves upon your
anchor, look afresh at the promises, and believe them, then thou shall have
hope enough: That which makes unquiet, is because we have not visited the
promises many a day, nor renewed our faith in them.

Doct. 2: That every Christian man that does hope to be like Christ in glory
hereafter, does purge himself, to be like Christ in grace here*
The lively hope of a Christian here, is set forth by the lively fruit of
selfe-purging, 2 Pet. 3.12, 13, 14. Titus 2.11, 12, 13, 14.

How does this hope thus purify us?

1: By the holy meditations it does suggest into the heart of every hopeful
Christian:

1. A Christian that knows he has long been imprisoned in the fetters of
corruption, and knows he shall shortly be called to appear before God; it makes
him to put off all superfluity of uncleanness, and to put on the garments of
holiness. Shall I come before Christ invested in pride and wantonness? This
makes him careful to purify himself, Jer. 2.32. Can a Maid forget her
ornaments when she is to be married? and can a Christian forget such ornaments
as may befit him for such a Kingdom?

2. A second meditation which provokes a hoping Christian to purify himself,
is this, He considers, the more he is purged and purified, the more he is
cleansed, the greater shall his glory be, 2 Pet. 3.10, 11, 12.

2. Hope purifies by setting some graces on work, which do cleanse and
purify: As,

1. Repentance is a grace that purges us from sin, Psalm 130.1, 2, 3

2. Faith purifies our hearts, Acts 15.9. If God stir but up our hearts to wait
on him, we may certainly know that he will do so as we have desired, else our
hope would make us ashamed, Psalm 119. 49. Remember thou the word unto thy
servant in which thou have made me to trust.

3 The meditation of the graces in Christ transform us into their image, 2 Cor.
3.18. There is such a power in the promises of God, that they fashion us like
unto Christ.

4. Hope cleanses us, by giving us hearts fastening on the Word, and applying
it; and the Word applied has a strong power to cleanse even young men, Psalm.
119.9.

5. This hope has a power to stir us up to faithfulness, which hope persuades
us our labor shall not be in vain in the Lord, and this faithfulness sets God
on work to purge us, Joh. 15.2. that we may bring forth more fruits. When God
sees us to stand at a stay, and to wax b^rren, then he is ready to cut us
down, that we cumber not the ground.

3. Hope to be made like to Christ in glory hereafter makes us to abandon such
impediments as hinder our purification, 1 Cor. 5.6. When he says, that every
one that has this hope purifies himself, it implies it is a continued work, he
makes it a part of his daily work.

2. He purges himself, he does not say from what, from wantonness; and
leaves covetousness behind, he leaves it indefinitely, he includes all, and
excludes none, James 1.21. This hope purges the whole man, the understanding,
will, and affections, 2 Cor. 7.1. 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. Well then may it be called a
lively fruitful hope.

Reas. Hope comes to all the ordinances of God, with expectation that it shall
find benefit from the Word, prayer, and good company. Hope waits on God for
good in every ordinance, and then it never goes away empty; it strive, before
it comes to prepare the heart, and to cleanse it from all filthiness.

Use 1. This may discover unto us the wonderful loathsomeness of sin. If sin
were not an excrement, why should we purge it out? We purge out nothing but
filthy loathsome things, and therefore when hope is said to purge, it implies
that sin is loathsome.

2. Hence discern the soundness of our hope. Do you find your hearts daily
striving to ^leanse your selves? if not thy hope will make thee ashamed. If thy
hope do not set thee on work every day to cleanse thy heart, truly thy hope is
nothing but a vain delusion, and nothing will more sting thee at the last day,
when thou shall hope for heaven, thou shall be cast out of Gods presence.

3. Let it teach all Christians, as they would not be ashamed of their hopes,
to make their calling and election sure. Let their hopes make them purge and
cleanse themselves. And let not Christians think it is enough to purge
themselves, but they must purge their families. A Christian must suffer none in
his family to be uncircumcised. God would have killed Moses because he had one
uncircumcised. Magistrates must cleanse their Towns and places where they live.
Good Josiah when he was to celebrate the Passover, he set himself with all his
heart to purge Jerusalem and Judah.

Doct. 3. The purity of Christ is the pattern of every Christians purity. Or
thus: Every hopeful Christian makes Christ's purity the pattern of his, 1 Cor.
11.1. Heb. 12.12. Be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ.
Set before you a pattern of a cloud of witnesses, 1 John 2.6. He that abides
in Christ, ought to walk as he has walked.

Why should every Christian make Christ the pattern of his purity?

1. From the end of Gods predestination. He has predestined us to be
conformed to the image of his Son, Romans 8.29. And God in all things requires
that we should grow up to the fellowship of the stature of Jesus Christ.

2. From the perfection of the pattern. All other patterns of godly men will
fail us in some things, but Christ is a perfect pattern, he will fail us in
nothing,

Use 1. This should teach us to reject the society of such men as inwardly
loath the name of Puritans; alas if they cannot endure the name of purity in
poor weak Christians, how would they hate the purity of Christ? If they cannot
endure the brightness of a candle, how will they endure the brightness of the
Sun? and yet they say, they love Christ. But if they have not purity, how can
they love Christ? and if they love not Christ, they are accursed for ever.

2. This reproves those, who though they do not hate purity, yet, they think
themselves very well, if they exceed the worst sort of men; they are no
whore-mongers, nor thieves, nor deceivers. Alas, if there be no more then
moral honesty, they shall come far short of Heaven.

3. This reproves the Romish Church, that think ordinary Christians are not
bound to so strict a pattern as their regular Christians. Did ever any of them
reach higher then Christ? and is not every Christian exhorted to set Christ as
a pattern?

4. This reproves another sort of Christians, who if they have got but such a
measure of grace, as they are assured to be in a state of grace, they never
look further, but now they look out for themselves in the world, as if they
might rest in what is behind, and never press forward to what is before them,
contrary to Paul: Know, O Christian, it is not enough to get truth of grace,
nor some purity, but you must grow pure as Christ is pure.

Use 2. This may exhort us all, as we would maintain our hope to be made like
Christ hereafter, so to strive to this exactness of purity, to purify our
selves as he is pure. If you would be hopeful Christians, you must be growing
Christians, growing up to the measure of the purity of Christ; decay in
growing* and you decay in hope. No Christian so full of joy and hope, as he
that is every day getting something, and growing up to perfection, 1 John 2.6.
Phil. 3.12, 13, 14.

Motives to stir us up to grow in grace.

1. So soon as you slack this care, your hope, faith, and grace waxes weak. If
we see our bodies do not void excrements for many days, we think our bodies
are not in a good state but some diseases lie on us. How can we have an
healthful soul, when we purge not our corruption many a day?

2. From the great uncomelinesse that is in us, if we do not strive to be pure.
Is it not an uncomely thing to see the head to be of gold, and the members
partly brass, partly clay and dirt?

3. It Is very grievous to the Spirit of God, that we should be no better for
all it has dwelt so long in us. When Christ had been long with his Disciples,
and they were not bettered by him, he up braids them, O foolish and slow of
heart to believe! how long shall I be with you? It was a grief to Christ that
he should be long with his Disciples, and they not to grow up to strength of
grace.

Obj. But does not virtue consist in a golden mean?

Ans. Virtue consists not in a mean between two degrees, but in a mean between
two extremes. You may exceed the bounds of righteousness, and so be
unrighteous; but you cannot exceed the degrees of righteousness, Christ says,
Be perfect as your heavenly father is perfect. Can you then be too pure and
holy. No you cannot, though you were as full of grace and holiness as Christ
himself.

4. As ever you desire to be worthy partakers of the Sacrament, then labor to
purify your selves. The reason why many a christian comes to the Sacrament,
and finds no comfort, is, because they grieved the Spirit of God before they
came, by neglecting to cast out those obstructions which hinder the influence
of the head to the members, 1 Cor. 11.30, 31.

Means to help us to purify our selves.

1. Be persuaded that you are not in a safe estate, till you are grown up to
some good measure of purity. You would think him in a poor case, that should
live 200 years, and yet for want of evacuation should live in sickness and
weakness. And so a christian is in an uncomfortable estate unless he purge
himself.

2. Be very watchful over thy ways.

3. Use the ordinances of God constantly. Say not after conversion, It is no
matter whether we be always conversant in Gods ordinances, but at some times,
when the Spirit moves us. Labor we to carry our selves not as idle hearers,
but as faithful doers; labor we to see our spots and deformities, and strive
to purge them, labor we to practice new duties, as they are renewed to us.

1 JOHN 3.4. Whosoever commits sin, transgresses the Law.


IN the words, and in the following to verse 7. he uses four motives to stir
up to self-cleansing.

The 1. is from the danger of committing sin, proved from the proper definition
of sin. Sin is the transgression of the Law.

2. From the end of Christ's coming, and that was to take away sin.

3. From the pattern of Christ, who was without sin.

4. From the practice of such, as have any fellowship by union with Christ.
Whosoever abides in Christ sins not; Set out by the contrary, He that
commits sin, he has neither seen Christ, nor known him.

Doct. It is and ought to be a sufficient motive to every hopeful christian, to
abstain from sin, because it is the transgression of the Law, Numb. 14.41. Why
will ye go up? why will ye transgress the Law?
The Rechabites were commended because they kept their fathers commandment.
And he hereby convinces the Jews of rebellion, that the Sons of mortal men
should make more conscience of obeying their dead fathers, then his people of
his Laws, Dan. 9.11. Neh. 9.34* 35. Romans 2.22, 23, 24. Jam. 2.9.

Reas. 1 From the Lawgiver, he looks at every sin as an abrogation of his
ordinances, Deuteronomy. 27. ult. He that walks in his Law confirms it, sets his
seal to it. They who break it would make it of no force. This is one act of
high rebellion against God, 2 Samuel 12.7, 8.

2 From the wrath and displeasure God pronounces against every transgressor,
Jer. 7.19. and 44.4.

3. God takes it as a dishonor to the power and efficacy of his word, Jer.
5.22, 23. God looks at it as a more boisterous and unruly passage in a man to
break the bounds of his Law, then for the Sea to break its bounds.

4. From the delight God takes in the keeping and keepers of his Law, 1 Samuel
15.22. He more delights in obedience, then in the cattle of an hundred hills,
Prove. 23.26. My Son, give me thy heart. That is more acceptable then all the
Sacrifices. Transgression is as rebellion, and the sin of witchcraft.

Reas. 2. Feom the Law it self.

1 It Is holy, just, and good, and therefore it is abominable to transgress it.
For this is a sin against Holinessc, Justice and Goodness.

2. From the vigor and efficacy of this Law, offering life to the obedient,
Psalm. 19.11. 1 Timothy 4.8. Psalm. 119.16. death to the disobedient, Gal. 3.10.
Isa. 59.1, 2. 2 Chronicles. 16.11.

Use 1. To reprove such as are afraid to break men's Laws, for fear of
penalty, and are sensible of such dangers, but are not afraid to violate and
break the holy and righteous Laws of God. This argues a most rebellious and
revolting heart. Such are not hopeful christians.

2. To teach and exhort us to make conscience of all our ways, and to take
heed to our paths, lest we transgress the Law, and sin against God, Prove.
28.9. If we turn away our ears from hearing Gods Law, even our prayers are
abominable. The consideration of this should keep us from secret petty sins.
For though man sees not, yet God sees and will punish, 2 Samuel 12.11, 12. If
we think to get honor, profit, or pleasure by sin, we deceive our selves. Is
it not as grievous a thing to have our soul wounded by our darling child, as
our mortal enemy? It is all one to be stabbed to the heart with a pen knife
and with a sword. Every sin wounds and rents our hearts. Abstain we from all
sin, even the least sin is the transgression of the Law.

3. This refutes such as think the Law is not given to the regenerate. The
Apostle here encourages hopeful christians not to transgress the Law.

Obj. But we are not under the Law, but under grace.

Answ. He means we are not under the covenant of works, but of Grace, Psalm.
119.105.

Obj. As Christ's passive obedience freeth from the curse, so his active
obedience freeth from the commanding power of the Law.

Answ. 1. Christ has done this, and therefore those that are in Christ fear
not death by their disobedience, nor look for life by their obedience; but we
look at the Law as a rule of obedience, that we may walk according to God, and
show that we live by endeavoring to keep his commandments. Take heed of
Satan's slights, that would make the Gospel a Supersedeas to the Law in certain
things; pray not, preach not, but when the Spirit moves. Thus you shall set up
a Spirit of delusion.

For sin is a transgression of the Law.

This is a perfect definition of sin; transgression is the genus, the Law the
difference.

By Law in Scripture without addition, is meant the Law of the ten
commandments, Jam. 4, 11, 12. and 2.10, 11.

Obj. 1. What if a man sin against the Law of nature, is not that a sin?

Answ. Ir is in effect and substance the same, Romans 2.15. Though the Law of
nature was more dimly and darkly known, Moses law was but a new draught of the
Law of nature in innocence. Heathen Lawgivers, Philosophers, and Poets have
expressed the effect of all the commandments save the tenth, Romans 2, 14.15.

Obj. 2. Was it not a sin to transgress the Ceremonial and Judicial Law?

Answ. To the Jews it was. The ceremonial Law was but an examplification of
the second Commandment, and the Judicial Law does but explain the second
Table. The Judicial, in regard of the equity, is included in the moral Law,
the Ceremonial stood in force till Christ dyed.

Obj. 3 Is it not a sin to transgress the Gospel? and is not unbelief a sin?
Joh. 16.9. Is not new obedience required in the Gospel? Joh. 14.21. Ezekiel.
36.27. What say you to the commandments of the Gospel, that we should walk as
Christ walked?

Answ. The commandments of the Gospel are all of them reduceable under the
commandments of the Law, God commanding perfect conformity and obedience to
his whole will, not only revealed, but to be revealed. If God command David to
bring in music into the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 29.25. though Moses speak nothing of
it, yet this was expressed, to hear and obey God in all things, Deuteronomy. 18.18.
God commanded to hearken to Christ, Moses improperly and hiddenly delivered the
substance of the Gospel, partly in the ceremonial Law, partly in the Sacrament
of circumcision and the passover. Christ was veyled under them, Romans 10.5.6, 7,
8. with Deuteronomy. 30.12. The word of faith spoken of by Moses, Gal. 3.24.

Transgression is (...), want of Law, and absence of it, when a man speaks and
does without Law, what we do against it, or beside the Law, it is (...).

Reas. Taken from the end for which God gives the Law, to be the means of
perfection, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. Sin is called error from the Law, Isa. 63.17.
Jam. 5.20. Prove. 21.16. He that wanders out of the way of righteousness, shall
rejoice among the dead.

Use 1 Of refutation of the works of Popish supererogation, which are held
forth as better and more perfect then the Law, for the Law never commands such
things; such are those monkish vows of perpetual virginity and voluntary
poverty: if these be above the Law, then they are transgressors of the Law,
Isa. 1.12, 13. Will a man be wiser then his maker, holyer then the Lawgiver?
Josh. 1.7, 8. To devise a worship better then God has appointed, is worse then
to fail in breaking Gods Law. This is mere impotency, the other is arrogance,
casting aspersion on Gods wisdom.

2. They further hold some sins to be venial in themselves, some mortal. If
they be sins, then they fall under the curse, The wages of sin is death.

3. That original sin in the regenerate is no sin, but David says, that he
was conceived in sin; and original sin in whomsoever it is found, it is a
transgression of the tenth Commandment.

4. They say that man's Law does bind the conscience, and the transgression of
man's law is sin.

We answer and grant, when these laws are grounded on Gods Laws, they bind,
not otherwise. If the breaking of men's laws is a sin, then the keeping of them
were a virtue, but this is hypocrisy, Isa. 29. We must be subject for
conscience sake.

2 Against those that hold, that infants are without original sin, but the
Scripture says, they are conceived in sin.

3 To reprove the familists, who hold, that godly and regenerate men are in no
wise subject to the Law, but are freed from the condemning and commanding power
of it. But if they sin, then certainly they are transgressors of the Law.

Use 2. Of instruction.

1. That all the sins and good things found in the whole Bible, are to be
ranked within the compass of the ten Commandments.

2. That all nations are under the Law.

3. That the Law and Gospel mutually thus agree. That the Law of Moses is
included in the Gospel, and yet the Law and Gospel are not confounded founded
together. The Gospel requires that in the way of thankfulness we should keep
the Commandments of God, Ezekiel. 36.27.

3 This should discourage us from all sin, and encourage us to labor to purge
our selves from all sin. All sin is the transgression of the Law of God. Let
not pleasures, profits, or credit allure us to sin against God; Shall we for
our own ends sin against God, and so transgress his holy, good, and righteous
Law, we must take heed how we meddle with that we have no Law for. We must
prove all our paths by the stony Tables of Gods Law, Psalm. 119.105. Obedience
is the fulfilling of the Law, and has great recompense of reward.

1 JOHN 3.5. Christ was manifest to take away our sins, and in him is no sin.


THese words contain in them the second and third reason, why every hopeful
Christian should purge himself as Christ is pure.

The second reason is taken from the end of Christ's coming into the world, and
that was to take away our sins.

The third argument is taken from the pattern of Christ's righteousness, for in
him is no sin.

From the second reason, which is the ends of Christ's coming into the world.

Doct. That the end of Christ coming into the world, was to take away our sins.
By the manifestation of Christ, we must understand the coming ^f Christ in the
flesh. 1 Timothy 3.16. He came for this end, to take away our sins, Joh. 1.29.

Q. But what did Christ for us to take away our sins?

Answ. He became our surety, he willingly took upon him the burden of our
sins, 1 Pet. 2.24. Isa. 5.44.

2. As Christ took the burden upon him, so God laid it upon him.

3. Christ did take away our sins by imputation, as in the old Law, every man
was to lay his hand on the head of the burnt-offering and to confess their
sins, and so by that means their sins were taken away. So now in this time of
the Gospel, we must lay hold on Christ by a true and lively faith, challenging
Christ to be our Savior, Lev. 16.21.22. 2 Cor. 5. ult.

Thus Christ takes away our sins by justifying us from the guilt, and by
sanctification he cleanses us from the spot and stain of them, Ezekiel. 36.25. 1 John 1.8.

This he does three ways.

1. By his death he overcame the principal enemies of our salvation, as the
Devil, Heb. 2.14. and he has overcome the world, which was strong to carry us
captive by flattery and fear, Gal. 6.14. He has crucified the body of sin and
corruption in us, Kom. 6.6,

2 By sending such ordinances into the Church as might cleanse us, Ephesians. 5.36.
Prove. 13.20. Isa. 27.9. The fruit of afflictions is to purge away sin.

3 He has sent his holy Spirit into our hearts to change us. A Spirit of faith
purifying, Act. 15.9. and of hope and love, 1 John 3.3. Gal. 3.14. We receive
the Spirit of grace, which makes Gods ordinance effectual to eleanse us.

Use 1. Of instruction to every one that is afflicted in conscience for sin,
and knows not how to be eased and purged. It is not fair buildings, music,
and merry company that will take away sin. This course will make thee worse.
But this thou must do, consider to what end Chtist was manifested and sent
into the world, was it not to take away our sins? But I find not this wrought
in me, I find the world and lusts of my heart prevail against me; Christ takes
away the burden and debt of sin, by undertaking to accept and bear them, 1 John 2.2, Mat. 11.28. The Father has laid on Christ the iniquity of every
weary and broken soul, Now we must get to Christ, and confess all our
iniquities, and leave them upon him, calling upon him for grace and mercy.

2. To comfort those that depend upon Christ for mercy, and have confessed
their sins to him. If he have taken away sin, it is done effectually, Heb.
10.1, to 10.

3 To teach every soul that believes that Christ came to take away our sins, to
renounce and abhor all sin, and to cleanse themselves from all filthiness of
slesh and spirit. Let us not take Christ's coming into the world in vain, but
give all diligence to purify our selves as Christ is pure.

And in him is no fin.

This is the reason, which is taken from the spotless innocence of Christ.

Doct. That Christ is spotless and pure from sin, Luke 23.22, 41.
Pilate and the Centurion acknowledged him to be so, Heb. 4.15. Joh. 14.30. 1
Pet. 2.21, 22. and 1.19, 20.

Reas. 1. In regard of the purity of the divine nature. If there had been sin
in the humane nature of Christ, it might have been said that God was a sinner.

2. That he might fulfill all the legal types and sacrifices, which were to be
without blemish.

3. From our necessity to have such a Savior, Heb. 7.26, 27. If he had offered
sacrifice for himself, he had needed a Savior to have redeemed him; If he had
not been without sin, he had been swallowed up of death.

Obj. How could he be clean that was born of a woman? Job. 25.4.

Ans. He was not born by carnal generation, after the manner of men.

Use 1 To show a difference between the first and second Adam. The first Adam
was a sinner, and propagated sins. The second Adam was without sin, and
propagated righteousness, Romans 5.19. We must not rest in a carnal generation,
for our natural birth is polluted; until we be born of him in whom is no sin
we cannot be blessed.

2. It is a ground of consolation to such as feel themselves burdened and
pressed down with sin; though we be sinful, and laden, and compassed about
with it, yet in Christ is no sin or spot in nature, heart, or life. He came to
fulfill all righteousness, and paid all to God to the utmost farthing.
Righteous is Christ both in life and death, what is wanting in us is supplied
in him.

3. Hence we must learn all, not to judge our selves more sinful and miserable
then others, because we are evil entreated in the world, and afflicted of God.
Thus it was with Christ, it is our happiness to do well, though we suffer
evil, 1 Pet. 2.21, 22.

Doct. The spotless innocence of Christ, is and ought to be an effectual
motive to every hopeful Christian, to purge himself as Christ is pure, 1 Pet.
1.16. Mat. 5. ult.
Reas. 1. From the ends of Gods predestinating us, Romans 8.28, 29. and God
works all things according to the counsel of his will, Ephesians. 1.11.

2 From the end of Christ's spotless life and death, leaving us an example to
follow his steps, 1 Pet. 2.21, 22. To justify us from the guilt, and to purge
us from the blot and stain of sin. If we sin, we sin against Gods
predestination. and the end of Christ's coming.

3 From the near fellowship between Christ and us, he is our head and husband,
we must labor therefore to be suitable and conformable unto him, Ephesians. 5.26.

4. Christ takes pains to cleanse and heal us, that so he might present us
without blemish to God. This is the scope of all his holy ordinances, and of
Christ's shedding his blood.

Use 1. To reprove such as take pleasure in sin, and being reproved, justify
themselves, in saying, all are sinners, we must purge our selves as Christ is
pure, in whom is no sin.

2. To stir up all the children of God, to conform themselves to Christ in
life and death, 2 Cor. 7.1. Let us not sin against Gods predestination and
Christ's blood; Let us not be a dishonor and grief to our head, and take Gods
ordinances in vain.

How shall we do this?

1. Believe steadfastly in the Lord Christ for justification, and get his blood
sprinkled upon us to cleanse us for sanctification.

1. Set the pattern of Christ before thee, and wisely behold it, and view it.
This will be effectual to mould and fashion thee according thereunto, 1 John
1.16. There is a supernatural power in Christ, looked upon by the eye of faith,
to transfigure us into his likeness, 2 Cor. 3.18. There is a power in the
sight of Christ to convey his Spirit to transform us.

2. Deal effectually with thine own heart, and pray to God for grace, that thy
soul may abhor, and disallow, and condemn all sin in thee, Romans 7.12, 13. Let
thy judgment disallow it, and thy will abhor and hate it, and then it is not we
that do it, but sin that dwells in us. God looks at sin as thy enemy, and
pityeth thee.

1 JOHN 3.6. Whosoever abides in him sins not.


THe fourth reason why every hopeful christian purifieth himself, is taken
from the constant practice of every hopeful christian that he abides in
Christ, amplified by the continuance.

Doct. Every hopeful Christian that has constant fellowship with Christ does
constantly avoid sin.
To abide in Christ, implies communion with Christ.

Continuance in it.

First, we have fellowship with Christ, by the free donation of God, we are by
Gods counsel and purpose, by imputation, members of Christ, our sins are
imputed to Christ, his righteousness imputed to us, Joh. 16.16.

Secondly, by a communication of his Spirit, causing us to receive him, and
cleave unto him by faith and love, 1 Cor. 6.17.

2. And thus this communion with Christ is indissolvable and everlasting, Joh.
8.31, 32. Such as continue not, had never fellowship with Christ, as his
Disciples, Jer. 31.40. Such do not sin, Psalm. 119.2. Psalm. 1.1, 2, 3. Mat.
12.35. Isa. 61.3. Whosoever is born of God, sins not.

1. He never sins to death, 1 John 5.18. He commits not the sin against the
Holy Ghost.

2. He lives not in sin; he makes not that his course and imploymen^ he may
slip and go astray, but he turns into the way again, Romans 6.2. Living in sin
is made all one with continuing in sin.

3. Because his judgment and conscience allows not sin, but abhors it. It
is not his sin, but the sin of his rebellious and carnal part, Romans 7.14, 15.
He judges and condemns himself, and grieveth for, and hates what he does,
and therefore is said not to sin

1. In a regenerate christian there is the flesh and the Spirit, his will and
conscience is more sanctified then corrupt. In the state of innocence the will
was the weakest, but in regeneration God has made it the firmest and best. God
has provided, that the hedge should be stronger where it was broken.

2 The will and judgment being the most predominant faculties, do lead and
rule the whole man. A clear fountain will purge it self to a clean stream; so
will the will and judgment, being the fountain of all our actions.

3. If these faculties be for God, God accepts the whole man according to
these. If there be a league between two Kings, though there be offenses
committed by some Subjects, yet if the Rulers do punish such, the league is
not broken. So is it with the godly.

1. The godly resolve against all sin.

2. They labor to mortify all sin, and quicken all grace in them, and use all
good means to that purpose. In the commission they are unwilling, and after the
commission they are grieved and ashamed, and take an holy revenge on
themselves, 2 Cor. 7.10, 11. Thus they show themselves to be clean from the sin
committed; denomination is taken from the best and greatest part.

Obj. Who does God bitterly and sharply reprove his people for sin?

Ans. God does this, to bring them to better sight of sin, and judgment, and
sense of it in their hearts, to shake us out of a lethargy and benummednesse.
But when he has awaked us, and caused us to judge and loath our selves for our
sins, God looks at us as righteous. Thus the diseases and distempers of
judgment and heart are pityed and healed. As the stone in the reins distempers
men, so the stone in the heart distempers the heart and judgment. God looks at
this as the disease of his children.

Use 1. To show a broad difference betwixt those that are born of God, and
those that are not.

1. Those that sin unto death are not born of God. God keeps his from that
sin.

2. They that take pleasure in sin, and make a trade of sin. Gods children do
not so.

3. If men live in secret sins, against knowledge and conscience, they are not
as yet born of God, their will and affections are not with God, but against him.

Use 2. To teach us all to make a favorable construction of the failings of
Gods people, we must not believe every one that reports evil of them. Those
that are born of God, when they commit any great sin, their repentance is as
exemplary as that sin, as is seen in David and Peter.

3. For comfort to such christians as find their judgments and wills upright,
hating and abhorring the sins they commit, complaining and shaming themselves
for them. If the judgment and heart be with God, and against sin, God looks
at them as not sinning. But this must not make us secure and careless of
repenting, and being grieved for sin.

From the scope St. John aims at in this discourse, to wit, that he that is
born of God, sins not; and therefore this ought to be a motive to such as
hope to see Christ, and to be like him, to purge themselves; note thus much.

Doct. That the exemplary walking of the children of God, ought to be an
effectual motive to every Christian not to walk in the ways of sin, but to
purge themselves, 1 Cor. 11.16.
When the Apostle dehorts men from wearing long hair, and women from shearing
their hair, the argument he uses is, We have no such custom; which argument
were of no force, except the examples of Gods servants were an effectual
motive to stir us up to the same ways, 1 Cor. 14.33. There is a decency in all
churches of God, therefore he pleads against their confusion. Let all things be
done with decency, comely, and without confusion, Psalm. 52.9. This is a reason
why we should wait upon God, because it is good in the eyes of his Saints.

Reas. 1. God commands it, God has set this as the royal way; Phil. 3.17.
This is the highway to heaven, God would have all to walk in the trodden path
of his people.

2. It is a matter of comfort to our souls, it will excuse us from many doubts
of our own hearts, and many slanders which might be cast upon us: If a member
have a motion not guided by the body, you look at it as a Palsy distemper that
we have.

3. From a discomfort we put upon our Brethren, when we Walk in such ways as
are contrary to them; they walk in a blameless course, if we shall walk in
sinful ways, we put upon them breaking of heart, Philip. 3.17, 18. When the
Apostle saw men walk in ways contrary to Gods, it was the grief of his heart.

Use 1. This is a notable comfort to every soul that stands in a mammering
what way to take. Walk in holy ways like Gods people; think not they are
solitary ways, and singular ones; no, if you walk in good ways you shall not
go alone, all good company have gone this way, some will go out of their way
for good company. Walk in a way free from sin, so shall thou have good
company, and in this only.

2. It disswades from sin, gird up thy loins from it. When we walk in the
ways of sin, none go that way but had company, and it will be a shrewd
argument against you, Mar. 7.23.

3. To guide us to a wise observation of the ways of godly men. Though there
be no godly man but has his failings, for which he blusheth before God; yet
none of them, but have something in their ways, whereby you may purge your
selves. None of them, but come nearer Christ in something then you, there is
something wherein they purge themselves more then you. Have respect to the
generality of their ways, God has been always wont to guide his servants
into ways of innocence. If God guide them into good ways, then follow them.

Obj. May I not be deceived?

Answ. True, sometimes generally Gods people go wrong, Exodus 32.19. Aaron and
most of the people dance about the Calf. The people of God took up a custom of
carrying the Ark in a cart from the Heathen, the shoulders of the Levites
should have carried it, 1 Chronicles. 13.5, 6, 7. When David saw his error (for he
was troubled for Vzzah his death) he said (2 Chr. 15.2.) none should carry the
Ark of the Lord, but the Levites. So true it is, the generality of Gods people
might go wrong if they were all met together in a counsel; but though they
may go astray, yet take them not at the^r starts, their ordinary courses are
good. David and his people, though they went wrong, yet presently after they
saw their error.

2. Look at the pattern of Gods people, so as that thou weigh them in the
balance of the Sanctuary. Have your wits excercised in the Scripture, that so
you may discern of their ways, and that you may so far follow them, as they
go right.

Doct. Whosoever sins had never any clear sound knowledge of the Lord Christ.
has not seen him.
Sight implies cleernesse, certainty, (know him) he speaks of such a knowledge,
whose ground is experience, Word, Spirit, Phil. 3.10. whose fruit is obedience,
1 John 2.3. whose end salvation, Joh. 17.3.

Reas. 1. Men that have had an experimental knowledge of God, they have a
spirit within them, that they cannot sin, Gal 5.17. If they do, their
conscience will so smite them, as that they shall be glad to be rid of it, the
Spirit keeps possession for God.

2. From the perseverance of Saints, or else they should never have fellowship.

Use 1. To refute the doctrine of the Papists, who say, that a man that is in
Christ may fall away, St. John here refutes them, If they sin they never knew
him. Stella cadens, nunquam stella, cometa fuit.

2. As we would rivet this comfort in our souls, that we have known and seen
Christ, let us keep our hearts innocent from sin.

3. Of consolation to such a soul as has formerly seen Christ's death, purging
sin in him. Though we be weak, and think we shall not hold out, yet God will
keep us from sin, and comfort us against the aspersions cast upon Religion, by
the sins of professors. Whosoever sins, never knew, nor saw Christ.

1 JOHN 3.7. Little children, let no man deceive you: he that does
righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous


THE Apostle had showed that all hopeful Christians do cleanse themselves from
sin. It might be objected, We have false Teachers that teach otherwise, as
Simon Magus was let loose at that time, and taught the free use of women. The
Apostle meets with this, You say an hopeful Christian abstains from all sin,
how comes it then to pass that so many teach otherwise? To this St. John
answers, Let no man deceive you. Here is 1. A loving compellation (Little
children) which comprehends babes, young men, and old men.

2. The exhortation, a warning against deceivers.

3. Two doctrins clean contrary unto them.

1. He that does righteousness it righteous as God is.

2. He that commits sin is of the Devil. Which he proves,

1. From the practice of the Devil.

2. From the contrary end of Christ's coming.

3. From the conrary practice of those that are born of God.

Doct. It is the duty of all sorts of good people, to take heed they be not
deceived in judging who be righteous men.
The question was, who were righteous? The false Teachers said A man may be
righteous, and yet live in sin. Be not deceived, says St. John, Phil. 3.2 We
must as much beware of conterfeit righteousness, as of dogs, they are not so
apt to bite men, as these to do the Church hurt.

Reas. 1. From the easiness of being deceived by the pretenses of righteous
men in all ages, Gal. 2 4. Under the mask of righteous men, may walk men
unrighteous.

2. From the necessity that lies upon our selves to have communion and
fellowship with them, Psalm. 16.3. Gal. 6.10. doing good offices to them, 1 John
4. Yea, we are commanded to walk in their steps, Phil. 3.17.

3. From the danger of walking with unrighteous men, Prove. 17.15. and 4.14, 15.
This we may easily do, unless we know them.

Use 1. To reprove such as think all they live amongst are righteous; wherefore
was this exhortation, how should a man be deceived, if all were righteous?
Numb. 16.2, 3.

2. To teach us all to pray to God that we may grow up in a spirit of
discerning. There is an inflinct in the servants of God, whereby they are able
to relish the spirits one of another. A dog will sent out his way with more
dexterity then all men can reason it out. A man can open the whole Law, but
when he comes to discerning, he knows not who is righteous, and who not.

2. Grow we righteous our selves, and to a great measure, so shall we the
better discern of others. A woman that has conceived, she will the more easily
discern of another. So when thou feel the work of righteousness in thine
own heart, how shall thou comfort thy self that thou ar^ righteous, because
thou love Gods children?

How shall I know who is righteous?

A righteous man is known by his righteous ways. St. John speaks not here,
what makes a man righteous, but what declares him to be righteous. The Jesuits
grant this, 7.18, 19.21. If a tree bring forth grapes, it is a vine; if figs, a
fig tree.

What is it to do righteousness?

The contrary to what it is to commit sin. He does righteousness; That walks
in Gods commandments, when his judgment and heart is for it.

2. When Gods laws are his rule of righteousness.

3. Whose end is righteousness. Hallowed be thy name.

4. When we do unrighteousness, it is a burden and grief, and we recover our
selves.

Obj. But righeteousnesse does not consist in the bulk of the work, but in the
heart, and an hypocrite may have as fair an outside as a true righteous man.

Answ. True. But God has given a spirit of discerning to a Christian, that he
shall discern the main sway of a man's heart.

1. If thy affections work as well as the outward man, Psalm. 51.6. his griefs,
cares, desires, see with what affection they come off, 1 Chr. 29.9.17. He saw
such joy when they came to offer, as if they would have offered more if they
had had it.

2. See whether they they come off with some facility, forced things are not
natural, John 4.34.

3. Consider the evennesse and constancy of a man's way; Violent things will not
last, unless there be a continual supply sent, Hos. 6.4. If when we have done
good works, we kiss our hands, and sacrifice to our own nets. this is
unrighteousness.

Obj. In times of religion, Gods ends and ours may be level, how then shall
we. know a righteous man?

Answ. Observe when those ends part, which will be at one time or other When
two men walk together, a dog follows them, you know not whose it is, but let
them part, then the dog will follow his Master. So it is here.

Use 3. To avoid the Doctrine of the Papists, of justification by works. He
says not that good works make a man good, but we may know a man is righteous
by his righteousness, lest they should run away with this, that the habit of
righteousness make us righteous. We answer, imperfect righteousness cannot
make us perfecly righteous, Isa. 64.6. 1 Cor. 13.8. to 12. This which you say,
will neither hold in covenant of works, nor covenant of grace. In the covenant
of works, not the habits of grace, but works of righteousness do justify. And
in the covenant of grace, we are justified by faith, without the works of the
Law.

Now a sign of trial of our own righteousness and others, is, when in
ordinary course we give God and man his due, when we go about good duties in
Gods name, and for his glory.

Obj. It may be I do it for the stopping of conscience, and that I may be well
thought of.

Answ. So may you do, and yet be sincere. I may please men, and my own
conscience. What if you please men, will you not still stick to God? If you do
good duties freely, constantly, and humbly, though you do them to satisfy your
conscience to please men, yet are you righteous. So may you judge of other men.
It is not enough to do good duties, but to see with what affection they do
them; if they cleave to God, though for their own ends, they are righteous.

1 JOHN 3.8. He that commits sin is of the Devil; for the Devil sins
from the beginning; for this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he
might destpoy the works of the Devil.


AGainst the wicked principles of false Teachers, the Apostle arms them wi^h
these two principles of Christian religion.

1. Who does righteosnesse is righteous.

2. Who does commit sin is of the Devil.

He that makes sin his work, makes himself the child of the Devil. So in the
Original.

Q. What is it to commit, to work sin?

Answ. Jam. 3.2. In many things we sin all. Yet a man is said to sin whose
ordinary course is not sin, but a righteous and good way.

1. When a man makes his course a trade of sin.

2. He allows himself in sin, justifies, and excuses himself, does not hate
his sin, nor himself for it.

In proper sense a man is said to commit sin;

1. When he imagines, devises, plotteth sin, as a Poet his fictions.

2. Acts it.

1. By traveling in birth, as a woman with child.

2. By bringing it forth in due time, Psalm. 7.14. He that does not
righteousness is not of God. Of whom then? John 8.41. of the Devil. To be of
the Devil, is to be of him as a Father, to be begotten of him. So Elimas, when
he would have kept the Deputy from the faith.

Reas. 1. From the imitation of the Devil, which those exercise and put forth
in such works. When a man is freely carried into evil, he imitates Satan, and
so is his child, Genesis 4.20. So they were called Fathers, who were first in any
act of all them that imitate them.

2. By spiritual propagation begotten of his seed, those are called the seed of
Satan. There is a seed of Satan which stirrs them up to this imitation. Genesis
3.15. The seed of Satan expresses it self in obstinacy and efficacy in sin.
When a man is willing to take pains in sin, John 8.44. Ye are of yur father the
devil. How will that appear? his work ye will do. So the Devil, (...) takes
pains and is industrious in sin. Elimas sought to pervert the Deputy who
attended to the Word.

Use 1. Of trial; Here we may see of what parentage we are of. We may see
whether we be so ill as to be born of Satan. Let us examine our selves. What is
our business in this world? if it be to follow the lust of our own hearts, to
regard our profits and pleasure, and we delight in sin, and what crosses us,
we malign, and are at enmity with it. The Scripture does not call a man the
child of the Devil, when he is but merely natural, deprived of grace, and
prone to sin; men are then called the children of the devil, when as they are
in the bosom of the Church, and see the way they should walk in, and that
their estate is not good, and yet are resolved to do evil, to take pains in
it, and if any cross them, they will be at enmity with them; there will be
private grudges between many, but when it is for righteousness sake, then they
are of the seed of Satan.

Now such men as are the children of the devil, may possibly become better 2 Timothy 2. two last verses. They may be delivered out of the snares of Satan. But
this God never does, but with such conflicts, as it may be seen there has been
strife between Micael and his Angels, and the Devil and his angels. Take a man
merely natural, and it is an easy matter to bring him home, Jude verse. 22,
23. shows, that when we are merely natural, tenderness of compassion prevails
much.

There is less opposition against grace, then when the Devil is come into the
heart, and joins with sin. The Devil cast a thought into Judas heart to betray
Christ, John, 13.2. he did not presenly consent to it, but ^after he had eaten
the sop Satan entered into him, verse 27. The Deill had possession of him
before, setting his heart in a course of covetousness, but now he had a
farther possession of him, now he resolves to betray Christ and now he spies a
time to bring it about. The Devil finds us flesh and blood at the first, then
he tempts us to sin; if we begin to run to him, then he enters, and sets us in
that way. When a new temptations comes, and we consider whether we shall do it
or no, when we break off, we are the better, and get strength against sin. But
if we yield, and commit sin willingly, then we are the children of the Devil.
Take we heed of pleasing our selves in any sinful estate. If we have committed
sin willingly, and the Devil come with full sail into our souls; if we now lie
down in peace, we shall be the children of Satan. This is to give our souls and
hearts to the Devil, 1 Samuel 15.15, 16. Sin of rebellion is not of ignorance,
but through depravation of will. when out of resolution a man will sin against
God, he will make bold with God, this is a sin of witchcraft. As in a sin of
witchcraft a man or woman give their souls to the devil; so when a man commits
sin willingly, he gives his foul to the Devil. You would think it a strange
thing to be called a Witch, therefore rest not in this condition.

How shall we get out of it?

1. Henceforth resolve, that through the strength of Gods grace, you will never
commit any sin again.

Listen more diligently to the Word of GOd, give up your heart to God and his
word, 2 Cor. 8.5.

Lay open all your rebellion, confessing your sins and rebellions to God, tell
him of those passages of your lives wherein you have rebelled against him 1
John 2.9.

Use 2. To magnify the freeness of Gods grace, that has delivered you out of
darkness into light from Satan to God, when you have sinned against knowledge
and conscience.

Doct. The devil keeps a constant and continual course of sinning from the
beginning to this day.
The word (...) signifies an accuser, yet that is not his only word, for he is
sometimes called Satan an adversary, this is one of his ordinary works to
accuse the brethren. Sometimes he does accuse God to us, as he did God to Adam.

He accuses God to the conscience of a poor sinner, that God has cast him off
for ever.

2. Sometimes he does accuse us to God as he did, Job 1.9, 10. Does Job fear
God for naught?

3. He accuses them to those that are in stead of God, as to the Magistrates,
and he accuses them to other men, he puts slanderous speeches in the mouths
of others, without any ground or cause.

How is he said to sin from the beginning?

It implies that he transgresses the law, and that by a constant act, he sins
daily, and provokes others to sin, that has been his constant course from the
beginning; (from the beginning) is not meant from his first creation; for it is
evident that he stood till the sixth day, else God would not have said, Omnia
valde bona.

There are five things wherein Satan has sinned from the beginning, wherein he
transcends all sinners besides.

1. He was the eldest sinner, the first in sin.

2. He is the most industrious painful sinner, he comes from compassing the
world, (...).

3. He is the Father of sin, John 8.44. If a man can utter any vain word, any
sinful practice, it is from the devil, because generally he does so watch over
the ways of men, and he is casting in blasphemous thoughts against God, and
envious thoughts against our Brother.

4. Every sin he has committed, has been a sin against the Holy Ghost. For to
that sin is required illumination, and malice of heart.

5. He transcends others in the perpetuity and constancy of sinning. He is
called an unclean spirit, 2 Cor. 1.1. when he lies, he speaks of his own
accord, John 8.44. If at any time he speak true, it is by the overruling hand
of God, 1 Samuel 28.19.

Reas. As is the tree, so is the fruit, Mat. 7.18.

Use. It shows us, that Satan has the Law of God in his heart; else he could
not sin, for sin is the transgression of the Law; Satan at first had the image
of God stamped upon him, he was created in holiness and righteousness, having
all the Commandments of the first and second Table written in his heart, Job
1.6. They are called the Sons of God, but sinning against holiness and
righteousness, they did transgress the Law of God.

2. It confutes the Anabaptists, that say, by the parents sin enters into the
world, not by propagation, but by imitation only; whence it follows that
children sin not tiill they are capable of imitation. But why does David then
complain he was born in sin?

3. It exhorts us all to a threefold duty.

1. It teaches us for to walk more circomspectly against Satan, for he knows
all the ways and methods of the Sons of men, therefore we had need pray daily,
deliver us from evil, and lead us not into temptation.

2. It teaches us to loath sin, and all the ways of it. You cannot walk in a
way of sin, but you have Satan for your companion.

3. Take heed especially of continuing long in any sin. Many there are who not
only now and then fall into sin, but ever (from the beginning to the end) walk
in sin. Are they not herein truly patterns of the devil.

Use 4. This may teach Gods servants never to be weary of well-doing. The
Devil is not weary of sin, he is always employed therein, and yet is not
weary. It is his meat and drink to sin, to draw in others to sin. And if Satan
find such pleasure in sin, then you may much more find comfort in well-doing.
If he be not weary to aggravate his own sin and misery, be not you weary in
getting grace and peace to your selves and others. As he is industrious in
sinning and accusing the brethren, so let Gods servants take heed of accusing
their brethren. Take heed of slander, do not believe Satan, he is a deceiver,
he is an accuser, he is your enemy.

In the former verses, seducers were crept into the Church, now to prevent the
seducement of the people of God, to prevent future delusion, and withdraw them
from present errors, St. John sets down two principles of Christian practice.

1. He that does righteousness is righteous.

2. He that sins is of the devil.

First, because the devil sinned from the beginning.

The second argument is from the contrary end of Christ coming.

Thirdly, from the practcie of every child of God, verse. 9.

From the second argument, taken from the end of Christ's coming; note,

Doct. The end of Christ's coming into the world, was to dissolve and loose the
works of Satan.
This was expressly foretold, Genesis 3.15. The seed of the woman shall break the
Serpents head; that is, the projects and plots of Satan. When as the devil did
plot to bring our first parents into sin, and so into eternal misery, and
fellowship with him therein. Head is taken for dominion and power, which he
has in our hearts.

What is it to loose and dissolve?

It implies that the work of the Devil was knit in diverse hnots. A three fold
knot.

1. He had tied our nature to sin, that you cannot draw mere nature, but you
must draw his corruption, Genesis 6.5. John 3.6. Romans 7.14.

2. There is a binding of one sin to another. Draw one sin, and you draw all,
Deuteronomy. 29.19.

3. If we draw sin, we shall inevitably draw punishment, Romans 6. ult. Genesis
2.17. Gal. 3.10.

What is a curse?

That is a curse, that sets us further off rom God, Heb. 2.14. Prove. 1.32.
Christ came into the world to loose these knots.

But how did Christ coming into the world loose works of Satan?

By Christ's manifestation, you must understand the whole work of Christ's
meditation. Christ by his innocent birth, holy life, righteous and holy
suffering, has procured pardon of sin, and having gotten it, sin and
punishment is dissolved.

But may not our natures be corrupt, though our sins are pardoned? Gal. 4.4, 5.
The same Spirit that makes us cry Abba Father, Romans 8.14, 15, 16. leads us into
all ways of holiness righteousness. Hence our ways are healed, and our
course of sin broken off.

But though God has broken off the wicked course of a man's life, Luke 19.48.
Yet we are still bittery entangled with the corruptions of our own hearts,
Hos. 4.8, 9.

Use 1. To teach such as live in any sin, or are the Authors of any sin, that
this is a sign that they are of the Devil, because they tie those knots, which
Christ came to loose.

2. Of trial, whether we be indeed born of God, or not. Would you know whether
Christ came effectually for you? if he did, then he has untyed those knots and
snares.

3. This may be a ground of exhortation to two or three several duties.

1. Take heed of all sin, and allow not your selves in any. If you do the work
of Satan, you dissolve the work of Christ.

2. This exhorts all that find their souls so entangled, to labor to dissolve
the work of Satan. Now, none can dissolve it but Christ, he came for this end,
therefore make we our moan to him. And because this will not serve, unless we
give up our selves wholly to be ruled by him, therefore let us resign up our
souls to him, wholly to be wrought upon by the Word of God.

3. To exhort us to comfort our selves, who have given up our selves to Chirst.
If we see that Christ has begun to pardon our sins, to cut us off from sin,
and to mortify it, he will perfect this good work, Deuteronomy. 32.4. Romans 16.22.

1 JOHN 3.9. Whosoever is born of God, does not commit sin; for his seed
remains in him, and he cannot sin, because he is born of God.


THE third argument whereby St. John proves that he that commits sin is of
the Devil, is taken from the common practice of Gods children, who are so far
from gratifying the Devil by commission of sin, that whosoever is born of God
sins not.

In the Verse there are three things.

1. The course of a child of God, He does not commit sin.

2. The cause of it, The seed of God is in him.

3. This is amplified from an impossibility of sinning, which is in regard of
his new birth.

Doct. The seed of God in the hearts of Gods children, preserves them not only
from sin, but from possibility to sin.
To be born of God, is the same with the seed of God.

What is this seed of God? 1 Pet. 1.23. The Word of God is an immortal seed,
and that not in the letter, but in the spirit.

To be born again, is when the Word and Spirit has framed a man to the image
of God. A man is then born again, when the Word and Spirit has done the work
of seed. For many a man knows the Word is true, the Devil knows the Word well
enough; but the Word is then seed, when the soul of a man does not only
receive the Word, but conceives of it, and is framed to the will of God, and
being born of God, he is always his child. When a man is transformed into the
image of God, his judgment and heart stamped with the image of God, he delights
in God and his ways, and children, his judgment and heart are carried that
way, they are all for God: repentance is called (...), his mind is then
changed, Prove. 23.26. My Son give me thy heart, his heart is given to God. The
seed of Gods Word was not in Herod, John 2.24. Psalm. 119.11. 1 John 2.27. The
seed of God remains in the children of God both Word and Spirit.

Reas. 1. From the mighty power the Word has had in his soul, when he was
first begotten and born of God. It was such as did so affect and terrify, as
no earthly comfort was able to satisfy his heart, he has been so overwhelmed
with fears and doubts, as that he will be afraid to sin as long as he lives.

2. From the strong possession that the Word and Spirit have in the heart, as
they do abide in the whole man, so especially in the conscience and will. I
do not allow what I do, but what I hate, that do I; which shows, that the
Word has taken such fast hold of his judgment and will, that both are for
God, Jer. 32.40. Psalm. 119.161.

3. From the great change this seed makes in the heart of a child of God. It
makes him from a wild olive, to be a sweet olive. A good tree (Mat.18.) cannot
bring forth evil fruit. Every thing brings forth fruit according to the seed.

Obj. There is a seed of corruption, cannot a man bring forth according to that?

Answ. There is an old man, but he is crucified, if we sin, we do not trade in
sin, our judgments and hearts are against it. When some lawless lusts have
carried us captive, and we complain of them to God, and desire that they were
cast out, God looks at them, not as ours, Romans 6.14. Psalm. 110.28.

Use 1. To refute all such doctrines as teach the apostasy of Saints. They say
such as are born of God may come to sin totally and finally. This error fights
against a double doctrine of the Apostle. He says, Whosoever is born of God,
the seed remains in him. If a man can shake out the Spirit, how does it
remain? 2. The Text says, there is no possibility of sinning; they say, he may
sin.

Obj. They say, Whilst he is a child of God he cannot sin, but he may cease
to be a child of God.

Answ. 1. He cannot sin, whereby he should be made no child of God.

2. There is a doctrine of the Papists and their Divines, that teach, liberty
of will cannot be nisi ad opposita, that a man may will a thing or not.

I ask whether a child of God forbears a sin willingly or not. We say,
willingly. If a child of God walk in innocence from sin, he can do no
otherwise. Whereas their doctrine is, a man's will is not free, unless a man
may do a thing or not to do it. What do they think of Saints and Angels in
Heaven, or God himself? whether have they free will or no? I hope none of them
can sin, yet do they good most freely. Wherein stands liberty? Not only that
a man does a thing without constraint, but that he follows the counsel of his
own will, he follows his own judgment and reason.

2. For trial of our own hearts, whether we be born of God or no. If we be,
our ordinary course is good, we dare not sin, know not how to go about it, that
seed which is in us, sets our hearts and judgments aright, Genesis 39.9. Other
men may think it strange, that we cannot do as they do. This is a good
evidence that thou art born of God.

3. See what to judge of those that have made a profession, and yet fall away.
They were never born of God* for then they could not have sinned.

4. This may be a ground of much comfort to every child of God. He will
preserve us spotless and blameless. Here is a double comfort,

1. He looks not at thy course as sin, if thou be humbled for it, and he will
take a course to mortify it.

2. You can never lose the favor of God, because if you be once begotten, you
can never be unbegotten. You are begotten of an immortal seed, and therefore
cannot die.

Obj. This may seem to be a doctrine of presumption, for then a man may live as
he list.

Answ. Suppose a Physician could give us the apple of the tree of life, that so
we should never die, but yet bids us take heed to a diet, for although we could
not die, yet we should have such pangs, stone, gout, strangury, as that we
would wish death rather then life. So God will make the best of his servants
know what it is to wax wanton against him, and make them curse all the
occasions that lead them to sin.

5. This should teach us that have received any seed of God, to take heed that
we sin not, and therefore inform the judgment aright, out of the Word of God,
2 Timothy 1.3. that so you may come to sound judgment and wisdom. One error of
judgment will shake you much in your way, 1 John 5.18.

1 JOHN 3.10. In this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the
Devil: whosoever does not righteousness is not of God, neither he that loves
not his Brother.


HErein is a manifest difference between the children of God, and the children
of the Devil.

The signs of difference are twofold.

1. General, do not righteousness. 2. Particular, do not love the Brethren.
Doct. The children of God, and the children of the Devil, are not so alike
one to another, but that there may be found a manifest difference betwixt them,
even in this world, Gal. 5.10. Mat. 7.20.
Were there not a manifest difference, it were not so necessary for God to
charge his Ministers, Jer. 15.19. to walk with a divided affection toward
them, Ezekiel. 13.22. If a difference had not been so manifest, God had not so
justly blamed them.

If you say, this is peculiar to Ministers, Levits; they must judge who are
clean, who are not, and not private Christians.

Answ. That God makes it a badge of them that shall inherit Heaven, and have
fellowship with God there, Psalm. 15.4. Jude v. 20, 21, 22, 23. which shows we
should put a sign of difference, not only between good and bad, but even
between bads. Some sin ignorantly, others more absolutely.

How does this manifest difference apear?

A double sign of it, 1 Cor. 12.10. It is a spiritual gift of discerning. He
speaks of discerning what gifts, and what measures a man has, and wherein the
strength of a man's gifts lies, 1 Cor. 2 15. Although he cannot discern every
man's special gifts, what he is most fit for, yet plain and manifest things he
discerns, and also between moral and spiritual, between things of God, and
Satan, and the World.

The second manifestation of this difference is the inclination of the end of
the one and of the other. By their fruits ye shall know them, Mat. 7.20. Gal.
5.19.

Obj. Cannot an hypocrite pass so as that he cannot be discerned? What say you
of Judas, he was not discerned of a long time, Mat. 26.22. for every of the
Disciples began to suspect themselves, 2 Cor. 1.13, 14, 15, 16. Again, Gods
people carry things so weakly, and the pulse of Gods grace beats so weakly, as
if no life and strength were in them, 1 Kings 19.17, 18. Psalm 12.1.

Answ. Sometimes hypocrisy is spun with so fine a thread, and it is so well
dyed, as that you can hardly discern any difference. And sometimes grace is so
low in the heart, as that you cannot discern it. This is true, but it is but
for a time. Judas at length was plainly known to have been but a thief, 2 Timothy
3.8, 9. Jannes and Jambres can do miracles as well as Moses and Aaron, but in
time they shall be discerned, 1 Timothy 5.22, 45. Lay hands suddenly on no man;
for if he prove not pure, thou shall be pertaker of his sins, and all the hurt
he does. Some men's sins lie open before hand, i. e. before the judgment of the
Church, others follow after, they cannot be hid, God will have them made
manifest in due time, Luke 12.2. There is nothing so secret but it will be
discovered. If you put leaven into five pecks of meal, it will not always lie
hidden, but in time break forth.

Use 1. An argument of just reproof to good men and bad. If after a while we
know not our selves, 2 Cor. 13.5. As if it were a dangerous sign of a man's
separation from God, if after so long a time of the Apostles preaching, they
knew not what was in them.

2. This reproves the Popish Doctors, that say no man can discern his own
estate. They allege that place, Eccl. 9.1, 2. A man cannot know by outward
things whether he be in Gods favor or not. If a man come in a sheep-skin, I
shall take him to be a sheep, Mat. 7.16, to 20.

3. To teach every one to take heed of a devilish spirit, or any unrighteous
course of life; for though a man may hide it long, yet at length it will be
known. It is as impossible that a man's want of love should not be known, as for
a man to keep fire in his bosom, and it not to break out, Psalm 36 2, 3, 4.

4. Of exhortation to all that are born of God, not always to smoother grace;
God will have your grace manifest, and that to edify withal, 2 Cor. 12.7. Do
not content your selves with close and household Christianity, but manifest of
what spirit you are. It was commendable in Elizabeth, to hide her self six
months, Luke 2.6. When she was stirring with child, then she visited her
Cosen Mary. So if God have wrought any conception of grace in our hearts, it
does well to be concealed a while, lest like the stony ground, in time of
persecution it should fall away. When thou art sure there is a manifest work of
Gods Spirit in thy heart, then manifest thy self.

Doct. Not only commission of sin, but negligence of a Christian course of
life, is a manifest sign, not of a child of God, but a child of the Devil.
Mat. 3.10. Every tree that brings not forth good fruit, is cut down, and cast
into the fire, Psalm 36.1, 3, 4. There is no fear of God before their eyes. How
shall this appear to David? He has left off to do good, he does not shun
evil, but if an evil matter comes in his way, he sets himself to work it,
Psalm. 116.12. He does not study as David did, What shall I render unto the Lord
for all his benefits? He that sets not himself in a good course, is not the
child of God, but of the Devil.

Reas. 1. His ways bear the image of Satan, he was set in a good estate, but
he ceased to do good, and set himself in a course now, not good.

2. From the necessary fruitfulness of the seed of God wheresoever it is,
Psalm 1.2, 3. A child of God is working in his mind and heart, and always
doing good.

3. From the hinderance which such put upon others that would do be ^r, if such
were removed, Acts 13.10. The Devil is always an impediment of good, Luke
13.7, 8, 9. A man if he can do good, and do not, he cumbers the ground,
therefore cut him down.

Use 1. To reprove the ignorance of such people that conceive, if they do no
body any harm, they hope God will accept them; but if it go badly with them,
what will become of whoremongers and adulterers, etc. Can you say you have
devised good, and watched your opportunity to be doing good? This is a comfort
to you. But do not comfort your selves merely in your innocence from evil,
without doing good.

2. To teach us all, as ever we desire an evident mark to our selves that we
are children of God, to turn Poets of righteousness, it is the seed o^ God
that sets you a work. God requires that we should be doing good with our
estates, that when we go hence we may say, as John 17.3, 4. Father, I have
finished the work that thou have given me to do. 2 Kings 20.31. 2 Chronicles.
Rehoboam did evil in the sight of the Lord, because he prepared not his heart,
he studied not to do good.

Neither he that loves not his Brother.

Doct. Not only the hatred of our Brother, but the want of love to our
Brethren is a sign (not of a child of God, but) of the devil, John 13.35. 1
Kings 18.17, 18:
Reas. 1. From the constant practice of God. Is there any one of them which he
has adopted, whom he loves not? Mat. 10. ult. And observe the contrary
practice of Satan; there is no child of God but he is estranged from, and sits
loose from.

2. From the want of knowledge of God, 1 John 4.8. He knows not, etc.

Here is a double reason.

1. He has not experience of Gods love. 2. God is love.
When the Sun shines upon a stone wall, though it be cold, yet it reflects the
heat back again upon every person. So there is none that has felt the warmth
of Gods love upon his soul, but though his heart were cold before, yet he
reflects it upon all.

2. God is love; It is a property inseparable from the nature of God, he love^
to communicate good.

3. From the like condition of all Brethren. He that loves not his Brother,
because he is a Brother, he loves none at all. He that loves not one of a man's
children, because he is born of such a man, loves none of them. A man may hate
a Brother for some sinister respect, as Joseph's Brethren; it was a certain
sign they were not born of God, though afterward they came to good. And they
that did not love Joseph for his goodness sake, could not love Jacob nor
Abraham. A man may hate and distaste some injury offered, but if once the
corruption of any child of God shall prevail with me to hate him, more then
his goodness to love him, it is a sign there is a distemper in my heart.

Use 1 See a manifest difference between the children of God and of the Devil.
If there be any Brother thou love not, from whom thy heart is girded up, whom
thou can not affect, thou art not born of God. I know provocations may be
such as may weaken affections, and turn the streams, as that it shall not run
so fully, nor strongly, yet a child of God dares not allow himself, but he
does take a course to remove matters of enmity, and he takes himself as much
bound to hate himself for neglect of his Brother, as he found cause to neglect
his Brother. A man may be angry toward those he loves, without sin. But this
want of love will do more injury to your spirit, then the injury that is done
to you. A man may be angry, but when his passion is over, his love returns
again,

What is it not to love any brother?

There are two things in love.

1. A Communion with them. 2. A communication of good to them. In some things a
man desires communion with others; other things there be, wherein though a man
desires not communion with them, yet he desires communication of good to them.
Use 1. This should exhort us to stretch our love universally to every soul.
You were better bestow your love upon some base hypocrite, then restrain your
love from some poor Christian. You cannot neglect one Christian, but it will
hazard your whole general estate; In judgment of Charity, if they abstain
from gross sins, and do good duties, we think well of them, and we had better
lose our love upon them; then neglect a child of God, Psalm. 35.12, 14. And
indeed it is not lost, for it shall return into his bosom. It is a sign I
love a man, if I love his picture; so though a man should be an hypocrite, yet
if we love the show of grace, it is a sign we love grace indeed. Never say
thou love a Christian, unless thou love the picture of a Christian. What a
miserable thing is the want of this? such a man is not born of God, but of the
Devil. And what a poor case is a man in, that makes his spirit the spirit of
Satan?

1 JOHN 3.11. For this is the message that ye heard from the beginning, that we
should love another.


THe Apostle in the former verse, had given us two manifest differences,
between the children of God and of the Devil. The latter mark the Apostle
proves to be a manifest difference. It is a message, and an ancient one which
we have received of God; as who should say, He that is born of God, will hear
the Word of God, But this is a message. The duty of brotherly love is set out
by a message, and that by its adjunct, from the beginning.

Doct. That when we read or hear the Word of God, we should look at it as a
message sent from God.
This Phrase is no where used, but in 1 John 1.5. And what says Saint John of
it? showing what Christ delivered at large, The Apostle sets the stamp of
message upon it.

Reas. 1. From the scope of all the Scripture; Whatsoever is written, is
written for our instruction, Romans 15.4. There is not in Scripture something for
some men of parts, and other things for meaner men, but all things are for our
comfort and instruction. If we read the Magistrate to be called to such and
such duties, it is for our instruction, for our comfort, that we may know what
care God has of us; no calling but redounds to our benefit, Whether I read
threatenings, commandments, promises, they are all a message to me; though
every threatening belong not to me, yet thus far it does, to keep me from such
and such sins, and terrify others. And so, though promises belong not to thee,
because thou art not in the state of grace, yet it is good for thee to know
them, that those promises may break thy heart, to see what mercies thou
neglectest.

2. From the office and calling of the Penmen of Scripture, Mal. 2.7. 2 Cor.
5.10.

Use 1. Of direction to those that either hear or read the Word. Deuteronomy. 17.14.
God calls the King to read it once a day. If thou take up the Book of God,
thou take a bundle of messages; as if God should round thee in the ears,
Understandest thou what thou read? Thou shall read it in vain, if thou look
not at it as a mess a ge. We are wont to receive the message so much the
better, by how much it comes from great men or friends.

2. In hearing or reading the Word of God, we must be led on to a twofold duty.

1. To receive all with reverence, Judge. 3.20. Acts 10.33.

2. Whenever thou hear the Word of God, consider how far it pertains to
thee; though all Scripture be for my comfort, to know, yet I must apply it to
my self, so far as it concerns me, receive it as bread of my portion, chew
upon it, Heb 4.3. God requires of us, that we do mix the Word with faith.

Obj. The Minister does not know the frame of my heart, therefore how should he
know what to say to me, I am a stranger to him?

Answ. It is true. If he speak out of his own mind and fancy, many times we
think that things are spoken by suggestion from neighbors, true, oft-times it
is so, but God knows better how such a thing is useful to us then we do, 2
Kings 9.5

3: This should teach us conscionably to obey the Word, it is a message sent
from God, therefore take it not ill at the messengers hands, nor cavil at it.
For a Prince is not so to do, though an Herald of Arms come and pronounce open
Wars against him, he comes and goes peaceably, telling the message of his
Prince. The Lord makes this a cause of captivity, 2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16.

4. This should exhort all to get them Bibles, if they have none, and if they
have them, every day to read something. There are two ways of parley between
God and our selves.

1. When we speak to God in prayer.

2. When God speaks to us in his Word. It is a fearful thing, when there is
such strangeness between God and us, that he should seldom hear of us, and we
seldom hear of him.

Doct. The love of another, is an ancient message that God has sent us and
has continued to send us, from the beginning.
He says not in the beginning, but from the beginning, which implies a
continuance of it, I Theff. 4.9. Romans 15.10. Writing a Law, he wrote nothing
else but a Law of God, Genesis 4.6. Thus God complains of Cain, why do thou
lowre upon thy Brother? Genesis 13.8. When Abraham and Lot's Heardsmen were ready
to fall out, this message from heaven was sent by Abraham a Prophet, we are
brethren. This continued to Moses, Lev. 19.18. Our Savior is instant in
preaching this love. John 13.34. Paul is earnest in this, Romans 13.8, 10. 1 Cor.
1.6.14. 1 Pet. 1.21, 22. and 18.4, 8.

Reas. 1. From Gods love to us. He walks in tender love to us, and therefore he
never writes a letter to us, but he bids us love one another, Genesis 45.24. See
that ye fall not out by the way, 1 John 4, 8. It is an argument we are born of
God, if we love one another.

2. From the great use of this grace. It is necessary above all graces, it is
the band of perfection, knits all together in a family, in a congregation,
Psalm. 133.1, 2, 3.

2. Love covers a multitude of sins, both in me and thee, 1 Pet. 4.8. Cant 8.7,
8.

3. The excellency of love, it is the fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13.20. When a
man walks in love, there is no good duty but love will carry him through with
cheerfulness and comfort.

Use 1. Reproves all strangeness and enmity amongst members of a family or
congregation. If God ever send this message, and we receive it not, there is no
fellowship between him and u^, a spirit of strangeness, or the breach of the
whole Law. If a man come not to Church in love, all is lost; he never profits
by any thing, neither Word nor Sacraments.

2. This exhorts us, whatsoever we learn, let us learn this lesson so anciently
taught us, so often pressed upon us. If we should see a child that has not
learned a lesson, which he has been a long time plodding upon, we would say,
he were a Non-proficient. If love have this efficacy, that it covers a
multitude of sins, that it is the fulfilling of the Law, we shall have this
comfort to our selves, that we are born of God, and not of the devil.

1 JOHN 3.12. Not as Cain, who was of that wicked one, and slew his Brother:
and wherefore slew he him? because his own works were evil, and his Brothers
righteous.


IN the tenth verse, the Apostle makes it a manifest difference between the
child of God, and of the Devil, want of love to the Brethren. This he proves,
First, because to love our Brother is the message os God.

2. Because he that wants love is of the Devil. This he proves by the pattern
of the eldest Son of the devil, as he did, so will his younger Brethren do.
Here is a pattern of hatred of our Brother, Cain, he is described by his
spiritual original, of the Devil.

3. By the clause of his hatred, Because his Brothers works were good and his
evil.

Doct. The example of any not loving his Brother, should be an effectual
motive to us, to love every Brother.
Consider what was the hatred of Cain to his Brother.

1. It was causeless, Genesis 4.7: John 15.15. They hated Christ without a cause.
So Cain Abel, Psalm. 69.4.

2. It was impious and wicked, he had just cause to love, and against that just
cause he hated him for his righteousness.

3. It was a deadly hatred, such as would not be slacked but with blood.

4. It was implacable, Genesis 4.8. for no counsel would abate the mood of his
malice. God parlyes with Cain, Why is thy countenance cast down? etc. The good
counsel God gave him, was as bellows to blow up his wrath.

5. It was an hypocritall hatred, for it is likely upon Gods speech he had
smoothed over his countenance and speech, yet when he gets him in the field,
and had opportunity, he slew him.

Use 1. This disswades us from the hatred of any one Christian soul. If there
be but one Abel whom we hate, it will translate us into the Brothrhood of Cain.
Therefore, either love your Brethren, or be as Cain.

Obj. But we do not slay our brother, though we hate him.

Answ. That is no thank to you, that is because your malice is curbed and
restrained.

Use 2. To teach us all, as ever we desire to be free from hating our Brethren,
to love goodness for goodness sake, Romans 16.4, 5. Aquilla and Priscilla would
lay down their necks for Paul, 2 Pet. 1.7. If we say, a man loves the light
well, it is a sign of good eyes: So, if we love to see many lights about us, it
is a sign our eyes are good, Acts 11.22, 23. If we were evil, we could not but
wink, and shut our eyes.

1 JOHN 3.13. Marvel not my Brethren, if the world hate you.


THe Apostle having told us of Cain's hatred to his Brother, he takes away an
objection. It might be said, It was a wonder, there were but two Brethren, and
Abel so innocent, it is a wonder he should slay him. But he bids them not
wonder at it.

Doct. The world is given to hate Gods children.
By world he means worldly men: 1. Because their original is the world, John
8.23. and 15.19. 2. Because they are the greater part of the world, 1 John
5.19. 3. Because they are wholly conversant about the world, minds, hearts,
speeches, actions, Phil. 3.19. Col. 1.3, 4. They serve the god of this world, 1
Cor. 4.4, 5. They have their portion in this world, Psalm. 17.14. such men hate
Gods children, Mar. 13.13. Luke 6.22.


Reas. 1. Ignorance of them, 1 John 3.1. The world knows you not. For a man to
be discourteously used when he is unknown, though he be a Prince, it is no
great matter, John 16.2.

2. The separation of Gods people from the world, John 15.19. I have chosen you
out of the world.

3. Because Gods servants are desirous to draw others out of the world, which
they cannot endure, when a man will be saving all that he can.

Use 1. To reprove the unthankfulness of the world, that will requite evil
for good, and hatred for good will. They run not with the world into the same
excess of riot, Heb. 11.38. 2 Pet. 3.9. 1 Cor. 3.22. The world has its
standing for their sakes, 2 Kings 3.14. Acts 18.9.10, 11. If your worldly
estates prosper, it is for the sakes of Gods people, Genesis 30.27. and 39.5.
Psalm 106.23. Genesis 19.22. God would have poured out his wrath, had not Moses
stood in the gap.

2. To teach us not to enter upon Christianity, if we cannot swallow bitter
pills, the hatred of the world; if it be too churlish for your stomachs, keep
your hearts and hands from it, Luke 14.26.

3. Comforts to Gods people, that though the world hate them, yet they are but
the world, they have no higher breath then the world.

Marvel not.

Doct: Gods people are wont to marvel at this.
Reas. Three causes of marvel. 1. Ignorance of the cause. 2. Some eminent and
good thing, Mat. 8.10. 3. Some rare and new thing, 2 Samuel 26: Mat. 1.27.
And so Gods people are apt to marvel at this: 1. Because they know not the
cause, Psalm. 69.4. 2. The hatred sometimes is extreme and deadly. 3. It is new
and rare, because they have been wonted to no such thing.


Use: Let the world know that Gods people have more cause to think strange of
the world, then the world of them, they give the world no cause to hate them,
Acts 17.6.

Doct: Gods children are not to marvel at the worlds hatred, 1 Thessalonians. 3.3.
Reas. 1. God has appointed you to it, you must take notice of it, God has
done it for many ends, How else should you show forth your patience? how should
you be kept off from bad company? God will lay bitter pills to the breasts of
the world, that so you may be weaned from it, Psalm 119.115.

2. The world many times does it out of ignorance: The world knows it not,
therefore we may take it the better that we are ill dealt withal. A King takes
it not ill to be badly dealt withal at strangers hands.

3. The world hated Christ, therefore no marvel if it hate us.

4. It is no new thing, it has continued from Cain.

5 From the inclination of your own hearts, if you were in the worlds case, you
would do the like. Therefore marvel not, Tit. 3.2, 3.

Use 1. Of instruction to such as live in places of Religion. If we be hated,
wonder we not at it. We shall condemn the generation of Gods people. The cause
is partly from the tempter, partly from the wickedness of the world.

Use 2. Do not lay down Religion for fear of the worlds hatred. This is not the
way, fear not the hatred of the world. Some Subjects will not fear the body of
a State, so they may have the Kings favor. Much less should Gods servants
fear though the whole body of a Country should fall foul upon them.

3. This should teach Gods servants to walk so much the more circumspectly,
humbly, lovingly. If a man were to walk amongst his friends, he would care the
less, but if he live among his enemies, he will look to every step; so soon
as you trip, you shall have mouths enough open against you. Therefore Daniels
course was notable, he so walked that they could not tax him, Daniel 6.1, to 7.

1 JOHN 3.14. We know that we have passed from death unto life, because we love
the Brethren: he that loves not his Brother abides in death.


THe Apostle lays down this as a second reason why they should not marvel;
implying, that they that know they have passed from death to life, need not
marvel though the world hate them.

Doct. Gods people have passed from death to life.
Gods people are opposed to the world, they are translated out of the world,
John 5.24. They are redeemed out of the world by death, he means a contrary
state to life: Death and Condemnation are Synonymaes. By death is meant death
for sin, and death in sin; the natural estate in which a man lives whilst he
is in this world, which is called a state of death in a fivefold respect.

1. All death presupposes life to go before. We do not say that a stone is
dead. Death is a privation of life. A man that has no life but what the world
gives, he is dead, because he had a life at least in possibility, in the loins
of Adam, Ephesians 2.3.

2. Death in the proper notion of it, is a separation of the soul from the
body. We are said to be dead, Gal. 2.20. because our souls and bodies which are
capable of life, are separated from the Lord Jesus the fountain of life, Ephesians.
4.17, 18, 19. and 2.12.

3. From the definition of life, which is a power to move it self in it is own
place. When we see a thing to move it self in it is own place, we say, it is
quick, and has life. A man may do many things, yet not from an inward
principle, as Judas and Jehu, Matthew. 27.18, 19. 2 Kings 10.15, 16. is this
life? There are some motions from common grace, but it is not spiritual life,
unless it aim at spiritual ends, and upon spiritual grounds. As if a man be
humbled for sin, because it is displeasing to God. Judas was troubled in his
conscience, not for sinning against God, for then he would not have grieved God
by hanging himself; It was not an inward motion and voluntary; so Jehu, he did
it to establish his own Kingdom, he regarded not the commandments of the
Lord, 1 Kings 10.30, 31.

4. In regard of the binding over to eternal death, as a condemned man is
counted a dead man, John 3. ult.

5. From the power required to make such a man alive, 2 Cor. 5.17. There must
be a new a breathing power.

The state of grace is called life.

1. Because we have received fellowship with Christ, he lives in us, and we in
him, Gal. 2.20. John 15.1.

2. We have an inbred power in our selves to move upon spiritual grounds, and
for spiritual ends, Romans 8.2. Mat. 5.3, to 10. Passed from death to life, from
the hatred of our Brethren, to the love of them. There are these steps of it
from one to another.

1. A man is a poor man; and that, 1. In debt. 2. Has nothing. 3. An hard
creditor. 4. No surety.


2. He begins to mourn bitterly for this his estate.

3. He becomes meek.

4. He hungers, and thirsts, and prays for grace, and cannot be satisfied
without it.

5. He begins to be merciful, he pities every soul that is in a state of
nature, and under a spirit of bondage.

6. He is pure in heart, abstains from sin, does Gods commandments.

7. He is a peacemaker, he is at peace with God, and with his own conscience,
and now he labors to make others at peace.

8. He will now suffer persecution for righteousness sake.

Use 1. This convinces all the works of the Heathens, as dead works. Some are
famous for courage, justice, etc. But all these are but dead works. Gods pure
Martyrs have suffered not for any glory of theirs, but Gods glory.

2. It refutes a main ground of Popery, the doctrine of Free Will, which gives
a man power to be converted when he will. If a dead man can rise from death to
life, then may a dead man in sin come to the life of grace.

3. Gather hence how our estate stands. We come to Church, it may be repeat
Sermons, and do many good duties. Would we know whether our life be a dead
life, or no? Consider we upon what principles we do good duties; if we do good
duties because they are pleasing to God, if we have respect to all Gods
commandments, if there be a change in our hearts, which makes us willing; this
is a sign we are passed from death to life.

4. To teach us not to rest in our natural condition, for then thou art but a
dead man, although thou have all moral grace, 1 Cor. 13.2, 3.

5. This may be a comfort to every soul that has passed from death to life,
God is his God, and he shall never come into condemnation, Math. 22.23. John
5.24.

Doct. The love of our Brethren is a known and undoubted evidence that we are
passed from death to life.
What is it to love our Brethren?

Love is an affection, whereby we desire communion one with another, and
communication of good one to another. A man in nature prizeth his Brethren, and
will do more for them then any other: So it is in grace. Acts 4. ult. and 2.42,
44. Phil 1.2. We must affect to be of one heart* Ephesians. 3.3, 4. There must be
brotherly equality, if we be Brethren. You are of the same Father, Gal. 6.26
one Mother, one Seed, 1 Pet. 1.23. one Inheritance, 1 Pet. 1.4. We will desire
to communicate brotherly offices to the inward man, Romans 2.11, 12. and to the
outward man, if need be, Acts 2 44.

Reas. 1. From the natural pronenesse which is in our nature, to strangeness,
envy, etc. We do not naturally seek any man's good but our own, or so far forth
as reaches our own ends.

2 From the affection of every man's heart to liberty. Now a man delights only
in such company as are like himself, because otherwise he is restrained: If
Gods people be the men of your delight and counsel, you were never so well as
wirh them, Psalm. 115.115. and 16.3. This is a sign we are passed from death to
life.

3. From a man's backwardness of communication of brotherly offices, Gal. 6.10.

4 From the great distance that is between us, and the love of our Brethren,
and how many steps there are before we come to it, Matthew. 5 3. to 9.

Use 1, Of trial of our own estates, whether we are in a state of death or
life. It is one of the plainest notes in Scripture and most evident, Gal. 6.10.
If our love run in an equal channel to all men; if we know not Gods people,
we know not Christ, 1 John 3.1, 2. If you know them, how do you affect them?
Do you think it were good if the Town were cleansed of them? Genesis 49.4, 5 Psalm.
101, we are not as yet born of God.

Obj. Do not many love Gods children, and honor them, and yet are not the
children of God? Genesis 27.29. Acts 5.13. That they did not join with them, was a
sign that they were not born of God, Genesis 39.1, 2, 3.

2 To convince the doctrine of doubting Papists, who say a man cannot know
himself to be in a state of grace, Eccl. 9.1, 2. No man can know it by outward
things They say here, by knowledge is meant conjecturall knowledge, not certain
knowledge.

Answ. This is a contradiction. A man lies, if he says he knows a thing, and
is not certain of it. There is no peace of conscience in this Religion.

3 To exhort such as know not yet that they are passed from life to death, to
labor to love the Brethren, Prove. 13.20.

4 Of consolation to every soul that has nothing in this world but this, they
love the Brethren. This is such a thing, as upon which thou may build a
certain knowledge that thou art passed from death to life, and therefore thou
may take comfort.

He that loves not his Brother, abides in death.

The Apostle in the former words did imply the world was in death for want of
love. And left any should think that he did but imply it, and not directly
express it he sets it down expressly.

Here is a description of a man that loves not his Brother.

1 He is in death.

2 Abides in death.

By death is meant the same that was meant in the former part of the verse;
Abiding implies not only a being in that estate, but continuance and residence
in it.

Doct. The want of love to any of our Brethren, is a sign of abidance in the
state of damnation, or in an unregenerate and carnal estate.
And he says not, he that hates, but he that loves not; and he says not
brethren, but brother, any or every brother, Mat. 18.6. Offend not one of these
little ones. Christ's little ones are such as have but little grace, and great
corruption.

Reas. From the want of love that is found in such a one toward God; and that
is an argument of being in a state of death. If a man love God in obedience to
his commandments, he should love his brother by the same commandment. That
commandment which requires me to love one Brother, requires me to love all,
Jam. 2.10, 11. Break one commandment, break all, for who gave one, gave all;
whosoever neglects offices of love to one, performs none to any, nor to God. It is
a note of sincerity, that a man hates all sin, as well as one, Psalm. 119.101,
104 For it is an argument of love, when there is no Brother or Sister but we
enlarge our affections toward them, Gal. 3.28. So much want of love, so much
hypocrisy.

2. From the bitter or deadly root of want of love to this or that Brother. It
springs from two occasions, 1. Either from his infirmities in himself: Or, 2.
From spiritual injuries to our selves.


True, a man will say, such Christians I would away with, but they have such
unsavory corruptions. The first root of this is the condemnation of the
generation of Gods people. If a man may condemn this or that man, for this or
that corruption, he may come to condemn the best of Gods servants, because the
best of Gods servants may be in the same failings for which thou hate such a
Brother, Prove. 30.12. The greatest of Gods servants have shamefully fallen,
David, Peter, Lot, Noah.

The second root is from the enmity against Gods free justification of sinners.
Take away this, and you take away all Christian religion. If you love not a
Brother, because of some infirmities, you do overthrow the free justification
of Gods grace of a sinner. For God that has justified the greatest, has
justified as well the least, as freely and as fully; and will thou justify
some, and condemn others? God condemns none, Romans 8.1.33, 34. If Christians do
believe the free justification of sinners, then let us imitate our Father which
is in heaven, justify whom he justifies.

The third bitter and deadly root. If there be the least spark of grace in his
heart, all his corruptions are his enemies, and he but a shrimp in grace, and
has many enemies. What good nature is this, when a man would love a man if he
had no enemies? but when he has enemies, and such as are ready ever and anon
to beat him down* he cannot love him.

The fourth, want of a member like spirit: for the more naked, unseemly, or
deformed any member is, the body is the more careful of it; if it may be, it
shall be healed; if not, it shall be covered, 1 Cor. 12.23, 24. If we want
this, it flows from want of a member like spirit.

2 Sometimes neglect of our Brother springs from some personal injury done to
our selves. We cannot love them. This springs from this root, want of
forgiveness of our own sins; for we pray for forgiveness upon this ground,
Mat. 6.12, 15. Our Savior gives a reason of this above all, there is no surer
argument then this. A Christian may reason thus: If I that have but a little
spark of grace, can forgive injuries, how shall not the Ocean of love much
more forgive me? Mat. 18. ult. God will never have us to think, that if we
cannot forgive one injury, he will forgive us a thousand. Yet a man is not
always bound to express his forgiveness, unless a man come and say, it
repents him; yet from his heart he must do it.

Use 1. Shows the dangerous and fearful estate of a man that dares live in
envy and malice against his brethren. A man thinks he has cause, he will not
receive the Sacrament, nor suffer them. What a poor thing is this? Thou have
not thy sins forgiven, thou love not God, nor any Christian soul in obedience
to God. A Christian dares not allow himself in hatred of any Brother, but
looks at it as an enemy to his soul.

2. It exhorts every Christian to enlarge the bowels of his affection to every
Brother, Psalm. 119.63. I am a companion to all them that fear thee. He does not
pick and choose, Psalm. 66.16. Gal. 6.10. If to all men, then especially to the
household of faith.

3. It is a ground of thankfulness to God, that has taken care for weakest
Christians; for want of love to such; God will either discharge a man for an
hypocrite, or else his own corruption shall take him by the throat, and make
him believe that many sins are not forgiven, and that he shall hardly get
pardon of sins.

1 JOHN 3.15. Whosoever hates his Brother is a murderer, and ye know that no
murderer has eternal life abiding in him.


THe Apostle having said in the former verse that he that loves not his
Brother, abides in death, he proves it by a Syllogism taken from a Murderer.

Doct. He that hates his Brother is a Murderer.
As he that looks upon a woman to lust after her, has committed adultery, so
he that hates his brother is a murderer.

Reas. 1 From the wrapping up and enfolding this in the heart, as the seed of a
tree in the root, though it break not forth; So sin hah its seed in the heart,
Mat. 15.19. No murder could spring from the heart, if it were not there. A
fountain could not flow over unless water were in it, Prove. 4.23.

2 From the foul murder hatred commits; to give offense is a destroying of our
Brother; now, who hates his Brother, makes no scruple of giving offense, Romans
14.15. 1 Cor. 8.11.

3 It is a foul murder in regard of withdrawing many good offices. A man shall
be unwilling to do any good office either for soul or body. Ill will never
speaks nor does well.

Use 1 Teaches us the spiritualnesse of the Word of God. It does transcend the
words of men, they never reach farther then speeches and actions; they make no
Laws for the hearts of men. But the Word of God has special regard to the
heart, 1 Samuel 16.7. As it is with wise parents, they look not only to the
guidance of their childrens speeches, but that their countenance and carriage
be well framed, Genesis 4.6. So soon as God saw hatred in Cains heart, and
expressing it self in his countenance, he reproves him for it, he will not
have so much as a wrinkle in the face.

2 Hence we may see a just ground of Divines referring all sins and virtues to
the ten Commandments, Mat. 5.21, 22. Before God, unadvised anger is killing,
so of adultery, verse 28.

3 See the wisdom of God in putting such foul names upon the beginnings of
sin, to make us afraid. He that hates his Brother is a Murderer. As if a
Father should say, Do not hate your Brother, you will be a murderer. He puts
bad words upon the seeds of sin.

4 This should be a means to cleanse us from all hatred of our Brother, look at
it as an ugly and loathsome vice. If there be a spirit of envy in thy heart,
what though thou lift not up thy hand against thy Brother, this is murder.

Doct. That it is a known truth amongst Gods children, every murderer is
devoyd of eternal life, Rev. 21.8.
Reas. 1 Because of the injury done to Gods image. If a man deface the image of
a Prince, it deserves death; then the defacing of Gods image much more,
eternal death, Genesis 9.6.

2 From the seed of all murderers, verse. 12. he makes every murderer to be of
the posterity of Cain, John 8.44. Now because a man kills his brother, out of
the seed of the Serpent* a devilish and malignant spirit, therefore he has
not eternal life abiding in him.

Use 1 See the danger of such, who in their drinkings quarrel even to murder.

Obj. If there be no possibility that a murderer should be saved, what say you
to David, and others in their carnal estate?

Answ. David did indeed kill, and God follows him with judgments and
afflictions, 2 Samuel 12.8, 9, 10. but yet upon repentance God forgave him his
sin. And as for such as have murdered in their carnal estate, if God give them
hearts to be humbled, then the blood of Christ is of a louder cry then the
blood of Abel, Heb. 12.24. Saint John speaks not of every murderer, for some
do it against their judgments and hearts, but others, if they repent not, have
not eternal life, 1 Cor. 6.8 9.

2. To stir up every christian man, that has his hands in blood, to have
recourse to the blood of the covenant, for the pardon of their sins, and
healing of them. The sin on Levi held him longest under, to bring him to
repentance, Genesis 49.7.28. Jacob blessed him in a curse, God preserves us with
curses, that may put us in mind of our sins, and makes us walk sensibly of
them, therefore renew we our mournings for our hatred.

3 In respect of challenges, let us take heed we take them not, and that we
stop them in the beginning: It is not fit that fire should burn out of its
place.

4 Such as love their Brethren, are not only not abiding in death, but have
everlasting life, already abiding in them; If you see any hatred spring in
thee, thou art taken with a dead Palsy. You cannot bring out a good word or
good countenance, so much hatred, so much death, so much want of love, so much
want of life.

1 JOHN 3.16. Hereby perceive we the Love of God, because he laid down his life
for us, and we ought to lay down our lives for the Brethren.


THese words are part of the exhortation St. John uses to all christians to
love one another. He uses many arguments, verse. 14. He tells us, It is a sign
we are translated from death to life.

2. From the danger of the hatred of our Brother.

3 From the exemplary and strong love of Christ.

4 From the emptiness of such hearts of grace, when there is no love of their
Brethren.

These words are a notable motive to christians. to express and abound in
love, taken from the great love of God to us.

Doct. The death of Christ for us, is the manifestation of his love to us.
Such a manifestation, as makes it a certain and known truth that he loves us,
Romans 5.10. 1 John 4 10. He gave his Son to be a propitiatory sacrifice, Ephesians.
4.5. Gal. 2.20.

Reas. 1. From the greatness of Christ's self-denial. That which commends love
is this, to bestow so great matters, and to come off freely with it. Joh.
15.12. Greater love then this can no man express, then to lay down his life
for his friend. But Christ did it for his enemies, 2 Cor. 3.8.

2 It farther magnifies his love, if we consider the great benefit we receive;
as reconciliation, pardon of sins, 1 John 4.10. Secondly, adoption of Sons,
Gal. 4.4, 5. Such favor as to be accepted as his Sons and Daughters.

2. Our corruptions are deaded and mortified, Heb. 9.14. Gal. 1.14. Wc are
crucified to the world; to all objects that draw us to sin, temptations and
snares.

4 Christian liberty, that by virtue of Christ's death we should be delivered
from the curse of the Law, Col. 2.13. from the enmity we stood in against the
Church, Ephesians. 2.14.15, 16. from hell and fear of death, Heb. 2.14. that we
should have liberty to call God Father, enter into his Sanctuary, have
confidence our prayers are heard, have assurance when we dye that we shall
enter into the holy place, that we shall have right and liberty to the
Creation. Rrm. 5.1, 2, 3. Heb. 12.19. This benefit will appear; if we consider
how miserable our estate had been. If Christ had not done this, we had been in
our sins, under the guilt of them, and in horror and anguish of spirit.

5 How freely has God done it. We gratified God with no kindness. Some will
recompense a small kindness with a great reward, Romans 11.35. But all we have
done, has been to abuse every mercy of God to his dishonor, Col. 1.10.20

Use 1. It reproves such weakness of Gods servants in time of temptations,
that can see no love of God, because he does not gratify them with something
in this life. Gods servants many times do want necessaries the world abounds
withal; therefore David has cleansed his heart in vain, Psalm. 73. But what
though Gods servants never see good days? Yet here is abundant, rich, and
inestimable love, that when you were enemies, strangers, children of wrath,
Christ dyed for you. God has showed you more love, then the Angels for he laid
not down his life for the Angels, Heb. 11.14 And if he had done so, he had laid
down his life for his friends, who never displeased him.

2 To teach such as abound in outward things, not to content themselves
therein, Eccl. 4.2. We can perceive neither love nor hatred by those outward
things, Psalm. 17.14. Labor you to say that God has laid down his life for
you, ^^se you cannot say he loves you.

3 It teaches us, that the death of Christ was not the cause of Gods love,
Gods love is more ancient then the death of Christ. Where shall we lay the
foundation of Gods love, but in eternity? He has loved me, and given himself
for me, Gal. 2.20. Gal. 3.16.

Obj But does not God attribute his love to the death of Christ? 1 John 4.10.
Romans 3.24, 25. Ephesians. 2.14, 15, Col. 2.21.27.

Answ. In a double respect Christ's death is said to make this reconciliation.
Hereby he has slain the enemy and hatred on our part, that we might be no more
enemies to him.

Obj. But Christ is sent not only to make reconciliation on our part, but
propition on Gods part.

Answ. It Is true, Christ by his death has made a way whereby God might show
his love to us, whilst sin was in the way, he could not show it. Many a Father
bears a tender affection to a child, yet will not seem to regard him, shuts
him out of doors, and though he be entreated, yet he thinks it not meet for
him to express his love; he will have his child humble himself, acknowledge
his faults; and will send some body to persuade his Son to humble himself: So
God sends his Son out of love, to take a course, that he might show us favor,
notwithstanding his justice.

4 Of exhortation, to take a view of Gods love, that we may be able to say
freely, We perceive the love of God. Rest not in any spiritual duty, nor in
any common gift, till you know that Christ dyed for thee.

How shall I know this?

Some will say, that Christ dyed for all, and so all may know. True, the
sufficiency of Christ's death reaches to all, but none can say Christ dyed for
him, till he find in his soul some fruits of the death of Christ.

5 To encourage Gods servants to expect offices of love from God to us and ours
all his days. He has given his Son, what would you have more? Psalm. 84.11.
Lay hold on this love of God, and plead with him upon his love. All blessings
are wrapped up in his Son, Gal. 4.4. As God in fullness of time sent his Son, so
will he every other mercy.

6. To teach us to abound in love to God, and to his children, hatred against
sin. Give up all to God, work for him, suffer for him, he loves us being
strangers and enemies.

Doct. Christian men ought to be ready to lay down their lives for their
Brethren.
The exemplary love of Christ in laying down his life for us, ought to provoke
us in like sort to lay down our lives for our Brethren, Romans 10.3, 4. The
Apostle does extol the love of Aquila and Priscilla: as if all the Church and
himself were bound to them that were so ready to lay down their lives, Phil.
2.17. If I be poured out as a drinke-offering.

R^as. From the example of our blessed Savior: He laid down his life for us.
This is an imitable practice of Christ, this is none of his miraculous works
but one wherein he sets forth himself as a pattern to us.

2. To this add Christ's command, which binds us to the imitation of this, John
13 34.

3. From the near fellowship of our brethren with Christ. We fulfill the
sufferings of Christ, for his Body, Col. 1.2, 4. He calls them Christ's
sufferings, Christ suffered in him, and he for Christ in his Saints.

4. From the subordination of Gods eminentest servants to the Church of God, as
Christ is for God, so Paul and Cephas for the Church, God has subordinated the
life of his servants to the Church, and the Church to Christ, and Christ to
God, Christ the head of the Church, the Church the head of the Members, Phil.
2.17.

5. From the rule of love God has given in ancient time, Levit. 19.18. We must
love our neighbor as our selves. Many a christian will lay down his life for
himself, therefore must in some cases lay down his life for the Church. A man
will lay down his life for his own salvation, and for honor; therefore how
much more for God and for the honor of Religion.

In what cases is a man to lay down his life?

Answ. The Apostle means, we should be ready to do it for the service of the
Church, if it cannot be otherwise.

1. In heat of persecution, to confirm the faith of the people of God, who
would be ready to think much if he should withdraw himself, though he might
escape, yet a minister or eminent person is bound to go before in sufferings.
So Paul, if he be poured out as a dr nke offering, every drop of blood in his
body poured out, if it be for the strengthening of the faith of weak christians,
he rejoices, Phil. 2.17. The stronger must lay down their lives for the
confirmation of the faith of the weaker.

2. There may be a case wherein the weaker are to lay down their lives for the
stronger: Aquila and Priscilla were ready to lay down their lives for Paul's
life; they thought it better to expose themselves to the utmost extremity then
that Paul should be hurt. I must not spare my own life, if it may be
serviceable to God and the Church, Romans 16, 4, 5. 2 Samuel 21.16, 17. and 18.3.

3. When we perceive it would much advantage the glory of God, that we should
rather perish then our brethren, Romans 9.2, 3. He could wish himself accursed
for the Jews, even his soul for a sacrifice. Thus Moses, Exodus 32.33.

4. When a man does see that the wrath of God is kindled against others for his
sin, he must rather offer himself to death, then that that evil should be
upon them that converse with him, Jonah 1.22. 2 Samuel 24. in David.

Use 1. Learn we from hence to justify our selves and others. If we should be
called to lay down our lives to suffer for our Brethren, here is a direction
how to suffer. Phil. 2.5. God has given us a commandment to love our Brethren
as our selves. Also, God has subordinated the members of his Church to the
body of it.

2. To teach us, that though it be lawful to fly in time of persecution, yet
if it cannot be without weakening the Church wherein we live, we must in heart
live and dye together.

3. To teach ministers when they are called by God for the service of any
Congregation, not to dispense with themselves for air or health, fearing the
cutting short of his days. You must not live from your means. Either never
take such a charge, or make account you must hazard your lives for the people
of God, unless upon trial it appears you may do more good in some other
place.

4. It reproves such as are so far from laying down their lives, as that they
will not lay down their estates, nor the superfluities of their estates for
their Brethrens necessities, 1 Samuel 25.11. How shall such ever persuade
themselves that Christ dyed for them?

5. A ground of such thankfulness, that God should not only give Christ to dye
for us, but also would have christians to be fitted to lay down their lives for
their Brethren.

1 JOHN 3.17, But whosoever has this worlds good, and sees his Brother has need,
and shuts up his bowels of pity and compassion from him, how dwells the
love of God in him?


Doct.
THere dwells no love of God in such a man's heart, as having this worlds goods,
stretches not out his hand to help the necessity of his Brother.

What is it to have the worlds good? In the Original it is (...), the life of
this world, this worlds living, whereof to live, whereof to maintain his life.

Bowels of compassion. Because compassion is an affection of grief and love
stirred up in us, by the sight and sense of one another misery, as if we
suffered with them; our compassion is stirred up as well as theirs, Heb. 13 3.

To shut up bowels, is to withdraw the affections, and the stirring of the
entrails. A man many times has little means to help, but if he have not bowels
to work for him, how dwells the love of God in such a man? This is a
peremptory question, utterly denying all.

Reas. 1 From the nature of love. Such is love that God dwells in it, 1 John
4.26. There is no affection wherein God reveals himself more then in love, 1
Cor. 13.4. Love is bountiful, ready to be doing good, succouring others in
their need.

2 Consider the nature of Brethren,

1 They are more worthy then our estate, one of their souls cost more then all
our estates, yea more then all the world. How dwells the love of God in us, if
we love the world more then our Brother?

2 Look at our Brother as a member of Christ, hungry, thirsty, naked
harbourlesse. We could not but love Christ wheresoever we did see him, Mat.
25.40. and they are members of our own body, 1 Cor. 12.25, 26.

Use 1. Of instruction, and rules to order our lives aright, or any work of
mercy.

1 Who shall relieve his Brother?

Answ. He that has this worlds goods, that can live, he must open his heart
and hand. This therefore will reach not only to men's superfluities, but if we
can but live, if we have but what we labor and sweat for, Ephesians. 4.28. We must
not only labor for our selves, but give to him that has need, 2 Cor. 8.3, 4,
5. Luke 21.34. and 8.3. Joh. 13.28, 29, and 12.6.

2. To whom must we be helpful?

Answ. He must, 1 Be a Brother, 2 Have need, 3 Every Brother. Gal. 6.10.

Beggars that are unable to labor, and would gladly labor, they must be
relieved, Luke 16.20, 21. or such as though they do labor, yet cannot get a
living, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10.

2 A brother that has need, Ephesians. 8.18. 1 Timothy 5.4, 5, Such are poor indeed, as
have neither hands, friends, nor maintenance. A man is said to be in need, not
only when he is utterly cast down, but when he is falling.

3 Every Brother, one as well as another, Eccl. 10.2. Job 31.19.

4 Consider the matter out of which we must give* out of this worlds good,
Eccl. 10.1. When we have unjustly gotten, we must restore, Prove. 5.16, 17

5 The time when we must give; when we see our Brother has need, that we may
see it our s;elves bestowed. It is a vanity to leave alms after our death, to
be bestowed by others, 1 Samuel 20.15. 2 Samuel 16.4, 19. If we give alms while we
are alive, we shall have the benefit of them, the loins of the poor shall
bless us; and though they have no heart to pray for us, yet the warmth of
their loins will bless us. When we are dead, their prayers will do us no good,
Luke 16.8, 9.

6 Give alms with compassion, give from within as well as from without, Isa.
58.10. 2 Cor. 9.7. Give heartily, let your bowels work.

7 Give alms out of love to God, fetch your love deep, even from the love of
God, who has given thee a hand to give and him to receive.

Use 2. To reprove those that are close-handed, and close-hearted. Though a man
should do something for company sake, and out of vain glory, yet if he give
not out of love and compassion, how dwells the love of God in such a man?

3 Comfort to poor men that are in need. God so far takes their parts, as that
he thinks there is no love to God in him that loves not, and helps not his
Brother; not that people should be idle, and sturdy; work a slack, and beg
with a sturdy hand.

1 JOHN 3.18, 19. My little children, let us not love in word, neither in
tongue, but in deed and truth.

And hereby we know that we are of the truth, and shall assure our hearts
before him.


THe Apostle exhorting to brotherly love, uses diverse arguments. The third
argument is taken from the security of such men's consciences that love in
truth. But a man say, I may be decieved. To this St. John answers, If our own
hearts condemn us not, God will less condemn us.

Doct. That the love of christians one to another, ought not to be verbal, or
in world only, but in deed, and in truth. Not in tongue, but in the truth of
inward affection and deed, and performance, Psalm. 16 2, 3.
He confines not his love to them, but that all is an universality of the
Subject, no part in him but expresses love to them. He loves them in his
words, thoughts, carriages, in his whole man, Psalm. 122. two last verses, 2 Samuel 1.26. His heart was dearly affected to David, passing the love of women,
in affection, action, 1 Samuel 18.3. He loved him as his own soul.

Reas 1 From the unprofitablenesse of lip love, it will neither do thee good
nor thy Brother, It is an empty love. Let us not love with an empty love, Jam.
2.15, 16. This will do our brother no good, to pity his nakedness will do
him no good, nor us either, because as is our love to our Brother, such is Gods
love to us. No man can assure himself of his hearty receiving Gods real love,
unless he loves his brethren really and heartily,

2. From the unsuitablenesse of this verbal love to Gods love toward
Christians, Luke 1.78. Isa. 55.3. It is an hearty love, real, John 13.10. He
loves his enemies, Romans 3.8. and 8.32.

Use 1. To reprove all such love as falls short of reality. Some fall short of
Lip-love, cannot afford their Brother a good word, or a good work, when they
know a word in season might be of such use, for the maintaining of the
innocence or honor of a man, not a blossom of love grows upon the tongue.

2. Such as give good words, but their hands are withered, and that arises
from withered affections, Prove. 23.7.8. He says, Eat and drink, but his heart
is not with thee. 2 Pet. 1.27. He shows every man wants ability to love his
Brother, if his heart be clogged with any base lust, of envy, coveteousnesse,
wantonness, etc. If there be any Kitchen lust, it will not endure this
heavenly fire.

Doct The sincerity of our love to our Brethren, is the security of our
consciences and estates before God.
Use 1. To reprove the Popish doctrine, That it is impossible to have a
certainty of salvation. The Apostle says here, We assure our hearts before God.

2. Of exhortation unto brotherly love in sincerity, and to grow up in it. A
man may give all that he has, and yet not know love. Get your hearts purified
from all lusts. The Word of God will purify you, Psalm. 119.9. You shall find
a fresh spring of love bubling up and streaming forth, and though your Brethren
cannot recompense it to you, yet you shall have peace.

3. See here a means to seal confidence and belief of hearts. Cleanse your
hearts from sin, that hinders brotherly love.

4. Of comfort to those that love the Brethren heartily; you may be assured of
your good estates,

1 JOHN 3.20, 21. For if our heart condemn us, God is greater then our heart,
and knows all things.

Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God.


THese two Verses declare the good or evil estate of a man, according to the
good or evil report of our consciences.

Doct. According to the verdict or testimony of our consciences, God will save
us, or condemn us at the last day.
If our hearts condemn us, God knows more by us to condemn us.

By heart here is meant conscience: For S. John here speaks an Hebraism. The
Old Testament has not conscience, only the New, Prove. 15.15. 2 Samuel 24.10. If
our conscience record we are innocent, God in Heaven will record it, Titus
3.10.11.

Reas. 1. From the office of conscience, which has a fivefold work.

1 Conscience uses to be an observer and spyer of what a man is, and what a
man does, Prove. 14.10. Another knows not what a man is, but himself does.
Conscience is a good companion of the good, the worst of the bad. Prove. 15.15.
A good conscience is a feast. There is good company where a good conscience is.
No man knows so well as his conscience does.

2 Conscience is a regester of what we have done long ago. 1 Kings 2.44.
Whereto thy heart is privy: He means his conscience, Genesis 42.20, 21.

3 Conscience is a witness, and will either accuse or excuse, Romans 2.15.
Excuse in well-doing, accuse in ill-doing, Heb. 13.18. Romans 14.12. 2 Cor. 1.12.

4 Conscience is a Judge, either to clear or condemn, 1 Cor. 4.3. Genesis 20.5.

5. It is an Executioner of what God gives judgment and sentence. It goes
before Gods judgment, and witnesses, Mat. 27.4, 5. But after Gods sentence
and his word, Conscience does execute it, Romans 8.15. then Conscience poures
upon us horrors and terrors, which is a forerunner of hell, only differing in
measure and durance. Thus Conscience does to good men upon some occasions. So
David, when he had numbered the people, 2 Samuel 24.10. I have done very
foolishly, he speaks with some bitterness of heart, Acts 2.37. This is called
pricking of heart, Prove. 18.14. A wounded spirit who can bear?

Why does God put such a faculty into men?

1. That God might manifest his being. There is no stronger evidence of Gods
being: For to whom does it witness? Is it not to God? Before whom does it
condemn, or to whom is it an executioner, if there were no God?

2. His own providence. And we must not think that God minds not things below;
if he did not, why is Conscience afraid and comforted, if God did not look into
Conscience?

3 For Gods justice, that he might magnify it. God proceeds in his Judicial
course, without any witness but Conscience: If God have none to bear witness,
how shall he magnify his justice in condemning secret sins?

4. Gods mercy. If God be angry with a man, it is an advantage to a man that he
knows it, Acts 9.6. Heb. 9.14. As Conscience does determine here, so will God
in another world. Conscience is Gods Vicegerent, set up in the throne of a man's
heart. Conscience is our companion, God much more, Psalm. 139.

Reas. 2. God is our witness, therefore when we speak soberly, we call God to
witness: He is a Judge, Heb. 10.3. an Executioner; and therefore if Conscience
sees cause to condemn us, God much more; if Conscience see cause to acquit us,
God much more, Psalm. 139.2, 3.

Use 1. A sign of our present estate, and what God will do concerning us, if
we live and die thus. What says thy Conscience, if thy heart assure thee thou
love thy Brother, 2 Cor. 1.12. That thou savourest not sin, that thete is no
good duty but thou would do; thou have been humbled for thy sins, Conscience
has been an Executioner, and yet has come with pardon sealed to thee, with
the broad seal of Heaven: If thou see one spark of sincerity in thee, God
sees more.

Obj. May not a man's conscience be deceived? Romans 3.17. Luke 18.9, to 14 May
not a man say, I have no guilty conscience?

Answ. Conscience sometimes bears false witness, Tit. 1.15, 16. If a man have
a defiled conscience, it will deal falsely. A man's conscience through ignorance
and partiality, does bring a false verdict: As it is many times with a Jury,
ignorance of law, and false evidence, makes them bring a false verdict; but
then send them back again, and show them better evidence, and the law, etc. So
Conscience does oft-times bring a false verdict, but its thorough ignorance of
the Law of God, or partiality. Does thy conscience speak bitter things?
Consider what the grounds are. If such as do argue thee dead in trespasses and
sins, then know that God does call thee from heaven to repentance. If it tell
thee thou art an hypocrite, consider what grounds it has, Conscience may be
muzled by ignorance and partiality; the Devil puts false glasses before our
eyes.

2. A ground of serious humiliation to every man's heart, whose conscience upon
due examination does accuse him.

3. To teach every Christian which has found that he has passed from death to
life, to be afraid to commit any sin. And comfort thy soul, if Conscience do
acquit thee, then will God much more.

4. Labor we always to be doing some good, for we have a companion that hears
and sees all, and a register that notes every good word or work.

The Apostle in stead of telling us, If our hearts condemn us, God will condemn
us much more. He gives a reason of it, describing God, 1 From his greatness. 2
Knowledge.


Doct. God is better acquainted with our hearts and ways then our selves,
Psalm. 19.12.
He means sins not only secret and hidden from others, but from our selves.
Psalm. 139.12. Thou Lord know my thoughts afar off, they are ever before
thee. 2 Kings 8.11, 12, 13.

Reas. 1. From Gods omnisciency, his all-sufficient knowledge, Heb. 4.13. They
are anatomized before him, as if every vein and sinew were laid open, he
divides between the marrow and the bone, John 21.12. Romans 15.11. Job 26.6.
Though hell and destruction be both covered, yet before the Lord they be both
open. Whether Hell be in the waters, or on the earth, they cover not from God.
Hell and destruction are before the Lord, how much more the hearts of the
children of men?

2. From the creation. God made our hearts, gave us power to affect, think,
purpose. He knows what is in us, Job 38.36 If God give understanding to the
heart, he knows much more what is in the heart, Psalm 33.13. God has fashioned
our hearts, therefore he knows them, Psalm. 99 10.

3. From the providence of God We have our motion in God. A Mill moves from the
Miller, because he has caused it so to do, but the motion of the Mill is not
in the Miller, it can move without him. We move in God, as a supportant
conservant cause, as a Mill moved by the breath of the wind, so we by the
breath of the Lord; as there is not a turning in the Mill, but from the wind,
so not a turning of our hearts without him. Our hearts are in the hands of the
Lord, Prove. 21.1.

4. From the unsearchable depth of the deceitfulness of man's heart, Jer. 17.9,
10. Prove. 3.17. Our hearts make us believe we are rich, and have need of
nothing, when indeed we are wretched, and miserable, poor, blind, and naked.
Prove. 30.2, 3. Sometimes that we are more foolish than any man, and have not
the understanding of a man; while we walk in a sinful way, they make us
believe we are in Gods favor, Luke 18.9. When we are in a good estate, and God
would have us walk cheerfully in him, our hearts will cast a thousand
discouragements upon us, we cannot pray or profit by the Word of God, or do
any good duty; our hearts will few pillows under our elbowes, that so we may
sleep quietly, but when we go to try our hearts by the Word of God, then they
will fall out with us indeed, 2 Samuel 15. the beginning.

Use 1. Take heed of all secret sins. Not only such as may be hid from men,
but of such roots of sin as are hid from thy self, yet cannot be hid from God.
Take heed of such sins as are so subtle, that thou know not whether they be
sins or no, sins which our own souls know not of. If a man would be kept from
presumptuous sins, he must cleanse the inward and hidden frame of his heart.

Q. How shall we cleanse our hearts?

A. 1. Pray to God with David, Psalm. 19. to cleanse us from such sins which we
know not. We have confessed such sins as we know by our selves, and those which
the world knows by us, but we must make a new reckoning for such sins as we
know not.

2. Not to trust our own hearts, but the Word of God, Psalm. 119.9. The Word of
God says, there are such sins in every age, therefore we must pray to God to
help us against them.

3. Keep our hearts with all diligence, observe every winding and turning, and
take heed of occasions that provoke our hearts any way to sin, Prove. 4.23.

2. This shows the impossibility of their good estates that look to be
justified by habits and works. It is the happiness of Gods servants, in that
they look not to be justified by the perfection of their hearts.

3. Ground of trial. If we find that our hearts do not condemn us, let us
trust our hearts no farther then we prove them by the rule of Gods Word. If God
has helped you to look up to Christ for the pardon of your sins, and you now
sit loose from sin, it is an argument that your sins are pardoned, because we
could not else hate sin, Psalm. 119.6. But on the contrary, if we find our
hearts condemning us, our hearts are full of self-love. Parents are full of
partiality, as that they can scarce see any evil in their children: If they
see cause of death in them, much more God the righteous Judge; If they see
cause of condemnation in them, the Judge much more.

1 JOHN 3.21. Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence
toward God.


Doct. SVch as have peace with their own consciences, have boldness with God.
If we have peace with our hearts, we have not only peace with God, but
boldness, Ephesians. 3.12. (...) is liberty of speech; hence comes liberty of
carriage. When God has been pleased to give us fellowship with him in Christ,
that we have the Ministry of the Gospel revealed to us, then we have boldness,
Phil. 1.20. He that has this hope, shall never be ashamed before God or men,
Romans 5.1, 2. This rejoicing is a companion of boldness.

Wherein stands this boldness?

Answ. In three things.

1 In liberty of spirit, to ask those things at Gods hands that are meet for
us. This we may do with some boldness and liberty, Heb. 4.16. Let us go
boldly to the throne of grace, he means in prayer. A Christian that has the
Lord Jesus Christ for his High Priest, who has reconciled him to God, to him
Gods throne is not a Judgment Seat, but a Mercy-seat and he begs mercy to help
him in time of need; we may safely expect, God will not deny what we ask, Phil.
1.6. The Apostle tells us by his own example, he never prays for them, but his
heart is warmed with joy, and he was confident God would grant what he prayed
for. We come to a throne of grace; that is, we may speak as favorites to God.

2 Boldness in dangers that may befall in this world, or another. He walks
fearlesse and securely against the fear of danger, Psalm. 23.4. ult. Doubtless
loving kindness and mercy shall follow me all my days. Surely, or doubtless.
This is a bold speech, to assure himself that goodness and mercy shall follow
him whithersoever he goes.

3 In expectation of all good things, whether we pray for them or not. God many
times will have more care of us, then we of our selves. Paul was in a straight,
he knew it would be better for him to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, yet
better for the Church, if he should in the flesh, and he is confident he shall
stay with them to their joys, Phil. 1.24, 25. Acts 20.23, 24. There was a
readiness of heart in him, so to carry all things, as that he might rejoice in
all, 1 Cor. 1.12.

Reas. 1 From the justification by faith, Romans 5.1, to 5. We rejoice in
tribulation, hope never makes ashamed. The soul is never at peace, till such
time as by faith it does receive and apply Christ's righteousness, Acts 14.5. A
man that owes another man money, and knows not how to pay him, he is ashamed to
come into his sight. He that knows he has injured his Prince, and that he does
watch an occasion to be revenged of him, he will be afraid and ashamed.

2. The sincerity of his sanctification. Though a man has assurance that his
sins are pardoned, and that he is a child of God, yet if he walk crookedly and
loosly in his own ways, his conscience will be so perplexed and distracted, as
that he will think every hand of God comes as a judgment, 2 Cor. 1.12. Here is
his boldness, he has walked in simplicity and pureness. A man is fearful
and ashamed when he has dealt doubly either with God or man, or walked in some
way of impurity of heart. Psalm. 51.8. David's bones were broken, he could not
stand upright, he could not look God in the face. When God gives a man to walk
in simplicity without guile, and pureness without uncleanness, then a man may
walk boldly, and with joy, otherwise he walks like a criple, and creeps up and
down.

Use 1 It reproves an old cavil that has been in the world, that Religion
makes men Dastards and Cowards; No, rather want of Religion: If men had but
purity of heart and good conscience toward men, they would fear no dangers, 2
Cor. 1.12.

2 Refutation of all Popery. They cannot be bold, because they cannot know God
to be their Father, they keep not a good conscience. Where there is no good
conscience, there is no boldness. Wicked men indeed may be bold through
ignorance, or through abundance of natural spirits, mettle, courage, etc. This
may be in Papists, and was found in Heathens.

3 A ground of trial of a man's peace, Luke 11.21. Thou art at peace. D^st thou
pray boldly? do thou look that God should answer thee? How do thou look
danger in the face? Prove. 28.1, 2. In danger thou know Christ has born all;
many things befall thee, thou art confident all shall be for thy good.

4 This teaches us the true way of boldness. St. Austin praises God that he
can think of his former evils without fear. If thou would do thus, strive
with God that he would sprinkle thy soul with the blood of Christ. If thou
have found peace of justification with God, labor for peace of sanctification.
Let no rebellious lusts be in thy soul, but complain of it to the Lord, and
fight against them.

5 Much consolation to a child of God, that walks in simplicity of a good
conscience. If God has given thee an heart to loath all wickedness, and
abandon all occasions of sin, there is a boldness springing in thy heart. A
child of God has boldness, but he sees it overclouded, he knows not wi^h
what sin; but God does sometimes pour out himself more largely, sometimes more
straightly, therefore a child of God fears something amiss in him, and he is
discouraged, but he needs not, there is a cause of boldness, it is our
portion. If our heart condemn us not, we have boldness toward God.

1 JOHN 3.22. And whatsoever we ask we receive of him, because we keep his
commandments, and do those things that are pleasing in his sight.


THere is a double benefit of our assuring our selves that we are of the truth.

First, If our hearts condemn us not. God will much less condemn us, but we
have boldness toward God.

Secondly, Acceptance of all our prayers in the presence of God. Which he
proves from an argument taken from the practice of such as have inward peace,
they keep his commandments.

1 Here is a privilege of such as are at peace with God, they may assure
themselves that their prayers are heard.

2 A reason of this, because they keep his commandments.

Doct. According to our hearing of Gods commandments, so he hears our prayers.
As we regard Gods Word, so he ours, John 9.33. The question was, What he
thought of him that opened his eyes? He thought he was a Prophet, because God
heard not sinners. John 15.7. If my word abide in you, etc. Let us keep Gods
Word, and he will keep our prayers to fulfill them. Gods Word abides in us,
when in our judgments we approve of it, and in our hearts we cleave to it, in
our lives we practice it. The Word of God abides not in us, except it rules as
becomes the Word of God, Zech. 7.13. Prove. 28.9.

Reas. 1. From a rule of equity, which God uses in dispensing himself, Mat.
7.2. As we dispense our selves to him, so does God himself to us. This it a
general rule of Gods walking toward men. With what measure we mete, God will
measure to us again. If we let no Word of God fall to the ground, but our
conscience stand in awe of it, and our hearts cleave to it, God will let none
of our prayers fall to the ground.

2. From the unity of the Spirit that does help us to keep the commandments.
God makes account we keep the commandments, when there is none but our
judgments approve, Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. Romans 8.15. The Spirit helps us to pray,
and it asks things according to the will of God, and he knows the meaning of
the Spirit. As who should say, He that prays not in the Spirit is a Barbarian
unto God.

3. From the love and respect God bears to them that keep his commandments. It
is the way to become Gods Favorite, John 14.21, 23.

Use 1. It shows us the cause of the fruitlesnesse of our prayers at any time,
God hears not us, because we hear not him. If our prayer fall to the ground,
then surely Gods Word has fallen to the ground. A good prayer and a bad life can
never meet, James 2.20. If we live in awlesse respect to Gods commandments, he
hears not our prayers.

2. Encouragement to the obedience of Gods commandments. What comfort would a
man have more then to have his wish? If God give thee an heart to keep all his
commandments, thou may assure thy heart, that all thy petitions are granted.

3. A ground of comfort to every such soul as makes conscience of his ways.
If thou walk with a care to fulfill Gods will, he will fulfill thine. Such
as give themselves to walk as Christ has walked, may have this comfort, John
11.32. Psalm. 119.5, 6. Such petitions as are long delayed, and seem to be most
strongly denied, are fulfilled, Dan. 10.3, 10, 11, 12. Daniels prayers were
heard the first day, but not then answered. A petition is granted in Heaven,
and a course taken for the accomplishment of it, but yet there must be a time
to bring it about, Deuteronomy. 5.25, 26. Though God delay our prayers, yet even then
he grants them, Prove. 21.10. Jer. 17.10. God regards the hearts of his people,
and their movings. Moses desired only to see the good Land, God bid him go up
to the hill, and so strengthened his sight to see it; he should not go over,
because the people should see Gods displeasure against him. We have an end
always in our prayers, and we prescribe means to God, he many times denies the
means in displeasure, but gives the end, 2 Cor. 12.7, 8. So it was in Paul, God
would not remove the messenger of Satan, but he did that by it which he would
have done, the free passage of the spirit in his heart, Heb. 5.7. A Christian
prays for the light of his countenance, God hears not, Why do thou desire it,
to strengthen thy faith? He will do it by the word of promise. We pray that
God would mortify some corruption, Why do we desire it, that grace may have
free passage in our hearts? God will by such lusts mortify a greater, that is,
pride of heart; and God works such a loathing in thy heart, and bitterness in
regard of sin, that we might mortify them.

The second benefit is the acceptance of all our prayers in the presence of
God, amplified by an argument taken from the practice of such men whose hearts
do not condemn them before God, they keep his commandments, and do that
which is pleasing in his sight, set forth in a Syllogism, Whosoever keeps Gods
commandments, those whatsoever they ask they receive of God. But those whose
hearts condemn them not, keep Gods commandments.

Doct. That such as keep Gods commandments, they keep a good conscience, and
Gods favor together: They have peace at home and in heaven.
First, They have peace at home in their own conscience, Heb. 13.18. We have a
good conscience in all things, desiring to live honestly; that is, to keep Gods
commandments.

Secondly, As they keep a good conscience on earth, so they keep favor in
heaven, 1 Kings 15.5. Thus its said of David, that he did that which was good
in the sight of the Lord, he had a care to keep Gods commandments. Thus did
Asa, 2 Chronicles. 14.2. Hezekiah, Ib. 29.2. So did Josiah, 2 Kings 23.25. and 2 Chronicles. 34.2.

What is it to keep Gods commandments?

Ans. It is not barely to keep them in our minds and memory; but, First, to
keep them as one would keep his highway: A traveller, so soon as he is out of
his way, and sees it, he blames himself for it, and hastens to get into it
again. Secondly, as a man would keep his jewels, Prove. 6.20, 21. Thirdly, to
keep it as the apple of our eye, Prove. 7.1, 2, 3. If the least more fall into
our eye, we never leave till we get it out; so we must make scruple of the
least sins. Fourthly, we must keep the commandments as we would keep our life.
Now, Skin for skin, and all that a man has, will he give for his life: So we
should lose our lives, and all we have for Gods commandments

Reas. From the suitableness of the will or commandments of God, and the
conscience of a Christian. You please a man when you do that which is
according to his will; and so look what is good in Gods sight, that is
according to Gods commandments. The commandments of God are a lively image of
his will. God is a God of pure eyes, Hab. 1.13. he hates wickedness, Psalm.
5.4. Any thing that is evil, is displeasing in Gods sight. When Vriah was
slain, and David took his Wife into his house, it is said that thing displeased
the Lord, 2 Samuel 12.27. But the will of God is our sanctification, 1 These. 4.3.
A man is said to be made after Gods own Image, when he is righteous and holy.
The Apostle exhorts us to put on the next man, which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians. 4.24. Holiness is the sum of the
commandments of the first Table, Righteousness of the second.

Use 1. Hence we may have a trial of our conscience, whether it be good or no,
for upon the goodness of our conscience depends the peace of this world, and
another, Heb. 13.18. Examine your selves, Do you keep Gods commandments as a
man would keep his way, the apple of his eye, his life and soul, or his
Jewels? Else you do not keep a good conscience. There are four sorts of
consciences.

First, A conscience that is quiet, yet not good: As, when the strong man keeps
the house, all that he p^ssesseth is in peace, Luke 11.21.

Secondly, There is a conscience which is good, but yet not quiet: Such was
David's, Psalm. 31.22. when he said in his have, he was utterly cast out of his
sight; though it was good, yet it did not speak the truth concerning David.

Thirdly, There is a conscience which is neither good nor quiet; such was Judas
his conscience, Mat. 27.3, 4.

Fourthly, There is a conscience both good and peaceable, which walks in Gods
commandments; and if he slip out of Gods commandments, he looks at himself
as out of the way; he finds refreshments in walking in Gods ways, he could not
by any means part with Gods commandments, he had rather part with his life,
and all that he has. But on the contrary, if a man keep not Gods
commandments, he is so far from making scruple of any sin, that he allows
himself in any sin, yea in all sin.

Use 2. It exhorts us all, to take the right way, to keep Gods commandemens,
and to keep a good conscience.

Obj. What shall we get by this?

Answ. In keeping Gods commandments is great reward. You shall keep a good
house at home, and favor in heaven. A good conscience is worth keeping, it
will uphold thy heart against all discouragements thou shall meet withal in
the world, and thou shall have peace with God by keeping his commandments, you
shall keep a good conscience, which is a continual feast. The peace of a good
conscience is the greatest blessing in the world, nothing in the world can take
it away. A man may keep all other things, and yet not a good conscience; but
without a good conscience, what good will they all do thee at the last day?
Wherefore, above all things have a care to keep it, it will be more joy to thee
then all worldly contentments, Psalm. 4.6, 7.

3. This may be matter of comfort and consolation to every such soul that has
a care to keep Gods commandments, for such a man keeps Gods favor in heaven,
and a good conscience on earth, which is a continual feast.

1 JOHN 3.23. And this is his commandment, that we should believe on the Name
of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, as he gave us commandment.


IN this Verse he shows you what this commandment is, in keeping of which we
obtain the grant of our prayers, This is his commandment that we believe in
the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and that we love one another.

Doct. That in stead of loving God with all our hearts, the great and first
commandment now is, that we believe in the Name of the Lord Jesus.
When the holy Ghost would rank all the commandments under two heads, he
reduces them to these two.

First, That in stead of loving God with all our hearts, we must believe in
Jesus Christ.

Secondly, In stead of loving our neighbor as our selves, that we love our
Brethren, as Christ commands. When Christ was demanded what was the first and
great commandment, he answered, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and the second is like unto this, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self, Mat. 22.36, to 39. But the Apostle John he sums up the commandments in
these two. He says not here, these are the commandments, but this is the
commandment: As if he should have said, there is no more commanded of God. 2 Timothy 1.13. Keep a pattern of wholesome words, which is the sum of them? Faith
and love in Christ Jesus.

Q. What is meant by the Name of Jesus Christ?

Ans. Here is not meant the letters or syllables of the Name of Jesus. There is
no other name under heaven whereby we can be saved, but by the Name of Jesus,
Acts 4.12. It were superstition to believe there were virtue in the letters or
syllables of the name Jesus. He means, there is no person under heaven, whereby
we can be saved, but only by him who is named the Lord Jesus. As it is, Genesis
13.4. Abraham called on the name of the Lord, that is, upon the Lord, Phil.
2.10. The Apostle says, At the name of Jesus every knee shall bow. So Isa.
45.24. there you may see what is meant by the Name Jesus, and what is to bow to
the Name Jesus. Romans 14.11. To bow to, or worship the Name Jesus, is to worship
the Person of Jesus. He does therefore add Name to the Lord Jesus, because we
do believe in Christ by those attributes given to him, it is by Christ we are
saved. Now if we did not consider him, as a Priest, a Prophet, and a King, he
could not have saved us, these offices of Christ are the name of Christ.

Q. What is meant by believing in his Name?

A. There are three acts of Faith in believing in the Name of the Lord Jesus.

1. To be persuaded of his goodness and promises. Doubting is opposed to
faith, Romans 4.20. Doubting and persuasion are acts of the mind.

2. Faith is an act of a man's will, whereby he trusts on the name of the Lord
Jesus. Not to believe in God, is not to trust on God for his salvation, Psalm.
78.22. Credere in Christum, 1 Pet. 2.6. is as it were to roll our selves upon
Christ. There are two things in Gods promises: 1. Truth. 2. Goodness.


Understanding believes the truth, will accepts and closes with the goodness.
These be acts about a promise.

3. There is a true faith, but yet weak, which does not reach to those, and yet
reach to believeing in his Name, and has salvation by his Name; which is, when
a man can abide by the Lord, and will not away till he bless him, like Jacob,
Gen 32.26. This is the same with drawing near to God, Psalm. 73.28. A man draws
near to God, when he is willing to forake all his lusts, and can find no
satisfaction in earthly things, but only in the Lord.

Reas. 1. It is a work of greater honor to God to believe in the Lord Jesus
Christ, then to love God, when we know him to be our friend. When a Christian
does first begin to believe in Christ, he does not take God as a friend, but as
an enemy; now, to cleave to God when he is an enemy, is more then to love God
when he is a friend unto us. For a soul to throw it self on God when he is
terrible, and seems as an angry God; now, not to let him go till he shows us
mercy, is a famous thing. The faith of a weak Christian becomes more famous
then the love of a strong Christian. The one has had the experience of Gods
love, the other never felt the warmth of Gods Spirit in the heart.

2. This does magnify the grace of God, because such a soul as believes in
Christ, does rely on Christ for every blessing; he does not trust on the best
graces he has received, he does not trust on his own faith, but he trusts on
Christ for the favor of God, and he believes that for his sake every promise
shall be fulfilled. This great commandment gives God and Christ all the honor.

3. Because by faith we rest on God for all the good we stand in need of, Romans
4.16.

4. From the wickedness of our nature, and impossibility to love God, before
we trust God, and before we be persuaded that our sins are forgiven. The end of
the commandment is love. Whence comes this love? From faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy
1.5. John 14.1. Christ's disciples were much troubled, because he was to leave
the world, but he labors to comfort them, saying, Believe in God, believe also
in me. but verse 6. No man must think to believe in God, before they believe in
Christ.

Use 1. This reproves a sinful error of the Doctors of the Church of Rome* who
say that Faith may be severed from Love. A man may believe in God and yet not
love him. Which is contrary to this great commandment. We, do no sooner believe
in God, but we love him.

2. To exhort every soul, as they would desire to do any thing pleasing to God,
to make this their greatest duty, to believe in the Lord Jesus. Faith and Love
are correlatives. Let no man flatter himself in this, That he is born of good
parents, that he lives in the bosom of the Church, and that he enjoyes Gods
ordinances, but trust thou on the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, Psalm. 9.10.
Now, we cannot trust on God before we know him.

3. It teaches this: That this believing on the Name of Jesus Christ, is a
divine thing. For Christ Jesus is no creature, but equal with the Father, John
14.1.

4. Of comfort to every soul that believes in the Name of the Lord Jesus. He
fulfils this great commandment. Is not this a great comfort to a man, when he
knows there is little that he can either do or suffer, but yet this he is
persuaded of, that he abides in Christ Jesus, and trusts in God.

Doct. 2. The second great commandment is that we love one another.
When the scribe asked Christ, What was the greatest commandment of the Law?
Mat. 22.36. Christ answers him, And the second is like to it: Thou shall love
thy neighbor as thy self. John says here, to love one another.

Reas. 1. From the large extent of it. The is no duty or office of love which
we perform to man, but is comprehended in this, Thou shall love thy neighbor
as thy self. Love is the fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13.10. Love not your
neighbor, and you break all the commandments of God.

2. Because whatsoever we do perform without love is unprofitable. As without
faith no duty profits, Heb. 4.2. So, without love we cannot profit our
Brethren, 1 Cor. 13.1, 2, 3. Neither can we profit our selves. The Apostle
exhorts that all be done in love, 1 Cor. 16.14. Love edifieth. Ib. 8.1.

3. Love makes all other duties honorable to our Brethren. They are best
entertained of those for whom we do any office of love* By love we should serve
one another, Gal: 5: 13: Love makes a Nurse very painful about her child, you
shall not have so much service from any servant you keep as that service a
Nurse performs; she does it freely and readily, love will make us serviceable
without measure.

Use 1 Let us all be stirred up to have great respect to this great
cammandement; If it be a work of love, it is that which God requires. By love
we perform all the commandment of God at once. Love is the fulfilling of the
Law. Whatsoever a man does without love, it neither profits himself nor his
brother. Whatsoever duty you perform to any Brother, if you do it not out of
love, you will soon be weary of it, that is the truest hearted duty that is
performed in love: avoid we therefore such occasions as hinder us from loving
one another, which is sometimes strangeness, sometimes enmity, sometimes
because of the wickedness of others, sometimes self-love.

For the first, avoid strangeness one toward another, God loved us when we
were strangers to him, Col. 2.1. So ought we. Consider also we may be
strangers. It Is an ill quality in a dog to fly on strangers. It is a Nabal-like
nature to neglect any office of love to a stranger, 1 Samuel 25.

2. We must love those that are our enemies, Romans 5.10. Thus did Christ,
whilst we were enemies he dyed for us. Will a man hate such a member as is
painful to him? No, he will rather labor to heal it. Shall we not be
compassionate to those members that make us sick, or disquiet us?

3. We must in no wise hate those that do evil in Gods sight or ours, but
rather pity them, 2 These. 3.14, 15.

4. The fourth enemy of love to our Brother is self-love; We must love our
selves, but we must not determinate our love in our selves: When men cannot
love others but for themselves, such men may have a form of godliness but
deny the power of it, 2 Timothy 3, 1, 2, 3, to 5. The greater any cammandement is
the more ready we are to break it. But (as we desire our prayers should prosper
in heaven) so let us love one another, and let us do all that we do in love,
This will do both our selves and others good.

2. Love we our Brethren in obedience to Gods commandment; this must be the
rule of our love. There are many cankers in love, which this love in obedience
to Gods commandment heals.

1. All carnal love springs from our nature, and so we love no farther then
serves our own ends, but love in obedience to Gods cammandement is spiritual.

2. If our love be not from a commandment it is faithless; now, whatsoever is
not of faith is sin. Therefore our love must be in obedience to Gods
commandment.

3. There is an immoderate love, which is not out of conscience to God.

4. There is a licentious love, which is lawless, but our love must be ruled
by the commandment of God. We must love where, and because God has commanded
us.

5 There is an inconstant love. When men will love fervently for a time, be
ready to put me in their bosom, but after a while their love grows cold. These
love according to their mind, Gal. 4.14. to 17. This is not according to the
rule.

3 Let us love the Lord our God so much the more, because he is careful to lay
this commandment on us, though a stranger, an enemy, a wicked man, God cannot
endure the rank breath of hatred.

As he has commanded us.

This is the rule of our love. How is thar? We ought to love our Brethren, as
Christ has loved us, Joh. 13.34. and 16.12.

Doct. The rule of our love one to another, is not now as we love our selves,
but as Christ has loved us.
Indeed, the rule in the Law was, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self,
Lev. 19 18. But now a new commandment, so called, because it is given by a new
rule (As he has given commandment.)

1 Christ denied his own case and pleasure, that he might save us from pain.

2 He denied himself in his own profit. He laid down his own soul, 2 Cor.
8.9. He laid down both earthly and heavenly profits, that we through him might
be rich.

3 He denied his own honor. He being in the form of God, yet made himself of
no reputation, to save us from reproach.

4 As if all this had been too little, he denied his own life, and laid it
down for us, John 3.16.

Reas. What is the reason of this difference, that our love to our neighbor
must be so great above the love to our selves.

1 Because there was no cause of denying our selves in innocence, but now man
is fallen, he cannot raise up another, but he must stoop. If two men go
together, if they go both upright, they may go hand in hand: but if one be
fallen, and not able to rise, the other if he will raise him, must stoop down,
and toil to get him up. God has raised up some sooner then others, therefore
we must take up our fallen Brethren.

2 God requires love in a more exact manner and measure, because he has now
given an higher and more exact pattern. We have the pattern of Christ, that
forgave us ten thousand talents, therefore we ought to forgive our Brethren an
hundred pence, Mat. 18.

Use 1. This should stir up all Christians to walk now in an higher frame of
love then formerly they were wont in times past. We walked then in a lower way,
to love our Brother as our selves. But we must now say, I will do so for my
Brother, as I may not prejudice my self, my estate, credit, or life. But now,
we that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weaker, Romans 15.1, 2.
Now we must have the same mind in us which was in Christ Jesus, Heb. 2.4. to
16. 2 Cor. 11.7, 8. Paul abased himself that they might be exalted, and denied
himself of many comforts, that he might help them. As Christ laid down his life
for us, so must we for our Brethren in sundry cases, 1 John 3.16.

For more particular direction.

1 A man ought to deny his own expediences for his Brothers necessity, Neh.
5.18.

2 He ought to deny himself in outward things, to supply his Brethren in
spiritual things. Thus Paul.

3 If a man be of a private condition, and his Brother of public use to the
Church, he ought to deny himself to maintain and succor him, as they said to
David, Thou art worth ten thousand of us. Romans 16.4, 5. Aquila and Priscilla.

2 This should teach you that are of higher estate, to help your poor
neighbors that are fallen into straights, not through prodigality or riot, but
through Gods hand, or charge of children. You must not say, I must look to my
self, and to my children, that they be maintained. This was the old rule, now
we must deny our selves and our own experiences, and be continually doing good
in obedience to this commandment. It was a royal speech of David, 2 Samuel 24.
Shall I offer a sacrifice of that that cost me nothing? Heb. 13 15, 16. When
God blesses thee with many a pound, will thou offer a sacrifice to God that
cost a penny, or a thing that cost thee nothing? It Is for you to bless God
that has enriched you with such abundance, and say with David, What shall I
render to the Lord for all these goods? Your goods reach not to God, but to the
Saints that are on the earth; and if you begin to straighten your hands and
hearts, you will find God straightning himself to you. What a blessed thing
were it, to be laying aside something for good uses? Our Savior that lived in
so mean a condition, yet had care to provide for the poor, John 13.28.

Doct. There is not a more effectual means to the obtaining our petitions, then
by growing up in practice of these two commandments, in believing on the Name
of Christ, and love to our Brethren.
Mark 11.22. to 26. There you have both joined together; Jam. 1.8 Let a man
pray in faith, and waver not. When a Christian is tossed with doubtings and
distractions, he shall rather drown his prayers, then bring them to the bosom
of Christ Jesus. Job's friends were godly men; but because they dealt not in
love with Job, God professes he would not hear them. Want of love to our
Brethren, it damps our prayers before God. So that though our persons be
accepted, yet our prayers shall not.

Why is faith so necessary?

1. Faith makes our persons acceptable to God. God hears the young ravens and
lions when they call upon him, he rather hears their misery, then their prayer,
but faith makes the person acceptable. Thus, By faith Abel, etc. Heb. 11.

2. Faith purifies the heart, Acts 15.9. If I regard wickedness in my heart,
God will not hear my prayers, Psalm. 66.18.

3 Faith furnishes the heart with graces, that make our prayers amiable. There
are four graces requisite in prayer, and all are wrought by faith.

1 Reverence to God. A man without faith considers not before whose presence he
stands, he considers not that God is near to hear his petitions, but faith is
the evidence of things not seen, it makes us come before God with reverence and
godly fear, Heb. 11.27.

2 Faith breeds in us humility, whereby we come before God with a sense of our
unworthiness, and of the least of Gods mercies, and an unablenesse to ask any
thing according to his will.

3 Faith works fervency and earnestness of spirit, that we will give God no
rest, 2 Samuel 15.16. Effectual fervent prayer is called a prayer of faith, For,
1 Faith puts life into every duty, Gal. 3. 2 Faith lays hold of the promises
of God in Christ, and we urge and press God upon his word. 3 Faith makes us
very sensible of our wants, and therefore we cry very hard for help. 4 Faith
works in us an holy canfidence, that what we ask, God will undoubtedly grant;
and it is meant of faith in the Name of the Lord Jesus.


There are three things in the Name of the Lord Jesus, which Faith lays hold
on.

1 Faith lays hold on the offices of his mediation. There had been no hope of
acceptance, unless there had been a Mediator to reconcile God and us, 1 John
2.1, 2. Heb. 4.14, 15, 16. Though we should find many weaknesses in our
selves, yet with confidence may we draw near to God, seeing we have such an
High Priest which is touched with our infirmities; he is that great Master of
requests, that is in such favor with God, that he never presents up a prayer
to God, but he returns such an answer, that we need not go away with sad
hearts, John 16.^3, 24.

2 Faith looks at Christ as him in whom all the promises are yea and amen, 2
Cor. 5.20.

3 Faith lays hold on all the attributes of God, set on work by Christ for our
good: So that if we look for wisdom, grace or power, they are all set on work
for the good of his Church. The name of the Lord is a strong tower, that is,
the attributes of God, the righteous fly to it.. How? By faith.

Q. How is the love of our Brethren such an effectual means for the obtaining
of our prayers?

Ans. 1. Love enlarges us to forgive injuries done unto us, and that moves God
to forgive us our trespasses. To forgive us a work of love.

2 Love is ready to give, Acts 10.4. God was ready to give ear to the prayer of
Cornelius, because he was ready to give alms.

3 There be to whom we can give little, but yet there is a good opinion and
esteem to be had of them. Now this is a fruit of love to esteem well of our
Brethren, and to judge charitably, and this prevails with God to have a good
conceit of our prayers. If we be estranged and alienated from our Brother in
ill conceits, we shall find God to be estranged to us. This was the fault of
Job's friends, they had an hard conceit of him, which was for want of love, and
this provoked God against them. Mat. 5.23, 24. God will accept of no prayer as
long as he sees in us a harsh conceit of our Brother.

Use 1. To exhort us in the Lord, when we go about any such duty as prayer is,
to present it up unto God, in the spirit of faith and love. They are such
special graces, as without them no prayer can be accepted. Let us but labor to
grow up in these two, faith toward God, and love to our Brethren, and then
whatsoever we ask being darted up by these two, shall find acceptance with God.

Use 2. Of consolation to every soul that comes in any measure with faith and
love before God, we shall not put up any petition, but we shall find God ready
to answer it.

1 JOHN 3.24. And he that keeps his commandments, dwells in him, and he in
him: and hereby we know that he abides in us, by the Spirit which he has
given us.


Verse. 22. The Apostle has taught us a notable privilege of keeping Gods
commandments, and that is the obtaining the grant of our petitions, verse. 23.
he tells us what commandments they be. In this verse he lays down another
benefit which we have by keeping Gods commandments; that is, fellowship with
God, God dwells in us, and we in him.

This verse consists of two parts.

1 The benefit of obedience to Gods commandments, God dwells in us, and we in
him. 2 The means by which we know that God dwells in us, and that is by himself,
for a Christian might else doubt of it.
Doct. That an obedient Christian keeps mutual, entire, and constant fellowship
with Christ.
He is an obedient Christian that keeps the commandments of God as his way, 1
John 7, 8. As his jewels, Prove. 6.21. As the apple of his eye, Prove. 7.2 3, 4.
As his life, Prove. 16.19. To keep them as commands implies obedience out of
sense of superiority in the commander, inferiority in the person commanded. He
that keeps the commandments in such a manner has true fellowship with God,
God dwells in him, and he in God.

Reas. From the effect Our keeping of Gods commandments is a means to keep
fellowship with God, John 14.23. God will come and keep house with us, and
refresh and comfort us. If a Christian shall grow up in obedience to Christ,
then Christ his Husband will lop off his superfluous branches, that so he may
bring forth more fruit then he did before; he will comfort us with the
consolations of his holy Spirit, he will come in and sup with us, Neh. 8.10.
The more comfort, the more strength. Comfort comes from confortare, to
strengthen; the more strong a Christian is, the more cheerfully he performs
Christian duties; like as the Sun is said to come forth like a giant, rejoicing
to run his race, Psalm. 19.4. A weak man soon faints, and is weary, but a strong
man goes through his business cheerfully.

Use 1. It reproves a Popish clamor. They say Protestant Christians can do no
good works, because we deny all merit in them; like as our Savior teaches us,
when we have done all we can, we must say, we are unprofitable servants, we do
not deserve our daily bread; but as Jacob confesses, we are less then the
least of his mercies, Genesis 30.1. Is there no use of good works except they
merit? Is there no use of gold because it does not justify us? Is not thi^
encouragement enough for us to be doing good works, seeing thereby we shall
maintain mutual, entire, and constant fellowship with God? Yea, we say that God
also will at the last day recompense us, though not for our works, yet
according to our good works. We do not merit any thing at Gods hands by our
good works, because we do receive strength from him for the performance of them.

2 This may show every Christian just ground of encouragement to keep himself
close to Gods commandments, in keeping of them is great reward. For we keep in
Christ Jesus, and we keep mutual, and entire, and constant fellowship with the
Father, and so we shall find him as an Husbandman taking pains with us,
keeping us from evil, and cleansing us from those corruptions which will make
us stink in his nostrils; and this he will do, because he sees us taking pains,
and employing that stock of graces which he has bestowed on us. By this means
God will make our lives comfortable, and will multiply graces in us in a great
measure, and give us more strentgh to make us yield more obedience unto him.
And whereas other Christians lives are very obscure, we shall shine forth as
the Sun at noon day; therefore those Christians much wrong themselves that
think themselves bound to no commandment, though they would do as God requires,
yet they would do it freely, and not as commanded. But why then does John bid
us keep his commandments, and promise such blessings to us, if we do keep them?
A good man would be doing good duties, though God did not command him, but yet
he must therefore do good duties, because God commands him.

3 Those Christians are reproved that walk loosely with God, who keep not Gods
commandments; as they would keep their way, their jewels, the apple of their
eye, their life, such Christians fall short of that great reward which God
promises. Whence is it that Christians are wanton, proud, covetous? Is it not
because they do not keep Gods commandments? For else God would keep their
hearts, and cleanse their spirits.

4 This may be an use of comfort to such Christians as have regard to the
commandments of God, and to walk more close with God on Gods holy day, such
shall have God dwelling with them, and working all their works for them; God
will play the good Husbandman about them, he will prune them from all loose
distempers that hang about their souls, he will give us more wisdom then our
Teachers, and by this means we shall come before him with Christian boldness
and confidence, and we may expect to receive strength of grace, whereby we may
run with cheerfulness the way of his commandments.

Hereby we know he abides in us, by the Spirit which he has given us.

In the second place we come to speak of the means whereby we may discern that
God dwells in us, and that is, by the Spirit which he bath given us.

Doct. That the Spirit of God bestowed on us, is an evident sign of Jesus
Christ dwelling in u.
He does not say, we believe, though this be a great word, for faith is the
evidence of things not seen; but he says, we know it; now scire is rem per
causam cognoscere.

What is that Spirit that being bestowed on us is an evidence of Christ's
dwelling in us? Did not the Spirit of the Lord come upon Saul, and he
prophesied? 1 Samuel 10. Yet it is not said that Christ abode in him, for chapter 16.
verse 14. it is said that the Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, and an
evil Spirit from the Lord troubled him.

Answ. There be sundry degrees of Gods Spirit which may be given to a man, and
yet be no evidence of Gods dwelling in him, or he in God.

1. There is a Spirit of illumination, whereby a man may prophecy, as Saul
did, But a man may have this Spirit of God and yet fall away, so as to sin
against the holy Ghost, Heb. 6.4, 5, 6.

2. A Spirit of administration of Church or Commonwealth, 1 Samuel 11.6.

3. A Spirit of power, to do many wonders, Matthew. 7.22, 23. And yet Christ
acknowledges that he never knew them, they did never abide in Christ, nor he
in them.

4. There is a Spirit of renewall of many affections, which may befall any man.

1. A Spirit of Zeal, as in Jehu, Come and see my zeal for the Lord, 2 Kings
10.15, 16. and yet he took no heed to walk in the Law of the Lord, verse 31,
32. 2. Of Joy in Herod, Mark 6.20. 3. Humility in Ahab, 1 King. 21.29. 4. Fear
in Felix, Act. 24.25.
What is then the Spirit whereby we know that we keep Gods commandments, and
have fellowship with him?

Answ. It is the Spirit of life which is in Jesus which frees us from the law
of sin and death, Romans 8.2. This is the Spirit of adoption, verse. 15. of grace
and supplication, Zac. 12.10.

What does this differ from the former, for they were the Spirit of God?

Answ. It exceeds in this: Because the former Spirits of God did rest only upon
the outward of a man, as his Tongue, Memory, Affection, but this bids defiance
unto all the enemies of his salvation, the Heart, and Will, which are the
Castle wherein Christ abides, are given up to Christ, Pro. 23.26. God requires
the heart, if we give the heart to God we give all, Prove. 4.23. Life springs
not from good affections, nor good actions, but from the heart.

Q. What does this Spirit more in my heart then did the other? How shall I know
that the holy Ghost has gotten possession of my heart?

Answ. If the Spirit of God has taken possession of your hearts, it lifts up
your hearts for to prize the Lord Jesus above all other things in the world, it
makes thee willing to do and suffer Gods will with patience, it will cause you
to resign your selves and your desires to the Lord Jesus; now all your
affections and whole heart is for the Lord. If Paul now sin, he does that which
he would not, Romans 7.16, 17. Having given us this Spirit, we dwell in Christ,
and he in us, 1 John 4.13. Because by this Spirit we keep his commandments. If
we keep his commandments, it shall go well with us, and with our children
after us for ever, Deuteronomy. 5.29.

Reas. From the free covenant of grace, by which he has promised everlasting
fellowship to those that keep his commandments, Jer. 32 40. Isa. 55.2, 3.

Obj. This may make us believe, but not to know as we believe; Unity in
Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, but we cannot know it. But you say here, We do
not only believe but know.

Answ. There is a difference between faith and knowledge: For a man may believe
a thing is true, because he does not doubt of the authority of it, but yet we
do not know all truths that are spoken, though we believe them, for stnowledge
is of a certain conclusion; we know this to be so, partly by faith, partly by
sense and reason; for though faith believe things before we know them, it being
the evidence of things not seen, and so a man may believe that God is gracious
before we know it; yet when faith has laid hold on the promises, it sets
reason on work. This Spirit of God works in us an evidence of our abode in
Christ, for 1. this Spirit of God works peace of conscience, Phil. 4.7. which
passes all understanding; though it does not always abide, yet it keeps
garrison always, it bears witness to a man that Christ is in him, and he in
Christ.

2. It works a change in all Christians, it changes them from the power of
Satan to the power of God, Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. And though the peace of
conscience and consolation of the Spirit abide not always, yet the Spirit of
regeneration and sanctification does always abide, and does change the whole
man, 2 Cor. 5.17. Before a carnal and fleshly Spirit, but now the Spirit of
glory and grace rests upon us, which makes us relish Christian communion, and
Christian society. This Spirit does always abide, and so we know that Christ
abides, Romans 8.9.

Obj. I may think there is a through change, but yet it may be it is only of the
outward man?

Answ. Consider how it changes thy heart. Is thy heart with God, and wholly
for God? Do thou long for peace with God? Would thou not forgo it if thou
had it; for all the world? Is the Word of God more precious to thee then
thine appointed food? No profit, pleasure, or preferment, shall hinder thee
from following of Christ. When a man has horror of conscience, he would give
his life for peace, but then a man does not affect God so much as his own
peace. Thus Cain, Genesis 4. When Saul had a spirit full of trouble, then David
must play a fit of music. When wicked men's hearts are at rest, then they never
regard God, but then they close with the world, and sensual lusts. But when
the Sun of righteousness does arise in a man's heart, he will scatter abroad
all those distempers of spirit that hang about him, and frame his heart to an
holy care of keeping Gods commandments.

Use 1. To reprove a Popish opinion, that no man can know whether Christ abide
in him or no. But why does St. John then say, Hereby we know? and he speaks to
old men, young men, and babes, to try themselves. These men condemn the whole
generation of the just. Such a woman as cannot tell her child who is his
Father, is a strumpet, and so is the Church of Rome.

2. It reproves others that think it impossible. Some think it not worth the
knowing, others think it not meet to know whether Christ abide in them or no;
such have no care to make their calling and election sure. But St. John says,
it is possible, and a thing worthy the seeking after, and also very expedient.

3. This should exhort all Christians to try and examine themselves, whether
they are in the faith or no, 2 Cor. 13.5. Know ye not. He speaks of such as
have lived long under a faithful Ministry. It is an evil sign; Either know
that Christ is in you, or be not satisfied.

4. To exhort us to give up our hearts to God, that his fear and love may rule
our hearts, that so those outward things take not up your affections, Romans 8.9.
and 14.

5. Comfort to Gods servants, that give up their hearts and lives to God, which
have laid their salvation not on a sandy but sound ground, which have built it
upon divine testimony, even the Spirit of God, which is a divine Spirit.

1 JOHN Chap. IV. Verse. 1. Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the
spirits whether they are of God: because many false Prophets are gone out into
the world.


THis Chapter consists of two parts; 1. A preservative against false Teachers,
to verse 6. 2. A renewed exhortation to Brotherly love.


The argument falls by the way on the trial of spirits, for he had said, Thereby
shall you know that Christ abides in you, by the spirit that he has given
you. Now lest the people of God should be deceived by the spirits of their
Ministers; he bids them therefore to try their spirits: and that by the Spirit
which Christ has given them, For he which is spiritual discerns all things,
1 Cor. 2.15.

These words are an Exhortation to the people of God, how to order themselves
toward the spirits of their Ministers; which exhortation is laid down, 1.
Negatively, Believe not. 2. Affirmatively, But try the spirits.


The negative duty and affirmative, are both confirmed by an argument taken
from the multitude of false Teachers, There are many false Prophets gone out
into the world, which shows he speaks chiefly of the trial of their Ministers,
or else you may be deceived in your judgment; as if a friend should bid his
friend take heed what piece of gold he takes, because there are many slips and
counterfeits gone abroad. In that St. John bids his hearers not to believe
every spirit, hence observe;

Doct. That every Minister is carried away with one spirit or other; or else
why does St. John exhort them to try the spirits?
He speaks of ordinary Prophets, such are subject to the judgment of the
people, 1 Cor. 14.23. as for Paul, he was an extraordinary Prophet, 1 Cor. 4.3.
What is meant by Prophecy?

Such as a man may attain to by use, hence Ministers are called Prophets: they
were wont to foretell sundry things to come, look what they speak on earth is
confirmed in heaven; though they cannot foretell things besides the Scripture,
yet they may things out of the Scripture; so that you may see that God is in
them of a truth. Every good Prophet so far as he prophesies according to God,
is carried by the holy Ghost: but when he does not speak according to God, he
is carried with an evil spirit, Numb. 11.25.26. 1 Samuel 18.10. an evil spirit
came upon Saul, so that every Prophet prophesies either by the Spirit of God,
or by a wicked spirit; an evil man may sometimes prophecy well, and then it
is by the spirit of God, it is a spirit that comes upon them; as Baalam, Numb.
Chapter 23. and 24 a good man is ordinarily led by the Spirit of God, but sometimes
he is transported by an evil spirit, and then he speaks not by the Spirit of
God, he perverts the Word, and he misseth the text and application of it. Peter
he will tell our Savior, this thing shall not be unto thee, Mat 16 22. what
says Christ to him? verse. 23. Get thee behind me Satan; There is not the
worst debauched Minister, but when he comes to preach, one spirit or other
comes upon him, therefore well does St. John say, Believe not every spirit, but
try the spirits.

What is the spirit of the Prophets?

1 Thessalonians. 5.23. There are three things in a man, body, soul, and spirit; the
soul of a man is the breath of God, by which he is made a living creature; by
the spirit of a man here is meant, the inclination of the mind, which is called
a spirit in diverse places, as a spirit of fornication, a spirit of slumber, a
spirit of jealousy, every good or evil inclination is called a spirit, Be
renewed in the spirit of your minds, Ephesians. 4.23. that is, the disposition of
your minds. What is the reason some are more just, some are more painful then
others? the good or evil spirit comes upon them.

Why is thy inclination called a spirit?

1. It always comes from some spirit. 2. It has some vehemence in it, to bow
the will one way or other, either to better or worse, as the spirit leads him;
it is possible a man may preach well in the morning, and badly in the
afternoon.
Try the spirits, what variety of spirits are there?

Try all things, says the Apostle, and keep that which is good, 1 These. 5.21.
There be three sorts of spirits, of the World, of the Devil, and of God, every
Minister is led by some of these; of every one of these spirits there is a
great variety.

1. Sometimes the spirit of God comes upon a man, as it did on the seventy
Elders, Numb. 11.25, 26. The Spirit of God is like the spirit of new Wine,
which ripens the wits; so when the spirit of God comes upon a man, he does
better understand the Word of God, and the hearts of the people, The spirit
searches all things, yea the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2. There are two sorts
of deep things of God, some lie hidden in the word of God, some in man.

2. There is a spirit of the world, which does not shine for the uniting of the
hearts of Gods people; but this is a spirit of pride, when a man would be
counted a learned man; or when a man seeks his own profit or honor; the Spirit
of God seeks to know the things that are given him of God, 1 Cor. 2.12.

3. There is the spirit of the Devil, which guides a man into error in his
doctrine, as Peter said to our Savior, This shall not be unto thee; this
spirit searches not the deep things of God, but of the Devil; this spirit
seeks to make the hearts of those sad, whom he would not have made sad, 2 Cor.
11.2.13. to 15. to pervert the Scripture, and drive out the care of Gods
service, and the power of godliness.

Use 1. This should instruct Ministers, when they come into the presence of
God, and enter into the Ministry, to labor to prevail with God, that they may
be acquainted with the deep things of God, that they may lead the people of God
by the still waters of comfort and consolation, such a man will go out
conquering and to conquer, and in prospering to prosper.

2. This should instruct the people of God to search the Scriptures daily, that
so they may be the better able to try the spirits of their Ministers; labor
they also to try their own hearts.

3. To exhort people to be earnest with God, that they may be endued with his
Spirit.

Try the spirits.

Doct. That the people of God are first (...) try the spirits of th^^r
Ministers, before they trust them; they must first try the (...)
Beloved, Try the spirits, as if he would take them by (...) exhort them to try
the spirits of their Ministers, try how they (...), whether they do^ (...)
mighty power of God in human^^ ^^ties Def (...) not prophecy, try all things
(...) la^^ ^st that which is good, 1 (...) you (...) your hearts from (...)
Spirit.

1. By trying the (...) ^ut honor upon it; (...) does not try a small piece of
money, but if (...) a great piece, he will try this.

2. In so doing you ^^ll keep your hearts from (...) ^he Spirit. Acts 17* (...)
of Berea, when they (...) heard Pau^ (...), (whom they might have believed, if
they had known him) (...) they (...) the Scriptures daily, (...) such things as
he preached (...) so or no, finding his doctrine true they believe it, and
(...) of them belived; it was not (...) counted a Conventicle for them to meet
together, to see what they could ^^member of of what they had heard (...) was
it counted any disgrace for great men to be conversant in good dutie^*

What is it (...) Spirits (...) their Ministers?

They must try the spirit of a man's Person, Calling, Doctrine, Appl^^^ions.

1. There may^^ a false spirit of a man's person* Matthew. 7.15, 16.

2. (...) spirit of their Callings* Christ says to John and James, You know
not of what spirit you are, Luke 9.55, 56. yet they were pillars of ^^e Church,
Gal ^^ 9. men of excellent gifts and graces, one of them was this John, which
wrote this Epistle* you know not what spirit you are proving, of what calling
you are of your calling is the same with mine; now he tells them, That he came
not to destroy but to save, as for Eliah and Elisha they were Ministers of
veng^^^^e, Ministers of the law, they might curse, but (...) seek to save.

^ry the spirit of their doctrine for they may be sometimes carried away with
(...) truth, (...) spirit of error, Mat. 16.16. compared with (...) receive
(...) the Kingdom of Heaven, was he therefore kept from (...)? No, he spoke
with a (...) spirit in the morning, (...) with (...) spirit in the afternoon,
he rebuke^ (...) Master; and what says Christ to him then? Get thee behind me
Satan.

4. You must try the spirit of ^^eir application. Bad Ministers (...) misapply
the (...) ^od, they will make (...) hearts of (...) God would not ha^^ made
(...) Ezekiel. 13.2^. (...) mis-apply the Word of God, like Job* (...) 47.^, 7, 8.
they spoke from a spirit of truth, but not from a spirit of (...) when you
shall see a man to (...) like courses, (...) apply the pr^mises, but rather
(...) to him; and (...) you may not apply ^^reatnings to ^^ounded conscience,
for (...) speak a right of God.

Belie^^ (...)

Answ* (...) believe, is (...) of the truth, Heb. 11.^^*

2. To apply (...) 1 John. 1.21.

3. W^ ^ust to it, (...) There are two things in a promise (...) truth, and
trust upon the g^^^^^esse, Psa^ (...). ^4.

Reas. 1. Taken from (...) of God, by the neglect of this duty, 1 Kings 20.3^
(...) the Prophet spoke, whether he spoke in the name of the Lord or (...)
hearkened not to the word of the Prophet, therefore a Lion slew him, 1 Kings
13.15. to 25. on the contrary.

2. From the danger in regard of the Prophets themselves, Matthew. 7.15. 2 Pet.
1.2, 3. Rev. 18.13.

Reas. 2. From the easiness of Prophets to delude Gods people.

1. Because the (...) great store of false Prophets, 1 Kings 22.21, 22, 23. a
man is easily dece^^d by a multitude.

2. They may delude by their calling, many men may think surely their Minister
is right.

3. From the hy^^crisie of their Ministers, Matthew. 7.15. They come to you in
sheeps clothing, but inwardly are ravening Wolves.

Use 1. To refute the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, they would keep men in
ignorance thinking it to be the Mother of Devotion.

2. This (...) ^^ir up all the people of God, to search the Scriptures, that so
they may (...) the spirit of their Ministers: do not take every thing as true
from your Minister, because he is your Minister, no, though he be a man that
fears God, but try his spirit, try every word, follow him from first to last;
if you do not try the Word, you will not trust it, so that all that is
delivered to you, is ^^ water spite upon the ground.

How shall I try the spirit of our Minister?

1. Try them by the Word of God, Esa. 8.20* acquaint your heart with the Word
of God, Heb. 5. alt.

2. Labor for the ointment of the Spirit of God.

3. Consider whether it make you more conformable to the Word of God or no,
whether it make you obey the Word of God more carefully then before, whether it
make you more like to Christ; if it work these effects, it is the Word of God
that is preached.

Doct. That many false Prophets even in the days of St. John the Apostle, were
gone out into the world.
There (...) several false Prophets as Ecclesiastical stori^ relate.

What is a false Prophet?

He is not every one that teaches false doctrine, for we know but in part, and
prophecy but in part, 1 Cor. 13.9. to 12. (...) ^art we may prophecy falsely.
A false Prophet then is such a one that preac^^h some doctrine that overthrows
the doctrine of the Christian faith; when he does seduce others to believe
false doctrine, who^^ words fret as a Canker, 2 Timothy 2.17, 18.

1. When men preach such doctrine as cannot be delivered without peril, without
damnation: except they afterward repen^^ 2 (...). 2.1, 2, 3. Such are called
ravening Wolves, ^atth. 7.15. they destroy both the souls and bodies of those
that believe them, they root up the Church of God like wild Boars.

2. They seduce others to believe the (...), 2 Pet. 1.1, 2, 3. they sell such
men's souls for naught (...) it is said, They should deceive if (...) were
possible the very elect. (...) 24.24*

3. Such as (...) of their errors, and yet will not yield, Tit. 3, 10, 11.
such are to be (...) being perverted, and sin being damned of their own souls,
a man i^ ^hen convinced when he will ^light the poi^^^n which he is convinced,
and if you hold him to it, that he cannot start (...), he will fall out with
you, (...) Apostle ^sheth that such men were even cut off, Gal. 5.17.

(...) only have divisions among Christians, that so the spirits of his fait^
^es may ^e discerned, but also he will have heresies, that so they may be
^e^^ed in judgment as well as in affections. 2. That so (...) made manifest;
as by the wind you may ^ee the difference betwe^^ (...) and ^haffe.

2. From the envious man who sowed tares, while the husbandman that sowed good
seed in the field slept, Matthew. 13.24, 25.

3. From the ignorance and darkness of the minds of professors, Rev. 9.2.
those Locusts were false teachers, which came out of the smoke of the
bottomless pit.

Use 1. If in St. John's time there were so many mists (...) reproves such men,
as when they see such variety of opinion in Religion^ do s^t down till, all men
be agreed but do^^ St. John make this (...) Prophets are gone out into the
world, therefore sit down (...) true Teachers? No, but rather makes this use of
i^ to (...) of their Ministers, because many false Prophets are gone out (...).

2, This may teach us not to wonder, although many also Prophets be gone out in
these days in the light of the Gospel, (...) they durst look such ^lorious
sight in the face as were St. J^^^ and Paul (...) days, there is not such
power of godliness in the hearts (...) Profe^^ but Christians now are given to
much worldliness, and many rest in (...), therefore wonder not though the ^^ce
of the earth be (...) with heresies.

3. This should teaches of (...) to take heed of opening a door to (...)
Prophets. Take heed of ignorance in your judgment, of ambition and sensuality
this is the smoke of the bottomless pit.

4. Try the spirits of false Prophets in these days, and take not up every
instruction at the first blush, but try them; there are sundry spirits o^ false
Prophets, you shall find in Popery a spirit of presumption, doubt, despair,
hypocrisy, not one point in Popery but is carried (...) some of those wings.

1. They teach a man cannot be assured of salvation, this is doubting, yet a
man may merit salvation, this is presumption, they worship stocks and stones.

2. The sp^^^ts of Arminians are a spirit of bitterness (...) the brethren, a
spirit of emulation, of disloyalty to ^^^ir Prince, of liberty and security.

3. Among the (...) shall find a spirit of unconformity and whoredom.

4. There is a doctrine of faith and (...), which does and (...) the doctrine
of Jesus Christ, Romans 8.2, 3. (...) doctrine of free grace is maintained to
free a man from prayer, preaching, and an^ Christian duty that God ^ath
ordained to maintain grace (...) not David pray God (...) create in him a
(...), and to renew a ri^^ ^^irit, within (...) therefore a man ought to (...)
that he (...) of God q^uickened in him; this doctrine of faith and (...)
secretly withdraw a man from the Ordinances of God.

Lastly, There is a spirit (...) ^om^ on Prot^^^nt which fashion their Religion
according to the (...) their profit and case they follow ^ course of the Court
and (...).

1 JOHN 4.^. Hereby know ye the Spirit of God: (...) spirit that confesses
that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is ^^ God.


IT is not rightly translated ( come (...) that Christ was come in the flesh,
as the (...) of Balaam, and the N^^laitans, Hymeneus and Philetus, but it
should (...) translated thus, Christ that has come in the flesh, Christ veiled
over with ^^mane (...).

Doct. That the people of God may well (...) the spirit of their Ministers, by
the confession which their spirits make of Christ come in the flesh.
What is it to confess?

There is a threefold confession in Scripture:

1. To acknowledge the truth, doctrine and worship of Christ, even before
Rulers, Matthew. 22.25. to confess is to profess, to bear witness of the grace
of Christ.

2. (...) of a man's Ministry, as it is said of John John 1.20.

3. There is a conf^sion of a man's work, Tit. 1.16. that is, by our life or
(...) be Savior, Matthew. 1.21. the anointed of the Lord (...) Prophet, and
King, Jesus Christ the second Person in the Trinity, (...) in the flesh, which
is a great mystery 1 Timothy 3.16.

What is it (...) spirit of a Prophet to confess Christ Jesus? By spirit is
not (...) for body 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. but the i^^mation both of soul and body (...)
else it is carnal, sensual, and devilish: when the spirit (...) the bent both
of soul an^ body, the inclination of (...) whole man does ^old forth Christ
Jesus; that is the mighty saving (...) revealed in humane infirmities: What is
Paul's meani^^, when he says I desire to know nothing, 1 Cor. ^.3, 4. He means
he desires to express nothing in his life and (...) Christ Jesus revealed in
the flesh in (...) infirmities: wh^^ the Corinthians (...) a sign of Christ in
(...) acknowledges that for his outside he was weak; but yet he did ex^^ (...)
the mighty ^^ving power of Christ crucified in his Ministry, 2 Cor. 13.3, ^, 5.
and he tells the Galatians, They knew, that through (...) infirmities of the
flesh, he preached the Gospel at the first, Gal. 4, 13, 14, 15. Was any
doctrine weakly delivered? he speaks of his bodily presence, for in his life he
showed such a mighty power of Christ, as that they looked at him as an Angel of
God, yea, they did so affect him, that if it were possible they would have
plucked out their eyes to have does him good.

Reas. (...) ^is cannot (...) from man's nature, for man's spirit comes short of
it, Phil. ^.20. every man s^^ks his own, Demas has forsaken Christ and
embraced this present world, 2 Timothy 4.10. Some men look too high, they look to
their own profits and preferments in (...) and account the seeking to save
souls, a matter not pertainin^ (...) if they preach, they (...) some moral
discourse which (...) those that are looking toward the ways of grace, (...)
the mighty saving power o^ ^^rist Jesus is not (...) their Ministry.

2* It Is not from the spirit o^ (...) spirit far exceeds his spirit, he c^v^^
own Ch^^^ ^^sus, Ezek^. ^ 22. he speaks with envy against Christ, therefore it
must needs ^e the (...) that confesses Christ Jesus come in the flesh.

Use 1: To teach Gods people (...) acq^ainted with the Lord Jesus, or else they
will not be able to discern (...) their Minister in doctrine, (...), and
carriage; it is (...) Saints to express their carnal excellencie^ (...)
complains of the Galatians, that they made a fair show (...) flesh^^ (...) ^^at
make a fair show i^ the flesh, when they come to (...) out, their spirits will
not bear it; a Christian should sa^ of those outward (...) Da^^d of Saul's
armor, if any man will come after Christ, he must (...) wisdom, life, and
carnal excellency* God ^^ts ho^^^r, upon many Christians, and gives them carnal
excellency, but they must take heed that they do not darken the power of the
Lord Jesus Christ (...) by.

2. (...) trial ^^ur estates; (...) whether the bent of our carriage does hold
forth the Lord Jesus in (...) infirmities: God is not affected with our humane
excellencies, (...) please him, when we show forth the hidden man of the heart,
this the (...) exhorts women to, 1 Peter 3.3, 4. Isa. ^2. and 53. there was no
(...) or beauty in Christ, why he should be desired.

3. If there were so many false Prophets in St. John's time, then this reproves
the Papists, that are burdened with traditions, Col. 2.20. they much adore
Venerable Antiquity, as they call it; true indeed, an hoary head is a crown of
glory; but it is when it is found in a way of righteousness.

4. Labor now especially to discern the spirits of your Ministers, for many a
man makes a fair show, has a fair outside, but nothing within him but
rottenness; many again have a fair outside, and as for their inside are like
empty shells, they have no power of godliness, Col. 2.22, 23.

1 JOHN 4.3. And every spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in
the flesh, is not of God; and this is that spirit of Antichrist, whereof you
have heard that it should come, and even now already is it in the world.


Doct. THat the spirit of every Prophet, that holds not out the mighty power of
Christ veiled with humane frailties and infirmities, is not of God but of
Antichrist.
He does not say every Prophet, or every Person, for a good Prophet may
express much weakness, but he says every spirit; whatsoever spirit is in a
Prophet that does express Christ Jesus; if any spirit shall not acknowledge
Christ come in the flesh, as the spirit of Menander did not, such a spirit is
not of God, but of Antichrist.

1. If a man does not express the truth of the Lord Jesus in his Ministry, but
breaths such error in his doctrine as does overthrow the Lord Jesus, such is
not of God, John 14.17. and 16.15. If a man speak truth, and not saving truth,
but only moral truths, he does not press the saving power of the Lord Jesus,
he expresses a spirit of morality, which is not to be disliked; but he does
not hold forth the saving power of the Lord Jesus; and a man must not only
express the saving power of Christ, but the saving power of Christ come in the
flesh; do you see a man revealing Christ in Moral writings, in tinckling
cymbals of man's wisdom, if his spirit relish nothing but affected eloquence,
his spirit is of Antichrist.

2. Do you see the spirit of a Prophet savor of ambition, pomp, and delicacy?
this is the spirit of Popery, this does not hold forth the Lord Jesus.

3. If a man's doctrine do hold forth the Lord Jesus in a tyrannical manner,
making the hearts of those sad whom God would not have made sad, such do not
hold forth Christ.

Reas. Because the whole carriage of the frame of spirit is clean contrary to
the Spirit of the Lord Jesus; for though he be veiled with humane frailties,
John 14.6. Yet he is the way, the truth, and the life, Christ Jesus came riding
upon the Colt of an Ass, he came not in any outward magnificence; when the
people would have made him King, he said, My Kingdom is not of this world, he
did not tyrannize over his people, but he gathers into his arms those that go
astray.

Why does the Holy Ghost say, That that spirit that does not confess Christ
Jesus, is the spirit of Antichrist? He is called Antichrist, quasi anti
Christum, It is called the spirit of Antichrist, because it is against Christ,
contrary to Christ; and this spirit makes way to the errors of Antichrist.

2. Because it does make cold the spirits of people, it makes iniquity to
abound, Matthew. 24.11, 12.

3. Because while Ministers do pump out the doctrine with Heathenish rights,
they have a special care to feed themselves as Demas.

Use 1. This should teach Ministers what frame of spirit they should hold
forth, when they take upon them such an holy and heavenly profession; if they
would approve their hearts to God and his people, they must hold forth the Lord
Jesus Christ in humane simplicity, though men cannot so well try the doctrine
of their Ministers, yet they may try their spirits; Paul desired to know
nothing, 1 Cor. 2.2. that is, to express nothing in his life and doctrine, but
Christ Jesus veiled with humane frailties.

Use 2. A ground of much consolation, when their hearts can bear them witness,
that God has given them a Spirit of saving Truth, not to deliver their
doctrine in carnal excellencies, seeking high matters but in humane simplicity.

3. This reproves men of an Antichristian spirit, who content themselves with
outward flourishings, they know not what hurt they do to the Church of God in
so doing.

4. This may direct the people of God, narrowly to watch the spirits of the
Ministers, as they would be freed from Popery, affect not flourishing
Eloquence, affect not him that has a tyrannical spirit, or him that delivers
only Moral truths; and let the people of God labor to have their hearts
filled with a spirit of truth, and the saving graces of Gods Spirit.

Doct. That the spirit of Antichrist was come into the world in St. John's time,
and as in St. John's time, so in St. Paul's time also:
He speaks of the mystery of Iniquity, that Antichrist did work in his time, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7.

There are three things in the body of Popery:

1. A spirit breathing in it is doctrine, worship, and discipline; the same was
visible in the Apostles time.

1. For the doctrine, there was a spirit of error in their foundation, and
wrought mightily at that time in their hearts, so that men durst not trust the
grace of Christ, a^ if there were not safe holding upon naked Christ; but the
Apostle does utterly inveigh against such, Gal. 5.3, 4, 5. says he, either
trust God for all or nothing, distrusting of grace, or depending on something
in nature or grace received, are the rocks upon which so many souls suffer
shipwreck in Religion at this day.

2. There is a spirit of arrogance, contempt of Magistracy and Government, Jude
verse. 8. looking at the Pope as the Sun in the Firmament; this was flourishing
in the Apostles time, and now also.

2. There is a spirit that breaths in their worship:

1. A spirit of superstition, Col. 2.18. men at that time worshipped Angels,
thus the Papists at this day; but they have more Angels and Saints, to which
they cleave rather then to Christ, they did begin to worship Images, 1 John
5.21. Therefore John blesses his babes from them: men departed from God, and
clave not only to creatures, but the works of men's hands, the same spirit
rules at this day: there was a spirit of hypocrisy, a show of Religion,
without the mighty power of the Lord Jesus showed is any performance, Col.
2.23. they had many things to draw their bodies and they durst not come to the
Lord Jesus, but they must have some Saint or Angel to come to him by: they did
invent courses the Lord did not require; this the Apostle calls a show of
Religion, which is hypocrisy; and so at, this day among the Friars, they have
a show of Religion, they take up worships, which God does dot require, of which
it may be said, Who required those things of you? the Galatians did observe
days, and months, and years, therefore the Apostle is afraid that he has
bestowed his labor in vain upon them, Chap. 4.10, 11.

3. What was the spirit of their discipline and government? they did affect
primacy; the Apostles were no sooner removed out of the world, but this spirit
began to spring up, yea, while some of them lived, John 3.9.

2. That that spirit did affect and exercise tyranny, casting out of the Church
such Ministers as were more faithful, 3 Epist. John 9.10. Diotrephes would not
receive John himself, nor his brethren; nor would suffer those that would;
that spirit has been in the Church of Rome from that day to this. A second
part of their tyranny was, in imposing upon them unprofitable courses,
unprofitable they were because they did perish in the using Col. 2.20, to 22.

3. There was a spirit of coveteousnesse in Ministers, they did not savor the
things of God; but did relish wealth and ambition, Jude 11. they follow the
ways of sin, as Cain did. In Cain there was first hypocrisy, he offers a
sacrifice, and when he saw his brothers sacrifice accepted, being offered in
faith, and his not, there arose in him a spirit of wrath, which ended in
bloodshed; such was the spirit of Popery in Queen Mary's days. Some walk in the
ways of Balaam, the ways of coveteousnesse, putting stumbling blocks before
the people, and that for covetousness sake. Thirdly, some have the gainsaying
spirit of Korah, they gainsay the Ordinances of God; like as he rose up against
M^ses and Aaron; this spirit breathing in Antichristian teachers at this day,
was hatched in the Apostles time. There was a spirit of Schism in the Apostles
time, some saying, I am of Paul and, I of Apollo, etc. 1 Cor. 1.12. and so at
this time among the Papists, Jude v. 19.

Use 1. See the diligence of Satan to sow tares, even in the Apostles times,
therefore Ministers should watch diligently over their people, that no such
spirit be sown in their hearts; Satan will creep in by dissension, the
affections being once distempered, the judgment will soon be corrupted.
Wherefore Ministers and people should have a special care of dissension; for
if dissension creep in, then soon will you have your worship shut up, and then
there will be a woeful wast of Religion.

2. See the impudence of Heretics, that dare look God in the face, and rise
up among his many bright and glorious lights in the Apostles times; but let no
Christians be discouraged by this, but rather the more encouraged to contend
and strive for the faith of Christ.

3. This should teach Scholars, not to take any ancient doctrine for truth
till they have examined it; Though Peter was blessed for the testimony of
Christ, one part of the day, yet he was sharply reproved the same day; trust
not any doctrine almost in regard of the antiquity of it, for it may be
Antichristianism, though in the Apostles times.

4. If we would be growing up in grace from day to day, take we heed of the
spirit of Antichrist; of taking up the worship which God has not commanded,
take we heed of hypocrisy, a spirit of Popery, a show of devotion. Come we to
the Sacrament, as if we would receive the power of the Lord Jesus veiled in
much simplicity: take we heed of the spirit of Cain, Balaam, and Korah,
gainsaying the Ordinances of God; but walk we steadfastly in that Religion we
have received.

1 JOHN 4.4. Ye are of God little children, and have overcome them: because
greater is he that is in you, then he that is in the world.


AS you had before in the former Verse, a sign of the spirit of teachers; so in
these Verses you have a sign of the spirit of hearers, which is double.

First Sign taken from victory, which good hearers have got of bad teachers, a
good hearer is not overcome of bad teachers, but he soon finds them out, and
overcomes them, and this is argued from a double cause.

First, They are of an higher offspring then corrupt teachers are.

Secondly, From the strength and excellency of their spirits, above the spirits
of worldly teachers, Greater is he that is in you, then he that is in the
world. False Teachers are set forth, 1 By their Original. 2 By their false
Doctrine.


He that knows God, hears us; there is another sign of good hearers, they
did hear good teachers; on the contrary, He that is not of God, hears us not.
You see here,

First, A difference between good and bad teachers, good and bad hearers; good
teachers and good hearers are of God; on the contrary, bad teachers and bad
hearers are of the World.

Secondly, Here is a combat between good and bad teachers, and a victory also;
Good hearers do overcome bad teachers.

Thirdly, You have the issue of the conflict; good hearers overcome.

Fourthly, The cause of the victory, is the divine descent and excellency of
their Spirit; greater is he that is in good hearers, then in bad teachers.

Fifthly, Here is a congratulation; little children you are of God.

Doct. That there is in the Church of God two sorts of teachers, and two sorts
of hearers, some of God, some of the world.
Quest. Why are good teachers and good hearers said to be of God?

Answ. 1. They are of God, because they are of a divine Original, they are
born from on high, from the seed of the eternal God, John 8.23. I am from
above, says Christ; and such are those that are regenerate, they are descended
from God: whereas those that have no higher offspring then flesh and blood are
of the world.

2. They both savor and relish that doctrine, Romans 8.15. They that are of the
Spirit of God, savor the things of God, such as hold forth the mighty power of
God veiled in humane frailties, they are of God.

3. He that is of God, has a place in the Church of God, 1 Cor. 12.28. God
sets the members of Christ in the Church, this is a work of God, ver. 18. not
any member of Christ, but the Lord has set him in that place, as all men in
the world cannot fit one member to the body, but it would be both unprofitable
and burdensome, except God join it to the body; so all the men in the world
cannot put one member into the spiritual body, except God put it in; indeed
those that are of the world, they have a place in the Church too, but yet they
are not of the Church, they are superfluous humors, as Christ speaks of the
Pharisees, Mat, 15.13. As it is never well with the body till the noisome
humors be purged out, so the Church will never be well till those superfluous
humors are cut off.

Use. This should teach us all, not to comfort our selves, because we are
members of the Church, that we live under such a Minister, and are baptized, we
must not here rest, as if we were of God, for all this while we go no further
then flesh and blood, and worldly respects lead us, we savor all this time of
the world: we may live civilly and painfully in our Calling, and yet have no
higher plantation in the Church, no higher Offices then worldly: but what are
we the better for this? What do noisome humors in the Church, what though we
be ornaments and supportants, we are not the better for this, we are not all
this while members of the Church, but labor we to be so in the Church as we
may be of the Church, that we be in that place in which God has set us, that
we do daily derive sap and strength from the root Christ Jesus; we must thus
try our hearts, and the spirits of others, and except this frame of spirit be
in us, we are not true members of the Church.

And have overcome: They overcome, therefore there is a conflict.

Doct. That godly hearers and worldly teachers have a conflict, Jude v. 3.
He shows them, that when corrupt teachers should break into the Church, he
would not have godly hearers sit down, but contend and wrestle earnestly for
the faith. Paul stirs up Timothy to war a good warfare, to hold faith and a
good conscience, 1 Timothy 18, 19. Which shows there are two things which good
Ministers and people, and worldly Ministers and people do contend for, viz.
faith and a good conscience; else of faith thou may make shipwreck, and a
good conscience you may turn away.

Quest. In what manner is this conflict acted between bad Ministers and good
people?

A. 1. When bad Ministers contend with good people to pervert their faith, 2 Timothy 2.18, 19. or else they labor to destroy their good conscience; if they
see good Christians make a conscience of keeping the Sabbath, of performing
family duties, and abstaining from sin, bad Ministers will do as much as they
can to pervert their faith, to destroy their good conscience; now the people of
God contend for both.

1 They wrestle with God for a better faith, and a better judgment, Romans
15.30, 31. if they did so for Paul, then much more for themselves.

2 They do observe such as do corrupt their faith, and so are better armed
against them, Romans 16.17, 18. and so are the better able to overcome.

3 Good hearers do admonish bad teachers, to look better to their doctrine,
Col. 4.17. and conversation.

4 If none of those will prevail, they argue with them, and deal seriously
with them, as the blind man (and therefore no great Scholar) did reason with
the Pharisees about Christ, and affirmed that he was a good man, because he did
open the eyes of the blind, John 9.7. to 34. if all this will not prevail,
then they avoid their doctrine, Mat. 22.3, 4. and their leaven, Luke 12.1.

2. They have a care either to remove altogether from their Congregations, or
else depart from them on the Sabbath day. The Levits left their Suburbs and
Possessions, and came to Judah and Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 11.14. and those that
could not sell their possessions, took horses, and rid whither the Word was
faithfully and sincerely taught; when the Shunamitish woman asked her husband
an Ass and a man to go with her to the Prophet, he said, Wherefore will thou
go to him to day, it is neither new Moon, nor Sabbath day, 2 Kings 4.22, 23.
which shows you, that if it had been either new Moon or Sabbath day, she should
have had liberty to go: And so should men that live under bad Ministers, take
their horses, and ride to such places where the Word of God is faithfully
taught; not that people must go from their Ministers, when they preach the
Word of God in truth.

Use 1. This shows how much people are left without excuse, who are ignorant
and graceless, when their Ministers are so; the worse your Ministers are, the
more should you contend to hold fast faith and a good conscience: you must not
plead that you are ignorant men; are you more ignorant then the blind man? he
was never book-learned, if you would show your selves to be Christians, you
must hold forth faith and a good conscience.

2. To exhort people to contend with their Ministers, when they are not of God.

Ye are of God little children, and ye have overcome them.

Doct. As there is a conflict between godly hearers, and worldly teachers, so
godly hearers do overcome.
Who so is born of God does overcome the world, John 5.4. the world not only
of vain glory and reproaches, of covetousness, injury, and losses, but the
world of false Teachers also.

In what does this victory stand? A godly Hearer overcomes worldly Teachers,

First, By trying and examining their doctrine, and finding it to be false; if
he do discover him he overcomes him, Rev. 2.2. by this means he puts them to
shame, as those that have lost the field.

Secondly, When they stand fast in the doctrine of Gods truth and liberty of
Christian profession, whatsoever those false teachers say, James 4.7. Resist
the Devil and he will fly from you, so those false teachers, if you yield not
to their doctrine, you overcome them, Gal. 2.4, 5.

Thirdly, When Gods servants grow so much the more fervent, resolute, and
zealous Christians, by how much the more they see themselves opposed, as David
when he danced before the Ark of the Lord, Michal the daughter of Saul, laughed
at him, but says David, I will yet be more vile then, thus 2 Samuel 6.20, 22.

Fourthly, A man gets ground when he is able to prevail, either by avoiding
them, or by being content to suffer extremity under them; by avoiding them, as
the Levits left their possessions, and went to Judah and Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles.
11.15, 16. when a man cannot overcome them, to hold constant to the death, and
so vincit qui patitur.

Reas. 1. From the blood of Christ, whereby we are sprinkled, Luke 1 74. we are
delivered from the hand of our enemies, verse 68. they overcome by the blood of
the Lamb, Rev. 12.11. Col. 2.13, 14. Christ has triumphed over them openly;
so that we come to fight with wounded enemies, Christ has broke the Serpents
head; we come to finish the victory that Christ has begun for us; were the
Devil and ungodly teachers let loose in their great strength, they would be
too strong for us, but now their teeth are broken.

2. From the mighty power of God that dwells in Gods children, I write to you
young men (says St. John) because you have overcome the wicked one, they are
so balasted with promises and threatenings as that they do not sin against God;
if the Devil or the world promise them earthly things, they have a great many
better promises.

3. From the glories of him that dwells in godly hearers, in respect of him
that dwells in wicked teachers: Who is he that is greater in them? It is the
Spirit of God, Ephesians. 1.22. 1 Cor. 3.16. the Lord dwells in his children by his
Spirit, he is greater then he that dwells in the world.

Quest. Wherein is he greater?

Answ. In all those things whereby men atchieve victory, Isa. 26.5. To the
obtaining of a victory there are required three things, wisdom, strength, and
watchfulness.

First, For wisdom, David says, I have more wisdom and understanding then
all my teachers, Psalm. 119.98, 99, 100. God had so taught him by his Word, that
he came to get more understanding then his old teachers, he does not speak this
in way of arrogance, only he does comfort himself hereby, God teaches
wisdom secretly, Psalm. 51.6.

Secondly, God puts a renewed strength and power into their souls, by which
they are mighty to overcome all their enemies, Ephesians. 6.10. Phil. 4.13. and
whereby they are able to do and suffer all things.

Thirdly, They are greater in watchfulness, which when it is wanting then they
fall; they never want wisdom and strength, but then it is the fault of Gods
servants to wax fat, and to kick up the heel against God, and to forget the
great things he has done for them; and then though they have their armor
about them, yet are they beat back by worldly teachers, and beat almost dead,
so that you shall scarce see them pant: but now at this time, greater is he
that is in them, then he that is in worldly teachers, for they do rise again,
and get greater strength, and overcome mightily, Mark 14.37, 38. Watch and pray
that ye enter not into temptation, so that when we have most need of watching
and prayer, then we are least able; because Peter could not watch with our
Savior, therefore he fell away most grievously; which shows when Gods servants
put on a careless spirit, and do not make use of their wisdom and strength
they have received, they come to be foiled, yet there is a seed in them, by
which they do overcome all their enemies, yea themselves also. Hence David
breaks forth into praising of the Name of the Lord, Psalm. 144.1. the people of
God are blessed with the blessings of God, Genesis 49.19. they shall overcome at
the last, in which respect they may well be said to be of his Tribe. How comes
a man to overcome at his first conversion? God puts forth such a mighty arm of
watchfulness, wisdom and strength, as that he overcomes the Devil, Luke
11.21. thus he overcomes the world, Gal. 1.4. John 15.19. he is crucified to
the world, and the world to him. He does then crucify the flesh, with the
affections and lusts, Gal. 5.24. so that he looks at them all as ignominious
and deadly enemies, and if Christ shows himself thus strong when a man comes
on to grow, what will he do when Christians grow more strong in wisdom,
grace, strength, and watchfulness.

Use 1. This reproves every one that excuses himself, and thinks he may
lawfully grow worse under bad and worldly teachers, they cannot do as they
have done, they cannot walk on in that power and strength, which they did
before; what is the reason, has a worldly teacher overcome you? What a shame
is it for a Christian man that has the seed of God in him, to suffer himself
to be overcome of worldly teachers? It is an ill sign for Christians to grow
worse because of bad teachers: it is a great shame, that God should give place
to the Devil, that the children of God should give place to the children of
the world, and of the Devil.

2. This should teach all Gods children to war against all worldly teachers,
with the wrestlings of God, with strong wrestlings, and not give over the
conflict, for they are upon certain grounds of victory; if you stand but out,
you shall overcome, for Christ has overcome, and his promises and threatenings
are greater then those of the world and of Satan.

3. A ground of much consolation and assurance to Gods children of
perseverance, for if any thing could separate them from God, then it must be,
either the world, the Devil, or lusts of their own flesh, but none of these
can. Ergo, Romans 8.15. to the end.

1 JOHN 4.5, 6. They are of the world, therefore speak they of the world, and
the world hears them.

We are of God: he that knows God, hears us; he that is not of God, hears
not us: hereby know we the spirit of truth, and the spirit of error.


Doct. THat according to the several descents of Ministers, such are their
several doctrines and several hearers.
Quest. What is it to be a worldly teacher?

Answ. 1. Teachers are said to be of the world, because it is their natural
frame and temper to be worldly, John 3.23. There be several descents of
Ministers, some have no other spirits then that they draw from their Parents,
but the Spirit of God comes down from God upon some Ministers, and makes them
walk by another rule then worldly men do.

2. Worldly men savor the things of the world; if a man be of a divine Spirit,
he relisheth divine matters, the saving of the souls of Gods people, he
relisheth the danger of sin; but a worldly teacher, he relisheth preferment and
housekeeping, his spirit reaches no higher.

3. The end of worldly teachers are worldly. And

First, To draw disciples after them, Acts 20.30.

Secondly, They have respect to their wages of unrighteousness, they love
only to live in pleasure, and keep a good house, 2 Pet. 2.13. But godly
Ministers labor to make Disciples for God, Mat. 28.19, 20. they make not
disciples for themselves; for what is Paul? or what is Apollos? They do not
seek their hearers goods, but their souls good, they look for their pleasure in
another world, 2 Cor. 12.15. According to the descents of Ministers, such are
their doctrine, and such are their hearers; wordly teachers speak of the World,
and from worldly principles, and from worldly helps, and to worldly ends.

Quest. What is meant by the world?

Answ. 1. The world is a mass of mankind, that lies in a state of corruption,
such as fell in Adam, and never rise again, of whom it is said, you are of the
world, John 15.19. wicked men are called the world, because they are but flesh
and blood, John 3.6.

2. They savor of those things that are of the world, every man speaks of
matters in his own element.

3. Because most of the world are such, 1 John 5.19. the world lies in
wickedness, take up their rest therein.

4. Because they have their portion in this world, Psalm. 17.14. but a child of
God looks for another inheritance, immortal and undefiled, 1 Pet. 1.4. Again,
those that are of the world would not have their conscience troubled, they
would go home in peace, and possess all they have in peace; but those that
are of God, they do relish the things of God, they cannot relish worldly
teachers, because they speak not to the conscience, nor show how to lay hold of
eternal life, and to make their calling and election sure, and if they speak
of heavenly matters at any time, they see such speak but with a cold affection,
and therefore they go home, and not affect them; but when a godly Minister
preaches in an heavenly manner, he being moved by a godly principle, his
conversation is in Heaven, Phil. 3.20. he talks of Heaven, Mat. 12.35. A good
man out of the good treasure of his heart, brings forth good things.

Use. If Ministers would know their own spirits, let them consider what
doctrine they deliver, what end they aim at, and what are their hearers, and
so by this means, they will easily discern their own spirits.

1 JOHN 4.7, 8. Beloved, let us love one another: for love is of God; and every
one that loves, is born of God, and knows God, etc.


IN the words and the verse following, the Apostle exhorts his hearers, and
himself to mutual love one of another, the occasion is from what he had
delivered, verse 6.

In the words, First, An exhortation to mutual love between Ministers and
people.

Secondly, A reason to press this on them: 1 From the Original of their love,
that is, from God. 2 From the Estate of such who love, they are born of God,
and know God. 3 From the evil estate of such as do not love, they know not
God: this is proved by an argument from Gods Nature, for God is love.


Doct. That it is the part of godly Ministers, to exhort themselves and their
godly hearers to mutual love, both the people to love their Ministers, and the
Ministers their people.
When our Savior was about to leave the charge of the souls of his people to
Peter, he asked him three several times, whether he loved him, John 21.15, 16,
17. that so out of his abundant love to Christ, he might feed his sheep, 1
These. 5.13. esteeming him, they would love him for his work sake. Heb. 10.24.
the Apostle exhorts them to provoke one another to love, Heb. 13.1. whatsoever
happens, he would have brotherly love to continue, so St. Peter exhorts, 1 Pet.
1.22.

Reas. 1. From the Covenant that stands between Ministers and people, they are
partakers of one baptism, members of one and the same body, 1 Cor. 10.17. and
1 Cor. 12.27. therefore they should enlarge themselves one to another, Ephesians.
4.16. they should love one another, because God has incorporated them into one
body.

2. Because they do not receive mutual edification, except all be done in
love, for all edification is wrought by love. Knowledge puffs up, but love
edifieth, therefore let all things be done in love; mutual love is both
profitable and comfortable.

3. Want of love, is the sowring of a Ministers spirit, 2 Cor. 12.20. it
saddens him when he sees the people envying one another; when the body is full
of swellings and inflammations, the medicines and plasters laid on do not
heal, a man must first allay the inflammations; so when a Minister sees swelling
amongst his people, what he preaches is spilt upon the ground.

4. If people walk not in mutual love, the Minister shall lose his portion 1
These. 5.13, from them, he shall lose his estimation among them, for they will
not profi^ by any Ordinance of God, but wax cold.

Use. 1. This exhorts Ministers to make it their main and principal work to
alla^ swellings, and to knit together all the Members of a Congregation in one
spirit, and mutual love, as God knits them together in one body; as we desire
to grow up together in the graces of Gods Spirit, let us love one another;
where there is no love, there is no edifying, all graces fall short of
edifying, where love is wanting, 1 Cor. 13.1, 2.

2 To exhort the people of God to receive this exhortation of love, not to
suffer any dissension to be found among them, Heb. 13.17. you cannot be
inflamed with hatred, but your Minister shall lose his portion of love.

Doct. That the springing of our love from God, should move Ministers and
people to mutual love.
Love is the chief lesson Christ gave to his Disciples, when he went out of
the world, John 13.35, 36. 2 Timothy 1.13. a man may as soon lose his inheritance
in the Lord Jesus, as lose his love to his brethren, if God set love in my
soul, and man unset it, I shall destroy the work of God in my soul.

Use 1. Take heed of wrath; if love be of God, whence then is hatred? that is
from the enemy of God, Ephesians. 4.26, 27. if we keep leaven long, it will sour, so
this anger will degenerate into hatred.

Obj. You will say, You will not hate your brother, but yet you will have
nothing to do with him.

Answ. When a man affects not Communion with his brother, nor communication of
good to him, such a man does hate his brother.

2. If we would have any comfort in our hearts, we must have a care, that
nothing that befalls betwixt us and our brethren should take away our love from
them; if we suffer a fire of wrath to kindle in us, we do as much as in us
lies to destroy our own souls, Cant. 7.7, 8. Much water cannot quench love,
therefore love is an heavenly fire, hatred a fire from hell. Majus lumen
extinguet minus.

Doct. That the love to our brethren, is a pledge of our birthright, John
13.34.
Reas. 1. It is the nature of God, and by this means thou partakest of the
Divine Nature, Romans 5.5.

2. Love is a fruit of faith, by which we receive Christ, Gal. 5.6.

Use 1. This condemns such of deep prodigality as suffer love to decay; so much
you lose of your love to your brethren, so much you lose of your love to God,
and so much you lose of the evidence of your inheritance.

2. Preserve your love to your brethren, and you preserve your inheritance;
your brotherly love is a pledge of your inheritance.

3. Of comfort to such souls, as abound in their love to their brethren; so
much love, so much grace, so much hope of an everlasting inheritance: if your
love decays, your faith and hope of salvation decays.

Obj. But a little thing frets my soul, and I am not so soon healed being
fretted; some flesh is hard to heal, so is it with some men's spirits: What
shall I do to uphold my brotherly love?

Answ. 1. Keep your love to God, and so you shall preserve your love to your
brethren; forgive your brethren, and God will forgive you, Mat. 18. ult.

2. Keep your hearts clean; love will not long rest in an unclean heart, 1 Pet.
1.22. because love is an heavenly fire.

1 JOHN 4.8. He that loves not, knows not God, for God is love.


Doct. THat according to our love, or want of love to our brethren, such is our
knowledge, or want of knowledge of God.
What is it to know God? The Apostle bears witness of the Corinthians, 1 Cor.
1.5. that they abound in knowledge, so that they fall short of no gift, yet 1
Cor. 1.10. he complains that there is schism among them; therefore there may be
knowledge of God, and yet want of love to our brethren.

Answ. 1. The knowledge that is there spoken of, is a knowledge that enlightens
the understanding, that puffes up and swims in the brain, it sinks not into
their hearts and affections.

2. There is a knowledge that reaches to the heart and life of a man, a man is
said not to know, when he does not acknowledge, Psalm. 1.6. The Lord knows the
way of the righteous, the Lord approves, affects and delights in their way;
when a man does not regard, he is said not to know, Mat. 7.23. Known unto God
are all his works, Acts 15.18,

3. There is a knowledge that does express its self in action, Know you the
God of thy Fathers, 1 Chronicles. 18.9. 1 Samuel 2.12. the Sons of Eli they knew not
God, though Priests, yet knew not the way of Religion, because they were wicked
children without yoke, they are not acquainted with the ways of the Lord.

Reas. 1. From the nature of God both in his attributes and works, both
express in abundance, that those that know God, cannot but love their
brethren; for no attribute does so much express the nature of God, as this of
love.

2 If we know God, and be acquainted with God, there will be some likeness
between God and us; if we see God loving godly Ministers and hearers, so will
we, Gal. 6.10.

3. From the impression which the love of God makes in our hearts, Romans 5.5.
our hearts are like to a stone-wall in a cold day, the wall is cold always, but
warmed on a Sunshine day.

4. From our love to God: What causes you to love God? if for this, because he
pardons your sins, and saves your souls, this a man may do by a spirit of
false love; he that loves God truly, will love him for his goodness, not only
to us, but to others.

Use 1. This may be a ground of trial of our love and fellowship with God; if
you find in your hearts an unfeigned love to godly Ministers; if you make Gods
serv^nts the men of your delight, you need no better evidence from Heaven, that
you are beloved of God.

Obj. I am acquainted with many godly Ministers and good men.

Answ. Consider, whether thou love them for thy own sake, because they may be
helpful to thee, this is from self-love; but do thou love a Minister or a
Christian for his goodness sake, for his likeness to God, for his graces and
virtues? this is a sign thou love him not for thy sake, but Gods.

2. This exhorts every such soul as desires fellowship with God, to be
acquainted with God, to love their brethren; you come to the Ordinances of God,
and you find not Christ; you come into Christian Communion, and find little
comfort; know this, that according to your love to your brethren, such is Gods
love to you; if there be any strangeness in you to any brethren, this will
make God strange to you, all the affections we find in prayer, in reading,
preaching, or any Ordinance of God, they will prove but delusions, if we love
not our brethren.

1 JOHN 4.9. In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that
God sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him.


THe second Argument to move us to brotherly love, is taken from the example of
God the Fathers love to us ward.

A third argument is taken from the benefit which such receive, which walk in
love among themselves.

The benefit is twofold:

1 They have fellowship with God, they see the face of God, and find God
dwelling within them, to verse 16.

The second benefit is, they grow up to perfection, without love there is no
growth of grace.

These words then contain an argument to move us to love our Brethren, and it is
taken from Gods love; Wherein we have

1 The manifestation of Gods love.

2 The Object, toward us.

3 The evidence thereof, because he sent his Son.

4 The place whereto he sent his Son, and that is, into the world, as also with
the end, that we might live through him.

In this was manifested the love of God toward us.

Doct. That God does not only bestow love upon his people, but it is his good
pleasure to manifest it, Romans 5.8, Psalm. 98.2, 3. Isa. 52.10.
There is the mighty power of God by which he overcomes all our sins, by which
he redeemeth us, Luke 3.6. All flesh shall see the salvation of our God, yea
more then all flesh, for it is manifested.

1 To the Angels, Luke 2.13, 14.

2 To men's consciences, Romans 5.8. Gal. 2.20. God commonly gives us no gifts,
but he is willing his Spirit should show unto us his love.

3 This love of God is manifested to the rest of mankind, Rev. 3.9.

Reas. From Gods glory, Luke 2.14. the high praises of God were in their
mouths; Jerusalem shall be comforted, because God will make bare his arm in
the redemption of his people, Isa. 52.9, 10.

2 If God did not reveal our salvation to us, it would be no comfort to us, but
when it is manifested, it is a ground of joy.

3 It Is a means to draw on many men into the unfeigned love of God, which
otherwise might be left in darkness, Zech. 8.23. When the love of God, is
manifested to the children of men, it does raise them up to seek God, Cant.
5.16. therefore the daughters of Jerusalem are provoked to seek Christ Jesus
with the rest of his people; when they discern what a gracious God he is to
them that cleave to him in a conjugall affection, Psalm. 106.45. this
encourages them that are coming on in the ways of grace, and discourageth
them that do not, and convinces them that are of the Synagogue of Satan, who
know that he is the Lord.

Use 1. This should teach the servants of God not only to bear an hidden love,
but also a manifest love to Christ; now indeed are the time, wherein men need
not be ashamed to manifest their love; but if times grow hard, then men will
come to Christ by night, as Nicodemus did; but God requires, if he manifest his
love to your conscience, that you should make it known to the world, and not to
be like Joseph of Arimathea, and Nicodemus, Joh. 9.38, 39. If we be ashamed of
him in the world, he will be ashamed of us before his Father, Mark 8, 38. when
Christ hung on the Cross, Joseph came in boldly to Pilate, and asked the body
of Jesus, Mark. 15.43, which shows you, that where there is truth of grace,
though it be close at the first coming on, yet when there is danger indeed,
every man will put forth himself to bear witness to the truth.

Doct. That God bare love to us before he sent his Son to reconcile us to
himself.
The sending of Christ into the world, was out of free love, for his love moved
him to send Christ, Romans 5.8. John 3.16. Christ says God so loved the world
that he gave hu only begotten Son into the world, etc.

Reas. He dyed for us to make an atonement for us, Christ did not come unsent,
he was sent before he went, Heb. 5.45.

Quest. How can this be, seeing the death and blood of Christ is the Original
of our reconciliation? Romans 5.10. Rom, 3.24, 25.

Answ. 1. Christ by his blood wrought reconciliation, because God loved us
before, yet we loved not him before, for there must be a mutual fellowship in
reconciling us to God, 2 Cor. 5.16. not so much in reconciling himself to the
world, in the 20. verse, he says we pray you in Christ's stead, which shows
you that Christ's blood did not so much reconcile God to us, as us unto God,
that we seeing the blood of Christ shed for us, we might be stirred up to love
God, who out of the abundance of his compassion takes a course, that we may be
brought unto him.

2 Because though he did bear love to us before, yet his love was secret, and
he did not break forth into a manifestation of his love to us, until he sent
his Son into the world: though God did love us with an everlasting love, Jer.
31.3. yet God did not manifest it to our conscience, neither could it stand
with his Justice so to do, until he had given his Son the Lord Jesus Christ
to dye for us.

Quest. What kind of love was it, that God bare to the world in that he sent
his Son, Tit. 3.5. was it his love toward mankind, by which he did love the
whole world, or a peculiar love which he bare to the people of the Election of
grace? Joh. 3.16. The Arminians say, that he bare a love to the World, and this
love was general to all, before the sending of Christ, and therefore all may
be saved.

The truth is, that God bare a love to the world, a (...) reaching to all, but
he bare an ancient love to his own people, had he only bore a general love
(as they say) all men might have perished, for if God sent his Son, that
whosoever believed, should be saved, was it in the will to believe or not? yes
say they, he gave them means, but they might will or not; if this was a
general love, then there was a greater love, then the sending of Christ, which
is contrary to Scripture, Greater love then this has no man.

Use 1. Let us magnify the love of God to us in Christ, we esteem much of
ancient love, it (like wine) is the best, God loved us, before he did send
Christ, before the foundation of the world was laid Jer. 31.3. This love was
without reason on our parts, for we were enemies to him.

2 This exhorts us to accept this love, shall God send his Ambassadors, 2 Cor.
5.20. and shall we still stand out with God?

3 If God so loved the world, we ought to love one another.

Doct. God sending his only begotten Son into the world, is a manifest token of
Gods love to us.
John 3.16. God so loved the world, this love is manifest.

1 If we consider, that God does not only send us bodily bread every day, but
the bread of eternal life, not so much the gift, as the giver himself.

2 Consider upon what terms we stood with God, when he sent us his on? Even
then when we provoked him to his face, and were enemies to his Majesty, Romans
5.8.

3 Consider we that God looked not at the Angels, but the seed of man, God
passed over Angels, left them in chains of darkness, Heb. 2.16. but of man he
said, shall he fall and not rise again?

Consider we were strangers and enemies to God; dead in sins and trespasses*
and so we did neither desire nor deserve love, yet us he has reconciled, Col.
1.21. Ephesians. 2.4, 5.

4 Consider Christ who was sent, had it been a morsel of daily bread, it had
been a great mercy, but in Christ he sent an horn of salvation, Psalm. 89.19.
Luke 1.69.

Consider Christ, not as a servant, but a Son, and a well-beloved Son in whom
he was well pleased, and such a Son as thought it no blasphemy to think and
say, he was equal with God, Phil. 2.5, 6.

5 Consider whither God sent his Son, into the world; our salvation could not
be wrought in heaven, it was no place for suffering, no place for a man to be
born in; therefore needful that Christ should come down.

Consider, the world did not put on Christ that honor which was due unto him,
but rather dishonor, a Crown of thorns.

Consider, the more the world knew him; the more they hated him; in heaven they
adore and honor him; but you have known me and hated me, says he, John 15.18.
This is the heir, come, let us kill him.

Use 1 Learn hence to acknowledge the Divinity of the nature of Christ, he is
called the only begotten Son of God, therefore of the same nature with God,
Phil. 2.5, 6.

2 This shows you the love of the Father to us, in that he sends his Son to be
a ransom for us; when all other signs fail you; if God give you his only Son,
that is a true token of Gods love, Eccles. 9 1.

3 This shows us the woeful misery that we naturally ly in, when as Christ
must come down from heaven, or else we could not have heen saved, no man nor
Angel could do it.

4 This should stir us all up to accept of this love of God, that God sends
forth such a manifest token of his love to us; and shall not we accept of it?
We should accept a small gift from a Prince.

5 To persuade us all, that if God gives Christ, he will deny us nothing, Romans
8.32. we may go boldly to the throne of grace, and he will fill our mouths.

6 This should cause us to return back again to God, manifest pledges of our
love to him, let us give body and soul to God, since he has not been wanting
in his love to us; does not love require love? Psalm. 116.12. Train we up our
children to know God; and draw we as many as we can to know God: there is no
greater dishonor to God, then to refuse this manifest love of God. The end for
which God sent his Son into the world was, that we might live through him.

Doct. That our life was the end why God sent Christ: Or thus; God therefore
sent Christ, that we might live by him* Joh. 1.10, 11.
Quest. What is the life that Christ came to procure for us?

Answ. 1. A life of Gods favor in points of Justification, sanctification, and
consolation, that is the chiefest life for the soul of a christian, the
manifestation of Gods love to his conscience; though God loved us before he
sent Christ, yet we knew not so much: there is a life of Justification, Romans
5.18. that is, the pardon of our sins.

In his favor is life, Psalm. 30.5. The Sun is the life of many Vermin, take
away the Sun, and they dye, as flies; but when the Sun shines in its season
they live; let God take away the Sunshine of his favor from us, we can
neither pray nor preach, we live a life of grace, of holiness, Prove. 16.14,
15. Romans 8.2. Ephesians. 2.4, 5. there is life enougst in Christ, to procure us
life.

2 There is a life of glory, of which it is said, John 10.27, 28. That Christ
gives to his sheep eternal life, 1 Cor. 15.4, 5. John 5.24, 28, 29. so many
whose souls receive life by the Word of the Gospel, their bodies shall rise to
eternal life.

How did Christ procure us this life?

He procured this by his death, Romans 5.9, 10. while we were yet enemies, we
were yet reconciled by the death of Christ.

We received life of grace and holiness by his means, I will pour out my
Spirit of grace upon all flesh.

Reas. 1. It was unpossible our corrupt nature should fulfill any law of God,
Romans 8.4. Gal. 3.21.

2 The glory of Christ requires, that as the Father quickneth, so he also, John
5.21.

Use 1. This shows us what our condition is without Christ, if God send
Christ, that we might live through him, then in Gods fight without Christ, we
are dead, as dead flies, dead worms in a cold frost; we are utterly dead
without true peace, we are like thorns that give a blaze; but we lie down in
sorrow, Isa. 50.11. Christ is our life, without him we can do nothing, we are
not able to put forth any spiritual action.

2 Let us try our estates, Whether can we say that God sent his Son into the
world, and hereby manifested his love to us? Do you live in Gods sight?
without him we are but dry bones, until we can say we live in Christ, we
cannot say we have any sense of Gods favor.

3 It teaches such as have any evidence of life in Christ, Joh. 10.10. to come
into Gods presence, as dry bones, entreat God that he would so speak the word,
as that those dry bones may live.

4 To teach all such as have received this manifest token of Gods love, to
acknowledge the Lord Christ to be their life, Phil. 1.21. For me to live is
Christ, and to dye is gain; now Paul is crucified with Christ, Gal. 2.20. and
now for him to live is Christ; now every day he lives, he does the more
express Christ.

1 JOHN 4.10. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and
sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins.


Doct. THe love of God to us, was not procured by our love to him, but his own
good pleasure; he therefore loved us, because it pleased him.
So that in these words, we have the freeness of Christ's love, he loved us
freely, because he loved us, when we loved not him, we did not begin in love to
him, but he to us; and this is set out by the effect and end of it, the pardon
of our sins.

What is that love God bare to us, before we loved him?

Answ. There is a threefold principle of love, which God magnifies and
manifests to his people, before they love him.

1 That love whereby he chose us to life, and to redeem us by Christ, 2 Timothy
1.9. and the choice to life was not according to works, but free grace.

2 Gods love in redeeming us by Christ, was before any love of ours to God,
Joh. 3.16.

3 His love prevented us, by effectually calling us; drawing implies
unwillingnesse, therefore it prevented all good affections in us: he must draw
us out of presumption, then out of despair.

Reas. From the difference between the care of Gods love and of our love, self
love is so ^iveted in our hearts, that we cannot love any, unless it be for
some cause concerning us; a natural man loves none any further then tends to
profit or pleasure; but a Christian is enlarged to all Gods children, he loves
them all; and the ground of this is, because we know such to be incorporated
into the same body with us, and so as we see them in some kind our own; and so
we should never have loved God, unless we had found his love to us.

Object. A christian comes off freely to many ^ffices of love to them, that
love not him.

Answ. True, but it is because he knows God can abundantly recompense it, they
sometimes may lay down their lives for their brethren, and for the Truth; but
they know that Christ has done it for them before.

2 From the eternity of Gods love, now Jer. 31.3. an everlasting love can have
no cause; the cause is always before the effect: no temporal thing can be the
cause of an eternal love.

3 From the end of Gods love, that he might bring us to walk in love, Ephesians.
1.4. Tit. 2.14. The love of God to his people of old, is a fir president to all
his children, Deuteronomy. 7.8, 9. compared with Deuteronomy. 9.4, 5, 6.

Use 1. Refutes a popish and Arminian conceit, that God chooses none to life,
but out of foreseen faith and good works, else he had chosen none to life, but
this is a mercenary love: let a servant labor never so hard, yet he knows he
shall be well paid at the years end; and therefore it is servile love, this is
that love which they would put upon God.

2 It exhorts all to begin betimes to love God; begin never so soon, God has
prevented us, Romans 11.35. it was an early love of Josiah, at twelve years of
age when he sought after God, but Gods love was up before him; you cannot be in
your love before him, though you begin as soon as you are warm in the womb,
John Baptist was very early, when he leaped for joy in the womb, yet Gods love
was before him; an Angel had appeared to his Father, and had promised a
blessing, before John was begotten.

3 To teach old people, if God have prevented them with love long before, how
should this stir them up to love God, and to be humbled for the want of love to
God, that has loved them so long? Shall we be to seek in our love to God and
cleave to worldliness in our old times, and let God stay till our children be
provided for? What an unworthy dealing is this with God? This should exhort all
Gods servants that have had experience of Gods love, to acknowledge the
freedom of Gods love. Job by Gods testimony, was a man that feared God and
eschewed evil: What says the Devil, Does Job serve God for naught? No, but
though God had stripped him of all, as he did, yet he had showed such mavelous
love to his soul, as that he had just cause to love God for ever if God should
not have bestowed on him one dram of wealth.

4 This should teach Gods children, to be as observant in love to Gods children
as God is to them, to love them freely, to do kindness to them freely, Psalm.
16.2, 3.

Obj. If a man be thus free to others, he shall empty himself?

Answ. Do you think that ever any man served God for naught? Did Jobs care
over the poor draw him dry? No, he multiplied it abundantly.

5 Comfort to all Gods servants that have tasted of this love; he that loves
you freely, loves you for ever, because his love stands not upon condition: he
that loved us when we were enemies, will he hate us when we are acquainted with
him, and reconciled? We shall not be worse then we were before, and if he loved
us, because he would love us, his love will for ever remain.

Doct. That the sending of Christ for our sakes was, a fruit not only of his
love, but of his free love, Romans 5.8, 4.
Herein is love, John 3.16. God so loved the world, implying there was a love
of God that moved him to send Christ before we did believe, that believing on
him, we might have mercy and salvation: Love is said to be free in two respects.

1 When love is granted, without nny desert on their parts to whom it is
granted, and then it is so much the greater, when there is no fitness of the
persons that receive it, but, rather the contrary; if men shall deserve our
love, our love is not free; Gods love is so free as that he sent his Son into
the world to redeem us, when we did not deserve it, but rather wrath Col. 1.21.

2 Love is said to be free, when it is without condition, so that nothing on
our parts, shall take away his love, Jer. 31.34. He will not remember their
sins any more.

Object. But why then is faith required, Joh. 3.16. and verse 36. He that
believes in the Son, shall have everlasting life.

Answ. True indeed, there is a condition required, but in what sort? It is
this, That the same God that requires the condition, does promise likewise,
that he will work the condition; and therefore the love of God is free.

Object. But we did bring something to God, that did make him deal thus
graciously with us?

Answ. Ezekiel. 36.32, 33. the Lord does show mercy freely, without any condition
on our parts, Be ashamed and confounded O house of Israel.

Object. God requires faith on my part, but faith is a supernatural gift,
nature cannot reach to it, he that believes shall be saved, but he that
believes not shall be damned. The condemnation is unjust because it is not in
my power to believe.

Answ. He is condemned, because light is come into the world, and men love
darkness more then light.

Reas. 1. Is taken from the estate in which we lay before Christ was sent into
the world we were then strangers and enemies, Col. 1.21. we were not fit to
receive mercy, much less to deserve any.

2 This God did that the glory of his great name might appear, Ephesians. 1.5, 6,
7. Deuteronomy. 7.8. God did not love us, because we were many, but because it pleased
him to love us: there is a great difference in the death of Christ, in respect
of his own and the wicked; the benefit they have by Christ's death is this, that
they partake of Gods patience and bounty: for the same day that Adam sinned, he
and his posterity should have dyed, Genesis 3.15. But the benefit that the godly
have, is, that we might live, and that we might all come to the knowledge of
his grace, 2 Pet. 3.9. Romans 2.4, 5. so that if they ask why God is patient to
the world, it is for Christ's sake, Exodus 33.1. to 5.

3 God sent Christ into the world, that so he suffering, his Elect might
suffer, he growing, they might grow, and he dying, they might dye, Col. 2.29.
There is a difference between Christ's dying for the world, and for the elect;
He so dyed for the Elect, as that he prayed that his death might be effectual
to them, John 17.9.20, 21. he prays for all them that shall believe in him, he
prays not for the world.

Use 1. This refutes an error of the Papists, that Christ was equal in his
love to all the world, and that without difference God sent his Son for the one
as well as for the other; they say God does not bestow his love without
condition; this we deny.

2 This teaches us that have pardon of sins, to acknowledge Gods love, in that
he sent his Son freely, Romans 5.8.

3 A ground of comfort, if God so loved us, when we loved not him, then how
much more being reconciled? Romans 5.8, 9, 10.

4 To teach those that have not found reconciliation with God, what course to
take to be reconciled, 1 John 2.2. get the Lord Jesus Christ to be a
Propitiatory Sacrifice.

Doct. That Christ (...) to be a (...) for^^^ s^^^.
What is meant by P^^pip^^^?

This word signi^^^ four thi^^^

1 It signifies a pledge, satisfaction, or ^^^emption, (...) some, (...) 35.31,
32. Heb. 12.24. the blood of Christ being spilt for our sins, spe^^^ better
things then the blood of Abel, his blood cried for vengeance, Christ's that I
might receive a ransom.

2 It signifies a gift to appease wrath, Genesis 32.20.

3 It signifies (...) surety to undergo wrath for another (...) Pr^^^. 21.18.
Rev. 12.11.

4 It signifies a covering not such a covering a^ the g^^^ to the (...) a
covering is a plaster, for the word signifies of the (...), pitch, G^^^. ^4.
this keeps the Ar^ from the in jury of the water, and to signifies s^^^nes to
pitch as a man does a wound: this blood of Christ will (...) are and purge away
all our sins, as a plaster does a sore; God sent Christ in to plaster us, as
to keep us from the ways of his wrath, and to purge away the filth of our
souls.

Reas. 1. Taken from the insufficiency of other thi^ (...) make away sin, Heb.
10.1. to 10. Psalm. 40.11. the bl^^d of ^^ls and Beasts could (...) ^^tisfie
Gods wrath.

1 Because they are but finite creatures, and these things it cannot b^o^
reason, that such base creatures, worse then men should be a propitiation for
(...) sins.

2 Bulls and Goats never dye willingly, but by force; and (...) most patient,
yet did they but know, what evil (...) would (...), they would be readyer to
run away, then come to the place of (...).

Reas. 2. Because of the disproportion of all other things, and the pi^^^ of
atonement; we by our sins have provoked God to infinite displeasures. Now that
gift which must appeal Gods wrath, most be infinite, and that is only Christ
Jesus.

Use 1. This holds forth unto us the wonderful wisdom, justice, land grace of
God that are met together; it was Gods wisdom that he took suc^ a course, as
would reconcile us to himself, neither men nor Angels could have done it;
wherefore when no creature would serve the ^u^n, God sends his Son to suffer
for us. Then see the grace of God, that he would send his Son to be a
Propitiation for us, and to be a surety for us, to drink up all the dreggs of
his Fathers wrath for us.

2 This shows the exact justice of God, though he be infinitely compassionate
and gracious, yet he will be satisfied; and yet rather then the creature should
perish in suffering, God in his infinite wisdom devised a mean, how all our
sins should be done away.

2 This sets forth the wonderful miserable estate that we had plunged our
selves into, so great, as that all the men in world, and all the Angels in
heaven, because finite creatures, could not have delivered us.

3 This shows us what course to take to have our sins pardoned; If God have
sent his Son to be a Propitiation for our sins, we must take the same course
that they did of old, Levit. 4.4. we must confess all our sins, and offer up
Christ, and entreat God that Christ's blood may speak better things then the
blood of Abel.

4 This may be a ground of trial, whether we have found Christ Jesus to be a
Propitiation for our sins: see whether his blood has been sprinkled on thy
soul; so that now thou find peace in thy soul.

But how shall I know whether I have found true peace, for there is a peace
when the strong man armed keeps the house? Luke 11.

Answ. Satan's peace is not a peace which passes understanding, Phil. 4.7. Gods
peace does; when a man has peace which passes understanding, it is such a
peace, as is careful to preserve it self, and (...) then a man will loos it,
he will loos all the world.

5 This is a comfort to all such souls, for whose sins Christ is a
propitiation; he makes now the Father to be reconciled to them, and well
pleased with them.

1 JOHN 4.11. Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another.


This is the conclusion of the argument, stirring up to the love of one
another; here heaven and earth meet as it were in one exhortation.

Doct. Such love of God to us, is a president and pattern of like love in us to
our Brethren.
How did God so love us?

So as is described in the two former verses, set forth to be 1. a manifest
love, verse. 9. Gal. 4.4

2 A bountiful and large love, he spared not his Son, he sent him out of his
bosom into the world: a man will not send his Son into an ill air.

3 When we loved not God, when we were enemies and strangers, he cast about how
he might by sending his Son reconcile us to himself: this is free gracious
love; so we should love one another, in manifest, bountiful, gracious love:
see some Scripture pressing this president, Ephesians. 5.1, 2. if he has so loved
us, as he has given himself an offering of a sweet savor, the more good
offices should we do to Gods people, expose our selves to in jury for them,
Ephesians. 4.32.

Reas. 1. This argument is of great force, as the Apostle applies it, both to
the subject and object of this love.

1 In regard of us that are beloved of God; children should be like the
parents, therefore the Apostle presses the argument from our near conjunction
with God, Ephesians. 5, 1. and the resemblance that ought to be between God and us,
Mat. 5.44, 45. as we look to approve our selves as children of such a kind,
gracious tender hearted Father, so to be to our Brethren.

2 In regard of us, as loved of God; there is an equity required in our giving
and receiving, Mat. 10.8. as we have received love, so give, Mat. 18.33, 34.
Ought not thou to have forgiven, etc. ought we to be so rigorous to our
brother, when God is so gracious to us?

3. From the just recompense of love we owe to God that has loved us: where we
sow more seed, we look for a more plentiful harvest, Matthew. 25.28. not to give
God his own with advantage, is a part of unjustice in us; our love cannot much
reach to God, but as David, Psalm. 16.2, 3. 1 Cor. 12.7. the members of the body
serve for the help of the body, pour all Gods love upon his Saints: David
inquires if there be any left of Jonathans house, that he might show kindness
to, 2 Samuel 9.2. the kindness of the Lord; as if David had been bound to it by
the Lord.

2 Look at them that are to be loved, since they have received such love, we
are to love them from the firmness of Gods love to them, which we cannot
reverse: therefore to be beloved of men and Angels. Numb. 23.20. he has
blessed, and I cannot reverse it, my curses cannot pierce through Gods blessing
toward them; it is a vain thing to hate there where God has blessed, we may
say, How can I hate, where God has not hated? He has loved, and I cannot
reverse it: it is not for the creature to be so saucy, malepert to dare to
bestow his hatred, where God his love and blessing; when Isaac had blessed
Jacob the younger brother, Genesis 27.33, 34. though Esau did entreat him, and
fought it with tears, though his own affection went that way, yet he would not
reverse it.

3 From the danger that may befall our selves, if we love not where God has
loved, 2 Chronicles. 19.2, 3. The wrath of God has gone out against his children,
when they have loved where God has hated; So when we hate where God has
loved, the wrath of God is gone out against us. What displeasure did befall
Jehosaphat? was he not a prosperous Prince? there were only some few ships
broken in going to Tarshish, he met with no great matter of wrath: but yet
because he joined in league and affection with Ahab, Gods enemy, wrath was gone
out, and did not return in vain, but fell foul upon his children; his eldest
son proved a persecutor: As Jehosaphat put forth love to Gods enemies, so his
own bowels hated Gods children: So if we shall be straight hearted where God
has loved, Gods wrath is gone out against us, and will find either us out, or
our children.

Use 1. Reproves all such strangeness or enmity that is found in Gods people
toward the brethren, one would think they should love one another, that have
Gods love shed abroad in them; yet this exhortation shows they are backward in
this duty: When Gods people are young beginners, and new come on, then they
think they can never love Christ nor his servants enough; so Mary, Luke 7.47.
when her sins were now forgiven her, many debts forgiven her, she loved the
creditor much: but St. John implies, that his old age had need of this
exhortation, what through love of the world, themselves, and their lusts the
people of God grow cold in their love to God and his servants: This argument of
love St. John does press in all this Epistle, and the danger of the contrary
is great, you renounce the resemblance of your heavenly Father; you are not
like him, you cannot love them so manifestly, freely and largely as God has
loved us, we expose our selves to the loss of the sense of our comfort: This
is one reason why we call in question our hopes of eternal life, because we
love not our brethren.

2 To exhort us to put this will of our heavenly Father in execution, Christ
did show us an example in his life, death, urged it upon his Disciples; God
has bequeathed a testimony of love from our hearts to our brethren, Romans 13.8.
this is a due debt, we must pay it out of our hearts; and if we do not so, no
wonder if our wills be not executed. As God loves us manifestly, graciously,
bountifully, so should we our brethren, Prove. 27.5. 1 Cor. 16.14. be bounteous
in your love, so shall you enjoy peace and comfort to your souls, we shall
keep the wrath of God from us, procure good to others and our selves for many
generations. Since God has loved and blessed his people, let us love and
bless them, and make it our happiness to be doing his will.

1 JOHN 4.12. No man has seen God at any time. If we love one another, God
dwells in us, and his love is perfected in us.


IN these words the Apostle stirs us up to brotherly love, and that from the
benefit of it, which is twofold.

1 Fellowship with God, verse. 13, 14, 15, 16.

2 From the perfection of his love to the end, both mentioned in the 12 Verse.
The fellowship we have with God is invisible: No man has seen God a any time.

How can we love God since we never saw him?

We never saw our own souls, nor ever shall; yet we know that such we have and
without such we could not subsist. No man has seen God.

Doct. That our fellowship with God and Christ, it is not outward and visible,
but inward, and consists in love.
Joh. 1.18. No man has seen God at any time, no man has had speech face to
face with God the Father, the only begotten Son that lay in the bosom of the
Father has revealed him, 1 Timothy 1.16. He dwells in that light that no eye can
attain unto, whom no man has seen, nor can see; his light is so glorious, that
no man can behold it; when Moses desired to see God face to face; God answered
None could ever see him and live, Exodus 33.10.

Obj. Jacob saw God when he wrestled with him, Genesis 32.24,

Jacob saw not God the Father, but Jesus Christ, he is called an Angel, and
Hosea calls him an Angel, Chap. 12.4.

2 No man has seen the Son in his glorious presence, in the presence of his
Nature and Essence.

But Moses saw God face to face, Exodus 33.11.

Answ. He did not see his glory, verse. 18. though in some sense he saw his
face: Moses saw Gods back parts, but his face he could not see, verse. 23.

What is meant by Gods back parts?

That is spoken of God according to the manner of men, Numb. 12.8.

Quest. What was it that Moses saw, when he saw Gods glory?

Answ. That he should see him in a glorious resemblance, he should see him in
his attributes, which did wonderfully affect Moses, that glorious similitude
was such, as that it was wonderful glorious, so that it did make his face to
shine verse. 35. And as the outside was glorious, so was the inside of Moses
heart enlarged, which made him go in and out before the people: in this manner
they saw Christ, Matthew. 17.1. to 5. they were so affected: they knew not what
they said.

Quest. Why cannot we see Gods face and live?

Ans. First, from the frailty of flesh and blood: The presence of God would
swallow us up, we are not capable of beholding God the Father, Son, or holy
Ghost; when we are in heaven, we shall be changed.

2 From the sinful corruption of humane nature; his glorious presence, which is
a consuming fire, would consume us. When Isaiah saw God in a similitude, but in
a glimpse of his presence, then said he, Isa. 1.5. Woe is me, for I am undone,
because I am unclean, he was afraid of his life, though he saw God but in a
similitude.

Use 1. To teach us how to understand many places of Scripture, that speak of
Gods manifesting himself to any; understand not God the Father, but Jesus
Christ assuming a humane body, they saw him face to face, or spoke mouth to
mouth, or they saw a similitude of God his glorious attributes.

2 Be willing to put off mortal infirmities, so shall we see God face to face,
Phil. 1.23. 2 Cor. 12.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

3 Of trial whether we have communion with God or no?

1 You never heard God the Father, nor the Son; God has now delivered all his
counsel in his Word by his Son, yet we may have familiar, sensible,
affectionate communion with God, Heb. 1.1.

2 We may find God revealing himself to our hearts and consciences, Psalm.
73.24, 25. That he is the chiefest joy, other fears and cares take us not up,
Heb. 11.27.

4 It stirs us up to the love of our brethren. No man has seen God at any
time, but have communion with him, and communion of love; God loves his people,
we have communion with God, Psalm. 16.2, 3. The Papists ask for Images, can
there be any better resemblance of the Father then the Son his Image? and in
loving and having communion with Gods Image that is like him? they kill his
living Images to honor dead Images. It is the greatest love we can show to
God, to love his Image.

Doct. Where love dwells, God dwells, for God is love, Verse. 16.
What is it for God to dwell or abide in us?

God is said to dwell, not where he is, but where he loves to be, and so does a
man. Now God loves to be where love is, God loves not to be where malice and
discontent is; God being a God of peace, loves to dwell in a place of peace, or
else he dwells not. God indeed is all the world over, if we go to Hell, he is
there; if to Heaven, he is there; but yet he does not dwell every where, Isa.
57.15. If where the Devil dwells, all that he possesses is in peace, much more
God, who is the God of peace, loves to be where peace is, and keeps that peace
which passes understanding.

There is a twofold peace that passes understanding.

1 The peace of that soul whose sins are pardoned, Phil. 4.7.

2 The peace of that soul whose sins are mortified; now where God is, where
God keeps the soul, there is peace that passes understanding, both pardoning
sin, and mortifying corruption: When Jacob was with Laban, and Joseph in
Potiphars house, all was well; much more will all be well, where God himself is.

Reas. 1. From Gods nature, for God is love, where sparks fly out of the
Chimney, there is fire; so where you see love in the lips, carriage and heart
of a man there is the presence of the blessed God.

2 From Gods operations: Where God dwells, he pardons sin, and purifies the
conscience, or prospers the outward man, and there is a spirit of love in that
man's heart; where God freely pardons, there is much forgiven, and where is much
forgiven there is much love, Luke 10.43.47. where we have a thousand forgiven,
we shall be ready to forgive an hundred, Ephesians. 4. ult.

2 He purges filth: If our hearts be purified from uncleanness and sinful
distempers, there the heart runs clear in love, and there dwells, 1 Pet. 1.21.
But if the heart be full of mud, it will run foul in hatred.

3 He works love. If we love our brethren, it must be from the love of God in
us, if there be love, it is from God; if there be hatred, it is from the
Devil, Judge. 9.23. it is said, That he sent an evil spirit between Abimilech
and the men of Shechem. Where Satan dwells, he will set all on fire, all hatred
and wrath is from hell, and it will so kindle that it will consume one another;
Fire from hell does not warm, it scorcheth, Ephesians. 4.17. If we give way to
sinful wrath, we give place to the Devil; Love cannot be from the Devil.

2 This love is not from the world, Jam. 4.4.

3 This is not from our flesh, Jam. 4.5.

Therefore it must spring from God, who makes peace, pardoning our sins, and
mortifying our corruptions.

Quest. But may there not be peace where Satan is? Luke 11.21.

Answ. He dwells in peace, but a false peace, for the wrath of God lies on that
soul, as a man's house when it is on fire, he being asleep, he sleeps, but not
securely.

2 This peace is a peace of a man's own conception.

Obj. There may be much peace and much love, and I have known much true hearted
love amongst men, that have nothing but the light of Nature, much more where is
the light of Gods common grace, shall we say, God dwells not here?

Answ. The Spirit speaks not of civil love, but of such a love as wherein God
dwells, pardoning sin, and mortifying sin, which he never does in natural men;
there may be found good nature in men, but that love which evidences pardoning
and healing of sin, is not found in natural men, this love differs from carnal
love.

1 This love reaches not to the body only, but to the soul, Lev. 19.16, 17.
If we love not the soul of our brother, our love is not true love.

2 Christian love reaches to strangers and enemies, as well as neighbors and
friends; good natured love may reach to strangers, but not to enemies.

3 Christian love will be stronger to our brethren then worldly love, though
Christian love may be damped, yet it will overflow; good natured love that
comes from a little fountain, a little thing will stop it; but Christian love
springs from heaven, and no man can make a dam to stop it.

Use 1. Of trial of Gods fellowship with us, whether God dwell in our hearts or
no, where God once dwells, he always dwells, John 10.27.28. who shall put him
out? he is stronger then all.

Quest. How shall I know whether God dwell in my heart or no?

Answ. Ask thy soul whether God dwell in thee or no: not good natured love; but
that love which desires peace of conscience, and purity of thy own heart, and
of thy brothers, 2 Cor. 7.8, 9, 10.

2 This should teach us all to walk in a frame of brotherly love, to abound in
tenderness of spirit to one another souls, not to provoke one another to
wrath, and seduce from ways of salvation, but to be helpful one to another in
our spiritual estate: God loves to lie in a bed of love, God will not dwell
where love dwells not, therefore keep open house for the spirit of love; God is
where he loves, and he loves to be where love is: wrath, malice, and hatred
smoaks God out of doors; a man performs no duty pleasing to God while wrath is
in his heart.

Doct. That such as love in brotherly love, the love of God is perfect in such,
verse. 16, 17.
His love is perfect in us, he does not mean, that love which God has shed
abroad in our hearts, for there is no love of God, but is perfect in every man,
but his love is perfect, that is, that love by which we love God: If our love
be not wanting to our brethren, our love is perfect toward God.

What is meant by perfect?

Perfect, is diversely taken, sometimes it is taken for sound and unfaigned;
thus Amaziah did not that which was good in the sight of the Lord, with a
perfect heart, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. But David and good King Hezekiah did that which
was good in the sight of the Lord, with a perfect heart, 2 King. 18.3. that is,
without hypocrisy and rottenness, Let a man profess love to God, and not
love to his brother, his love is not true, but hypocritical; but if a man
unfeignedly love his brother, he does soundly love God: a man cannot find God
pardoning his sins, healing his infirmities, but he will love his brethren, and
do good offices to them.

2 Perfect is all one with entire, as a child is then said to be perfect, when
he has all the parts of a man; this perfectness is opposed to that which is
maimed, so his love is perfect, which is entire to God and man: All our duty is
to love God, and to love our neighbor as our selves, 1 John 4.21. He has
showed thee, O man, what is good, and what does the Lord thy God require of
thee, but to walk humbly with thy God? that is, to express thy love to God,
and to do justice, and love mercy; that is, to our brethren, Mic. 6.8. This is
perfection of spirit, Romans 13.10. Therefore says the Apostle, He that loves,
fulfills the Law, the law of the first and second Table, and God would have the
chiefest part of our love to him expressed in our love to our brethren, 1 Cor.
13.12. the chiefest of those is love; we do God more honor by faith and hope;
but we edify the Church more by love: so that God requires, as we see, 1 Cor.
13.1, 2, 3. our love to him to be expressed by doing good to the sons of men,
Hence our Savior will reason with the sons of men at the last day, Come ye
blessed of my Father. Matthew. 25.34. to the end; so that all the love God
expects we should show to him, should be poured out to our brethren; if thou be
righteous, what do thou then give to God? Job 35.6, 7, 8. 1 Cor. 11.10. I
have abounded more then they all, (says St. Paul) by the grace of God, and
that good was by doing many good offices to the Brethren; hence God would have
all the sons of men to serve him in their general callings, with such graces, 1
Cor. 16.14. as they may show forth in their particular callings in doing all
their duties in love, when David was earnest with God for the pardoning of his
sins, Psalm. 51.8. and verse. 18. and 12.13. shows you; that as he would spend
himself in Gods praise, so he would labor to bring on others in the ways of
grace.

3 Perfection of degrees, which he means here, and though no man is perfect in
all degrees, yet he is more and more perfecting, he is on the growing hand,
Ephesians. 4.15, 16. As no member can grow in the body, except it be knit to the
body by joints and sinews, so Col. 3.14. in the body of Christ love is the bond
that knits us together to God and our brethren, 1 Cor. 18. and 13.1, 2, 3.

4 A thing is perfect when it is expert; thus Ezra 7.8. so is a man's love to
God perfect to any good office, a loving Christian is a perfect Christian, you
cannot set him to any good duty, but he is perfect to it; love oils the wheels
of his affections, and sets him on that which is helpful to his brethren, and
hence it is, that when our Savior would set Peter on to feed his lambs, he
would lead him on to this work, by propounding this question, whether he loved
him or no? John 21.15, 16, 17. he pressed upon him this love; every time he
asked him, his love required him to feed his lambs, 2 Cor. 4.15. The love of
Christ's constrains Paul to be ready for doing and suffering: A man that goes
about a business with ill will, he always bungles it.

5 A thing is then perfect, when it is durable; so is it with a man's love, it
is durable if it be nourished with love to our brethren; if it make a man ready
to be doing good offices to his brethren; this will make it not only grow and
continue, but also to abound for ever, Ephesians. 2.4, 5, 6, 7. If love continue
not, the Church will not continue, that is, the whole body of Christians, the
body of faithful Ministers and people; the Church will be removing, if love
begin to remove.

Use 1. A sign of the truth of our love; we must have as great a care of the
truth of our love to our brethren, as of faith and repentance from dead works:
How shall we know our love is perfect to God? How stands your love to the
brethren? If your love be closed up from your brethren, then your love is very
unsound, or very sick, so much love, so much life; and so much failing in your
spiritual love, so much failing in your spiritual life, Gal. 5.6. Faith works
by love, and that avails much with God: we must receive the Sacrament often, that
we may be strong in love, according as our love works, so works our faith.

2 It exhorts us all to the love one another, for by this means God dwells in
us, and his love is perfected in our hearts. As you desire therefore that your
love to God may be found entire, and thriving in your souls, give your selves
to the unfaigned love one of another; edify one another in love.

3 Comfort to such a man as knows he is of a loving heart, his love to God is
perfect; you may know your love to God is perfect, if your love be sound to
your brethren.

1 JOHN 4.13. Hereby we know that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he
has given us of his Spirit.


THey that love their Brethren they have a twofold benefit, they have Gods
Spirit dwelling in them, and they know it.

Doct. That such as love one another, to them God has given of his Spirit.
What is meant by this, that God has given us of his Spirit?

1 It implies that God has given us that spirit of grace that accompanies
salvation; this branch of that spirit that dwells in God, Numb. 11.25. Moses
spirit was not diminished, though God did communicate it to the seventy Elders,
God did cause it to be enlarged in them, that were in the place of Magistracy
with him; so who so loves, dwells in God, and the same spirit of love do they
communicate to their brethren, so that they walk by the same rule, and aim at
the same end. The fruit of the Spirit is love, Gal. 5.27. But the works of the
flesh are adultery, etc. They that walk in love, have received of the Spirit;
they have received of the Spirit of the holy Ghost, for the Spirit lusts
against envy, Judge. 9.22, 23.

Use 1. It teaches us, there is no love to be found toward our brethren, but
amongst spiritual men; for if we love one another, there is a Spirit of God in
us; where the Spirit is not, there is no love; Love is not a fruit that grows
upon thorns, or on such a stock as nature brings forth, the old Olive.

Object. But many of Gods servants bring forth sour fruit, which will neither
benefit themselves, nor others, therefore how is it said that Gods Spirit is in
them?

Answ. They have sour Oil distilling from the old stock, for there are many
branches in us that suck sowrnesse from the old stock; though there be a spirit
of love in Gods children, yet many times it does not run forth: But when you
see Christian love expressing it self, it springs not from nature, but the
Spirit of God.

2 A ground of much comfort to any soul that does find his spirit suppled with
any compassion; If you can find your spirits mourning for the evil case of
your brother, it is a sign that Gods Spirit is in you.

3 Labor we to preserve our hearts in brotherly love, for love is a fruit of
the Spirit of God; so much as a man's heart runs sour and hard, so much does he
damp the lively Spirit of God which the Lord has shed abroad in his heart;
therefore as we desire that God would for ever keep us in a good estate, and
that his Spirit should not be grieved by us, we must keep this Spirit of love,
that is, the Comforter; when we grieve the Spirit of God, we shall have grief
enough: If the Spirit of comfort that is in us be uncomfortable, how great is
that dis-comfort?

Doct. That such to whom God has given of his Spirit of love, they maintain
mutual, entire, and constant fellowship with God, and they know it.
God dwells in us, which is more then to have God to dwell with us: if God did
but dwell with us, it would argue much happiness; but this is more, for God to
dwell in us; We are not only near one another, and branches one of another,
but one body with another, he abides in us as the head, we in him as the
members.

Quest. What is this, We know it?

Answ. This act of knowledge is more then an act of faith, men may believe more
to be true, then they know, Heb. 11.3. By faith we understand the world was
made, faith understands a thing to be done, and so we may be persuaded of the
truth of a thing. Something we know by reason, which by sense we cannot know;
if it be not evident by sense and reason, we cannot know it; the meaning is, we
have evident sense and evident reason for it.

Reason 1. Is taken from the evidence of sense; when God has shed abroad into
our hearts a spirit of love, we shall see and feel the favor of God shining in
our hearts, the mercy of God pacifying our souls; so that now we do not only
believe the promises belonging to us, but the feelings of Gods love is a
manifestation of Gods grace, John 14.21, 22. If any man love me, says Christ,
and keep my Word, my Father will love him, and we will come in to him, and make
our abode with him: As we grow in love, so the comforts of Gods Spirit grow in
us. The ground of this reason is taken from Gods nature, who is love; God is
not said to be faith or hope, but love; and the more any man has received of
love, the nearer does he come to God, and the readier is he to be doing good
offices, and to be helpful.

Reas. 2. From the cause of love we know; God dwells in us, and we in him,
because we have received a Spirit of love. We could not receive a spirit of
love, if we did not receive a spirit of faith, Gal. 5.6. We could not love our
brethren, if we had not faith to believe in Christ: Now where faith is, there
Christ dwells, Ephesians. 3.17. This reason is from the cause of love.

Use 1. Of consolation to loving Christians, they have manifest experience and
knowledge of Gods love; Hereby we know that God dwells in us, and we in him.
The benefit of a loving spirit is this; that it keeps fellowship with God, and
that entire fellowship: A loving man does not only believe that he has
fellowship with God; but he knows it, he has evident reason for it.

2 To teach such as want the goodness of the promises; they are not sensisible
of Gods favor, they have no sensible experience of it, they may be persuaded
that God will show them mercy at the end, but yet they do not know it: If thou will know the fellowship between God and thy soul, then pray more that the
Sprit of love may dwell in thee; as thy love grows, so shall thou grow in
sensible experience of Gods love to thee; God crowns faith with trust and
confidence, and assurance, but he crowns love with experience; If you want
experience of Gods love, then think surely there is some weed of envy wrath and
hatred; from which if thou cleanse thy heart, thou shall not only have
assurance, but experience.

3 This refutes the Papists, that say, a man cannot know that God dwells in him,
this is an evident sign that they have neither faith nor love; if they had
faith, they should have assurance; if love, they should have experience.

1 JOHN 4.14. And we have seen and do testify, that the Father sent the Son
to be the Savior of the world.


Doct. THat such as love one another, they have seen, and do bear witness of
the Father sending his Son to be a Savior of the world, John 13.4.5.
Reas. This word sight is more then believing, for the Apostle put; a
difference between them, 2 Cor. 4.3. We believe that Christ sits at the right
hand of God, but we have not seen it; when he says, They have seen, he would
have you know that they have had experimental knowledge; all sight is an act of
sense, and rises from some ground of reason, reason is from sensible feeling,
which every loving soul has found, that God has sent his Son to be a Savior
of the world; a Christian knows that except his heart be warmed with the love
of God, he cannot love his brethren: The woman in the Gospel, of whom Christ
asked a little water; when she saw that Christ was the Messiah, and had
convinced her of her sins, John 4. she left her water pots, verse. 20. and ran
into the City, and says to the men, Come see a man that has told me all that
ever I did, is not this the Christ? Verse. 29. and verse. 39, 40. When the
Samaritans were warmed with his words, they besought him to stay amongst them,
and many of them believed in him; so that so much sight of Christ, so much love.

Reas. 2. From the knowledge that such have of Gods love unto themselves, the
Lord has sent his Son to save the world, the Lord has sent his Son into the
world to save us from his own wrath, and shall we bear wrath and malice toward
those that are his? a Christian will be ashamed that his heart should be
wrathful and malicious, he will be reconciled to his hrethren; when a Christian
walks in love, he has seen the Savior of the world, and has known him, for
that makes him love them, because God sent his Son to save them. They bear
witness.

If a man refuse the love of his brethren, he denies, that God sent his Son
to be a Savior of his brethren from his wrath. God sent his Son to save us
from hell, death, and the grave, and from all evil we may meet with. God has
promised to with hold no good thing from them that fear him; but if death and
sickness be good, we shall have them, Psalm. 84.11. Now if we withold any
good from our brethren, we bear witness that Christ came not into the world to
save them.

Use 1. This should teach us to lay down all wrath and hatred, and to be
discouraged from harboring any such distempers in our souls, for else you
proclaim before God, Angels, and men, that God did did not send his Son to be a
Savior; for shall Christ come to save his people from the wrath of God, and
from the Devil, and shall he not free his people from my wrath? Either make
Christ a whole Savior, else make him no Savior at all. If Christ save from
any evil, he will save from all. Agrippa was a Christian in part, but Christ
was not a Savior in part.

2 To exhort every soul to be loving to their brethren; the more you abound in
love to your brethren, the more you testify that God sent his Son into the
world to be a Savior, and the more love will God express to your souls.

3 Of consolation to such as love all men, but especially to such as are of the
household of Faith, such a man has seen that God has sent his Son to be a
Savior of the world; As Gods will is they shou d be saved, so for his part,
his will is they should be saved, such a man may be persuaded that God has
forgiven him his sins.

1 JOHN 4.15. Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God
dwells in him, and he in God.


THe 14 and 15 verses contain an argument of Gods love dwelling in us, the
proposition is laid down, verse. 14. the assumption, verse. 15.

Doct. The confession that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, is a true note or
pledge of our mutual, entire, and constant fellowship with God.
They have entire fellowship, because they do not only dwell one with
another, but one in another, as members in the body, as branches in the root;
Whosoever shall confess Jesus, etc. So that this is one mark of true
Christianity, in that it seals up a man's soul to everlasting fellowship with
God; There are many marks of Christianity, but none so general, so that where
this confession is, there is true fellowship with God, this is certain and
true, Mat. 16 16, 17. Whom say men that I the Son of man am? etc. But says
Christ, Who say ye that I am? Peter answered and said, we confess thee to be
the Son of the ever-living God; what says Christ to him? Blessed art thou
Simon; if he were blessed, then his soul was wrapped up into the fellowship of
the souls of just men made perfect, and so into fellowship with God. The same
acceptance did Christ give to the Thief upon the Cross, when his Disciples
left him, when the Soldiers spightfully entreated him, and all despised him,
one of the thieves railed on him; says the other, Fear thou not God? since
we are in the same condemnation, Luke 23.42.3. Remember me, says he, when thou
come into thy kingdom. He acknowledges here that Christ was the Son of God,
because he says, Remember me when thou come into thy kingdom, knowing that
power and glory was his: what says Christ to this confession of his? That he
should confess him in the midst of so many reproaches and disgraces, that one
Thief should confess more then all the rest; Christ says to him, This day
shall thou be with me in Paradise, his soul was taken up into heaven, and so
he was a blessed man, and had fellowship with God, 1 John 5.5. He that
overcomes, believes that Jesus is the Son of God, so chap. 2. and 3. of the
Revel. if any man overcome the world it is only he that confesses that Jesus
is the Son of God, 1 Cor. 12.3. No man can truly say, that Jesus is the Lord,
but by the holy Ghost; such is the work of the holy Ghost, that God dwells in
him, and he in God.

Object. But if that be such an argument that we are blessed, if we confess
that Jesus is the Lord, then I hope we shall do all well enough, for who of
all the sons of men that profess Christianity are not persuaded, and do not
believe that Jesus is the Son of God? Papists believe this, and the Pharisees
that sinned against the holy Ghost, believed this, Matthew. 21.38. This is the
Heir, say they, therefore the Son of God, come let us kill him; they sinned
against the holy Ghost, because they knew that Christ was the Lord: there are
two things in the sin against the holy Ghost, light in the mind, and malice in
the heart, the Devils profess that they knew Jesus, Mark 1.24. What then does
God dwell in the Devil, or the Devil in God? God forbid.

Answ. There is something in respect of the time, it was something in the days
of St. John, for a man to confess, that Jesus was the Son of God, for then men
durst not, because this was but a new doctrine, this point had Universality,
and antiquity against it, but now it is burning to ashes to deny it; It is now
no thank for men to confess that Jesus is the Son of God, he that shall not
confess it, shall have cause of confusion in this world, and in the world to
come. The Devils did believe this, but they did not confess him truly; and
good men will sore distrust this point, because the Devil confesses this, the
Devil was convinced of the truth of this, but yet it was no argument of his
dwelling with God, because he did this fraudulently.

Object. But the Pharisees they confessed this, and they knew that he was the
Son of God.

Answ. They did believe it, and were convinced in their consciences but yet
they did not confess him openly, John 7.13.

Quest. What is it to confess that Jesus is the Son of God?

Answ. It is not only an act of judgment, neither is it barely an act of the
lips to say, that Jesus is the Son of God, this is no such sign of our
fellowship with God; for it is now as great a wonder for a man to deny it, as
it was then to confess it.

That there is an act of the works or deeds of a man, and so confessing it is
an argument that we have fellowship with God, God does not take that for a true
confession, when a man does confess him with his lips, but in his works deny
him, Tit. 1.16. Isa. 29.13. This confession is twofold 1. with the heart, 2.
with the life, Confession with the heart is double.

First, A looking to Christ for salvation, and this is an evident pledge of
Gods dwelling with us, and we with him, Isa. 45.22. to 25. Romans 14.11. Phil.
2.10, 11. Look to me and be saved, no man can look up to God as a God of his
salvation but shall be saved; this is the proper work of faith.

The second is a penitential confessing, when Peter had convinced the Jews,
that Jesus was the Lord, they were pricked in their hearts, Acts 2.26, 37. For a
man to confess that he is the Lord, and never to be troubled that he does
afflict him, nor never look for salvation by him, there is no truth, no
heartinesse in that confession, but when the heart is humbled for all the wrong
it has done to Christ, this is an evidence of hearty confession.

In the confession of our life there are two parts.

1 If I confess Christ to be the Son of God; I do not only take him to be my
Savior, but to be my Lord and Governor, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. Heb. 5.9. we obey
Christ in thoughts, in speeches affections and conversations. 1 Pet. 3.14.2.
When we suffer as Christians, and are not ashamed of the Cross of Christ, but
answer as did the three children, Dan. 3.17, 18. The grace of a Christian is
the lively confessing of Christ.

Reas. These may be all, as so many reasons of the point* another reason may be
this, flesh and blood cannot believe it, and confess it, Matthew. 16.16, 17.

Object. But Peter did swear, that he never knew Christ.

Answ. But yet he did believe, for it pricked him at the heart, that he had so
wronged Christ, he wept bitterly, and did afterward with constant courage
profess Christ.

Use 1. Refutes all contrary religions: you see what becomes of all the Nations
of the world, that do not believe Christ to be the Son of God, they have no
fellowship with God, nor God with them; there is no other Name given by which
we shall be saved, but the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ; whosoever does not
belive that Christ is the Son of God, he excluds himself from the fellowship
with God in this world, and in the world to come.

2. Of trial; would you know whether God dwells in you, or you in him, do you
confess that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, do you look up to Christ for
salvation? Isa. 45.22. Do you find that your hearts are pricked when you sin
against Christ? Do you desire to walk in obedience unto Christ? Do you
sanctify him in your hearts? Zach. 12.10. If you be obedient children unto
God, you shall enjoy entire fellowship with God.

3. Of comfort to such, as have prevailed with their hearts and lives to make
such a confession: Does any man desire everlasting life? Let him look up to
Christ, there is none from whom you should look for salvation, but Christ,
wrestle with God by prayer, that you may find Christ in all the Ordinances you
partake of, so shall you be sure to have God dwelling in you, and you in him,
so shall you not go from home, whither soever you go.

1 JOHN 4.16. And we have known and believed the love that God has to us, etc.


THese words contain a third argument to prove a proposition laid down, verse.
12. That they that love one another, God dwells in them, and the argument is
taken from the knowledge and faith, that such have of the love that God has
toward them, and it stands thus; they that have known and believed the love
that God has to them, such dwell in God, and God in them; but they that love
one another, do know and believe the love that God has to them. Ergo --

Doct. That loving Christians do discern the love that God has to them, as
well by knowledge as by faith.
We have known and believe the love that God has to us, this love is wrapped up
in the bosom of the Father, and no man can discern either love or hatred by
any outward thing; but yet this love is manifested by faith and knowledge;
faith and knowledge are both acts of the judgment, for both are Scientia
axiomatis certi, the knowledge of a certain truth, for it is not divine Faith,
unless it be of such a truth, Cui subesse falsum non potest.

Quest. How thou does faith and knowledge differ?

Answ. Faith is the judgment of a certain truth, but certain by divine
testimony, whether of the Spirit or of the Word; the apprehension we have of a
truth by the authority of a divine testimony is faith; but knowledge is the
judgment of a truth certain, not only by a divine testimony, but either by
sense or experience, or evident reason; experience is but an observation of
diverse Sciences, and so most of the rules of practical Art are known by
experience, or by evident reason; such are Mathematical rules gathered by
certain principles of evident reason; such therefore as love one another, have
a certain persuasion of Gods love to them, by some divine (...)

^

3 A loving (...) love of God to him by evid^^^ reason, by artificial argu^
(...) judgment of Gods love to him.

First, From (...) in a Christians heart, when he is once be^ (...) exhorts
them to be loving and ge^ to a^ (...) ^metimes foolish disobedient and (...)
one another, James (...) do you think the Scripture speaks in vain, the (...)
in us lusts after envy, the frame of our natural temper lusts after envy
emulation, as the sparks fly upward; (...) therefore we find this temper
subdued, that we can think well, and speak well, and do good mee^ to our
brethren; way, this is an evident argument, that God has showed love to us,
or, (...) the could never have so freely loved others.

2. From the knowledge (...) may have of (...) in Christ because they see us
expressin^ (...) John 13. (...) this shall all men know that ye are the
Disciples if (...) men forward and ready (...) ^elpfulnesse to their (...) ^ill
say, surely he is (...) that company; i^ therefo^^ (...) to be Christ (...),
may not (...) it our selves? ^^ay not (...) discern love to (...) all (...)
world knows it?

Use 1. Of refuta^^^ of ^^^e Popish (...), that faith is rather defined by
(...) the evidence of things not seen; but we (...) and (...) well stand
together, (...) we (...) know a (...) we can believe; when Steven saw Christ
(...) at the right (...), what did he not then believe it? For that place, Heb
(...) not a definition of faith, but a description of (...) of the (...) that
it makes things evident; that we (...); as by faith (...), though we (...) his
feeling (...) not his faith, but helps it, John 20.27, 28.

2. Bellarmine and most of the (...) say, that (...) i^ spectalis misericor^^^,
is not (...) but praesumpti^^^ certainly their error is presumptuous, for does
not the Apostle plainy say We (...) the love that God has to as?

Use 2. This may be a strong (...), to be abundant in love, and tender
heartedness one to another, little does a man know how he disturbs the (...)
of (...) own conscience, that disturbs another man's peace true it is (...)
wrong his brother in evil (...) hard speeches, in doing evil (...) and he
goes (...) other times, and thinks all is right as (...) that the Lord is
departed from him; so that there is as (...) difference betwixt himself now,
and himself at other times, as betwixt a man found and a man fainting away with
some evil disease: or betwixt a Vine of September and December, formerly full
of sap and (...) now dead and (...); Why, what is the matter the heart is so
straight and heavy? Why our bowels have been shut up toward our brethren, and
therefore God shuts up his favor and helpfulnesse from us therefore we hear
much and profit little, receive the Sacrament often, and little good done; as
you desire therefore to keep Gods love fresh, and springing up in you, so let
love to your brethren grow up and spring in you. Many a soul is in fear and
doubts of Gods love to him, Why what must he do? Why, stir up your love to God
and your brethren and God will manifest his love to you, (...). 2.13. Mercy
rejoices against judgment; If a man have an heart pitying the miseries of
others, whether in their bodies, or in their souls, at the day of judgment,
when others tremble and quake, merciful men shall rejoice, Matthew. 5.7.

1 JOHN 4.^^ God is love, and he that (...) in (...)


1. The (...) contain a (...) those (...) one (...), as he (...) said down,
(...), and ther^^ (...) words (...) parts, (...)

1. The (...)

2. The (...) constant (...); dwell (...) one an another (...) God observe (...)

(...) part of him whosely (...) it is called it, that is the object (...)
Christ (...), the object of (...) Psalm 7^^^. In the (...) not; but it is (...)
to in (...) there (...) lovely.

2. God is love effect (...) he is the (...) of love, 1 (...) Christ is called
Wisdom, because he gives (...); so God (...) if there be a (...) to (...) 1
John 4.^^ and so if any show love to (...).

3 God is love (...) God full of love and mercy, we (...) is wisdom it self,
or love it self, without a (...) Aco^deus non predicatur de (...) man wisdom,
or a (...) but ^^re God transcends all (...) abstracts, God is love, from where
may be (...) it is of the divine Essence, we may (...) God is a Spirit, that is,
it is not a (...) but love is essential and natural to him, (...) and wisdom.

2. It implies the simplicity of Gods nature (...) but free without mixture he
is without all causes (...) himself, from himself, and by himself, and (...)
compounded of causes, so (...) not compounded (...) subjec^ (...) is one thing,
and his (...) wisdom are (...) is no reason of this (...) works, but not of
(...)

Use 1. This may exhort us all (...) forgot (...) the world for the love of
God; many (...) because they shall lose the (...) by (...) may be (...), for if
a man's ways please (...) make (...) be at (...) with him, and then much more
(...) lose the love of all thy friend, (...) more by Gods love, then (...) of
love is nothing to the God of (...) but God is love it self, and in enjoying
of God (...) injoy^^^ (...) of love, love passing knowled^^ (...), you never
met with love in the world, but you might (...), but Gods love is like a
bottomless depth without bounds or bottom^ you can neither know the beginning
nor end of therefore (...) in (...) say more truy, then Medea did of Jason, Non
magna relinquam, (...), I shall not lose great love, but follo^ great love.

Use ^. To teach all (...) is God is, (...) cannot be so (...), as to be (...)
strive to (...) love, Let all (...) he don't in love (...) and (...), Be yo^
(...) your (...) Father is perfect* Matthew. (...) us be kin^ (...) injury upon
(...), Luke 1^^3, 4. (...), and (...) would (...) be so. As Christ argue^^
(...), and (...) us reason, God is love, and ^^^^fore they that worship (...)
him in love, Matthew. 5.22, 2^ (...) any unkindnesse betwixt (...) in his (...).
God (...) in your hearts, (...) that we can perform righteously, (...) 14. let
all d^^^^ be per^^^ (...) had power to save any, but (...)*

3. If God be love then the (...), and therefore the more we live we hatred,
the more we walk in (...) our selves firebrands of all.

Doct. ^. (...), entire and constant (...)
Constancy (...) abiding in (...) he not only dwells with God, (...), which
implies entireness and (...)*

(...) of God (...) Apostle infers it, God is love, (...), all the well placed
love in that (...) Chariot of God, whereby he convey (...) when he she is
abroad his love in our hearts, and (...) which extend as well to the soul as
the (...) Carnal love is neither of God, nor from Go^ (...) love, which is
indeed called charity, when that (...) God com^^^^cates himself to such a
soul, as the root to the (...) the groun^^ of it is, from the immediate
presence of God where (...) such a presence as whereby the holy Ghost lives in
the (...), Gal. 5.22. Love (...) a fruit of the Spirit, John 1^.34. (...)

(...) and aptness that (...) such a sold to grow up by (...) Love is of an
edifying nature, 1 Cor. (...) admonish, (...), it edifiers much; especially if
it be (...) there (...) on both sides, both in speaker and (...) you (...)
savingly: it is love that puts life into (...).

3. From the (...) to (...) his love there more abundantly, where he finds
(...) walking in love; no creature partakes of the boundless love of God,
(...) are grounded (...) love, Ephesians. 3.17, 18, 19. Let but says toward Christ,
(...) our brethren abound in us, and we shall have a large (...) to us.
According to the capacity of the receiver, so is the thing received: (...) no
grace is of so enlarging a nature as love is; so that if we abound in love,
then we become of a fathoming and comprehending nature, so that we comprehend
the height, and breadth, and length, and depth of Gods love toward us.

Use 1. It exhorts us all not only to the love, but the constant love of our
brethren, this is the benefit of it, you shall have constant and abiding
fellowship with God; we should not only grow in love, but grow rooted in love,
let no grace be so eminent in you as love; if God had said he dwells in
wisdom, how should it have provoked men to study for wisdom; but God does
not say he dwells in knowledge, for what then should the ignorant do? He dwells
not in honor and riches; for what then should poor men do? But he dwells in
such an house as the poorest may build to God, an house of love, therefore
above all indowments and gifts of soul or body, have a special care, to grow
rooted in love; a man may have a world of wit, and yet God not dwell in that
wit; a man may have abundance of wealth, honors, and beauty, and yet God not
in them; but if you ask where God dwells, I answer, God dwells in love.

There are four places wherein God is said to dwell; 1 In the highest holy
place. 2 In an humble heart, Isa. 57.15. 3 Christ dwells in our hearts by faith,
Ephesians. 3.17. 4 God dwells in a loving heart; so that if you would know where God
dwells, it is one of these three graces, humility, in faith, or love. How should
this provoke us as David says, never to give sleep to our eyes, or slumber to
our eyelids, till we have built God an habitation of love in our hearts? Psalm.
132.3, 4, 5. Set up a loving heart, and there will God dwell for ever; whereas
if your hearts be envious, and hateful and bitter, little do you know what an
evil spirit dwells there, and instead of comfort, you shall find such horror
and anguish, that you may plainly discern, surely God is not in this place,
Ephesians. 4.26. if you sleep in wrath, the Devil rests with you.


Use 2. Of consolation to every loving heart, if God has given you an heart to
love our brethren, with true spiritual love, take God home with you, God dwells
in thy heart, and more then that, thou dwell in Gods heart; so that had
thou testimony of no other grace, yet can thou find an hearty love in thee?
thou have a Tabernacle for the most High to dwell in.

1 JOHN 4.17. Herein is our love made perfect, that we may have boldness in
the day of judgment, etc.


THese words depend on verse. 12. where he promises a double benefit to them
that love one another, God dwells in such, which he proved by four arguments
before: the second benefit now, that if we love one another, Gods love is
perfected in us, this he inlargeth in these following verses, and shows wherein
it is perfect, and how that it is perfect, he proves from the boldness they
have in the day of judgment; and the argument stands thus, They that may have
boldness in the day of judgment, in them is love perfected; but loving
Christians may have boldness in the day of judgment; Therefore, The
assumption he proves thus, They who are in the world, as God himself is, they
may have boldness in the day of judgment; but they who love one another are
in the world as God himself is.

Doct. Those in whom is found perfect love to God and their brethren, they may
have boldness in the day of judgment.
This Paul confirms, 2 Timothy 4, 7, 8. he is confident that God would give him a
crown of righteousness, who had fought the good fight of faith, and had
finished his course, had abounded in love to God and man, which is our
righteousness, to (...) God and man his due; and this crown of glory God will
give not only to him, but to all that love his appearing, James. 2.13. Mercy
rejoices against judgment, which is a fruit of love, for mercy is nothing
else but love compassionating our brothers distress: the judgment day is
terrible to all bitter, cruel and harsh spirits, but mercy rises against
judgment, Matthew. 25.34. to 41. We see what encouragement he gives to his sheep
on this ground, because they showed him kindness in being kind to his brethren.

Reas. 1. From the esteem the Lord Jesus bears to such, before whom they are to
appear in judgment; for such as love Christ and his members, have found Christ
dispensing himself to them, not as a Judge, but as a Savior, or else they
could never have loved him nor others; now they that are to meet with a Savior
have cause of boldness in that day; or if he come as a Judge, it is but as a
Judge to plead their cause, and right their wrong, and take vengeance on their
enemies.

2. A loving Christian has a further ground of confidence in his heart, that
the day of Christ's appearing shall be as the day of his marriage; now a
marriage day is a day of the gladness of the heart, Cant. 3.10. Now they that
love one another are espoused to Christ here by their effectual vocation; but
the day of judgment is as the marriage day, Christ here adorns and beautifies
us, that so at the last day we may be represented as fit Spouses for himself.
Such as are in marriage love, how do they desire and long after the marriage
day? and so do all true Christians, that have kept their hearts chaste to
Christ, how do they pray for the hastening of that day? Beloved be like a Dove
or young Heart upon the Mountains of spices, Cant. 8. ult. This day is called
the day of refreshing, Acts 3.19. and it is the work of the Ministers of the
Gospel, to drive a match between you and Christ, that so at that day they may
look them out, and present them to Christ, Lo here am I, and the children that
thou have given me, Isa. 8.18. 2 Cor. 11.1, 2, 3. It Is therefore the day of the
comfort of Gods Ministers and all his servants, therefore a day of boldness.

3. It Is a day of much comfort and boldness, because then they shall be freed
from all discouragements, from all persecutions and malignities, from
slanderous tongues, and hard speeches, from all fears and sorrows; nay more,
from all temptations and corruptions; this must needs give boldness to them;
it is all the cause of boldness we have in this life, because at that day all
our sins and sorrows shall be put away, it is a day of universal freedom from
all sin, 1 John 3.2. we shall then be like him in grace and glory, and freedom
from all evils.

Use 1. To reprove a gross error in Popery, which is that no man can be
certain of his salvation in the day of judgment, but we see it is no other
doctrine, but St. John here delivers, is it not a word of boldness and
confience that Paul has, 2 Timothy 4 7, 8. I know from henceforth is laid up for
me a crown of glory? true say they, Paul was an extraordinary Christian; but he
adds, not for me only, but for all them that love his appearing; were not
Christians confident against that day, how is it that they so earnestly desire
that day? The Spirit and the Bride say Come, and every one that is a thirst,
says, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, be like a young Roe; which shows plainly,
they do not look at it as a day of terror, but as a day of boldness and
comfort.

Object. Have not many of Gods servants been afraid of the face of death, and
troubled at it? What was Hilarious his speech, Egredere anima mea quid trepidas?
Egredere, septuaginta annos Christum colui, and jam mortem times?

Answ. The words of Hilarious show that he checks this fear, he thought he had
no cause to be afraid, therefore he bids his soul go forth.

2. I grant that a man's nature may shrink at death, though he knows that he
has been a faithful servant, and is not afraid of judgment, for death is an
enemy to nature, though a friend to grace, 2 Cor. 5.12. Paul himself desires
to be clothed with glory, (...) unclothed of his body, so Christ told Peter,
John 21.18. (...) thee whither thou would not, he means to martyrdom
implying if he could have shunned martyrdom with a good conscience he would
have ^orded it because its an enemy to nature; but yet this (...) ^^ture is
after aggravated by tempt^^ (...), so that as (...), so to (...) will (...)
times taking away all matt^^ (...) he w^^ con^^^dent o^ (...) all (...) of
com^^^^ (...) him (...) that day shall (...) examination, and possese him,
(...) youth, that his (...) Psalm. 30.7; (...) his face, (...) is the (...) and
Joh^ ^0 (...) yet this (...) love may (...) in that day, though (...), wh^
(...) with temptati^^ and (...) it may be (...) and so other Christians) in his
(...) ^emper, (...) Christ (...) to him, Psalm. 3.6. I will not be af^^^ (...)
about; (...) St. Ambrose, I have not (...) am ashamed to (...) any longer
neither does it irk me to die (...) a good Lo^^ so Paul professes, Phil. 1.21.
(...) ^^^ved, so Job. 19.^^, 26. (...), but even of every one whose lo^^ (...)
that th^^ (...) in that day.

Use 2. Shows the dangerous estate of such whose love to Go^ (...) brethren is
not perfect; for if they wh^^^ love is perfect may have (...) then such as
never sought (...) his favor, never loved the ^ell (...) of his servants, in
tha^ (...) where (...)

Obj. I have know^^^ (...) ^^ve never troubled themselves with matters of
Relig^^^ (...) yea scornful, (...) boisterous men, yet as little afraid of
death and hell, (...), Isa. 22.^^.

Answ. That which the Papists condemn as heretical (...) Gods servants, that
may be called (...) presumption in such men (...) who never shrink at death or
judgment: and indeed it proceeds from (...) profound ignorance and deadness
of their hearts who nenver (...) of God nor the terrors of hell, D^^^e bellum
in ex pertis, but if one (...) ^ome to see that d^y, then shall they call to
the moutainns and hills to cove^^ ^^em from the wrath (...) the Lamb.

Use 3. For those that would live comfortably and die peaceably, take this
ready way, be perfect and sincere in your love to God and his Saints, and that
will breed (...) mavelous boldness against that day, when the Lo^^ (...)
shall come to be admi^^ (...) you, and glorified in all his (...) so (...)
perfect love, so much (...); if your hearts be (...) and your love unsound, all
(...) at (...) from the halting of your love: W^^^ made Dav^^ afraid (...) pit,
but that his (...) was com^ on he (...) Vrian (...) Bathshebah.

Use 4 (...) loving hearted Christians, that (...) sincerely toward (...)
brethren, who, thou walk up and (...) with a spirit of (...) as other call
Death (...), the most (...) all (...) thou shall (...) at it with confi^^^^,
when others (...) be lifted up.

^ John 4.17. latter part. Because as he is, so are we in this world.


IN these words, (...) whom love is perfect, such ^^y have boldness in (...)
argument (...) who (...) in this world (...)

Doct. Such (...) this world at God himself.
For proof, Ephesians. (...) 1. Be kind one to another (...) (...) be useful and
(...) one the another, ready to do (...) ^ood, tender^^^^ (...) you any
wrongs, and (...) them it their miseries, (...) 1. Be (...) follower of Go^
(...) dear (...); they that walk in (...) Christ himself did, (...) sons (...)
giving (...) and giving liber^^ to (...) is God in this world, all his path
(...) and truth, in his love (...), in (...) love (...) God in this world: When
Adam stood (...), be loved (...), and (...) he fell, he would not let him lie,
but in his love he sent his Son to redeem him; so let men walk lovingly toward
(...) love to thee decay, yet stretch out (...).

(...) righteousness, that is ^^^^est in the (...) ^ercy, wisdom, goodness,
all pro^^^^ from love, in his love he (...) his love he preserves us, in his
love he (...) his love he (...) 13.10. Love is the fulfilling of the (...) if
it fulfill the law, then if (...) falls all the righteousness (...) to God
(...)

Use. This is a notable (...) grow up in the grace of love: If a man would know
how in a (...) of performance, he may be as God himself is; why, this is the
(...), he who is perpect in love, is in this world (...) God himself is: Many
(...) the duties (...) ^^^^gion hard and (...) but to a loving (...) all is
(...); let there be but love in the (...) to God and (...) will come off
easily; (...) many loving (...) god in resemblances Magistrates are called gods
in (...) they bear the Image of his Sovereignty; old men bear the Image (...)
Eternity, learned men of his Co^^^isciency; but a man may have all these Images
of God, and yet perish: The Devils are spirits of power and wisdom, and yet
bound in chains of darkness; but a poor Christian that walks in the spirit of
love, he is in this world, as God himself is, he goes beyond all other
resemblances, and they that are such may have boldness in the day of
judgment, which is more them either wisdom, or wealth for honor can afford;
a man (...) have all them, and yet tremble at the tho^^^ts of death: If you
observe, (...) she (...) men in the world busy the (...) about some of those
perfections, to be perfect in wisdom, lear^^^ or ^^nours, and these things
they labor hard after; why, go (...) as hand after love, strive to be as
eminent in love, and (...) shall get (...) purchase then they can get by (...)
endeavors, all their contents (...) them boldness against the day of
judgments: great men, and learned (...) slept in the grave, and have (...)
nothing in the morning (...) they (...); but a loving Christian what (...) in
the dust (...) the (...) when he awakes, shall be satisfied with the Image of
God. But if (...) are blessed with Magistracy wisdom, rich learning, if you
likewise bound with a spirit of love, you and more like Go^ (...) Christian,
that wants those other resemblances; a rich (...) and a loving Christian how
much do they set out the similitude and fullness of God himself? God is
royal and loving, God is wise and loving withal, he is Almighty and loving
withal; its his love only that does good to us, his Majesty, Power, and
Eternity, would be a terror to us, its his love whereby he does us good;
therefore to all endowments, add, what good do riches, and honors, and
knowledge, except thou have love withal.

Doct. They that are in this world, us God himslfe is, they may have boldness
to the day of judgment, Mat. 18.33. to the end.
The which shows, that suppose a man should live in this world, with a
confidence that all his sins are forgiven him, and in the mean time he grows
straight hearted and bitter to his brethren; why ^^on his sick bed or some
other trial, the Lord takes him by the throat, and exacts the whole debt of
his sins at his hands; or if before he have had good assurance of the pardon of
his sins, yet he shall find such horror and anguish, that he believe (...)
his sins still lie on the score. If we want love, we cannot have boldness
(...) judgment, Christ had so furnished his Disciples with love, that thereby
they abounded in much service to him and his, and these being men of love, they
should not be afraid of Christ's coming, but then he bids them lift up their
heads with comfort, Luke 21.28.

What is this boldness?

1. Boldness is that which mortifies fear and shame, which two things are
contrary to boldness; if a man be fearful, what boldness is there? but this
boldness makes a man look at death and judgment without fear.

2. Boldness removes shames, 1 John 2.28* when he shall appear we may have
boldness, and not be ashamed; a man therefore that is like God in this world,
is neither afraid nor ashamed in the day of judgment.

Reas. 1. Because that which might be matter of fear is removed, for that which
makes a man afraid at that day, is, because he is not like God, God is of pure
eyes, and they are altogether unclean, and then indeed Christ will command such
to depart from him, the workers of love, a worker of mercy and righteousness,
and so God accepts of him.

2. This spirit of love, clothes us with those duties and works, which God
most recompenseth at that day; God will then crown men with glory, not because
they are wiser and richer then others, but because they saw me hungry and gave
me meat, naked and clothed me, etc. Mercy rejoices against judgment, God
will there be abundantly merciful, to recompense every work and office of
mercy.

3. There is no cause of shame, for where there is a resemblance of God there
is cause of joy: God acknowledges his own Image, and will perfect it at that
day, for love cease not; a man may have learning and riches, and honors, and
be ashamed at that day, but if we be clothed with love, we shall never be
ashamed.

Use. Labor therefore above all graces, to cloth yourselves with love, a
loving Christian is a courageous Christian, when other men's hearts shall quail
and tremble for fear, and shake like the leafs of a tree, Isa. 7.2. then a
loving Christian may lift up his head with joy, because then he knows his love
shall be consummate, and when others are ashamed of their riches, learning, and
honors, he is not ashamed of his love, a loving Christian, is safe and bold
both in life and death: look at all the straights of a Christian, if they be
upon any ground, its for want of love, he that neglects this duty of love, God
and his conscience will take him by the throat, and exact the due debt, because
he walked with a private spirit, in the public world, whereas if we do but
walk in a spirit of love and helpfulnesse to our brethren, and learn to walk
with a public spirit, neglecting private respects, the Devil and thy
conscience shall find nothing to accuse thee of, but thou shall meet death and
judgment in the face, without fear or shame.

1 JOHN 4.18. There is no fear in love, but perfect love casts out fear,
because fear has torment: he that fears, is not made perfect in love.


VErse 17. he ^roved, that such as love one another, may have boldness in the
day of judgment, this he proved;

1. From the likeness to God v. 17.

2. He proves it from the contrariety that is betwixt fear and love, There is
no fear in love, which he proves by an effect of love, perfect love casts out
fear, and therefore perfect love and fear cannot stand together, this he proves
by a double argument (...) fear.

1. Fear has ^^^ments, therefore love, a peaceable grace, casts out fear.

2. Because he that fears is not perfect in love, therefore he that is
perfect in love fears not.

In this 18. verse, 1. Observe the estate of a soul troubled with fear, and
that is a state of torment.

2. The unsound and uncomfortable condition of such a soul, he is not perfect
in love.

3. The remedy of this estate, perfect love casts out fear.

4. The exemption of perfect love from all fear, or the comfortable condition
of a soul so healed by love, There is no fear in love.

Doct. A fearful conscience lies in torment.
Fear has torment, and he speaks of the fear of death, but specially of
judgment; where that fear is, there is torment, the word translated torment,
(...), is elsewhere so translated, Mat. 25. ult. The torment here spoken of, is
such a kind of torments as hell is, not for measure, but for kind. For the
handling of this, we may see what the Scripture speaks of this torment in the
several descriptions and metaphors.

First, This torment is sometimes called pricking of conscience, Acts 2.37.
they were pricked at their hearts with fear and shame for sin, though but a
little before they scoft at the Apostle, v. 13. yet now they were struck with
such torments, as they knew not what to do.

Secondly, Its called a wounding of the spirit, Prove. 18.14. which wounding is
a larger gash then pricking, and so implies more anguish, fear and shame.

Thirdly, It is compared to the sting of a Scorpion, Rev. 9.5. the Jesuits do
so sting men with torments of hell and horror of conscience, and God gave them
not power to heal themselves again; hence they thought every thing little
enough to satisfy their conscience, and so they suck out their estates in
building Hospitalls, and bestowing on their Cloisters.

Fourthly, The wrath of God in the soul is compared to venomed arrows, Job 6.4.

Fifthly, This torment is called the rending of the heart, Joel 2.13. Rend your
hearts and not your garments, the heart and thoughts are so rent and
distracted, that one thing will not hang by another.

David calls this, melting of spirit, Psalm. 119.28. as if the heart were like
wax, and Gods wrath like burning fire, therefore a man in this case is in a
bitter estate, Job 13.26. Thou writest bitter things against me, Isa. 38.15 I
shall go mourning in the bitterness of my soul, for this the soul is
troubled, Psalm. 77. and sorely vexed, Psalm. 6.3.

Why does a soul lying in fear, lie in torment?

Reas. 1. Consider this fear in the effects of it, this fear sometimes brings
men into trembling of body, so that all the spirits fly inward.

2. If it continue, it leads often times to inward Consumptions of body, or
burning Agues, Hab. 3.16. Psalm. 30.4, 5.

3. Sometimes it causes terrible dreams, which do amaze and affright us, Job
13.14.

4. It causes weariness of life, so that a soul long exercised with this
kind of fear, cries out in bitterness, and heartily wishes for death, Job
7.15. My soul chooses strangling rather then life, if he might have his choice
he would rather choose strangling then life; there are worse effects then those
proceeding from this fear, when Satan sets on withal against us.

1. Sometimes Satan so follows us with fears and horrors, that though a man be
o^ a large measure of patience, yet he is able to bear no longer, but breaks
out in impatience, Cursed be the day that ever I was born, Job 3.1, 2, 3. and
this is a sinful effect.

2. It breeds in some a flying from the presence of (...) that they dare not
read or pray, they are afraid the earth should swallow (...) up, and God
suddenly consume them; so Cain when he was pursued wit^ ^orror of conscience,
he fled from the presence of God, from Adams family, from the Church.

3. This fear sometimes brings destruction, when the soul is so wearied with
sense of horrors, with cares and watchings, that the brain grows frenzy, so
that you can be able to do them no good, till God puts in his help, Psalm.
88.15, 16. This was Hemans case, through the terrors of God, he was
distracted, yet when God healed his spirit, he grows one of the wisest men upon
the earth, except Solomon.

4. Sometimes upon this fear follows despair, the soul is persuaded it shall
never see the light of Gods countenance again, but that its utterly cast off,
Psalm. 3.6, 7. Psalm. 77. but this was but for a time; but sometimes this despair
is final, as Judas his was.

5. From hence follows sometimes selfe-murther, as in Judas, Mat. 27.

Reas. 2. From the properties of this fear, its incomprehensible, when Job
would express it, he could not tell how to set it forth, but O that my
afflictions were laid in the balance, Job 6.2, 3. Lam. 1.12, 13. Is there any
sorrow like my sorrow?

2. Its insupportable, A wounded spirit who can bear? Prove. 18.14. the stoutest
heart is not able to stand under it.

3. Its immovable, nothing in the world is able to remove it; no balm can cure
the conscience but the blood of Christ.

Reas. 3. From the causes of this fear, which are two.

1. The sense of Gods wrath here, and the expectation of greater hereafter,
Psalm. 90.11. Who knows the power of thy wrath?

2. A terrible expectation of violent fire, to consume Gods adversaries, Heb.
10.27.

Reas. 4. Consider the subject of all this fear and torment, and that is the
conscience and heart of man, the judgment and will; the will that before was
most tough and obstinate, of all the faculties, these torments make, it soft,
and tender, therefore its said, Josiahs heart melted at the hearing of the Law,
2 Chronicles. 34.17. Job 23.16. the heart is made raw and tender, that look at raw
flesh would be against the fire, so the tender raw conscience is anguished with
this fire of Gods wrath, according to that old saying, He that would go to
heaven must sail by hell gates.

Use 1. To stir up all such who have any of their friends thus exercised, to
pity and compassionate them; Is it nothing to you that pass by, that Gods hand
lies so sore on him? to him that is afflicted, pity should be shown by his
friends; but they forsake the fear of the Almighty, Job 6.14. Even as some
Seamen at their first voyage, they can pity those that are Sea sick and tossed,
but afterward they grow senseless: so when Christians first lanch out
themselves into this troublesome condition, they could have pityed others in
the like case; but through custom men forsake the fear of the Almighty: for
though commonly these fears be safe, yet they may end in despair, and therefore
pity should be showed them, Job never cried out for help in the loss of his
children or estate, but when Gods hand touched his soul, then he called upon
all that feared God to pity him; and indeed God is very sensible of all such as
compassionate them; why, if ever God send them comfort he will restore comfort
likewise to their mourners, Isa. 57.78. for those torments are not always
safe, except you find then mixed with some spark of faith and love, but
however, God looks, that if he be angry, we should fear.

Use. 2. From those that are thus afflicted, learn to be sensible of your
estate, and do not think this estate desperate, for this torment may be
healed, and therefore let labor in this case to seek out for healing: is a man
in torment, and wi^^ (...) live and die? what in torment, and not seek out for
help?

Quest. How shall help my self in this case?

Answ. 1. God would hereby have you know something, which you never considered
before, know therefore, and see that is an evil thing and bitter, that thou
have forsaken the Lord thy God, we have gone on obstinately and cast aside Gods
yoke, therefore thy own wickedness shall corrrect thee; therefore know, and
see and learn by it, to see the danger of sin, and if thou begin to be
tendable, there is hope this torment will end well; know that it is an evil to
provoke God to such fierce anger, for as you have pressed God, Amos 2.13. so he
will press you.

2. Confess thy sins to God, lay open thy ways, and set them in order before
him, and by this means you will find an unmeasurablenesse of ease, Psalm. 32.
to 6. he that confesses his sins shall find mercy, Prove. 28.13. And with this
confession add prayer for pardon and healing of thy sins, and God ordinarily
will heal such, Hos. 14.3, 4, 5. Job. 33.27, 28.

3. Use the Ordinances, the Word, the Sacraments, Christian Communion; these
are of special use to quiet the afflicted conscience, Isa. 57.19. I create the
fruit of the lips, peace, God by the lips of his Ministers, secretly drops
sweet balm: and so in the Sacrament, behold the blood of the New Testament shed
for thee, for such souls especially, is Christ's blood, and for Christian
Communion, read Job 16.5. The movings of my lips should have assuaged your
grief; he would have spoke words which should have been as balm or oil to a
Christian soul.

4. Bow your hearts to wait on God patiently, as he has waited on you; the
soul is ready soon to wax weary, and to say, Wherefore should I wait on the
Lord any longer? Isa. 50.10. Tarry but a while, and he that shall come, will
come, and will not delay.

5. Prize the least expression of Gods mercy to thy soul, praise him for
dealing thus with thee, that he would take such pains with thee.

First, Bless him that thou art yet on this side hell, crying for mercy, its a
greater blessing then all the Devils or damned have.

Secondly, Its another fruit of Gods love to thee, that he has applied a fit
medicine to the frame of thy spirit, Jer. 2.17. Thou drinkest but of the cup
thou brewest thy self; that God should thus hedge thee in with his hands, and
break thy heart, and lay it on so; sure, this is such a mercy, as we cannot be
sensible of.

Thirdly, Another fruit of Gods love is, that hereby he cuts you off, not only
from the wildness and looseness of thy heart, but from taking further day
with him: we are ready to put off repentance from time to time, to the cool of
the day, and the evening of our age: but when God imbitters our souls with
this torment of conscience, then we should stand out no longer, but the soul
longs and cries for mercy, this night before the morning; then they could wish
no greater blessing then Gods favor, Psalm. 4.5, 6.

(...) such (...) in (...) is not (...) to brook the (...) and (...) ^roken the
(...)

(...) out; take

(...) us (...) what an (...) back (...) with (...) fell (...) part of (...)
found (...) from (...) and ^udg^ (...) is not (...) full (...) not^rious (...)
there (...) ^ound hearted. (...)

(...) is a double (...) ^he day of judgment, of (...).

(...) When a man i^ afraid of (...) men; (...) ever so right and (...) men,
(...) ^9. (...) of ^en brings a f^^r (...) ^^ese are ^^sound; (...) a (...)
no^, though (...) in the midst of the shadow of death, (...)

(...), which is unbelief for faith (...) Ephesians. (...). We have access with
confidence (...) therefore which (...) fear in unbelief, Rev. 2^.8. ^elievers
together: that (...) that believe^ not Gods (...) or goo^ (...) fearful heart.

(...) this fear, it drives us from God; men ^^ossest with (...), shall cry to
the Mountains to cover them from the (...), Rev ^. ult. So when (...) sinned,
he hid ^^elfe from the presen^e of the Lord.

3. From the ^^bject of this (...), which is an expectation of some evil
terrible to him: If therefore the creature look at God as terrible, and to be
feared, its a sign they are not sound in love; for they that love Christ, love
his appearing, the Spirit and the Bride say, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, be
like a (...) heart, for (...) look on Christ as comfortable, and his ^^esence
^^ joyful and good for th^^.

4. From the adjunct of fear, ^^r brings torment (...) with it, (...) a kind of
torment in the soul, but love brings (...) and joy; and (...); therefore this
properly argues, that where fear (...) heart is not found.

(...) How (...) pass then, that some that are of loving spirits, are full of
fears and terrors, as Jo^ ^.4. So Heman and Paul compla^^, 2 Cor. 7.5. that
(...) without and terrors within: if such glorious Saints may be fea^^st, will
you say they were unfound.

Answ. There may be found such fears even in Gods Saints that have ^^perience
of his love (...), and the world experience of their love: (...) consider what
kind (...) it is, the fears differ much from (...) of unfound hearts.

First, The fears of the godly spring not so (...) from the expectation of
death and hell, as from some inwa^^ trouble for want of Gods favor, Psalm.
80.3, 4. Turn us again (...) thy (...) to shine, and we shall be saved, its for
want of the (...), that they so grieve, otherwise we read not of the fears
(...) judgment: now here is a great difference, (...) of love mixed with (...)
fears, (...) its the love of God, they (...) the contrary, (...) is not so much
affected for the way (...) for the sense (...) and judgment, and expectation
(...)

Secondly, to the (...) there is (...) ma^^ (...) support (...) thought within
^e (...) heart, he has no (...) wrath (...) mixed with (...) but sus^^ (...)
for (...)

Thirdly, ^^here (...) the effect (...) from God, as (...) from (...) other
means (...) ^tresse sometimes (...) sometimes he (...), as run to an (...)
science falls to (...) But the fear of (...) use (...) right me (...) his (...)
came (...) exceedingly; What (...) he to Wiches, ^^ ^^laters? No, (...)
himself to seek the Lord, (...) him for help, 2 Chronicles. 20.3. So (...) seem
very (...) will throw themselves into his arms they run to the horns of (...)
these if they (...) ^^erish, will the (...): and indeed the heart (...) found
in love then when it (...) and it argues the (...) cleave to him, when we see
(...)

Obj. May we not find many (...) defy death and judge^^ (...) no more afraid
of hell, then if it were a ^^le.

Answ. True, there are such ^^terous spirits the^ neither (...) man, are not
afraid of hell, and ye^ (...) from any (...) differs from the boldness of
Christians. For, (...)

First, Its without root.

Secondly, Without fruit; whereas the true (...) Christians proceeds from faith
in Christ, Ephesians. 3.12. Romans 5.1, 2, 3. (...) from searednesse and benummednesse
of conscience (...) such neither fear God nor (...) whereas the boldness (...)
them reverence God, and fear sin the more.

Thirdly, Their fearle^nesse is fruitless, they are not more fruitful by it,
but more licentious, and such men ordinarily at death are desperately
licentious, then halter or dagger, or any thing to rid them out of the horror
of conscience.

Use ^. May teach all them that will be possessed with a spirit of boldness and
confidence, let them maintain sound hearted live to their brethren, and indeed
there is no (...) that befalls Gods servants, ^ut it proceeds either from
bemudding themselves with the world, or else for want of love to their
brethren: As a wi^^ when her husband has been long abroad, and her heart has
gone after her lovers, his coming is the less welcome, she could (...) his
coming deferred: so when we have let our hearts run loose from God, and our
brethren, why, then our hearts grow full of doubts and fears, gladly could we
desire that God would defer his coming, and respite us a little, that we might
recover our selves before we go hence, and be no more seen; therefore as you
will find your hearts comfortable and unmovable at death, and judgment, when
the Mountain quake, and the Seas roar; would you then be cheerful? grow up in
love to God, acquaint your selves with him, let your desires be toward ^ him,
and withal join the love of your brethren, or else his coming will be
uncomfortable: Even as children, when their Parents have been abroad, and they
have fallen out, and fought, and hurt one another, (...) their Fathers coming,
which otherwise would have been (...) if you fall out with your brethren, and
stain their good names and wrong them, you still find your hearts afraid of
Gods coming, and would gladly have God to defer it a while. It Is a direction
therefore to all the sons of men, how to be prepared for death and judgment;
it is not building Hospitals, that will fit you for it, but this is the best
way, love God, and love your brethren, and you cannot dye uncomfortably: No man
dies more fearfully then a contentious or covetous man; a wrangling contentious
man never dies with peace and comfort; if therefore thou find an heart
afraid of death and judgment; if thou would help this, labor to cleanse out
all enmity, and want of love.

Use 2. Of consolation to such as find their hearts fearful and uncomfortable,
and yet find their hearts sound in love to God and their brethren; why,
consider if there be not an evil root of bitterness in you; and if thou
find thy heart free from envy; and wrath, and hatred, then consider what
good offices thou do; labor not only to be sincere, but to (...) up to
fruitfulness: and if God give you to see that your fear is rather for want of
his favor, then for hell and wrath, this is not the fear of hypocrites, Isa.
33.14. but proceds from want of experience.

Use 3. It is a ground of much comfort to those that are either fearlesse of
death and judgment, or sound in love; if thou find thy fearlesnesse arise
from longing after God, and making thee more fruitful. Why, its an evidence,
that thou art sound-hearted in love: And again, if thou find a loving heart,
why, thou have a just ground of fearlesse boldness; soundness of love and
boldness go hand in hand: And how should we labor for that grace that will
help us against all fears and doubts?

We have formerly heard of the torment of fear, and the hypocrisy of fear.

Now the third thing is the remedy of this fear, But perfect love casts out
fear.

Doct. 3. True hearted love to God, casts out all fear of evil from the
hand of God.
So that though at first the conscience of a young Christian be fearful of the
wrath of God and judgment, yet as love grows, so fear is casting out; Perfect
love casts out fear; he means not without imperfection; For we know but in
part, and love but in part, but he speaks of love without hypocrisy and
dissimulation; True-hearted love fears no evil from the hand of God. Now this
love casts out fear: Not as soon as ever it comes into the soul, but by
little and little, as a man that goes to cleanse a pit, he cannot do it
presently, but he is casting it out till it be all cleansed: Fear is a deep
pit, compared to the sinking into deep mire; now love comes to cast out this
fear, but it is not done the first hour, but by little and little it will get
rid of all fear: it does not cast out the fear of God, for the more we love
him, the more we fear him; but it casts out all tormenting fear, it casts out
the fear of the day of judgment, and so consequently of Gods wrath, 2 These.
3.5. He prays that the Lord would direct their hearts into the love of God;
Why, what is the fruit of that? And into the patient waiting for of Christ;
when a man's heart is once directed to the love of God, he is prepared to wait
for the coming of Jesus Christ. Jude verse. 21. Keep your selves in the love of
God, looking for the mercy of the Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life. So much
love as you keep in your hearts toward God, so much expectation you keep in
your hearts against the day of his appearing; the like may be said of keeping
our hearts in love to our brethren, Jam. 2.13. Mercy rejoices against
judgment.

Reas. 1. From the proper nature and effect of love, Love thinks no evil, 1
Cor. 13.5. This is the work of love in the heart, it bows the heart to take all
in good part that God does against it; so that though we find much disquiet and
anguish, and torment, yet love makes the soul take all in good part, so that it
thinks no evil of God: For particulars.

1 The soul thinks thus; though I feel much smart and anguish, yet I cannot but
think it well, that God should apply such corasives to my wrankled festered
wounds.

2 The soul takes it well, that God shows him all the danger before times of
sickness or death, that he shows him this out of Hell, and awakes him before
he comes there: it is a great mercy that I have yet time of mercy, that Hell
has not swallowed me up, but that he has given me so fair a warning to
prevent it.

3 A loving soul takes Gods dealing in this kind in very good part, as being a
notable preservative against many sinful distempers he should have fallen into;
by these anguishes, he drives me from the world, and putting off GOD for
aftertimes: this makes us seek God speedily, there is no man, when grace
knocks at his heart, that quite rejects the motion, but defers it; but these
tormenting fears are like hooks in a fishes belly, they draw us to God
presently.

4 The soul takes it in good part, in that by these fears of conscience, he is
brought better to attend on Sermons, to be conversant in the Scripture more, to
like good company better; This though it quite casts not out tormenting fear;
yet it makes all to be taken in good part, for that the soul hereby grows more
meek and lowly, and by this means he begins to find rest to his soul; When a
man begins to take Christ's yoke and bear it patiently, and learn of him to be
meek and lowly, he finds rest to his soul, then he is not in torment.

2 Effect of true hearted love, it stirs up a man to seek him whom I ^ soul
loves, and the very seeking prepares the heart to rest; for such a soul, when
he has found Christ, will not let him go, till he be possessed of his love,
Cant. 3.4. Whereas the soul that wants love runs away from God, as Adam, and
Cain, and Saul fled from God in their distress: but love is in the midst of
all these tormenting fears, gathers up the soul, that it runs not to music
nor mirth, or any evil means to quiet it, but provokes the heart to seek God
by all good means, and so casts out fear.

3 Love of God makes us afraid of all sin, and conscionable to obey in all
things: All that love God, hate sin; love makes us hate sin, and affects us
with a desire to keep Gods Commandments, and to be doing good, John 14.23. Now
both these lead to tranquillity, Psalm. 79.10, 11. There is a double ground of
comfort to those that begin to hate evil, out of love to God.

First, The Lord preserves such a soul.

Secondly, Light is sown for such, which in time will sprout up to manifest
comfort; therefore Psalm. 79.12. he says, Rejoice in the Lord ye righteous.
Love likewise provokes us to be fruitful in goodness; and if we be so, Christ
promises that he will manifest his favor and familiarity to such, John 14.23.

Reas. From the object of love, which is always some good; and if the soul
love good, God will be good to it, Psalm. 79.1. Truly God is good to Israel. In
the midst of many fears and doubts, and griefs, in the midst of all, like the
Sun through a cloud, he breaks out, yet God is good to Israel: Now when a man
in the midst of evil, can look at God as good, this makes way to quiet all,
as he expresses, verse. 24, 25.28, 29. When the heart conceives of God as good,
it scatters all doubts und fears wherewith the soul is possessed, that though
his heart and flesh fail, yet God is his portion for ever.

Use 1. Of direction to them that have to deal with troubled spirits, where
they may apply comfort; a man comes and complains bitterly of the burden of
his soul: Why, as yet there is no sure ground of applying of comfort, but when
you can discern any fruit of love in their expressions, if you find them
taking all in good part, and blessing God, that by this means he is pleased to
break them off from their own sinful ways, and draw them closer to himself,
then you may safely apply comfort; but otherwise, if you see men murmuring
against Gods hand, why truly that fear has torment, and that soul is not
sound-hearted: This is true love, to love God when he is angry, and to take it
in good part, that God should deal frowardly and crabbedly with a froward and
^^ooked heart.

Use 2. For them that find their hearts overwhelmed with fears and doubts, and
yet are unwilling to come to his frame of spirit, that think they have not
lived so badly as some have done; convince them they have deserved more then
this, that so they may take all in good part (...) then if they be possessed of
Gods love in this and apprehend ^^, there is way (...) ^^mfort and peace.

Use 3. For you that find disturbance and anguish of soul; it may be a ground
of consolation and direction to you; (...) heart pricked with the torment of
sin, consider how thou find thy (...) to God; does thy soul say to God in
(...) deepest anguishes, as (...). Thy^ art just in all that is come upon us,
thou have done righteously, but we have done foolishly? Do thou take it in
good part, and bless God that in very faitfulnesse to thy soul he has
afflicted thee? If thou (...) thy self to God, and put thy mouth in the
dust, willing to be turned any way, so that he will set thee in a good way:
Why, then there is a spirit of love in thee, which in time will cast out all
fear, there are now (...) of light and joy sown, which ere long will sprout
forth to thy endless comfort.

Use 4. May teach them whose consciences are tormented, what course to take for
comfort.

1 Look at Gods good providence to thee, in trying thee, and proving thee, that
he may do thee good in the latter end.

2 As you have cause to take all in good part, so learn to seek him carefully:
Again, take heed of sin, and be doing what good you may, strive to be more
fruitful in good services to God, and offices of love to your brethren, and
certainly this unfeigned love will lead to peace.

Use 5. Hence see the estrangement of wicked men from the ways of peace, Romans
3.17. The way of peace they have not known.

1 They cannot think that torment and fear should be the way of peace if they
see a man in this case.

2 They would put off such fears with (...) company; but if they see such a man
seeking God earnestly praying and hearing the World carefully, they cannot
think this is the way of peace; will you bless God and dye when he is ready to
swallow you up? The way of peace they have not known, salvation is far from
them, Psalm. 118.155.

Verse. 18. There is no fear in love, etc.


We come to the fourth thing, the exemption of perfect love from all fear.

Doct. 4. An heart possessed with the love of God, is dispossessed of fear of
evil from God.
He speaks of the fear of death and judgment; so much love as is in our hearts,
so much freedom and boldness against the day of judgment; a loving heart
fears not wrath, nor jugement, nor hell, Psalm. 23.4. When once I look at God
as my Shepherd, and love him, and follow him: Why? then though I walk through
the vale of the shadow of death, I will fear none evil, though I walk in near
danger of death, for if the shadow follow me, the body is not far off, yet I
will fear no evil, Psalm. 49, 4, 5. David makes open proclamation to all men to
hear and hearken, there is the solemnity of the audience: the matter is, It Is a
parable, and dark mystery, and yet a word of wisdom and understanding. Why,
what is this parable that all the world should take notice of? Why, this is it,
Wherefore should I be afraid, when the iniquity of my heels do compass me
about? that is, the iniquity of my footsteps, the tripping of my steps, or the
iniquity of my heels, that is, the fears and dangers that follow him at the
heels; yet wherefore should I fear? An heart possessed with the love of God, is
dispossessed of fear of evil from God. Psalm. 3.6. I will not be afraid of ten
thousand of people, that shall compass me about. Why, what makes him so
confident? Because the Lord is my shield and lifter up of my head, verse. 3. So
that we see that a Christian possessed of the love of God, stands not in the
fear of judgment or hell, nay more, not of his sinful failings, Psalm. 49.5.

Reas. 1. From the nature of fear, and the (...) oval of it, fear is a
troblesome affection in the expectation o^ (...) evil: Now (...) the removal
of fear, two things must be done*

1 There must (...) evil toward him.

2 He must (...) this. Now to him that fears God; no evil is toward such a
one, Psalm (...) There shall no evil befall thee. Now to whom is this promise
made* (...) Because he has set his love upon me, therefore I will deliver him*
I will set him on high, far above all dangers and evils; indeed sicknesses may
befall him, and (...), and imprisonments; but what ever befalls under the nature
of evil, that shall not come nigh him.

As no evil is toward him, (...) ^e must know this, that no evil shall befall
him; Now a Christian that loves God, he knows that no evil shall befall him,
Psalm. 56.3.9. What time I am afraid, I will trust on thee. When I cry unto
thee, thou shall cause mine enemies to (...) their backs this I know, for God
is for me: So that a Christian not only finds security from danger, but
knowledge of it too. Nay further, the child of God is so far from fearing
any evil to come nigh him, that he knows all those things that are counted
evil, shall turn to his advantage, Romans 8 28. So Phil ^.1^. where he tells you
what wrong false Apostles did him on purpose, to add afflictions to his bonds;
Well, says he, I know this shall turn to my salvation, through your prayers,
upon a double ground he comforts himself against all their malignities.

1 He knows the more they afflict him, the more will the Church pray for him.

2 That the more he is tempted, the more will God supply by his Spirit.

Quest. How do they know that no evil shall befall them?

Answ. 1. From the love of God shed abroad in their hearts, Romans 5.1 to 6.

2 From the presence of God for him in his worst times, And if God be for him,
who can be against him? Romans 8.31.

3 From the interest he has in the blood of Christ, which has cleansed him
from all his sins, so that he does know that God will follow him as a deliverer
from his sins, so that the soul though burdened with many sins, yet fears
not, Psalm. 44.5.

4 From a knowledge he has of all the promises as belonging to him, which are
a stay and support to his soul, Psalm. 56.3, 4 10, 11. Psalm. 84.11. he knows God
will be a Sun and a shield to him.

5 From the knowledge that he has from the integrity of his conscience, which
is as a brazen wall against all evils, 2 Cor. 1.12. For our rejoicing is this,
the testimony of our conscience.

6 The prayers both of his own soul and other Christians are for him, so that
through them he is confident no evil shall befall him, Psalm. 56.9. Phil. 1.19.

7 He is imboldned against dangers, from the supportance of Gods Spirit in his
worst times, Phil. 1.19. Psalm. 5. So Psalm. 46. God is a present help in the
time of trouble; when trouble is near at hand, yet God is nearer; as it was
sometimes with Elisha, he saw the Mountain full of Chariots and Horsemen, 2
King 6.17. Though there were not such a multitude constantly about him, yet
when an Army of the enemies come; an Army of Angels come as soon.

It has been an ancient opinion, that every true Christian has a particular
Angel to deliver him; why, this is certain, when dangers come, there never want
Angels without, nor Gods Spirit within, nor the prayers of his servants for us,
and therefore we have no cause to fear.

Use 1. This is a notable ground upon which that heavenly truth is built, of
the perseverance of Saints; and a bulwark against Apostasy; if a loving heart
be without fear of the day of judgment, he is without fear of falling away.

Obj. True, as long as he keeps perfect to his love, but may he not fall off
from his love, and so from his good estate?

Answ. The Apostle ^ith, there is no fear in love; then if there be no fear,
there is no fear of falling away.

Use 2. Of direction to poor souls, against those (...) and fears of their
hearts, if we would be quit^ of all those cares and grie^ (...) g^ ^p in love
to God, and to your brethren, for there is no fear in love(...) therefore from
all hatred of God; learn to take all Gods d^g^ in good part as proceeding from
his love to your souls; Look at all th^se fears and anguishes he puts you to,
as wholesome for your spirits, and the very apprehension of Gods love to you in
these will quiet your consciences, and scatter those fears. Grow up likewise in
love to your brethren, lay aside all wrath and revenge, be tenderhearted and
merciful unto them; and thus growing in love, you shall grow in fearlesnesse.

Use 3. Shows the fearful estate of a hateful heart; as there is no fear in
love, so there is nothing but fear in hatred; he that finds his heart
estranged from God, and (...) love to his brethren, why when troubles comes,
fears increase. What is (...) reason natural men are so afraid of death and
judgment? Why, because they have hateful spirits, whereas a loving soul prays
for the hastening of the day of judgment, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly: But an
hateful spirit knows, the Lord Jesus comes to take vengeance on all his hateful
carriages, and hard speeches, and therefore he trembles at judgment. Yea, this
hateful disposition is more dangerous to the soul then any sin besides. Let
a godly man be defiled with many sins, fall into diverse weaknesses and
frailties; yet because he maintains a loving heart to God and his people, they
do not eclipse his boldness. David confesses, That the iniquities of his
heels compassed him about: yet because he kept his heart sincere and upright to
God, he dares be confident, wherefore should I be afraid? whereas on the
contrary, let a man walk never so justly and honestly, and do many good things,
yet if the heart be estranged from God, have no fellowship with him, nor his
Saints, let death and judgment come, because his heart is not possessed of Gods
love, therefore he is oppressed with many fears and anguishes.

Use 4. Of consolation to every loving heart, if thou find thy heart possessed
with love to God and his Saints, that there is none in heaven or earth, that
thou desire in comparison of him, and for the Saints they are the ^ly men of
thy delight; if thou be afraid, thou art much too blame: If thou discernest
^ods love in thy heart, bid farewell to groundless fears.

Object. But will a loving heart say, Have not I just cause to fear, do you not
see how loosely I walk, how often I trip and fall in my Christian course?

Answ. There is no causes of fear, Wherefore should I fear in the day of
evil, when the iniquities of my heels compass me about? These are causes to
make me love love God the more that pardons these fallings, and to hate sin the
more, but they ought to weaken thy confidence, for there is no fear in love.

1 JOHN 4.19. We love him, because he first loved us.


THese words depend on the former words, verse. 17. he delivered this truth;
that those that are sound-hearted in love, may have boldness against the day
of judgment, this he proves from the resemblance that is between God and a
loving heart.

2 from the contrariety betwixt fear and love, there is no fear in love, which
he proves.

1 From the eff^^^ of love, perfect love casts out fear. 2 From the ^nct of
fear, Fear has torment, therefore love that is a quiet peaceable gr^ cannot
stand with it. 3 From the ^oundnesse of fear, he that fears is not perfect in
love.
The fourth argument is taken from the cause of love, which is Gods love to us,
if we love God, because God loved us first, then perfect love casts out fear,
but we do so: Ergo. For this is the nature of love, it makes us look at God as
good and merciful to us, and therefore love casts out all fear of evil from the
hand of God.

In this 19 verse observe two parts.

1 The freedom of Gods love to us, he loved us, not because we loved him, but
he first loved us.

2 The root and spring of our love to God, is Gods love first to us, preventing
us. For the first part observe,

Doct. 1. The love of God to us is altogether free, un-prevented and
un-deserved on our part.
If the question be, why God loved us? it was not because we had done him any
service of love, but he loved us before we loved him. 2 Timothy 1.9. He called us
not according to our works, but according to his free purpose and grace. Deuteronomy.
7.7, 8. The Lord did not set his love upon you, because you were more in number
then any people, for ye were the fewest of all people, but because the Lord
loved you. So Deuteronomy. 9.4, 5. he loved them because he loved them, and therefore
surely without prevention or desert on our parts.

Reas. 1. From the removal of such causes of love, as might prevent God on our
parts, if there be any cause on our parts, he loved us either out of foreseen
faith or good works; but from neither of these; not from foreseen faith, for
it is the love of God to us that produces faith. Acts 13.48. As many as were
ordained to eternal life believed, so that our faith springs from Gods love,
choosing us to life; nor for our good works, for we are his workmanship,
created in Christ Jesus to good works, so that good works did not cause Gods
ordaining us to life, but Gods ordaining us to life causes good works, so that
faith and good works are not causes, but fruits of Gods love to us.

Reas. 2. From the eternity of Gods love to us. Je. 31.3. I have loved you with
an everlasting love. Now if Gods love be eternal before the world was, then it
was not for our sakes, who were made after, Ephesians. 4.5. Nothing temporal can be
the cause of that which is eternal, our love and faith began in time, his love
was eternal.

Obj. Though our love and faith began but now, yet he foresaw it from
eternity, and therefore it might move him to set his love on us.

Answ. It Is all one with God, whether you have respect to that which is now, or
what he knows will be hereafter, so a wise man serves a Prince, not out of mere
affection to the Prince, but because he loved himself first; for he foresaw
if he served him carefully, he should have abundant recompense: Now to the wise
man it is all one, whether he have respect to the future foreseen recompense, or
to the present, and therefore still his service is mercenary; therefore when
God loved us, it was not for any thing we did, or was foreseen to be done by
us, for then we had not loved him, because he first loved us, but he had loved
us, because we first loved him.

2 In Scripture account, that which comes after, is not the cause of that which
went before, therefore our love coming after cannot be the cause of Gods love
going before: To Abraham and his seed were the promises made, not by works or
obedience to the Law, for the Law was given four hundred years after, Gal.
3.17. and therefore God had not respect to it, as the Apostle argues; So that
which we have done four thousand years after the world was made, cannot be the
cause of Gods love before the world was, Romans 9.12, 13, 14. If the Apostle
there had not excluded foreseen works, his arguing had been of no effect; for
he speaks not only of what was then, but he considered nothing that might be
afterward as the cause of his love.

Use 1. To refute those that make Gods love to us depend upon our love to him,
they expressly blot out this Scripture, to say that any one is beloved of God
for his foreseen faith, is to say, that God loved us, because we first loved
him, which is expressly contrary to this Text, so that if we enquire the cause
of Gods love to us, we must seek it in God, not in our selves, for he loved us,
because he loved us.

Use 2. May teach us to love God betimes; for you can never begin too soon, but
he has prevented you, you can never begin so early, but he has been up before
you: what a shame is it for men to defer this, till 30. 40. 50. years, till
their old age? God was up betimes to manifest his love to you, and will not you
begin to love God, till you are going out of the world?

Use 3. To such as have already given their love to God; let them learn to
maintain their love, and increase it: a man is wont to make much of an old
friend; Thine own friend, and thy Fathers friend forsake not, Prove. 27.10. Why,
God is the ancientest that ever thou had, he loved thee before thou were,
before thou knew what the world was, or what love was, therefore love him
again.

Use 4. Of consolation to such as have experience of Gods love toward them, if
God loved us before we loved him, when we were strangers and enemies, then
surely he will not cast us off for our infirmities in our after loves, it may
be we may be loose and sinful; but God loved us at first, not for our
goodness, neither will he cast us off afterward for our wickedness. Yet this
is no encouragement to licentiousness, for God knows how to put us to
anguishes and straights, and crosses, and yet reserve everlasting life for us.
There is never a servant of God, but had he cast him off for his failings, he
had never been saved, none but have failed in many things, and abused Gods
grace; but God knows how to heal such distempers, and yet reserve his mercy to
us; if he began to love us, before we loved him, then as he was first in love,
so he will be last.

Use 5. May teach us to be free in our love to God and our brethren, Mat. 10.8.
Freely ye have received, freely give. God loved us, when we loved not him; So
though men prevent you not with love, yet prevent you them; and if they provoke
you, be fast in your love, be like God in your love, begin first, and continue
last, and so come off freely in your love to God; be content to part with all
for him, for when shall we be able to give more to God, then he has given us?
If you ask In quo consistit efficacia gratiae? What makes grace effectual to
any soul? the answer is, the love of God to us.

Doct. 2. The preventing love of God to us, is the effectual cause of our love
to God.
The love he here speaks of, is such a love as casts out fear of judgment,
and therefore must needs be a securing love.

1. Objective, By setting us a pattern of love; but that is not all, for all
have read and heard of the great love of God to us.

2 Physice, by working something in us, which makes us to love him. Jer. 31.3.
With loving kindness have I drawn thee, and this is not only a moral drawing,
by propounding some suitable object, as an horse is drawn by a lock of Hay, for
that is a leading rather then a drawing; but Gods drawing us is not only by
propounding fit arguments, but by a physical, or rather hyper physical work of
his Spirit, he makes us of unwilling to be willing to follow him; objects do
not give us a new heart, but God is said to give us a new heart, Ezekiel. 36.26.
this he works.

1 By striking us with shame and horror for our sins, so that we are brought
heartily to grieve for them, and when he has drawn us to the suburbs of hell,
then he shows us the glad tidings of salvation, and withal gives us a believing
heart to long after them, to embrace them, and to assure our selves of them.

Reas. 1. From the efficacy of Gods gracious work; there is no work of God in
us, but it works in our hearts the like suitable work; If God choose us for
himself, then we choose him for our God, we choose him, his Word, and favor,
and promises, above all treasure; Gods election of us stamps on us an election
of him: Has God purchased us at a dear rate? then we learn to purchase Christ
at a dear rate, though with the loss of all we have. Does God call any of us
to be his sons? then we learn to call him Father, Hos. 2.1. to 3. In what ways
he walks toward us, we begin to walk toward him, but ever God begins first,
Psalm. 27.8. When God says to a soul, Seek my face, then it answers, Thy face O
Lord will I seek. If God go on in a constant course of helpfulnesse by his
Spirit to us, then we go on in a constant frame of grace toward him. Jer.
32.40. I will not turn away from them, and then he will put his fear in our
hearts, that we shall not turn from him. So that Gods work ever leaves some
impression of the like frame in us: if God first love us, then we learn to love
him.

Use 1. To reprove the Papists and Pelagians, that have attributed the efficacy
of grace to other causes. If you should ask the Pelagians of old, and their
followers at this day, what is the reason why Peter accepts Gods love. Simon
Magus refuses it? They would say, the one was willing to accept the offer, the
other not: Well then, the efficacy of grace consists in our wills, then we begin
first. Many of the Papists say the same, but the more moderate amongst them ask
them why Peter accepts grace, Simon Magus refuses it? they say the grace
offered was sufficient for them both; but God offered it to Peter in a fit time
and place, when his heart was free from temptation; but it was offered to Simon
Magus at such a time, when his heart was carried away with the love of money:
But the true cause was, Gods first love to Peter, that made him love God again;
should God wait for times and opportunities? why, at the best time, men's hearts
will find some evasions; if God should stay for a fit time, he should never
find it, for Christians can tell, God took hold on them, when their hearts were
most undisposed to it. How long is it before they can be convinced of their
dangerous estate, or will be brought on to seek for help, till God awaken their
hearts and open their eyes, so that they would be glad to see one glimpse of
favor? why, tell them of never so fair promises, they cannot be brought to
embrace them; so that unless God mightily draws us to it, we should never come
on to accept of the offer of grace; but we therefore love God, because by his
preventing love he brought us to that, which of our selves we could never have
been brought to.

Use 2. Would a man know whether God love him or no? a needful point to be
known. Why, no man can know it by these outward things, these fall alike to
all, Ecles. 9.1. Why, enquire you how thy heart stands affected to God? if thou
can find in thy heart that thou love God, the Text will tell thee, that God
loves thee.

Object. Love God? who does not? God forbid that any should not love God.

Answ. That thou may know this indeed, do thou find thy heart choosing God
above all things in the world? Why, thou could not thus choose God, unless
he had first chosen thee; if thou find thou can be content to purchase
Christ at the loss of thy dearest comforts, then make account that God has
loved thee, and been willing to part with Christ for thee: What made Abraham
willing to offer up his Son, but that he knew that God had given his Son to dye
for him? Can thou look up to God as thy Father? then he has adopted thee for
his Son; do thou find thy heart cleaving close to God, as David did, Psalm.
73. ult. It Is good for me to draw near to God? why, it is evident that Gods love
is constant to thee, because thine is so constant to him.

Use 3 Of consolation to such as do find in their hearts that they do love
God; if thou find thou could be willing to part with all for his sake;
why, then surely, God so loved thee first, that he will rather part with any
thing then thee, Isa. 43.4. O how this should stir us up to love God more then
ever we did; if thou love God dearly, and prizest him above all things; why,
this will seal up to thee, that he loves thee as dearly; if you would know
whether God love you with a love unto life, why, labor you to love him with a
lively love.

1 JOHN 4.20, 21, If any man say, I love God, and hates his Brother, he is a
liar: for he that loves not his Brother whom he has seen, how can he love God
whom he has not seen, etc.


THese words continue the discourse hegun, verse 12: wherein he uses two
motives to stir us up to love our Brethren.

1 From the fellowship such have with God, amplified from the 13. verse to 16.

2 From the soundness of Gods love to such; from verse 17. to the end.

In these two verses, he argues this truth by the contrary, viz. that such as
hate their Brethren, their love is not perfect but unsound: If any man say, he
loves God, and hates his brother, he is a liar, then he loves not God, this he
proves by a double argument.

1 From the greater occasion he has to love his Brothrr then God, therefore if
he love not his brother, he loves not God, and the occasion is, the daily sight
of his brother.

2 From the like and the same cause he has to love his brother, as well as
God, and that is from the equal commandment of God, and therefore if we love
God out of obedience to his law, we should love our brother, out of obedience
to the same law.

Doct. 1. That the hatred of a Christian brother, is an undoubted sign of
hypocrisy of the profession of our love to God.
If any man say in heart, tongue or practice that he loves God, and yet hates
his brother, such a man is a liar, that is, he expresses not the truth, 1 John
3.9. to 11. this is part of the message of God, that we love one another: now
the profession of a Christian, is a profession of his subjection to the Gospel
of Christ; Now the Gospel holds out five principal Ordinances.

1 Prayer. 2 The Apostles Doctrines. 3 Sacraments. 4 Mutual Communion. 5
Discipline.
Now if a man profess subjection to the Gospel, he professes subjection to
these five Ordinances. The Apostle delights in this word profession, Heb. 3.1.
and commends it in Timothy, that he had made a good profession before many
witnesses, 1 Timothy 6.12. Now do but consider, what every one of these
Ordinances express about brotherly love.

1 In prayer we call God Our Father, and if he be our Father, then all his
children are our brethren, and if we do not respect them as our brethren, we
renounce God for our Father.

2 In the same prayer we desire God to forgive us, no further then we have
hearts to forgive our brethren; if therefore we will not forgive our Brethren;
we are no true professors.

2 In the hearing of the word, we are to come like New born Babes, desiring the
sincere milk of the word, and that is, when we come free from all malice and
emulation, as babes be, 2 Pet. 2.1, 2. Therefore if a man come to the word with
an heart full of envy and emulation, he professes himself a Christian, but he
deceives himself.

2 It overthrows the Gospel, because this is one of the great Commandments of
the Gospel, that we love one another, Mat. 22.36. to 40. if a man therefore
profess himself a hearer of the law, and so of the Gospel, (for he that
renounceth the law, renounceth the Gospel; for the Gospel establishes
obedience to the Law, Romans 3. ult. Besides, it is the Commandment of the
Gospel, for the whole Gospel is compact of two, Faith, and love, 2 Timothy 1.13.
Joh. 13.34.) and do not yield obedience to this particular Commandment of the
Gospel, he is a liar.

3 The Sacraments are seals of our love, in Baptism, We are baptized into one
body, 1 Cor. 12 13. and in the Lords Supper, We are all partakers of one bread,
and one spirit, 1 Cor. 10.17. If therefore there be a different spirit in us,
we are not of the same spirit, work not by the same Spirit. In a natural body,
if a member be cut off in a combat, in our hot blood we miss it not, nor feel
the pain, but in cold blood we find the miss of it, and seek out for help; so
in hot contentions betwixt Christians they fall off from one another, they
discern no change for the present; but when they begin to look back at former
passages, and see what wounds they have made, both jointly begin to be sensible
of pains, and cannot rest till they have taken some course to set the members
in joint again.

4 For private Communion, it calls for love; this profession David made, and so
does every true Christian, I am a companion to all them that fear thee, Psalm.
119.63. He does not say only, he is a well willer or favourer to such, (which
yet is a great matter in our days) but he was a companion to them, he had
sweet and comfortable familiarity with them; if therefore we be so far from
making them our companions, that we can hardly be brought to be favorers of
them, we renounce subjection to the Ordinances of the Gospel.

5 For discipline; this is one of the main ends of discipline, to see that no
offense be given from one to another, Matthew. 8.15. to 20. if therefore a man
offend his Brother, and be not willing to be reconciled, in this case a man
renounceth subjection to a main Ordinance of the Gospel.

Use 1. To teach Christian men, if you would be honest true hearted men, let
there be no christian brother in the world, but thou can say, that thou
love him; if there be any one that thou neglectest, and can not have
fellowship with; why there is no soundness in thee; better it is thou should
love an hundred hypocrites, then hate one christian brother; he that professes
himself a christian, and professes subjection to the Gospel, and yet wants
love to his brethren, he renounceth subjection to every Ocdinance of the
Gospel, and therefore his profession is but hypocrisy, and he himself is a
liar: e contra, if God give thee an heart unfeignedly loving every brother, if
you make them your companions, and the men of your delight; why then, If he
that says he loves God, and hates his brother is a liar, then on the other
side, he that doubts whether he loves God, and yet unfeignedly loves his
brother, he deceives himself; if thou can say, thou love thy brother, the
text will tell thee thou love God: if thou can but find in thy heart true
love to thy brethren, though thy profession may be but weak and poor, yet it
is sound and sincere; so much love, so much sincerity; so much want of love, so
much hypocrisy.

Doct. 2. The sight of our brother is a stronger inducement to the love of him
then any that hates his ^rother, can have to the love of God.
For some might say, What though I love not my brother? he is full of
weaknesses and failings, yet I can love God, for (...) more cause, the Apostle
tells you the sight of your brother is a greater oc^^^s^on to love him, then
any that hates his brother, can have to love God (...) a true indeed, he that
loves his Brother, has more cause to love God then his Brother, but he that
hates his brother, shall find less cause to love God then his brethren.

By sight is meant not only viewing the face, but to have familiarity and
fellowship with him, to have daily intercourse and commerce with him, now this
much furthers love.

Reas. 1. From the strength that is in daily commerce together to procure love.

Our brother does many things in our sight; which might justly winn our love,
we see many good parts in them, many good offices which they do to us, and we
to them, which much increases our love, the more we see our brothers, and
communicate good one to another, the more we love them.

Reas. 2. From the little cause a man has to love God that hates his brother;
take a man that is estranged from his brother, he is much more estranged from
God.

1 Such a man has no faith in God, that wants love to his brother, for faith
works by love.

2 He can have no sense of Gods love, for God never reveals sensible love to
such, as have no love to these brethren, and then how can we love God, if we
have no sense of his love to us?

3 Much less can he have experience of Gods love to him, for he never had it.

4 You will say, he may have reason to love God, for many bounties of God
toward him; I, but what reason can such have to think, that God gives them
these in love? and therefore he will have little cause to love God; if he find
in his heart no reason to love his brother, he will find less reason to love
God.

Use 1. To stir us up to hasten out of this sinful lust of hatred toward our
brethren, for though we may think we have more cause to love God then them, yet
truly we shall find if we be willing to part with our Brother, we shall be more
willing to part with God.

Object. But this man has done me much wrong, but God never did me any.

Answ. If he has wronged thee, and thou see him daily, pity him the more
strive to heal it, and redress it, if thou can not do it, thou can not
look that God should ever pardon thee.

The second argument the Apostle lays down why we should love our brethren is
from the equal cause we have of both, and it is from Gods Commandment to love
both.

Doct. 3. True and sincere profession of christian Religion, does as duly
yield obedience to one commandment as to another.
He that loves God, let him love his brethren also? Why? because God has
commanded the one as well as the other, Psalm. 119.9. then shall I never be
ashamed when I have respect to all thy commandments, he does not say, when he
keeps them all, we all fail in that, but I may have respect to all, so a
christian cannot keep all Gods Commandments, but he may have respect to all,
so David professes, Psalm. ^^^.128. I hate every false way.

Reas. 1. From the same Lawgiver that gives all the Commandments, Jam. 2.10,
11. he that breaks one, breaks all; if in obedience to Gods Law thou love him,
the^ in obedience to the same Law thou will love thy brother also.

2 From the n^^ ^^finity betwixt the Commandments, they are like to the links
in a chain, break one, you break all: If a man love not his brother, how can
he love God, or worship him, or keep his Sabbaths? He that has not respect to
all Gods Commandments, has respect to none.

Use 1 Gives us a free trial of our sincerity or hypocrisy, If God give thee
an heart to have respect to every Commandment, and therefore to make
conscience of them all; why, then thy profession is true and sincere, though
thou can not say that thou keep one of them aright, yet if thou be
conscionable unto them all, and it grieves thee, that thou can not perform
that indeed which in heart thou respectest, thy heart is sound; contrary, if we
shake off the bonds of these Commandments, or break but one willingly, we
have no truth in us: Jehu had no respect to walk in all the Commandments of
God, and therefore was an hypocrite, if a man take not heed to all the
Commandments; he takes heed to none at all: When the two Harlots came before
Sol^mon, his judgment was that the child should be divided betwixt them, the
Harlot was willing, but the true Mother would by no means endure it: so if thou
give God undivided obedience, thy heart is sound, but if you divide with God,
and some part you will give to God, and some part keep for your lusts; why, you
have the heart of an Harlot, and all your works are dead works.

Object. Do we not all sin in many things, Jam. 3.2.

Answ. Yes, we all fail in performing, but we may have respect to all Gods
Commandments, and it grieves us that we have failed in those we do respect,
and we are sorry for it; if we be thus affected, our hearts are right before
God.

Use 2. Of consolation to all such as find this frame of heart, to yield
universal obedience to God, God himself testifies your profession is sincere,
and so you shall find you shall never be confounded, when you have respect to
all Gods Commandments.

Use 3. Of exhortation to all that would have a testimony of the sincerity of
their profession; Why, make we conscience of every Commandment of God, and so
we may have a sure ground of our sincerity.

1 JOHN 4.21. And this Commandment have we from him, that he who loves God,
love his brother also,


WE come now to observe one point out of the words themselves.

Doct. 1. The same commandment that requires love to God, requires love to our
brethren also.
God requires no man to love him, but he requires him also to love his
brethren; it is one of the great Commandments of the Law, neglect love to your
brethren, and you neglect love to God likewi^^ and this direction Christ
himself gives, Matthew. 5.23, 24. Which imply^^ a^ God would not accept a
service to himself without reconcilement to (...) Brother, so God will not
accept any Office of love to himself, if we come not in love to our brethren.
God loves a cheerful giver, that does it in hearty love and affection, God
would stay for his service, and he would have us stay, till we be at peace with
our brother, not but that our love to God ought to be greater, and in case of
competition, God will be loved even with the hatred of our brother, but when
there may be a suburdination of their loves, he requires the one as well as the
other, 1 Timothy 2.8. Let us lift up pure hands, without wrath and doubting, and
he means wrath to our Brethren; as when a man comes with doubtings he is not
accepted, Jam. 1, 7. so neither is he accepted when he comes in ^^ath; nay, if
he comes in wrath, he either wants faith, or his faith is full of doubtings, or
else it is a false faith, The wrath of man accomplisheth not the righteousness
of God, Jam. 1.20. a man can do no righteous service to God, if he come in
wrath.

Reas. 1. From the near relation that lies between God and our brethren, God
looks at his people, as his children, as his Spouse, as his Members, and
therefore often times, he will longer bear with injuries done to himself, then
to his members; Pharaoh was an heathen Prince, but yet God past by that, he
does not charge him for his horrible idolatry and filthy abominations, God
winked at these things, but when Gods people came amongst them, and were evil
entreated by them, then Moses his message is, Exodus 4.22, 23. Israel is my Son,
even my first born, and if thou refuse to let him go, I will slay thy son,
even thy first born; this was that which made God fall so heavily upon him, for
opposing of his people: so though Babylon abounded with many Idolatries, yet
God makes little mention of it, but he punishes them, for the insolency
against his people, Psalm. 137.8.9. Zach. 1.15. I am very sore displeased with
the Heathens that are at ease, for I was but a little displeased, and they
helped forward the affliction. They are his members like us, and therefore the
injury done to them, redounds to God himself, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou
me? and they are such members as art as dear to him as the apple of his eye,
Zach. 2.8. Now he will endure touching any where else rather then on the apple
of his eye. God knows that men's goodness extends not to him, so neither does
their hatred; if we be wicked and injurious; what harm can we do to him? Why,
God will bear much longer Idolatry, swearing, and other gross sins, then
injuries put upon his people: how long did God endure the heathen Monarchs,
till they fell sore upon the Church? the Roman state flourished exceedingly
above seven hundred years; though their Capital was filled with all manner of
Gods, but the times of this ignorance God regarded not, but followed them with
great Victories and designs, and there were many worthy men among them for
valor and prudence; but when the Emperors grew hot against the Christians,
and persecuted them, God would endure them no longer, but tumbled their
Monarchy into the dust: Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm.
Some man will endure much more injury against himself, then against his
children; so while the world trespasseth against God himself, by Idolatry,
Superstition, or profaneness, he sits silent as if he regarded them not: but
when they wax fierce against the Church, then he arises like a mighty Giant,
and raises his forces, even such plagues as the world rings of, as those ten
plagues of Egypt witness; and all this arises from his tenderness over them,
because their afflictions may do them more harm then they can do him, as long
as the Church keeps any good terms with him, no man is more tender of his
Spouse, no father of his child, then God is of his Church.

Reas. 2. From the delight God takes in the sincerity of his service; 1 Cor.
16.14. Let all things be done in love, what is done in love is an hearty
sincere service; and if love be wanting, a man either performs no service, or
else it is not done in truth, God that is a God of truth is most impatient of
such overly, and ha^ting performances, Psalm. 51.12. God requires truth in the
inward parts, whether in duties of service to himself, or man, 1 Pet. 1.21.

Reas. 3. From the care God takes of the preservation of love unfeigned to
himself; why, that it may be preserved spotless, God will still keep in us a
diligent care of love to our brethren; for next after hypocrisy, nothing more
odious to God then Apostasy, and more dangerous to us, as being the way to the
sin against the holy ghost: Now so long as a man walks in love, and keeps a
constant fellowship with the Saints, so long we keep a constant fellowship with
God himself; but let a man fail in his love to his brethren, he falls off
from God, and so runs into grievous Apostasy against God to the spighting of
the holy ghost; therefore as you would put honor on God, and maintain his
Spirit in you, so take heed you neglect not brotherly love; if we neglect this,
we are in the way to total Apostasy.

Reas. 4. From the delight God takes that all his servants should wear his
livery, and be known to be his Disciples: now if God had only left us to faith
in Christ, to calling on his Name, all this might have been and yet we never
been known what we were; but because God would have it known thar there is a
generation of men calling upon his name, and serving him in truth, he would
never have them come abroad without this cognizance to their brethren, and by
this mark all men should know ye are my Disciples, if you love one another,
Joh. 13.35. therefore if a man throws away brotherly love, he throws away the
profession of Christianity, he is no Christian, therefore offer not to say,
thou love God, or love thy brother also.

Use 3 To teach us that the love of our brethren, is not a conceit of
perfection, or supererogation, but its a duty of necessity straightly lying
upon all men, that if they love God they must love their brethren also, never
say you have a God in heaven whom you love, if you neglect love to your
Brethren; we think we may love our brother as long as he loves us, but if he
comes betwixt us and our profit, we fall off from him; Why, if you love them
that love you, what singular thing do you? Matthew. 5.45. Turks and Pagans will
do so much; but you must know you are bound to love your brethren by virtue of
a Commandment; if thou think thou art bound to love God by virtue of his
Commandment by virtue of the same Commandment thou art bound to love thy
brother also.

Object. I, but my Brother is changed.

Answ. It may be so, but yet Gods commandment is not changed, indeed we are to
carry the expressions of our love according to diverse occasions; it is one thing
to comfort, another thing to reprove, yet both acts of love; besides, there is
no Commandment of God, but the transgression of it brings a curse with it,
Deuteronomy. 27. ult. If therefore I love not my brother I fall under a curse, and so
under separation from Gods presence, for that is properly a curse, and so then
we cannot so wrong our Brother, as we wrong God and our own souls, as soon as
Cain hated his Brother and slew him, he went out from the presence of God, and
dwelt in the Land of Nod, a land of agitation; wandering prayers, and wandering
performances does an hateful soul put up: When David had once wronged Vriah,
what poor work made he? He then makes nothing of the destruction of a worthy
subject, that had before time been scrupulous of cutting an enemies skirt;
whereas e contra, no man that expresses hearty love to his brother, prays for
them, does them good, but he shall find as he closes with his brother, God
will close with him; as he lifts up a cheerful countenance upon his Brother, so
will God on him, so that he shall plainly find, that in keeping this great
Commandment is great reward.

Use 2. To teach us to love God so much the more, that has such care that no
man withdraw his love from us, but he will be as ready to sit loos from them*
as they sit loose from thee; why, what mavelous love is this, that God should
take it so ill, that any should offer injury to thee; so that he will not
endure, that the greatest Monarch should evil entreat thee? how should this
shame us, that we should sit so loose from God, and slight him, and wrong him,
that is so careful that none should wrong us?

1 JOHN Chap. V. Verse. 1. Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born
of God: and every one that loves him that begat, loves him also that is
begotten of him.


THese words contain a third argument to confirm a truth delivered Chap. 4.
verse. 20. which was, That the profession of the love of God, without the love
of our Brethren, is but hypocrisy. In this verse the argument is drawn from
the nearness of our Brother to that God whom we profess to love. He is as near
as the begotten is to him that begat him; and the argument stands thus, if our
Brother be begotten of God, then we cannot love him that begat, but we must
love him also that is begotten; but our brother is born of God, which he proves
by his faith, Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God.

In this verse observe these two parts, 1 The safe and comfortable estate of
every believer. He is born of God 2 The necessity that lies upon such as love
God. To love the Brethren also


Here therefore is a double universal proposition. 2 Concerning Faith. 2
Concerning Love.


The former universal proposition is, That whosoever believes that Jesus is
the Christ, is born of God.

Doct. 1. Faith in Christ Jesus is a certain and universal work of
Regeneration.
Quest. What is it to believe on Christ? Do not the Devils believe and tremble?

1 To believe that Jesus is Christ, is to be persuade that God has anointed
him to be King, Priest and Prophet of his Church; as a Priest to sacrifice
himself for us; as a Prophet to direct us, and reveal his will to us; as a
King to govern and to rule us.

2 Believing is not only an act of the understanding, for the Devils believe
that Christ is the Messiah, that is, that he is Priest, King, and Prophet of
his Church, therefore in this believing there is more then a mere persuasion,
namely,

1 A particular application to mine own heart, that he is a Priest, King and
Prophet to me. And

2 Where this faith is, it works such a frame of heart in me, that I trust on
him alone for my salvation, and out of him I look for none? in his blood I look
to be pardoned; in his Prophetical office, I look to be guided; and I look to
him as a King to subdue my rebellious heart; this kind of Faith is a certain
mark of Regeneration,

1 From the removal of all other causes, for a man to look up to him, as the
Christ, the anointed of God, this is above the reach of flesh and blood, and
this kind of faith makes a man blessed, Mat. 16.16, 17. The hand of faith is a
work of Gods Spirit; for take the state of nature, it reaches no further then
this, Flesh and blood looks to satisfy by the works of the Law; and this was
the stumbling block of the Jews, they sought righteousness by the Law, Romans
9.3. this is natural ever since Adam, for his principle being given to Adam,
Do this and live, this still cleaves to us by nature, and this is the Religion
of all the Nations, to look to be saved by the works either of the natural or
moral Law.

2. Suppose you convince flesh and blood, that all his righteousness is
unclean, why, yet far off was it from men in St. John's time, to look for
salvation in a crucified Savior; this was a stumbling block to the Jews, and
to the Greeks foolishness, 1 Cor. 1.23.

3. Suppose you prevail so far with flesh and blood as to convince them their
righteousness is unclean, and that there is no salvation but only in Christ;
yet nature will not be persuaded that Christ did all this for him, but in
anguish of soul nature runs to merry company, to the world, to the gallows,
rather then it will come to Christ for help, and wait on him, and cleave to
him; if therefore a man be brought to believe on him as his Savior, and by his
Priestly, Kingly, and Prophetical Office to look for salvation, and trust on
him for it, is an evidence of our Regeneration.

Reas. 1. From the mighty power of lively faith; for St. John here ^oth not
speak of a cold dead faith, but of a lively powerful faith; now where such
faith is, it makes us live by our faith, Heb. 2.4. The just shall by his faith
live a life of justification and sanctification; faith looks not at his own
works for satisfaction, but to him that justifies the ungodly, Romans 4.4, 5, 6.
And so by faith we live a life of sanctification; w^ether Gods will be to be
done or suffered, he lives by faith, that is, he will have a commandment for
his rule, no duty he takes in hand but he will have his warrent for it.

2. Faith looks to the promise for strength, when he goes about any Christian
duty, he goes not about it in his own strength, but he derives strength from
Christ, Without me ye can do nothing, from him is thy fruit found, Hos. 14.8,
9. he relies on the promise for help, for comfort, for acceptance, he does all
in the name of Christ, that is, in his life and power, and looks for acceptance
in the name of Christ only.

3. If he suffers the will of God, and lies under heavy temptations and
afflictions; why, he waits on God, he lives by his faith, he knows that he
that will come, shall come and will not tarry, Heb. 10.36, 37. in the mean time
the just lives by faith, that is, quiets himself in dependence on Christ and
expectation of his promise.

Use 1. To refute a Popish Doctrine that teaches, That faith may be common to
Gods people with Hypocrites, and they profess no other faith, then what may be
common to Hypocrites and Devils; and therefore they disclaim justification by
faith, because if faith justify, then the Devils and Hypocrites, may be
justified. But the Apostle speaks of a faith that flesh and blood cannot attain
unto; therefore that which they call Catholic faith, to believe those
Doctrines mala fide propounded by their Church is a fiction; the Devil
believes better then they, he believes the word of God to be true: but to
believe this to be true by a true and lively faith, is such a belief, as
whereby we are born of God.

Use 2. Of trial, whereby we may take an estimate of our faith, thou say,
thou believe that Jesus is the Christ. Why, try that, has thy faith
regenerated thee? has it brought thee into subjection to Gods will? Do thou
live by thy faith? that is, if thou be to do any part of Gods will, do
thou walk by a Commandment for thy rule, and do thou depend upon some
Promise for strength? if thou be to suffer Gods will, do thou wait
patiently on Christ, and quiet thy self in him? then thy faith is a
regenerating faith. Contrary, if a man say he believes in Christ, and yet makes
no conscience to live according to Gods commandments, relies not on him for
strength in his performances, is not patient under his hand, such a belief as
this, is far from that which the Text speaks of.

Use 3. Of direction, what course he must take, that would become a son of God,
born of him. Why? faith is the door wereby we are to enter into this happy
estate; there is a power in faith, not only to justify, but to sanctify: If
therefore thou be convinced of thy filthy unclean state by nature, and look
up to Christ for cleansing; if thou find thy heart submitting to Gods will,
careful to walk by a rule, going out of thy self, depending upon him for
strength; and if God hide his face, thou can wait patiently on him: why,
this is the way to regeneration. To believe on Christ, and not to make use of
him, is to say, we believe in him, and yet believe him not. If thou were told,
that in such a corner of a field there lay abundance of treasure, and yet thou
live in penury and want, and never go about to dig it up, every man would
think thou were not persuaded of the truth of it, but that thou look at it
as a fable. So for a man to say that he believes on Christ, and yet to let
Christ lie by him, as a refused commodity, and never look to him for salvation
and help, who will believe that we are persuaded that Jesus is the Christ the
anointed of God?

Use 4. Of consolation to every believing soul, we are ready to call in
question our regeneration and adoption, why if God gives us hearts believing
that Jesus is the Christ, and therefore thou go about to dig up this
treasure in him, and therefore art resolved not to leave off till thou have
found him, and trustest upon him daily for help and comfort, dependest on him,
seek him with all thy heart: Why, be of good comfort, thy faith is a
sufficient testimony to thee, that thou art born of God.

1 JOHN 5.1. latter part. And every one that loves him that begat, loves him
also that is begotten of him.


Doct. EVery Christian that is affected with the love of God as a father, is
enlarged also with love to his brethren, as those that are begotten of him.
This Doctrine is not delivered in these express terms any where else, but
something like is found, John 20.17. I ascend to my Father and your Father. He
acknowledges his Father to be their Father reconciled in him, and he looks at
them as his bre hren, therefore tell my Brethren. He therefore that
acknowledges God as his father, and bears a child-like love to him, by the
same affection is he carried to love his brethren, as those that are begotten
of God.

Reas. 1. Because he takes them all to be his Brethren. And 2. Because he looks
at God as their father as well as his, so that he that looks at God as his
Father, and yet respects not his children as his brethren, is a liar; he that
loves his Father, loves all his children, because they are his brethren of the
same blood, of the same womb.

2. If we look at God as our Father, and love him accordingly, then we look at
his children as those that have the image of God stamped upon them, and
therefore we look at them as of the same temper with our selves, as partakers
of the divine nature with our selves, 2 Pet. 1.4.

3. If we look at God as our Father, and so at every believer as the son of
God, then we cannot but conceive that they are beloved of God, and that God
pities them as a father does his children, Psalm. 103.13. Why then we cannot
love God the Father, but we must love his children, for the loves sake* that
God bears them: It (...) for, 2 Chronicles. 19.2. Should thou love (...) those
whom the Lord loves (...) 20, 21. so (...) those (...) love^^^ Lord, (...)

(...) God, (...) then (...) for (...) w^^ked in (...) Lord spare^ (...) for,
David (...) 1 Kings (...) of Abija^ (...) God, yet for David (...) Fathers
(...) though God see the children o^ (...) yet (...) their others sake, (...),
Israel. So (...) ^e, if God the ^^ther ^e holy a^^ (...) and (...) though his
children so^^times walk (...) for their fathers like unto m^st ^ave them a
(...) ^amp, (...) helpful and loving to them for their ^ood fa^ (...) What
(...) spo^^ be not the sp^^^ Gods child^^^ De^^ ^.5. (...) ^not see those
badges of holiness and righteousness (...) yet because God is holy, and just,
we are to respect them (...) God bea^^ them and us. It was observ^^e, that
speech (...) of God, whe^^ came to Jezabel, and comman^^^ (...) down out of a
window and slain, (...) ^^^ds forth his (...) that cursed woman, for she is a
Kings dange^ (...) 34. What Kings ^^ghter? but an Idolatrous King; and yet
becau^^ (...) daughter, bury her. Now if this speech of (...) by Go^ (...); it
should th^^ the children of Kings and Princes, (...) ^atiou^ (...) must be
respected for their ^^^ds sake. Why, how much (...) ^ill God look you should
put (...) the (...) and (...) any of his children be so far fo^^^ (...)
blaspheme, (...) them be respected, no^ (...) but beca^^e the sons and
daughters o^ (...) King (...) they (...) and sinful passages (...) offices
(...) sons and (...) of God, they have (...) of the^ Father in them, though
(...) degenerate, and that is gre^^, then to be born of any earthly (...)

(...) 1. Ex^lu^^ all such from the love^^ God as their Father, who^e (...) are
(...) up fr^^ (...) as their brethren, i^ (...) they come (...) the stamp of
Go^ ^^ildren upon them, his (...) stamped upon them, (...) they begin to sit
(...) ^trange themselves from them, though formerly they loved them (...). What
a poor case is his blind world (...) that the more any (...) the nature of
God, the mo^ ^^ey hate the^? (...) such know, (...) ^ever look up to God as
their Father, and (...) and neglect their brethren: we^^ the (...) Prin^^ you
wou^^ ^^our and respect them for their Fathers (...) why, (...) Gods sake? But
know, that if you estrange^ you (...) from the^, you plain^^ show that for want
of love to them that (...) gotten, you w^^ (...) to their father that begat
them.

Use 2. To exhort at all (...) his brotherly love for if God use so many
Exhortations and Arguments to stir us up to this duty, ^t shows that we are
very backward (...), and that our Spirit lusts to envy, James 5.5, ^. And to
help us to this duty of love, this is an especial good means, by looking at
them as born of God, and so partakers of the same faith, partakers of the same
divine nature; by looking at them as our Brethren, as the beloved of God, (...)
great King; and though they walk in many, ^^ose (...) children of good parents,
and does not easily break out (...) how much more ought we to love the children
of (...), and Jehu could respect the Daughter (...) and enemy to the State
(...) though (...) ^od on the^^ (...) love and (...) their ^^nities they are
King (...). We use to say so to some (...), I loved your (...) my good friend,
and as honest man, the^ (...) I cannot (...) love you (...) your Fathers ^ake,
and therefore I am so^^ ^ou take course^ (...) your good Father; (...) and
desire you to break off (...) such bad company. Thus we dea^ (...) whom we love
and shall we not do so much (...) for (...) children that we see degenerate
from him, and (...) you should take such courses as no way beseech the children
of such a good Father* I beseech you carry your self like h^ (...), be holy as
he is holy, and this is a true act of love.

1 JOHN 5.2. By this we know that we love the children of God, when we love
God, and (...) ^^mmandements.


IN the fourth Chapter the Apostle had exhorted us to the unfeigned love of our
Brethren; now he proceeds to a word of direction, ho^ (...) now whether we love
them or no.

Hereby we know, etc. It was the scope of this holy Apostle (...) such things
as by the knowledge whereof their joy might be full, and with his exhortations
he mingles diverse marks and signs, that so knowing the estate, they might have
fullness of ^y. Now therefore, because love of (...) Brethren was a course of
full Joy, yet if we knew not whether we loved them (...) no, it would ^e matt^^
^f little (...), therefore he tells us how we (...), to sati^fie some weak
Christians th^^ might be doubtful, (...) ^^ny we kn^w that (...) love the
children of (...), when we love (...) his commandeme^^s. A right Preachers
(...). First he says down instructions and duties, and then lays down (...).

In the words two (...).

First, The expediency of our knowledge of our love to our Brethren, which is
here employed, else he would not have laid down marks to know (...) by.

Secondly, The marks of discerning our love, which are two.

1. Love of God. 2. Obedience to the commandments of God.
Doct. It is a behovefull point to a Christian ^^s comfort, not only to love
Gods children, but to know that he loves.
The scope of his writing was to fulfill (...) was a means of th^^ ^e teaches
us this main duty to love our Breth^^ (...) only so, but (...) how to know it.
Isa. 48.17. I am the Lord thy God the holy (...) teaches thee to profit. Why
then surely if God teach us such a point (...) ^his, its a way of profiting,
and therefore to walk in the knowledge of our love to Gods ^aints, is a
profitable way.

Reas. 1. From the assurance it will give us of our good estate before God, and
of Gods protection of us in such an estate (...) therefore if we know this, we
know we are in a good estate. The love of our Brethren is an undoubted argument
of our passage from death to life, 1 John 3.14. Therefore the knowing of this,
must needs give us much comfort; nay, it not only gives me evidence, but it
manifests to others that our estate is good, John 13.35. Now, if we did not
know out (...) courages a Christian that others (...) suspect himself; thus
(...)

Further (...) this (...) God will ^^eive (...) God. (...) God (...) ^on, ^.10.
(...)

Reas. 2. From (...) they may (...) 22.6. They (...) love her. If therefore God
(...) we (...) him, and his (...), we know we fall under a covenant of (...) I
will blessed ^^m that bless thee, Genesis 22.3. (...) contra^^ Let them be (...)
and turned back that have ^^ will to Zion; let (...) be to the c^en on the
(...), thereof the m^^er fills ^ot his lay, neither (...) pass (...) God
(...) ^0.5, the Implying, that lives in an estate (...) of (...) shall never
prosper in the outward or inward man, (...) shall (...) as the corn on the
house top; and as God (...) him not, (...) no^ from him, so man blesses
him^^^, because he is turned from him, ^od its (...) shall be turned b^ If we
^oe not love our Brethren, every thing (...) again (...) A man that wants a
spirit of love, has no ground (...) for blessing, he withers as the corn on
the house (...) hot weather, (...) no root. If a man have not his heart softened
(...) love (...) his Brother, these is something within him which will not
suffer (...) there want (...) and moisture, upon which he ^ight prospe^; (...)
grow^ (...) b^de he yields no service en^^ to God ^^an. (...) hopes the spa^^
^f love (...) blessings.

Reas. 2. (...) and comfortablenesse of (...) dealing (...) is sincerely
affected (...) 2 Cor. 1.12. (...) we (...) they, and ^ad to (...) carefully,
and pai^ (...) him, Thy corn was not current, or (...) was not fully (...)
^oth, he stands confidently out, and it comforts him much: So (...) when joy,
when others suspect his love to them, which is his debt, Ro^. 13.8, ^hy, if he
know he has pa^^ it the^^ to the full, and in current duties of love, (...)
satisfies (...): This is our re^^^cing, the testimony (...) conscien^^.

Use 1. It reproves the (...) of men, when they content themselves with the
love of the (...) but are not solicitous to know whether that way be a way of
(...) have much self lo^^ and false love (...) may easily (...) ^ves. All this
have I done ^ith the young (...) 9.^^. (...) ^oncei^ed of himself, an^ his is
(...) are (...) ^waded we do such things in lo^^, when i^ nothing so (...)
take (...) upon trust have not so much wisdom as those that (...) they, the^
^^rely before they pay it. Why, everyday we that a (...) of love to (...), le^
(...) therefore we pay our debt in current love. God (...) not only tha^ we
^ould love our a ^rethren, but that we should know^ (...)

Use 2. Of (...), not only to (...) down ^^es to people, But withal to lay
(...) the^of whereby (...) may know it. This was St. John's practice, and he
does (...) their joy.

(...) commandents, is an undoubted (...)

(...) to God before we can (...) to ^ee (...) when (...) Prove. 6.21. as the
apple of (...)

Reas. (...) not his life (...) against his Brother Herod (...) loose form
(...) at (...) of Gods (...) our Breth^^ (...) cannot (...) from (...) from the
other.

(...) love of God is an evidence that we love (...) Brethren, so^^ a (...) not
God, ^e so was not his Brother, (...) be for self (...) on (...) grounds, and
its (...) civil love not a (...) Brother love. 2 (...) 10.^5, 16. For Je^^^
(...) King, so (...) with (...), a good man, he would think it (...), but (...)
it was that he might (...) zeal for the Lord (...), and to w^^k out (...)
^ands. So (...) no means part (...) Jacob was not this great love? No, he (...)
found it did advantage his estate.

Use 1. A ground of trial, whether (...) love to our Brethren ^e unfeigned or
no; such as we may be bold to say, I know I love them. (...) thou affected
toward God? Do thou look (...) and would thou (...) his commandments as
thy took precious (...) life, that thou would part with thy life sooner thou
them (...) it thus, (...) sincere and unfeigned Many (...) their (...) very
good, because they find their hearts love Gods children, and favor (...) But
exee^^ you have (...) ^eart fea^^ God, making (...) ^ment, (...) not (...)
^ouring ^^ligion that will (...) the love of God and obedience to his
commandment be (...) otherwise you may affect Gods children, be (...) you
(...) harmless as Pil^to did Christ, gave (...) ^^ting^ (...) the (...) of
Caesar wa^ a sign the fear of God (...) enemy to Christ, only out of
conviction of conscience, (...) he was a just man. (...) respects may many
times move a man (...), the very sense of (...) sings and helps by th^^^; as
La^a^ (...). But this is far from tru^^; otherwise, if we love them in
obedience to God and his commandments, its an evidence of (...) sincere (...).

Use 2. For (...) that desire to know that they love their Brethren. (...)
constantly conscionable of your obedience (...) commandments, and love him,
and then you may be assured (...) to your Brethren is sincere. Break your
obedience to God (...), and your (...) to him, and then you will soon break off
you^ (...) Brethren, a^ (...) and (...) did, bu^ ^^intain obedience to Go^
(...) Brethren.

Use 3. Of comfort to Gods servants (...) good evidence of their unfeigned love
to their Brethren, If God give that (...) to love God and keep his
commandment. Its our an^ ^e if thy love has this superscription on one side,
Love of God, one the other side the ^^^ce to Gods commandments, it ^^ll prove
current, before God (...) a sufficient breast plate against all
^isconstructions of the world ^^y this we ^^ew our love to our Brother, if we
love God and keep his commandments.

1 JOHN 5.3. For this is the love of God, that we keep his commandments, and
his commandments are not grievous.


VErse 2. he had given a double mark of our love to our Brethren, which was, if
we love God, and keep his commandment. Now because a Christian might be
inquisitive and doubtful, How shall I know that I love God and keep his
commandments? why, v. 3. This is the love of God, that we keep his
commandments, and they are not grievous.

Doct. The keeping of Gods commandments, and the easiness of that yoke, is an
undoubted sign of our unfeigned love to God; that is, If we be willing to bear
the yoke of Christ, and account it easy, that evidently argues that the love
of God in our hearts is sincere.
This Christ teaches his Disciples, John 15.14. Then are ye my friends, if ye
do whatsoever I command you. Now friendship argues integrity of love. Now
betwixt friends there passes a mutual covenant, a mutual communication of
good one to another, and of secrets; so there is a certain community of all
things, all things are common among friends: So, he that keeps Gods
commandments, looks at Gods law, so as he makes it of his counsel and
delight, and is ruled by it. And again, God communicates his attributes to him,
which is something more then a parent does to his child, though he love him
well, yet he will not communicate to him whatsoever is his, nor always make
him of his counsel, nor yet show familiarity toward him; but God looks at
Christians as his friends, communicates his counsels to them, grows in
acquaintance with them.

Obj. Its not for friends to be at command, but servants. Its a point of
service, and not of friendship.

Answ. To do it as a duty of necessity, is a servants condition; but to do a
thing for loves sake to his friend, this is an act of friendship. Further, a
man is not said to keep the Commandments, when himself only strives to keep
them, but when he draws others to the same conscionable obedience. Friends have
all things common, and they do not love that any that belong to them, should
be enemies to their friends: So God looks at it as a part of Abraham's
friendship, that he would command his children and servants after him, that
they should keep the way of the Lord, Genesis 18.17, 19. Hence in Scripture its a
spiritual style give to Abraham, Abraham the friend of God, James 2.23. Isa.
41.8. Now, what eminent service did he above others? There were others as
zealous as he, but this he had eminent in him, I know he will teach his
children and household to keep my ways. Look at Moses, David, Eli, Jehosaphat,
all godly men, yet they were all failing in this, in instructing and bringing
on their children and servants to the fear of God; but this was Abraham's
friendship, that he was not only careful himself, but he sought to bring on
his whole family to Gods worship. We see his care about Isaac, that God would
establish his covenant with him, Genesis 17.18. And about Ishamael, that he might
live in thy sight; and he brought on his whole family to be circumcised, though
a painful thing, Genesis 17. ult. This was a fruit of true love. So David.
professes in his own person and Christ's, Psalm. 40.8. O Lord I delight in thy
Law. Ps 19.9, 10. Thy commandments are more precious then gold, yea then fine
gold: thy precepts are sweeter then honey and the honeycomb. A sign they were
not grievous to him. Love makes us delight in the thing beloved.

What is the reason that this is such an undoubted argument of our love to God?

Reas. 1. From the strictness and purity of Gods law, and the crosnesse of it
to our nature. The weapons of our warfare are mighty to bring down every high
thought, 1 Cor. 10.4. Here two contraries meet together; the prerogative of God
he will have our thoughts brought into subjection; and the liberty of the
Creature, We will not have our thoughts and tongues bound, Psalm. 12.4. We are
free born, we are servants to none. Now these being so cross one to another,
for a man now not only to do Gods commandments, but to do them willingly,
and out of love; why, this is such a yoke, that were it not for the mighty
power of Gods love prevailing in our hearts, which constrains us to do it most
willingly, which nature is most unwilling unto, it would never be wrought.
Hence Gods people are said to be a willing people, Psalm. 110. The Spirit of God
is a Spirit of liberty, 2 Cor. 3.17. Its evident Gods Spirit is there where we
do Gods commandments with freedom and willingness.

2. From the experience such have had of the burden of sin, to whom Gods
commandments seem easy: For this is certain, the more welcome sin, the more
unwelcome Gods commandments; the more we delight in sin, the less we delight
in Gods commandments; but when once sin is wearisome to a soul, to them
Christ's yoke is easy, and his burden light, Mat. 11.28, 29.

3. From the unsufficiency of any estate but an estate of love, to reach to the
obedience of Gods commandments, much less to the easiness thereof. A man by
nature is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be, Romans 8.7, 8.
And though by common gifts we may be brought to do much, as Jehu and Herod
did, yet unless there be soundness of love within, you shall never prevail
with Jehu to cast out the golden calves, or with Herod to put away Herodias. It
must be the love of God within that must bring us to keep his commandments, or
at least to do them willingly and heartily.

Use 1. A ground of trial of our estates, whether we love God or no. If we
would be assured of this, as we all had need to be, consider of this, Do thou
keep Gods commandments as thy way, thy jewels, the apple of thy eye, thy life?
And, do thou desire to bring all thy children and family to the like
conscionable obedience, that all thy family may be Gods friends? This is an
argument of thy unfeigned love to God. And if withal this seem easy to thee,
and thou delight in it, and think it thy happiness, that every thought in
thee may be subject to Christ; this is a sufficient testimony of the sincerity
of thy love. But, e contra, if we shake off Gods yoke, and we will have our
thoughts and tongues at liberty, if it be a grief to us to see any of our
friends conscionable of Gods worship or of religion; why, thou art none of Gods
friend. For if thou were, thou would desire that both thy self and all thy
friends were Christ's friends. If a man loved his Master, and liked his service
well, and desired to stay with him, he would have his ear bored, that so all
his Masters commandments might sink the better into him; why, this must needs
argue great love to his Master. This David alludes to, Psalm. 40.6. Mine ears
have thou bored, or as it is in the Original, dug. He dug through all
obstructions, and made him willing to listen to Gods will; a loving Servant
becomes a friend: So, if we might have liberty to get loose from God, yet if we
had rather abide in his service, let us give our ears to God to be bored, and
give up not only our selves but our whole family to be Gods bond-servants.

Use 2. To teach all such as love God, to take heed that they be not drawn to
break any of Gods commandments, for love to others. This is plain. If love to
man makes us break any of Gods commandments, then we love him better then God.

Use 3. Of encouragement to natural men to give up their hearts to Gods
commandments and not to think them burdensome and intolerable. For if thou
had but the love of God in thy heart, Gods commandments would be sweeter
then the honey, or the honey-combe. They are deceived much that look at Gods
commandments as heavy and burdensome: No, his commandments are not grievous;
and if his commandments be pleasant, what are his promises and rewards?

Use 4. For them that would have Gods commandments seem easy to them, and not
burdensome; why, grow up in the love of God, meditate on his goodness, and
promises, and mercies, and so thou shall grow up to love him; and the more
love, the more willing and obedient. A man never loses his first works, but he
loses his first love. Let him renew his first love, and he shall renew his
first works, Rev. 2.4, 5.

1 JOHN 5.4, 5. For whatsoever is born of God, overcomes the world, and this
is the victory that overcomes the world, even our faith.

Who is he that overcomes the world, but he that believes that Jesus is the
Son of God?


VEers. 1. the Apostle had made an evidence of the love of God to keep his
commandments, and to do them with ease. This he proves verse. 4. by an argument
taken from the removal of the impediments of Gods love in such an heart, and
that is the overcoming of the world. And the argument stands thus: To them that
overcome thy world, Gods commandement^ an easy yoke: But they that are born of
God have overcome the world; Ergo, Its the love of the world that hinders our
obedience to Gods commandments. This kept off the young man, so every one that
is kept off, it is for the love of some pleasure or profit, which they will not
deny, and so Gods commandments seem burdensome

Doct. 1. Every regenerate Christian, is a victorious Christian, a conqueror
of the world.
Every Christian be he never so poor that has but the least pittance or shred
of true grace, has a mighty power in him to overcome the world. It was a
famous thing of old to be but conquerors of the world, as the Babilonian and
Roman Monarchies were. But St. John testifies here, that every Christian is
Lord of the whole world, 1 Cor. 3.22, 23. He has it there by gifts, but here
by conquest, he overcomes the world viz. so far as it is an enemy to grace.
Indeed, in themselves the comforts of the world are good and useful but as far
as they have a snare in them, he overcomes them, 1 John 4.4. The honors of the
world have a snare in them to puff up our hearts, 2 Chronicles. 26.16. Profit of
the world choke the good seed of the Word, Mat. 13.22, 23. So the pleasures of
the world they make the Word unfruitful, Luke 8.19.

Now, how does a regenerate Christian overcome this?

1 He abides constant in his Christian course, notwithstanding the flattering
or threatening of the world, so that he will not be seduced by any of these
snares, Ephesians. 6.11, 13. Paul would not give place to such seducements; no, not
for an hour: Now, that is a part of a man's victory, to hold his own, and to
keep his standing, and not to flit; such a man is never said to be overcome
that keeps his standing.

2 He not only holds his own, but he resists his enemies, he musters up all
the forces he has to resist the temptations of the world. Jam. 4.7. Resist the
devil, and he will fly from you. Stand out against a temptation, and you
overcome it. Joseph being tempted by his Mistress, he takes into his hands for
his weapons Gods commandments, and his Masters kindness, Genesis 39.7, 8, 9.
That that would be a dishonor to God, and an injury to his Master, and so he
overcame the temptation.

3. To overcome a temptation, is to make a good use of every temptation, and to
get ground by it, that the more he is invited by a temptation the more earnest
he is against it, and the more forward in his Christian course. When Michael
reproved David for his unseemly dancing (as she thought) Why, says he, I will
be yet more vile. Whereas her temptation was fetched from his disgrace; why, he
would bear more such disgrace: So when John's Disciples stirred him up to
emulation against Christ, that he carried away all the applause of the people
after him. What says John, He must increase, and I must decrease. He is the
Bridegroom, and I but his friend. And it is my joy and glory to see him
glorious: so that he made an advantage by that temptation, and drew them on the
more to honor Christ, by how much the more they sought to debase him: the more
we are tempted to covetousness, wantonness, or emulation, the more liberal;
chaste, and ^umble let us grow. This is to overcome a temptation, to take a
spoil, to enrich our selves by the spoil of our enemies, that is such a
conquest as the Apostle calls more then a conquest, Romans 8.37. In all this we
do more then conquer. For a conqueror gets a victory sometimes, but with much
wounds and loss* we sometimes with no loss. 2 After victories they grow
Inxurious. As it was said of the Romans after their great conquests.

Luxuria incubuit, victumque ulciscitur urbem. But a godly man so overcomes and
divides the spoil that he spoils not himself. Worldly conquerors fall to riot
and excess after their victories, but a Christian conqueror grows more wary
and humble, and sober then before. As it was said of John Baptist by Christ, A
Prophet, yea more then a Prophet: So, a regenerate man is a conqueror, yea more
then a conqueror.

Reas. From Christ's victory over the world, Romans 8.37. It is through him that
loved us. Christ has overcome the world, John 16. ult. Therefore I am to
wrestle but with a wounded, pimoned enemy, Christ having led captivity captive,
I come but to contend with a captive world, and so I overcome through Christ
that has loved me. It Is the death of Christ that has crucified the world to
me, Gal. 6.14. And therefore I am to fight but with a crucified enemy.

2 From the mighty power of Gods Word abiding in a Christians heart, 1 John
2.14. The commandments of God, and his promises do so rule in his heart, that
no flatterings of the world, no commandments of men can oversway him.

3 From the Spirit of God dwelling in them, which is greater then the spirit of
the world, 1 John 4.4. This Spirit does so mortify him to the world, and so
quicken him to grace, that he overcomes the world.

Obj. Did not Demas a great professor, forsake Paul, and embrace this present
world? 2 Timothy 4.10, Have not many for the live of the world erred from the
faith? 1 Timothy 6.9, 10. Was it not so with Ananias and Saphira, and Judas? The
love of this world overcame them. Has not the love of the world overcome many
of the Germane Christians to apostatize to Idolatry, and yield themselves to
the temptations thereof? How is it true then, that every poor Christian
overcomes the world?

Answ. It Is true, the world prevails with many professors, but many of them
were never truly born of God, as Demas and Judas, Ananias and Saphira.

Obj. Do you think that every one that is led away with the world, has no
shred of true grace in him?

Answ. No, for then I might condemn the generation of the righteous; for it
may easily fall out, that sometimes the servants of God are so filled with the
world, that they have much ado to take pains about edifying themselves, or
keeping peace with God. But yet, though a true Christian be led captive by the
world, so as he has little skill in any thing else but worldly matters; full
of dexterity in the world, and but a bungler in grace; yet if a man be born of
God, the Spirit of God at length will let him see his error, and then be will
mourn for it, and oppose and resist to the death. As a child getting into a
boat, at length the wind rises, and carries the boat from the shore, and
tosses him in the deep, he is not able to use the oars to bring him to the
shore, but after much toyling he is drowned, and a puff of wind, or the return
of the flood, casts him on the shore dead: So, many times a Christian falls a
tampering with the world, and it pleases him well, till at length the world
heaves and carries him up, until he be carried into the main, plunged so deep
in the world, that he sees he has lost his love to God, and then he strives to
recover himself, and labors and goes mourning to his grave but at his death,
he is cast up safely on the shore, the seed of God has kept some life of grace
in him.

Use 1. Shows the hypocrisy of such as are carried wholly captive with the
world, such were never truly born of God. Stella cadens, nunquam stella, cometa
fuit. Some illumination may make them blaze a while, but they vanish away at
length.

Use 2. Shows us the mavelous danger of the world. We think it an happy thing
to lade our selves with thick clay, to have our treasuries full, and our houses
well furnished. Why, would a man think himself rich, if his house were full of
enemies? Why, truly such is the world, it carries us into the deep, and drowns
us with many sinful lusts. Therefore the more we have of the world, the more
wary grow we of keeping the world shackled, that it may not hinder us, but help
us to more freedom; as a man, the more Sea-room, the better he sails: So let
Christians that have much of the world, learn to be more free for God.

Doct. 2. It Is the faith of a Christian that helps him to overcome the world.
Moses his example is full, Heb. 11.24, to 28. We see here.

1 Honor might have tempted him. He might have been called the Son of Pharoahs
daughter, this he refused by faith.

2 There was much treasure to be got in the Court, but by faith he esteemed the
reproach of Christ greater riches then the treasures of Egypt.

3 He might have had many pleasures in the Court, but by faith he esteemed the
affliction of Gods people before the pleasures of sin.

4 He might have incurred the Kings wrath, but by faith he feared not the Kings
wrath. So that, let the world flatter or threaten, faith overcomes it.

Reas. 1. Because faith inlightens the mind, to see things in another manner
then the world sees them. Faith lets us see things as they are. Faith lets
Moses see, that to be called Gods Son, is far greater honor then to be called
the Son of Pharoah's daughter. Faith lets him see, that the afflictions of Gods
servants are better then worldly pleasure. Faith lets him see, that Gods wrath
is more to be feared then the Kings. Faith is of a discerning nature, Heb.
11.1. Faith makes that evident to a Christian, which others see not.

2 Faith estates us into Christ. Now Christ dwelling in us by faith inables us
to overcome the world.

3 Faith has a power to purify our hearts, Acts 15.9. 2 Pet. 1.14. from the
lusts of the world. Faith looks at God as our portion, and therefore regards
not the profits of the world. 2 Faith cleanses us from voluptuousness. Faith
lets us see more joy and pleasure in Gods favor, then in all the contents of
the world. 3 Faith establishes our hearts in Gods fear, Prove. 29.25. and
therefore makes us not to be afraid of the wrath of men; so that faith fenceth
us on every side against the world

4. Faith lays hold on the promises, 2 Pet. 1.5. Now, Gods promises have a
power to take off our minds from the world. Faith believes the promises of Gods
protection and provision and goodness, and therefore makes us not to regard
the world.

Use 1. To teach a Christian never to go without the continual exercise of his
faith. The world will be still drawing us away, either after pleasure or
profit, or else will discourage you with fears and dangers. Why, faith alone is
able to overcome them; therefore live continually by faith, depend upon Christ,
look up to the promises, and you shall be too hard for the world.

Use 2. Of comfort to every faithful believer, in order to their perseverance.
If faith overcomes the world, then it will overcome Satan, and your own lusts.

Doct. 3. To them that have overcome the world, the yoke of Gods commandments
is easy.
By the world we heard is not to be understood the creatures, but there be
somethings in the world that have a snare in them. 2 There be many comforts in
the world that are apt to draw our minds from God. Again, there are many
discomforts and dangers, which are enemies to grace. Now, to him that has
overcome these, the yoke of Gods commandments is easy. Paul to whom the world
was crucified, Gal. 6.14. when he hears that bonds and afflictions attend him.
he cares for none of these things, he can fulfill his course with joy for all
these, then surely his task is not a grievous yoke, but joyful.

Reas. 1. From the weapons that the world lends Satan in every temptation.
Whatsoever temptation comes from Sotan, or from our own corruptions, they find
no argument to persuade us, but only taken from the world; so that if once you
have overcome the world, no temptation will lay hold on you. There have been
many that have been willing to partake of Christ, but when Christ has bid them
part with all, they went away sorrowful. Mat. 10.22. Here was a loss of profit
kept him off. Some are kept off by profits, some by pleasures, Luke 14.18, 19,
20. The profits of the world made Ananias dissemble, the love of the world made
Demas forsake Paul. What made Achitophel hang himself, but disgrace of the
world? For ease sake Judas hanged himself: So some men's credit and honors keep
them off, John 5.44. How can ye believe that receive honor one of another? The
seeking of worldly honor and glory, hinders them from seeking Gods glory, John
12.42, 43. All the discouragements that hinder in our Christian course, are
either from the profits, pleasures, or honors of the world. If therefore we
have got victory over the world, then no temptation shall make us think Gods
yoke grievous. What made Herod and Demas, and others think Gods commandments
heavy but their profits and pleasures?

Use 1. May serve to teach those that would walk on in a Christian course with
freedom and liberty, to wean their affections from the love of the world. Bear
a crucified affection to the contents of the world, and then Gods yoke will not
seem heavy.

1 Though the commandments be great and heavy, yet as a man is, so is his
strength. When a man has got victory over the world, he has got Christ in
his soul, and so through the strength of Christ he is able to prevail, 1 John
4.4. And withal, there abides with him the mighty power of Gods Spirit, and
Gods Word, which affords him mighty strength.

2. There is a weakening of the enemy. All the weapons that Satan uses are took
away when a man has once overcome the world: were a man advanced to the stars,
he would see the stars to be huge immense things, far above that they seem now,
and he would look at the earth as a small point. But if we stand here below, we
look at the earth as a great thing. We think worldly honors and preferments
great dignities, and the stars we think them small things, because we stand
below, and are renewed from them; but in case God lift us above the world, and
we might have our eyes enlightened to see the greatness of Gods favor, and
Christ's blood, and heavenly things; why, then those earthly things would seem
small. If we would therefore walk in an enlarged frame, let us esteem earthly
things as small matters, worth little regard, and account heavenly things as
worthy your highest esteem, and chiefly to be looked at.

1 JOHN 5.5. Wh^ is he that overcomes the world, but he that believes that
Jesus is the Son of God?


Doct. THe faith that overcomes the world, is faith in the divinity and Sonship
of Christ.
Who is he that overcomes the world, but he that believes that Jesus is the
Son of God?

When Peter had made that profession of his faith, Thou art the Christ the Son
of the living God; what says Christ to this? Blessed art thou Simon, etc. Mat.
16.16, 17, 18. This confession made Simon to be a rock, and upon this rock of
Peter's confession, Christ built his Church: So that, if you ask upon what
foundation the Church stands, it was upon this faith, and against this faith
the gates of hell, and all the judicial power thereof shall not prevail.

What is it then to believe that Jesus is the Son of God?

1 He that believes that that Jesus whom Judas betrayed, and the Jews
crucified, is the Son of God.

2 He that believes that he is the Son of God in whom he is well pleased, Mat.
3.17. So that he is that mighty power and wisdom of God, in whom his Father is
well pleased. This faith overcomes the world.

1 Because this kind of faith cannot be attained by any humane means, but by an
heavenly revelation from God the Father, Mat. 16.16. And in that age when St.
John wrote this, there was no humane reason to induce us to believe it.

1 All antiquity of the Gentiles was against it. They had heard of Jupiter
Apollo and Hercules, but Christ seemed a new God to them, Acts 17.18.

2 All authority was against it, 2 Cor. 2.8. None of the Princes of the world
knew of it.

3 The universal consent of all the habitable world was against it, save only
a small handful of people that believed him to be the Christ, the Son of God.

4 There was something in reason founded against it, for a man to look for
salvation from a poor Carpenters Son, from a despised man; one that was
excommunicated, and crucified, and could not save himself; for a man to look
for salvation from him, was more then flesh and blood could reach; for the poor
thief upon the Cross, to see him on the Cross, and yet to beg of him a
Kingdom, and after death too, this was such a faith as overcame the world.
This flesh revealed not, to take a man at the worst, and then to believe on him
for salvation.

Object. But now who is there that believes not Jesus to be the Son of God?

Answ. It Is true. We have now all those arguments to prove him to be the Son of
God, which they wanted. We have the antiquity of many hundred years, we have
authority on our parts, and the universal consent of the whole Christian world
has now taken up such a principle; and for reasons, we have reason enough,
seeing so many ages, so many wise and great men consent to this truth. And
therefore it is now less wonder to believe Jesus to be the Son of God. What
then? Is St. John's argument of no force now?

Yes certainly, therefore 2 we say, It Is no great matter to believe Jesus to be
the Son of God, upon humane credulity of antiquity, universality, or humane
reason. That Is not the faith that overcomes the world; but it must be such a
faith as is wrought in our hearts by God himself, and this faith far differs
from humane credulity.

1 No man that believes Christ to be the Son of God by this divine faith, but
looks up to him for salvation. Look unto me and be saved all ye ends of the
earth, Isa. 45.22.

2 If we look at Christ as the Son of God, this faith has an efficacy in it,
to work in us contrition and mourning for our sins, whereby we have crucified
the Lord of life, Acts. 2.37. When they heard that was the Christ whom they had
c^ucified, they were pricked in their hearts, Zach. 12.10. To such as bebelieve
thus, Christ is made the author of eternal salvation, Heb. 5.8.

3 From the mighty power and virtue a faithful soul derives from Christ to
overcome the world: when you look at all the world, and all the comforts
thereof, and compare them with Christ, you shall find them so vain and empty,
that there is no comparison, Psalm. 73.25. Mat. 16.24. What is there in the
world that would be equal with Christ? Did not Moses on this ground despise all
the treasures and pleasures of Egypt, because he had seen him that was in the
bush? Heb. 11.27. That was the Lord Christ. The transcendent worth a Christian
finds in Christ, far outswayes all worldly dignities.

Use 1. Of encouragement to a Christian soul against all temptation. For if
this faith overcome the world, then it will overcome Satan and the corrupt
lusts of thine own heart, and therefore this faith cannot be overcome, but is
secure against all enemies. If it were possible that our faith could be
extinguished then this were not true, that Faith overcomes the world. If a man
therefore lose his faith; such faith was never true.

2 It teaches us the exceeding danger of the love of the world. How many are
there that rise early and sit up late, that spend their whole care and pains to
get worldly wealth? Why, do you think this a safe condition? Would you not
think him an infidel, that would not believe that Jesus is the Son of God. If a
man be overcome of the world, truly he believes it not, that Jesus is the Son
of God and can such a man be a Christian?

Obj. What say you? Were there never any good men overcome of the world? What
say you to those that recanted in Q. Mary's days for fear, and after repented,
and were burnt for their profession? What say you to Peter?

Answ. A godly man in a combat may be overthrown, yet not overcome; as it is
in wrestling, a man may get the foyl, and yet afterward rise up and get the
victory, so oft-times a foiled Soldier gets the day. So Peter though he were
foiled at that day, and yet when he got up again, and afterward was charged not
to preach in the Name of Jesus, he overcame all. Whether it be meet to obey God
or man, judge ye, Acts 4.19. Indeed, if a man be thrown down, and there he
lies, and takes no care to get up again, look at him as no true believer;
therefore look not at these as things that may stand together, to serve God and
man, and the world too. So respect the world, as that you ever look at Christ
to have incomparably more worth then all the world, and let your chiefest love
and endeavor be toward him.

Use 3. Of consolation to them that maintain this principle, that Jesus is the
Son of God. Why, you may assure your selves that the world shall never overcome
you. Look up to him as your Savior, for your salvation; Look so on him as to
mourn for your sins, and obey him as the eternal Son of God. Keep this faith in
exercise, and you shall not be overthrown; or if you be, it will so raise you
up, and recover you, that you shall overcome at the last.

1 JOHN 5.6. This is he that came by water and blood: even Jesus Christ, not by
water only, but by water and blood: and it is the Spirit that bears
witness, because the Spirit is truth.


IN the former verse. he had showed, that faith overcoming the world, is faith
in the divinity and Sonship of Christ. Now in these words he describes Christ
the object of our faith: 1 By his manner of coming: This is he that came by
water and blood. 2 By the witness that is born of him.


1 In general, the Spirit, v. 6. Then, 2 In heaven, and 3 On earth, v. 7, 8.

1 For the furniture of his coming. He came fully addressed for the works of
our redemption; he came by water and blood. By water is not meant their legal
oblations, for he speaks of such a water as bears witness that Christ is the
Son of God to this day, which they do not. By this water therefore is meant the
clear water of sanctification, spoken of Ezekiel. 36.25, 26. wherewith our Savior
Christ came abundantly furnished, fit to be our redeemer. By blood is meant the
blood of his sufferings.

Doct. That Jesus Christ came to execute his office by the water of
sanctification, and by the blood of redemption.
It is he that came to overcome the world, to redeem us. How, By water and
blood. Why by water and blood both?

1 From the end of his coming, that he might fulfill the types of the Law. In
the old Law no Priest might enter upon his office upon pain of death, but he
must first wash his hands and feet, Exodus 30.19, 20. Which shows how careful
we should be, to come with clean hearts and hands to Gods service; and it typed
out, that when the Lord Christ should take upon him his Priestly office, he
should come free and spotless from all sin, and he did so, so that ^ guile was
found in his mouth. Pilate himself testified of him, I find no evil in him.

2 As they came by water, so they might dot enter into the holiest place,
except they were first sprinkled with blood. Which signified that it was
needful that Christ should come by his own blood to exp^ate our sins, Heb.
9.7, to 12. More particularly:

Q. 2. Why shoald he come by water; that is thoroughly watered from all sin?

Answ. 1. It was fit he should be such a one, that he might not expiate for his
own sins, Heb. 2.25, to 29. Had there been found the least sin in Christ, all
the blood he spilt would have been little enough for himself.

2 That his sacrifice might be available for us. Had he been unjust himself, he
could not have redeemed us, 1 Pet. 3.18. But being just himself, there was no
need he should dye for himself, but for us.

Q Why was it needful he should come by blood?

Answ Had he come never so purely sanctified, yet this would never have made
atonement, for, without shedding of blood is no remission, Heb. 9.22. He came
by blood therefore.

1 That by his blood and sufferings he might purchase out of his Fathers wrath,
a Church unto himself, Acts 20 28. And by that blood, not only the elect, but
all the creatures are purchased, at least to be serviceable to the Church.
Christ bath bought all things quick and dead, either for his Churches comfort
or affliction, 2 Cor. 3.22, 23. All power in heaven and earth is given into his
hand, Psalm. 2.8.

2 That he might make at onement for our souls. It was impossible that the
blood of Bulls and Goats should expiate for our sins, but as they look at
Christ, his blood is given to be an atonement for our sins, Heb. 9.12, 13. And
it makes an atonement not only between God and us, but also between Jews and
Gentiles, Ephesians. 2.17, 18, 19. Whereas before the Gentiles would not become Jews,
by reason of their hard ordinances; now, Christ took away that wall of
separation.

3 That he might procure not only Gods favor, but this fruit of it, the
remission of our sins, Mat. 26.28.

4 That by the price of his blood, he might purchase the inhabitation of his
Spirit to us, that he might procure it for us, that our consciences might be
purified, Heb. 9.14. This blood purifieth our consciences. The blood of Christ
cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1.9. And that is done by putting in us a a
Spirit of grace, which purges us from all uncleanness and sin, and adorning
us with the contrary graces of piety, humility, patience. Christ by his cursed
death for us, has procured a Spirit of ^race for us, which purifies our
consciences from the guilt and from the stain of sin, Heb. 9.14.

5 That he might confirm his new covenant, the New Testament to us, Mat. 26.28.
This is the blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many for the
remission of sins. Now, without the death of the Testator no Testament is in
force. Heb. 9.1^, to 21. It Is accounted a sacrilegious thing to violate the
Testament of the dead. So it is with Christ; for a man to call any of his
promises into question, is a sacrilegious violation of his Testament.

6 That he might keep in us everlasting nourishment to feed on in our hearts,
John 6.56. So that his blood may be his wine to cheer us, that by the comfort
of his blood, and mediation applied to our souls, we might have wherewith to
sustain our selves in the worst times. This is meat indeed, and drink indeed,
no nourishment our souls can feed on, but this; our souls cannot feed on
pleasures and profits, spirits must feed upon spiritual things. Those are
beggarly naked souls that have nothing but lands and riches to feed on, the
souls food is holy spiritual things; and if the ordinances yield you any good
or comfort, whence comes this, but only from the blood of Christ that has
besprinkled all these ordinances, and made them effectual, Heb. 9.19. It Is the
blood of sprinkling that makes every ordinance effectual to us.

7 He came by blood to us, that so he might open a way to us into the most holy
place.

Use 1. Teaches us, that a poor Christian that believes in Christ, may thereby
overcome the world, because he believes on such a one as came both by water and
blood, by the water of sanctification to purify and cleanse us and by the
blood of his redemption, whereby he has procured for us pardon, and
happiness; therefore whosoever believes on Christ, is so sprinkled with the
blood of Christ, that he is redeemed from the world, to become the servant of
God, he has all the promises of God, which make him overcome all the promises
of the world, and encourages him against all difficulties, and so assures him
of heavenly glory; so that he looks at the world as a thing little to be
regarded.

Use 2. To stir up all those that desire to get victory over the world, to
labor to get faith in Christ Jesus, who is so abundantly furnished with helps
and means for our redemption, fit to sanctify us by the water of
sanctification, fit to sprinkle us with the blood of redemption; whereas, if we
do not believe on Christ, we shall be continually slaves to the world. Hence it
is, that worldlings take such content and comfort in the things of this life,
and are so discouraged at the loss of them; a plain sign they want faith to
overcome the world.

Use 3. Of trial what portion we have in Christ. Why, what feedest thou on? If
thou have a part in Christ, thou have a Spirit of God within thee to comfort
thee, thou find the ordinances sprinkled with the blood of Christ to feed
on; thou can say to the flattering world, I have better meat and better
comforts to feed on, then the world can yield, Psalm. 4.6. It Is poor nourishment
for spirits to feed on the husks of this world; but a Christian finds the
blood of Christ, the only food of his soul, and the world to be his Servant,
and not his Master. But if we have no higher matters to feed on, then the
profits and contents of the world, the Spirit of God and grace we relish not;
why then truly Christians we are not.

4 If thou would use the privileges which come by Christ, why this is the
way, Believe on the Lord Jesus, and then he is come for thee by water and
blood. Distrust therefore thy own righteousness, rest upon Christ, live in
such places where Christ is dispensed in his ordinances, that so being brought
on to believe, thou may find Christ to thy salvation.

5 Of consolation to such as renounce the world, and esteem Christ to be better
worth then all the world; why, thy hope is not frustrate, thou believe on
such a one as came by water and blood; so that though thou be unclean, and thy
works defiled, yet he came by water to purge and cleanse thee, Exodus 28.37, 38.
And what though thy heart be full of many sinful lusts, yet thou trustest on
one that can by blood make atonement for thee to procure his Spirit, and when
thou dyest, to give thee an open entrance into the most holy place.

1 JOHN 5.6. This is he that came by water and blood, even Jesus Christ, not by
water only, but by water and blood: and it is the Spirit that bears
witness, because the Spirit is truth.


IN these verses, as we heard, Christ is set out,

1. By the manner of his coming, he came by water and blood.

2. By the witness born to him, which are, First, in general, the Spirit, v.
6. Secondly, more particularly the witnesses are distinguished into two parts,
three in heaven, and three on earth, v. 7, 8.

It is the Spirit that bears witness here, Christ's coming is confirmed by
the witness of the Spirit, and that Spirit amplyfied by the certainty, that
Spirit is truth.

By the Spirit is meant, the Spirit of God breathing in the Word, and in the
conscience of Gods people, both are here included.

For 1. the Spirit breathing in the Scripture, is one of the chiefest
testimonies, that is born to Christ, John 5.39. and therefore this witness may
not be omitted.

2. By the Spirit, is meant the Spirit as it breaths in the consciences of Gods
people: for though the Spirit be strong in the Scripture, yet how shall I be
ascertained of that truth of the Scripture, but by the consent of the same
Spirit in my heart? Its the Spirit in our hearts, that witnesses to the truth
in the Scripture, John 3.33. and therefore its called a Seal, 2 Cor. 1.20. All
the promises in Christ are yea and amen; how appears that? by the Spirit
breathing in our hearts.

Quest. What is that the Spirit witnesses?

Some understand it thus, The Spirit bears witness, that the Spirit is truth:
if there were no other testimony of the Spirit, but the Spirit it self, it
would show it self, as the Sun shows its self.

But first, the Apostle has not occasion to speak of the witness it bears to
its own truth; but the scope of his speech is, to speak of the witness that is
born to this truth, that Jesus Christ came by water and blood, and therefore
the witness here spoken of, is of the Sonship of Christ, and of his powerful
coming, and to this the Spirit bears witness, and that Spirit is truth.

Doct. The Spirit of God breathing in the Scripture, and in the conscience of
Gods people, bears witness to our souls, that Jesus Christ came to save us, by
the water of Sanctification and the blood of Redemption.
The Spirit breathing in the Scripture, John 5.39. Its not the saying of the
Prophets nor Apostles, that bears such authentic testimony, we look at the
testimony of them, as of Isaiah and Paul, Christ speaks of them, I receive not
the testimony of men, John 1.33. Therefore some that have read them have lookd
at them as fables, 1 Cor. 2.6, 7. What is it then that captivates the world to
the belief of this testimony, but the testimony of the Spirit breathing in
them?

What is that Spirit that breaths in the Scripture that bears such strong
witness to Christ? Zech. 4.6. Its not by might or power, but by my Spirit,
that any building of grace is built.

Answ. There is in the Scripture, 1. A Spirit of power. 2. Of Perfection.


First, Of power, Luke 24.49. and its that power that fell on them on the day
of Pentecost; which our Savior intimated to them expressly, John 20.21, 22. so
that their words remit sins and ease the conscience, and bind it, 1 Cor. 14.24,
25. 2 Cor. 13.3, 4, 5. Now then the Spirit breathing in the Apostles, though
their outward man was base and weak, yet their words were mighty and powerful,
and even as Christ was most full of power, when he was most debased. There is a
threefold power in the Scripture.

1. There is a mighty power therein to convince men of their sinful estate,
and of their need of Christ, John 16, 8, 9.

2. A power to comfort the hearts of Gods servants in sense of his favor, Romans
8.15. hence the Spirit is called the Comforter, John 14.15. and when the soul
finds this success, it witnesses that no writings are like them, to cast
down to hell, and lift up to heaven again.

3. There is a Spirit of power in the Scripture to cleanse us from all
defilements, to purify our hearts, to overcome the world, to strengthen us
against all temptations and discouragements. This Spirit breathing in us, let^
us see that Christ came fully furnished for our redemption, I can do all
things through Christ that strengthens me, Phil. 4.13. by the power of Christ
I can learn to stand even in every condition of life, and to walk in his fear,
Ezekiel. 36.25, 26.

Secondly, In the Scripture there is a Spirit of perfection, whereby the man of
God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished to every good work, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.
There is no calling but a man may find abundant directions for it in the
Scripture: the Heathen Moralists have written concerning our carriages toward
men, but little toward God; so the laws of men, a man may fulfill them all,
and yet live an hypocrite, and die a reprobate, which shows their imperfection,
and therefore men's laws are often changed and altered: if therefore a man find
such a word, as that when he understands it, he finds sufficient directions to
lead him in all his ways, and bring him to Heaven: this shows the divine
perfection of the Scripture, that what once it delivers that is absolutely
perfect, and this Spirit bears witness to it.

1. The Spirit bears witness to Christ, as it breaths in our hearts, for
though the Spirit should breath never so strongly, yet if we have not the
evidence of it in our hearts, we shall not know the truth of such a thing: Now
the Spirit breathing in our consciences is a Spirit of peace and purity, both
springing from Christ; the Spirit of peace persuades our consciences of the
virtue and power of Christ's blood, had it not been for Christ's blood, we should
never have had peace, but have been like Cain living in Nod, in continual
agitation; but Christ's blood speaks peace.

2. As he came by blood, so he came by water, and this is witnessed by the
Spirit of Sanctification, and there is in this Spirit a threefold work suitable
to this water.

1. A Spirit of refreshing: as water refreshes the dry and thirsty soul, Isa.
44.3. so does the water of the Spirit allay the heat and scorch of Gods wrath.

2. As springing water washes and cleanses along as it goes, so does the Spirit
of God wash us with clean water, Ezekiel. 36.25. unless it be troubled with some
obstructions, which yet it will overgrow and run clear.

3. As water has a power to make trees fructify about it, Psalm. 1.3. so the
water of life gives a Christian such supplying strength unto his heart, that it
makes him strong and fruitful, that whatsoever God or man requires, he in some
good measure is enabled to perform it: so that a Christian soul by this Spirit
breathing in him, can plainly discern that Christ came by water and blood.

Use 1. May be a just refutation of Popery, that places the groundwork of our
faith upon the testimony of the Church; ask them how they will be saved? they
will say by Christ: ask them, how came you to believe in Christ? By the
testimony of the Scripture. But how know you the truth of the Scripture? by the
testimony of the Church, say they. But may not the Church err? Did the whole
Church so dangerously err, as all to consent to the crucifying of Christ, and
may not they as well err in putting on us false Scripture? Are not all men
subject to errors? and therefore a Christian dares not build his faith upon
humane testimony; for their testimony can give but humane credulity, but a
Christian tells them be therefore believes the Scripture, because the Spirit of
God breaths in them by a Spirit of power and perfection, and withal Gods
Spirit breaths in him such peace, as he knows Christ came by blood, and such
purity, as he knows, Christ came by water.

Object. Thus you will pi^ the Scripture upon your own private spirit.

Answ. This is not our private spirit; but the same spirit that breaths in the
Scripture, which witnesses to our conscience the truth.

Use 2. To teach Christians never to rest in any Scripture they read, or
Ministers they hear, before they have examined things by the testimony of the
Spirit: it is not the saying of all men that can assure you of this, but it is
the Spirit of God in the Scripture, and in your hearts, that must testify that
Christ came by water and blood; if you do not discern this Spirit in you, all
your faith is but humane credulity, no^ divine faith.

Use 3. For trial of our faith, whether it be the faith of Gods elect or no.
Do thou believe that Jesus is the Son of God? Yes thou will say: But what
witness have thou to believe it? Is it from the Scripture or because thou have
been taught so; and so take it up as a Principle? Why, this is no divine
faith* But do thou find a Spirit within thee, which convinces thy
conscience, purifies thy heart? Why this divine witness testifies, that Jesus
Christ came by water and blood.

Use 4. Of consolation in the testimony of the Spirit, whereas the world (...)
^est you ^ is but a delusion and a fancy, he not deceived, This spirit (...)
truth, and such a Spirit as witnesses that true faith, only trust not thy
private spirit, which ag^ees not with the Spirit breathing in the Scripture,
and therefore both are to be joined together, the Spirit breathing in the
Scripture, and the Spirit breathing in our hearts.

1 JOHN 5.6. the latter part. Because the Spirit is truth.


THe Spirit which bears witness to Christ is amplified by the effect,
witness bearing, and by (...) junct of truth, which is the cause of his
bearing witness, he br^^s witness, because his is a Spirit of truth.

Doct. The Spirit of God bearing witness ^^ the Scripture, and in the hearts
^f Gods people, is a Spirit of truth John 14.16, 17.
John 16.^ When the Spirit of Truth is (...), he shall guide you into all truth.

Quest. Why is it called a Spirit of Truth?

Answ. Not only because be in one of the Persons in the blessed Trinity, and
therefore his witness must needs be truth: a man that works by a rule may go^
aw^y, but the rule it self is not awry* the holy Ghost being a God of Truth,
cannot (...) speak truth; himself being the line, cannot go wrong: But he is
called a Spirit of truth rather.

1. Because he speaks nothing but what he hears of the Father, and of the Son,
John 16.13. ^^e Spirit (...) ^^thing from the Father, and the Son, speaks
nothing, but (...) we receives from them, what they apprehend and judge* the
same (...) testifies, John 8.26. and he speaks it without change and alteration.

2. Because he speaks a testimony, not of a shadowing or typical
representation, (...) and manifest truth Moses s^ake by types, which observed
the (...) but what the holy Ghost speaks is evident truth, without v^^d or
covering, ^ Cor. ^.17, 18.

3. From the effect of the Spirit, the Spirit not only speaks, but works truth
in the hearts of those to whom he speaks, by speaking truth he works truth in
the heart, so that they that receive the testimony are of the truth, John 3.19.
2 John 1.2.

Now they that receive the testimony of the Spirit, that Jesus Christ is come
by water and blood, they are cleansed from the world, from dissimulation and
hypocrisy, and so are made of the truth.

Object. How comes it to pass then, that sometimes many speaking by the
Spirit, yet speak falsely, and yet are confident they speak truth.

Answ. True, a man having received some work of the Spirit, may speak
falsehood, as Zedekiah, 1 Kings 22.24. and yet was confident he spoke by the
Spirit; but yet though a man speaking by a spirit of delusion, may think he
has spoken the truth; yet it hinders not, but when the Spirit of God indeed
bears witness, it may be discerned to be truth.

Use 1. If this Spirit bearing witness to Christ's coming be a Spirit of truth,
then such as have received the Spirit of truth, need not be afraid, that they
are led by a spirit of delusion, that do believe that Jesus Christ came by
water and blood, Jer. 20.10, 11. the way of the righteous man cannot deceive
him.

Quest. How shall I know that this spirit does not deceive, when it witnesses
pardon, and healing, and the like?

Answ. 1. The Spirit bears witness of it self, as well as of other things;
the Sun shows it self, as well as makes other things visible.

2. The Spirit bears witness of it self, from the work it frames in the
hearts of Gods servants, the testimony of the Spirit does so set on its
witness, does so pacify, and purify the conscience, that he plainly sees,
that this is the very Spirit of God, which is manifest by the fruits.

3. The testimony of the Spirit breathing in the Word, and in the hearts of
Gods children do so agree in every thing that its evident to be the same
Spirit, though it be true, the Spirit is more strong and evident in the
Scripture; the witness may be weak in our hearts, yet always in the main aim
and ends they agree together.

4. By how much the more suitable it is to the Scripture, by so much the more
it conforms us to the Image of Christ; the Spirit of Christ's make you meek and
lowly, as he was, draws us from earthly objects to a more divine frame; that
Spirit which fashions to Christ is of God.

Use 2. Of just reproof to Gods servants that have found the blood of Christ
pacifying and purifying their hearts; if in this case their souls doubt, and
are solicitous, they refuse the testimony of the Spirit; Satan, say they, may
transform himself into an Angel of light; I, but Satan cannot pacify the
conscience, much less purify it, himself being an unclean spirit, loves to
draw on others to impurity; if therefore the spirit within you, draw you on to
walk in truth, and to frame your heart according to the Image of Christ, if you
find any measure of peace and purity, its evident the Spirit is a Spirit of
truth.

Use 3. Of comfort to all such as have put their trust in Christ, upon the
testimony of Gods Spirit witnessing to them, that Christ came to save and heal
them; Why, this is strong consolation to them: that which makes out spirits
doubtful, is the deceitfulness of our own hearts, Jer. 17.10. But yet this
should comfort us, that though our hearts be deceitful, yet this Spirit of God
breathing in us is a Spirit of truth: and if you would know whether you have a
spirit of truth in you or no: Why, by this you shall know it, that Spirit which
speaks peace and purity to a man's soul, that Spirit is of God; Satan may do
much, but he is not able to transform himself into such a spirit; no other
spirit can work this but the Spirit of God; a spirit speaking peace without
purity may be a delusion; and a spirit speaking purity without any measure of
peace, may be a delusion, for all the paths of Wisdom are peace; but both
peace and purity together, do evidently manifest it to be the Spirit of God.

Use 4. For them that have found any measure of peace and purity, they ought to
teach them, to be very careful to discern whether this spirit be of God or no,
if thou have found much peace, and withal thou walk in simplicity and godly
sincerity, this Spirit is of God, 2 Cor. 1.12. But if our peace make us
careless of our ways, and more licentious, we shall never approve such a
spirit to be of God; where Gods Spirit breaths, the more peace, the more care
of purity, and therefore let us always put them together. Herod's spirit of joy
was a spirit of delusion, because it was not a spirit of purity, Mark 6.20.
Herod and David both, fell into the same lusts: how shall we know whether of
them had the Spirit of God? David for a while seemed to do worst, but Herod he
so favored his lust, that he destroyed John that reproved him; David he heard
the Prophet, and humbled himself, and renewed his repentance before God, and
therefore doubtless his Spirit was of God, because he was studious of purity;
such a soul as favors his lust, and takes part with it, has not Gods Spirit
in him: that sickness is mortal, that refuses utterly all means of health;
if therefore either our peace or purity be wanting, we shall not have this
testimony of Gods Spirit; that spirit that speaks both, is a Spirit of truth.

1 JOHN 5.7. For there are three that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the
Word, and the holy Ghost: and these three are one.


CHrist the Object of our Faith is set out, First, By the manner of his coming,
v. 6. He came by water and blood. Secondly, By the testimony given him of his
coming, which is double, three in Heaven, and three on Earth. In this Verse the
heavenly witnesses are set forth, 1. By the number, three. 2. By their place,
in Heaven. 3. By their work, they bear witness. 4. By their names, the Father,
the Son, and the holy Spirit. 5. By the unity, these three are one.


Doct. That there are three Persons, yet but one God, that do bear witness to
the divinity of Christ, and of the plenteous salvation wrought by him.
For Explication.

Quest. Who those three Persons be, and why so called?

Answ. The first Person is the Father, so called,

1. Chiefly because he is the Father of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.3. Partly by eternal
generation, as he is God; partly by adoption, as he is man.

2. As he is the Father of all the Elect, 1 Pet. 1.3, 5. John 20.17.

The second Person is styled the Word, as likewise, John 1.1. A solemn name
given him in his greatest triumph, Rev. 19.13. A style seldom attributed to
Christ, but by St. John in all his Books, although some understand it of
Christ, Heb. 4.12.

Christ is called the Word in a fourfold sense, he is a Word of wisdom, of
representation, of revelation, of promise.

1. Christ is a word of wisdom: for (...) is not only (...) but (...) ratio:
now Wisdom is accidental, but ratio is essential to a humane soul: Now such a
thing is Christ to his Father, he is the wisdom or reason to his Father, Prove.
8.23, 24: he is the begotten of his Father; they that write of the Trinity
express it thu^, the Father from eternity considering and understanding
himself, from this conceiving of the Father resulted the Image of himself,
that was his Son, from them both resulted the holy Ghost.

2. He is called the Word of God, as he is a word of representation, for (...),
so Christ is the living Image of God, Heb. 1.3. the character of the Father,
like a seal stamped in wax, they answer in every point.

3. He is a word of revelation, John 1.18. No man has seen God at any time,
but Christ the Wisdom of the Father has declared unto us, and revealed Gods
will, it was the Lord Christ that appeared to Adam, and Moses, and Abraham, and
Gideon, and the rest of the Patriarchs; as a word expounds all our meaning and
reveals our will, so it is Christ the Word of God, that reveals the will of God
to us.

4. He is a word of promise, Heb. 11.39. Christ was promised of old, but not
exhibited till the last days.

The third witness is the Spirit, every Person in the Trinity is an holy
Spirit* John 4.24. yet it is more particularly attributed to the third Person,
because he works powerfully and effectually, all that life and power we see the
creature express, so we see that there are three (...) as that bear witness
to the Divinity of Christ, and if three, there is a difference in number* now
there is no dissertion but a Personal difference, Heb. 1.3. so that the Father
is one Person, the Son a (...), the holy Ghost ^ third, yet these Persons make
but one in Na^^, and so they are one in witness, D^^. 6.4. Jehovah our God is
but one, for it is impossible there should be more then one God: Nature of it
self abhors more Infinites then one; if there were more Gods then one, if many
gods, how could they be Al sufficient, but that one should have the perfection
of another?

Quest. What is that they witness to?

Answ. They all witness Christ to be to the Son of God, and that he (...) by
water and blood.

1. The Father testifies this, by that voice that came down from Heaven, T^^ is
my (...) and well ^^^sed, Mat. ^.17.

He (...) to his works, John 6.^^, 9^, 3^, 36, 3^.

2. Christ (...) himself; that (...) the Son of God by his Ministry as often as
occasion ^r^^d, John 14, 17, ^8.

2. By his works, John 5.36.

3. By his Resurrection he declared himself mightily to be the Son of God,
Romans 1.

3. The holy Ghost have witness of him, by descending upon him in the shape of
a Dove.

2. By convincing the world of sin, because they did not believe on him.

3. By sealing up this (...) to the conscience of men, Ephesians. 1:13.

Use 1. Of refutation of the Jewish heresy, that denies the Trinity of the
Persons, and others that (...) the unity of the Godhead, all such heresies are
here condemned, There are (...) that bear witness in heaven, the Father, the
W^^d, and the S^^ing and yet the^^ (...).

Use 2. Learn here a just (...) work of (...) faith, there is nothing we
believe concerning Christ, but we ^^^e sufficient testimony (...), Mat. ^.19,
15. At the (...) two or three witnesses every truth shall stand: now we have
s^^ wit^esses, thee (...), and three (...), if therefore we believe this truth,
we ^et to (...) God is (...), who has witnessed it, 1 John ^.10. But if we
believe not Jesus to be the Son of God, we make God a liar, because we believe
worth testimony that he has given us of his Son, were not (...) hearts slow
to believe this truth, what need we so many witnesses?

Object. There is none but believes this truth.

Answ. ^^ not enough to believe this upon antiquity, or authority, or
universal consent of the Christian world, but God calls us to believe this,
upon some divine testimony of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Spirit;
its (...) enough for us ^^ believe that Christ is the Son of God, but that God
is our ^^ster in him* so that (...) that does not give up it self to be
conformable to the Image of God, the wisdom and revelation of Christ, and
unless the Spirit likewise transform our spirit to holiness and purity, we
do not believe this truth upon any Divine testimony, but upon humane credulity.

Use 3. If all the three Persons in the Trinity agree together in the witness
of this ^^^th, their we see what manner of men we ought to be in our witness
were we never so many persons; as the Persons in the Trinity are three, and yet
their nature such, as they cannot be but one, one holiness, one goodness, one
truth, so all that worship him, though their persons be never so different, yet
let their spirits be all one.

1. Hence learn, not to take up a truth upon a slight report; God would not
commend any work of his to us, unless he had confirmed it by three witnesses,
therefore believe not single reports; say not he was a good man that said it,
for God would not put upon us any truth, but confirmed it by sundry witnesses,
therefore believe not every report, though brought by a good man, let God be
true and every man a liar, Romans 3.15. Jer. 9.2, 3, 4, 5.

2. Hence learn, that all that believe this divine testimony of the Son, ought
to be compounded into unity; it was the last solemn Prayer that Christ put up
for the Church, that they all might be one with him, as he was one with the
Father, John 17.8, 9, 20, 21. where he uses this as a motive to God, to bring
on all believers to unity, because he was one with the Father, and the Father
with him, and therefore he prays that they be one, that hereby the world might
believe that God had sent him; as if dissensions among brethren would bear
witness to the world, that God did not send his Son to be our Savior; so that
by these dissensions, as much as in them lies, they make the promises of God of
none effect.

2. They annihilate all the testimony that the three Persons give to Christ;
this unity is that mark whereby all the world shall know them to be Christ's
Disciples, and it is the main duty Paul calls for, Ephesians. 4.3, 6. from this
ground, because there is but one God; and one Christ, and one faith, Acts 4.31,
32. And indeed all the dissensions of the world have sprung from this ground,
that they do not all worship one God, or believe not that God is but one: For
what makes a man to fall out with his brother, but either his profit, or
pleasure, or credit is conceived to be hindered, and is not this because I make
my profit, or my credit my God? and so I had rather lose God, and fellowship
with his Saints, then lose any gain and pleasure, and so I am a lover of
pleasure more then of God: Now the Apostle made account, if we profess but one
God, the unity of God should be more powerful to make us one, then any thing
in the world should be to make us two: so much dissension, so much atheism: If
we suffer the world to be more mighty to make difference then God to make
unity, we make God our Idol.

1 JOHN 5.8. And there are three thus bear witness in earth, the Spirit, and
the water, and the blood: and these three agree in one.


IN these words is described the testimony given on earth to the Divinity and
Sonship of Christ. Wherein 1. Their number, Three. 2. Their names, the Spirit,
the Water, and the Blood. 3. Their consent, and these three agree in one.


Doct. The Spirit, the Water, and the Blood, are three principal witnesses on
earth, that bear witness to the Sonship of Christ.
The three principal witnesses, for he does compare them to the three
witnesses in Heaven.

Quest. What these three witnesses be?

Answ. The Spirit partly breathing in the Scripture, partly in the conscience
of men.

First, The Spirit breathing in the Scriptures, for they in a special manner
bear witness to Christ, and they are called Testaments, and indeed they are so
far witnesses, as no witness is to be received, unless it be consonant to
the testimony of the Scripture, Gal. 1.7, 8. and it is not Paul, or Peter, that
testifies this, but the Spirit breathing in them, otherwise Christ receives not
the testimony of men, neither does the conscience of a Christian receive the
testimony of any living man, except he find the Spirit breathing in him; for
let God be true, and every man a liar. This Spirit breathing in the Scripture
is a Spirit of power, and perfection, the Spirit of power in the Scripture, is
discerned partly, 1. In convincing men, John 16.9. 2. In comforting those that
are dejected, Romans 3.16. 3. In strengthing us against temptation, 1 John 2.14.


Secondly, There is in the Scripture a Spirit of perfection, so that if we have
but the testimony of the Scripture, what need we any further witness? 2 Timothy
3.16, 17.

Thirdly, There is a Spirit that bears witness in our hearts, that Jesus is
the Son of God, and that Spirit is the same that breathed in the Scripture, so
that when we are hearing, or reading, yet the Spirit sets it home to your
hearts and souls, so that we go home either convinced, or comforted, or
strengthened to every good work and duty God requires; now this Spirit fully
persuades us, that Jesus is the Son of God; for this Spirit goes beyond the
power of all created things; for no created power is able to convince an hard
heart, or comfort a dejected Spirit, or strengthen us in our Christian course,
therefore if we find a Spirit in us, inabling us to do all this, the soul
rests satisfied without any need of further witness, that Jesus is the Son of
God.

Fourthly, Water bears witness to this; by water some understand the water of
baptism, and indeed that gives strong testimony to Christ, especially to them
that are prepared to receive it: as in the Apostles times, when they were first
brought on to believe, and then to be baptized, God then strongly testified
this truth, so that after baptism, they were filled with much joy, and
oft-times with diverse gifts and tongues, Acts 8.36. The water of baptism sent
away the Eunuch rejoicing, see Acts 19.6, 7. and though children be not capable
of this mercy now in their Infancy, except by an extraordinary power, yet
notwithstanding a Christian afterward finds such virtue and strength from his
baptism, that he sees there is no water like it, but that there is a divine
testimony in it: But because water is but a representation of this Spirit,
therefore by water here, may be understood the water of sanctification, the
Spirit of God sanctifying and regenerating us; for besides the Spirit of God,
that at some extraordinary times fills with unspeakable joy of the holy Ghost;
there is also an ordinary work of Gods Spirit, partly cooling, refreshing us,
as water does, partly making us fruitful in our Christian course; for those
great inlargements of Gods Spirit, do not always abide with us in that
measure, but this water is a spring in us, continually afording us something
which evidently witnesses this truth, Tit. 3.5. John 4.14.

1. In this water of Gods Spirit, we find a power to cleanse us from our
lusts, as running waters do channells and sinks, Ezekiel. 36.25. when I see
something in me conforming me to Christ, that water bears witness, that Jesus
is the Son of God.

2. There is a power in water to cool and refresh us, when God sheds abroad his
Spirit in us, there is something that cools us from the heat of Gods wrath,
Isa. 44.3.

3. This water is of a mighty power to make us fruitful, Psalm. 1.3. A
Christian watered by the Spirit of God, draws such moisture and life from every
Ordinance of God, that he brings forth fruit in due season, according to his
calling, Ezekiel. 30.26, 27.

Quest. How does this water bear witness that Jesus is the Son of God?

Answ. Because all the virtue that this water has to cleanse, comfort, or
fructify us, springs only from faith in the testimony, that Jesus is the Son
of God, Gal. 2.19, 20. Let Christians observe, when we walk in the strength of
our own spirits and graces, we shall grow so dry and barren, that not one good
fruit comes from us, and this is because we suck from our own graces, and so
spend on the stock, and so soon draw our selves dry, for want of living by
faith in the Son of God; but a Christian that has the water of Sanctification,
let him do all in the Name of Christ, and suck life from him daily, and he
shall be sufficiently enabled to every duty that God requires; we never found
this water, till we believed on Christ, and this water no longer runs fresh and
full, then we renew our daily dependence on him, and if we did so daily, we
should always find it full Sea in our hearts.

3 Blood is a third witness on earth, and that is the blood of his sufferings
that does bear witness to our souls, that Jesus is the Son of God.

And it bears witness to us, 1. by pacifying our conscience, Heb. 12.24. There
is a louder cry in the blood of Christ to pacify our souls, then in the guilt
of sin to bring wrath upon us, and this is so lively a testimony, that a
Christian knows, were it not for the blood of Christ, all the things in the
world would not have quieted his conscience.

2 The blood of Christ, purchases us to become his, Acts 20.28. Now when we
can find our selves the purchased ones of God, the peculiar people of God, this
blood of purchase witnesses, that it was the Son of God that redeemed us from
the world and our own corrupt hearts.

3 The same blood does therefore bear witness, that Jesus is the Son of God,
because it is a blood of purity, sprinkled upon every Ordinance and creature,
every thing was purified by blood, Heb. 9.19. to 23. this blood of Christ on
every thing makes it pure, To the pure all things are pure, so that to such a
one, his calling and company, his meat and drink do not ensnare him, as they
do other men, set further off from God, but by this blood it is, and the
blessing of God, that we are made more fruitful and serviceable to God, yea
were it not for the blood of Christ, our very graces would corrupt us, it is the
blood of Christ that makes them all useful and savory, and turn to our good.

Doct. These three witnesses, the Spirit, the Water, and the blood are in one.
Not only in this witness, but they are all one for one work; in the Original,
(...) that is, they all consent to one truth.

And 2. they all go an end and conspire in one work of our Redemption, so that
one would be of small use without the other.

Use 1. To establish our hearts in this testimony, that Jesus is the Son of
God, and so to believe it, that we may overcome the world; In the mouth of two
or three witnesses every truth shall stand, how much more when three in heaven
and three on earth testify the truth? and it is not enough to believe this upon
the authority of the State, or thy Parents, or upon the universal consent of
all men, for this is no part of divine testimony, and this belief will never
help thee to overcome the world; and yet this is the testimony of the Church of
Rome, but these humane testimonies will beget but humane credulity.

Use 2. For trial, whether you believe this truth aright or no; if your faith
be built upon the testimony of the Father, the Word, and the Spirit, upon the
testimony of the Spirit breathing in the Scripture, and in your own conscience
upon the water of Sanctification and blood of Redemption, if your faith be
built on these principles it will stand.

Use 3. Reproves that Popish doctrine that maintains a Christian can never
attain to any certain assurance; Why, if a Christian have six such strong
witnesses, and divine, as these, will they not breed more then probable
conjecture? Six be ^est men's testimonies would breed more then probability; And
do not God the Father, Son and holy Ghost breed assurance in their
testimonies? It Is a dishonorable thing to think otherwise.

Use 4. Of consolation to every one that has found this witness in him, it is
a ground of singular comfort to them, that that Jesus on whom they have
believed, will help them to overcome the world.

Use 5. Since these three, the Spirit, the water, and blood, do bear witness
to the Sonship of Christ, it should teach us to keep our hearts and ears always
open to these testimonies. Two things hinder this testimony, the noise and
tumults of worldly businesses so fill our hearts and hands, that we cannot hear
what the Spirit speaks. Secondly, the noise of our lusts does so fill our
souls, that we cannot listen to the peace Christ's blood speaks, which speaks
better things then our lusts: therefore we should always keep our hearts and
ears open, and free from tumults of the world, or the noise of our own lusts,
that so we might hear what Gods Spirit testifies to our own hearts.

1 JOHN 5.9, 10. If we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is
greater; for this is the witness of God, which he has testified of his Son,
etc.


HAving spoken in the former verse, of the manner of Christ's coming, and of the
witness born to it, three in Heaven, and three on earth, in these verses he
excites us to receive the testimony of those witnesses by four arguments.

1 A minori, If we receive the witness of men, how much the more ought we to
receive the witness of God?

2 From the divinity of this testimony, whatsoever any of these fix witnesses
speak, their testimony is not from the earth, but from God, verse 9.

3 From the nearness of this testimony, in the heart and conscience of every
believer, and therefore the rather to be credited, because it is an inward
testimony that we feel in our own hearts.

4 From the dangerous condition that such fall into that do not believe this
truth, they do no less then make God a lya^, for all these bear witness from
God, and therefore if we believe them not, we make God a liar.

Doct. The three witnesses in heaven, and the three witnesses on earth, are all
of them divine and inward testimonies in the hearts of believers, and therefore
far more to be credited, then the witness of all men in the world.
1 That the Father, Son, and Spirit, are divine witnesses, is no question, for
they are the three Persons in the Trinity, and yet are but one God, Deuteronomy. 6 4.
Therefore their testimony must needs be divine. But the question is, How do
these hear witness in our hearts to this truth, he that believes has all
these witnesses in himself?

1 The Father, as he is the Fountain of the God head, so his work is a work of
Almighty power, and that is it which speaks in the heart of every believer,
John 6.44. No man can come to me; except the Father which sent me draw him: as
none come to Christ, except the Father draw him; so he draws none, but by the
same power whereby he sent Christ, and that was by his Sovereign authority; if
God should draw us only by the cords of men, we should break through all, as
the Israelites did, Hos. 11.4. But when God shakes our hearts by an Almighty
power, and lets us see the danger of our estate, and after enlightens us to see
the ways of salvation, then he draws a man on to Christ: take a natural man,
all the world cannot persuade him of his dangerous estate, but he is persuaded
of his good nature and good heart toward God.

Secondly, If he be convinced of it, all the world cannot persuade him, that
any promise belongs to him, and therefore here God must put forth an Almighty
power of a Spirit of adoption, whereby he is brought on to believe the
promises; before he had only an humane credulity, now he believes it from a
testimony within himself, John 6.45.

2 The Son of God bears witness in our hearts of this truth, by speaking
freedom and liberty to our souls from the guilt of sin, John 8.36. If the Son
shall make you free, then shall you be free indeed, that whereas before we were
bound to our sins, and lusts, and ways, Christ comes and sets us free from
all, so that now we serve not our selves or men, but the Lord Christ; and by
this a Christian knows that surely Christ is the Son of God, that has made me
a son of God my self.

3 The Spirit bears witness to our hearts of this truth, by convincing our
hearts of it, John 16.9.

Secondly, By working a Spirit of faith, and a spirit of joy in believing, John
14.16, 17. Hence he is called the Comforter.

Thirdly, By giving us a spirit to make us overcome the temptations of the
world, and the lusts of our own hearts, 2 Timothy 1.7. 1 John 4.4. and this
testimony is divine.

1 Because it is the revelation and will of God himself.

2 Because it is above all humane power thus to draw us and convince us, and
strengthen and comfort us against all temptations.

For the three witnesses on earth, they likewise bear witness to this truth in
our hearts.

1 The Spirit, that is, the Spirit breathing in the Word has such a mighty
power to enlighten, and quicken, and strengthen a soul, that whatsoever the
Spirit speaks in the Scripture, the same it witnesses in our souls, 1 Cor.
14.24, 25.

2 Water bears witness in our hearts to this truth, that is, the water of
Sanctification does so cleanse, and cool, and refresh the conscience of a man,
and make him so fruitful in his Christian course, that it is plainly a divine
testimony, it passes all the power of the creature thus to pacify and quiet
the conscience; it is only the Spirit of God that is able thus to pacify a
guilty soul; thus to cleanse an impure heart, and to make these dry barren
stocks as we are fruitful; this is a divine work of Gods Spirit.

3 The blood of Christ witnesses this truth to our hearts, by being sprinkled
on our consciences, and so speaking peace to us; this is a divine work.

2 The same blood purifies every Ordinance, and creature; there would be no
virtue in any Ordinance, nothing would do us good, but for the blood of Christ
sanctifying it to our use: now this testimony is of greater force then the
testimony of all the sons of men together. There be three things needful in a
testimony.

1 That it be certain. 2 Evident. 3 Powerful and Effectual.
1 This divine testimony is more certain, then all the testimonies of the
world, because God is greater in knowledge, and so knows more then men can.

2 Because he is greater in truth; men may err, but God cannot lie, Tit. 1.2,
3. Romans 4.2.

2 This testimony is more evident, to make a thing evident is required, 1
Objectum perspicuum. 2 Organum been affectum. 3 Medium apt dispositum.


Now God does make this truth evident by the concurrence of all these.

1 He lets us plainly see the danger of sin, and the virtue and worth of
Christ's blood; God reveals his Son to our hearts, John 3.12. Gal. 1.46. so what
the Gospel speaks of his Son, the same is plainly revealed, and so he makes the
object perspicuous.

2 He opens the eyes of men to discern it, to long after it, to taste of his
virtue and power, Acts 26.18. 1 Pet. 2.3. 1 Cor. 2.14, 15. A natural man sees
nothing of this work.

3 He clears the Medium, that is, the Word and Sacraments, Prayer and Christian
Communion; so that whereas before we looked at them, but as beggarly rudiments,
of little power or worth, after God has once enlightened us, we see the power
and virtue of God therein, so plainly, as if we had been touched by the Sun
beams.

3 This divine testimony is far more powerful then any humane testimony, Heb.
4.12, 13. 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. The Ordinances of God are mighty and effectual
through God, so to change and renew our hearts, that no humane power is able to
reach them.

Use 1. To refute two doctrines of the Romish Church.

1 That the last groundwork of faith is resolved on the testimony of the
Church: Ask them if they believe Jesus to be the Son of God, they say yes; ask
them why? Because the Scripture say so: ask rhem, But why do you believe the
Scripture? From the testimony of the Church, say they; so that their best faith
is but humane credulity: But ask a true Protestant, why he believes Jesus to be
the Son of God? he tells you because the Scripture say so; ask him why he
believes the Scripture? he says, not because the Church believes so, but he
believes it from a testimony within himself. What say they, you trust a
private spirit of your own? nay his private spirit is common with him to all
believers, ever since the world was, and that spirit is no other then the
Spirit of God that breaths in all his children. Besides, he has other
witnesses in his heart, the Spirit, the water, and the blood, and this is a
divine testimony, greater then the witness of all the world; so that here is a
double error of theirs; 1 In grounding their faith upon the Churches
testimony. 2 In blaspheming the Spirit of God, for a private spirit.
Fundamental errors.

That Doctrine that lifts the Church from Christ, and builds it on the
testimony of the Fathers and the Schools, that doctrine overthrows the
foundation; for other foundation can no man lay, then what is laid already,
even Jesus Christ.

2 It refutes another uncomfortable doctrine of the Romish Church, that teach,
that a man cannot by divine faith have assurance of his estate in grace and
salvation; for say they, all divine faith is general; thus he that repents and
believes shall be saved, but I repent and believe, this say they, the Scripture
no where says: But say we, besides the testimony of the Scripture, there is a
threefold witness in heaven, and three on earth, all witnessing this truth;
now their testimony is divine, and therefore my faith is divine, and they all
witness to this truth, that Jesus is the Son of God; and that I believing on
him shall be saved.

Obj. All these are but suavis quidam motus, and cannot produce a divine faith.

Answ. Can the testimony of men produce an humane certainty, and cannot three
divine witnesses in heaven, and three on earth, produce more then an humane
probabilty? If not, how does the text say, their testimony is greater then the
testimony of men?

Object. How comes it to pass then, that this witness is so low sometimes,
that we can hardly discern it?

Answ. We so grieve the Spirit of God sometimes, that he delights not to reveal
himself to us; but this is our own fault, that we so black this evidence, that
we cannot read it; but if we maintain and cherish it, it will be a strong
testimony to our souls.

Use 2. For trial of our faith; would thou know whether thy faith be true or
not? If it be, it will convey a double trinity of witnesses into thy heart,
witnessing that Jesus is the Son of God, and that he came by water and blood.
If you should resolve most men's faith into its principle, you should find most
men's faith built upon antiquity, and authority, and universal consent of all
men: Why, if these be the best grounds of thy says, the Devil has better
grounds of faith then so; but if thou find this truth confirmed to thee, by the
testimony of Gods Spirit within thee, this faith will hold trial.

Use 3. Of consolation to all them that find this witness in themselves. Why,
they have grounds of full assurance of their good estates, seeing they have
such divine and certain witness of it, both in heaven and earth.

1 JOHN 5.10, 11, 12. He that believes on the Son of God has the witness in
himself: he that believes not God, has made him a liar, because he believes
not the record that God gave of his Son, etc.


HAving showed verse. 6, 7, 8. three witnesses in heaven, and three on earth,
that bear witness to the Sonship of Christ, verse. 9, 10. he stirs us up to
believe this witness, 1 A minori, If we believe the witness of men, the
witness of God is greater. 2 From the Divinity of all those witnesses in our
hearts and consciences. 3 From the nearness of this testimony. 4 From the
danger that follows the not believing this testimony we thereby make God a
liar, and he gives a reason of it, because he believes not the record that God
has of his Son, and he shows what that record is, this is the record that God
has given us of his Son, even eternal life.


From the change of the phrase in this 10 verse. believing on the Son of God,
and believing God, observe

Doct. True faith that believes God believes also on the Son of God.
There is a double phrase used, 1 Credere Deo. 2 Credere in filium Dei.


Credere Deo, is to believe that there is a God.

2 That every testimony God gives us is true, Act. 27.25. I believe God, that
it shall be so as he has said, but to believe on God, or on the Son of God, is
a phrase peculiar only to Scripture, not found in any humane Writers.

Now to believe that there is a God, and that his Word is true, are acts of the
understanding; but to believe on God, is not only an act of my understanding,
but of my will; whereby I trust on him, and roll my self upon him, it is
expressed by laying a stone upon a foundation, 1 Pet. 2.5, 6. Christ lies as the
corner stone of his Church, every living stone lies upon him, depends upon him,
and that is to believe on God, to lift up our souls, and lie on the foundation,
John 14.1. Let not your hearts be troubled, ye believe on God, believe also on
me; so much belief so much less fear; and so much fear, so much less faith,
Jam. 2.19. The Devils believe and tremble; but he that believes on the Son of
God fear not, this believing on him, is a resting on him, for many may have
faith, and not rest on Christ, Isa. 30.15. In quietness and confidence shall
be your rest, there is no such rolling our selves upon Christ; so that as
living stones we lie still and quiet upon Christ the corner stone, so that you
cannot lift off a Christian from his foundation, except you overthrow the
building, and this is, when a Chrstian is so established in faith, that all
mists of doubtings are removed, and Gods favor clearly seen, and then the
soul sits down in calmnesse, and quiet, Psalm. 3.5, 6. and this hand of faith
the children of God are wont to put forth in dangerous times, Psalm. 91.12. He
that abides in the secret place of the most High, etc. Two things are in God,
which are the secret place of the Almighty, and both expressed in the Name of the
Lord.

Which implies, 1 his attributes of mercy, goodness, and patience, and the
like.

2 His truth, Psalm. 138.4. Thou have exalted thy word about thy Name, the Word
of God does more comfort, and command, then any attribute without the Word; so
that the Name of God, is the secret place of God in danger; A Christian runs to
the attributes and promises of God.

2. But if this were all, it would exclude from faith, all those whose faith is
not grown to this quietness and rest, for many a day is it before we come to
such quietness and rest, but full of doubts and agitations are we: as if you
commit such a sum of money to be paid at London, into a faithful able man's
hand; I never doubt of his care or faithfulness, if I doubt of either, my
heart is never at rest, till I hear how matters go? no Christian ord^narily
doubts of Gods power and ability; but he doubts whether God be willing to put
forth his power for my salvation or no; hence a poor soul has many thoughts
and cares what will become of his soul, yet there is some kind of saving faith
in him that believes his ability, and this faith makes him in some measure to
lean on Christ, as Mark 1.40. the poor Leper came to Jesus, and said, If thou will thou can make me clean, he believed his power, yet something doubts of
his will; yet he comes to him that he might be willing.

3. There is a weaker faith then this, that is, a Christian comes sometimes to
doubt even of the power of God, that he is not able to show him mercy, and so
doubts of it, as thus, because God has said, That they that have sinned
against the holy Ghost shall never be forgiven, and they are afraid they have
committed this sin, and they know God is not able to break his word, Mark 9.22.
There comes a poor man to Christ for help for his son, and said, If thou can
do any thing, have compassion on us; What says Christ, If thou can believe,
all things are possible to him that believes? viz, that I am able; why, says
he, Lord I believe, help my unbelief, he believed God was able to help him,
and yet was not certain of it neither, and yet this faith procured this
blessing from God.

Quest. How can this be called believing on Christ, when the heart is not
grounded on Christ, nor rests on him?

Answ. As to believe on Christ, is to rest on him, as a stone on the
foundation, so there is a believing on Christ, when the heart yet rests not one
Christ, but rowls it self on Christ, and that may be done, while the heart is
yet in motion. Resting is a setlednesse of condition, but rolling is an
unsettled tumbling about, sometimes rowls one way, sometimes another; yet such a
Christian believes on Christ, because he is rolling toward him; that so he may
lie on him, Psalm. 37.5. Commit thy ways to the Lord, in the original, roll thy
ways upon God, lean thy soul that way, that is done by rolling thy self
toward him, that thou might rest on him, Prove. 3.6. Trust on the Lord with
all thy heart, lean not on thy own wisdom: a man may be said to lean that way,
whereon he is not yet settled.

Quest. When is a man said to lean on Christ?

Answ. 1. When a man is persuaded that God is able to help him, yet doubts of
his willingness, and yet comes to him, leans toward him, craves his help: as
Mark 5.25. there comes a woman to Christ with a bloody issue, she came, neither
doubting of his ability, nor will, If I may but touch the hemme of his garment,
I shall be made whole, this was a resting on Christ: But the poor Leper was not
come so far, as to assure himself that Christ would do it; but he believes
his power, and uses the means to make him willing, Lord if thou will, thou
can make me clean

2 A man may be said to lean on Christ, when he believes not his willingness,
nor yet confidently his power, and yet desires God to help his unbelief, this
is a rolling upon Christ; If thou ca^^^ do any thing, help us, in Scripture
phrase, this kind of rolling upon Christ, is called a coming to Christ: it is
one thing to be coming to Christ, and another thing to rest on him, but yet he
is a believer, if he do but come to Christ, Math. 11.28. this coming to
Christ, is believing on him, for to such he promises that he will refresh
them, and he refreshes none but believers, Joh. 6.35, 37, 67. By coming to
Christ, we believe on him, and he that comes to him, he will in no wise cast
out; if a man be but coming onwards, humbled for his sins, and persuaded that
God is able to help him, if not, yet if he be grieved for his unbelief, and
prays to God to help his unbelief, this is coming to Christ, that is, making
toward him, and this is faith. Suppose a man tell you in such a field of yours
is a rich treasure, if you believe the man, will you not go about to dig it
up? but if you doubt of the truth, then you let it alone: so God tells you all
the treasures of life and grace are laid up in Christ this record God gives of
his Son; now if we believe this record, we will use all good means to attain
this eternal life, otherwise if we do not use the means to get this treasure,
we make God a liar; as if his record were not true.

Use 1. It reproves the dangerous sin of such as neither rely on Christ, nor
roll toward him, St. John tells us, we make God a liar, a fearful thing for
mortal men, to make the God of truth a God of lies; now if we make God a liar,
we make him no God at all; if we live in unbelief, we live in Atheism; all such
as find not their hearts resting on God, or rolling toward him, they make God
a liar, and there is no truth in them, for if we did but believe that eternal
life were to be found in Christ, we would not rest till we were assured of it;
if we know of any Inheritance left us, we will ^ow from one end of the land to
the other to obtain it; so if we believed that the treasure of salvation were
laid up in Christ, we should never rest rolling toward him, till we had got
possession thereof.

Use 2. May stir us up never to rest, till we have brought our hearts to rely
upon Christ, to lean on him, to roll toward him, if we do not this, we are
Atheists; therefore as we desire to make God, a God of truth, let ^s never
rest, till we have found our hearts relying on him. Psalm. 132.^. to 6. It was a
notable resolution of David, in the midst of all his ^^bles, that he would not
give himself rest, till he had prepared as habitation for God, so let us never
cease rolling toward Christ, till at length we find our selves resting on him.

Quest. What would you have us to do to ^^ing our hearts to rely and (...) on
God?

Answ. 1. Roll your selves to such places where you may have means of grace,
Faith comes by bearing, Rom 10.17.

2 Roll off your hearts from all your sins, come out of your sinful
corruptions, roll your selves out of your bod^ of security, 2 Cor, 6. two last
verses.

3 Roll your selves so far from all worldly comforts, as that you set not your
hearts on them, Psalm. 62.10. nor on great friends, Psalm. 146.3.

4 Cast your meditation on the mighty power of God, which is able to heal such
untoward hearts as yours.

5 Use all the means you may, and endeavor with all the strength you may, that
God may heal you.

6 If you doubt of his will, and are not confident of his ability, pray that
God would give you a believing heart. Lord help my unbelief.

Use 3. For them that have rolled themselves on Christ, rest not in rolling,
there is no rest to be had in rolling, therefore from rolling (...) come to
establishment in Christ, and th^re rest, sit down in quietness and confidence;
now if thou would have a stone lie on the foundation, thou most cut off all
the roughness and unsquarenesse, or else it cannot lie (...) there is none but
either he has some doubts that make him under or else pride that is a great
swelling, therefore we must lay down all our high thoughts and (...) level
with Christ, for he is meek and lo^ly: besides, all hatred and (...), is an
uneven swelling in our hearts, and how (...) can they lie smooth in the
building? bowls and swelling bodies will not touch but in (...) point, smoo^^
things lie flat: what swelling of heart we see in us, either to pride, on
covetousness, or wrath; if we would lie smooth and sure in the building, we
must pare off all these out-running and swellings of our hearts, and so bring
(...) smooth and even, we shall lie sure upon the foundation.

1 JOHN 5.11. And this is the record that God has given to us eternal life,
etc.


Verse. 7, 8. having declared the three witnesses in heaven, and three on earth,
that bear witness of the divinity of Christ, verse 9.10. he exhorts us to
receive their testimony in these 10, and 11. verse. he tells us what this divine
record is, which he presses us to believe, and this record is threefold.

1 Of an heavenly gift, eternal life. 2 That this life is given us by Christ. 3
That this life is given only to believers.
Doct. Eternal life is the gift of God.
Here two things are to be opened, 1 That the life given us by God in Christ is
eternal life.

2 That this eternal life is the gift of God.

1 It Is eternal life, 1 John 3.16. Eternal, ab ante, because it was given us
before the foundation of the world, it is more ancient then the world, or man's
fall, and this was not only purposed in Gods Council, but this was manifestly
promised before the world began, Tit. 1.2. And The Trinity then concluded that
the Lord Christ should be made head of all.

2 That all that did believe on him should have eternal life, therefore it is
said, He chose us in Christ before the foundation of the world, Ephesians. 1.4. and
therefore God choosing us as members of Christ, he promised to Christ, that he
would give them all eternal life, 2 Timothy 1.9. There was not only a purpose of
God, but a declaration of the same to Christ, of this gift our Savior speaks,
John 17:6. Revel. 13.8. and this gift is more ancient then our actual vocation,
for a man is said to be given to Christ, when he gives up his heart and service
to him, but this is given in fullness of time; but we were given to Christ,
before we were called to the fellowship of his Spirit, and adoption of sons,
John 6.39.

2 It Is called eternal life, because the fountain and principles of this life
are eternal; the Word of God was revealed from eternity, and of this Word were
we begotten, 1 Pet. 1.23. And as in seed there is something more material,
something more spiritual; so in the Word there is both the matter of the word
and there is the Spirit of the Word, John 3.5. Now we are born of the Spirit,
and this Spirit in us is a fountain of living water, springing up to
everlasting life, John 4.14.

3 The continuance of this life is to everlasting, He that believes on Christ,
shall never dye, but have everlasting life, John 3.36. John 5.24. and this
eternal life is a record which God has given us of his Son, because the gift
was given to Christ, and througst him, as by our Head, is the life conveyed to
all the members.

2 This life is a gift of God, Romans ^.23. All the life we have is Gods gift:
There is a fourfold life, and all given us by God.

First, The life as justification is a free gift, Romans 5.15. we lay all dead in
sin, now the pardon of all these is the very life of our souls, Col. 2.13.

Secondly, There is a life of holiness whereby we live to God, are for his
^nds, and walk by this rule, and this life is the free gift of God, Ephesians. 2.4,
^.

Thirdly, There is a life of consolation, which is called a man's life, 1 These.
3.7, 8. We live, if you stand fast, he means a life of comfort, and this life
is given by free grace; 2 Cor. 1.4, 5. When God so comforts a poor soul, he is
to be looked at as the Father of mercies, and God of all consolation.

Fourthly, There is a life of glory, which God has given us by Christ, Romans
6.23.

Reas. 1. A minori, If our natural life be Gods gift, how much more this
spiritual and eternal life, Job 10.12. Thou have granted me life and favor,
and he speaks of natural life, that is, thou in thy favor have granted me
life, and preservest it: Now if that be a gift of God, as it is, for it was
neither Father nor Mother that could give us life, how much more is eternal
life the gift of God. It was Mephibosheths speech to David, 2 Samuel 19.28. What
was all my Fathers house, but dead men before my Lord the King? so take us
without Gods gift, we were but all dead men before him. Now if this natural
life be a gift of God, and that of his favor too; how much more is this
spiritual and eternal life a free gift from God?

2. All our life must needs be Gods free gift, by removing all that might
concur to the making up of our merit of this life.

Four things must concur to merit, which are all wanting in this gift.

1. If you would merit, you must prevent the other in giving but who has given
to God first? Romans 11.35. and if we give God but his own, how then do we
merit? 1 Chronicles. 29.13, 14, 15.

2. In the nature of merit is required, that what we give we should give ^eely,
not of due debt, nor due recompense, Luke 17.9, 10. If we do but ou^ duties,
what do we merit? When we have done what we can, we have done but our duty,
and how then do we merit?

3. What merits at Gods hands, should be perfect and part, without spot, else
it deserves nothing: Now our best righteousness is defiled, Isa. 46.6. Exodus
28.38. Our best offerings, if God did not accept of them in Christ's holiness,
he might justly reject them.

4. In all merit it is requisite that there should be something proportionable
betwixt the work and the reward, now what proportion is there between natural
life and spiritual, and betwixt our life of grace, and the life of glory? Our
sufferings, which are the highest part of our obedience, they are not worthy to
be compared to the eternal weight of glory; indeed they work for (...) a
plentiful recompense of reward, 2 Cor. 4.17. But this is through the free gift
of God.

Use 1. For reproof of Popish merit, if eternal life be the free gift of God,
then the life of grace is not given us of merit, ex congru^, not this life of
glory ex condigno; if it be gift, then sure we pay no answerable price for it;
there is no purchase on our part, but a gift on Gods part. I would know whither
this natural life was given us of merit; who d^re say, ^e has merited to be a
man, rather then a Beast, of a Serpent, or a Toad, and how then can we say our
eternal life is of merit? Does not every Christian freely confess at his
first conversion, that if God should utterly cast him off, and never show him
mercy, just and righteous should his proceedings be? And how dare any appear
that dare claim grace and glory of merit? In the continuance of his faithful
obedience, who dare claim the least mercy ex condigno, how much less eternal
life? Whereas e contra, Gods servants do not think God beholding to them for
their service, but they never think themselves more engaged and beholding to
God, then when he inables them to most service, they say with David, Who are we
that we should be able to offer thus willingly, 1 Chronicles. 29.14. they know every
jo^ of mercy is free grace, every sin pardoned is free grace. No Malefactor on
earth, but if the King send him a pardon, he acknowledges it to be of the
Kings free grace and Royal compassion* but yet the Synagogue of Rome will not
acknowledge Gods pardon to be of free grace; but Gods people acknowledge they
are (...) but as dead dogs before God; and were at not for the free grace of
God, they had never seen life.

Use 2. Of exhortation to all the sons of men, that never look after Christ,
why as ever you desire to see me, and that life for ever, look up to God for it
to derive it from him, it is his free gift, Every man is a friend to him that
gives gifts, Prove. 19.6. Shall we respect Princes so, that have but earthly
honors and profits to give, that we think it our happiness to do them any
service, and shall we neglect God that has such great gifts to give, even
eternal life, and a Kingdom of glory; it is God that gives us these natural
lives, and that gives us power to get wealth, Deuteronomy. 8.18. nay its he that gives
life of comfort, and the life of justification, and holiness, and also the
life of glory, and shall we neglect this great gift, and more respect the poor
comforts of the world then him, in whose hands is our breath and life? Skin for
skin, and all that a man has will he give for his life, he means for his
natural life, and shall eternal life lie by like a refuse thing that no man
looks after.

Use 3. Of trial whether God has given us this life or no, and this we may
discern for the eternity of the gift, consider whether there be any eternal
life shed abroad in thy heart or not, have thou found any pardon of sins? that
whereas thou saw thy soul as a dead dog for want of this life, now God has
justified thee from thy sins; Why, the life of justification is eternal life,
if he has once pardoned thy sins he will remember them no more, Jer. 31.33.

Secondly, Have thou found a spirit of life in thee to obey and serve the Lord,
Romans 8.2. Why this is eternal life, that will never decay, John 17.3. has God
shed abroad the comfort of his Spirit, and the joy of the holy Ghost into thy
heart, which is better then life, Psalm. 63.3. this is eternal life, which
though it may be sometimes overwhelmed, yet it shall spring up again, as trees
after winter; if thou find none of these works in thee then thou have no life.

Use 4. Of consolation to all those that have received this life, if we have
found the life of justification in the pardon of our sins, the life of
holiness in our Christian obedience; if we have found the lively comforts of
Gods Spirit: Why, know this is a life that will never decay, this is the record
of God himself, that the life which he has given us is eternal life, it was
given us before we were born, and will he take it away when we are born? that
which he gave us before there was a world, he will not take away when the world
shall be no more? it comes from everlasting principles, 3rd therefore it cannot
decay; if therefore we find this life in us, we may be assured, that God has
given us this life, will preserve it to eternity; if it be eternal, how can it
decay? Therefore let us walk worthy of this eternal life, and pray with David,
Consider me Lord, if there be any way of wickedness in me, and lead me in the
way everlasting, Psalm. 139. ult. Sinful lusts are dead lusts, and what has
eternal life to do with dead lusts, keep your hands off from a sinful
carnal life, but lay fast hold on eternal life, 1 Timothy 6.12. get sure
possession of it, and let neither Satan not the world wrest it out of your
hands.

1 JOHN 5, 11. the latter part. And this life is in his Son.


Doct. THe Eternal life that God has given us, is laid up for us in Jesus
Christ, John 11.25, 26. Col. 3.3. John 14.6.
This life is fourfold, of Justification, Sanctification, Consolation, and
Glorification. All these are laid up in Christ, Jer. 23.6. He is the Lord our
righteousness, Psalm. 4.1, 2. For them altogether, see 1 Cor. 1.30. He is made
our Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption. Our Redemption not
only from the guilt eternal and punishment of sin, but from all the
afflictions both inward and outward that Gods servants he exposed unto, as for
inward temptation in sickness, and griefs, etc. Col. 3.3. Your life is hid
with Christ in God, Its sometimes under a veil of corruptions, sometimes of
affliction, but yet laid up in Christ.

Quest. How is our life said to be laid up in him?

Answ. 1. Because he has received it for us from God the Father to give unto
us, John 5.21, 26. 1 These. 5.9, 10. He has appointed us to salvation, through
Jesus Christ, that so whether we remain alive or die, yet we may live in Christ.

2. Christ has purchased this life for us, 1 These. 5.9, 10. the Father has
not only appointed us life, but he has appointed it through the death of
Christ, John 10.10. I am come that my sheep may have life, and that they may
have it in abundance, and this is by giving his life for us.

3. Its laid up in Christ as one that prepares it for us, and us for it, Col.
1.12. its he that makes us meet to be made partakers of the Inheritance of the
Saints in light, that whereas before we were unfit, now he has adorned us, and
made us fit Spouses for himself, which he does by turning us from darkness to
light, by giving us of his Spirit, by dispensing himself to us in his
Sacraments, and Christian communion, wherein all the members receive
nourishment from the head, Ephesians. 4.16. and as he thus prepares us for eternal
life, so likewise he prepares a place for us, John 14.2, 3.

4. Its reserved for us principally in himself, notwithstanding the
communication of it daily to us, Jude 1. we are said to be preserved in Jesus
Christ to life, all our life of grace here, and of glory hereafter, is
preserved in Christ.

First, Because all the claim of eternal life is laid up only in him, we
neither desire nor beg any pardon of sin, or any grace, or comfort, or glory,
but through Jesus Christ, the claim of eternal life is wholly in him; for
though God has promised all those kinds of life, its only in Christ.

Secondly, As he reserves the claim of it in his own hands, so he reserves the
security of it in his own hand, even as a Father doubting how his son will
spend his estate, he puts not into his hands the writings or evidences, but he
keeps them in his own hands; so God saw the life he communicated to our first
parents, they prodigally wasted it away, and therefore never since would he put
it into our own hands, but reserved it in the hands of Christ, Romans 4.16.
Therefore it is faith that the promise might be sure. If our salvation had
stood upon our own works, the promise had been sure only so long as we kept
our obedience, but we are unsettled, sometimes enlarged, and sometimes
straightned, so that we should have been at a stand oftentimes, not knowing
whether we had life or no, therefore he has laid it up in Christ, that it
might be sure.

Thirdly, The possession of this life is reserved for us in Christ, our
justification is complete in Christ here, never increased, though the sense of
it may; the first day we are regenerate, we are fully justified; the
justification of all Christians is equal, though their sanctification be not
alike; our life of justification is complete, but yet our life of holiness is
but imperfect, We know but in part, and believe but in part, but its fully laid
up in Christ: so for the life of consolation, we have some beginnings of it
here, Phil. 4.7. 1 Pet. 1.8. But sometimes all our comforts are lost, and where
then lies it but in Christ; as the sap does in the root in winter time, so that
in him we rejoice always, Phil. 4.4. and so our eternal life is reserved in
him, John 14.2, 3. Ephesians. 2.5.

Fourthly, In regard of the glorious manifestation of this life at the last
day, 2 These. 1.10. when he shall come to be admired of all his Saints, this
life is now laid up for his Saints, which at that day he will dispense to his
servants, to the admiration of all men.

Quest. Why has God laid up this life in his Son?

Reas. From the impossibility of laying up life for us in the law, or in the
first Adam, Gal. 3.21. If the Law could have given us life, verily
righteousness had been given us by the law; No, the law that Adam had given
him in Paradise could not have secured our life, but that we might forfeit it
by our own fall, nor could Adam himself give us this life, for in Adam all
dyed, 1 Cor. 15.22. and therefore its Christ alone that has restored as to
life and glory.

Use 1. Hence learn the order of all that life, and grace, and salvation, that
is derived to us, God did not first give us life, and then provide Christ to
maintain it in us, but he first appointed Christ, that in him we might have
life, Ephesians. 1.3, 4. He has chosen us in Christ, Christ is the first fruits of
all that life that we enjoy, he loved Christ, and in him loved us, he first
gave him eternal life that he might give it to whom he would, John 5.26. he
poured this life first on his head, and from him this life runs down to the
lowest skirt of his garment, to the meanest member that belongs to him, he
poured on him the oil of grace, and from him it drops down upon us; he first
crowned him with glory, that he might glorify us.

Use 2. It teaches us the dead estate of all men by nature, if all our life be
laid up in Christ then such as want this life, they want pardon of sins, and
want holiness, and want comfort, and want eternal life, Ephesians. 2.11, 12. Ephesians.
4.19. We by nature are aliens from the life of God, strangers from the
Covenant, that as strangers neither meddle nor make with that which is none of
theirs, so we have nothing to do with the promises of life, till we be in
Christ; let natural men go look at themselves as dead men, all their best
comforts are but as the crackling of thorns, they may warm themselves a while
with the sparkles of their own fire, but this they shall have at length, They
shall lie down in sorrow, Isa. 50.11. Nay by nature we have no hopes of
eternal life, we must be regenerate to this hope, 1 Pet. 1.3, 4.

Use 3. May teach all such as live in a dead estate, to look out where they may
have life; look into your own hearts, there you shall not find life, look into
the world, that is not able to give you life, but get Christ, and then you get
life; as Jacob said to his sons, Why stand ye gazing one upon another, have ye
not heard there is corn in Egypt? why, go up, go and buy it that we may live,
Genesis 42.2, 3. So the Spirit says to us, when we find our hearts ready to
starve for want of this life, for want of pardon of sin, of grace, of comfort;
why stand ye gazing upon the profits and pleasures, and contents of this world,
none whereof can give you life? do you not hear that there is life laid up in
Christ, go and buy of him: its the speech of Wisdom, even of Christ the
wisdom of his Father, Prove. 3.85. Who so finds me, finds life, and all
that hate me, love death.

Use 4. Of consolation to all those that have found their parts in the Lord
Christ; if you have found him, you have found life, pardon of sin, peace of
conscience, and life eternal, Romans 5.1. If you have found him, your sins are
done away, and no Saint under heaven is justified more then you. 2. Having
found him, thou have a life of holiness said up in him, so that though we want
zeal, wisdom, patience, we may fetch it from him, and though we find our
hearts, sometimes drooping under heavy discouragements and afflictions, yet in
him thou may rejoice always; and what though our life here be poor and base,
yet there is an eternal life said up for us in him, and when he appears, we
shall appear with him in glory, Col. 3.3, 4. And the more we may comfort our
selves in that our life is not laid up in Satan's hands, for then we should
never finger any of it, nor in our own hands, for we should lose it at every
hand; but this is our comfort, that our life is laid up in Christ, and reserved
safely for us in him* and therefore it may teach Gods people, that if our life
be laid up in Christ, we must be daily spinning out life from him; what ever we
do, let us do all in the Name and power of Christ, 1 These. 5.9, 10. all the
peace and comfort we find in our selves or families, let us derive it from him,
live not upon the stock of your own graces, but fetch your daily supply from
him, Gal. 1.20. I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, and the life I now
live, I live by faith in the Son of God, live upon Christ daily, fetch all your
help, and comfort, and life from him; and for eternal life, seeing it is laid
up in him, let us lay claim to it in his Name, and lay up the security of all
our life in him; that so though it be unsettled, yet in him it may be sure.

1 JOHN 5.12. He that has the Son, has life, and he that has not the Son,
has not life.


THis Verse contains the third record God has given us of his Son, and that is
the subject of this eternal life to whom this life is given, and that is only
to the true believers, He that has the Son, has life, and he that has not
the Son, has not life.

Doct. Upon our having or not having of Christ, depends our having or not
having life.
Prove. 8.35, 36. He that finds me, finds life, but he that hates me loves
death. Ephesians. 2.11, 12. Without Christ we are aliens from life, and strangers
from the Covenant.

Quest. Why does our life depend upon the having of Christ?

Reas. 1. From the insufficiency of all the creature to give life, Heb. 10.1,
4. For it is impossible that the blood of Bulls or Goats, should take away sin.
Besides, should we die for our sins our selves, yet we could not satisfy for
our sins, because we could never overcome death, neither can our obedience to
the law give us life, Gal. 3.21, 23. David speaks it fully in the Name of
Christ, Psalm. 22.29. No man can keep his soul alive, he cannot keep natural
life, much less a spiritual; yea Adam in innocence was taught to look for the
preservation of his life out of himself, and therefore he was to eat of the
tree of life, implying that the maintenance of that life he then lived, could
not have been in himself, but he must eat of the tree of life, a type of
Christ; How much less could Adam fallen keep this life in him?

Quest. Why is the creature insufficient to give life?

Answ. 1. From the preciousnesse of that price which was to be paid for our
life, the matter of our justification, is the price paid for our redemption,
Psalm. 49.8. The redemption of souls is precious, and it is beyond the power of
the creature, it was only the obedience of Christ as suffering to the death,
that could give a sufficient price for us, and none but Christ could do it,
because he thereby declared himself mightily to be the Son of God.

2. For our life of Sanctification and Consolation, that proceeds from the
Spirit of God within us, springing up in us to everlasting life, John 16.7.
John 4.10. Now its only Christ that can give us this life, its he that must
ascend up to heaven, and send down the Comforter; its he that sets open this
living Fountain.

3. For eternal life that can only be given by Christ, in regard of the
difficulty of it, above all humane reach, no man is able to deliver his soul
from the grave, Psalm. 49.7, 8. Death is the passage to eternal life; now for a
man to die, and aftewards to raise up himself, is above created power, John
11.25.

Reas. 2. From the good pleasure of God that has appointed, That in Christ
should all fullness dwell, Col. 1.19. Col. 3.4. All the springs of life flow
from him only, there is no deriving of life from any other fountain.

Use 1. From hence we may have an evident ground of trial, whereby we may know
whether we be alive or dead; why, if we have the Son, we have life, if we have
not the Son, we have not life. For the understanding of this we are to
consider, 1. What it is to have Christ. 2. What it is to have the Son. 3. Show
some signs of life.


For the first, we are said to have Christ four ways. 1. By way of service. 2.
By way of purchase. 3. By way of Covenant. 4. By way of acceptance.

1. By way of service or worship, a man is said to have God that worships God,
as some Princes are chosen by the peoples adoration, so by our adoring of God,
we have God, Exodus 20.3. Thou shall have no other Gods but me, that is, Thou
shall worship no other Gods but me, if thou worship me, you have me, Psalm.
45.11, 12. For he is the Lord thy God, and worship thou him: we receive Christ
to be our Lord, by worshipping him. This Moses sang at the red Sea, Exodus 15.2,
3. to exalt and worship God, makes him our God; the worship of God is performed
in our minds in our wills, in our live^.

1. In our minds; we then have Christ, when we have him in high estimation,
Cant. 5.10. My Beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest of ten thousand, who is
like unto thee among the gods? Psalm. 8.7. Exodus 15.10, 11. when the soul
prizeth Christ above all, then we have him; this is the difference between
spiritual and earthly things: a man may prize gold, and silver, and riches,
and yet not have them; but we never prize spiritual things, especially Christ,
but we have them; and this is worship, for all worship stands in exalting
another, and debasing my self: now if I give Christ divine esteem, its divine
worship; now when the soul thus esteems Christ as the highest, and debaseth
himself to the lowest, it has Christ. John 1.27. John the Baptist he so
advances Christ, that in comparison of him, he thinks himself unworthy to
loose the lachet of his shoe: no mortal man so great, but another may be
worthy to loose his shoe; but Christ is so highly advanced, that we are not
worthy to do him the meanest service; when a man's heart thus advances Christ,
and thinks himself most unworthy of the meanest service about him, much more
of having Christ himself; when once we have Christ in such high esteem, we
have him indeed, and this high prizing of Christ may a poor soul have, when it
can express little else; and this is an evident argument of our having Christ,
when we can think the worst thing in Christ honorable and precious; this was
Moses his faith, that he looked at the very reproaches and afflictions of Christ
as greater riches, then the treasures of Egypt, Heb. 11.25, 26.

2. We honor Christ in our minds, when we esteem nothing more worthy knowing
then Christ. 2 Cor. 2.2. For I determined to know nothing among you save Jesus
Christ, and him crucified, John 17.3. and to know Christ, is to know the virtue
and worth of Christ, as Paul knew him, Phil. 3.7, 8, 9. that is, to esteem all
his best outward privileges as base and filthy in respect of the knowledge of
Christ, an evident sign that Paul had him. In Nature we never have a thing, but
we desire to know the worth and use of it, Phil. 3.10. so every one that has
Christ desires to know what the power of his death is, and the virtue of his
Resurrection, and the fruits of his mediation.

2. In our hearts and wills, we have Christ, when we look at him as our
chiefest good, that there is nothing in heaven or earth, that we desire in
comparison of him, this is an act of the will and affections, Psalm. 73.25.
Psalm. 42.1, 2. this is called hungering and thirsting after Christ; No hunger
is satisfied, without eating of that we hunger after; so when a soul hungers
and thirsts after Christ, give him pleasures and profits, yet they satisfy
not, except you give him Christ; and this is an high point of worship, Gal.
6.14. when our hearts are set on him, that our chiefest care is to get him, our
greatest grief to lose him, our chiefest delight in him; why, if we be thus
affected to Christ, we have him.

Object. The Church earnestly desired and sought after Christ, yet found him
not, Cant. 3. 1, to 4.

Answ. 1. She could neither have sought after him, nor desired him, except she
had had him.

2. When she sought him, and said, She found him not, she means, I found him
not in that measure of peace and comfort, and fellowship I desired, but yet she
had him, for she said, She sought him whom her soul loved. Secondly, Such a
soul as it thus highly prizeth, and desires, and hungers after Christ, so it
debased it self; the more we esteem him the more we debase our s^lves, the
more we love him the less we love our selves; when Christ once revealed
himself to J^b, Job 40.3. What laid he? Behold Lord, I am vile see* Job 42.4,
5. No soul that highly prizeth and aff^cteth Christ, but the more he d^saffects
and loathes himself, as unmeet to come into the presence of Christ, Isa. 6.4,
5. Then said I, woe is me, for I am undone, because I am a man of unclean lips,
for mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of Hosts, the more he sees Christ,
the more he abhors himself, as an unclean and abominable thing, that if he
could, he would go out of himself; this selfe-denyall is the first principle
in Christianity, Luke 9.23.

3. We worship Christ in our lives, by our obedience in doing his will, and by
patience in suffering for him. Our obedience is a true worship of Christ, 1.
When a man has such respect to all Gods Commandments in his heart, that there
is not one of them, but he has respect unto, and submits his heart to it, this
is a principal part of Gods worship, Psalm. 119.6, 2. When he has respect to
them all in his conversation, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. The Gospel of Christ brings every
thought into subjection; now this is a mavelous worship of Christ, when a man
has not a thought in him, but it is subjected to Christ.

4. We worship Christ in our lives, by our patience in suffering, if the Lord
call us to suffer for him, when we can sit down quietly, and rest well
contented to endure his good pleasure with patience, this is a principal part
of Gods worship, 1 Samuel 3.18. It was a good testimony of Elies sincerity, when
he heard of a woeful judgment denounced against him, It is the Lord, let him
do what seems good in his eyes, we have the Lord for our Lord, when we give
him leave to rule us as he pleases, and patiently submit our selves unto him
in every thing, Job 1.21. an argument we have God for our God, otherwise how
should we complain and murmur at the instruments? Psalm. 39.9. Lam. 3.29. The
Church complaining of her misery, tells us the frame of her Spirit, in such a
time it is good to bear the yoke in our youth, she sits alone and keeps
silence, Psalm. 62.1, 2. Micah 7.7, 8. This is a solemn worship of Christ; if
God call a man to suffer for his Name diverse evils, he is so far from being
ashamed of it, that it is his glory and rejoicing; if any man suffer as a
Christian, let him rejoice in that behalf, when a man is thus framed to
obedience in doing, and patience in suffering the will of God, such a soul is a
true worshipper of Christ, and by worshipping him, we have him; if contrary, we
look at Christ as no such excellent thing but are ashamed of him; if we can
look at our selves as great men in the world, and scorn to seek and mourn after
Christ, when we will not be under Christ's yoke, but scorn to stoop to him in
every thing, and by no means we will endure any hardship for him; why, then we
do not worship Christ, and if we do not worship him, we have him not, and not
having him we have no life.

5. We are said to have Christ by purchase, this is expressed partly in that
parable, Mat. 13.46. One way to have this Pearl, is to buy it, see Isa. 55.1,
2. Come and buy, yea without money; why, without money? Cant. 8.7. If a man
should give all the treasure of his house for Christ, they would be greatly
despised, Acts 8.19. when Simon Magus offered money, for the gift of the holy
Ghost, Peter tells him, Thy money perish with thee, yet many times without
parting with money we cannot have him, the holding fast of money oft-times
loses Christ; upon this ground the young man went without him, Mat. 19. 21,
to 25. Upon the point of money Christ parted with the Pharisees, Luke 16.14.

In three cases money must be parted with, else you shall not purchase Christ.

First, When the Lord upon some special command requires it, as he did the
young man expressly; now for him to stick for money, for want of parting with
it, he lost Christ; upon the same point Ananias and Saphira lost Christ,
because they kept back some of the price, Acts 5.1, 2, 3, 4. a fearful
judgment felt on them, to show how dangerous it is to stand upon terms with
Christ; in this case money must be parted withal.

Secondly, When in times of persecution, a man cannot have Christ with peace
and purity, unless he be willing to part with all for him, as sometimes the
m^rket goes higher, sometimes lower, but at what rate soever it goes, a
Christian is resolved to take Christ at the highest rate; sometimes unless a
man be content to be spoiled of all his goods, he cannot have liberty of
conscie ce: in this case set money, and goods, and lands, and all go, and
suffer joyfully the spoiling of your goods, Heb. 10.34.

Thirdly, When sometimes by laying out money, we may win Christ, as in case we
want a good Ministry among us, and cannot have it unless we be willi^g to lay
out money for obtaining the Gospel, and this he calls sowing to the spirit,
Gal. 6.8. As a man by laying out money provides things needful for him, so
when a man lays out for spiritual uses, he shall of the Spirit reap life
everlasting. In these three case money must be parted with, and yet if you
think money can purchase Christ, you are not worthy of him.

1. Christ must be purchased, by parting with all those strong lusts that keep
us off from Christ, Isa. 55 7. v. 1. having bidden us buy without money, he
tells us then what it is that we must lay out for Christ; why, Let the wicked
forsake his ways, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, let him forg^e his
secret and open sins, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will abundantly
pardon, upon this point sundry have broken off from Christ; Jehu was carried
with ambition to rule, and when he saw it would hazard his Kingdom to forsake
his golden Calves, he would rather part with God, then with his Kingdom, 2
Kings 10.29, 30. and therefore he is said, Not to regard the Commandments of
the Lord, and therefore because he cut short his reformation, and did it not
fully, therefore v. 33. the Lord began to cut short Israel in his days, so
tha^ Hazael cut off many of the out parts of his Kingdom; if we cut short with
God* God will cut short with us: so Herod heard John Baptist gladly and did
many things, but when he would not cut off his lust of uncleanesse, but rather
cut off John's head that reproved him, it is said he added this above all his
other evils, that he shut up John in Prison; they that will not be cut off from
their sinful lusts, they cut themselves short of mercy; Demas a forward
Christian, yet the love of the world so prevailed with him, that he fell off
from the Lord, and embraced this present world* if we would have Christ our
lusts must be parted with, Judge. 10.10. to 16. the people were in great
distress by their enemies, they come and cry unto God for help, God bids them
go to the gods that they had chosen, to see if they would help them, I will
deliver you no more, upon this they put away all their gods, and then the soul
of the Lord was grieved for them, and he raised up a deliverer for them; when
he saw they were willing to part with their gods for him, then God had
compassion on them; so when men are willing to forgo their honorable and
profitable sins, which stick as close to a man as his very heart, if God see
men willing to rend out their dearest lusts for him; why, then Gods soul is
grieved for them, Hos. 14.23. then the Church cries unto God, Take away our
iniquities and receive us graciously; and that's not all, but they go about to
reform their ways, Ashur shall not save us, neither will we ride upon Horses;
Why then v. 4. I will heal their backslidings and love them freely; the like
means Ephraim uses, v. 8. Ephraim shall say, What have I to do any more with
Idols? What says God to this? I have heard him and observed him. When we begin
to protest a solemn abandoning of all our corruptions, then God hears such a
soul: many a soul cries hard for mercy, Take away all our iniquities, and
receive us graciously, and God regards them not, but when we not only cry to
God, but set to in earnest, to turn from all our evil ways, and say, What have
I to do any more with Idols? Why then God hears and observes us: when we
abandon all our lusts, then Christ shall suddenly come into his holy Temple.

2. We must purchase Christ sometimes, by parting with all confidence in his
Ordinances; we may soon lose Christ, if we look for life in them, and not in
Christ, not that we are to reject the Ordinances of God, but account them a
great blessing, and earnestly desire them, Psalm. 27.4. Psalm. 84.10. but yet we
should not put our trust in the Temple of the Lord, Jer. 7.3, 4. Part not with
your fellowship in them, but yet trust not in them, Mat. 3.9. Rest not in the
outward letter of any Ordinances, count all your best privileges, as dross
and dung that you may win Christ, Phil. 3.8. Many that have lived under great
means shall say at the last day, Lord thou have eaten and drunken in our
presence, and we have heard thee preach in our streets, but Christ shall say,
Depart from me, I know you not, ye workers of iniquities: trust not therefore
in often hearing, or in the great means you enjoy; for what is Paul, or Apollo?
they are nothing, but it is God that gives the increase, 1 Cor. 3.6, 7, 8.

2. Sometimes we must be content to part with the very Ordinances themselves:
if we cannot enjoy the Ordinances of God in purity; without sin, let us part
with them all, so when the Priests could not enjoy the liberty of their places
in Jeroboams days; except they would offer sacrifice in their course to the
golden Calves, which were the Image of the Cherubims, they left all and came up
to Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 11.14. where they might enjoy Gods Ordinances in purity,
and as the Priests did, so did the people, verse. 16. as Christ wishes them,
Cant. 2.7, 8. which is spoken of Jeroboams days; and so in case we cannot have
the liberty of the Ordinances, without some impurity, which may defile the
conscience, in this case part with all, for we come not to the Ordinance for
the Ordinance sake, but for Christ's sake; therefore if we cannot have them
without sin, in this case part with them.

4. We must part with all our good parts, and good gifts, and good natures for
Christ, 1 Cor. 3.18. If any man seem wise in this world, let him become a fool
that he may be wise; we must lay aside all carnal wisdom and reasonings, and
be content to be counted fools, that we may win Christ.

2. We must part with all common graces, which commonly choke all hypocrites,
who having received some common gifts and graces, they think they have part in
Christ, or else he would not have vouchsafed them such graces, Matthew. 7.21, 22.
We see there they not only plead their privileges, but their gifts and graces,
that they had prophesied in his Name, etc. and so trusting in them, they fell
short of saving grace. And it is a wonder to think what a strange change a
Spirit of Prophecy works, 1 Samuel 10.10. 1 Samuel 19.20. As in a Scholar, when a
man has been given to loose vain courses, yet when God begins to enlighten his
mind, and to enlarge his affection, and comfort his soul; it is a wonder to
think what a change it will work in a Scholar; so that now he will leave his
old vain courses, and compose himself to more edification and spiritualnesse
in his teachings: why; such a change works such a confidence in him, that he
thinks all the Congregation may sooner perish then he; and if Ministers may be
deceived upon those common gifts and graces, how much more may people be
deceived? Herod's joy, and Jehues zeal, all these you may have and yet want
Christ, a man may have these, and yet not prize Christ, not give up himself to
him, he may still reserve some lust which he favors; therefore if thou have
such common graces, observe, in the midst of those, whether thou cleavest not
to some lusts, for so Christ shall tell such at the last day, Depart from me ye
workers of iniquities: if thou be a worker of iniquity, all thy good gifts
and parts will deceive thee in the end, but if in the midst of such gifts and
graces, thou have a care to keep thy heart clean, and do favor no lust, and
do not place any confidence in these, but in Christ, thy case is safe; for
this is a true rule: hypocrites though they have many good common gifts and
graces, yet they are given up to some sinful way, by which the world shall
know what they are, by their fruits shall you know them. 3. We must part with
all confidence, even in the saving graces of God, Spirit, trust not to them for
justification, look not to be justified by them; if you think to be justified
by your own works or graces, Christ shall profit you nothing, only by faith in
Christ stands our justification, Romans 4.5, 8. 1 Cor. 4.4. I know nothing by my
self, that is, wherein I have failed yet am I not thereby justified, and this
is the error of the Romish Church, if God give them any common graces, they
look to be justified by them.

2 Trust not on them for the life of your sanctification, for though they be
true parts of sanctification, and we may look at them as precious talents, yet
if you shall trust your graces, and go about your performances in the strength
of grace received, you will want Christ, the life and power of Sanctification;
you may have Christ, and he lie like a dead Christ in your hearts; though you
have saving graces, yet know that the life of a Christian is not a life of
graces, but a life of faith in Christ, Gal. 2.20. If you would have Christ live
in you, you must live by your faith, fetch all your grace and strength from
him, Isa. 40.30, 3^. If we go about any duty in our own strength, we shall
utterly saint; but if we wait daily upon Christ, we shall renew our strength as
Eagles, we shall mount above all straights and difficulties, our graces are too
weak to carry us through in our Christian course, and therefore live upon
Christ daily.

3. We are said to have Christ by way of Covenant, Isa. 49.8. Psalm. 50.5.7.
Gather my Saints together to me, those that have made a Covenant with me by
Sacrifice, and then verse. 7. I am God, even thy God, and so the tenure of the
Covenant runs, Genesis 17.17. Deuteronomy. 29.10. to 13. Deuteronomy. 26.17, 18. This day thou
have avouched God to be thy God, Sponsionem stipulatus es, Junius reads it,
When Gods people give up themselves to the Lord, and yield themselves to what
God requires, the God is their God, and they his people, 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. This
Covenant is made by Sacrifice, Psalm 50.5. and he means that solemn Sacrifice
then offered before the Lord, Exodus 24.7, 8. wherein they promised before the
Lord, to be obedient to all the Lord would command them, and on the other side
Moses sprinkled the people, and said, Behold the blood of the Covenant, which
the Lord has made with you, which implies when we come to make a Covenant with
God, we confess before God that death is our just portion* and therefore we
look up to Christ, that his blood being sprinkled on us, he might impart life
to us; this is to make a Covenant with God: for burnt offerings typed out
Christ the meat offerings typed out the people, giving up themselves to God,
and when we do thus, God for his part promises, to be our God, Genesis 17.7. I
will be thy God, that is, not only a good Father a good Mother, a good King, a
good friend, but whatsoever is good in the creature, that he promises to be to
us, he will be a good Father, and Ruler, and Friend, and Husband to us, partly
in his own person; that if all those fail, he will be all these unto us, or
else he will dispense himself so in those instruments, that we shall see Gods
goodness in every creature; when therefore we desire God to be our God, we
desire him to do all that good for us that our estate in this life, or another
world requires. 2 We on our parts offer our selves to be obedient to every
command, and to expect from him all that goodness that he has promised; and
as we offer up our selves to God, so must we offer up all our children and
servants and friends, all that are under our reach, we promise before God, that
as much as in us lies, we and our household will serve the Lord. Josh. 24.15.
and when we give up our selves and ours to the Lord, God promises that he will
be a God to us and ours.

There is a threefold Covenant that passes between men in civil society in
this world. 1 There is a Covenant between Prince and people, 2 Chronicles. 23.16. 2.
Between man and wife, Matthew. 2.14. 3 Between friend and friend, thus David and
Jonathan made a Covenant together, 1 Samuel 20.16. Now in all these respects God
makes a covenant with his people.

1. He makes the covenant of a Kingdom with them that as a King he will rule
us and defend us, and we for our part promise to be at his command, and to be
obedient subjects to him.

2. There is a covenant of marriage between God and his people. Jer. 3.14. Turn
O back sliding children, for I am married to you, that as a wife promises to
be for her husband alone, and he for her only; so does the church promise, that
she will be for Christ alone, and he for her, Hos. 3.3.

3. There is a covenant of friendship betwixt God and his people, 2 Chronicles,
13.5. Ought you not to know that the Lord gave the Kingdom to David, and his
sons for ever by a Covenant of salt, that is, a covenant of friendship, such a
covenant as friends that eat salt together, make and its a perpetua^l covenant,
2 Chronicles. 34.31, 32. and this covenant implies not only subjection and
affection, but communication of secrets and counsels one to another, and to
do all things out of friendship and love, heartily, and readily; thus God said
of Abraham, I know that Abraham will command his family to keep the way of the
Lord; therefore says God, shall I hide from Abraham what I am about to do? If
God be our friend, he will communicate many secrets to us, which the world
shall not know of, Psalm. 25.14. And 2. he will counsel us for the best, Psalm.
25.22, so that in a doubtful case, he will still tell us what way to take, he
will guide us by his eye, Psalm. 32.8. 2. We on our parts shall communicate all
our counsels to him, that we shall do nothing, but we shall acquaint him with
it, we shall acknowledge, Lord we know not what to do, but our eyes are
toward thee, and withal we are ready to do whatsoever God commands us, Psalm.
119.5. and 24.

Try therefore if such a covenant have past betwixt you and God, have we for
our parts given up our selves to God, be sure God has prevented us in all
this, if there have no such covenant past between you and God, then God is not
your God, you have not Christ.

Object: Who is there to be found, that so looks to his own ways, and his
households, that he walks so strictly with God as you require?

Answ. True they that do make a covenant with God often break, even as often
as there is a thought, or word, or action that was not from Gods word, or
mouth, or counsel, but this is our hope. 1. We have Christ for our surety of
this covenant, Heb. 7.22. and he will make up all breaches; when therefore we
break covenant with God, let us renew our humlliations, and be ashamed of our
breach of covenant and charge our souls for it, and acknowledge, that as we
have broken covenant with God, so might God justly break covenant with us, and
if we thus return and humble our selves, then God will renew his covenant with
us again.

2. We have Christ by way of acceptance, this is expressed, Joh. 1.12. To as many
as received him he gave them power to become the sons of God; to receive him,
as diverse express this place, is to receive him as a Father, as a King, as an
Husband, but it may rather be conceived, that to receive Christ, is to receive
him into an house or Temple, and this may be gathered from the precedent words,
verse. 11. (...), is meant his own place or own home, for so it is used, Joh.
19.27. (...), he took her into his home, so as many as received him, as many as
received him into their hearts, as into a Temple, when we thus receive him, we
have him.

Quest. How do we receive Christ as into a Temple?

Answ. Three ways, 1. When we prepare a way, for him to come into his holy
Temple, Mal. 3.1.

Now what is this preparation? Isa. 40.3, 4.

1. Mountains must be pulled down, that is, the lofty spirits of man must be pulled
down, and that is, when we subject our selves at his feet, willing to be
disposed and framed which way he pleases, and to do what he would have us do;
if we would have Christ come into our hearts, he must not find high craggy
rocky ways; but all must be laid level and even.

2. Every valley shall be filled, that is, every base eatthly heart shall be
lifted up to the high ways of the Lord, to mind life and heavenly things,
raised up above earthlinesse and low things of the world, Psalm. 24.7. to 10.
Lift up your heads O ye Gates, and be ye lifted up ye everlasting doors, that
the King of glory may come in; Christ will not descend into pits, but if your
hearts be set on heavenly things, on Gods favor and his heavenly Kingdom,
then you are fit for Christ, 2. A man's heart may be too low through despair,
many a poor soul, after his high thoughts are pulled down, he sinks down so low
into despair, that he thinks no promise or mercy belongs to him; Why, this
heart is too low for Christ, therefore it behooves a christian to believe there
is an hope in Israel concerning this; Christ has had mercy on as bad as me,
and therefore we will lay our mouths in the dust, till he shall have mercy on
us; and if he offer grace, we are willing to receive it,

3. Crooked things must be made straight; there are in our hearts many turnings
in and out, these must be made straight, it is when we look with a single eye,
and are willing to be guided by a straight rule, and aim singly at Gods ends,
such an heart is fit for Christ, when it is cleansed from all hypocrisy. 2.
There is another crookedness of our hearts, when we shift off and cover sin,
Psalm. 125.5. but to prevent it, Christ will, have us deal plainly, discover
our sins openly before God, and then is Christ ready to come suddenly into his
Temple.

4. Rough places must be made smooth, many a man's heart is rough and harsh, and
bitter; why, God will have this frame of heart laid down, all bitterness and
wrath put away, and the heart made loving and meek; the Lamb Christ will not
rest in Lions dens, therefore the Apostle bids us lay aside all wrath and
malice; when our rough hearts are made smooth end amiable; why, then
undoubtedly Christ will come into his Temple. 2. When Christ is come into our
hearts, if we would look to keep him there, we must look to it, that there be
no common and unclean thing found there, 2 Cor. 6.16, 17, 18. This Temple is an
holy place, therefore put away not only unclean, but common things; all your
affairs must be dedicated to the Lord, all your wealth and store, all your
household and children must be consecrate to the Lord, Christ loves to lie
clean, he dislikes even bodily slovenlinesse, much more spiritual defilements.
3. To receive Christ into his Temple, is to look well to the charge of Gods
holy offerings; God would have every man in particular to take the charge of
his holy things on himself, and not put it off to others; let every one keep
his charge, every one offer up his daily sacrifice, and his service for the
Sabbath; all Gods offerings must be looked to, and if we do thus, God will
rest in his holy Temple for ever, Exodus 15.2. consider therefore whether you
have thus received Christ, have you found your proud hearts humbled, your base
earthly hearts lifted up to Gods ways, all crooked bypath of hypocrisy and
shifting put away; do you find your rough spirits made smooth and amiable?
Why, if it be so, then Christ is come, and when he is come, do you strive to
keep your hearts clean, and undefiled, and dedicate your selves and yours to
God, you keep the charge of Gods holy offerings, and set up his Ordinances
amongst you; why, then we have received Christ: e contra, if we find it not
thus, we have no Christ, and so no life. Hitherto we have heard what it is to
have Christ; the second thing to be inquired after, is, What it is to have the
Son, He that has the Son has life, it is not enough to have Christ, but if we
would have life, we must have Christ as the Son.

Quest. What then is it to have the Son?

Answ. There are three things employed in having the Son. 1. That such a have
Christ in truth, do not rest so much in having any of the benefits of Christ,
but they do chiefly affect to have the Son himself: many professors sought
after Christ for the loaves sake, John 16.26, 27. But Christ bids them not to
labor for the meat that perishes, but to labor for Christ himself, the bread
of life: hereby Peter discovered hypocrisy of Simon Magus, in that he desired
the gift of Christ, but not Christ himself, and such gifts as might tend to
profit; but Peter tell him, Thy money perish with thee, Act. 8.18, 19. So
Balaam wished, O that I might dye the death of the righteous, Numb. 23.10. but
he desired not Christ, but own happiness and freedom from hell and misery, and
therefore what ever gift he had besides, as indeed he had a goodly gift of
prophecy, he never sought Christ in any of them. Nay further, a true christian
that affects Christ himself seeks him, not only without respect to profit or
gain, or happiness hereafter, but even here in this life, in the Ordinances of
God, wherein he seeks for help against his lusts, for increase of grace, for
supply of comfort, he does not so affect them, as to find Christ in them: When
David fled from Absalon, and the Priests carried the Ark after him, as knowing,
they should never meet with a Prince that more favored and upheld Gods
worship, then he; David bad the Priests carry back the Ark again, If I shall
find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me back again, and show me
both it and his habitation; but if he say, I have no delight in thee, here I
am, let him do what seems him good, as if he had said, the Church shall not
be so much prejudiced as to be deprived of the Ark of God for my sake, without
which they cannot offer their solemn Sacrifices, nor find the presence of God,
therefore he considers, that thereby Gods Name should be dishonored, and the
Church wronged, and rather then he would do that, he would part with the very
Ark, the presence of God, and his Ordinances, which yet was his greatest care
and desire, Psalm. 27.4. Now this is an argument of grace in sincerity, to be
willing to part with the Ordinances, rather then have God dishonored, and the
Church prejudiced. This was Moses care, rather then God should be dishonored
by the Heathen, he would have God blot his name out of the book of life, Exodus
32.32, 33. A true christian perfers Gods honor, above the pardon of sin, above
the best graces, yea above salvation it self; if a christian desire the
Ordinances, it is that he may find the beauty and loving kindness of the Lord
in them, Psalm. 63.1, 2, 3. if he desire the subduing of his lusts, it is not so
much for his own comfort, as that the power of Christ might he magnified in
him; he desired, salvation, if he desires gifts and graces, it is not that he
might be made excellent, but that the grace of Christ might be magnified in
him; if he desire salvation, it not so much for his own joy and happiness, as
that he may be with Christ, Phil. 1.28. having a desire to depart and to be
with Christ, which is far better, Cant. 5.10. My beloved is white and ruddy,
the chiefest of ten thousand, not only of persons, but the chiefest of ten
thousand benefits and privileges which God gives, pardon of sin, and grace,
and comfort, and salvation it self, Christ is better then all these, and he
that thus affects Christ, has the Son, and so has life. Grounds of this.

1 Christ must be so received as God gives him, but God gives us Christ first,
in every Ordinance: when Philip preached to the Eunuch, it is said he preached
Jesus to him, Act. 8.35. So in the Sacrament, you must first take and eat his
flesh, and drink his blood, and then you have remission of sins, Mat. 26.26. No
gift of grace but is given through Christ, if it be lively and true. Herod
received joy, Jehu zeal, Ahab humiliation, but none of these received life,
because they received the shell and not the kernel, the casket, and not the
Pearl, the gift, but not Christ; and therefore their graces were not lively.
Simon Magus believed yet had no lively faith, because Christ wanting: except we
find Christ, we find no true grace, Hos. 4.8. in me is thy fruit found, without
me you can do nothing, Joh. 15.5. Hence let us gather an estimate of our
selves, whether we have life or not, If you have the Son, you have life, try
therefore whether you labor not more for the loaves, for the benefits of
Christ, then for Christ himself; if thou find thou come to the Ordinances
rather to find Christ, then the pardon of sin, and comfort, and happiness, and
salvation; if with the Church in the Canticles, thou seek Christ and not the
loaves, if thou with her inquirest of the watchmen, where thou may find him
whom thy soul loves, if we thus affect Christ, we have the Son, we could never
have sought him thus, if he had not first sought us: but e contra, if we have
longing desires after pardon of sin, and after grace and salvation, those
desires indeed are ordinarily sincere, but there may be an Harlots affection in
them; as an Harlot seeks her an husband not for his persons sake, but for his
goods sake, that her debts may be paid, and that she may be a sharer in his
wealth, now she seeks him not for his ends, but for her own: so if a man shall
desire Christ, that he may have his sins pardoned, and his conscience pacified,
and seek not Christ himself; why, this is but an whorish affection; whereas one
that loves her husband, she will have him though she have but the bare man,
though she beg with him; so one that truly loves Christ, he would be glad and
think himself happy to have him, though he should never see good day after,
never find peace or quiet after, Whom have I in heaven but thee, and there is
nothing on earth, that I desire in comparison of thee.

This will exclude from having of Christ.

1. All such as are so far from seeking Christ himself, that they do not seek
the benefits of Christ, they look at grace and christian duties as melancholy
wearisome things, for pardon of sins, they never look after it, and for heaven
they hope they shall do as well as others; why, these men they will neither
have Christ nor any thing of his.

2. This excludes such from having Christ, as have more desire of his benefits
then Christ himself, pardon of sin, and grace, and peace of conscience, and
comfort that they look after, but Christ they forget; why, as yet our seeking
is not sincere: if a woman perceive that her love seeks more for wealth and
dowry, then her person, no wonder, if she hold off; so if Christ find we come
to him, and seek for pardon of sin, and grace, and peace, more then for
himself, no wonder if he keep off and hide himself from us, because this may
come from self-love, from respect to our own good, and yet nature teaches us
not to seek such things, and those desires are ordinarily good beginnings; for
indeed christians at first are full of self-love, but yet Christ will never
fully reveal himself, till we seek his person rather then his gifts,
therefore first labor to get Christ and he will bring all these privileges
with him, Romans 6.32. seek him chiefly and not his gifts; you must first know
Christ will be more loved for his own sake then his gifts, before he say to you
as to the church, Cant. 2.14. O my Dove, let me see thy Countenance, let me
hear thy voice for sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance lovely, before he
thus manifest himself to thee, he will make thee willing to seek thee as thy
head and husband, as the most wise, the most beautiful, the chiefest among ten
thousand; and let but thy desire be toward him, and his desire will be toward
thee, Hos. 3.3. Stand not upon dowries, take him without Feoffments, for
better, for worse: and if you thus take Christ, and choose his person in the
first place, then all his benefits and privileges become yours, 2 Cor. 3.22,
23. 2. A child of God is said to have the Son, when he has the Spirit of the
Son, 2 Cor. 3.17. Having spoken before of a Spirit of ministration and grace;
why, says he, the Lord is that Spirit, not only because he is the giver of it,
but there is a secret union betwixt Christ and his Spirit, so that if you have
the one, you have the other, Romans 8.9. If any man have not the Spirit of
Christ, he is none of his, Gal. 4.6. he that has the Son, has the Spirit of
the Son, and is made conformable to his Image.

There is a twofold Spirit whereby we are knit to Christ, and Christ to us 1. A
Spirit of union. 2. A Spirit of liberty.

1. He that has fellowship with Christ, has a Spirit of union, whereby he is
made one with him, Joh. 17.21. It Is the prayer of our Savior for all
believers, that they al may be one, As thou father art in me, and I in thee,
that they also may be one in us, thou in me by thy Spirit, and I in them by the
same Spirit, hence it is, that of his fullness we shall receive grace for
grace, Joh. 1.16. Romans 8.29. We are predestinate to be made like to the Image
of Christ. There is a threefold conformity and likeness betwixt Christ and us,
that is wrought by the Spirit.

1. We are like him in his nature, 2 Pet. 1.4 by the precious promises, we are
made partakers of the divine Nature, so that we are meek as he was, lowly as he
was, innocent and harmless as he was the Spirit of God stamp^ the same Image
on us that was in Christ, Joh. 1.16. Hence it is, that the e that have Christ,
they reason from Christ's nature to theirs, and from their nature to Christ's, 2
Cor. 1.17, 18, 19. Paul had sometimes sent to them, that he would come to them
as he passed by into Macedonia, but neither in his going not his return did he
come to them, therefore they accuse him of levity and inconstancy; Paul
excuses this, and he pleads from the nature of Christ; for the Son of God,
Jesus Christ that was preached among you by us, was not yea and nay, but in him
was yea; Why, what is that to him? Yes, look as Christ is yea and amen, the
faithful witness, that what he speaks, he will perform, ^o make account that
Christ has poured the same Spirit on us, that our words likewise are yea and
amen, had not Gods providence hindered it; there is such a participation of the
divine nature, that the nature of Christ, the nature of the Gospel, and the
nature of a Christian, all of them answer one another; the same Spirit that
made Christ yea and amen, faithful and true, has made the Gospel, and so the
same Spirit in Gods people makes them true and faithful, so that look what
they say, their hearts go with it, and if Gods providence hinders not, they
will perform their word.

2. There is a conformity in his offices, he has made us Priests, Kings and
Prophets to his Father, Rev. 1.6. Kings to overruled our lusts, to overcome the
world, anointed with a royal Spirit, although not yet invested with full glory;
Priests, to offer sacrifices of prayer, of a broken spirit, Psalm. 51.12.
Sacrifices of righteousness, Psalm. 4.5. and to sacrifice our lives for Christ,
Phil. 2.17. so he has made us Prophets of God, Act. 2.17. he has poured on us
the Spirit of prophecy, poured, not dropped sparingly, but poured on us
abundantly, hence it is that a christian understands many secrets of Gods
will, Psalm. 25. 14. many hidden mysteries of the Scripture, so that he is bound
to see a secret providence of God, guiding him in his way.

3. There is a conformity in their estate: our Savior in this world went
through a double estate, 1. Of Humiliation, 2. Exaltation, and in the most deep
passions he went through, when he was excommunicated by the Church, hated,
crucified, yet even then he mightily showed forth his divine power; hence he is
said to triumph openly on the cross, Col. 2.17. and such is a Christians
estate, Psalm. 34.19. Many are the afflictions of the righteous, there is his
humiliation: but the Lord delivers him out of all, there is his exaltation, for
by those deliverances he makes them glorious, Psalm. 149.4. He will beautify
the meek with salvation; nay a christian in the midst of all his worldly
comforts, he gets loose from them, so that you may see those are not the things
he chiefly looks after, if he have great parts and gifts, yet they are clad
with a Spirit of Christ crucified, Gal. 6.14. their outward deportment is but
mean and homely, yet in their outward meanness and baseness, you may discern
the power of Christ crucified, 2 Cor. 13 4. Since ye seek a proof of Christ
speaking in me, as he was crucified through weakness, and yet live^h in me by
the power of God, even so we are weak with him, that is, in outward show, why,
yet as Christ when he was most deb^sed* showed forth most power; so a christian
in his greatest debasements and weaknesses, Gods power is most magnified in
him, never more glorious then when most debased. Hence those strange phrases,
we are dead with Christ, Col. 2.20. and risen with Christ, Col. 3.1. crucified
with Christ, Romans 6.6. that is, by the same Spirit of Christ that is in us, we
are so knit with him, that we are made of the same state with him; that as he
was weak and base, and yet glorious; so are we,

2 There is a Spirit of liberty; nothing better expresses the temper of the
Son, Christ the Fathers Image, then a Spirit of liberty, 2 Cor. 3.17. Where the
Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty; If the Son shall make you free, then
you are free indeed, Joh. 8.36. His liberty is a real liberty: And this is

1. Liberty from the fear of sin of hell of the grave, and of all his enemies
he is not afraid like a sla^e that is not is a (...) of liberty, Romans 8.15.
H^b. 2.15. A Spirit of liberty is a Spirit of freedom from all fear, Luke
1.74, 75. Such a man is not afraid what flesh can do unto him, Psalm. 3.5, 6. I
will not be afraid though ten thousand shall compass me about I will ly me
down and sleep quietly, the fear of men shall not break his sleep, so Psalm.
56.3.10 11. this holy tranquillity frees us from all fears, and this liberty is
proper to a Son, he fears not others, so he may please his father; he knows his
Father will give him protection, and provision, Romans 8.37.

2. He has a liberty from the dominion of sin, sin has not that power to
carry him captive, Romans 6.4. Romans 8.2. The Law of the Spirit of life in Christ
Jesus has made me free from the Law of sin and death, that is, the Spirit of
grace that commands and rules me like a law, has freed me from the law of sin
and of death, that a Christian is now but a beginner of sin, sin has not that
power over him that formerly it had; time was when I could not break off from
evil company, but now the Law of the Spirit of life has set me free from them;
many a valiant spirit fears not death; many a soldier venters upon a Canons
mouth, but yet I presume he is captivate to many a base lust; but a Christian
is not only freed from the fear, but the bondage of sin.

3. He has liberty from being servant unto men, 1 Cor. 7.23. Ye are bought
with a price, be not servants of men: he does not mean that they should shake
off all obedience and subjection; but though they should be subject to their
Masters, ye now they should not serve them in a slavish manner, but with
freedom of Spirit in obedience to Christ, heartily and readily, 1 Cor. 7.22. he
that is called in the Lord, being a servant is the Lords freeman, he does his
Masters work with a free spirit, and withal he does the work of Gods service
with much more freedom, and when they come to their own liberty, they will be
inclined to good duties, strive to gain opportunity for prayer and reading, and
hearing, whereas others though they have much more outward liberty, yet they
have far less inward.

4 The Spirit of God that sets me free from the service of men, makes me free
to every duty of God, to have free access to him, the Spirit that set me at
liberty from Satan, will make me run the ways of Gods Commandments with an
enlarged heart, Psalm. 119.32. Ps. 110.3. Gods people are a willing people and
as he is free from the bondage of men, so he is Lord over them, he can make
them all serve him; Genesis 25.23. God told Rebecca there were Nations in her
womb, and the elder should serve the younger, how was that fulfilled, seeing
Jacob calls Esau Lord, and himself his servant? Genesis 33. Why, as some say, that
must be understood of the Nations, not of the persons; but it may be Esau's
Lordship and roughness did Jacob more real service then ever Jacob did him,
whence was it that he went out of his Fathers house, met with so glorious a
vision the first night? whence was it that he made such a vow to God, that if
the Lord would be with him, and bless him in that country, then the Lord
should be his God? whence was it that he returned with such a blessing? whence
was it that he so wrestled with God and obtained a blessing? was not this from
Esaus bitterness, and for fear of him? which shows that every fury and
persecution of wicked men do Christians the truest service, as it was with the
Tyrants in Syria, and Egypt, all the tyranny did but purify the people of God,
and make them white, Dan. 11.35.46. they are but as scullions to scour and
rinse Gods people, they are but as servants or like house-wives, they lay them
in soap, and dung, and sharp lee, but it is but to make them white.

Try therefore whether you have the spirits of sons. Do you find in you the
nature of Christ? do you find your selves invested with a Kingly Royal spirit?
do you find in you the spirit of prophecy? do you find in you the state of
Christ, that in the meanest condition you have a mighty power of Christ
breathing in you? why, then it is evident you have the Spirit of God, but if we
find we are not like him in his nature, we cannot pray or prophecy, then we
have none of Gods Spirit.

Do we find our selves still in bondage to sin, lying under the fear and
dominion of it? then we have not Gods Spirit in us, Gods Spirit would set us
free from all bondage.

3 We are said to have the Son, when we have Christ not only for our Savior,
but for our Prince. Acts 5.31. Him has God exalted to be a Prince and Savior.
To whom he is a Savior, to them he is a Prince. It were dishonor, to God to
save those whom he cannot rule, to deliver them from sin and Satan and yet
leave them in their sins; God has sent his Son not only to save but to rule us.

Two things here are to be opened.

1 That he that has Christ, has him for his Savior. 2 That he that has him
for his Savior, must have him for his Prince likewise.
We are ready commonly to conceive, that every one would have Christ for his
Savior, but indeed they are but rare that would have a Savior indeed. To have
Christ for our Savior implies two things.

1 He that has Christ for his Savior, looks up to him for salvation in all
his distresses, Isa. 45.22. Look unto me, and be saved, all ye ends of the
earth. He that looks for any other Savior, denies Christ. He that has Christ
for his Savior, in what coasts soever of the world he lives, he must look up
to him for salvation, as they that looked toward the Temple, had their
petitions heard: So, wheresoever we are in what condition soever, we must look
toward Christ, and long after him for salvation, not only from Gods wrath,
and hell, but even from whatever distresses we are in, torment of conscience,
sickness, imprisonment; we must wait upon him for deliverance. Isa. 8.17. I
will wait upon the Lord that hides his face from the house of Jacob, and I
will look for him. The Church was then in grievous distress, both in regard of
sin and calamity, there were none for her to look unto, either Princes or
Priests, to redress the matter, all had been in vain; but there was no hope in
them, yet I will look unto the Lord, and wait on him that hides his face, Isa.
17.7. Speaking of such times wherein only a few gleaning grapes should be left.
In that day shall a man look to his Maker, and his eyes shall have respect to
the holy one of Israel. We cast respect or disrespect upon one with our eye,
whilst our eyes are upon the creature, and turned away from God, we disrespect
God; but when our eyes are toward him, set on him, we show respect to God, and
this man has Christ for his only Savior. This was Jehosaphats practice, 2 Chronicles. 20.12. Being in a great fear of a mighty host that came against him, he
set himself to seek God, and prayed, O Lord, we know not what to do, but our
eyes are toward thee. This having our eyes toward Christ in evil times,
argues that we have Christ for our Savior, Psalm. 121.1. I will lift up my eyes
to the hills, from whence comes my help. And he means the Hills of Zion and
Moriah, where the Temple and Ordinances were. My help comes from the Lord who
made heaven and earth. Jonah went away from God when he should have gone to
Nineveh, he sent him to Nineveh, but he fled to Tarshish; and therefore,
because he would not have God for his Prince to rule him, he would not be his
Savior, but sent out a mighty tempest against him, and the most unruly
creature of the Sea to swallow him up; and then Jonah out of hopes prays out
of the Whales belly, If I am utterly cast out of his sight, yet I will look
again toward his holy Temple, Jonah 2.4. His heart had respect to it, though
he could not tell which way it stood, and in that he had respect to Christ, a d
therefore the Lord sent him a glorious deliverance, If you have Christ for your
Savior, your eyes will be toward him in every distress.

2 He that has Christ for his Savior, not only looks for salvation by him
from all his distresses, but from all his sins likewise, Psalm. 130.7, 8. He
shall redeem Israel from all his sins, and therefore his name is called Jesus,
Mat. 1.21. Hos. 14.2. They said unto God, Take away all our iniquities and
receive us graciously. They desire God not only to take them away, that is, to
pardon them, but to heal them, for so God understands them, verse. 4. I will
heal your backslidings. We think it a common thing for men to desire Christ to
be their Savior, but how sew are there that desire to be redeemed from all
their sinful ways? How many are there whom Christ would lovingly gather, but
they will not be gathered? Mat. 23.37. And if God speak so of his Church,
wonder not if he say so of Babylon, He would have healed her but she would not
be healed, Jer. 51.9. God looked that his people, living amongst them 70 years*
they should be brought on, but none were, or very few, therefore God bids his
people, Come out from amongst them, Jer. 24.25. God complains of the evil
lives of his people, that they were like wild asses, snuffing up the wind at
their pleasure; and when he called to them, Withhold thy foot from being
unshod; they said desperately, No, strangers have I followed, and after them
will I go. How do such men look for Christ to be their Savior, when they
will not be delivered from their sins? when Christ comes to cast out their
sins, they are ready to cry as the man possessed with the Devils, Art thou come
to torment us before our time? Pulling away their sins from them, is a grievous
torment to their souls: do but take away their hopes of some gainful sin, and
they are enraged, Acts 16.19.

2 If we have Christ for our Savior, we must have him for our Prince, Act.
5.31. that is, we must resign up our selves and submit our selves to him. Isa.
9.6. Unto us a Son is born, to us a child is given. And why, how shall I know
whether the Son be given me? Why, the government is upon his shoulders.

Two ways we are said to have Christ for our Governor,

1 When we resign up our selves in obedience to him, when we have not a
thought within us but is brought into subjection to the Lord Christ, 2 Cor.
10.4, 5. Prove. 12.5. The thoughts of the righteous are right thoughts, coming
from a right ground, guided by a right rule, tending to a right end.

Obj. But, whose heart is so right, that every thought is subdued to the will
of Christ? Who is there but have many vain thoughts lodge in them? Jerem. 4.14.

Answ. He that has Christ for his Prince, will not have a vain thought lodge
in him; indeed, evil thoughts may rush in upon him, as sturdy beggars into an
house, and they would be Masters, and have every one tend upon them; but a
Christian, he suffers them not to lodge there, he rests not till they be thrown
out of doors, they find no welcome in his heart: Indeed, a Christian man may
have many evil thoughts within him, but yet here is the difference between him
and the carnal man, a wicked man that has not Christ, he has not one good
thought in him, the frame and inclination of, his heart is wholly evil, Genesis
6.5. Or if good thoughts or motions be cast in to stir him up to repentance;
why, they suffer them not to lodge there, but they bid them come another time;
whereas a good man, if a good thought come, it is most welcome to him, he
entertains it; and cherishes it, even as a Messenger sent from his Prince.

2 If an evil thought come into a natural man's heart, it is connatural to him,
it finds lodging and welcome there, Ephesians. 4.18, 19. But a godly man, if an evil
thought come, he looks at it as an enemy and traitor, he calls to all the
family, to all the faculties of the soul to help against it: and if he be not
strong enough, he calls to all his Christian friends, but especially he calls
to his Prince to deliver him, even as a good Subject that has a Traitor got
into his house, that plots treason against the King, and spoils his goods, and
he is not able to get rid of him, be secretly sends to his Prince for aid. This
course David took, Psalm. 139.23. Search me, O Lord, and try me. He would have
God to make privy search, and find out the frame of his heart; unlike to them,
Isa. 29.15. And then v. 24. See if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me
in the way everlasting. And if he would have God to be ruler over his thoughts,
then much more of his words and actions. Now there are some men whose hearts
are like the highway ground, let evil thoughts come and go at their
pleasures, they will not be subject to Christ. As for this man, we will not
have him rule over us, Luke 19.14. What say they? Thoughts are free, and our
tongues are our own, who shall control us? Whereas a Christian would have God
rule all his thoughts and words; nay, a carnal heart is so wonderfully
desperate, that they will not only not be servants to God, but they will make
God servant to them. Isa. 43.24. Thou have made me to serve with thy sins, and
wearyed me with thy iniquities. They make God to serve a wearisome service,
that as a cart is pressed under the sheaves, so is God under them; they load
Gods patience with one sin after another, pitch one sin upon another, till he
be burdened with our sins; and what parts and gifts, and liberties God gives
them, they abuse to Gods dishonor, And is not this monstrous rebellion, for
poor creatures to make God serve a wearisome service? Wonder not therefore if
he say, Rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, 1 Samuel 15.26. As a Witch gives
her soul to the devil, to have her own liberty for a while, so rebellious
sinners are at league with the devil and hell, to serve their lusts whilst they
live.

2 As a witch makes the devil serve her all her life, but at death she serves
the devil; So God shall serve them all their life time, but at death they
would serve God, and then they will do him the best service they can. Why do
you think God will accept our service when we dye, when we have made him serve
us all our life time?

2 To have Christ for our Prince is not only to serve him, but we must give
him Princely service, such service as becomes so royal a Prince, Mal. 1.8.
Serve not him with blind and lame sacrifices, but with the best and fattest;
crucify your fattest and dearest lusts to him, let him have your best parts,
and best affections; righteous Abel brought to God the firstlings of his flock,
and of the fat thereof, Genesis 4.4. So let God have our first years, and the
strength of your affections, give not him your old, decrepit age. 2 Samuel 24.24.
I will not offer to God (says David) that which cost me nothing. Araunah
indeed gave them all freely to the King, like a King. If a man give to a King,
he must give as to a King, he must give as a King. Nay, (says David) if you as
a King give those things to me, must not I then who am a King give as a King to
that King of Kings? Let God have all you have, give up your selves and all your
families to him.

For application.

Would you know then whether you have life? Why, if you have Christ, you have
life; and if you would know whether you have Christ or no, you must consider,
God has exalted him to be both Savior and Prince. Do thou find thy heart
looking up to him for help in all thy miseries? Then thou have him as a
Savior. If in cases when thou know not what to do, yet thy eyes are
toward him? Why, this very looking toward him, is of an healing nature, as
was the looking toward the brazen Serpent, Numb 21.9. The Conies are but a
feeble folk, and yet they make their nests in a rock; so, it is good for us in
our distresses, to have recourse to the rock that is higher then we.

Again consider, are there any lusts in us that we desire to be spared in, and
would not be saved from? Why, then we have not Christ for our Savior. So
consider, Have we Christ for our Prince? Do we subject every thought unto him?
Do thou not entertain an evil thought? if they rush in upon thee, do thou
strive to thrust them out? Then thou have Christ for thy Prince. But if thou
find evil thoughts in thy heart, and suffer them to rest in thee. Do
thou make God to serve a wearisome service from month to month, and year to
year, and over burden his patience and mercy? Then Christi not thine. If thou
look at him as thy Prince, he should have the best service thou could
afford him.

A third head of signs whereby we may know whether we have Christ or no, is
expressed in the text, He that has the Son, has life. For we may as well argue
from having of life that we have the Son, as from the having of the Son that we
have use; they are reciprocal, he that has the Son has life, and he that
has life has the Son.

This Life is fourfold: Of Justification, Of Sanctification, Of Consolation,
and Of Glorification.


If we have good evidences of the three former, we may have assurance of the
latter.

The signs of life are of three sorts, our spiritual life may be discerned
three ways: By the causes. By the effects. By the properties.


For the causes, the holy Ghost gives us three causes of our spiritual life,
which if we find, we may assure our selves that we have life, and so
consequently we have the Son.

1 Cause of our spiritual life, is Gods own good pleasure. Of his own will
has he begot us* Jam. 1.18. This St. John proves by denying all other causes
of our begetting to life, John 13 Not of blood: that is, not of parentage, for
godly parents may have wicked children; though Gods commandment do much, yet
it is not from their good parentag^, but from Gods pleasure in the covenant.
Nor of flesh, that is not of corrupt nature: nor of the will of men; that is,
not of the will of our best friends, that desire it, and pray for it, unless
God set in with all those of his good pleasure, he shall not have life, Ezekiel.
16.6. It was od that said to us when we were in our blood, Live. This is an
eviden^ sign of the life of grace. Such a man's heart acknowledges all the
grace he has to be of Gods good pleasure. Take a natural man, he thinks well
of him elf, that he has always had a good nature, and towardly, and hopeful,
and all his friends could say no less But now a regenerate Christian
acknowl^dg^th that he had no heart to goodness by nature, only some outward
correspondency toward his friends, to please them; but he acknowledges what
Paul does, Gal. 1.15, 16. When it pleased God to call me by his grace, and to
reveal Christ in me, then I lived, but not before. A living soul never
attributes any thing to his good nature or towardliness, but when it pleases
God to call him to his grace.

A second cause of life is a word of promise; for, all that are of Abraham are
not the Children of Abraham, only the seed of promise, such as are begot of a
word of promise, as Isaac was, and least you should think it belongs to Isaac
only, he makes it common to all the elect, that they are all children of
promise, Gal. 4.28. But yet Isaac had the peculiar, in that even his birth was
by promise to Abraham and Sarah: But the Apostle would thereby infer, that
all our spiritual birth, is by a word of promise. Here therefore try thy life,
thou say thou live, but what word of promise were thou begot of? Faith
comes by hearing, Rom: 10 17. Gal. 3.5. There is some word of promise
dispears^d in the word preached, which the soul lays hold of, and is thereby
knit to Christ by faith: Indeed, many a good soul cannot tell what word of
promise he was first begot of, yet sure it was by a word of promise; and though
thou do not know this promise, yet there is no Christian but he sustains
himself by some promise, which shows plainly that he was bred of a promise
which is fed by a promise. Many times a word of grace and wise admonition sinks
so deep into the heart, as that it makes many a one amend his wicked ways, and
take better courses, and reform his life; but this is no evident sign of
spiritual life. So an hypocrite may be so far convinced as to turn the stream
of his life, and yet without all power of godliness, and the ground is, we
cannot receive life from the words or works of the Law, it is altogether
impossible, Gal. 3.21. All true spiritual life is from some word of promise
that has been dispen^ed to us in the Word. The word of the Law may reclaim us
from giving outward offense, but yet without all respect or obedience to God.
But when we are quickened by a word of promise, then the love of God
constrains us.

Obj. Is it not ordinary for the word of the Law to cast down and humble us,
before we can lay hold on a promise.

Answ. True. Yet this is not that which makes a man a new man, this may reach
to the reformation of many outward sins, but yet it gives not spiritual life,
till we begin to think of, and long after Christ, and meditate and talk of him,
till at length the sight of Christ, does so work on us, that we do not only
long after him, but we so receive him, and embrace him, that we are enlightened
by him.

A third cause of life, is the Spirit of God, John 3.6. There is a shedding
abroad of the Spirit into the heart of every regenerate man, that he has not
the same spirit he had before. Now a man's spirit is the bent and inclination of
the soul. Ephesians. 4.23. Be ye renewed in the spirits of your minds. The soul and
the body is the same: But there is another spirit, they see other things they
never saw before, judge otherwise then they did before; now they have new
thoughts, and judgments, and affections, so that their heart is far off from
earthly things, and let on spiritual things. All things are become new. A new
heart, new conference, new employment, new company, the whole man has another
frame of spirit in him. He that finds it thus has life.

For application.

Consider therefore how you find your hearts speaking concerning your estates.
Do you find indeed that sometimes you have had good motions cast in, but
before God was pleased to call you to his grace, nothing did you good. Do you
find your life wrought by a spirit of promise. Do you find that you are
renewed to a new inclination and frame of spirit, then you have life. Your life
springs from true causes, if not you have not life.

A second sort of signs of life is from the effects of spiritual life; And,

1 Justification or pardon of sins is a principal part of our spiritual life,
Psalm. 32.2, 3. And this is called justification to life, Romans 5.18. Even as a
condemned man's pardon is the life of the man, so is the pardon of our sins the
life of our souls. Now the first effect flowing from the pardon of our sin, is,

1 Some inward peace of conscience, some inward satisfaction that he never
found before. My sin is not pardoned, at least not manifested so to be, till I
find some measure of inward peace, Romans 5.1. What was it that burdened thy
conscience, but guilt of sin? If therefore God say to my soul, Son, thy sins be
forgiven thee; upon this follows the tranquillity of the mind, and sometimes in
that unspeakable manner, that passes all understanding, Phil. 4.7. Though this
be not so ordinary, yet they always find a secret peace and ease, as if you
had cast off milstones from the heart, Isa. 32.17. The effect of righteousness
is quietness and assurance for ever; if sin be pardoned, peace and everlasting
assurance follows.

A 2. effect of this life of Justification, is, that look as you see in a
moral life, no man has received life, but he strives to maintain it, so that
all that he has will he give for his life; So, if thou have received the life
of the pardon of thy sins, thou shall find a serious, and constant care of
preserving that life and peace, so that you will let all go rather then the
peace of your conscience. Thy loving kindness is better then life, Psalm. 63.4.
And therefore if I find a tender care in me to maintain my peace, it is a sign
I have received life, seeing I am so careful to maintain it. A man that has
been in a great debt, and lately paid it, he is careful to run on the score no
more; so when God has blotted out the score of our sins, a Christian is very
sollioitous to sin no more, but that he may live an holy and spotless life all
his days. Notable is the example of Joseph, Genesis 39. How shall I commit this
great wickedness and sin against God? How shall I break my peace of
conscience, and run on a new score? Sometimes indeed Gods children have
received pardon of sins, and yet afterward turned Gods grace into wantonness;
but withal observe if they have been overtaken with some grievous lusts, the
loss of their peace, and favor of God, has been more bitter to them then
death it self; and if the Lord give us hearts follicitous to maintain our
peace, it is a sign that he has given us peace, those sins are pardoned which
we abhor; it is the nature of life to preserve it self, and to expel what may
be an enemy to life: And this is a sign our peace is not counterfeit, but
sound, if we be careful to preserve it.

A 3. effect of our life of Justification is that which our Savior gives, Luke
7.47. Her sins which are many are forgiven her, because she loves much. He that
loves much has much forgiven him. The love of God in some measure
proportionable to the sin pardoned, is a good evidence of the pardon of our
sins. Gods pardons are lively pardons, they leave not a man as he was, but whom
he pardons them he heals. This woman was a notorious Harlot, her loving much
showed that her many sins were forgiven her; according to the multitude and
measure of sins pardoned, such is the measure of our love to God and his
Saints; And indeed, there is none has so little forgiven him, but he thinks it
a great deal, as indeed well he may, and thinks himself bound to love God
abundantly.

For application.

Consider therefore what peace thou have. Perhaps thou will say, I have had
peace all my life long, but such peace is ill rooted, it springs not from a
word of God; And,

2 It Is fruitless. Thou say thou have peace, but what care have thou to
maintain it, and to expel thy sins which hinder thy peace? And again, if thou
have such peace, where is thy love? If that be wanting, pardon of sin is
wanting.

If thou would have good ground of the pardon of thy sins, try thy self by
the former signs.

Having before heard of the effects of the life of our Justification, now we
come to show the effects of Sanctification. Now because Sanctification is found
partly in the heart, partly in the life of a Christian, First, I will show you
the effects of Sanctification in the heart. Wheresoever this Spirit of
Sanctification is shed abroad, you shall find variety of graces, so different
and various, that in nature they could not stand together. There are in
Christians certain combinations of graces.

1 Look at grace as it first works in the conversion of a sinner. When a man is
first brought on to God, he is then taken up with two contrary effects, with
joy that God should have such mercy on him, and withal grief and sorrow for
his sins, whereby he has offended so merciful a God: as it was with the
return of the Jews temporal Captivity, Psalm. 126.1, 2, 3. We were like them
that dreamed, then were our mouths filled with laughter. They were out of
themselves, like men in a dream, they rejoiced at this their delivery, and yet
the same people that rejoiced at this their delivery, yet in their return they
went up mourning with weeping and supplication, for their unworthy dealing with
God, Jer. 50.4, 5. And such a combination of affection is there in a Christian
at his first conversion, he rejoices in his deliverance; and yet never was
there any so kindly mourning as a Christian sensible of Christ's redemption and
goodness to him, in this case he mourns as a man that mourns for his
firstborn, Zach. 12.10.

2 In the duties of Gods worship there is another combination of affection, and
that his joy and fear, Psalm. 2.11. Rejoice before him with trembling, When
grace is lively and stirring, a Christian comes with holy fear and awefulnesse,
and yet none comes with more joy and holiness. A dead hearted Christian he
comes very unwillingly, and holds back; but living Christians are a willing
people, Ps. 110.3. It Is the joy of their hearts to do God any service; and yet
withal, never do Christians go about any duties with more awefulnesse then
when they come with most joy. In another thing those affections do not concur.
When a man goes joyfully about his business, he goes not about it with
trembling; or, if he goes trembling, he goes not rejoicing; But a Christian,
though he go about a duty with much fear, yet with much joy, Psalm. 130.4. There
is mercy with thee that thou may be feared. Exodus 15.11. God is fearful in
praises. When the heart is most enlarged to praise God, then is it most awefull
of God.

3 Take a godly man in tribulations, when he is most oppressed with
afflictions, and made sad and awefull by them, yet then is the heart most
joyous. This was an argument of their sincerity, 1 Thessalonians. 1.6. Having received
the Word in much affliction, and joy in the holy Ghost. Now, naturally no
affliction is joyous, and yet Paul says, We rejoice in tribulation, Romans 5.3.
A Christian under sore pressures of Gods hand, that does thresh them out of his
husk, is not only content, but joyful; and that is above all nature.

4 There is a mixture in his affections, in his dealing with men. In a
Christian you shall find much patience, and yet without all forbearance; very
patient, and yet by no means bearing with evil, Rev. 2.2. This is the nature of
spiritual patience; injuries put upon himself, he endures with patience, but
injuries against God, he will by no means bear.

5 You shall find gentleness and meekness mixed with much austerity and
stiffnesse. The wisdom that is from above is peaceable and gentle, Numb. 12.3.
Moses was the meekest man upon the earth, yet the same Moses so meek and gentle
in his own cause, if it be in Gods cause, he is so stiff that when the King
would have the cattle left, he would not leave so much as an hoof at the Kings
command, he is inflexible in Gods cause; even as the liquid air most easily
yields to the least fly, yet if God set it as a firmament, to separate the
waters above from the waters below, it stands like a wall of brass, it yields
not, only lets it drop through by small drops, as through a sieve, but not to
fall into a deluge: So, though a Christian be as the liquid air, easy and
gentle, apt to yield, yet in a cause of God, let there be never so great a
mass pressing on him, he stands steadfast and unmovable.

6 There is a modesty mixed with magnanimity, a thing not easily found in moral
virtues Paul looks at all his outward privileges but as dross and dung in
comparison of Christ; a man that speaks of himself, I am less then the least
of all Saints, Ephesians. 3.8. though he were not inferior to the chiefest of the
Apostles, 2 Cor. 12.11. Yet this modest man, Acts 10.37. when the Magistrates
had whipped him and his companions, and then when they had done, would have
sent them away; Nay, (says he) but let them come and fetch us; see the
magnanimity of his spirit, when his person, or calling, or cause is called in
question, in that case he will put forth himself; deep modesty and high
magnanimity to meet in one man, at one time, in the same action, this is a work
above nature, Psalm. 131.1, 2. You would think that such a weaned child as
David was, should not have an high thought or word in him; but he that was thus
mean, and low, and thus weaned from earthly preferments, if you come to speak
of spiritual things, he looks at all worldly things as too mean for him. Psalm.
24.7.9. Lift up your heads ye gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors,
that is, let your hearts be lifted up to higher objects then the world can
afford; his heart is weaned from the Kingdom and Crown, but to Gods favor and
grace, and the Kingdom of heaven; why, are not these of an higher nature then
they? Yes, and yet in these matters his heart is in a kind haughty, and his
eyes lifted up, and he exercises himself in great matters; so that a
Christian has not a base spirit, but an heart lifted up above the world, to
the favor of God, and pardon of sins, and an eternal Kingdom. Psalm. 149.6.
Let the high praises of God be in their mouths, In the Or ginal, high things,
great and mighty things of God, his mighty majesty, and power, and glory and
praise, let these be in your mouths. He would have a Christians spirit filled
with high thoughts, and his mouth with high words, high words and powerful
threatenings to bind Princes, the high promises and commands of God; nay, the
high counsels of God, that are unsearchable, yet as far as they are revealed, a
Christian will be prying into them, yet with much modesty and Christian
magnanimity, his spirit searcheh out the deep things of God.

7 There is another combination in a Christian, busy diligence in worldly
affairs, and yet a dead heartedness to the world. For a man to rise early, and
sit up late, follow his work hard, take much pains, is not a thing to be
discommended, Prove. 10.14. Prove. 31.27. It Is commended in the good Housewife,
even the greatest Princess may not eat the bread of idleness, then we see
diligence in worldly business may well stand with grace; but yet the same
person must be dead to the world, his heart must be set on things above, these
are not his life, that is laid up in Christ, Col. 3.1, 2, 3. His heart is
crucified to the world, Gal. 6.14. Though his employment be in the world, yet
his conversation is in heaven, Phil. 1.20. Prove. 6.5, 6. It Is made a part of
wisdom to be as busy Ants, gathering and laying up, but all the while his
hands are there, his heart is in heaven; he does things in obedience to God by
the rule of his Word, and for his freedom in Gods service, another may do the
same work, with the same care and success, and yet the heart far unlike.

3 The love of our enemies is a particular virtue of Gods Saints, Matthew. 5.45,
to 47. Now this very grace has in it contrary works in our heart, it is like
fire, and water both; naturally our hearts are very cold, and hard, and frozen
like ice toward our enemies, but Christ comes and thawes these frostlings, and
warms us with compassion toward them, that his heart oftentimes mourns for
them, to see them take such unjust courses against them who have not wronged
them; and on the other side, whereas a natural man if he see his enemy, he
boyls in wrath and passion against him, love comes like a cool water and cools
the heat of passion in our heart.

For application.

Would thou know whether thou have life or no? Why, have thou found thy heart
affected with joy for Gods goodness to thee, and yet withal grieved and
sorrowful for thy unkind dealing with him? These are certain evidences of the
life of grace in thee. You may find many affected and comforted with the Word,
as Herod was; but if this joy were of God, it would not vanish away like smoke,
but would administer so much the more sorrow and mourning for sin; though a
Christians joy may suddenly vanish, yet it always leaves behind an inward
grieving for sin, to keep possession for it.

2 How do you find your hearts affected to Gods worship? Do you find your
hearts generally unwilling to pray or hear? This is an ill sign. But if you
find your hearts willing, and the more willing, the more careful withal. In
this case there is life. But if a man have fear without joy, or joy without
fear, the heart is not in a good temper.

3. How do thou find thy heart in tribulation? Do thou find no
consolation supporting thee? This is an ill sign. But if thou find with
David, in the multitude of thy troubled thoughts, Gods comforts sustain thy
soul, Psalm. 94.18. in this case thou have life.

4. Observe your carriages, Do you bear patiently with bad men, and yet not so
patiently as to bear with evil? Patience and zeal must go together.

5. Are you of a meek, gentle, and flexible temper? Its well. But how are you
in Gods cause? Are you there inflexible, and immovable, so that you will not
abate an hoose in Gods cause? Why, both these are a life of grace.

6. Thou say thou art modest, and think meanly of thy self; I, but how is
this grace coupled? for God sends them two and two together, as he did his
Disciples, to balance one another. Have thou withal a lofty spirit in the
ways of God, an heart lift up to heavenly things? Why, such a spirit has
life. The most modest should be most magnanimous.

7. Look at worldly business, Can thou be diligent in thy calling? Why, this
God requires. But how stands thy heart? Art thou busy in the world, and yet
thy heart dead to the world? This is a sign of true spiritual life.

8. If we find our hearts so abounding in love, that like fire it thawes our
cold frozen affections; and again, like water, can cool our hot passionate
spirits; why, this love is a fruit of faith, and a sign of life; its a sign
our sins are forgiven us, if we have hearts forgiving others.

Now we come to the effects of Sanctification, as they are expressed in the life
of a Christian, and they are answerable to the effects of natural life. The
effects of natural life are principally five.

1. Motion.

When a creature is able to move it self in its place, to those duties of this
or that life, its said to live. If a thing move not but by others, its not
alive; or if it move out of its place, its not alive, as a stone thrown up
moves downward, and fire moves upward; but this is not properly life, but
rather a desire of rest; and for things that move, they move according to the
life they have; as, a tree a vegetative life, a beast a sensitive life, a man a
rational life; but if a man have a spiritual motion in his proper place its a
sign of spiritual life; sometimes a man reaches out of his place, reaching
to higher matters, and more ambitious thoughts then his calling leads to, those
move not from an inward principle of grace, but from levity of heart; so the
Pharisees, they moved to holy duties, but it was for credit, others for profit,
for loaves, John 6.26. Its one thing to move to spiritual duties out of an
inward inclination and affection to them, another thing to move out of levity
or desire of eminency; it is one thing to move to them out of love, another
thing to move to them out of respect, or credit, or profit. Why, this is but as
the moving of a stone out of its natural gravity. Absalom had a mavelous
affection to reign, and oh that he were King, every one should have justice, 2 Samuel 15.13. But he was now out of his place, and therefore the thing he did,
was but to attempt the cutting off his Fathers life; but that is life properly
that moves in its place.

Again, a man may move in his place, and yet by an outward principle, as a
clock moves by the weight that hangs on it: so a man may move to some duties of
Religion by the weight of the Law, or authority hanging on him. Again, Jehu may
move in his calling very busily, and yet have no spiritual life; so it must be
inquired whether the duty a man does be spiritual or no. And a duty is
spiritual,

1. When we are sensible of our insufficiency, and therefore depend upon
Christ, that thorough him we may do all things.

2. When we have respect to the Word of God as our rule.

3. When we do all for the glory of God, Gal. 2.20. The life I now live, I
live by faith in the Son of God. So far a man lives, as he denies his own
sufficiency, and depends on Christ for assistance, and has respect to Gods
commandments as his rule, Psalm. 119.6. and aims at the glory of God as his
end. Zech. 7.5, 6. When ye fasted, did ye fast unto me at all? Did ye it to
bring any service or glory to me? Did ye it not for your selves, for your own
safety and deliverance? Why, if we go upon such principles, we want life, till
we be in Christ we detain all the graces we have in unrighteousness, to
magnify our selves, to bring about our own ends.

Obj. May not a good Christian have his heart so dead that he is unfit for
prayer, or hearing, or any holy duty, that he is unwilling to pray at all or to
receive the Sacrament at all? Will you say such a soul is dead, because unfit
for motion?

Answ. True, there may fall such a deadness on the heart of a Christian, as
whereby he may be both unable and unwilling to good duties, to which God
usually leaves us, when we go about things in our own strength, and grow
selfe-sure; but when by this God has schooled us, and taught us thereby that
all our life is hid in Christ; why, in this case God is wont to make us
sensible of this sinful disloyalty, and that in us dwells no good thing, that
we of our selves are unable to do any good duty, and for this distemper we
mourn and grieve heartily. Why, this very sense of deadness is an act of
spiritual life, which in time will work him to a farther dependence on Christ,
and to be more heedfull of Gods Wo^d, and by how much the more we strive thus,
so much the more life we have.

A second effect of life is feeding. This sign Christ gives, John 6.54. Whosoever
eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal life. This is not meant
of the Sacrament, for it was not then instituted, but of Christ himself; but
when God has instituted ordinances, this is a sure sign of life, if in every
ordinance we partake in, we feed on Christ, on his blood; he that feeds not,
lives not, he that forbears his meat, and forbears it long, he cannot live.
Indeed, for a time a man's stomach may be so distempered, that he cannot eat,
but he recovers himself and falls to his food.

Q. How shall we know whether we feed on Christ?

A. 1. Do you find an inward longing after Christ in every ordinance, that
nothing will satisfy your soul but Christ, he is a sweet savor to you; as an
hungry man, give him silver and gold never so much, he is not satisfied unless
he have meat? It was an argument of life in the Spouse, that she sought Christ
diligently in every ordinance, and her soul was grieved because she found him
not. If a man therefore come to the ordinances, and it never troubles him
though he go home without Christ, this man feeds not on Christ.

2. Feeding implies a finding of sweetness and relish in our meat: So
consider, how do you find Christ, is he a sweet savor to you? Do you find
comfort and strength in him, 2 Cor. 2.15, 16. Why, its a sign of life that you
relish your meat well; nay, its a sign of health, for a sick man cannot relish
his meat; and if a Christian find no relish in the ordinances, he complains of
it as his sickness, and looks up to God for help against it.

3. In all feeding there is a taking of the meat down, we do not spit it out,
and when it is down it must continue there, we must not cast it out: So, if
Gods Word abide in us, and we hide it in our souls by a wise applying of it to
our souls, Psalm. 119.11. and therefore give up your selves to be guarded by it,
this is a sign of life and strength.

4. All feeding implies a conversion of the aliment into the thing nourished so
that in time our meat is so digested that its turned into our own nature and
this is more then receiving Christ by faith; for when we receive him, and apply
him to our selves, this is faith; but to be conformed to him in every thing, to
be fashioned according to his nature, this is a farther act of life. When a
Christian so feeds on Christ, that he is of the same nature with him, meek,
lowly, and patient, as he was, this is a sign of life. When we are turned into
his nature by feeding on him, and he into ours; why, this very feeding on
spiritual food, implies a spiritual life: e contra, he that eats not the
flesh of Christ, has not Christ; he means not a Cannibal-like eating of his
very natural body and blood; for if a man should indeed eat the flesh of
Christ, and suck out his blood, it would profit him nothing, John 6.63. And
this the Capernaites thought a monstrous thing to eat the flesh of Christ,
therefore it is not the flesh of Christ, but the Spirit that quickens and
gives life.

A third effect of spiritual life is growth, that which lives grows, until it
comes to full maturity, and then it either stands at a stay, or begins to
decay; but a spiritual life grows up to full perfection, and then it continues
in that perfect estate for ever in heaven, 1 Pet. 2.2. and 3.18. Ephesians. 4.11, 12.
Col. 2.19. If a Christian grows, he lives.

Obj. Does not many a Christian stand at a stay, or oft-times go back, and lose
his first love and fruitfulness?

Answ. True, for a time he may, as a living man by sickness may lose his
strength and vigor, and be made unfit for any employment, but if he strive to
recover himself, its a sign of life: so a Christian by some corrupt lusts may
wast his best graces, like a thief in a candle, but if he be a living
Christian, he strives against them, and prays with David, O spare me a little,
that I may recover my strength, before I go hence, and be no more seen! If he
find a decay, he considers from whence he is fallen, and he recovers himself,
and does his first works, Rev. 2.4. Repentance is the purge of the soul, it
expells out evil lusts, and then we do more at last then at first, Rev. 2.17.
So then, a Christian is continually a growing, if not in the bulk of grace, yet
in more sweetness, and mellownesse; as apples at their full bulk, yet grow
more ripe and sweet; so a Christian, though he grow not to more tallnesse, yet
he may grow to more rootednesse in Christ.

2. In more sweetness of spirit, that is, in more love to his Brethren, and
care of Gods glory.

A fourth effect of life is this, life has an expulsive power to expel that
which is noisome and dangerous to it, it will cast it out either by purging, or
sweat, or vomit, any noisome humor is burdensome to nature; so if grace be
living, there is a power to expel every thing that is superfluous, much more
what is noisome and hurtful, nature keeps nothing but what it converts to its
own nourishment; so a Christian cuts away every superfluity, if it be a thing
of no purpose, or no use to his calling, though it may to others, this he
abandons, James 1.21. But that knowledge which may be either necessary or
expedient for him, that a Christian retains, a Christian casts out that chiefly
which is contrary to grace.

1. Doubtings, for that is contrary to the life of grace. 2. It casts away all
presumption, and selfe-dependance, perfect love casts out fear, and patience
strives against frowardness, and every grace against its contrary, so that he
may grow up to full holiness; the life of grace casts out the life of the
world, so much of the world as is cumbersome to his spirit, so much a Christian
lays down.

A fifth act of life is the begetting of his kind: nature grows up to this
ability, though at first it be but weak; so grace no sooner moves, or grows, or
feeds in any measure, but it has a mind to beget others; as soon as ever the
woman of Samaria began to be acquainted with Christ, she ran to all her
neighbors, and tells them she had met with one that told her all that ever she
had done, Is not this the Christ? John 4.29. This is the nature of spiritual
life, as soon as they are well begot themselves, they are ready to beget
others. Indeed, a Christian may hide himself a while, but as soon as he is
assured of life himself, he propagates the same to others, John 1.41, to 46.
When one Disciple was called, he goes and calls another to come and see. Psalm.
51.10, 11, 12, 13. David professes that if God will but assure him of mercy,
and establish him therein, then he will teach others Gods ways, and sinners
shall be converted unto him, he that is once converted himself, his care is to
convert others to God.

Try your selves by these signs.

Do you find your selves moving a life of grace, growing up therein, feeding
upon Christ, expelling the enemies of life, and drawing on others to the same
life? these are evident signs of life; if you find it not thus, there is no
true sign of the life of grace in you.

3. This life may be discerned by the properties of it, by finding of which we
may discern of our spiritual life. And there are three principal properties
of life.

1. Where ever life is, there is some warmth. When Elisha had stretched
himself over the dead child, the flesh of the dead child began to wax warm,
a sign of life, 2 Kings 4.34. So the presence of the Spirit united to the soul
of man is the cause of all spiritual heat. Romans 12.11. Fervent in spirit.
Therefore the Spirit is compared to fire, Mat. 3.11. 1 These. 5.19. Quench not
the Spirit. A sign that the Spirit is of a fervent nature. So 2 Timothy 1.6. I
put thee in remembrance to blow up the graces of Gods Spirit. A Metaphor taken
from blowing up the fire with bellows; all which imply, that the Spirit of
Christ communicated to Christians is a fervent spirit. Where there is no
warmth, there is no life. If our spirit begin to wax warm, its a sign of
spiritual life; as the two Disciples that went to Emaus said, ( Luke 22.32.)
Did not our hearts burn within us whilst he spoke those things? Implying the
Word has a power to quicken, and warm, and heat the spirit of a Christian.
This same warmth and heat is expressed diverse ways.

1. The very knowledge of a Christian is warm, whereas in all others the
knowledge is cold, and merely speculative, without any life or power. There is
a zeal according to knowledge, and there is a knowledge according to zeal. The
zeal that is not according to knowledge is a rash vain zeal, Romans 10.2. So, it
is a cold empty knowledge that has not zeal with it. John was a burning and a
shining light, showing every several condition what they should do, but he
burnt up the hypocrisy and lusts of the body, and inflamed their affections
with zeal and warmth, as Herod heard him gladly. Where there is truth of light
and knowledge, there is burning. The knowledge of a Christian makes him
fruitful in a Christian course, 2 Pet. 1.8. So that whatever he knows either
necessary or expedient for him to do, he will do it, and he will cause others
to do their duties that belong unto him; such is the heat of his spirit, that
he will not suffer his Brother to lie in sin, Lev. 19.17. Now another man knows
many things, but does them not, nor thinks he is bound to do them; but a
Christians knowledge is of that nature that it will not suffer him or his
Brother to lie in any sin. True Christians are thought oft-times to be more
busy then needs.

2. There is warmth in our breath; as long as there is life in us there is
breath, and that breath is warm; so if there be any spiritual life, there is
always some warm breathing, some warmth in his breathing toward God, there is
always some warmth in his prayers, the prayers of hypocrites are but cold, and
empty, and vanish away, but there is always some breath of life in a good man's
prayers, even then when we know not what to pray for, or how to pray, yet then
there is always something in him that expresses warmth, his very sighings and
groans come from some kind of heat and life, Romans 8.16.

2. As their breathing toward God is warm, so they breath warmth one toward
another, so that in their conference, if they speak of the things of the Word,
they do not speak slightly, and overly without any affection, but they speak
of them with reverence, and fear, and love, and affection.

3. There is that kind of warmth in him, as that thereby he does not only
affect the Word, but he is able to digest it in some measure; there is no life,
but there is some power to digest something, if not strong meat, Psalm. 119.20.
My soul breaks for the longing it has to thy judgments. So Psalm. 42. My
soul pants after thee. This very panting and breathing of the soul after God,
so unites the soul unto God, that thereby he digests something that inables him
to walk before God in the land of the living, whereas an hypocrite is hopeless
to any good.

4. If things be warm, the more they lie together the more warmth and heat;
cold logs laid together heat not one another, but two or three brands put
together are enough to kindle an heap of wood: so take a Christian that is very
cold, and almost benumbed, yet put him to two or three more, and one word
kindles another, and their spirits are more and more inflamed, more fit to
pray, and fitter to admonish, and comfort, and help forward one another, 1 Pet.
4.8. Fervent love among Brethren so kindles one another that they are inflamed
to any good offices; but when Christians are disjoynted they lose all their
heat, as when a man means to put out the fire, he lays one brand from another,
a sign he means to go to bed and sleep; so when Satan would put out the life
and heat of grace in a Family or Town, he disjoynts Christians, and so they
fall into security, and grow dead in sins and trespasses, all their heat is
quite extinguished. Therefore the Apostle exhorts us not to forsake the
assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is, Heb. 10.25. 2 Pet.
1.21. See that ye love one another, with pure hearts fervently.

Obj. If this heat be always found where life is, how comes it to pass that
the hearts of Christians are so cold and dead? How comes a Christian to be so
unprofitable if he digest the Word? Do not Christians meet and afford little
warmth and help one to another? Luke 24.32. The two disciples hearts burned
when Christ talked with them, a sign before he came and chafed them up, they
were cold and dead-hearted.

Answ. True Christians oft-times find a mavelous coldness and benummednesse
of heart, that they find little warmth in their breathing, in their prayers or
conferences, and this comes partly from want of supply of new fuel, when they
walk in their own strength, without looking up to Christ for new supply; and
partly by pouring cold water upon it, that is, some noisome lusts that put out
the grace of God, or else the use of outward comforts with wordly hearts, these
cast cold water on the fire, as the fire is put out either by withdrawing the
fuel, or by casting water on it: But yet though this be their fault, yet even
then when they want chafing and heat, there is some striving in them, which
argues life, so much life as in them, so much heat. As for those two Disciples
that went to Emaus, though their hearts burned whilst Christ spoke, yet before
Christ came, they were talking of Christ, and of his sufferings, which made
them sad, then Christ comes and puts life, O fools and slow of heart to
believe; This blew up the sparks in them. So much as a Christian has lost of
his heat, so much of his life, if his warmth be smothered his life is smothered.

Now this warmth is sometimes expressed in sad looks, and pantings, and deep
sighs, and groanings and mourning for his forlorn estate, and surely there is
life in that, for in grief the heat runs to the heart. But worse then this, a
Christian sometimes vanishes away in much frothy emptynesse, outwardly
rejoicing in worldly comforts, when there is no life within. Peter when he
denied his Master, his heart was filled with grief and sorrow, and he went out
and wept bitterly. But what say you to David, when he had committed adultery,
how did he go on from one sin to another? He can make Vriah drunk, and then
kill him, and then make no matter of it, he is careless in all this, as if he
had quite lost all life and affection to God, there was not the least beating
of the pulse of a Christian, such a (...), that a man that knew him not before,
might have written in his forehead, a man forsaken of God, without any life of
grace in him, Where now was David's life? None so far gone as he; it is a
question whether he prayed or no all this while; as some Christians have so
lost themselves, as for three years together they have not prayed at all, as
doubting of any acceptance, because they were so sinful, yet there is some
habit of grace, but hardly one act of life; yet still this holds true, so much
warmth so much life, as by the Almighty power of God, there may be fire and yet
no heat; as the fiery furnace, though made seven times hotter then ordinary,
yet God so restrained the act, that it did not so much as singe the garments of
the three children that were cast into it, Dan. 3. So e contra, there is a
mavelous hellish power in sin, so as it will suspend all the acts of grace,
so as a Christian may express no acts of grace, but lie as a man in a deep
swound, without life and motion, that can be discerned, and yet this you shall
find in a Christian at such times, a listlesnesse of his heart to sin, that he
cannot break out into sin with all his strength and power as he did in his
natural condition; and the ground is this, because there is still flesh and
spirit in him, so that as the spirit cannot do what good it would, so the
flesh cannot do that evil it would, Gal. 5.17. And when a Christian is most
lively, yet there is still some faintness and weakness in him; so e contra,
when grace is most weak and corruption most strong, yet he cannot commit sin
with all his strength as formerly he has done, but he goes about sin
unwillingly, not with the full sway that he was wont to do, he goes listlesly
about it.

Try your selves therefore by these signs, if thou have Christ, thou have
life? if life, thou have warmth and heat; look to thy knowledge, does it puff
thee up, and not edify? Do thou magnify thy self by it? If it be lively
knowledge, it is joined with zeal, as Christ revealed himself to the Church of
Thyatira, Rev. 2.18. Thus says the Son of God, whose eyes are like flames of
fire, writing to the Church of Thyatira that was warm in love, and growing up
therein, he revealed himself according to the state of the Church, as having
eyes like flames of fire, as that Church had zeal with her light; so that if
thou have a true knowledge, thy eyes are like flames of fire, what thou know
thou do with zeal and fervency of spirit, as Peter and John said, We cannot
but speak the things which we have seen and heard; that is, which we have
certain knowledge of, Acts 4.20. See Jer. 20.9.

1. Consider therefore whether thy knowledge be joined with zeal: How do thou
breath? do thou smell a sweet savor in the Word? Then there is breath in thy
nostrills.

2. Do thou breath warmth in prayer, pant and sigh after God? In thy
conference, do thou express life and heat? Then thou art a living Christian.

3. How do thou find thy stomach to the Word? do thou relish it, or else
art thou ashamed of thy unprofitablenesse? Then there is life.

4. Do thou love to be disjoynted from thy Brethren, like brands cast one
from another? Then there is no life. Life loves to preserve it self; if you
sit loose one from another all heat and life goes out, religion cease, there
is a bidding farewell to all Christian duties; but if you see bone join to
bone, one gather to another, then you shall see flesh and sinews will cover
them, and life will come in, Ezekiel. 37.7. Put brands together, and there will be
some fire and heat propagated.

2. A second property of life. Where life is, there is some plyablenesse and
flexiblenesse, a dead carkase is always stiff: So consider whether you be
stiff or no; why, if there be life of grace in you, That wisdom that is from
above, is gentle, and easy to be entreated, James 3.17.

There are four things in this plyablenesse.

First, He is easily pleased with any indifferent indevours, 1 Pet. 3.8. A
gracious man is easily pleased; if a man be froward and hard to please, its a
sign such a soul is stiff and dead.

Secondly, If he be offended, he is easy to be entreated, James 3.17. Its a
sign^ of a reprobate sense to be implacable, Romans 3.1.

Thirdly, If he have offended another, he is willing to yield to that man whom
he has offended; so much stiffnesse, so much deadness.

Fourthly, There is this gentleness in every living Christian, he is willing
to deny himself upon unequal terms, when he might stand upon his right, yet
he yields his right, rather then any offense should grow; so Abraham did to
Lot, Genesis 13.8, 9. If we find it thus, we are loving Christians; but if men be
hardly pleased, like Nabal, churlish, hardly recalled, will not yield, but
stand upon their right to the utmost, then they are in a deep swound, or dead.

3. Whilst the body is alive, its savoury, a dead carkase is very unsavory;
mark your spirits, every living Christian is a sweet savor to God, his words
are savoury, Col. 4.5, 6. Ephesians. 4.29. His works savor well in the nostrills
of God and man, Ephesians. 5.10. But if your speeches and carriages be unsavory,
uncomely, and profane, are ye not then carnal? 1 Cor. 3.3. But a good
Christian so carries himself, that the bowels of the Saints are refreshed by
him. Unsavory speeches and carriages argue the deadness of such a soul.

Use 2. May show us the dangerous and uncomfortable condition of every such
soul that has not Christ; He that has not the Son, has not life. If we be
without Christ, we are dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2.1, 5. We may say of
men by nature, as was said of Senacheribs host, Behold ye are all dead
carkases, 2 Kings 19.35. We by nature have not this act of life.

Five acts of life we heard of before, by Nature we are wanting in them all.

1. By Nature we have no spiritual motion, all our works are but dead works,
Hebrews 9.14. And so dead are we by Nature that we do no good; nay, we can
do no good; and, which is worst of all, we will do no good. Romans 3.12. There
is none that does good, no not one. All the imaginations of our hearts by
nature, are wholly evil, and that continually, Genesis 6.5. And as all his
thoughts are evil, so are all his words, Mat. 12.33. And so are all his works,
Mat. 7.18. We are as rotten trees, we cannot bring forth one good fruit. There
is not so much in a natural man, as one good thought, or word, or action, that
proceeds from faith, or is regulated by Gods Word, or aims at Gods glory; nay,
if God should raise us up, and enable us to do good, yet we would not. Jer.
13. ult. Oh Jerusalem! will thou not be made clean? When shall it once be? The
man that had a bodily disease on him, when Christ asked him, Will thou be made
whole? He said, Yea Lord. But if God ask us the question, Will thou be made
clean? we refuse it. We find shifts to put off Christ, never could we find
that day, wherein we could say, This day I would be a Christian, but we are
either almost persuaded to be Christians, or else it must not be this day; as
bad debtors, they would not have the creditors set them a day, lest they should
break it; so we would be spared from setting God a day, for surely we would
break it; indeed, when we are pressed with some fore sickness, indangering
death, what say we? O! If God would but once restore me to health again, all
the world should see I would become a new man, and yet when he was in health,
he said, I will seek God, and turn to him in sickness; and thus we put God
off from Winter to Summer, from Spring to Harvest; when we are sick, we promise
amendment, if God will send us health; but why not now? Do you know whether
ever you shall have health or no? And will you hazard your souls? And
therefore God expects that in afflictions we should seek him.

2. They feed not on Christ, which was a sign of life, but as God said of his
superstitious people, Isa. 44.20. the same may be said of every natural man,
He feeds upon ashes, a deceitful heart has turned him aside, that he cannot
deliver his soul, nor say, Is there not a lie in my right hand? Every natural
man has an idol that he sets up in his heart, and whoever he be that feeds
not on the living God, feeds upon ashes. It is taken from children, that for
some evil humor, delight to be ^^^bling upon ashes and coals: So every
natural man he feeds upon ashes, that is, upon dry and unsavory meat that
will not profit the soul, for the soul is spiritual and fed upon spiritual
food; profits, and pleasures, and honors are no more fit meat for the soul,
then ashes for the body. Solomon complains of the vanity of mankind, Eccl.
3.21. Who knows the spirit of a man that goes upward, or the spirit of a
beast that goes downward? Who knows? Who considers, or takes it to heart, that
his soul goes to a better place then the beast? Who provides better for his
soul then the beasts? Do not they all feed on worldly comfort who should feed
on immortal food? We by nature all of us feed on ashes, so that we cannot
deliver our souls, and say, Is there not a lie in my hand? Is not this a false
course, a lying vanity? Will not profits and honors deceive me? A seduced
heart has deceived him.

3. A third act of spiritual life is growth. Now a carnal man is far from
growing in grace; apt is he to grow in sin, to proceed on in evil, to increase
in ungodliness, 2 Timothy 3.17. Jerem. 9.3. From coveteousnesse to ambition, from
ambition to voluptuousness, this is his best growth.

4. A fourth act of life was expulsion of noisome lusts. Now by nature we are
loath to part with our lusts. Jer. 4.14. O Jerusalem! wash thy heart from
wickedness, how long shall vain thoughts lodge in thee? We by nature will
never cleanse out our lusts, but if we do cast out any thing, its the motions
of Gods Spirit, we think them superfluous and burdensome, and hinderers of our
credit and pleasures, so that all good motions and good counsels that have
been put in us, we cast them out. Ahab is struck with fear and humiliation, but
he casts out all by calling a Council for War; Let Cain have a good motion, he
puts it off by building a City, and so takes off his thoughts from once seeking
to God to heal his sins. Felix, when Paul's words made him to tremble, he would
hear him no more at that time, Acts 24.25. As Paul complains of the Jews, Acts
13.46. And Stephen, Acts 7.52. Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart, ye
have always resisted the holy Ghost. They are not well till they have cast out
all such thoughts; we are not well, till we are alive to run from God; wise are
we to do evil, but to do good we have no knowledge, Jer. 4.22.

5 A fifth act of life was begetting men to grace, but we e contra endeavor to
beget them to the devil, and make them seven times more the children of the
devil then before, Mat. 23.15. Though we understand that chiefly of corrupt
Teachers, yet Jeremy speaks it of all men by nature, Jer. 6.28. They are all
corrupters; not only bad themselves, but corrupters of others, none that comes
amongst them but is made worse by them, kept off farther from God, they would
not have their friends, look toward matters of Religion. All flesh have
corrupted their ways, Genesis 6.11.

Use 3. It may teach us to bemoan all those our friends that yet lie in the
state of nature. Have thou any child, or wife, or friends that lie in the
state of nature, look at them as thy dead children, and dead friends; and if
our friends lie dead, how bitterly do we mourn for them? Zach. 12.10. They so
mourn, that they will not be comforted, Matthew. 2.18. All was full of mourning,
and lamentation, because all the children were dead, and have not many parents
many children lying in their natural condition, and is not the spiritual death
far worse then the bodily? if they be alive in grace, Blessed are the dead that
dye in the Lord, Rev. 14.17. Therefore mourn not so (...) for their natural
death, but if they be spiritually dead, without God, without Christ, without
the life of grace; why, weep then for this child and that friend that lies
dead before you. It may be thy whole house is full of dead carkases, not one
child or servant alive. Oh! then weep over them, mourn for them, ^e earnest to
God for them, and never leave till thou have got life propagated to them. And
if thou do th^^, he (...) has given thee children will give them life, some
of them at (...) that promise is full, 1 John 5.16. If any man see his Brother
sin a sin which is (...) unto death, he shall ^^k, and he shall g^ve him life.
You may therefore so handle the matter, that as you have given them natural
life, so you may give them spiritual life. You know what a sore and bitter cry
there was in Egypt, so that they arose at midnight; why, what was the matter,
there was not one house wherein one was not dead; what would they have done
then, if there had been but one alive in every house? Such is the case of many
families, that a man may rise up in the ^^^ing, and not find one alive in his
family beside himself, it is a just occasion of bitter mourning, if there were
but one dead, how much more then when there is hardly one alive? Therefore pray
heartily for them, that their soul^ may live in Gods sight. If you have the
bowels of parents, be earnest with God till you have procured life for them.

Use 4. To condemn the Church of Rome, that think by nature men have free will
to lay hold on Christ; but I would ask them, when they lay hold on Christ,
whether they have Christ or no before; why, before they have received him, they
have him not, and if they have him not, they are but dead men, and how shall
dead men lay hold on Christ? If they do lay (...) it is an act of life, if we be
either able or willing to do any good, it proceeds from the grace of Christ,
Phil. 1.12, 13.

Use 5, Let it teach us all, if we yet be without Christ, let us not give rest
to our eyes, nor slumber to our eyelids, till we have procured Christ to our
selves and ours. What if a man have wealth, and honor, and beauty, if he has
not Christ, he has not life. Therefore labor for Christ, that having him thou
may have life.

Motives.

1 From the sweetness of life. Skin for skin, and all that a man has, will he
give for his life; and he means natural life, but truly our spiritual life is
worth the laying down our natural life. What shall a man gain, if he win the
whole world, and lose his own soul. If a man live and dye without Christ we may
say of him as Christ did of Judas, It had been good for that man if he had
never have been born. Mat. 26.24.

2 Consider, if we have Christ we have life, and that in abundance. If you have
all the promises, for in him they are yea and a men, 2 G^^. 1.20. All the
blessings of God are yours, both spiritual, Ephesians. 1.3. and temporal, 1 Timothy
4.8. 1 Cor. 3.2. last verse. If you have Christ, the world is yours, all the
dealings and carriages shall be serviceable to you, whatever you want, peace,
or comforts, or outward things, if you have Christ, you have all things, Romans
8.32.

Q. But what shall we do to get Christ? Are we not by nature unable and
unwilling to receive Christ? To what end then is this your exhortation?

Answ. Though this be our sinful distemper, yet our exhortations be not in
vain, for God by his Word oft-times conveys a power whereby we are enabled to
lay hold on Christ Peter spoke to a lame man to walk. Acts 3.6, 7. Would you
not think it was a vain word? No, because he conveyed strength withal, whereby
he was enabled to rise up and walk.

Means to help us to get life i^ Christ.

1 Consider how de^d and lost thou are by nature. Christ came to call such as
feel themselves lost, Luke 19.10. Mat. 9.12, 13.

2 If thou know any fin^lly thy self, ^id thy hands of it, cast them such
thee. Many a man lives in sin, which if he would but renounces God would
receive him to mercy, 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. Isa. 1.16, 17, (...) ^f the Passover,
except they put away ^^^en, Exodus 12.19, So if (...) the old leave^, we shall
become a new (...), 1 Cor. 5.7, 8. Is^. 55.6, 7.

3 Seek the Lord whilst he may be found, Isa. 55.6. Do but seen him, and he
will be found.

And how is this done?

1 By longing and thirsting after him.

2 Seek him in all the means. Hear diligently and your souls shall (...), Isa.
55.13. It Is a notable promise, Prove. 8.35, 36. Therefore men should be willing
to straighted themselves a little in their worldly businesse^, to loy^ and hear
Gods Word.

3 Seek him in prayer, Isa. 55.6.

Use 6. To teach every soul that has Christ, and yet complai^s of the
deadness and dullness of his heart; if thou find a decay of life, seek
Christ again, get faster hold of him, and thou shall increase thy life;
exercise your faith, live daily by faith, and you shall not want life.

Use 7. Of consolation to every soul that has Christ. If thou have Christ,
thou have life, and shall have it more abundantly; he that finds him, finds
life; and they that seek not Christ, seek death.

1 JOHN 5.13. These things have I written unto you that believe on the Name of
the Son of God, that ye may know that ye have eternal life, and that you may
believe on the Name of the Son of God.


WE are now come to the beginning of the conclusion of this whole Epistle,
wherein he sets down the persons to whom he writes;

These things have I written to you, to you that believe.

2 The end wherefore he writes these things to these: the end is twofold.

1 That ye may know that ye have eternal life.

2 That ye may believe on the Name of the Son of God; which he amplifies in the
verses following.

These words afford three Notes.

Doct. 1. This Epistle of John was written and delivered to believers only.
This is evident not only in the Text, but sundry other places of the Epistle,
cap. 1.4. He wrote it to such, as by reading this Epistle might attain to full
joy. This is evident likewise by recounting the several sorts of persons to
whom he wrote, cap. 1.12, 13, 14. Which were of three sorts, Babes, Young men,
and Fathers, yet all believers so, cap. 4.4. Ye are of God little children. His
second Epistle was written to the elect Lady; and the third Epistle to his
beloved Gaius, verse. 1, 2. All his writings were directed to believers; so were
all the Epistles of the rest of the Apostles, directed to believers, to Saints,
to the chosen of God, to their brethren, as will appear in all their first
greetings; when our Savior himself wrote, he wrote to such in whom he
acknowledged many special graces, yea even in the worst of them, in the Church
of Sardis, he acknowledged that she had a few names. Now this gives us just
occasion to enquire; Why they were written to believers? 2 Why to them only.

To Believers, 1. In regard of the special help, and benefit their writings
afford the Church; the benefits of their writing to the Church, were 1
Teaching, 2 Thessalonians. 2.2. 2 Putting them in remembrance, 2 Pet. 1.22, 23. 3
Stirring them up to practice what they knew, 2 Pet. 1.2, 3. 4 To humble the
spirits of them that were puffed up, 2 Cor. 7, 8. 5 That they might be
strengthened in their faith, 1 John 5.13. 6 That their hearts might be filled
with joy, 1 John 1.4. which was effected, Acts 15.31. 7 These writings have bin
the foundation of the faith of all Christians to the end of the world, because
they have afforded matter of all the preaching of the Ministers, for by them
the men of God are fully furnished, and made perfect to every good work, 2 Timothy
4.16, 17.

2 He writes to believers only, the reason is taken from the little use or
profit that unbelievers will make of these writings, till they be brought on to
believe, which is so little, that not one of the Apostles directs any of their
writings to them, but only for the believers sake, amongst them; it is with the
Apostles writings, as with prophesies, and not miracles; Prophesies are not for
them that believe not, but for them that believe; Miracles are not for them
that believe, but for them that believe not; not but that Miracles may confirm
believers; but believers should chiefly attend to Prophesies. Take a company of
unbelievers; it is little good they get by reading their writings, for no good
is done without faith; now faith comes not by reading, but by hearing, had God
ordained that reading should be effectual to the conversion of men he would
have confirmed it by Miracles, as he did the preaching of the Apostles. Again,
had their writings been sanctified for the conversion of men, they would have
sent them abroad to the most remo^e places of the world, where they were never
likely to come, but we see they did not, but rather took pains themselves to
go about the world, Romans 10.15, 16, 17, 18.

Object. Sometimes God has blessed the reading of the law to the conversion of
men, Deuteronomy. 31, 10, 11, 12, 13. He blessed it not only to them that knew the law
before, but to their little ones that knew nothing; and why then should not the
reading of the Gospel be as effectual now, seeing of the two it is fuller of
power?

Answ. You shall not read that God blessed the ordinary reading of the law to
this end, but the reading there spoken of Deuteronomy. 31. was a solemn reading of the
law, at the years of solemn release, which was but once in seven years, and
the reason of it was, because that year of release was an acceptable year, and
typed out our redemption by Christ; for in one of those years of release,
Christ was put to death; therefore to denote that God could give an
extraordinary blessing to the reading of the law even to little children, and
show that those that are released by Christ, they shall read with understanding
and profit, this solemn reading every seventh year was instituted and blessed.

2 He does not speak of bare reading, but of expounding and applying it
likewise, which ordinarily accompanied their reading^ of the law, for so we
read expressly that they did at that very feast, Neh. 7. ult. and cap. 8.4, to
9. Ezra stood up and read, and then gave the sense, whereat they were so much
affected, that they all wept abundantly.

Use 1. May show us the reason, why so many good books, written by learned
godly men, have so little prevailed to bring on any of the Papists, few or none
converted by any of our writings; and no wonder, for the writings of the
Apostles themselves were not sanctified to this end; it is true, writings have
ever been useful to the convincing of some, to the establishment of others, to
the satisfaction of others, but none have prevailed to the conversion of any,

Use 2. The like may be said of our reading Ministers, look at all the good
that has been done in such Congregations, where they have only readings, you
shall find them as ignorant of Christ, and empty of grace, as if they had never
heard of such things. You will say, this is an uncharitable saying: But I would
know whether is more uncharitableness, to flatter you in your woeful condition
to your destruction, or to tell you of your danger? 2 Chronicles. 15.2, 3. Now for a
long time Israel had been without the true God, and without a teaching Priest,
it cannot be conceived, but that they had the law read in their Synagogues, for
the very Judicial law of Moses, was the form of the Government, which they
could not be ignorant in, but yet they are said to be without God, because they
had not a Priest to teach.

Object. Acts 15.21. For Moses of old time has in every City them that Preach,
being read in their Synagogues every Sabbath; Does not that imply that reading
is preaching?

Answ. No, it implies that when he is read, he is also preached, for they used
with the reading to expound, and lay open the law to them, Amos 8.11, 12, 13.
God threatens a famine of hearing his Word; never was there a famine of
reading* since the Church was in any measure established, but it is threatened as
a grievous curse to want the word preached Hos. 4.6. My people perish for want
of knowledge; because thou have rejected knowledge, I will also reject thee:
Now wherein they did refuse knowledge, did they refuse to read? That cannot be
conceived, but because they refused knowledge to instruct and comfort the souls
of the people.

Use 3. May teach all that are believers, diligently to be conversant in the
reading of the writings of Saint John, and the other Apostles. Shall the holy
Ghost have an hand to write, and shall not we have an hand to receive, or an
eye to read? To us were those Epistles written, even to all that believe to the
end of the world, Romans 15.4. How much then is the Church of Rome to blame that
lock up those writings from the people, that they may not hear them, but in an
unknown tongue which they understand not? nay sometimes the Priests understand
not the Latin they read, much less are they able to expound it.

Use 4. Of direction to carnal men, what will you say they have no benefit or
profit by reading the Word? Yea surely.

1 By hearing the Word expounded, they may be brought on to faith.

2 The very reading it self is useful to beget knowledge, to stir up their
memory, to quicken their desires.

3 They serve to discover to the people what sin is, what moral works be; so
that they have a power to keep men in civil conformity, so that there is good
use of them to moral men; but they were chiefly directed to believers. But yet
for unbelievers, how should this stir them up to be diligent in hearing the
Word preached; for may I read much, two or three times a day, and yet little
the nearer salvation? How should it provoke them then, to give diligent heed to
hearing? that so wherein reading prevails not, hearing may.

Use 5. To teach all those that are believers, not only to read, but to expect
and look for in reading, those benefits before mentioned; if you do not find
those benefits by reading, you read unprofitably and take Gods Ordinance in
vain.

Now for the ends of his writings, which were two: 1 That they might know that
they had eternal life. 2 That they might believe on the Name of the Son of God.


Doct. 2. Such as do believe on the Name of Jesus Christ, by reading the
Epistles of John, may come to know they have eternal life.
1 Because he sets before them, where eternal life is to be found, and that is
in Jesus Christ, as verse. 12.

2 He directs them to certain means, whereby they may attain eternal life. As 1
Confession of sins, 1 John 1.9. 2. By looking up to Christ as our Propitiation
and Advocate, cap. 2.1, 2. 3. By walking in the light. cap. 1.8, 9.

3 He gives certain signs, whereby we may know whether we be in an estate of
eternal life. As 1 Walking in the light, cap. 1.7. 2 Keeping his Commandments,
cap. 2.3. 3 Purifying our selves from sin, cap. 3.3. 4 Love of our brethren,
cap. 3.14, 5 Boldness toward God, cap. 3.21.

Use 1. This may be a just refutation of the Popish Doctrine, that says we
cannot know that we have eternal life, but if that be true, then St. John's end
in writing these Epistles is disappointed, and not only St. John, but the holy
Ghost himself is deceived: Whereas they tell us we cannot have a certain, but
conjectural knowledge only, there is a contradiction; for if a man says he
knows such a thing, it implies he is certain of it, or else he speaks safely:
and were it for nothing else, this doctrine of doubtings were a sufficient
discouragement against their Religion; that Church, that trains up her self
and children to be ignorant of their Father, is not the true Spouse of Christ,
but an Harlot; a sign the Church of Rome has mixed her self with so many false
gods, that she knows not of whom her children are begot.

Use 2. It condemns their excluding the vulgar sort from reading the
Scriptures, for if by them we may come to know Christ, and that we have eternal
life, then take away them, and you take away a principal means of salvation.

Use 3. For such Christians as are doubtful of their estate, above all the
writings of the Apostle read this Epstile, it was the main scope of St. John,
in this Epistle, that their joy might be full, and that they might know they
had eternal life, here you shall find a good groundwork of your good estate.

Use 4. To teach all believers to know what they have profited by reading: it is
an usual thing to content our selves, if we do but read a chapter, and pray
every morning, and our conscience is not satisfied if we omit it, but a man may
read and pray, and yet get no good, but if you would read profitably, so read
that you may know that you have eternal life, and when you have so read, then
you have read to purpose, therefore in reading learn to search out diligently
the knowledge of your estates.

This verse declares a double end of St. John's writing this Epistle, one was,
that believers might know they have eternal life, of which before; the second
end was, That they might believe on the Name of the Son of God.

Doct. 3. It Is one of the holy ends, and scope of the holy Scripture, that
believers might belive.
St. John when he wrote his Gospel, it was for this end, That they might
believe, John 20.31. For though believing be already wrought, yet they that do
believe had need to believe more, the Word is the mighty power of God to lead
believers from faith to faith, Romans 1.17. that is, from one degree of faith to
another, Phil 1.25 as that is not only faith, but increase of faith, so 1 Thessalonians. 3.10. there is not any of Gods servants, even the most exemplary
Christians, but there is some defect in their faith, which had need to be
supplied, and this may be the first reason.

Reas. 1. Taken from the defects that are found in believers, the supply
whereof they had need to increase and grow up to. 1 They had need to grow up to
the belief of some principles which they believed not before, and this is a
defect in the objects of faith; many of the Apostles believed not the
Resurrection of Christ; nay Thomas said, he should not believe, except he
should see the print of his nails, John 20.25. So many of the Corinths
believed not the Resurrection from the dead, a main Article of Faith: the
Thessalonians lacked this in their Faith, they thought Christ would then have
come suddenly, and therefore began to lay aside all care in their outward
callings, which Paul informs them in, 2 Thessalonians. 2. The Galatians are wanting in
believing justification by faith, and therefore Paul writes that Epistle to
them.

2. There is something wanting in the habit, or in the grace of faith,
therefore the Apostle prays for the Colossians, that they might be rooted and
established in the faith, Col. 2.7. even as a young plant may be so weak, that
the least rub may root it up; so a Christian may have some rooting in Christ,
and yet want sound rootednesse and firmness of faith, there may be a want of
that confidence and full assurance that is required.

3 Faith may be wanting in the sense of it, for a Christian may have attained
to a great measure of lively faith, and yet be in doubt whether he have any
true faith or not; now that we may be assured of it, he had need to be built up
in faith; as the poor man said to Christ, Lord I believe, help mine unbelief,
he believed, and yet knew not well whether he should call it faith, or
unbelief, therefore Phil. 1.25. Paul trusted that he should continue with them
for the furtherance and joy of their faith; now so long as a Christian is
doubtful of his faith, he has little joy or comfort in it, therefore they had
need to be brought on further, that their faith may be a joyful faith.

4 Faith had need to be increased in regard of the acts of it, which are
persuasion and trust on Christ, those had need to be increased. Peter when he
walked on the water, he was persuaded Christ would save him, but when the winds
began to be boisterous, he was afraid and began to sink, but Christ reaches
forth his hand to help him, and reproves him, O thou of little faith, Matthew.
14.30, 31. The two Disciples that went to Emaus, and were talking of Christ's
death, they said one to another, We trusted it had been he that should have
delivered Israel, we so trusted, but now are afraid we are deceived, for they
looked that the Messiah should abide for ever, but what says Christ to them? O
fools and slow of heart to believe, so that faith had need to increase in the
acts of it.

5 Faith had need to grow in the fruits of it, though faith may be of some
strength and comfort, yet it may be much wanting in the fruits of it; one fruit
of faith is love, Gal. 5.6. Now a Christian may leave his first love, and so
far, that withal he may lose his first works, Revel. 2.2, 3. therefore a
Christian had need to grow in the increase of the fruit of faith, in their love
and fruitfulness, that their love may abound, and that their last works may be
more then the first*

Reas. 2. From the marv^llous power that is in the Scripture to supply all
those defects of faith in the Scripture, whether read, preached conferred,
examined, or meditated on.

1. The Scriptures preached, they are the mighty power of God (...) to
Salvation, Romans 1.16, 17. All their writings are good helps this way* but yet
their personal presence, their preaching much more effectual. Therefore Paul
prays that he might come to the Thessalonians, that he might perfect what was
lacking in their faith, 1 Thessalonians. 3.10, 11.

2. The word conferred about is very effectual to the increase of faith* Luke
24.27. When the two Disciples were conferring together, and their hearts were
sad, Christ he comes in with them and warmed their hearts so that their faith
who confirmed, that when they returned to Jerusalem; they told the Disciple^,
The Lord is (...) indeed. Now they made no more doubt of it. And you know how
effectual Philips conscience was with the (...), ^e was brought (...) thereby
to believed with all his (...), Act. 8, 37.

3 The word read (...) of that force that by reading you may believe, John
20.3^. By reading the Scriptures believers are established in the Faith.

4 The word examined, that is, when h^^rers bring things to the ^^llance of the
Sanctuary; when they (...) the Masters doctrine, by the Scriptures, whether it
be sound or not* This (...) use to father our faith; nay, to ^^get faith
sometimes in those that (...) not before, as it did in the ^^reans, Acts 17.11,
12. Th^^ ^^king this c^^efe, many of them believed, Many times when a Christian
(...) the Word of God, his hear^ fails him, he is not well persuaded of what
(...), his (...) examines it; why, oft-times the Word (...) works and (...)
faith, when the Word preached did not.

5 The Word meditated on (...) of special use to increase our faith, to make
(...) more comfortable, and (...) and rooted old his faith, Psalm. 1.3. ^^ When
a man so delights in the Word, that he meditates there^^ on day and night, such
a one shall be as a tree planted by the river side, well rooted, well watered,
and so he becomes to be very fruitful in every season, his leaf fades not, but
in every condition of life he brings forth seasonable fruit.

Use 1. Hence we may take a good trial of a faithful Minister, and a faithful
Christian. We see St. John, when he had begun faith in them, he would not leave
them so, as thinking that what he had begun, God would perfect; and therefore
he would leave them and turn to others. This was far from St John's practice,
and (...) it should be far from every faithful Minister, (...) leave believers
that they have began faith in them; but their care ought to (...) to be
desirous first to grow themselves in faith, Lord increase our faith, Luke
17.^9. so to confirm and establish others in the faith. So for Christians; it is
a sign of a good heart, not only to labor for truth of faith, but also for
growth of faith; that ^s the Apostle prayed, so ought every Christian to pray,
(...) increase our faith; or as the poor man cried to Christ, Lord I belive,
help my unbelief^* ^ (...) need of a great deal of faith to be so plentiful in
(...), and to heal offenses, as Christ requires, for on this ground the Apostle
pray^^ (...) faith, Luke 17.3, 4, 5. So we have many temptations to mee^ with,
therefore a Christian had need of strong faith. Above al things take the shield
of faith Ephesians. 6.6. the shield that covers the whole body. No man would
willingly go into the field with a weak (...), but that had need to be metal of
proof to supply a man at every turn, and every occasion, it is a sign of a
lively faith, if it be a growing faith.

2 It reproves the sacrilegious, ungodly, and uncharitable practice of the
Church of Rome, that take away the Scripture from the people. St. John writes
those things that they might believe, why then take away the Scripture, you
make them no better then Infidels, under the faith of Gods elect; And as they
are injurious to the souls of the people, so they cast the imputation of
ignorance upon God, as if God had been mistaken when he sent his Word, that
believers might believe, and they think that reading the Word would make them
heretics.

Use 3. For you that do believe, be frequent in reading the Word, for to you it
was written, that you might believe. Meditate there on day and night. The
blessed will find a time to meditate on Gods Word every day, and every night,
and this you shall ^^^le very effectual to the increase of your faith. The
King himself, whose employments were greatest, the Lord said a charge on him
to read in the Book of the Law all the days of his life. Deuteronomy. 17.14. And much
more is every private man bound to it. If these God has sanctified, to help us
in our belief, then as ever you would believe, ^e diligent in hearing, reading,
conferring, examining, and meditating on the Word, all these are notable means
to increase and enlarge our says; therefore if thou ^e wanting in faith,
consider whether thou have not been wanting in this practice, take away the
Word, and take away the fuel of your faith. And for you that believe not,
though this Scripture was not so much written for you, yet because hearing is
the only way of faith (...). 10.17. be diligent in hearing the Word preached,
Prove. 8.3^ ^5. Blessed it be that hears ^^, for whose finds me, finds
life. And when you have heard, be careful to search and ^^amine whether the
things preached be agreeable to Gods Word. By this means many that believed not
before, have been taught to believe, and be careful to confer on the Word.
The Lord has sanctified the Word preached, and the Word examined, and the Word
confer^ed above, to the begetting of faith, and the Word read to the increasing
of faith; therefore be ste^u^^ in these, and withal join hearty prayer to God,
1 Timothy 4.4, ^. that he would open thine eyes, and cause thee to understand, and
bow thine heart to embrace every truth, that so every ordinance may be
effectual to thee, to the (...) and increasing of faith in thee.

1 JOHN 5.14, 15. And this is the confidence that we have in him, that if we
ask any thing according to his will, he hears us.

And if we know that he hear us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the
petitions that we desired of him.


Verse. 18. he had showed a double soon of his writing; the atte^ (...), that
they might believe on the Name of the Son of God. This he exhorts Christians
to, verse. 14, 15, 16. by three arguments.

1 From the confidence such may have of the hearing of their petitions, verse
1^4.

2 From the certain knowledge such may have that their prayers are granted.

3 From the prevalency of our prayers with God that as we shall be assured of
the granting of our petitions, so we shall thereby, obtain life for our
Brother, that both not sinned a sin unto death.

Doct. A prayer that is made well, never speeds ill. Or thus,
A prayer made according to Gods will, God will grant according to our will.

Notable is that encouragement Christ gave to the Woman, Matthew. 15.^6. O (...)
I great is thy faith, Be it unto thee even as thou will. As if God would let
such into his privy treasury, and grant them what they would.

For explication.

Q What is it to pray according to Gods will? These two things it holds forth
at the first view,

1. When we pray for such things as are agreeable to Gods will, viz. his
revealed will, we should ask nothing but what he commands us. In the Lords
prayer Christ tells us what he would have us pray for, for those things we have
warrant to pray.

2. What ever we ask, we ought to ask with submission of our wills to Gods
will. So did Christ himself, Matthew. 26.39. Not as I will, but as thou will.
But for further enlargement.

1. A man is said to pray according to Gods will, partly as his will is expressed
in his word, and partly as his will is revealed in our hearts.

For the will of God expressed in his Word.

1. God requires that we should ask for nothing but what he commands us to do,
and therefore had need to pray for; whatever duty God requires of us, that we
are to pray for. So did David, Psalm. 119.4, 5.

2. Whatsoever we pray for, God commands us to ask it in the Name of Jesus
Christ, Joh. 16.22, 23, 24.

To ask in the Name of Christ requires two graces of us, Humility and Faith.

Humility of spirit in prayer is expressed in four acts.

1. We acknowledge our selves less then the least of Gods mercies, Genesis 32.10.
So that if God should grant him nothing, he would justify God.

2. Another act of Humility, is to pray in sense of our insufficiency to think
a good thought, much more to pray according to Gods will, 2 Cor. 3.8. Romans 8.26.

3. A man prays in Humility, when he does not desire God to satisfy any of
his sinful lusts, but that Gods will may be done, Matthew. 26. verse. 39.

4. To pray in Humility, is to make mention of no mediation in our prayers, but
only of Christ, Col. 2.18. They made a show of Humility, as not being so bold
as to have immediate access to God, therefore put up their prayers through the
mediation of some Angel; but to go lower then God allows, is but pride of
heart.

2. To pray in the Name of Christ, is to pray in Faith. Which is expressed in
four acts.

1. Faith directs us to put up our prayers only to him on whom we believe,
Romans 10.14. But we believe only in God, therefore neither Saints, nor Angels,
nor the Mother of Christ, the Virgin Mary, are to be prayed to, but we are to
pray to our Father only, Gal. 4.5, 6. Romans 8.15.

2. Faith makes us come with some child like confidence to God as our Father.

1. By Faith we come to God as our heavenly Father in Christ, and well affected
to Christ, as loving us himself, Joh. 16.36.

2. We come to him as a Father Almighty, full of goodness, readyer to give
then we to ask.

3. A third act of faith is, for a man to come truly cleaving unto Christ, not
standing in demurre, whether we had best leave our lusts or no, whether we had
best become altogether Christians or no. This wavering cannot stand with faith,
for it is such a wavering as whereby he is (...), a double-hearted man, an heart
for God, and an heart for the world; sometimes for God, sometimes for his own
lusts. Let not this man think he shall receive any thing. Jam. 1.6, 7, 8.

4. A fourth act of faith, is to believe that what we have asked according to
Gods will, he will certainly grant, Matthew. 11.24. So far as you have asked with
submission to his will, so far will he grant according to your wills, and
though he defer, yet make account your prayers are heard, that he will either
grant what you ask, or what he knows will be better for you, and as welcome to
you, for God looks not so much at the petition as at the end you aim at in
opportuning such a blessing, and that he will grant even when he seems to deny
us our petitions, Heb. 5 9. Christ was heard in that he prayed for. Why, how
was he heard? did he not drink of the cup he prayed against? Yes, yet he was
heard:

1. Christ's will was that his Fathers will might be fulfilled, not his; in this
he was heard.

2. It Is said he was heard in that he feared, though he did drink of the cup,
yet he was saved from those fears and terrors that overwhelmed him.

3. The main end of Christ was, that his Church might be redeemed, which God
granted; so God granted the end of his petition, though not the thing it self.
So Moses prayed earnestly that he might go over and see the good Land, God
told him he should not go over, yet God let him see that good Land as well as
if he had gone over. If we submit our wills to Gods will, and pray in humility
and faith, make account God seriously ponders the aim of your hearts in
begging such a mercy, and though he seems to cross such your petitions, and to
delay them, yet he knows how to grant the end of your petitions by other means
then you conceive, even then when God is displeased with our weak and unworthy
prayers, as he was with Moses, Deuteronomy. 3.22, to 28 Yet then he knows how to grant
what we aimed at. And this magnifies the name of Christ, that though in our own
name we should never find acceptance yet in Christ's name he will grant our
petitions.

2. We pray according to the will of God, when we pray according to his will
revealed in our hearts, in the spirit of him that prays, Jude v. 20. Ephesians.
6.18. Now we pray according to Gods will revealed in the Spirit.

1. When the Spirit raises our hearts to reach forth sensibly with longings
and breathings after the blessings we want. Thus Hannah poured forth her soul
unto God, 1 Samuel 1.15. She expressed not so much in words, as in the reaching and
breathing of her spirit after the blessing she prayed for. So Isa. 26.9. With
my soul within me have I desired thee; as if there were another Spirit in his
spirit. When we pray in a further measure of strength then our own hearts could
reach to, such a prayer is of the Spirit.

1. When we pray with fervency and earnestness, Jam. 5.16. This is that which
is called wrestling and striving with God, Romans 15.30. When our hearts are so
set on Gods favor, as they will not let go, till we have prevailed, Genesis
32.10, and 24, 25, 26. expounded, Hos. 12.4.

3. We pray in the Spirit, when we persevere in praying and are importunate
with God, Luke 18.1, to 10. This is expressed by the importunity of the Widow
that prevailed with the unjust Judge: Shall a sinful Judge, a mortal man be
prevailed with by the importunity of a poor Widow, and will not God much more
avenge his elect that cry to him day and night? You may think God regards not
your prayers, but the poor Widow did not more trouble this Judge, then God is
troubled with your prayers, so that he cannot rest until he have fulfilled
your desires. To the same purpose, Luke 11.5, to 11. Though God seem to be
asleep, yet if you continue knocking, God will open unto you; therefore when
you have a good petition in hand, never give over but pray continually, and
watch thereunto, Ephesians. 6.18. till he answer. To what end does he call it
knocking, but to imply that our prayers make as much noise in heaven, as men
do by knocking at our doors? Matthew. 7.7: So the woman of Syrophaenicia, she
knocked and continued knocking, and would not have a denial, so that Christ
answers her, O woman! great is thy faith, be it unto thee as thou will: As if
he were overwrestled by her importunity, to grant her petitions.

Reas. 1. Because when we pray according to Gods will, he fulfills his own will
when he grants our petitions. It Is Gods will that we should pray so, now Gods
will must be fulfilled.

2. Because when we pray according to the will of God, in the Name of Christ,
our prayer is Christ's prayer; as if you send a child or servant to a friend
for any thing in your name, the request is yours, and he that denies your
child or servant in this case, denies you; so no more can God deny a prayer
put up in Christ's name, then he can deny Christ himself, Joh. 16.23, 24.

Reas. 3. From the intercession of the Spirit in such a prayer; no prayer put
up in the manner aforesaid, but is the prayer of the holy Ghost, and God knows
the meaning of his Spirit, Romans 8.26. God knows our prayers would be weak and
cold, except there were another Spirit besides our own; if therefore he discern
his own Spirit in our prayers, he cannot deny his Spirit; nay further, as the
Spirit makes intercession for us, so Christ himself prays for us, Romans 8.34.
He takes up all our prayers for us as the great Master of requests, and he does
so perfume them, and take out all weakness out of them, that he presents them
as a sweet odor to God, Rev. 8.3. Even as if a younger Brother should go and
gather a Posie for his Father, he out of ignorance gathers many weeds withal,
but his elder Brother takes it, and pulls out all the weeds, and perfumes the
flowers with sweet water, and then presents it to his Father in his Brothers
name: so Christ sees many sinful weaknesses in our prayers, but he takes away
all unsavourinesse, and perfumes them, and so presents them to God, and he
accepts them.

Use 1. As ever we desire that our selves or ours should speed well, let both
our selves and ours learn to pray well, you have enough if you can but pray
well, you can but speak and have, desire and it shall be granted, open thy
mouth wide and God will fill it; as long as you have an heart opened to pray,
you shall want no blessings, therefore above all blessings beg of God a spirit
of prayer. Now that you may pray well.

1. Take heed that you be not of a wavering double mind, Jam. 1.6, 7, 8.
partly for God, partly for our selves; pray with a single heart, Act. 11.21.
that is, 1. Give up your hearts wholly to God. 2. Be careful to keep all Gods
commandments, for as we hearken to Gods commandments, so will he hearken to
our prayers; if we observe his words, he will observe ours.


2. Have respect to pray according to Gods will in Faith and Humility.

Use 2. For them that do pray according to Gods will, be assured that God will
grant your petitions according to your wills, God has spoken it, and therefore
he will not deny it. Notable is that place, Dan. 9.23. and chapter 10.12. At the
beginning of his supplication the commandment came forth, only God was
bringing it about in the Court of Persia. The King oft-times grants a petition
the first day it is put up, but it must pass many hands before it come to the
subject; so the very first day we put up a lawful prayer, God grants it, there
be many means to bring it about, which we must wait for.

Doct. Such as do believe on the name of Christ for salvation, may come to have
confidence and knowledge of the hearing and having all their petitions.
For explication.

How do these two great benefits, confidence and knowledge of granting our
prayers, spring from what St. John has written in this Epistle?

Answ. Five things concur to this confidence, and all of them insisted upon by
St. John in this Epistle.

1. Our adoption expressed by St. John, chapter 3.1. He wonders at the admirable love
of God, not only indebasing of himself to behold things here below, as David
did, Psalm. 113.4, to 8. but in looking on us poor earth-wormes, and raising us
up to be Sons and daughters to God: So that this is the first ground of our
confidence in prayer, viz. our adoption, that we are Sons of God, Gal. 4.5, 6.
Romans 8.15. To whom may a Son come more boldly then to his Father? And what
assures him more of the grant of his petitions, then that he is his Son?

2. Christ's advocation breeds confidence in us, 1 John 2.1, 2^. Christ pleads
with his Father on our behalf for the hearing our petitions, and for the
granting of what we want. An Advocate puts the petition, that it may be was
rudely drawn by a man, into a form of Law, and so it holds current in Law; so
does Christ with our prayers, he puts them into a right form and so pleads for
us.

2. The atonement or propitiation of Christ, is another cause of confidence, 1 John 2.2. So that whereas many a Christian may be afraid that his prayers shall
never be heard, he is so sinful and unclean; Why, (says St. John) If any man
sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, and he is the propitiation for our
sins. He is not only an Advocate but a propitiation, to make atonement for our
sins, that they shall not hinder our acceptance.

4. The anoyntment of the Spirit, whereby we know all things, 1 John 3.20. is a
ground of much confidence, that though we be blind and dull, and know not what
God does for us in our prayers, or how they speed in heaven; why, Christ like
an Advocate sends down his Spirit, and lets us know how all things speed. This
unction teaches us all things, 1 Cor. 2.12.

Q. How does the Spirit certify us of the hearing of our petitions?

1. By helping us to pray; for we know our own hearts are dead and straight,
not able to put up any good prayer, if therefore the Spirit come like oil, and
make us pray affectionately, and sensibly, we know a prayer well made cannot
speed ill, a prayer made by Gods Spirit cannot but be heard, for God knows the
meaning of his Spirit, Romans 8.26.

2. This Spirit puts in us a persuasion of faith, that what we pray for God
will answer, Matthew. 11.23, 24. And so God gives us an Amen in our hearts. Psalm.
6.8. David was in a sore trial and affliction, he prays to God then, Verse. 8.
Away from me all ye workers of iniquity, for the Lord has heard the voice of
my weeping. In the midst of his mourning, this unction fills him with a
persuasion of the granting of his prayers; and so God often times satisfies the
heart of a Christian with this persuasion. Hannah when she had poured out her
spirit before God, and Eli had said to her, The Lord grant thy petition thou
ask of him: Why, she took this as a voice from heaven, and so she went away
comfortably, and she feared that petition no more, 1 Samuel 1.16, 17.

2. There is another act of faith besides persuasion, and that is a constant
wrestling against all discouragements which come betwixt us and our prayers;
famous is that example of the woman of Syrophaenicia, Matthew. 15, 26, 27, 28. If
the holy Ghost does but give us so much resolution, as not to be overwearyed
with d fficulties, then Be it unto thee thou will.

3. This Spirit works as a Spirit of hope, and this stirs us up to wait
patiently on God, till he answer; our carnal spirits would be ready to say,
Wherefore should I wait on the Lord any longer, as that wicked King did, but
now a spirit of hope waits on God, till God shall give an answer of peace,
Psalm. 85.8. Psalm. 130. 2 last verse. When God gives us spirits to wait on him,
he seals up unto us the grant of our petitions. A wise Prince if a petition be
put up that is lawful and he bid me wait for it, I count it granted: so if I
put up a prayer, and God give me an heart to wait for it, I make account he
will grant it.

4. This Spirit is a Spirit of fear, Psalm. 145.9. Do thou walk in thy
Christian course depending upon Christ, reverencing his name and Ordinances?
Why, God will fulfill the desires of them that fear him, Jer. 32.40. And so he
keeps covenant with us. If God give us an awefull reverent heart, that keeps us
from departing from God, and God from departing from us, then the Lord will be
near when we call upon him, and this is from the unction of the Spirit which
make us profit in all our ways, Isa. 11.2, 3.

5. This is a Spirit of obedience, and that gives us good assurance of the
hearing of our petitions, 1 John 3.21. For as we hearken to God, so God
hearkens to us, Prove. 28.9. He that turns away his ear from hearing the Law,
his prayer shall be abominable. But if you hearken to God, God will hearken to
you, Judge. 9.7. If we say, Speak Lord, for thy servant hears, 1 Samuel 3.5.
then what we speak God will hear. An obedient Christian is a powerful
petitioner, mighty in prayer.

6. From the root of confidence, which springs partly from Gods nature, partly
from faith in Christ, partly from the unction of the Spirit; now for those
things we see many promises belong to us, our adoption assures us of Gods
Nature, that he is a merciful Father; our Father assures us that Christ is our
Advocate; the unction of the Spirit breeds in us experience that we have the
Son, that we are Sons; it assures us of our election, vocation, and salvation;
and if it assure us of greater matters, then much more of the grant of our
prayers, Romans 8.32. But now knowledge is a further work, knowledge springs
either from sense or experience? Now then this unction of the Spirit which
gives us experience, not only gives us confidence, but knowledge, that our
prayers are heard, Ephesians. 3.19. This Spirit of God in our hearts, gives us both
sensible and experimental knowledge of Gods favor, and breeds certain
knowledge of the hearing and having our petitions granted; hearing, that is, of
Gods accepting them, Verba sensus cum affectu, and effectu sunt intelligenda;
and having, that is, of the performing and fulfilling of our desires, chiefly
of the ends and aims of our prayers.

Use 1. Serves to take off our hearts from confidence in any worldly thing, and
incourages them to believe on the name of Jesus Christ; why, because hence you
shall not only be assured of salvation, (which yet is more then all the
travails, and p lgrimages, and devotions of our Forefathers could reach unto)
but by believing on the Name of Christ, you shall have confidence that all your
prayers are heard.

Use 2. For them that do believe in Christ, here is a method, whereby they may
be assured of the granting their petitions.

1. Make sure your adoption, for that breeds much assurance in prayer.

2. Meditate much on Christ, that Christ is your Advocate* and atonement for
your sins.

3. Labor for a Spirit of faith, and hope, and fear, and obedience, and so you
shall grow up to confidence and knowledge that your prayers are granted. Many a
Christian falls short of this confidence, because he considers not who helps
him to make his prayers, who makes intercession for him, or else he is wanting
in some of those graces, and so his prayers are full of doubtings.

Use 3. Of consolation to all that believe on Christ; why, This is our
confidence, that whatsoever we ask according to Gods will, he hears us. How
comfortable then is the condition of a believer? Be his estate never so
miserable, his wants never so great, if he can but pray well, he may go on
comfortably.

1 JOHN 5.16, 16. If any man see his Brother sin a sin which is not unto death,
he shall ask, and he shall give him life for them that sin not unto death.
There is a sin unto death, I do not say that he shall pray for it.

All unrighteousness is sin, and there is a sin not unto death.


THese words contain a third motive to stir us up to believe on Christ, and
that is from another benefit, we shall thereby be enabled to bestow on our
Brethren, and that is, our prayer for him shall give him life.

Observe in them, 1. A promise to such as shall pray for their Brother that
sins a sin not unto death, he shall give him life. 2. An exception, or
restraining a man's prayer, There is a sin unto death, I do not say he shall
pray for it. 3. The prevention of an objection, verse. 17. All unrighteousness
is sin; and, the wages of all sin is death, Kom. 6. ult. And therefore this
promise is of none efect, for every sin is unto death. Unto this St. John
answers, verse. 17.


1. By granting all unrighteousness is sin, yet there is a sin not unto death;
not but that every sin deserves death, but every sin does not cut off all hope
of recovery, but as Christ said of Lazarus his sickness, Joh. 11.4. it was not
unto death, yet he dyed; but he means, it was not irrecoverable, because he was
raised to life again; so every sin is unto death, but every sin is not
irrecoverable, but that a man may be raised up out of it into life.

Doct. A believing Christian is not to hide his eyes from beholding and
observing the sins of his Brethren.
If any man see his Brother sin, he may see it, and ought to see it, Gal. 2.14.
St. Paul did not turn away his eyes from seeing Peter's dissembling, but took
notice of it, and reproved him, Heb. 3.12, 13. Take heed lest there be in any
of you an evil heart of unbelief. He speaks not only of a man's self, but of
his Brother, that ye have not an evil heart, and therefore he propounds a
means to help them, and that is exhorting one another. This the Apostle exhorts
us to, Heb. 10.24.

Reas. 1. From the love we owe to our Brethren. God requires larger love
toward our Brethren then toward our Ox or Ass, and yet God requires that if
we see them lying under their burden, we should help them up, Deuteronomy. 22.4. Now
if God require so much help to their beast, much more to our Brethrens souls,
that if we see them going astray, or sinking under the burden of sin, we should
raise them up again.

2. From the love we owe to our selves; this benefit we shall reap by it, we
shall learn to keep better watch our selves, when we see our Brethren fall,
Romans 11.20. We must not by their falls grow high-minded, and pride our selves
that we are not so bad as they, but their falls must be our fears.

Q. With what eyes should we look at the falls of our Brethren?

Answ. 1. Look not at them wirh a partial or hypocritical eye, Mat. 7.3, 4, 5.
But we must so look at the mote in their eye, as to see a beam in our own; we
should see as great sins in our selves, or greater, if God did not restrain us,
for we all have the same root of evil, and should break out into as bad
distempers as any, if God did not hold us back.

2. We must not observe them with a curious and censorious eye, for that is an
imbred curiosity in us, that we love to be prying into other men's sins, not to
heal them, but to censure them. This St. James reproves, chapter 3.1, 2, 3. Be not
many M sters: that is be not of a Master-like spirit, be not busy in every
man's matters, and censorious of them.

3 Look not at them with an envious, malicious eye. This Jeremiah complains of,
chapter 20.10. All my familiars watched for my haltings. That Is an envious eye,
when a man watches for an advantage to undermine his Brother.

4. There is a wanton eye:

1. When a man is not humbled at the sight of his Brothers sins, but puffed up by
it, like the proud Pharisee, Luke 18.9, 10. he built his comfort on the falls
of others. This the Apostle reprehends in the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 5.2.
That there was fornication among them, and yet they were not humbled but puffed
up, they magnified themselves that they were honester men.

2. A man sees his Brothers sin with a wanton eye, when he thereby grows to
imitate him; if such a man venture into such a course, I hope I need not stick
at it. This God gtievously complains of in the Church of Judah, that though she
saw what her treacherous Sister Israel had done, and that God had therefore
cast her off, yet she feared not, but went and played the Harlot also, Jer.
3.7, 8. Now all those heads of seeing our Brothers sins ought to be far from us.

Use 1. Hence learn not to neglect the falls of our Brethren, as if they
belonged not to us, and we would neither meddle nor make with them. This was
Cains spirit, Am I my Brothers keeper? Genesis 4.9. We should look at every man's
sin as belonging unto us, and strive to heal them.

Use 2. To teach us to have a due regard to the falls of our Brethren, not to
see them, and take no notice of them, but God requires we should observe them,
and help them, and make use of them.

What use should we make of our Brethrens falls?

1. Let their falls affect us with a holy fear and jealousy of our own hearts;
in that we have a deceitful heart, subject to the like. This use Paul would
have the Church of the Romans to make of the fall of the Church of Israel,
Romans 11.20.

2. Look at them with such an eye as may move thee to pity thy Brother; if he
be gone astray, bring him back; if he lie under the burden of sin, help him
up, and if thou can not have opportunity to speak to him, yet pray heartily
for him, that is the frame of heart of every loving Christian, to be
compassionate of his Brothers misery.

Object. Does not the Holy Ghost say, love covers a multitude of sins? 1 Pet.
4. v. 8.

Answ. True, it covers them, but how?

1. With a mantle of wisdom, not so cover them as to skin over their wounds,
but so cover them as that they may be covered before God and men, Jam. 5.19,
20. This is a right covering, when a man takes such a course as that his
Brothers sins may be covered from Gods eyes, and from the conscience of the
sinner, that it may not be overwhelmed with them, Psalm. 32.1, 2. God would have
us cover them not with a mantle of flattery, but with a healing plaster that
may cure them.

2. We must cover these sins with a mantle of faithfulness, that is, not to
blaze them abroad to their defaming; but as if our Brothers beast lay under his
burden, and we were notable to help him up alone, we get the help of others;
this is faithfulness, no further to reveal their infirmities, then to such as
may help them, Prove. 11.13. And yet we may so ^eveile them in this kind to
others, as may be sinful, if it be done in as insulting, soot^^ manner, Genesis
9.22, 23. Cham told his Brethren of their Fathers nakedness, but he did it in
a scornful manner; beside* he might have covered him himself, and never told
them, and therefore Noah made him a curse. This God requires of us, if we be
able to heal an infirmity our selves, then to let it go no further; if not,
then to get the help of others, but not in a scornful manner, but in a spirit
of grief and holy fear.

3. Cover them with a mantle of compassion, that if they shall turn again, and
say, It repents them, be ready to forgive them, even as God for Christ's sake
forgave you, Luke 17.13, 14. Ephesians. 4.2 last verse.

Obj. 2. If a man be thus willing to observe other men's sins, we shall be
counted busy bodies, and medlers in other men's di^cesses.

Answ. True, we shall be buisie, but yet not where we have nothing to do, God
lays the charge upon us to have regard of our Brethrens carriages; if we keep
the true bounds of observing them, named before, we do not go beyond our
commission.

Obj. 3. But I shall be more busy then I shall have thank for, I shall be
worse, and he never the better.

Answ. True, for a while it may be so, but yet remember what Solomon says,
Prove. 28.28. He that rebukes a man, afterward shall find more favor then he
that flattereth with the tongue; but suppose thou should loose his favor;
yet thou shall have favor with God.

Doct. 2. Upon the sight of our Brothers sins a faithful man is to pray for
him.
So Moses did pray for the people when they had sinned, Exodus, 32.30, 31. Either
pardon them, or let me have no mercy. Thus God would have Job pray for his
friends, Job 42.7, 8. So did Jeremiah, chapter 13.17, and 14.17.18. Our Saviors
example is a full pattern, Luke 23.24. Father forgive them, they know not what
they do. So Stephen the first Martyr, with a loud voice prayed for his
adversaries, Act. 7.60. Lord lay not this sin to their charge.

Reas. 1. From the compassion we owe to our Brethren, we are bound to pray for
them in sickness, Psalm. 35.13. or in any other calamity, Ps. 141.5. How much
more in the calamity of sin, which is the greatest calamity that can be.

2. We are bound to exhort and reprove them, now neither will do good without
prayer, 1 Timothy 4.4, 5.

3. From the desperate condition of sin, which is such that none alone is able
to help them, except God do it. It Is the work of an Almighty power to redeem
us from any sin, Psalm. 130. ult. Sin is of a poysen some nature, some poisons
take away our eyes, and some benumme us, so sin takes away our eyes that we
cannot see our condition, and so hardens us, that not any thing can help us but
God, and therefore God must be prayed to for help.

4. From the displeasure of God against men, if he see none to stand up and
intercede for their Brethren, Isa. 56.16, 17.

5. From the benefit that befalls Gods servants, if he see them praying for
their Brethren. Job's prayer for his friends was the rise of his deliverance,
Job 42, 8, 9. Isa. 57.18. If ever God restore comfort to those we pray for we
shall be sharers in their comforts, God will restore comfort to them and their
mourners.

Doct. 3. A faithful Christian praying for his Brother fallen into any sin,
shall obtain life and peace for him.
If any man, (...) his Brother sin a sin not unto death, he shall pray for him,
and shall give him life. He that prays for him shall be an instrument to
convey life unto him; or God himself moved by his prayer, shall give him life;
it is all one: he shall give him life of justification, sanctification, and
consolation: This is evident by other examples, when the Israelites had
committed a great sin, so that God in his displeasure had threatened to destroy
them, yet at Moses earnest request, he spared them, and Aaron, Deuteronomy. 9.15. to
21. Job prayed for his friends, and the Lord accepted him. Our Saviors prayer
for his enemies is thought to be the cause why Peter's Sermon was effectual to
the conversion of three thousand at once, Stephens prayer made way for the
conversion of Paul.

Reas. 1. From the pleasure God takes to knit the members of his body together,
now no better means to knit them then to make them useful one to another, 1
Cor. 12.21, 22. So Jobs friends should not prevail by their own prayers, but
they should all be beholding to Job whom they had wronged.

2. From the ointment of Christ that is poured on the head of every believer.
This honor have all his Saints* that they shall become intercessors for
others. What is said of Christ, Romans 8.34. the same word is used of our
prayers, 2 Timothy 4.1. James 5.15.

Use. Its a ground of much encouragement to all that see their Brethren sin a
sin not unto death, to pray for them; be it a sin of covetousness; nay, be it
a sin of frowardness, which is of a deep nature; yet the Lord promises to
hear us for them, Isa. 57.17, 18.

Motives.

1. The Lord will be angry with you, if you neglect it. Is it nothing for you
to see your Brethren be under the burden of sin?

2. It will increase your comfort, if you pray heartily for them, God will
return all your calamities, Job 42.

3. None can help but God, therefore pray to him.

4. This is a mavellous benefit, that thy prayers shall be an instrument to
raise the dead to life.

Obj. Many pray for their Brethren, yet full short of giving them life. What
say you to Abraham's prayer for Ishmael, Genesis 17.18. and Samuels for Saul? 1 Samuel 15.11, 31. and 16.1.

Ans. 1. It would be considered whether he be a Brother thou prayest for;
Abraham prayed for such a one as was neither yet gracious, nor belonged to the
election of grace, as is likely, for that is prerequired; Samuel prayed for
Saul, but God tells him he had rejected him.

2. Consider whether you use the other means that God requires in your places.
David no doubt prayed for his Sons, yet he neglected other means; as its said
of Adonijah, that his Father never displeased him at any time saying, Why have
thou done so? 1 Kings 1.6.

3. A man may pray, but it may be without faith or fervency, for that's
required, James 5.17. If we be wanting in none of these, God will make good
undoubtedly that which he has here promised.

Verse 16. latter part. There is a sin unto death, etc.


These words contain an exception from his former direction, that in case we
see our Brother sin a sin unto death, I do not say he shall pray for it.

There is therefore a sin unto death.

Indeed every sin is mortal, no sin venial, Romans 6.23. There is no sin but
deserves death, but yet there is a sin unto death; that is, there (...) no
ordinary sin but may be forgiven, that therefore is a sin unto death, that not
only deserves death, but does certainly and inevitably procure death.

Doct. There is a sin that not only in it self is deadly, but that
irre^^^rably procures everlasting death, Mat. 12.31, 32. Mark 3.22.
What is this sin unto death?

Two thing, concur to the composition of it: 1. Illumination in the mind. 2.
Malice in the heart.


The Apostle joins them together, Heb. 10.26. If they sin wilfully,
maliciously, after they have received the knowledge of the truth, (which is
called inlightning, Heb. 6.4.) then there remains no more sacrifice for sin.

First, Such a knowledge of the truth is required, as comes from the
illumination of the holy Ghost, when he is clearly let to see the truth of Gods
Word, and the goodness of his grace, if after this they sin wilfully, there is
no more hope of mercy.

Secondly, There is malice in this sin, that is included when its called the
sin against the holy Ghost, Mat. 12.31, 32. which partly expresses the object
against which they sin, which is the Spirit of grace, and the manner, it is
done with spite and malice against the know truth. That malice concurs to it,
its evident, Heb. 10.29. they are said to despite the Spirit of God; now this
is not only contempt and despising but its joined likewise with malice and
scorn. That it is unpardonable, our Savior testifies, Mat. 12.32. Mark 3.22.
Heb. 6.4, 5, 6.

Why is this sin so unpardonable?

1. From the mighty strong power of Satan in such a man, because its ever
committed when seven worse then himself, worse then the former, have entered
in, after the knowledge of the truth, and reformation of many things, Luke
11.24, to 27. When a man has been so enlightened and convinced, that he has
cast out many sinful lusts; if he shall make way for Satan again, by voluntary
and wilful commission of sins, then Satan enters with seven other spirit worse
then before.

2. Some yield a reason from the order of the Persons in the Trinity. If we sin
against the Father, the Son may intercede for us; if we sin against the Son,
the holy Ghost may intercede for us; but if we sin against the holy Ghost,
there is no other Person to intercede for us; but I rest not in that, for it is
certain this sin trespasseth against all the three Persons.

3. From the nature of this sin: Its not a sin of ignorance, for want of
knowledge, not a sin of infirmity, nor is it only a sin of presumption, for
that may proceed from boldness, rather then malice; but a sin of malice far
worse than any of those. He that despised Moses Law dyed without mercy under
two or three witnesses; that is, that sinned presumptuously, and out of
boldness; for sins of ignorance and infirmity, there were sacrifices ordained
in the Law; but if a man sinned wilfully, he dyed without mercy, though his sin
were never so small, as gathering of sticks; now therefore, if there was no
pardon for such a sin of presumption, How much sorer punishment is he worthy
of, that tramples under foot the blood of the covenant, and does despite to
Spirit of grace?

4 From the glory of Gods grace. It Is the glory of grace that it extends to the
pardoning and healing of all sins besides; no sin of ihnorance or infirmity,
but grace can heal, the most presumptuous it can humble, but if a man man
maliciously despise the Spirit of grace, God that is most jealous of the glory
of his grace, will never have it abused by them.

Use 1. Of refutation of some ancient tenets about this sin. The Schoolmen say
it is one of those siv sins, as Aquinas reckons them up, either despair, or
presumption, or opposing the known truth, or envying the graces of others, or
obstinate purpose in sin, or final impenitency; but many of those may be found
in those whom God afterward receives to mercy. There has been found despair
even in Gods own servants, Psalm. 31, 22. And as for presumption, Nathan
charge David that had despised the commandment of the Lord. And that was a
sin of presumption, Number: 16.30, 31. for oppugning the known truth. Herod put
John in prison, and to death; Darius cast Daniel into the Lions den, both
against their conscience, and yet neither of them sinned against the holy
Ghost, because they were both sorry for it. Afa put the Prophet in prison. For
envying the graces of others, it was found in Joshua, Number. 11.28.29. For
obstinate purpose in sin, its found in every one that sins presumptuously, 2 Samuel 24.1, to 4. For final impenitency, that it is not the sin against the
holy Ghost, because St. John then would not have given order not to pray for
them, for final impenitency cannot be discerned till death, and so St. John's
direction had been but frivolous.

St. Austin taught this sin to be envy, and final impenitency. Origin, any sin
after Baptism: The Novatians took up the same tenent; but that it was an
error, is evident, for Peter sinned after Baptism, and so are all the sins of
Gods children; if these were sins against the holy Ghost, who should be saved?

2. Of refutation of Bellarmine and Suarez, that say, Therefore this sin is
said to be unto death, not that it is never pardoned, but not without much
difficulty. Whereas its said to be impossible, Heb. 6.4. They answer, 1.
Impossible in Aristotle is the same with difficile. 2. Its impossible with
men, not with God.


But were it a sin that might be pardoned, though with never so much
difficulty, yet we ought to pray for it, and so much the more earnestly;
therefore, seeing St John disswades us from the usual remedy against sin, viz.
prayer, therefore certainly its a sin unto death, that cannot be pardoned.

3. A third error hence refuted, is of those that conceive this sin is very
rarely found, and more hardly to be discerned, but why does St John write to
common Christians not to pray for them? a sign they may be found and discerned.

Use 2. To teach all that would live long and see good days, to take heed of
opposing and maligning the known truth. Many have conceived that this sin has
hardly been found in the world, except in Julian the Apostate, and such open
enemies of Christ; I wish it were so rare, but are there not too many in the
world, that have been enlightened and convinced of the truth of God, that those
are the ways and servants of God, and yet rise up against them with open
spite and disdain, and persecute them with malice and scorn? Is not this sin
found too often in the Church? Many indeed of our Saviors persecuters did it
out of ignorance, and our Saviors prayer was effectual for them, Father
forgive them, they know not what they do: But there were of them that knew him
to be the heir, and said, Come let us kill him, Mat. 21.38. And for such as
those, there remains no more sacrifice. It was David's prayer, Psalm. 57.5. Be
not merciful to any malicious offenders, that transgress without a cause,
Psalm. 25.5.

Use 3. It may teach all the servants of God to strengthen themselves against
this sin, and to use all good preservatives against this sin unto death.

1. Keep constant fellowship with Gods servants, and forsake them not, for that
is the rise of the sin, Heb. 10.25. As long as God keeps in thy heart a love to
Gods people, and a reverent esteem of his grace, its impossible thou should
fall into this sin.

2. Be diligent to add one grace to another, for so thou shall make thy
calling and election sure, and shall never fail, 2 Pet. 1.5, 10. Psalm. 73.27,
28.

3. Deck thy heart with an humble and awefull respect toward God and his
ways, Prove. 28.14. Jer. 32.40.

4. Take heed of turning aside to crooked ways, Psalm. 125.4, 5. One sin will
draw another. Heb. 12.13. Make straight steps to your feet, lest that which is
same be turned out of the way. Saul's once straining his conscience, brake the
back of his profession.

Use 4. To such as fear they have committed this sin, which is the case of two
sorts of Christians.

1. Of such who having found much enlargement, after fall into deadness, and
slack-heartednesse, and all is dampt, and therefore they fear they have sinned
against the holy Ghost.

2. It is the case of such as have sinned against their consciences.

For the first sort, its true, a man may sin against the holy Ghost, by vexing,
and despising, and damping the Spirit, but yet this is not the sin against the
holy Ghost, unless it be done with spite and scorn against Gods Spirit.

For the second sort, such indeed as have sinned against their consciences,
they have wronged their own souls, and brought much mischief upon themselves;
but yet a man may sin against his conscience, and not sin against the holy
Ghost; for it may either be done out of infirmity, or boldness, as Peter's and
David's sins were, they sinned not out of spite and malice; if therefore thou
fear thou have committed this sin, this fear argues thou have not committed it,
because thou art afraid and sorry for it.

Again, some answer thus, and say its not a sin against the holy Ghost unless
it be joined with an universal apostasy from the whole Gospel of Christ.
Indeed that was a good mark in the primitive Church, when the Church censures
were so hot, that such were cast out, and so being cast out, turned open Pagans
and enemies to Christ, being admitted into the Commonwealth; but now this is
not so sure a mark in our times, wherein such a man should not only be
excluded from the Church, but from the Commonwealth too; and therefore now
they keep themselves from open blaspheming Christ, and so would those former
Apostates, had they lived in our days, and others would do as they did, fly
out as openly, had they lived in their days; and therefore judge not so much
by that, as how thy heart stands affected to Christ. This is certain, they that
are born of God sin not this sin, for they that sin this sin cannot avoid
everlasting death, whereas they that are born of God shall live for ever.

Verse 16. last part. I do not say you shall pray for it.


Doct. The sin unto death, or the sin against the holy Ghost, we have no
warrant to pray for it.
I do not say; that is, I give you no warrant, nor any other of the Apostles,
to pray for it, that is, for the good or salvation of them that have sinned
this sin. Though Paul bide us pray for all men, 2 Timothy 2.1. yet St. John
excepts them that have sinned this sin; and Paul himself is so far from
praying for them that he prays against them, 2 Timothy 4.15. Alexander the
Coppersmith has done me much harm, the Lord reward him according to his works.
No more dangerous curse, then to be dealt with according to our works. Indeed
David sometimes desires to be dealt with according to his works, Ps. 18. but he
means according to the innocence of his cause, not of his person; in case of
some particular action he may plead so, but if it be spoken at large, in
general, that the Lord would reward us according to our works, no more heavy
curse; therefore when he prays so against Alexander, 2 Timothy 4.14. he means that
God would confound him; whatever he was, no doubt he was a member of the
Church, for Paul judged not them that were without, 1 Cor. 5. ult. Whether it
were that Alexander spoken of, Acts 19, that bec^^ed with the hand, as if he
would have pleaded for Paul, and the people esteemed him an enemy to their
superstition; or whether it were that Alexander, 1 Timothy 1.20. whom Paul
delivered to Satan (as is likely) certainly he had formerly been a professor of
the truth, who afterward made shipwreck of faith and a good conscience, and
withstood Paul, and therefore Paul prays against him. Some think he did it as
discerning by extraordinary revelation that he was in a state of reprobation,
but that is not likely, he leaving his prayer as exemplary to all after comers.
Gal. 5.12. I would that even those were cut off that trouble you, that subvert
or unddermine you, those he wished they were utterly cut off from Church and
Commonwealth. Those false Apostles they would have overthrown the Gospel of
Christ, and brought in another Gospel; and because those false Apostles were
all alike, the Apostle discerned them to be in a state of damnation, as being
enemies to the Cross of Christ, Phil. 3.18, 19. At the first they preached the
Gospel, but afterward turning aside to earthly things, they began to magnify
themselves, and vilify the Apostles, and so hindered the preaching of the
Gospel, and therefore he looks at them as deserving to be cut off, he looks at
them as dogs, Phil. 3.2. 1 Cor. 16.22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus
Christ, let him be anathema maranatha; that is the greatest curse that can
befall a man.

There was a threefold Excommunication in the primitive Church.

1 A mere restraint from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, of such as were
ignorant, till they were better instructed.

2 There was Excommunicatio major, when they cut them off from all fellowship
with the Church, from the Word and Sacraments, and Christian communion, and
from eating with them. This ought to be inflicted upon notorious, scandalous
sinners.

3 Let him be Anathema Maranatha, was a greater curse then any of those; for in
the former Excommunication, though they excluded them from their fellowship,
yet they ought not to count them as enemies, but might admonish them, and bring
them on to repentance, that they might recover themselves, 2 Thessalonians. 3.14, 15.
There was hope of such, for they did therefore excommunicate them that they
might be saved, 1 Cor. 5.5. And when it was rightly dispensed, it was a notable
means to humble them, when they considered, that if the Church saw cause to
banish them from their society, God might see much more cause to banish them
from heaven. But yet there was a greater Excommunication, Let him be Anathema
Maranatha; that is, let him be accursed until the coming of the Lord; surely
then their sin is a sin against the holy Ghost.

Obj. Some will say, Paul loved not Christ at first.

Answ. True, He speaks not of men without the Church, but within the Church.

Obj. Why, are there not many carnal men in the Church, that love not Christ,
that desire him not, that never look toward him?

Answ. I take it to be a kind of (...), in this slender expression he intends
much more then he expresses; If any man love not; that is, if any man hate the
Lord Jesus Christ, if he have partaken in the gifts and graces of Christ, if he
have received nor only Baptism, but tasted of the sweetness and goodness of
his grace, if after he come to oppose and malign Christ and his ways, Let
such a man be Anathema Maranatha.

Reas. 1. From the despite such persons do to the chief means and help of
prayer, one is the Spirit of grace, for the Spirit of grace is the Spirit of
supplication, Zech. 12.10. Now they that despite the Spirit of grace, the
Spirit is so grieved, that it will not assist us in any prayer we make for
such, Heb. 10.29.

Reas. 2. From the like despite they offer to the other principal help of
prayer; that is, asking in the name of Christ: upon those two wings our prayers
fly up to heaven, viz. upon the mediation of Christ, and the Spirit of grace,
with these two they prevail; now these men that sin against the holy Ghost,
they make a scorn of Christ, Heb. 10.29. They trample under foot his blood, and
put him to open shame, Heb. 6.6. that is, they put him to open and exemplary
punishment, as the most notorious malefactor. Now if a man shall know Christ,
and afterward hate him, what does he but show that Christ was a notorious
malefactor, and suffered not for other men's sins, but his own? Therefore there
is no hope Christ should lend his Name to be a Mediator.

Reas. 3. Where Christ is not a sacrifice of propitiation for sins, there be
cannot be expected to be an intercessor for such. Now there remains no more
sacrifice for such, Heb. 10.27. If the sacrifice of Christ reach not to such,
then he will never make intercession for them.

4. From the encouragement God is wont to give his servants in their prayers.
He will fulfill the desires of them that fear him, Psalm. 145.19. And this is
their confidence, that whatsoever they ask in the Name of Christ, they shall
receive; and therefore God will not so much dishonor his promise, nor
discourage us, as to give us hearts not to pray when we shall be answered; we
may pray for wicked men, whom we know not in what condition they are, but then
our prayers shall return into our own bosoms, Psalm. 35.13. But if men be
professed enemies to Christ, then we do not show our selves to be Gods friends,
if we show friendship to them, or pray for them, and therefore our prayers will
do them no good, and our selves harm.

Use 1. To teach us, that sin unto death may be discerned even of common
Christians, for else why does he write to common Christians, to all believers
in general, Verse 13. That if his Brother sin a sin unto death, then he should
not pray for him?

Use 2. It may therefore teach Gods people to learn the nature of this sin,
left they pray unawares for such whom their prayers shall do no good. If
therefore you see professors that have tasted of the grace of God, if afterward
they malign and oppose those ways, and the servants of God, in this case,
save your labor in praying for them, your prayers will do no good, but harm.

But how shall we discern when they are enlightened and convinced? We may indeed
discern their malignity, and opposition, but it may be they do it of
ignorance. In this case our Savior and Stephen prayed for their adversaries,
because they knew not what they did; therefore three thousand after they were
convinced that it was the Christ whom they had persecuted, they were pricked in
their hearts and brought on to repentance. Therefore, if you discern they do
this out of ignorance, pray heartily for them.

But how may we discern they commit this against the light and knowledge of
the truth?

Answ. If they do express in their speech and conversation, that they are
affected with Christ, and the ways of his grace, and convinced that those are
the right ways, and yet afterward they maliciously oppose those ways, then
pray not for them, Mat. 21.28. The Pharisees knew Christ to be the heir, and
yet said, Come let us kill him; and in the mean time they said he was a
Conjurer, and cast out devils through Beelzebub the Prince of devils, when as
they knew he was the Son of God and did it by his own power, therefore Christ
tells them, their sins should never be forgiven them. But if they shall go
further, and affect the society of Christians, delight to do them good
offices, and take the like from them, if such after fall off, and maliciously
oppose those ways, they more plainly manifest themselves to have sinned this
sin, and therefore pray not for them.

Use 3. Shows us the desperate condition of all such as commit this sin, and
therefore to bless our selves from it, they are cut off from all means of
salvation, a man may neither admonish nor reprove them, nor show them any
courtesy, or do any good to them; for if I might, I ought to pray for them,
for no office of love ought to be dispensed without prayer; and therefore take
heed of all sins against conscience, of all presumptuous sins, and sins of
boldness, for they lead to this great transgression, Psalm. 19.13. And that you
may be kept from presumptuous sins, take heed of secret sins.

Use 4. Of direction. If we be Children to Parents, or Wives to Husbands, or
Subjects to Kings, and they sin against the holy Ghost, yet they may do civil
service and offices toward them, as those that lived under Julian the
Apostate; he committed this sin, therefore the Christians prayed against him;
but he had many Christians in his Army that doubted whether they might serve
him, or acknowledge him as their Emperor, or depose him; it was concluded they
might serve him, but yet they prayed that God would take a course against him,
as David said, his day shall come on, or he shall descend into the battle and
perish; which shows, that if a Prince shall sin this sin, his Subjects ought
not to depose him, but to do him offices of service. The like may be said of
Children to Parents, and Wives to Husbands, if there be any tie of nature, a
may do them civil offices; which confutes that desperate doctrine of the
Romish Church, that whosoever denies the Pope to be the Supreme head of the
Church, he is to be excommmunicated, and then no man is bound in allegiance to
him, but that whosoever shall slay such an heretical Prince, shall merit
salvation.

Use 5. Learn hence to discern the nature of peremptory prohibitions. When St.
John would peremptorily forbid praying for such, he says, I do not say he
shall pray for it. Neither do you say he shall pray against it (might some
say.) St. John makes account this is a strong prohibition. I do not say; that
is, you have no warrant from me, I give you no commission; such is the manner
of Scripture prohibitions, Isa. 1.12. Who has required this at your hands? So
Jer. 7.31. I commanded them not, neither came it into my heart; implying, that
it is a most peremptory prohibition if Gods Word give us no warrant of
direction; for if there be nothing for it, there is enough against it; for this
is our direction, that we are to do only what God commands in his Word, to
that we must add nothing, nor take away any thing.

THE END.
THE TABLE. The First Figure notes the Chapter, the second Figure notes the
Verse.
A
Abiding in Christ is joined with avoiding of sin, 3. 6. Christ an Advocate for
Gods Children, yea a righteous Advocate, 2. 1. Anabaptisme examined, 2. 19. Why
Christ was not an Angel, 1. 1. Primary Antiquity a certain note of Divine
verity, 2. 24. True Antiquity fetches its Original from the beginning, 2. 7.
The Antiquity of the Doctrine of imitating Christ, 2.7. Ministerial Application
must be made to several sorts and ages, 2. 13. Antichrist foretold, 2. 18. In
John's days there were many Antichrists, nor can the last times be long without
such Antichrists, Ib. In petty Antichrists the praediction of the great
Antichrist is in some measure fulfilled, Ib. Antichrist denies Jesus to be the
Christ, 2. 22. and how? Ib. Antichristian Teachers deny the Father and the Son,
Ib. Every Antichristian doctrine is a lie, 2. 21. Apostates are in the Church,
2. 19. were never Members of the Church Ib. Apostasy is a note of a Seducer,
and of an Antichristian spirit, 2. 19. Its the punishment of Hypocrisy, Ib.
B
Beginning, what it signifies, 1. 1. Believers may be assured their prayers are
heard, 5.19. Blood of Christ, how it cleanses, 1. 7. For Christ came by Blood,
5. 6. Boldness with God, and peace of Conscience go together, 4. 3. Boldness
mortifies fear and shame, 4. 17. Perfect love assures of Boldness at the day
of judgment, Ib. The sight of our Brother is a stronger inducement to love him,
then any hater of his Brother can have to love God, 4. 20. He that hates his
Brother will find less cause to love God then his Brother, Ib.
C
Cards and Dice unlawful, 2. 16. Certainty is a property of the Apostles
Doctrine, 1. 3. The Chiefest creatures may be wicked, 2. 13. Gods Children must
be as little Children. 2. 12. Its comfortable to know we are Gods Children, 5.
1. God has his Children among all Ages of men, 2. 13. Little Children may know
that God is their Father, Ib. note this against the Anabaptists. How little
Children, must be trained up, Ib. Christ's active and Passive obedience must not
be separated in cleansing, 1. 7. Christ pure from sin, 3. 5. this should be an
effectual means to purge us, Ib. Christ came to dissolve the work of the
Devil, 3. 8. Christ's death the manifestation of Gods love, 3. 16. Christians
must be ready to dye for their Brethren, Ib. True Church Members never depart
from the Church, 2. 19. Communion of Saints, what it is, 1. 3. The same Command
that requires love to God requires love to our Brethren, 4. 21. Confession to
God, not simply to the Minister the way to pardon, 1. 9. Confession that Christ
is the Son of God, a sure note of Gods dwelling in us, and our dwelling in him,
4. 15. The office of Conscience, 3. 20. according to the testimony of
Conscience will God judge us, Ib. A fearful Conscience is void of true hearted
Love, 4. 18. Conversion why called a New Birth being but an alteration, 2. 29.
Converters are spiritual Fathers, 2. 1. The Covenant of grace how without
condition, 2. 19.
D
As Darknesse-passing is the Estate of Gods Children in this life, 2. 8.
Difference between a sin unto death and deadly sins, 5. 16. False Teachers must
be looked at as Deceivers, 2. 26. Sometimes they may be reproved and confuted
but not named, Ib. The desire and endeavor to deceive is deceit, Ib. He that
denies the Son has neither the Father nor the Son, and contra. 2. 23. The
Devil sins continually, 3. 8. of him sinners are, Ib. Difference between the
Children of God and the Children of the Devil, 3. 10. The Disproportion
between worldly lusts and Gods Children should wean us from the love of the
world, 2. 17.
E
The Easiness of Gods Commands a sure note of our Love to God, 5. 3. Easy is
the yoke of obedience to them that overcome the world, 5. 4. The Epistles were
written to Believers only, 5. 13. A permanent Estate is their portion who do
the will of God, 2. 17. Eternal life is the gift of God, 5. 11. Is laid up for
us in Christ, Ib. Good example an effectual motive to purge sin, 3. 6. A
Believer must Eye the sins of his Brethren, 5. 16. and with what Eye, Ib. We
must be weaned from the lusts of the Eye, 2. 16. wherein this stands, Ib.
F
How Christ was with the Father, 1. 2. Faith is the great Commandment 3. 23.
Faith in Christ's Divinity helps to overcome the World, 5. 4, 5. Faith in God
and in the Son of God go together, 5. 10. Difference between the three acts of
Faith, namely, learning in Christ, rouling toward Christ, and coming to
Christ, 5. 10. Why Fathers may be suspected, 2. 7. The Feast of Christ's
Nativity no command, but a custom, 2. 5. Fellowship with God is inward and
consists in love, 4. 12.
G
The future Glory of Gods Children is hid at present, 3. 2. Till Christ appear,
Ib. Christ is God, 1. 1. God is the Author of no sin, 2. 16. Gods accidental
work about sin, Ib. Gods Children must be the men of our Love, 3. 2. God knows
us better then we know our selves, 3. 20. Growth in Faith and Love effectual
in order to audience, 3. 23. Is one end of writing the Scripture, 5. 13.
H
He that Hates his Brother is and ever was in Darkness, 2. 9. Hatred of the
Brethren in any should effectually move us to love them, 3. 12. The world is
given to Hate Gods Children, 3. 13. At which Gods people marvel, Ib. but
should not, Ib. Hatred is murder, 3, 15. and such are devoyd of eternal life,
Ib. Hatred of our Brethren argues our Love to God to be Hypocritical, 4. 20.
As we hear God, so he hears us, 3. 22. Every child of God Hopes to be like
Christ, 3. 3. Every Hoper is a self-purger, Ib.
I
Idleness is a lust of the flesh, 2. 16. Its danger, Ib. Ignorance of Christ
and reigning sin are inseparable companions, 3. 6. Imitation must accompany
profession of Christ, 2. 6. In judging who are righteous be not deceived, 3. 7.
K
Gods Children Know they shall be like Christ, 3. 2. Saving Knowledge is able
to wean old men from the love of the world, 2. 14. yea though backed with
Antiquity and Authority, Ib. Not ignorance Knowledge occasioned the Apostles
writings, 2. 21. How Knowledge and faith differ, 4. 16.
L
The days of the New Testament are the Last times, 2. 18. Life, Signs and means
thereof, 5. 12. Why Christ is called Life eternal, 1. 2. Life eternal is
given by promise, 2. 25. Gods people have past from death to Life, 3. 14. this
is evidenced by Love, Ib. How God is called Light, 1. 5. Light, how taken, 1.
7. By seeing Christ we shall be Like him, 3. 2. Little children must be
acknowledged as Brethren, 2. 7. He that Loves walks constantly and
inoffensively in the state of grace, 2. 10. Our love must be weaned from that
which is not of the Father. Love must be real and not only verbal, 3. 18. The
sincerity of our Love is the security of our Estate, 3. 19. Love is a great
Commandment, 3. 23. The rule of brotherly Love under the Gospel, is not self-
Love, but Christ's Love, Ib. We must exhort to mutual love, and why, 4. 7. As
is our Love, so is our knowledge of God, 4. 8. God does both Love his people,
and manifests his Love to them. 4. 9. God Loved his people before he sent his
Son to make reconciliation for them, Ib. Gods Love to us is free, 4. 10. 19.
and a president of our Love to our Brethren, 4. 11. Where Love dwells, God
dwells, 4. 12. By mutual Love we see and testify that the Father has sent
his Son, 4. 14. Loving Christians do not only believe, but also know Gods Love
to them, 4. 16. God is so Loving, that he is love it self, Ib. Constant Love is
a sure evidence that God dwells in us, and we in him, Ib. Such as Love each
other are in this world as God himself is, 4. 17. Those who love perfectly may
have boldness in the day of judgment, Ib. True hearted Love casts out all
fear of evil from the hand of God, 4. 18. An heart possessed of Love is
dispossessed of fear, Ib. Gods preventing Love to us is the effectual cause of
our love to him, 4.19. Its behovefull for our comfort, that we know we Love
Gods Children, 5. 1. The Love of God and keeping his Commandments is an
undoubted evidence of our Love to our Brethren, Ib. What makes a Lie, 2. 21.
M
Christ true Man, 1. 1. 1. 2. How Christ was manifested, Causes of Marvel, 3.
13. What requisite to Merit, 5. 11. The Gospel is a Message, 1. 5. The doctrine
of mutual love is an ancient Message, 3. 11. ^ry Minister is carried away with
one Spirit or other, 4. 1. Ministers are discovered by their confession about
Christ, 4. 2. As also by their holding forth Christ veyled, under humane
infirmities, 4. 3. According to the descent or extraction of Ministers, such
are their several doctrines and several hearers, 4. 5, 6. In what cases
people may leave their Ministers, 4. 4. Playing for Money, how far forth
lawful, 2. 16.
N
Two Natures in Christ, 1. 1. Neglect of a Christian course a manifest sign of
a Child of the Devil, 3. 10. Newness of doctrine in what case commendable,
2. 7. In what sense the Commandment is New, 7. 8. Novelty in faith and manners
must be avoided, 2. 7.
O
Obedience keeps a good conscience and Gods favor together, 3. 22. Preserves
fellowship with Christ, Ib. Sincere Obedience a clear evidence of our
fellowship with Christ, 2. 3. and of our perfect love to God, 2. 5. and of our
being in Christ, 2. 6. Old men must be honored as Fathers, by all, yea, even
by Ministers, 2. 13. Its the honor of Old men to know him that was from the
beginning, Ib. Opinion of perfect holiness is pernicious, 1. 8. yea a
blasphemous error, v. 10. Opinion no sure sign of Piety, 1. 6. Opinion of
knowledge without obedience a sure sign of a Liar, and Hypocrite, 2. 4.
P
God Pardons for his Names sake, 2. 12. Pardon is the portion of all Gods
Children, Ib. Pardon and cleansing go together, 1. 9. Perfection what, 2. 5.
and 4. 12. The love of God is Perfect in such as act Brotherly love, 4. 12.
There are three Persons, yet but one God, that witness the Divinity of Christ,
5. 7. Perseverance in the Apostles doctrine, a sure pledge of Perseverance in
grace, and of attaining glory, 2. 24. The promise of Perseverance opens no door
to carnal liberty, 2. 28. Perseverance is the duty of all Christians, Ib. Such
expect Christ with boldness, and receive him without shame at his coming, Ib.
Prayer made well never speeds ill 5. 14. What it is to Pray according to Gods
will, and in the Spirit, 5. 15. Prayer obtains life for a fallen Brother, 5.
16. No warrant to Pray for those who have committed the sin against the Holy
Ghost, 5. 16. Prevention of sin is the end of conviction and illumination, 2.
1. We must be weaned from Pride of life, 2. 16. Motives and means thereunto,
Ib. Profession, See Opinion. A sincere Professor yields obedience to one
Command as well as an other, 4. 21. Christ a Propitiation for the whole world,
2. 2. Christ was sent to be a Propitiation, 4. 10. There were false Prophets in
John's days, 4. 1. We may receive any thing by way of Ordinance, not so by way
of Providence, 2. 16. Christ's Purity is our Pattern, 3. 3.
R
Reading converts not, 5. 13. It promotes evidence, Ib. A Regenerate Christian
is a victorious Christian, 5. 4. Its a sinful conceit to hold a man may be
saved in any Religion, 2. 23. Riches without an heart to help our Brethrens
necessities, argue there dwells no love of God in us, 3. 17. Jesus Christ is
Righteous, 2. 29. Such as work Righteousness are born of Christ, Ib. They who
know Christ to be Righteous, know Righteous ones are born of God, Ib. None, can
know Christ to be Righteous, but he that is sensible of his own
unrighteousness, Ib.
S
The Seed within preserves from sin, 3. 9. A double use of Scripture, 2. 26.
The properties of Scripture, 1. 3. All sorts and Ages must be conversant in it,
2. 13. The Sending of Gods Son is a manifest token of his love to us, 4. 9. God
Sent his Son that we might live by him, Ib. This Sending of Christ was a token
of Gods free love, 4. 10. Separation from our Churches examined, 2. 19. Reading
of prayers no just ground of Separation, Ib. Upon Sight of Sin in a Brother we
must pray for him, 5. 16. Sin is the transgression of the Law, 3. 4. and this
should be motive enough against Sin, Ib. Sin unpardoned is filthy, 1. 9. is
unrighteousness, Ib. Sin pardoned is cleansed, Ib. Sins removal the end of
Christ's coming, 3. 5. Sinners, have enemies pleading against them, 2. 1. Why
the Sin against the Holy Ghost is unpardonable, 5. 16. Sonship a note of
wonderful love, 3. 1. The Spirit received dwells in Gods Children for ever, 2.
27. Its no Spirit of delusion, but of truth, Ib. The Spirit bestowed on us is
an evident sign of Christ dwelling in us, 3. 24. and 4. 13. The Spirit is given
to them who love each other, 4. 13. The Spirit breathing in the Conscience
bears witness that Christ came by water and blood, 5. 6. This witness-bearing
Spirit is a Spirit of truth, Ib. The Spirit, water and blood are three
principal witnesses, 5. 8. How the Spirit certifies the hearing of our
prayers, 5. 15. Spirits must be tried before trusted, 4. 1.
T
There is no better Teaching for matter or manner then the Teaching of the
Spirit, 2. 27. Teachers of two sorts, 4. 4. worldly Teachers, and godly hearers
have a conflict, Ib. What is required to a Testimony, 5. 9. A fearful
Conscience lies in Torment, 4. 8. The World and its lusts are Transitory, 2.
17.
U
The least of Gods Saints have an Unction. 2. 20. By it they know all things,
Ib. and the truth, 2. 21. and true Religion, Ib. This Unction is received from
the Father, 2. 27. It teaches or assures of perseverance, Ib.
W
Walking what, 1. 7. Want of love a manifest sign of the Devils Child, 3. 10.
Christ came to execute his Office by water and blood, 5. 6. Why Christians are
so troubled with Withdrawings of the Spirit, 2. 27. Unlearned men why Witnesses
of the truth, 1. 2. The six Witnesses are divine and inward Witnesses, 5. 9.
Why Christ is called the Word, 1. 1. The Word abiding in us and pardon go
together, 2. 14. The Word abiding makes us strong and victorious, Ib. The Word
read and heard is a message from God, 3. 11. World, what it means, 2. 15. and
2. 2. Its not to be loved, Ib. Love to our own lusts, and to Worldly lusts is
in us, Ib. Love of the World is enmity with God, Ib. The three capital lusts of
the World, 2. 16. All the lusts of the World are of the World, Ib. We must be
weaned from what comes from the World, Ib. Means to mortify Worldly lusts, Ib.
The World knows not Gods Children, 3. 1. Thence they suffer the more in and
from the World, 3. 2. The Apostles when absent taught Gods people by Writing,
2. 12. None were converted by the Writings of the Apostles, 2. 21.
Y
Satan is an especial enemy to young men, 2. 13. Is often overcome by them,
Ib. Spiritual strength in Young men is a grace highly acknowledged, 2. 14.
FINIS.

