(...), Or, The contemplation of the Heavens, in a perpetual Speculum, or
general Prognostication for ever.

Wherein is succinctly demonstrated the Names and Natures of the Signs, Planets
and Aspects, Terms of Art, order of the Spheres, the Colors, Magnitudes,
Motions, Solid Proportions and Distances of the seven Planets from the earth.
The natural Causes and Significations of the Eclipses of the Luminaries,
Earthquakes, Thunders, Lightnings and Comets, etc.

Amplified with such Precepts and Examples and Operations, that any of ordinary
capacity (by their own endustry) may be enabled to resolve most propositions in
Astronomy, the right and oblique ascensions and descensions of all the Planets
and fixed Stars: To calculate the Diameters, Circumferences, Solidity and
Superficies of all Globs and Spheres: The Dominicall Letters, Golden-numbers,
Epacts, Moveable feasts and ages of the Moon, etc. for any time past, present,
or to come.

By JAMES CORSS Philomath.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by a Society of Stationers, 1662.

To the truly Noble, most Worthy and Singular Patronage of Virtue, my honored
Friend, THOMAS WOOD

The Author, in Testimony of his (endeared) affection, and gratitude for
civilities received, humbly presents his VRANOSCOPIA.

James Corss.

depiction of a crown atop a shield

To the as much singular for Virtue, as eminent for Honor, the Magnificent and
Illustrious Lord, William Earl of Glencairn, Lord Kilmars and Finlaystoun,
Cuninghame, Lord High Chancellor of Scotland, etc.
Most Illustrious Lord,
I Have brought forth to breath the Common Air, this small Tract, at the desire
and command of several (ingenious) Gentlemen, whose high merits, straightly
requires at my hands, a devoutly-obedient, strict and sudden performance, of
their imperious and not to be questioned commands. If the Rays of your
Transcendant Magnitude had not given it life, I was without any hope (after I
had conceived it) ever to see it breath. And now I am constrained to dedicate
it unto your Lordship, before whom it ought to have appeared as richly endued
with Ornaments, as you are with Virtues. Vouchsafe (I beseech you) to accept,
in excuse of my boldness, the necessity of my obedience, by receiving this
Infant into your high and gracious protection,

Being now delivered from the Press, I am humbly bold to present it unto your
Lordships Patronage, at no less a distance then the Center can be supposed
from the Circumference, not questioning but your high candor and courtesy
will acquit me of the presumption.

Great Lord, I do it not, as if I hereby thought to add the least Atome to your
Transcendant Magnitude and Merit; (a thing impossible to your inferiors) but
to set the better Luster upon my Labors, that their passage through the world
may be the more current, as having the impresse of your High and Illustrious
Name and Authority upon them. Besides your exquisite skill in, and affection to
all Mathematical Arts and Sciences, is sufficient to entitle you Mecoenas to a
Piece of far greater worth and Learning then this I present you with: But the
meridian of my glory is this, That the Pilot of my poor Vessel is a Person most
Illustrious and Excellent, in whose breast, the sublimity of all virtues are
concentred.

I hope your Lordship will excuse the meannesse of the present, (seeing the
smallest Penny is stamped with His Majesty's Impresse, as well as the greatest
Jacobus) for Princes cannot expect from their Inferiors Presents
proportionable to their high magnitude and merit. And though I cannot now (by
this affectionatly-bold attempt) avoid the censure of rashness, yet this is my
comfort, that I have but assayed to do that whereunto I was wholly obliged (by
your High-meriting favors) and that with the greatest affection and submission
imaginable, that the world may know how much I am

My LORD, Your most humble and most devoted servant, JAMES CORSS.

To the Reader.
I Have oftentimes lamented with my self to see so many Learned Mathematicians
to arise in sundry parts of the world, and so few to appear in our Native
Country. In other things we are parallel with (I shall not say in a superlative
degree far above) other Nations; but in Arts and Sciences Mathematical, all
exceed us. And had not that thrice Noble and Illustrious Lord, viz. John Lord
Nepper, Barron of Marchiston, etc. preserved the honor of our Nation by his
admirable and more then mortal invention of Logarithms, we should have been
buried in oblivion, in the memories of Foreign Nations; but his famous Works,
and admirable Skill in sublime Sciences, together with his unparalled Invention
aforesaid, makes us coequal to the most subtle Nations in the Universe.
Certainly, the good Angels of God in an extraordinary Revelation made known to
this Illistrious divine Lord, the grand Secret of Numbers perfection, which all
the world had been searching for but in vain, until this great Lord and
Luminary, (the Generalissimo of all wise men) made the light thereof to shine
not only in Britains Horizon, but over all the Vniverss; who now are enabled by
the divine beams of his sacred mind to see into the bottom of Numbers Mystery,
etc. He was a mighty Moecenas to all Mathematical Studies, but who will
imitate him now, I know not. O Noble Lord Naper, Baron of Marchiston, etc. my
Genius is too dull to commend thee, or to give thy sacred wisdom the thousand
part of thy due praise, etc. But to return, the only thing that produces so
few Mathematicians in this famous and ancient Kingdom, is first, lack of
encouragement; There Is no man (of eminency) takes notice of an Artist in order
to encouragement. None will stand up to interceed in his behalf, though he had
all Arts and Sciences lodged within the Circumference of his brain or capacity,
and all Qualifications requisite (in a Gentleman) for any employment public or
private, Martial or Civil; yet another of inferior parts, etc. shall be had in
far more estimation, sought unto, enquired for, etc. The second cause is, the
super-abounding ignorance and prejudicate opinion of some persons Literate and
illiterate, of all Functions, who know nothing as they should know; and the
knowledge which they cannot imitate, they hate, Nemo enim Arti inimici nisi
ignorans, are born, lives and dies ignorant of all sublime Sciences, from such
no encouragement is, or can be expected.

Therefore, I humbly entreat You noble Lords and Gentlemen, who (reads this
Treatise and) moves in superior Sphers, that as the Almighty has made you
Patrons of Honor, so You would (be pleased to) make Your selves also
Patronages of Virtue, in cherishing, countenancing, and encouraging of
Mathematicians, assigning them to such stations as necessarily falls within the
limits of, and cannot otherwise be managed nor duly execute but by a subtle
Artist. For the utility and benefit of the Mathematics is of such importance,
that without the assistance thereof we can scarce live, much less preserve our
selves from danger, or hinder the irruption of a Foreign (or Domestic) Enemy.
And if an effectual course be taken with Artists in order to encouragement you
shall have plurality of qualified and well skilled Mathematicians ready to serve
you upon all occasions or designs Martial or Civil, Public or Private, by Sea
or Land, who will not only give you a true account of the Distances, Magnitudes
and Motions of the Celestial Orbs and eclipses of the Luminaries. The
probability of the Heroic Hypothesis of Copernicus concerning the Earths
motion; and solving the various conjectures of the Ancients concerning its
species, etc. but also to Measure, Plot, and give the true Simitry, Situation
and Content of your Land: To search out all kinds of Longitudes, Latitudes,
Profundities and Altitudes, accessible or inaccessible to fabricate your
Cities, Towns, Castles, Forts, Palaces and all manner of Edificis; To plant
your Canons, conduct your Mines which rents the Rocks and tares the Earth, to
the utter ruin and destruction of an Enemy. To trace the way of the Sun upon
the Earth, and by the shadow of an Axis, to point out unto us those atoms of
Time unto which our artificial Day is Artificially divided, etc. I think there
is no Gentlman (who deserves that denomination) that will not only desire to
learn and know these Arts and Sciences, but also confess that they are most
requisite in all Nations, especially in this most ancient Kingdom; but (alas)
they are wanting, not because of any imbicility or defect that is in our
Intellectuals, for no Nation under Heaven can parallel us for the subtilty of
Sciences, sagacity of apprehension, etc. but our only silence and unwillingness
to these Studies that we do not profess them in public as other Nations
generally do, is because we want encouragement.

Certainly, there is no noble, liberal, or free mind of Civil or Military
Profession, high, or low degree, of whatsoever Function or Station, but will
take great delight in the Arts and Sciences Mathematical; to see how by Art a
man can calculate the places of all the Planets, fixed Stars, and Eclipses of
the Luminaries, and that for anY ^im^ past, present, or to come. To erect
Celestial scems upon Nativities, framing of Astrological Speculums,
Revolutions, Transits, Directions, etc. To measure the distances of places
remote and far asunder, without approaching nigh them, etc. these things are
absolutely and perfectly prodigious to vulgar heads, whose dimmer eyes cannot
penetrate the astral Spheres, etc.

In all preceding ages from the Creation the Mathematics has found respect
and entertainment amongst the greatest Princes and Potentates, insomuch that
History reports that the noble sons of Seth were the first propagators of it;
others, that Atlas King of Mauritania was the first that discovered the motions
of the Sun, Moon and Stars, and put his Invention into Writing, and afterward
committed the same to his Scholar Hercules; who (as some Histories relate)
first brought the Sphere into grace, whereupon arose that fable, Antlantem
Hercules auxilio Coelum sustinere humeris, but Josephus lib. 1. cap. 3. de
Antiq. Jud. attributes it to the sons of Seth, but be the Inventers of it who
will, a Princely study it is, and we find many admirable men (even Kings and
Princes) in all ages to be famous therein. Nevertheless, this last age is to
be wondered at, as producing more admirable and rare discoveries in the admired
frame and machina of the visible world then any before had done, etc.

But to return to my task in hand, the ensuing Treatise which I have entitled
URANOSCOPIA, I seriously recommend to the perusal of all ingenuous Gentlemen
who (of all others) can best determine the worth thereof, not doubting but it
will as much delight the wise (to whose ingenious censure I freely offer it) as
offend the foolish humor of the ignorant and malicious, whose approbation or
exprobation I value not, studying to approve my self to God in a good
Conscience. It Is my ardent affection (and ambition) to be a servant to my Dread
Sovereign, and to my native Contrymen and friends, which puts the pen into
my hands, else I should have buried my Conceptions when they first budded:
Besides, I tremble to think what became of that servant who hid his Lords money
in a Napkin, and did not improve it in such labors as might have been for his
Lords glory, profitable to himself and others.

I confess, God has endewed me with a little knowledge, especially in his
works of Creation, that thereby I have endeavored (in contemplation of his
works with a Sacred-secret delight) to know himself, so, that whatsoever I seek
on Earth (and wants with indifferency) is all and only to be found in Heaven,
where it is a honor to be a Grandee in Gods Court, to sit on Christ's Throne,
there is glory to shine as the Sun, to be a brother to Saints, a peer to all
Angels, a spouse of the Son of God; with whom there is honor without envy,
glory without vanity, and state without change. I do not call those gifts
little, or few, which God has bestowed upon me, for that would argue (if not
blasphemy, yet) extreme ingratitude; but comparatively in respect of that which
shortly shall be revealed to the sons of men.

To conclude, if this small Tract find thy candid acceptance, it will
encourage me to publish other things both profitable and pleasant; In the
interim, if thou be desirous of wisdom, ask it of God, who gives it freely; be
diligent and studioas, and though thou may (perhaps) be a person of honor
that reads this Tract, yet it will not detract a grain from thy glory, nor
diminish thy (due) respect to be a Student in the Sacred Celestial Sciences.
And although that most men (seek how they may profit and advance themselves
(making Earth their principal aim) that they may excel others) out of their
blind and depraved judements, thinks that time and labor lost that is spent
upon the Princely Arts and Sciences Mathematical, yet there is some select
Gentlemen (whose inclination to virtue, makes them capable of that
denomination) whom I know in this Country that are of more solid principles,
and (considering seriously the incredible profit and excellency of the
Mathematics) have applied their minds accordingly (with fixed resolutions) to
the Study of these noble Arts and Sciences, and are (now) become notable
proficients: There may happily be many others in this Nation eminently gifted in
all liberal Sciences, though they obscure it, but its my unhappiness I know
them not, or if I do, they are persons inaccessible, of such magnitude and
altitude, that admits not of any inferior access, etc. Wherefore I shall now
humbly take my leave, not questioning but thy Courtesy will freely accept what
I have here communicated, having other matters shortly ready to publish, that
may witness to the World how much am

a real Friend and Servant to all honest Ingenious men and Arts, JAMES CORSS.
From my House in the head of Robertsons closs, near to Lady Yesters Church in
Edinb. April 3. 1662.
To my singularly honored Friend Mr. James Corss, upon his Treatise entitled,
URANOSCOPIA.
SIR could I dictate to Apollo's lyre,
His sacred Anthems; were my fancy high'r
Then wit Meridianiz'd could feign, yet I
Should justly fear my insufficiency
In this endeavor; for he who would praise
Thee well, must first court bright Vrania's rays.
Dazzling (yet dear) Urania, O that I
Could once but taste thy sweetness e're I die!
But cease fond confidence, wave those endeavors
For blessed Corss ingrosseth all her favors,
He Is her Adonis, she to him imparts
Her sacred Secrets, her abstruser Arts,
By which he raises Monuments of Fame,
Perpetuates his thrice ingenious Name.
And thou famed The City of Glasgow
Town, whose occidentall Towers
Exults in his Production, when the powers
Of rigid Fates, Illustrious Cities dooms
To be entombed, within their ashy wombs;
Thou needs not fear that black oblivion shall
Triumph upon thy glories Funeral;
For while bright Titans Chariot does run
Thy Corss shall prove thy famed Mausolium.
Tho. Wood.

Upon my Ingenious and much honored Friend Mr. James Corss, his URANOSCOPIA.
GReat Glasgow's glory! Oh that I could raise
A Monument might magnify thy praise,
But that is an Herculean task, yet thine
Own Works have done it, thus thy praises shine
Best from thine own Achievements, but lest I
Shadow thy praise, with my obscurity,
I will be silent; Let who list aspire
To speak thy praise, I rather will admire
Thy matchless Arts, that makes thee soar so high
To know the language of the spangled sky,
Observ'st their order, what news their thou hears
Thou tells us all, the wonders of the Spheres,
Thy boundless skill, with such unmated glory
Has crowned thy name, (that it is a living story
Of thy great worth) which may be well enrol'd
Not into Paper, but rich leaves of Gold.
Tho. Mackconvy.

Upon my honored Friend Mr. James Corss his URANOSCOPIA.
LEt heaven and earth and all their hosts conjoyn
Their lights together, all in one light let shine
To show the glory is in astrall Art,
That God and Nature does to man impart,
Which does express a Divine Dialect
Whose beams from earth to heaven it does reflect,
From worldling wit, such knowledge is abstract,
But this our Author in Art is exact
In sublime manner, manifests his skill
To Mathematics, he does show good will,
The knowledge whereof, could not be the worss
That every village had but such a Corss.
Alex. Auchmuty Philom.

A Crostick to my Ingenious Friend Mr. James Corss his URANOSCOPIA.
Ingenious soul, great sounds of fame, sets forth
A name to thee; but far below thy worth.
My lines may derogate; thy works do praise,
Enough thy skill and pains: for which the bays
Shall on thy head be set; in glorious rays.
Continue then, in this thy astrall strain;
O'r looking what this Orb can give, for gain;
Resume thy works, in honor of thy Nation:
So, when thou dies, and hes removed thy Nation:
Scotland will say, you are turned a constelation.
J. Hamilton a lover of the Mathemat.

VRANOSCOPIA.
CHAPTER I. Of the Names and Natures of the Signs, Planets and Aspects.
HE that resolves to be an ingenious Student, or would attain any knowledge in
the Sacred Celestial Sciences of Astronomy and Astrology, must (first)
necessarily know that there be twelve Signs (in the Zodiac) whose Names and
Natures are as follows.

Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagitary,
Capricorny, Aquary and Pisces.

The nature of Taurus, Virgo, Capricorny, is cold and dry, Earthly.

The nature of Gemini, Libra, Aquary, is hot and moist, Airy.

The nature of Aries, Leo, Sagitary, is hot and dry, Fiery.

The nature of Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces, is cold and moist, Watery.

The twelve signs are divided into Moveable, Common, Fixed, Masculine and
Faeminine.

Aries, Cancer, Libra, are moveable signs.

Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, are fixed signs.

Gemini, Virgo, Sagitary, Pisces, are common signs.

Masculine signs be Aries, Gemini, Leo, Libra, Sagitary, Aquary.

Foeinine signs be Taurus, Cancer, Virgo, Scorpio, Capricorny, Pisces.

Every one of these twelve signs is said (and found true by experience) to rule
certain distinct Members of Man's Body, as Aries rules the Head, Taurus the
Neck, Gemini the Shoulders, Cancer the Breast and Ribs, Leo the Heart, Virgo
the Belly and Bowels, Libra the Reins, Loins and Kidneys, Scorpio the secrets
of both Sexes, (it is not fitting for me to name them) Sagitary the thighs,
Capricorn the Knees and Hams, and Pisces the Feet.

In the twelve signs of the Zodiac, are constantly moving (according to
nature) seven Planets, which by reason of their different and various motions
from that of the 8 Sphere, (in which the fixed Stars move) are called wandering
or erant Stars, whose Names and Natures are these following, viz. Saturn,
Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus, Mercurius, and the Moon.

Of these 7 Planets, two ( viz. the Sun and Moon) are most perspicuous and
universally known, by every vulgar eye, but the other five are carefully
observed (only) by the Sons of Wisdom, in all ages throughout the earth.

The seven Planets are of different Natures, for

Saturn is cold and dry, and has Capricorny and Aquary for his houses.

Jupiter is hot and moist, and has Sagitary and Pisces for his houses.

Mars is hot and dry, and has Aries and Scorpio for his houses.

Sol is hot and dry, and has only Leo for his house.

Venus is cold and moist, and has Taurus and Libra for her houses.

Mercury is convertible in nature, and has Gemini and Virgo for his house.

Luna is cold and moist, and has only Cancer for her house.

These seven Planets moving in the twelve signs, do make several Angles and
mutual Aspects, from whose influence, the generation and corruption of all
Sublunaries are caused, and they are five especially, whose Names, and Natures
are these following, viz.

A Conjunction is either good or bad.

A Sextile is an aspect of imperfect friendship.

A Quartile is imperfect enmity.

A Trine signifies perfect amity.

A Opposition signifies nothing but mischief, etc.

And thus much shall serve for the Names and Natures of the Signs, Planets and
Aspects.

CHAP. II. Of several Terms of Art, necessary for all Students to understand.
BEsides the Names and Natures of the Signs, Planets and Aspects, which I
showed you before, there are some other Terms of Art (used by Astronomers)
which seem difficult to be understood, unless first explained, as
Applications, Separations, Prohibitions, Peregrinations, Retrogradations,
Combustions, etc. of the Planets.

1. The Aspects of the Planets are either partile or platique. A partile Aspect
is when Planets behold one another directly to the same degree and minut, be it
either Sextile, Quartile, Trine or Opposition: But a platique Aspect is, when
Planets are within the mediety of others Orbs, which Orbs are as follows.

The Orbs of Saturn are 10 degrees. 00 min. Jupiter are 12 degrees. 00 min. Mars are 7
degrees. 30 min. Sol are 17 degrees. 00 min. Venus are 8 degrees. 00 min. Mercurius are 7
degrees. 00 min. Luna are 12 degrees. 00 min.


2. Their's Application of Planets, and that 3 ways.

First, When two Planets (both direct and in motion, and the one a more light
and swifter Planet then the other) do apply. As Mercurius in 10 degrees. of Aries,
and Saturn in 10 degrees. of Gemini, here Mercury (being more swift then Saturn) is
said to apply to a Sextile of him.

Secondly, When both Planets is Retrograde.

Thirdly, when one Planet is direct (in motion) and the other Retrograde, as
Mercury Retrograde in 10 degrees. of Aries and Saturn, direct in 15 degrees. of Aries,
Mercury is said to apply to the Conjunction of Saturn by Retrogra^ation.

Here note, that the Superior Planets ( Saturn, Jupi^er and Mars) never apply
(unless Retrograde) to the Inferiors; but (just as it is amongst men) the
Inferiors always apply unto the Superiors. This Celestial Economy
demonstrates the infinite love of God toward us, who being Superiorum
Altissimus, should apply himself to us, his sinful creatures, even when we run
Retrograde. O wonderful love!

3. Separation of Planets is, when two Planets having been united by Body or
Aspect, and are separated or departed from each other six minutes at least,
continuing their separations, until they be past the mediety of others Orbs.

4. Prohibition of Planets is twofold: First, When two Planets are applying to
each other, but before they can come to eithers Body or Aspect, behold another
Planet swifter in motion, interposes his Rays, and so prohibits their
Application. Secondly, When a lighter Planet is applying to another (Planet)
more ponderous, and before he comes to his Body or Aspect, falls Retrograde,
and so is prevented by that Planets refrenation.

5. Translation of light and nature is, when a light Planet shall separate from
a more weighty one, and immediately shall be joined to a more ponderous one.

6. Reception of Planets is, when they are mutually in others Houses,
Exaltations, Triplicities, Terms, or Faces.

7. Peregrime, a Planet is said to be Peregrine, when he is out of all his
essential dignities.

8. Frustration is, when a light Planet would join with another more ponderous;
but before he can come to the Conjunction of him, the ponderous Planet is
joined to another, whereby the Conjunction of the first with him is frustrated.

9. Combustion is, when a Planet is within 8 degrees, 30 minutes of the Suns
Body: here note, that a Planet is more afflicted when he is applying to (then
separating from) combustion.

10. Cazimini, Planets are said to be in Cazimini or (Cordisolis) heart of the
Sun, until they be separated 17 min. from his Body, all Planets in Cazimini are
exceedingly fortified.

11. Direction, Planets are said to be direct in motion, when they move a
regular progress in the Sign they are in, as out of one degree into another,
and from that to the third, etc.

12. Retrogradation is, when Planets move contrary to their wonted order and
succession, and goes backward, as out of the eight degree into the seventh, and
so to the sixth, etc.

13. Planets are said to be Stationary, when they move not at all, but stands
still in the Heavens.

14. Planets are said to be Oriental, when they rise before the Sun, and
Occidental when they set after the Sun.

15. Besieging is, when a Planet is between the Bodies of two other Planets, if
the Besiegers be benevolents, its good, otherwise its (almost) as bad as
Combustion.

16. Planets are said to be void of Cause, when they are separated from a
Planet, and do not apply unto, nor meet with the Body or Aspect of another,
during the time they be (and remain) in the Sign wherein they are posited. This
accident happens most frequently to the Moon, by reason of her first motion,
this much shall serve for the Terms of Art, and their Explanations, that every
Young Beginner ought to be acquainted with.

CHAP. III. Of the Systemn of the World, and Motion of the Earth,
THe World (containing all the Visible Creation) is the order and distribution
of all things kept and preserved of God, and is vulgarly divided into two
parts, viz. Heaven and Earth, of which this Excellent Structure is composed.
The Center of which Fabric is held to be the Sun; but their has been much
controversy amongst the most eminent Mathematicians concerning the Situation
and Motion of the Sun and the Earth. Copernicus and some of the Ancients,
before and since Christ, held the Sun to be immovably fixed in the Center of
the Universs, and that it was the Earth (only) that moved: Others again denied,
affirming that the Sun moves only, and that the Earth stands still. Both
produce their Reasons and Demonstrations to prove it. The Judgment of Divines
is unanimous, viz. that the Earth is immovably fixed, and that its the Sun that
moves. But although the Judgment of Divines concur in it, yet I am not
altogether of their Opinion, that says it is immoveably fixed in the Center.
For the equal (or unequal) distribution of the Universal Anima Mundi, allows
it to have a Life: and consequently Motion (which is the property of Life (and
therefore it must be granted, that either their's no such thing, as the
Universal Anima Mundi: or else if there be that the Earth is exempt of it and
so lifelesse, to affirm either of which is prodigiously absurd and ridiculous,
and contrary to the Judgment of the soundest Divines, Philosophers and
Mathematicians. But whether the Earths Motion be Central, Circular, or
Equilibral, their's the Question, let them whet their Wits upon it, and they
will be the sharper. As for me, I shall satisfy my particular friends
concerning the Motion thereof; (for I am confident it has a Motion, though
insensible, by reason of the dis-proportion, which our visual senses have to
its vast Magnitude) and the World in general in the next Edition.

But I shall now return to give you an account of the several Spheres of
Heaven, in their various Situations and Motions, according to the Opinion,
Demonstration, and acurate Observations of that Noble Danish Lord, Tycho Brahe.

1. That the Earth is the Center of the World, equidistant in all places from
the vast Circumference of the fixed Stars.

2. About the Earth is the Sphere of the Moon, which by reason of its
Propinquity and Parvity of her Orb, She compleateth her Periodical Revolution
in a Month.

3. The Sun is the Center of the Planetary Systemn, so that all the Planets
respect Him as their common Node and Center, He compleateth His Course through
the twelve Signs of the Zodiac in a year.

4. The nearest Planet to the Sun, is the Orb of Mercury, which by reason of
the Parvity of his Circle and Vicinity to the Sun (his greatest Elongation not
exceeding 28 degrees) therefore he is rarely seen, he finisheth his Revolution
in 88 days.

5. In the next Sphere moves Venus, who accomplisheth her Revolution through
the 12 Signs of the Zodiac in 225 days.

6. The next Sphere above the Orb of the Sun, is the Orb of Mars, which
Intersects the Suns Orb twice, he compleateth his Revolution once in two years.

7. The next Sphere above the Orb of Mars, is Jupiter, he finisheth his
Revolution in 12 years.

8. The highest of all the Planetary Spheres, is the Sphere of Saturn, who by
reason of his great Remotion from the Earth, and Center of the Universs,
compleats his Revolution but once in 30 years.

9. And lastly, Above the Sphere of Saturn, is the Immense Orb of the
Firmament, wherein all the fixed Stars are placed, which compleateth its
Revolution it 25920. years.

Having now spoken of the Celestial Economy of the Planetarie Spheres, even
from the Center to the vas^ Circumference, I am drowned in a Sea of Admiration
and Contemplation, to behold, and seriously consider (with a Secret sacred
delight) the Proportion, Situation, Magnitude, Transcendant Glory and Luster,
Stupendous and Constant Order of the Visible Celestial Hosts of Almighty God,
Cujus Centrum est ubique, Circumferentia nullubi. I can never behold and
contemplate them sooner, then my Heart and Soul is lifted above the Heavens, by
the ravishing sight of JEHOVAHS back parts, which conducts me thither by
Invisible Lines, and Immortal Beams, am led in to the most Holy Place, where
the KING in His Beauty, the ANCIENT of DAYS sits upon His Throne, attended by
Infinite Millions of Saints and Angels (whose Glory obscures the Visible Sun)
sounding everlasting Anthems to the Primum cus. The first beginning and
ultimate end of all Created Beings, The Supreme UNITY of all Perfections. I
say, when I consider these things, my souls joy Initiats.

O my dear God, comfort my soul and heart with thy Immortal Rays, and
strengthen the understanding of thy servant with a Light of Glory, that may
enable me to bear thy Beatifical Visions. For I am ravished in Contemplation of
thy Glorious Works of Creation.

CHAP. IV. Of the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon.
AS there is no part of the Mathematics so Noble and Excellent as Astronomy:
So there is no part of Astronomy so difficult as the Doctrine of the Eclipses
(especially when the Calculation of Solar Eclipses is limited and determined to
a certain Longitude and Latitude) in regard of the tedious Computation of the
Moons Paralaxes in Longitude and Latitude (upon which the Solar Eclipse
principally depends. This Piece of Learning is the very Superstructure and
Punctilio of Astronomy: and so rare is it to be found amongst men, that not one
of 20000. has attained to it, it is the very Crown and highest Pitch (and may
justly Challenge to it self the Sovereignty and Precedence) of all Humane
Learning whatsoever. It Is not only Speculative (for the Ignorant) ^^d
Contemplative (for the Ingenious) but also Predictive (because it tells us as
well what Eclipses is past, as what is to come) In so much, that an Astronomer
is rather an Angel, then a man, and (at least) a Prophet in the Superlative
Degree. Is there any Art or Science under Heaven (except Astronomy) that can
tell me, Whether there will be any Eclipses of the Luminaries in March, Anno
Christi, 1990. Or (I might have said) 5670? (Presupposing the World shall
continue so long) Can either Philosophy, Physic, or Logic do 't? No it is
impossible, and yet an Astronomer will resolve the Question within one quarter
of an hour, almost, Ex tempore. And is not this a rare Art, and Worthy to be
Encouraged, but the blind World knows little the Sublimity of the Mathematics.
And hence it is that they always bewray their own Ignorance, by proportioning
their Encouragement accordingly. But to return,

1. Eclipses of the Luminaries are (vulgarly accounted) twofold, viz. Solar and
Lunar. The Solar Eclipse is caused by the Interposition of the Moon, between
the Sun and the Earth, whereby some particular Tract of the Earth is deprived
of the Suns Light, during the Eclipse, at which time other places of the World,
have the full light of the Sun. The Lunar Eclipse is caused by the
Interposition of the Earth, between the Sun and Moon: so that the shadow of
the Earth falls directly upon the Moon, and thence comes the obscurity.

2. Eclipses of the Sun are always happening at the Change of the Moon, and
Eclipses of the Moon happen at the full Moon.

3. The Magnitude of every Eclipse depends upon the Propinquity of the Moon to
the Ecliptic Dragons Head or Tail.

4. When the new Moon is Central; and falls exactly in either of the Nods, the
full Moon next preceding and succeeding, do always pass without an Eclipse.

5. When there be two Central new Moons, the one before the Suns Apogaeon, the
other after, there shall happen no full Moon Eclipse that year.

6. When there are two full Moons in six Months space, in, or near the
Ecliptic Line, it usually falls out, that there will be no Eclipses of the Sun
that year, or at leastwise, they cannot be of any sensible Magnitude, neither
be visible in any part of the World, but only near the Poles.

7. Eclipses of the Moon are Universal, appearing in all places (where it is
visible) of a like Quantity and Duration, differing only in Time, according to
the Meridian of the place.

8. A Reduction for the difference of Meridians, will give the time of the
appearance of a Lunar Eclipse, to any determinate place of the Earth.

9. At the mean time of the full Moon, if the middle Longitude of the Moon shall
be different from the Dragons Head or Tail, least then 15 degrees. 12 min. either
according or contrary to the succession of Signs, then that full Moon will be
eclipsed, but if more she will not.

10. Eclipses of the Sun is different in every Climate, so as the neither
retain the same Time, Quantity nor Duration in all places alike, and therefore
admits not of any Reduction.

11. Eclipses of the Sun will only agree to that determinate place of the
Earth, for which they are calculated to a certain Longitude and Latitude,
because of the Moons Vicinity to the Earth, and sudden changes of her Paralaxes
in Longitude and Latitude.

12. The Conical Shadow of the Earth, terminating in a Point (in a Lunar
Eclipse) is augmented or diminished, according to the Suns Propinquity to, or
Remotion from the Earth.

13. At the mean time of a new Moon, if the middle motion of the Moons Latitude
shall be distant from the Dragons Head less then 20 degrees. 40 min. or from the
Dragons Tail, less then a 11 degrees. 22 min. then the Sun will be eclipsed of
that Conjunction, but if more he cannot.

Lastly, Eclipses of the Luminaries, forwarns this sinful World of Drought,
Inundation of Waters, Wars, Plagues and Pestilences, Famine, and the Visisitude
of all Sublunaries.

I have composed an Almanac for seven years to come, initiating Anno Christi,
1663. terminating 1669. Not a Transcript, but a Calculation de novo, for the
Meridian of the most famous City of Glasgow. Whither or no I have had great
pains in its Calculation, either in the Eclipses of the Luminaries, or Monthly
Lunations, he (only) shall know that shall attempt, to do the like. I have
Typified all the Eclipses that will be Visible in Great Britain, during these
seven years, the greatest Eclipse of the Sun that happens within the time
(aforesaid) is upon May the 15 day, 1668. The Type whereof as it will appear in
the Heavens, in the Meridian of the City of Glasgow, take as follows.

diagram of an ecliptic EAST

NORTH

WEST

SOUTH



The Explanation of the Figure is this, H, I, L, represents the Ecliptique,
wherein the Sun continually moves, I, is the Center of the Sun, A, the Center
of the Moon at the beginning of the Eclipse, V, is her Center and true Place at
the Visible Conjunction: At which time so much of the dark Body of the Moon as
covers the Sun in this Figure: so much of the Suns Body in the Heavens will
be covered by the Inrerposition of the Moons dark Body, between the Sun and the
Citizens of Glasgow: E, is the place of the Moon at the end of the Eclipse,
when the utter Circles of the two Luminaries, lastly touch one another. The
Line, A, V E, represents the way of the Moon, during the time of the Eclipse;
but for further satisfaction in the Premises, I refer you to the Book it self,
which will be ere long Printed and Published.

If you desire to behold an Eclipse of the Sun without damage to the Eyes,
THen take a Burning-glasse, such as men use to light Tobacco with the Sun; or
a Spectacle-glasse that is thick in the middle, such as is for the eldest sight,
and hold this Glass in the Sun as if you would burn through it a Pastboard of
White-paper-book, or such like; and draw the Glass^ ^^om the Board or Book,
twice so far as you do to burn with it: so by direct holding it nearer or
further, as you shall see best, you may behold upon your Board, Paper, or Book,
the round body of the Sun, and how the Moon passes between the Glass and the
Sun during the whole time of the Eclipse.

This may thou practice before the time of an Eclipse wherein thou shall
discern any Cloud passing under the Sun; or by another putting or holding a
Bullet on his fingers end betwixt the Sun and the Glass at such time (the Sun
shining) as thou hold the Glass, as before thou art taught.

CHAP. V. To find how long the Effects of an Eclipse continues, and when they
begin and end.
QVot horas durat Eclipsis Solaris tot annorum duratoris, effectus praenunciat:
Quot horas durat Lunaris ut mensem. How many hours the Sun is Eclipsed, so many
years will the effects continue, but if it be a Lunar Eclipse, so many Months.

Now to find the time when the effects of some Eclipse begins and ends, observe
if the Eclipse falls in the Eastern Horizon, the effects thereof will manifest
themselves, about the next four Months following the Eclipse, and will more
strongly operate in the first third part of its whole Duration -- But if it
fall in the Mid-heaven, the Events thereof will begin to appear in the 4th
Month next following, but most apparent will the effects be in the middle most
third part of its whole Duration. -- But if it happen in the West part of the
Horizon, the effects shall not begin until about the last four Months, and
its greatest Operation will be in the last third part of its whole Duration.

Therefore we are to observe at the middle of the Eclipse, how far the Luminary
eclipsed is distant from the rising, and how long it continues above the
Horizon: which known, reduce them into minutes (for facility of Operation) and
then say by the Golden Rule -- if the time of the whole continuance of the
Luminary eclipsed above the Horizon, give 365 days (or a whole year) What
shall the time of the rising give? Multiply and Divide, and the Quotient will
yield your desire.

As for example, in the Eclipse of the Moon that is to happen the 27 of July
1664. (in the Meridian of the Honorable and Famous City of Glasgow) at a 11
hours, 12 min. 12 seconds. The Moons Nocturnal Arch is 8 hours, 30 min. reduced
into minutes is 510.

The Sun sets (in the Latitude of 56 degrees.) at 45 min. past 7. which in this
case may serve for the time of the Moons rising: so that the distance of the
Moon at the greatest Obscuration, is 3 hours, 37 min. which reduced (as
aforesaid) into minutes, is 217.

Now 365 (the days in a Common Year) multiplied by 217. the product 79205.
divided by 510. the Quotient is 155. 31 -- 102. Or you may perform the
Operation with more facility and greater expedition by the Logarithmes, which
was first invented by the thrice noble and Illistruous Lord, viz. John Lord
Nepper, Barron of Marchiston, etc. in Scotland, whose Name and Fame will never
Terminate, until the general Dissolution.

The Operations, by his Lagarithmes, is this, Logarith. Length of the night, 8
h. 30 m. or 510 m. 2, 707570 The Common Year has 365 days. 2, 562293 Distance
of the greatest obscuration, 3 h. 37 m. or 217 m. 2, 336459 4, 898752 Days or
the Effects begin. 155. 2, 161182

And so many days it will be, before the Effects begin to operate, and
therefore from the day of the Eclipse, ( viz. the 27 of July, 1664.) I number
155 days, and it points out the 29. of December following, on which day the
Eclipse begins to Operate. And because the Duration of the said Eclipse is 4
h. 1 m. 8 s. (according to my Doctrine of Eclipses) therefore the Effects will
last 4 Months, from the 29 of December 1664. as aforesaid.

Moreover, Ptolomy says, that how many hours the Sun is distant from the
Horoscope (or ascendant, all is one) at the time of his Eclipse, so many years
will it be ere the Effects begin to Operate: so that if the Eclipse be in or
near the West Angle, it may be 12 whole years, before the Effects take place:
But I rather consent to Origanus, who says, they Inchoate at the very day of
the Eclipse. Consentem namque est Eclipses statim operari, and effectus suos
aliquasque extendere. Orig. par. 3. cap. 2. de effectibus.

Thus having shown you how to find the time of the beginning and ending of the
Effects of the Eclipses and time of continuance, I come next to show in what
Kingdoms and Countries the Effects will principally manifest themselves.

CHAP. VI. The Names of the Regions, Cities and Towns, subject to the Signs and
Planets.
THe Effects of Eclipses are most felt in those Regions and places that are
under the eclipsed Sign, and in such places where they are visible, Nil nocet
Eclipsis illis Regionibus, in quibus non videtur: They operate more
efficaciously in such places where they are Vertical, or where the chief
Significator shall pass by their Zenith in the time of the Eclipse. As also
upon those men whose Nativities agrees with the Eclipse, that is to say, upon
them in whose Nativity or Revolution have the place of the Horoscope (some
ignorant fantastic fools cannot endure this word Horoscope) because it is above
the reach of their capacities; for their ignorance outweighs their Wits, as
much as a Millstone a Feather: They hate all they understand not, etc. Therefore
they may call it (if they please) the Ascendant, for all is one) Sun, Moon, part
of Fortune, and other Planets in, or about the degree of the Eclipse, or in
Quartile, or Opposition thereof. Especially if there be any Malevolent
Direction concuring therewith. But to return,

Under Aries and Mars are these Regions.
England, France, Germany, Swevia, Silesia the higher, Polonia the less,
Denmark, Syria, Palestina, and of Cities and Towns, Naples and Comia, Capua,
Feraria, Florence, Verona, Lindavia, Rajectum, Padua, Brunswick, Cracovia,
Vincentium.

Under Taurus and Venus,
Russia, Polonia the Great, Ireland, Lorain, Campania, Helvetia, Rhetia,
Franconia, Parthea, Persia, the Islands of Syclades, Cyprus and the Sea Towns
of Asia the less; of Cities and Towns, Bononia, Sena, Mantua, Tarentum,
Sicilie, Parma, Brixia, Tigor, Lacern, Nantz, Lipsig, Posnania, Guesna.

Under Gemini and Mercuri,
Sardinia, part of Lombardie, Flanders, Brabant, the Dukedom of Wertemberge,
Hercania, Armenia, Serenaica, and Egypt the lower; of Cities and Towns, London,
Corduba, Turinum, Vercelas, Lovain, Bruges in Flanders, Moguntia, Bamberge,
Norrinberge.

Under Cancer and the Moon,
Scotland, Granado, Burgundia, the lower Holland, Zealand, Russia, Numidia,
Africa, Bythinia, Phrygia, Colchish, Carthage; of Cities and Towns,
Constantinople, Tunnis, Venice, Genoa, Luce, Pisa, Millain, Vinscentia, Bern,
York, St. Andrews, Lubeck, Magdeberg, Wittenberg, Gorlick.

Under Leo and the Sun.
Gallia, Togata, the Alps, Italy, Sicily, Apuliae, Bohemia, a part of Turkey,
Phenicia, Caldea; and of Cities and Towns, Damascus, Syrabusa, Rome, Ravena,
Cremona, Ulms, Confluens, Pragu, Lintz, Cremisum.

Under Virgo and Mercuri,
Achaja, Greece, Crete, Corinthia, Arthesina, a part of Galia, Comata a part of
the Rhyne, Silesiia the lower, Mesopotamia, Babylon, Assyria; and of Cities and
Towns, Jerusalem, Corinth, Novaria, Brundusium, Papis, Tholos, Lions, Paris,
Basil, Heidlberg, Erphord, Uratislavia.

Under Libra and Venus,
Austria, Alsatia, Livonia, Sabodia, Delphinate, Thuscia, Bactriana, Caspia,
Thebys, Togloditica; and of Cities and Towns, Lisborn, Arles, Cajeta, Lauda,
Lascentina, Friburg, Argentina, Spires, Frankford upon Moene, Hallinswevia,
Heilbrune, Phrysinga, Mosbachum, Vyena in Austria, Antwarp.

Under Scorpia and Mars.
Norway the higher, Bavaria, Comagena, Capadocia, Edumea, Mauritania,
Catholinia, the Kingdom of Fess, Getulia; and of Cities and Towns, Algeirs,
Valens, Trapezunt, Urbinum, Acquilia, Pistorium, Tervistum, Forum-Julium,
Messana, Vienna in France, Monachium, Franckford upon Odar.

Under Sagitary and Jupiter.
Spain, Dalmatia, Slavonia, Hungary, Marravia, Misnia, Seltica, Arabia the
happy; of Cities and Towns, Toletum, Voba-Terras, Mutinum, Narbone, Avenion,
Colonia, Aggrippina, Slagarde, Buda.

Under Capricorn and Saturn,
Macedonia, Ilyrus, Thratia, Albania, Bulgaria, part of Greece, Musovia,
Lituania, Saxania, Hascia, Thuringia, Stiria, India, and the Islands of
Arcadias; and of Cities and Towns, Oxford, Juliacum, Clivia, Berges, Mechlin,
Gaunt, Vilna, Brandeburge, Augusta, Vindel, Constance, Fervence.

Under Aquary and Saturn.
Amazania, Samaria, Great Tartaria, Valachia, Muscovia, the south-part of
Swedland, Westphalia, Mosel, Piemont, part of Bavaria, Ethiopia, Sogdiana,
Media, Arabia the Desert; of Cities and Towns, Hamburg, Breme, Monsferat,
Pisaurum, Trentim, Golstead.

Under Pisces and Jupiter,
Cilicia, Calabria, Pottugal, Galitia, Normandi, Garomantes, Lydia, Pamphilia,
Egypt the higher; of Cities and Towns, Alexandria, Hispalis, Compostella,
Worms, Ratisbon, Tevertoun.

CHAP. VII. To Prognosticate the Natural Portents of Eclipses.
FIrst erect your scheme exactly to the time of the middle (or greatest
obscuration) of the Eclipse, then consider diligently what Planet is Lord of
that Eclipse, by colecting the essential Dignities and Debilities of the
Planets from the ascendant, Medium Coeli, and place deficient, etc. And seeing
experience in all ages testifies that Eclipses of the Luminaries has been
attended with some notable events, and sequels, as not only Histories, but even
our Times do testify. I shall therefore insert a few Aphorisms (built upon
Experience) by which the natural portents of Eclipses may be foretold.

1. If Saturn shall happen to be Lord of an Eclipse, he portends much evil,
Corruption proceeding from cold, tedious diseases, Consumptions, Fevers,
Dropsies, Fears, Exiles, etc. and in the Air he engenders thick pitchy Clouds,
Snow, Shipwracks, scarcity of Fruit, Penury, damage by Locusts, Hail and
violent Storms.

2. If Jupiter be Lord of an Eclipse, he causes things to increase, gives good
things, and is the general signifier of Peace and Tranquillity, when he alone
bears principal rule, etc.

3. If Mars be Lord of an Eclipse, he presageth Wars, Tumults, Dissentions,
Violence, Injury, great Heat, Tempests, Lightning and Dryness; he brings upon
men Imprisonments, Captivities, threatens Depopulations and Slaughters of men,
besides many sore and grievous Diseases, and much evil in general.

4. If Venus be principal ruler of an Eclipse, it signifies much good to
ensue, and promises a delicate and temperate season, etc.

5. If Mercury be Lord of an Eclipse, he does insinuate himself into the nature
of that Planet he is joined with, or aspected to: Of his own nature, he
portends dry Diseases, Coughs, Quotidian Fevers, he signifies Roberies and
Pyratical Invasions, he moves turbulent Winds, brings Dryness, Thunders,
Lightning, and hurts the Fruits of the Earth.

6. In prognosticating the effects of the Eclipses, the Asterism in which the
Eclipse happens, is to be warily observed: For if it shall represent the form
of men, then the influence will fall chiefly upon men; ^f of four footed
beasts, upon four footed beasts; if Serpents, upon Serpents.

7. If there happen an Eclipse (especially of the Sun) and Mars be the
principal ruler thereof, and posited in a fiery or airy sign, Mars being strong
and Lord of the year; It threatens House burnings.

8. If Saturn be Lord of the place Eclipsed, and be strong in earthly or watery
Signs, Mars being joined to Stars of Saturns nature, or if he be in
Conjunction, Quartile, or Opposition to Saturn, it portends an Earthquake, and
Inundations.

9. In Prognosticating the effects of the Eclipses, you are to observe in what
House of Heaven the Luminarie Eclipsed (or the Eclipse it self) happens in, for
the influence of that Eclipse will most strongly operate upon those men and
things signified by that House.

10. Fiunt in mundo multa in commoda quando erit in una mense utriusque
Luminaris Eclipsis, and praecipue in his locis quibus est significatio eorum
speciales. Herms. Centiloquium 53.

And thus much shall serve for judging the effects of the Eclipses for any time
coming. I come next to demonstrate how,

CHAP. VIII. To find the Lords of the Year, and four Quarters thereof.
THe best way as Origanus says, is to erect three Figures for every Quarter.
viz. one for the Conjunction or Opposition of the Luminaries preceding the
Ingresse, the next for the Ingresse it self, and the third for the Conjunction
or Opposition succceding it, notwithstanding Haly himself was of another
opinion as appears, Lib. 8. cap. 3. de Jud. Astrorum (to whom Guido assents,
part. 4. cap. 24.) Quando introitu solis in arietem fuerit ascendans signum
fixum continet enim illa Revolution, in somenes quartas illius anni and sic qui
fuerit tunc Dominus omni, erit Dominus totius anni, and totius Revolu^ionis
illius, sed si fuerit ascendens signum Commune, non durabit illa Revolutio,
nisi usque ad introitum Sol in Libram, tunc opportebit te reiterare
Revolutionem, etc. When at the Suns ingresse into Aries, if the Sign ascending
shall be a fixed Sign, that Revolution comprehends in it self, all the four
Quarters of that year, and so he that shall (then) be found Lord, shall be Lord
of the whole year, and of that whole Revolution, etc. but I rather adhere to
Ptolomy, lib. 2. Quadr. cap. 10. who advises us to erect Schems of the four
Quarters, and of the preceding Conjunction and Opposition of the Luminaries,
and so raise a judgment of the state and condition of the year; I my self do
always follow this Direction: For I erect four Figures for the ingresse of the
Sun into the cardinal Signs, Aries, Cancer, Libra, Capricorny, and to the time
of the Lunations preceding and succeeding the Suns ingresse into these Signs;
and so I collect the essential Debilities and Dignities of the Planets from
the Horoscope Medium Coeli, and places of the Luminaries. Lastly, that Planet
which I find to excel in testimonies of Fortitude, I conclude him chief
Almuten and Ruler of that Revolution.

In like manner I find out the Lord of an Eclipse, by collecting the essential
Dignities and Debilities from the Horoscope, Medium Coeli, and place deficient.

CHAP. IX. Of the signification of the twelve Celestial Houses.
THere are four principal parts of the Zodiac, two of which fall equally upon
the Horizon, and the other two upon the Meridian, these are called Cardinal
Points, or Angles of the Figure, viz. The ascendant Medium Coeli, the Angle of
the West, and Imum Coeli; those Houses that next follow these Angles be the
second, fifth, eighth, and eleventh, and are called Succedents. The third,
sixth, fourth, and twelfth are called Cadents, and does preceed the four Angles.

The first House has proper signification of any Natives Life, Stature, Form,
Shape, Visage, Temperature, Complexion and Color, and is called the Horoscope,
Ascendant, or Angle Orient.

The second House; of Estate, Goods moveable or immovable, and is called of
the Greeks Anaphora, from the continual Ascensions of the Planets (there) to
the East.

The third House; of Brethren, Sisters, Kindred, Neighbors, Removals, or in
land Journeys, Epistles, Letters, etc.

The fourth House; Lands, Houses, Tenements, Inheritances, Patrimony, the
natives Father, etc. its called Imum Coeli.

The fifth House, Children, their condition and qualities, Delights, Music,
Mirth, Banquetings, Plays and Games, Messengers, Ambassadors, the fathers
substance, etc.

The sixth House, of all manner of Diseases that our frail Nature is subject
to, their Quality and Cause, Curability and Incurability, Servants, small Beasts.

The seventh House, of Marriage, Lawsuits, Public Enemies, Contests, Duels,
Controversies, Partnership, etc.

The eighth House, of Death, Goods of dead Men, Legacies, Wills, Women's
Dowries, Nulla divisio circuli tunc pessima tamque crudelis in omnibus quam
octava est.

The ninth House, of Religion, long Journeys, Dreams, Visions of all Arts and
Sciences, the Wifes Kindred, Churchmen and Lawyers, all Ingenious men
whatsoever.

The tenth House of Preferment, Office, Honor, Renown, Vocation, or Trade the
Mother, etc. It Is called Medium Coeli, or Cor Coeli, the mid Heaven, or Heart
of Heaven.

The eleventh House of Friends, Favorites and Counselors, it is called Bonus
Genius, or good Demon, Angel or Spirit.

The twelfth House of Imprisonments, Captivities, Banishments, Private Enemies,
great Cattle, as Oxen, Horse, etc.

And this much shall serve for the general signification of the twelve Houses,
which is more briefly comprehended in these few Verses.

Prima domus, vitam largitur, and altera nummos,
Tertia dat fratres, Venerandos quarta Parents,
Prolem quinta dabit. Morbos tibi sexta minatur,
Septima conjugii domus est, octavaque Mortis,
Religio sequitur, confert tibi decima honores,
Hinc tibi amicus erit, postremam inimicus habebit.
Or more briefly thus, Vita, Lucrum, Fratres, Genitor, Nati, Valetudo,
Vxor, Mors Pietas, Regnum, Benefactaque, Carcer.


CHAP. X. Of the Distances, Magnitudes and Colors of the seven Planets.
THere has been much controversy amongst the eminent Mathematicians,
concerning the Planets just Magnitude and Distance, the very Dimensions of
Tycho and Lansberge are much contraverted, and I think not without cause; for
it is certain, that the Circumradiancy of the Planets glittering Beams, makes
them appear to the eye, much bigger then they (truly) are, a^ appears by the
Telescope, which you may experimen^ at pleasure, by pricking a little hole in a
piece of Pape^ or Pastboord with the point of a Pin on Needle: an^ then through
that narrow passage, if you observe the Planets and Stars on some clear nights,
you will soon find how much they loose of their borrowed luster.

But I return, The Distances, Magnitudes and Colors of the seven Planets,
according to the Dimensions constitute and built upon the acurate Observations
of the Ancient and best Modern Astronomers, be as follows.

The Moon, when she is furthest distant from the earth, is removed 4229 parts,
and when nearest the earth, is 3879. Her apparent Semidiamiter (when she is
Apogaeon) is 15 min. 21 seconds, she is 48 times less then the earth, her
colors and several shapes are so vulgarly known and observed, that I need not
describe them.

2. Mercuries greatest remotion from the earth, is 146764 parts, his nearest
distance is 53236 parts, his apparent Semidiamiter is 10 seconds, he (for I may
call him either Masculine or Feminine without any disparagement to his person)
is 2800 times less then the earth, by reason of the parvity of his Orb: He is
seldom seen, and when he is, he appears a Star of dusky Silver color.

3. Venus when she is furthest from the earth, is distant 172937 parts, her
least distance is 27063. Her apparent Semidiamiter is 26 seconds and a half,
she is 157 times less then the earth: she appears a Star of a great and bright
glory, insomuch, that when she is nearest the earth, and furthest Elongate from
the Sun, I have seen thousands of men in Edinburgh (when they beheld her
magnitude) admire her as some strange Apparition or Blazing Star: So ignorant
were they, that not one of a 1000 could describe her. Oh profound ignorance in
Celestial Sciences!

4. The Sun when he is nearest the earth (which is about the 19 of December) is
distant from it 101798 parts, and when furthest from the earth (which is about
the 17 day of June) is 98222. His apparent Semidiamiter (when Aphelion) is 16
min. 28 seconds, he is 333 times greater then the earth, his color is so well
known, that he that cannot see it, will not see to read it, though I should
describe it.

5. Mars his greatest distance from the earth, is 266435 parts, his least
distance 66435. His apparent Semidiamiter is 18 seconds, he is 150 times less
then the earth, and appears a Star of a fiery red, sparkling, glowing color.

6. Jupiter his great distance from the earth, is 644644. parts, his least
distance is 444644. His aparent Semidiamiter is 25 seconds, he is less then
the earth once and a quarter, and appears a Star of a clear, bright, azure
color.

7. Saturn his greatest distance from the earth, is 1108090 parts, his least
distance 908090. His apparent Semidiamiter is 18 seconds and a half, and
appears (to our sight) a Star of a leaden, swarthy and pale color.

Being now arrived at the highest of all the Planets, I am now at a stand, to
behold the vast and immense distance of the fixed Stars: And while I am
thinking upon it, there comes to my rememberance the words of our blessed
Savior, viz. In my Fathers house are many mansions. O Lord, it is most true;
but if thou have created so many Millions of visible Mansions, in these thy
visible, and (as to us) inferior Spheres: What infinite Millions, millions,
millions of invisible Mansions is there in those invisible and superior
Spheres, which are comprehended by thy glorious Angels, and they again
comprehended by thy Majesty!

Now, if (at any time) ye be desirous to know the distances of these seven
Planets from the earth, in Miles, say by the Golden Rule, if 68 and a half give
3436 Italia^ Scottish Miles: What shall the distance of the Plane^ from the
earth in parts give? Multiply and Divide, an^ the Quotus will be your answer.
But because I would have you to understand the Premises, I shall therefore add
an Example or two for Illustration.

Suppose it were required to know the distance of the Moon from the Earth when
she is in her Aphelion, (o^ greatest remotion from the earth) her distance bei^
4229 parts. I say, if 68 and a half give 3436 miles, Wha^ shall 4229 give?
Multiply the second Number by the third, the Product divide by the first, the
Quotient is 212129. and so many Miles is the Moon distant from the earth when
she is in her Aphelion.

I shall add another Example: The least distance of the Sun from the Earth, is
98222. Now to know how many Miles this is, I say, (as before) if 68 and half
give 3436 Miles: What shall 98222 give? Multiply and Divide, and the Quotient
is 4926872. and so many Miles is the Sun distant from the Earth when he is
nearest.

In like manner, you may calculate the distances of the rest of the Planets
from the earth, either at their nearest Vicinity or greatest Remotion,
according as I have shown you in these two Examples.

If you would know the Diameters of the seven Planetary Orbs in Miles also, you
must first know, that their particular Semidiamiters (in such parts as
aforesaid) be as follows.

Saturn 952500. Mars 152040. Venus 72405. Moon 4047. Jupiter 519500. Sun
100000. Mercury 38240.
Now, If you double the Planets Semidiameters, the Product is their Diameters,
which multiplied by 22 and the Product divided by 7. the Quotient will show you
their particular Circumferences (in such parts as their Diameters is) whick
known, you may easily compute the Miles contained in the Circles of their
several Orbs.

As for Example, The Semidiamiter of the Moons Orb, is 4047. which doubled, is
8094 the Diameter, which multiplied by 22. the Product 178068 divided by 7. the
Quotus 25438 is the parts contained in the Circumference of the Moons Orb.

Now if you would know what Miles those parts will give, say, if 68 and a half
give 3436. What shall 25438 give? Multiply and Divide, and the Quotient will
be 1275984 for the Miles contained in the Circle of the Moons Orb. Thus having
found the Circumference and Diameter of the Circle in Miles, you may easily
find the Unequal Superficies thereof, by multiplying the one by the other, the
Product will be 518048228016 Miles, for the Superficies of the Moons Orb, a
vast sum indeed; yea, it is so much, that all the men and women that ever yet
breathed, if they were assigned to dwell in the said Orb, should have more for
their particular Mansions, then the limits of a Kingdom. O wonderful magnitude!
But if there be such regal mansions in the Mons Orb, which is but the least and
lowest: What super-infinit Mansions must there be in the rest of the higher and
greater Orbs of the other Planets? O what joy is it to contemplate the
ravishing Magnitudes and Motions of the Glorious Heavenly Hosts of Almighty God!

To the end that ye may better conceive the Order, Scituations and Various
Distances of the several Celestial Spheres, I shall here add the Type of the
Systemn of the Visible World, according to the Opinion and Constitution,
Ratified and Confirmed by the acurate Observations of that Noble Danish Lord,
Tycho Brahe.

In this annexed Figure, you may behold as in a Glass how excellently great
JEHOVAH has made the Frame and Machina of this Visible World: What a wonderful
Economy, Proportion and Celestial Harmony is there to be seen and heard in
this admired and most excellent Fabric! O man! set thy foot upon earth (it
does so by nature to teach thee not to set thy heart upon it) and lift up thine
eyes, and behold the Glorious Hosts of the most High and Almighty
TETRAGRAMATON! and Adore with Admiration this Grand ARCHITAS, who has made all
his wondrous works in Number, Weight and Measure! O how admirably has he made
the Creation of the Universs, subordinate and inferior one part to another.
Heaven is a work on which he bestows much cost and skill, to make a Throne
for himself! The earth is a cheaper and courser piece of work, for a footstool!
Hell is his strange work! A work, in which he enstrangeth himself from himself!
In which he goes to the vastest distance, to bring forth a work most unlike
himself! In which he hides the workman in the horror of the work, and shows
him by hiding him so deep! All things created are in their great Creator,
Eminently, Psalm. 139.12. The night shines, as the day; the darkness, and the
light are both alike to thee! Darkness, and light, are both in GOD! Not only
representatively, but really! Not in their Ideas only, but their Indentities!
Yet not materially, nor formally, but eminently! After a more perfect manner
then they are in themselves! As in the Supreme UNITY of all perfections!

I have dig^essed a little, but I shall presently wheel into the Road again.
The Type of the Mundane Systemn according to the opinion of Tycho Brahe, is as
follows.

diagram of Tychonic system

In this Figure, the uttermost Great Pricked Circle represents the Firmament
(or eighth Sphere whein all the fixed Stars move) The Center whereof is the
Earth. Here you see that all the Planets (except the Moon) regard the Sun for
their common Node and Center. And that Saturn in opposition to the Sun, is
nearer the earth then Venus in Apogeon. And that Mars in opposition, is nearer
then the Sun himself. You may also perceive (in this Diagram) a Demonstration
of the Planets various distances from the earth. Why they are sometimes more
near to, and sometimes more remot from the earth, etc.

To conclude, of the distance of the fixed Stars from the earth, I can say
nothing. For Observations tells us, that the Angle of Paralax (by which the
distances of the Planets is exactly determined) is altogether insensible, as in
relation of this Orb. And from thence it follows, that it is impossible (by the
wit of man) to obtain either their Distances or Magnitudes;

CHAP. XI. Of the Trees, Herbs and Planets, under the government of the seven
Planets.
THe great wisdom of a Physician is to know what Planet causes the disease, and
whether by Simpathy or Antipathy; for, as the cause is, so must the cure be,
viz. Simpathetical, or Antipathetical: Simpathetical cures strengthens nature,
Antipathetical cures in one degree or other weakneth it; But because I am not
now to act the part of a Physician, (although I much honor their Functions)
nor to prescribe or meddle with their Manual Operations; but as a Mathematician,
I may lawfully and acceptably direct my discourse to the Astrological
Physician, who of all others (in that Profession) I esteem most, for he only
knows the Influence of the Stars upon humane bodies, and can tell a man's
disease by the Sta^s, without going to visit the sick, etc. to these Gentlemen
therefore I direct my speech. When a Planet ca^^eth a disease by Simpathy, the
best and only way is to cure it by the Simpathetical Herbs under the dominion
of the said Planet; but if he cause the disease by Antipathy, look to what
Planet it is to, whether it be to the Sun or Moon, etc. As for example, A young
Student in Physic presented an Urine to me, and desired my Judgment what I
thought of it, and of the Patient whose it was: I found Mars to be the causer
of the disease, and in partile opposition to Venus, and she hard by the Dragons
Tail, * I told him the Patient was afflicted in the Instruments of Generation,
which was most true (as he confessed) Therefore I concluded that it was by
Antipathy to Venus, and so I bade him make use of the Simpathetical Herbs of
Venus for cure. I mention this Gentlemen, only for your best advantage in
attaining the true causes of the disease, whether it be by the Nativity,
Decumbiture, or Urine, that so you may speedily discover what Simpathetical
Herbs are fit to cure it.

But to return, the Herbs and Plants under the dominion of Saturn, are, Barley,
Redbeets, Byfoil, Birdsfoot, Bistort, Buckhorn-plantane, Clavers, Comfray,
Cudweed, Syatica-Cresses, Croswoort, Darnal, Dodar, Epithimum, Elm-tree,
Fleawort, Flaxweed, Fumitory, Stinking-Gladwin, Gutwort, Hakweed, Humlock,
Hemp, Henbane, Horstail, Knapweed, Knotgrasse, Medlartree, Moss, Mullen,
Osmond-royal, Nightshade, Pylewort, Polipodium, Poplartree, Quinstree,
Rupturetree, Rushes, Solomonsseal, Sarasens-consound, Servicetree, Splenwort,
Tamari, Melancholy-thistle, Blackthorne, Throughwax, Tutsan, Woad.

Herbs under Jupiter, be
Agrimony, Alexander, Asparagus, Avens, Baytree, Whitebeets, Waterbetony,
Woodbetony, Bilberries, Burrage, Buglosse, Chervil, Sweetcisly, Cinqfoyl,
Costmary, Dandeleon, (or rather Dens-leonis, Lyonstooth,) Docks, Dogsgrasse,
Endivy, Hartstongue, Hysop, Housleek, or Seengreen, Lungwort, Liverwoort,
Sweetmaudlen, Oaktrees, Redroses, Sage, Sawcealon, Scurvygrasse, Succury,
Ladies-thistles, Bloodwort.

Herbs under Mars, be
Ars-mart, Asarabaca, Barberries, Sweetbazil, Bramble, Briony, Brooklime,
Butchersbroom, Broom, Broomrape, Crowfoot, Cuckowpint, Cranbil, Cotton-thistle,
Flaxweed, Furbush, Garleeks, Hathorn, Hops, Masterwort, Mustard, Hedge-mustard,
Nadir, Netles, Onions, Pepperwort, Cardusbenedictus, Radish, Horsradish,
Rubarb, Rapontick, Bastard-Rubarb, Thistles, Starthistls, Woolythistle,
Tobacco, Treacle, Mustard, Mithridet-mustard, Would or Weld, Wormwood.

Herbs under the Sun, be
Angelica, Ashtree, Balm, Oneblade, Burnet, Butterbur, Cammomill, Celandine,
Centaury, Ibright, Saint-Johns wort, Loveage, Marigolds, Misleto, Peony, Saint
Peter's wort, Pimpernel, Rosasolis, Rosemary, Rue, Safron, Tormentil, Turnsole,
Vipersbuglosse, Walnut-tree.

Herbs under Venus, be
Alhoofe, Aldertree, Apletree, Arach wyld and stinking Archangel, Beans,
Ladiesbedstrow, Birchtree, Bishopsweed, Blits, Bugle, Bardock, Chery tree
Chickweed, Cichpease, Clary, Cockshead, Coltsfoot, Cowslips, Daisies,
Devilsbit, Elder, Eringo, Fetherfew, Figwort, Filipendula, Foxgloves,
Goldenrod, Gromwel, Groundsel, Herb-Robert, Herbtrew-love, Kidneyswort,
Ladiesmantle, Malows, Mint, Motherwort, Mugwort, Neips, Parsneips, Peachtree,
Peartree, Penyroyal, Periwinkle, Plantan, Plumbtree, Primroses, Ragwort, Sorel,
Sowthistles, Spignell, Strawberies, garden-Tansie, wyld-Tansie, Tezles,
Vervain, Vinetree, Violets, Wheat, Yarow.

Herbs under Mercury, be
Calamint, Carats, Caroways, Dill, Elecompane, Fenel, Fern, Germander,
Haslenut-tree, Horehound, Hounds-tongue, Lavender, Liquoris, Walrue,
Maidenhair, sweet Marjorum, Melilot, Moneywort, Mulberytree, Oats, Persly,
Cowparsnip, Pelitory, of the wall, Groundpine, Restharow, Samphire, Winter and
Summer Savory, Scabions, Smalage, Southernwood, Meadowtreefoyl, Gardenvalerian,
Woodbin, or Honysuckles.

Herbs under the Moon be,
Aderstongue, Cabages, Coleworts, Columbines, Watercresses, Duckweed,
Waterflag, Flowerdeluce, Fluelin, Ivy, Letice, Waterlillies, Losestrise,
Moonwort, Monseear, Orpine, Popyes, Purslain, Privet, Ratlegrasse, White-roses,
White-saxifrage, Winter-Gilitflowers, the Willowtree.

CHAP. XII. Of the particular Diseases which the Planets signify.
HAving told you in the preceding Chapter of the particular Herbs and Planets
under the government of the seven Planets, my next Talk is, to show what
diseases each particular Planet signifies, and they are these.

Saturn causes Toothach, Quartan agues, all diseases of Melancholy, Cold and
Dryness, Leprosy, Rhumes, Consumptions, Black-jaundice, Palsies, Tremblings,
Vain fears, Gouts, Hemarhoids, Broken bones, Dislocations, Deafness, Ruptures,
(if Saturn be in Leo or Scorpio) Iliack passion, Chin-couch, Pains in the
Blader, all long Diseases, all madness that comes of Melancholy or Fears of a
Hobgoblin, or Brouny.

Jupiter, all infirmities of the Liver and Veins, Inflammations of the Lungs,
Plurifies and other Aposthums about the Breast and Ribs, all diseases
proceeding of Putrefaction of Blood, Wind, Quinsies and Fevers.

Mars, Pestilences, Burning-Feavers, Tertian and Quotidian agues, Megrim,
Carbuncles and Plague sores, Burnings, Scadings, Ringworms, Blisters,
Phrensies, Fury, Hairbrains, Sudden distempers of the Head coming of heat,
Yellow-jaundice, Bloody Flux, Fistulas, all wounds whatsoever, Diseases in the
Instruments of Generation, Stones in the Reins or Bladder, Scars and Pockholls
in the Face, all hurts by Iron or Fire, all diseases coming of Choler, Anger or
Passion.

The Sun causes Pimples and Buries in the Face, Afflictions of the Heart,
Heart-burning, Trembling, Faintings, Sore eyes, Diseases of the Mouth, all
diseases of the heart, Stinking breath, Rotten fevers.

Venus, all diseases of the Womb, as Suffocation, Precipitation, Dislocations,
all diseases incident to the Instruments of Generation, the Reins and Navel,
running of the Reins, Noli me tangere, Priapismus, all diseases coming by
inordinate Love or Lust, etc.

Mercury, all diseases of the Brain, as Vertigos, Madness, diseases of the
Lungs, as Asthme, Phthisicks, all imperfections of the Tongue, as Stammering,
Lisping and Hoarsnesse, Coughs, Snuffling in the Nose, Stoping of the Head,
Dumbness, Folly and Simplicity (the Epedemical diseases of the Time) and
whatsoever hurts the Intellectual Faculty, etc. I shall live Mercury, and come
a little lower to the Moon.

The Moon causes, the Cholick, Belly-ach, stoping and overflowing the Terms in
Women, all cold and Rhumatick Diseases, Worms in the Belly, hurts in the Eyes,
Surfeits, rotten Coughs, Convulsions, Falling-sicknesses, the King's Evil,
Smal-pox, and Measles, all Coagulate and crude humors in any part of the body,
Lethargy and Phlegmatic Diseases.

CHAP. XIII. Showing how to rectify a Nativity by the trutine of herms.
THe first and easiest way of rectifying an Nativity, and reducing it to that
moment of time when the Infant made its exit from the dark prison of the
Mothers womb, and began to be a visible member of the Creation, is by the
trutine or scrutiny of herms (one of the wisest of all mortal men, and as
ancient as Moses) who was of this opinion, that the very degree of the same
sign wherein the Moon was at the Conception of the Child, should be the true
sign and degree of the ascendant at the Birth; this way of Rectification is far
more ancient then the animador of Ptolomy, and allowed by Ptolomy himself, in
his 51 Centiloquium, his words are, What sign the Moon is in at the time of the
Birth, make that very sign the ascendant at Conception, and what signs the Moon
is in at Conception, make that same sign, or the opposite unto it, the sign
ascending at the Birth, etc. He therefore that would know the exact time
aforesaid (its no matter whither it relate to himself or another,) must first
erect a Celestial Scheme for the estimate time of the Birth, and rectify the
place of the Moon thereto, and place her in the Figure.

Then take the distance of the Moon from the ascendant, if she be Subteranean,
(or under the earth) and from the seventh house if she be above the earth,
substracting the signs and degrees of the Angles, from the signs and degrees of
the Moon (by adding 12 signs if Substraction cannot otherwise be made) and with
the distance of the Moon from the Angle, enter the Table, Entitled, A Table of
the mansion of the Child in his Mothers womb. Under the titles of signs and
degrees, seeking the nearest Number thereunto, and over against that, under the
Columns of the Moon, under, or above the earth, and in the respective Columns,
you will find the certain number of days, that the Child remained in the dark
prison of its Mothers womb.

This done, consider whither the year of Birth be Common or Bisextile, and what
day of the year the Birth is, then Substract the number of days that the
Child remained in the womb, from the day of the birth, (by adding 365 or 366
(according as the year of birth is common or Bisextile) if Substraction cannot
otherwise be made) and with the residue enter the Table of Months, under the
year of Birth, and you will find the Month and day of the Month, when the
Child was Conceived.

A Table of the Mansion of the Child in its Mothers Womb.
Signs. Degr. Luna sub terra. Luna supra terra^. A Table of the Months.
Months Common years. Bisext. years. 0 0 273 258 January 31 31 0 12 274 259
February 59 60 0 24 275 260 March 90 91 1 6 276 261 April 120 121 1 18 277 262
May 151 152 2 0 278 263 June 181 182 2 12 279 264 July 212 213 2 24 280 265
August 243 244 3 6 281 266 September. 273 274 3 18 282 267 October 304 305 4 0
283 268 November. 334 335 4 12 284 269 December. 365 366 4 24 285 270 5 6 286 271
days days 5 18 287 272 6 0 288 273

Then observe the place of the Moon, the day of Conception at noon, which if
she be not distant from the estimate angle (or ascendant of the Nativity) above
13 degrees, then the day found is the day of Conception, but if she is more
remote, you may imagine either the good aspects of the Fortuns put the Birth
forwards, or the untoward aspects of the infortuns retarded it.

These things being premised, I come next to practice, and for illustration
thereof, I shall add one Example with as much brevity as I can.

A Child was born in the famous City of Glasgow, Anno Christi, 1632. upon
Sunday the 15 of July, about half an hour past 8 in the morning, as was
observed and is reported.

At which estimate time aforesaid, the Cusp of the ascendant is Virgo, 18. degrees.
19 min. (in the Latitude of 56. degrees) The Moon is sub terra under the Earth)
viz. within the limits of the third House in Scorpio, 10 degrees 25. min. Now
to know the Month and day when the Child was conceived, I marshal the matter
according to the following method.

Sig. degrees. m. True place of the Moon 7. 10. 25 Cuspe of the ascendant (...)
Substract. 5. 18. 19 Rests the distance Moon from the ascendant. 1. 22. 06

With which distance, I enter the Table of the Childs Mansion, and the nearest
number thereto in signs and degrees, is 1 sign, 18 degrees. Against which (in
the Column, Entitled, Sub terra, or the Moon under the Earth) I find 277.
intimating that the native was 277 days in the obscure prison of his mothers
womb.

The native was born in 1632. which divided by four, and nothing remaining,
shows it is a Bisextile year.

days, Number of the days from January 1 to the 15 of July in a Bisextile
year, is, 197 For facility of operation I add the number of days in a
Bisextile year, 366 The Aggregate 563 From which I substract the number of
days that the Child was in his Mothers womb, 277 Rests 286

Which in the Table of Months (for the Bisextile year) points out the 12 of
October 1631. on which day the Child was conceived. The Moon that day at noon
(according to precise Calculation from Keplers Tables) was in Virgo, 20 degrees. 56
min. 31 seconds, which is not above 3 degrees distant from the ascendant at
birth: And therefore I conclude that the Child was conceived the 12 of October
1631. as aforesaid. And thus much shall serve, for the Correction of a Nativity
by the Trutina Hermetis. There be other ways of Rectifying the estimate time
aforesaid, as the Animodar of Ptolomy, and accidents of the Native, which
Latter is most exact, and that which I make practice of next, the Trutine of
Herms.

If you desire to know, whither the Child be likely to live any space after
it is born; for many times we see Children live but a few Months; yea, some but
a few days, hours, or minutes: Sometimes the Mothers womb becomes the Infants
Tomb. O how thankful to God should we be, who are preserved to the age of 30.
40. 50, etc. It Is a great blessing from God to have a long lease of our life,
whose kindness and infinite love we should endeavor to requite, by spending it
in Divine Contemplations and Adorations, etc. I say, if you would know (from
the Hierogliphical Characters of heaven,) whither the Infant will live past his
Infancy, then observe these few Aphorisms following.

1. Erect a Celestial Schem upon the estimative time given, and correct the
same by the Trutine of Herms as aforesaid, and then observe.

2. If there be an unfortunate Planet in the Ascendant vitiating the degree
thereof, or in Quartile or Opposition unto it.

3. If Saturn or Mars be conjoined in the Ascendant, or if the light of the
time be afflicted.

4. The Lord of the Ascendant Combust, Cadent, or Retrograde.

5. If all the Planets be Subteranean, or if the Birth be upon a new or full
Moon.

6. The Moon in Conjunction, Quartile, or Opposition of Saturn or Mars, in the
4th, 6th, 8th or 12th Houses.

7. The Moon besieged between the bodies of Sol and Mars, void of all helps
from the Fortunes.

8. The light of the time eclipsed at the moment of birth, is a sure argument
of a short life.

9. If the birth be by day ( viz. between the Suns rising and his seting) then
have special regard to the Sun; if by night, to the Moon, because he is, Fons
vitalis Potentiae, Luna naturalis, according to Ptolomy, Cent. Aphoris. 86. and
according to the first Aphorism of Herms Trismegistus, (Sol and Luna post Deum,
omnium viventium vita sunt) they are the life of all living creatures. And
therefore if the Luminaries be strong or well dignified, or in a good House of
Heaven, or in a favorable Aspect of Jupiter or Venus, whither the native be
born by day, or by night, it is a sure argument that the child then born may
live long, but if otherwise, they deny long life.

10. They who are born upon a full Moon, dye by access, or too great abundance
of moisture; and upon a new Moon, for want of humidity, or by reason of too
much dryness; usually the most sickly, small and weakest bodies, are brought
forth upon the change of the Moon.

11. The Conjunction of many Planets in the Ascendant void of all Essential
Dignities, argues a short life probatum est.

12. The Lord of the Ascendant going to the Conjunction of the Lord of the 8.
or if the Lord of the Ascendant be in the 8. or Lord of the 8. in the
Ascendant, the same.

13. If the Luminaries separate from a fortune, and apply to a Malevolent, the
Child shall then be in great danger of death, at what time that Luminary (by a
just measure of time) comes either to the body, or has a course to that
unhappy Aspect.

14. If you should happen to perceive such an application as aforesaid, and
would know the time when the eminent danger will happen, take and resolve the
Ark of Direction into Time, by allowing to every degree one year, five days,
eight hours, and so you will be easily informed of the time, etc.

These are the general testimonies of a short life, if none of them happen in a
nativity, the child may live until some eminent direction of the Sun, Moon or
Ascendant, unto some Malevolent Promittor, prove the cruel Atropos to cut in
two the thread of life.

Fac ut experiar, JEHOVA, finem meum, mensura dierum, quid sit; experiar quam
durabilis sum.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Year what it is, and the quantity thereof.
A Year is the most principal, ordinary, common and usual part of time, whereby
not only the ages of men and other accidents of the world are measured, but
also the times of (almost) all our actions in the world, their beginnings,
progress, durations and intervals, are squared and reckoned thereby: and
albeit the said space of time, called (years) are variously accounted
according to the custom of diverse Nations, greater in some, and lesser in
others; yet has it (or at least wise should have) its principal dependence
upon the true place and motion of the Sun, by which the years are measured, and
therefore they are rightly divided into Astronomical and Political.

The Astronomical years are measured, either according to the Periodical motion
of the Sun, or the Conjunction of the Moon with the Sun, and therefore twofold,
viz. Solar or Lunar.

The Solar year is that space of time, that the Sun (by his proper motion) is
departing from some Radical or fixed Point of the Ecliptique, to his return to
the same again, and this may be called either Tropical or Syderial.

The Tropical year, is that space of time in which the Sun is departing from
one of the Tropical, Equinoctial, or Solstitial Points, and (running through
the whole Ecliptique) returns to the same Point again. The true length of this
year (according to the acurate Observations of Ancient and Modern Astronomers)
is 365 days, 5 hours, 49 min. 4 sec.

The Syderal (or Starry year) is that space of time, wherein the Sun is
departing from some fixed Star, or determined Point of the 8 Sphere, and
returns to the same again: the true Quantity whereof (immutably) is 365 days,
6 hours, 9 min. 21 seconds.

The Political or Civil years be such as are every where used for distinction
of times, wherein a respect is had to the motions of the Luminaries, Conjunctly
or Severally.

The year is usually called either Common or Bisextile, the common year
contains (according to the constitution of Julius Caesar) 365 days, 6 hours,
which 6 hours make every fourth year Leap-year, which contains 366 days: it is
called Bisextile of Bis and Sex (twice six) because the sixth Calends of March
is twice repeated: it is called Intercalar, because of the day that is put in
between and Leap-year, because that (by the addition of a day) the fixed holy
days etc. do, as it were, leap one day further into the week, then it was in
the year preceding.

CHAP. XV. Of the Judgment of the Weather from the Celestial Bodies.
ALthough the knowledge of the Weather be a thing so common, yet the true Key
is exceeding difficult: and therefore I have thought it necessary to write
something thereof, that the world may see and know that our Judgment of the
Weather in our yearly Almanacks is not built upon a mere conjecture or bare
guessing (as Millions of ignorant men think) but upon principles of reason, and
that reason ratified and confirmed by many hundreds (if not thousands) of years
experiences, and yet it is but counted (amongst ignorant Asses) at best, but
guessings: I charge my Readers for the future, that they do not carp at that
(in my Book) which they cannot imitate, lest they attain to the honor of being
branded for Ignorant Fools, whose dimmer eyes are not able to penetrate the
Astral Spheres, etc.

I dave digressed a little, but I shall presently wheel into the Road again,
and perform what I have promised, with as much brevity and facility as I can.

1. To the time of the Suns ingresse into Aries, and to the Conjunctions or
Oppositions of the Luminaries preceding the same. Erect Celestial Schems,
then observe whether the place of the Luminaries at the time of their
Conjunction or Opposition (preceding the Ingresse) happened in a moist, cold
or dry Mansions, and of what Planets they are aspected.

2. If Saturn shall be well disposed in an Angle, and in a moist Asterism,
without impediment, neither applying to another Planet at the time of the Suns
Ingresse, it presageth temperate and seasonable showers, and fills the Heavens
with obscure Clouds; but especially in that Lunation wherein he has the chief
dominion. -- Bu^ if Saturn be impedite or evil disposed, it portends turbulent
Storms of Wind and Rain, and cold dense thick clouds especially if Mercury or
Venus shall be in moist signs, and behold him from an Angle, for in such a case
the Astrologer may predict of much Rain.

3. If Jupiter shall be in such a Position, it will produce Winds and Rain,
with redish Clouds.

4. Mars so posited, signifies yellow Clouds, Thunder Coruscations and Rain,
especially in those times prope^ and convenient, and the rather if Jupiter or
Mercuriu^ give any testimony thereof.

5. The Sun in such a Position, as aforesaid shewet^ Red Clouds, and great
store of Wet: There are some (...) the best Astologers who will not Elect the
Sun and Moo^ for Rulers, because they are general significators of the Times.

6. The Moon applying to Venus, and assuming the prerogatives aforesaid,
brings gentle Rain, or at least wise Clouds, but if the Moon shall apply to
Mercury, or if Mercury shall be Lord and Ruler of the Figure with Jupiter, it
portends Showers and violent Winds, and a cloudy Air, yet somewhat more
violent, and sometime again more remiss in respect of signs, mansions of the
Moon, and eratick Stars.

7. If the Panet ruling shall be Oriental, his effects will appear in the end
of time, if Occidental, in the beginning whither it be in a Revolution or Solar
Ingresse.

8. Many Planets, especially Saturn, Jupiter and Mars, in Northern Signs, argue
a hot Summer, and a Temperate Winter. The contrary when many Planets
(especially the three aforesaid) are in Southern Signs, for so they signify a
cold and moist Peristasis of the Air, and a colder Winter.

9. Saturn in Southern Signs, and especially in Capricorn or Aquary, argue
terrible Winters of Frost and Cold, Summers remiss in heat.

10. In the Revolution of the year, if Mars shall be in Aries or Scorpio, it
portends much Rain: if in the houses of Saturn, it shows but little, in
others a Mediocrity.

11. In the Conjunction or Opposition preceding the Revolution of the year, if
Mars shall behold the same place, it signifies Lightning and Thunder, and
sometimes a Comet has succeeded such a Position.

12. In the Revolution of the year, when Venus, Mercury and the Moon are found
in moist Mansions, it portends much Rain.

13. At the Ingresse of the Sun into the Tropic signs, if Venus shall aspect
the Moon from a moist place, it is a sign of much Rain: or if Mars from Scorpio
shall aspect Venus, it pretends likewise Rain.

14. When the Sun is in Aries or Taurus, if Venus be then Retrograde, the
Spring will be moist.

15. Upon a Conjunction or Opposition of the three superior Planets, either
mutually, or with the three inferiors: if the Moon soon after apply unto them
by a Quartile or opposite Aspect, then be sure of Rain or Winds, according to
the nature of these Planets so Aspected.

16. When the Moon or any other Planet, transits the Angles of the Worlds
Revolution, or Angles of the new and full Moon, then look for some change of
Air, according to the nature of those Planets and Angles.

CHAP. XVI. How to Prognosticate more particularly of the Weather by the
Planets mutual Aspects.
1. THe Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter is a rare Aspect, happening but once
in twelve years, and therefore ought acurately to be observed; for it produces
its effects in the mutations of the Air, many days before and after, because
of the Tardity of their motions, etc. If this Conjunction happen in hot and dry
mansions, it will produce dryness accordingly; it increases heat in Summer,
and mitigats the cold in Winter, but if it happen in moist signs, it portends
Rain and Inundations.

2. If Saturn claim principal dominion in the place of the Conjunction, it
signifies many diseases, and much evil in general; but if Jupiter prevail (as
he does in the year 1663. the Conjunction happening in Sagitary) it is a sign
that much good shall follow within few years, and that many unnecessary Customs
shall be abolished, and many wholesome Laws established, ere the effects of
that Conjunction shall determine.

3. These ponderous Planets in Opposition, Quartile, Trine, or Sextile, is a
sign of continuance of seasons; but for the most part, they bring forth
temperate storms of Rain and Hail, particularly happening in the Springtime: in
moist Asterisms, it produces turbulent Air, in Summer Thunder, in Autumn Winds
and Wet, in Winter thick Clouds and dark Air.

4. Saturn and Mars in Conjunction, Quartile, or Opposition, produces Winds,
Hail, Lightning, Thunder and Coruscations, according to the seasons of the
year: In the Spring, Wind, Rain and Thunder: In Summer, Hail and Thunder: In
Autumn, violent Rain: And in Winter, diminution of cold.

5. Saturn and Sol in Conjunction, Quartile, or Opposition, is, Apertio
portarum, if it happens in moist constellations. In Spring it threatens cold
Clouds: in Summer, Hail, Thunder and remission of Heat: in Autumn, Cold and
Rain: in Winter, Frost, Snow and cold weather.

6. Saturn and Venus in Conjunction, Quartile, or Opposition, generally
produces cold Rain and Showers. In Spring, Rain: in Summer, sudden and hasty
showers: in Autumn, cold Rain: in Winter snow.

7. Saturn and Mercurius in Conjunction, Quartile or Opposition, In the Spring
produces Winds and Rain, in Summer, winds and showers: in Autumn, winds and
clouds: in Winter cold and snow.

8. Saturn and the Moon in Conjunction, Quartile or Opposition, in moist signs,
portends clouds and coldness, in Airy signs, cold, especially in dry signs,
sharp air, and (if it be Winter) a frosty season.

9. Jupiter and Mars in Conjunction, Quartile or Opposition, changes the
quality of the air, according to the quality of the Signs and Stars, which they
are joined with or aspected to. If in hot and dry mansions it causes great
heat, in moist signs thunder and rain, etc.

10. Jupiter and the Sun in Conjunction, Quartile or Opposition, brings forth
blasts of wholesome winds and serenity, particularly in Spring, and in Autumn
winds, in Summer thunder, in Winter remission of cold.

11. Jupiter and Venus in Conjunction, Quartile or Opposition, does generally
produce serenity, and temperature of air: in moist signs it promises gentle
showers, in other signs fair weather, wholesome winds, and fertility of all
things.

12. Jupiter and Mercurius, in Conjunction, Quartile or Opposition, stirs up
winds and rain in fiery signs, begets dryness and warm winds in airy fair
weather, but winds at all times in the year when they are in such mutual
Aspects.

13. Jupiter and the Moon in Conjunction, Quartile or Opposition, alters the
quality of the air according to the signs they possess, but generally a
temperate season.

14. Mars and the Sun in Conjunction, Quartile or Opposition, in fiery signs
portends heat and dryness: In the watery, hail, thunders and lightning, in the
airy clouds, and in the earthly, violent winds, etc.

15. Mars and Venus in Conjunction, Quartile or Opposition, in or from moist
signs, argues abundance of (if not too much) rain especially in Spring and
Autumn: In Summer showers, in Winter remission of cold, and snow if Saturn
behold them.

16. Mars and Mercurius in Conjunction, Quartile or Opposition: in Winter and
Spring argues snow, in Summer hail and thunder, in Autumn great winds, in
fiery and dry signs, excessive drowth and winds.

17. Mars and the Moon in Conjunction, Quartile or Opposition, in moist signs
rain, in fiery, dryness, red clouds, and sometimes rain, in Summer hail,
lightning and coruscations.

18. The Sun and Venus in Conjunction, commonly produces moisture, in Spring
and Autumn rain, in Summer showers and thunder.

19. The Sun and Mercury in Conjunction, in the airy signs produce winds, in
the watery rains, in the fiery warm winds.

20. The Sun and the Moon in Conjunction, Quartile or Opposition, in moist
signs portends rain, in fiery, fair weather, but generally it alters the air,
according to the nature of the season and ruling Planet.

21. When the Sun shall enter the 18 degree of Scorpio, if Venus be (then) in a
moist place, it is a sign of rain.

22. In Winter, if Venus be direct and Oriental, it signifies but little rain
at the beginning, but more at the end.

23. When Venus applies to Mars in Scorpio, it brings rain immediately.

24. When the Sun and the Moon, Venus and Mercury shall be all conjoined
together, it argues continual showers that day.

25. At the time of the Conjunction or Opposition of the Luminaries, if Venus
shall be in an Angle, it is a certain sign of rain.

26. The Lord of the Ascendant in ( Conjunction or Opposition of the
Luminaries) a moist sign produces rain.

27. When the Moon shall come to the sign ascending of her Quartile,
Conjunction or Opposition, the time shall be changed according to the quality
and nature of the sign and Asterism.

28. A special regard must be had to the nature of the earth and air you live
in (or write for) I mean, peculiar to your Horizon; because that in all places
they are not of alike nature, neither do the winds blow alike in all Horizons,
some being Tropical and peculiar to one place, others Chronical, which come at
a certain time of the year, etc.

CHAP. XVII. Vulgar Observations of the changes of the Weather.
IN the preceding Chapters, I have given you the choicest Aphorisms, for
giving judgment upon the weather: and I am confident, that he which
understands them (which I fear will not be many) may not only give a probable
conjecture of the weather, for (one) but many years to come; But because the
preceding Aphorisms may happen to (some) to be of difficult understanding to
the illiterate, I shall therefore show (even the most rural) how to foretell
the changes of the weather, if he have but the eyes of sense and understanding
in his head: and for his greater facility, I shall Marshal the method in these
seven Devisions.

1. Signs of fair weather. 2. Signs of rain. 3. Signs of wind. 4. Signs of hot
weather. 5. Signs of drought. 6. Signs of cold weather. 7. Sings of frosts
continuance.
This is the method, now to the matter.

1. Signs of fair weather.
1. The Sun rising and setting clear: 2. The Moon clear three days after the
Change, or before the Full: 3. Spots appearing in a Full Moon: 4. Clouds with
golden edges toward Sun setting: 5. A cloudy sky clearing against the wind: 6.
The Rain bow appearing only Red and Yellow: 7. A Red Evening or a Gray Morning.

2. Signs of rain.
1. When the Sun in his rising is hidden with a black cloud: 2. When the Moon
(within three or four days after the Change) is blunt on both horns: 3. The
Rainbow appearing in a fair day, the greener, the more rain: 4. The
extraordinary chattering of the Pyets: 5. Cattle licking their hoofs behind:
6. When the greatest Stars only appear, and that misty: 7. Lute or Violstrings
breaking untouched.

3. Signs of wind.
1. Red clouds in a morning. 2. Often shooting of Stars: 3. Clouds flying
swiftly in a clear air: 4. The Rainbow red: 5. Black circles with red strakes
about the Sun or Moon: 6. Stars dimn and fiery, it is a sign of wind and
showers when the Sun beams appear before he rises: 7. If the Sun sets pale, or
be enclosed with a black circle when he is near the time of his setting.

4. Signs of hot weather.
1. Many Bats flying abroad sooner then ordinary: 2. A white mist rising out of
Moors and Waters before the Sun rise: 3. The Kyts (or Gleds) flying high in
the air: 4. Crows or Ravens gaping against the Sun: 5. Great store of Flies
and Midges playing in the Sunshine toward night.

5. Signs of drought.
Stars seeming dimn or fiery red, signifies both drought and wind.

Signs of cold weather,
As frost, snow or hail. 1. Clouds flying low, seeming to touch the tops of
hills: 2. Great flocks of small Birds gathered together: 3. If in the Winter
the Sun shine clear toward night: 4. The extraordinary twinkling of the Stars:
5. Clouds upon heaps like Rocks: 6. An obscure circle about the Sun or Moon.

7. Signs of frosts continuance.
Snow falling small in the beginning of a frost; but if the snow fall bigg,
viz. in great flakes, then it is like to thaw very suddenly, especially if the
Southwind blow.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Winds, their Names and Natures.
Daily experience shows that the disposition of the Air is much varied by the
Situation of Winds, for according to their different bea^ing is the Season
much inclined, sometime to Wind, Rain, and Snow, and sometime to fair weather.

The wind (it self) is nothing else but an exhalation or earthly humor passing
over the Superficies of the Earth; or it is an Elisian, or drawing forth of the
Air out of a cold Region.

The four principal or Cardinal Winds which comes from the four Angles of the
World, are called, the East, West, North and South, the Latins calls them
Septentrio, Auster, Favonius, and Subsolanus.

Septentrio, the North wind, is cold and dry, is very wholesome, bringing
serenity, preservating all things from corruption, albeit it be hurtful and
pernicious to Flowers, young and tender Plants, by reason of its excessive
coldness.

Auster, the South wind, is warm and moist, sultry, hurtful and dangerous,
hurts the sight, stuffes the head, makes men slothful, engenders Diseases,
putrid Fevers, Plurisies, Inflammations of the Lungs, and when this wind
produces serenity, it is with great heat.

Favonius, the West wind, (called Zephyrus) is moist and watery, begetting Rain
and Thunder, but in Summer fair weather, in Winter and Spring, Snow or Rain.

Subsolanus eurus, the East wind, is temperatly dry, it produces Rhumes and
cold Dewes, it blows most commonly at the Suns rising, and (for the most
part) little in the night time.

These four are called Venti principalles, the chief winds, the intermediate
winds between these, be North-east, South-east, South-west, North-west.

The North-east wind is (for the most part) cold and dry, ingendring clouds,
and sometimes Snow; The South-east wind, is weak, moist, and producer of clouds
and obscure air: The South-west wind is of a hurtful quality, sickly, moist,
producing clouds and rain: The North-west wind is most tonitruous, tempestuous,
violent and hasty, causing a turbulent air.

The Laterall winds, are in number eight, viz. East, north-east, North
north-east, North north-west, West, south-west, South south-west, South
south-east, West north-west, East south-east.

The Colaterall winds are in number sixteen, viz. 1. East by North. 2.
North-east by East. 3. North by East. 4. Northeast by North. 5. North by West.
6. Northwest by North. 7. West by North. 8. Northwest by West. 9. Southwest by
West. 10. West by South. 11. Southwest by South. 12. South by West. 13. South
by East. 14. Southeast by South. 15. Southeast by East. 16. East by South.


Thus having demonstrated briefly the Names and Natures of the Winds, I shall
in the next Chapter show you.

CHAP. XIX. How to Prognosticate what winds will blow.
THat this may be known, for it is not only possible, but also probable, be
pleased to take notice of these few particulars following:

In the Figure of the Suns ingresse into any of the Cardinal Signs, or
Conjunction or Opposition of the Luminaries preceding and succeeding, or any
Monthly Lunations; observe carefully what Planet is predominant in the Figure,
his position and mutual aspect (if he hes any) which known, do so much but as
to take notice what Winds or Quarters of Heaven that Planet (or Planets)
signify (together with the sign he is posited in) and that you may not be
mistaken herein; before I go further, I will here show you the principal
Quarters of Heaven, which the Planets signify, by which you may (at all times)
be enabled to give a more then probable conjecture, which way the wind will
blow, For,

Saturn is mover of the Eastern winds, Jupiter, of the Northern, Mars of the
West and Southern, Venus of the Southern, Mercury according to the nature of
that or those Planets he is joined with, or aspected to; the Luminaries are
movers of the Western winds, etc.

The quality of the winds and their bearing is also known from Planets
positions in the Figure; for those Planets with Latitude and South Declination,
from the Medium Coeli moves the Southern winds to blow; from the Imum Coeli
with Latitude and Northern Declination, the North winds: The Oriental Planets
move the Eastern winds, and the Ocidental the Western wind, and when they be
weak, they cause the intermediate winds to blow. -- Likewise the Situation and
Quality of the winds is found from the Latitude of the Moon, as she inclines to
the North or South.

The Signs do also demonstrate the winds as well as the Planets, although the
magnitude of their significations be less then the Planets, for they draw down
their virtues, and transmits it to the Earth: Aries, Leo and Sagitary excite
the North-west winds; Taurus, Virgo and Capricorny the South-east, Gemini,
Libra, and Aquary the North-east, Cancer, Scorpio and Pisces the South-west.

We may in some measure Prognosticate the quality of the winds, for if
Mercurius apply to Saturn, it produces great winds, clouds and rain; if to
Jupiter, sweet winds, if to Mars, warm winds; if to the Sun, warm and hurtful
winds; if to Venus, winds, and so I conclude this Chapter.

CHAP. XX. Of Earthquakes, Thunders, Lightnings, Comets, etc. their natural
causes and significations.
1. Of the Rainbow.
THe Rainbow is the shining and rebounding of beams of light, which turn to
the contrary vapor again in the cloud, which is opposite to the Sun; and so
according to the diversity of the thinness of that cloud do the beams appear,
red above, yellow in the middle, and green in the lower parts, but in themselves
all this while they have no real color, that is a true color. Here note, that
the nearer the Sun is to the Horizon, the greater is the Rainbow.

The effects of the Rainbow.
If the Rainbow appear or be visible in the morning it signifies moisture
(unless great drought of the air work the contrary) if in the evening, fair
weather; Moreover, if the Rainbow appear fair, it betokens foul weather, but
if it appear foul, look for fair weather, the greener the more rain, the reder
the more wind.

2. Of Rain.
Rain is a cold vapor, and earthly humor or fumosities out of water attracted
by the clouds: I omit to speak of prodigious and miraculous rains, as Milk,
Blood, Flesh, etc. They who desire to read suck like, see Plinius, lib. 2. cap.
58.

3. Of Frost and Dew.
It is a cold moist vapor, drawn up in the day by the faint heat of the Sun,
and descends again in the night, where it is either congealed (as in Winter) or
resolved into water (as in Summer) Frost in the Spring or Harvest is a sign of
fair weather.

4. Of Snow.
Snow is a moist vapor, drawn up to the middle Region of the Air, then
thickened and frozen into the body of a Cloud, and so congealed, descends
into Fleeces.

5. Of Haill.
Haill is a Cloud resolved into water, congeals in its descension, the higher
it comes, and the longer it tarrieth in the Air, the rounder is the Haill.

6. Of Winds.
Winds is a multitude of dry exhalations drawn up from the earth, enforcing it
self here and there.

7. Of Earthquakes.
Plenty of Winds, entered into Holes or Caves of the Earth, which being absent
from above the Earth (causes quietness) at last their violent bursting out
(the earth sudden by closing again) causes the Earthquake.

8. Tokens of Earthquakes to come.
A fiery clould appearing in the Element like a little Pillar. The obscurity
and darkness of the Sun (without Clouds) and strangely colored, as bloody,
etc. is a token of Earthquakes to come. Also when deep Well waters are seen to
tremble at the bottom; or if the waters there be infected: Also a great
quietness by Sea and Land, and especially long absence of Winds. Moreover,
strange sights and apparitions in the Air: or the noise and clamours (as it
were) of men in the Clouds, rushings of Harness, Mournings and Lamentations,
etc.

9. Of Thunders.
Thunder is the quenching of fire in a cloud, or a hot and dry exhalation mixed
with moisture, carried up to the middle Region, and wrapping it self in a cloud
which is moist, there arises a strife; the heat beating, and with a mighty
violence breaks the sides of the cloud with a thundering noise; the fire
disperses and flashes, thence comes the lightning.

The signification of Thunder.
10. Thunders in the morning signifies wind, about noon rain, in the evening
great tempests. -- Some write that Sundays thunder, signifies the death of
Learned men: Mundayes, the death of women: Tuesdayes, the plenitude of corn and
grain: Wednesdayes, the death of harlots, and bloodshed: Thursday, plenty of
sheep and corn: Friday, the slaughter of a great man, and other horrible
murders: Saturndayes thunder, a general Pestilent Plague, and great dearth.

Of Comets and their significations.
A Comet is a Flame working in a dry and hot exhalation, drawn up to the
highest part of the Air: its matter or substance after it is burnt and
dispersed, provokes winds, it signifies corruptions in the Air, Earthquakes,
Wars, dearth of Corn, a common Death of man and Beast.

12. Of the Whirlewind.
A Whirlewind is a most sudden and violent blast, breaking forth from the
narrow passages of the Clouds, as it were winding, is vehemently carried and
dashed against the earth, and so rises back like a Ball, windeth about what it
finds, and bearing aloft all that is within its power.

CHAP. XXI. Containing several Propositions in Astronomy.
THese few Propositions which I intend here to deliver, be such as are of
ordinary and frequent use in the practice of the Mathematics, and such as I
hold fit and requisite for all them to know who shall make use of this Treatise.

Proposition 1. To find the Suns Declination.
As the Radius is to the sine of the Suns greatest Declination, so is the fine
of his distance from the next Equinoctial Point, to the sine of his Declination
required, which is North if the Sun be in Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo
and Virgo, and south when he is in Libra, Scorpio, Sagitary, Capricorn, Aquary
and Pisces.

Proposition. 2. To find the Suns right Ascension.
As the Radius, is to the Tangent of the Suns Longitude, so the Co-fine of his
greatest Declination, to the Tangent of his right Ascension required.

Proposition 3. To find the Ascensional Difference.
As the Co-tangent of the Latitude, is to the Radius, so is the Tangent of his
Declination, to the sine of his Ascensional Difference.

Proposition 4. To find the Suns Amplitude.
As the Cosine of the Latitude, is to the Radius, so is the sine of the Suns
Declination, to the sine of the Amplitude required.

Proposition 5. To find the time when the Sun will be due East and West.
As the Tangent of the Latitude, is to the Radius, so the Tangent of the
Declination, to the Cosine of the hour from the Meridian, when he will be due
East or West.

Proposition 6. To find the Suns Altitude when he is due East or West.
As the sine of the Latitude, is to the Radius, so is the sine of the Suns
Declination, to the sine of his Altitude, when he is due East or West.

Proposition 7. To find the Suns Altitude at the hour of six.
As the Radius, is to the sine of the Latitude, so is the sine of the Suns
Declination, to the sine of the Suns Altitude, at the hour of six as was
required.

Proposition 8. To find the Suns Altitude at any time assigned.
In this Proposition there be two cases; For,

1. If he be in the Equator, say, -- As the Radius, is to the Cosine of his
distance from the Meridian, so is the Cosine of the Latitude, to the sine of
his Altitude required.

2. When the Sun has either North or South Declination: As the Radius, is to
the Co-tangent of the Latitude, so the Cosine of his distance from the
Meridian, to the Tangent of ane Arch, which subtracted from the Suns distance
from the Pole, leaves a second Arch. Then say,

As the Cosine of the first Arch, is to the Cosine of the second Arch, so is
the sine of the Latitude, to the sine of the Suns Altitude, as was required.

Proposition 9. To find the Suns Azimuth.
As the Cosine of the Suns Altitude, is to the sine of his distance from the
Meridian, so is the sine of his distance from the Pole, to the sine of his
Azimuth required.

Proposition 10. To find the Declination, right Ascension and Ascensional
difference of the Planets or fixed Stars.
Suppose the place of any Planet be given in Longitude and Latitude: As suppose
the Moon were the Planet proposed her true place given, let be Leo, 20 d. 49 m.
53 s. and her Latitude 00 d. 22 m. 52 s. North (as at the time of that solar
Eclipse, which will happen in July 1684.) which being given with the greatest
obliquity of the Ecliptique, 23 d. 31 m. 30 s. we shall enquire for the Moons
declination thus.

d. m. s. As the Radius, 90 00 00 Is to the s. of the Moons Longitude ab.
Ariete, 110 49 53 So is the Tangent of the greatest obliq. 23 31 30 To the
Tangent of an Arch. 22 8 24 Then from the Radius, 90 00 00 Substract the Moons
latitude (because its North) 00 22 57 Rests distance of the Moon from the Pole
89 37 8 From which Substract the first Arch 22 8 24 Rests a second Arch 67 28
44 Then I say again; As the Cosine of the first Arch 22 8 24 Is to the Cosine
of the second Arch 67 28 44 So is the Cosine of the greatest obliq. 23 31 30 To
the sine of the Moons declination required 22 16 50 2. To find the Moons right
ascension, I say, As the Cosine of the Moons declination 22 16 50 Is to the
Cosine of the Moons longitude, ab Ariete 110 49 53 So is the sine of her
distance from the Pole 89 37 8 To the sine of an Arch, viz. 22 36 2

Which added to 90 degrees, because the Moon is in the second Quadrant of the
Ecliptique, (and to 180 degrees. when in the third Quadrant, etc.) the Aggregate
112 degrees. 36 min. 2 sec. is the right ascension of the Moon, as was required.

Lastly, Her ascensional difference is to be found according to the third
Proposition aforesaid.

Proposition 11. To find the oblique ascensions and descensions of the Planets
and fixed Stars for any time assigned.
In this Proposition there be two Cases.

1. If the declination of the Planet or Star (given) be North, substract the
ascensional difference from the right ascension, and the residue will be the
Planets (or Stars) oblique ascension, but if you add them, the aggregate will
be his oblique descension.

2. If the Planets declination be South, add the ascensional difference and
right ascension together, the sum will be the Planets oblique ascension, but if
you substract it, the remainder will be the Planets oblique descension.

As in the former Example, the right ascension of the Moon is 112 degrees. 36 min.
2 sec. and her ascensional difference 37 degrees. 26 m. 31 sec. Now because the
Moons declination is North, I substract the ascensional difference from the
right ascension, and the residue 75 degrees. 9 min. 31 sec. is the Moons oblique
ascension; Likewise, I add the ascensional difference to the right ascension,
and the aggregate 150 degrees. 2 min. 33 sec. is the Moons oblique descension as
was required.

CHAP. XXII. To find the true time of the Suns rising and setting, with the
length of the day and night for any day of the Month assigned.
ALthough I could prescribe several Rules for the resolution of this Question,
yet I shall for your greater facility) make choice of that which I suppose to
be most familiar and easy, as by the Examples following will appear.

Enter the following Table with the 5, 10, 15, 20, 25 or 30 day of your Month,
finding your days (aforesaid) on the top, and months on the margent, and in
the common Angle, you will find (by inspection) the exact time of the Suns
rising the said days, and by the Rule of Proportion for any other intermediate
day.

A Table showing the exact time of the Suns rising every fifth day, exactly
calculated for the Latitude of 56. degrees, 20. min.
Names of the Months The days of each Month. 5 day 10 day 15 day 20 day 25
day 30 day January 8 21 8 12 8 3 7 53 7 42 7 29 February 7 18 7 6 6 55 6 43 6
31 March 6 12 6 0 5 48 5 36 5 24 5 10 April 4 58 4 48 4 36 4 26 4 15 4 5 May 3
55 3 47 3 39 3 32 3 26 3 21 June 3 18 3 17 3 18 3 23 3 23 3 28 July 3 35 3 42 3
50 3 59 4 9 4 19 August 4 32 4 42 4 54 5 5 5 17 5 28 September 5 42 5 54 6 3 6
17 6 29 6 41 October 6 52 7 4 7 16 7 27 7 38 7 49 November 8 1 8 11 8 20 8 27 8
34 8 39 December. 8 42 8 43 8 42 8 40 8 36 8 31 Time of the Suns rising in
hours and min.

Example, I desire to know the exact time of the Suns rising the 15 day of
April; I look in the Table for the 15 day, and descends the said Column,
until I come against the Month given, viz. April, and I find 4. 36. viz. 4
hours, 36. min. past the Suns rises the said day. In like manner, the 15 day
of May the Sun rises 39. min. past 3. in the morning: The 15 of June, 18 min.
past 3 in the morning; The 15 of July, 50. min. past 3. in the morning, etc.

But if you would know the time of the Suns rising for any other intermediate
day, take the difference, and work by the Golden Rule, and you shall find the
proportiall part to be added.

Example, I desire to know what time the Sun rises the 23 of August; I look
into the Table, and I find that the Sun rises the 20 day, at 5 min. past 5. and
the 25 day, 17 min. past 5. the difference is 12 min. Then I say -- if 5 days
gives 12 min. What will 3. days give? Ans. 7. min. which added to 5 h. 5 min.
(the time of the Suns rising the 20 day) the aggregate is 5 h. 12 min. for the
exact time of the Suns rising the 23 of August, as was required.

If you desire to know the time of the Suns setting, substract the time of the
Suns rising from 12 hours, and the remainder will be the time of his setting.

Example, I desire to know the time of the Suns setting the 15 day of July; I
find that he rises that day at h. m. 3 hours 50 min. which known -- from 12 00
I substract the time of Sun rising (the 15 of July) 3 50 Rests the exact time
of Sun seting the 15 of July 8 10

Lastly, Having thus found the time of the Suns setting, if you double the
same, you have the whole length of the day, whose complement to 24 hours, is
the length of the night, as in the Example preceding.

h. m. The Suns semidiurnal arch, or time of's seting 8. 10 which doubled,
gives the length of the day 16. 20 Whose Complement to 24. 00 Is the noctural
arch, or length of the night 7. 40

This is so plain, that he which understands it not, his ignorance out-weighs
his wit, as much as a Milston out-weighs a Feather, and consequently incapable
of Sublimer Arts and Sciences.

CHAP. XXIII. To find the Golden-Numbers, Epacts, and age of the Moon for any
year of God assigned.
1. TO find the Golden-Number, add 1. to the number of years given, the
aggregate divide by 19. the remainder is the Golden Number, required.

2. To find the Epact, multiply the Golden Number (so found as aforesaid) by
11, the Product divide by 30. the remainder is the Epact, required.

Example, Anno Christi, School. I demand the Golden Number and Epact for the
said year?

To School. I add 1. the aggregate 1699. I divide by 19. rests (by the quotient)
8. for the Golden Number, which multiplied by a 11. the Product is 88. this
divided by 30. the remainder (besides the quotient) is 28. and so much is the
Epact of the said year School. as was required.

3. To know the age of the Moon at all times: Find first the Epact for that
year, and unto it add the number of the days of the Month, and the Months
from March (counting March for one) and the aggregate (if it be less then 30.)
is the age of the Moon, required.

Example, I demand the age of the Moon the 20 day of September 1664. first I
find the Epact for that year (either by the former Rule, or by the Table
following) to be 12. to which I add 20. (the day of the Month assigned) the
sum is 32. to which I add the number of Months from March, (calling March one,
April two, May three, etc.) which is 7. the aggregate is 39. from which I
deduct 29. rests 19. for the age of the Moon the 20 of September 1664. as was
required. -- The operation.

The day of the given Month 20 days The number of months from March 7 days
The Epact of the year assigned 12 days Aggregate 39 days The Common Lunar
revolution. subst. 29 days Rests the age of the Moon, required 19 days

But because every one cannot Multiply and Divide, that thereby they might find
the Golden Numbers and Epacts, and consequently the Age of the Moon: I have
therefore composed the following Table, which (by Inspection only) will show
you all the Golden Numbers, Epacts, Sudayes Letters, and Whitsundayes for 51
years to come, beginning Anno 1662. ending Anno 1713.

Years of Christ Gol. number. Epact. Sun. let. Whitsunday. 1662 10 20 e May 18
1663 11 1 d June 7 1664 12 12 cb May 29 1665 13 23 a May 14 1666 14 4 g June 3
1667 15 15 f May 26 1668 10 26 ed May 10 1669 17 7 c May 30 1670 18 18 b May 22
1671 19 29 a June 11 1672 1 11 gf May 26 1673 2 22 e May 18 1674 3 3 d June 7
1675 4 14 c May 23 1676 5 25 ba May 14 1677 6 6 g June 3 1678 7 17 f May 19
1679 8 28 e June 8 1680 9 9 dc May 30 1681 10 20 b May 22 1682 11 1 a June 4
1683 12 12 g May 27 1684 13 23 fe May 18 1685 14 4 d June 7 1686 15 15 c May 23
1687 16 26 b May 15 1688 17 7 ag June 3 1689 18 18 f May 19 1690 19 24 e June 8
1691 1 11 d May 31 1692 2 22 cb May 15 1693 3 3 a June 4 1694 4 14 g May 27
1695 5 25 f May 12 1696 6 6 ed May 31 1697 7 17 c May 23 School 8 28 b June 12
1699 9 9 a May 28 1700 10 20 gf May 19 1701 11 1 e June 8 1702 12 12 d May 24
1703 13 23 c May 16 1704 14 4 ba June 4 1705 15 15 g May 27 1706 16 26 f May 12
1707 17 7 e June 1 1708 18 18 dc May 23 1709 19 29 b^ June 12 1710 1 11 a May
28 1711 2 22 g May 20 1712 3 3 fe June 8 1713 4 14 d May 24

The use of this Table is this, find the year of God in the Table, and over
against it, you have (1) the Golden Number: (2.) The Epact: (3.) The Sunday
Letter: And (4.) the Month and Day when Whitsunday falls: I shall Illustrate it
by an Example or two.

Suppose the year of Christ given were 1665. against 1665. In the Table I find
(1.) 13 for the Golden Number: (2.) 23 for the Epact: (3.) A, for the Sunday
Letter: And (4.) May the 14 for Whitsunday. -- In like manner, if the years
assigned were School. the Golden Number is 8. the Epast is 28. the Sunday Letter
B. and Whitsunday falls that year on the 12 of June, etc. More Examples were
superfluous.

Here note, that where you find two Dominical Letters, it signifies that year
is Leap-year, and therefore you are to take the first of them for January and
February, and the second Letter for all the year after.

CHAP. XXIV. To find the time of the Moons rising and setting, and how long She
shines.
BY the true places of the Luminaries, find their oblique Ascensions (according
to the 21 Chapter, Proposition 11.) Which being known, substract the oblique
Ascension of the Sun, from the oblique Ascension of the Moon, and the Arch
remaining converted into time, and added to the time of the Suns rising, the
Aggregate will be the exact time of the Moon (or Stars) rising as was required.
But because every one who peruseth this Book, cannot understand this direction,
nor properly apply the same to practice. I shall therefore make choice of that
way which I know to be most familiar and easy for the benefit of all men:
Wherefore,

First find the Age of the Moon according to the preceding Chapter: with which
enter the following Table, and ye shall find against it the hours and minutes of
the Moons shining, which is to be added to the time of the Suns rising, if the
Moon be increasing in light. But to be subtracted if she be decreasing, etc.
and so the Sum or difference will be the time of the Moons rising.

Example, I demand what time the Moon rises the 5 of January, 1662? the said
day the Moon is 25 days old, (according to my Mercurius Coelicus page 15.
lately emited for the year 1662.) with which I enter the following Table, and I
find that the Moon shines 4. h. 00 m. then I look in the 22 Chapter what time
the Sun rises the 5. of January, which I find at 8 h. 21 m. Now because the
Moon is decreasing in light, therefore I substract 4 h. 00 m. (the time that
the Moon shines) from 8 h. 21 m. (the time of the Suns rising) rests 4 h. 21
m. hence I conclude, that the Moon rises 21 min. 4. in the morning the 5 of
January 1662.

Moons Age increasing. The time that the Moon shines. Moons Age decreasing. H.
M. 1 0 48 29 2 1 36 28 3 2 24 27 4 3 10 26 5 4 0 25 6 4 48 24 7 5 36 23 8 6 24
22 9 7 10 21 10 8 0 20 11 8 48 19 12 9 36 18 13 10 24 17 14 11 10 16 15 12 0 15

I shall add another example for practice. The 14 day of February 1662. the
Moon is 6 days old, with which I enter this annexed Table, and I find that the
Moon shines 4 h. 48 min. Then I look for the time of the Suns rising the 14
day of February, which I find (by making proportion) at 6 h. 57 m. And because
the Moon is increasing (in light) therefore I add 4 h. 48 min. to 6 h. 57 min.
The Sum is a 11 h. 45 min. Wherefore I conclude, that the Moon rises (the 14
day of February 1662.) at 45 m. past a 11 in the forenoon, that is 15 m. Ante
meridiem.

If you be desirous to know the time of the Moons setting. Then to the time of
the Suns setting, add the time of her shining (if she be increasing) Or
substract the same (if she be decreasing) to; or from the time of the Suns
setting, and the sum or difference will be the time of her setting: this is so
plain, that an example were superfluous.

CHAP. XXV. To find the Dominical Letters, and days of the Week that begins
every Month, and Moveable Feasts for ever.
TO find the Dominical Letters for ever, I have insert the following Table:
Upon each side whereof ye have first the Dominical Letters: And secondly, the
years of God respectively, which Inchoats at 1661. and continues till 1688.
Where you are to note, that 1688. begins another new Period of years: so that
you are to place (if need be) 1689. in stead of 1661. and 1690. in place of
1662. etc. The use of this Table is to find the Dominical Letters, and days of
the Week that begins every Month, and consequently what day of the Week any
day of the Month happens upon.

As for Example, in the year 1667. I find that the Dominical Letter is F. This
Dominical Letter F, I find likewise amongst the lower Dominical Letters, at the
bottom of the Table, and under it is M, for Monday: Wherefore I conclude, that
the first Monday of Aprile or July falls upon the first day, the second Monday
upon the 8 day, etc. So after this manner may be found the time that every
Monday falls through the Months: As also, the days of the Week that any day
of the Month happens on, by observing the days under the respective Months
through the year.

I told you before, that wherever you find two Dominical Letters, it is Leap
year, and that you are to take the first of them for January and February, and
the next for all the year after. As for Example, the year 1680. D, directs you
to Wednesday for the Months of January and February, and C, to Thursday for all
the year after.

Dom. Let. Year God. July April Sept. Dece. June mar. feb. no. August May
October. Jan. Year God. Domi. Let. AG / F 1688/1661 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1674 1675 D C E
D 1662 1663 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 1676 1677 BA G OB A 1664 1665 15 16 17 18 19 20
21 1678 1679 F E G F 1666 1667 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 1680 1681 DC B ED C 1668
1669 29 30 31 1682 1683 A G B A 1670 1671 G F E D C B A 1684 1685 FE D GF E
1672 1673 S M T W T F S 1686 1687 C B

Lastly, to find the Moveable Feasts,

Seek the Change of the Moon in February, for that year in which ye desire to
know when any of the Moveable Feasts happens, and not upon what day the Change
falls; for the next Tuesday is Shrove-Tuesday, or vulgarly called Fastens.
Even; but if the Change of the Moon happen on Tuesday, then the next Tuesday
succeeding is it. The next Sunday is the first Sunday in Lent, six Sundays
after is Easter day, commonly called Pasch day, and the seventh Sunday after
that is Whitsunday. This is so plain that it needs no Example.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the description of the Quadrant, and how to find the Altitude
of the Sun, Moon or Stars thereby.
FIrst, having prepared a piece of Box-wood, Pear Tree, Walnut-tree, or good
Plain-tree, well plained and smoothed on both sides, in manner of a Quadrant.
Draw thereon the two Semidiamiters, A B, and A C, in such manner as they may
cut one another, at right Angles (or Square-wayes) in the Center A. Upon which
Center A, set on foot of your Compasses. And diagram of a quadrant (opening the
other to as much a convenient distance as you think fit) with the other
describe the Arch, B C. This Arch is called the Limb of the Quadrant, and is
divided into 90 equal parts, called degrees thus. First, divide the Arch, B C,
into three parts, then every third into three again, so have you nine. Now if
ye divide every of those nine into two, so you have 18 parts.

Lastly, If you divide each of these 18 into 5, the total will be 90 degrees.
Which (you may sub-divide if quantity will give live) numbered from the left
hand toward the right, marking it with 10, 20, 30, 40, etc. unto 90 after the
usual manner.

As for the Square within, ye shall draw from either side of your Quadrant a
right Line, cutting one another at right Angles at the middle of the Quadrant,
which is 45 degrees. This Scale or Square you may divide into 12, 60, 100, or
1000, (the more the better and more commodious) equal parts, all marked from
the Center A. That side of the Square next the sights, is called, Vmbra recta,
or parts of right shadow. The other side is called, Vmbra versa, or points of
contrary shadow.

To this Quadrant (as to all others of this kind in their use) you must place
two sights upon the Line A C, with a Line and Plummet, hanging up in the Center
A, and so your Quadrant is finished.

Now to find the Altitude of the Sun, Moon or Stars thereby.
HOld up your Quadrant to the Sun (the Thread and Plummet having their free
course hanging in the Center A,) moving it up or down, until you see that both
the sights have received the Sun Beams: At which instant mark the fall of the
Line and Plummet, for it will cut (upon the Limb of your Quadrant) the degree
and minut of the Suns Altitude, at the time of your observation.

But if you desire (in the night time) to find the Altitude of the Planets or
fixed Stars, then set the Quadrant to your eye, looking through both the
sights, until you espy that Planet or Star whose Altitude you require, which
having found, your Plummer hanging at liberty, mark the fall thereof upon the
Quadrants Limb, and it will show you the Altitude of that Celestial Body, as
you required.

CHAP. XXVII. How to find the Altitude of any Tower, Castle or Steeple, etc.
IF I should endeavor to instruct you by Precept and Example, in every various
Situation and Demonstration that might be proposed, for attaining the true
heights of Towers, Castles, Steeples or Hills, etc. by the Quadrant, I should
exceed my intention in this place, for it would require a peculiar Treatise by
it self (which I may happily publish, if God continue my life) And therefore I
shall (here in this Chapter) only show you, how (by your Quadrant, with, and
without Calculation) to know all heights accessible,

First, by Calculation.
Lift up your Quadrant toward the Tower or Steeple whose Altitude you require,
until you behold (through both the sights) the very Summity or Top; which
found, mark well the Divisions or Points in your Square, which the Thread and
Plummet did fall on: And if they be of right shadow (that is to say when the
Thread and Plummet falls on that side of the Square which is next the sights)
Then say, As the Parts out, is to the whole Scale. So is the length of the
Base, to the Altitude of the Tower: And therefore multiply the distance from
you to the Base by 12. the product divide by the parts cut (by the fall of the
Plummet) the Quotient will show you the Altitude required. -- But if the Thread
fall upon the contrary shadow, then say, As the whole Scale is to the parts
cut, So is the length of the Base, to the Altitude required. And therefore
multiply the Base by the parts cut, the product divide by the whole Scale, and
the Quotient is your desired Altitude above the Level of your Eye.

Example, Suppose the Thread with the Plummet should happen to fall on 6 parts
of contrary shadow, and the distance from your standing to the Base of the
Tower be 120 foot: I say, -- As the whole Scale 12, is to the parts cut 6, So
is the length of the Base 120 foot, to the Altitude of the Tower 60 foot. Thus
multiplying the Base 120, by the parts cut 6, the product 720 divided by 12,
the Quotient is just 60, and so many foot high is that Tower or Steeple above
the Level of your Eye.

Secondly, Without Calculation.
Because there may be some Ingenious Men, that would know the Altitude of a
place, and yet has no Arithmetic to Multiply and Divide: therefore to
satisfy such, I give this Direction. That if the Tower or Steeple, etc. be
accessible, then hold your Quadrant up toward it, looking diligently through
both the sights, going backward or forward, until the Line of the Plummet fall
on 45 degrees. Which found, Measure the distance between your standing and the
Base, for that is the just Altitude of the Tower, above the Level of your Eye,
as you required.

CHAP. XXVIII. How to find out the Latitude of a place, or the Poles Elevation
above the Horizon.
YOu must diligently attend with your Quadrant about noon, to find the Suns
Meridian Altitude, which you may easily do, by observing carefully a little
before noon, and a little after, until you perceive the Sun begin to fall
again, then marking what was his greatest Meridian Altitude, reserve it till
anon.

Then find the Suns declination according to the first Proposition of the 21
Chapter, and consider whither it be North or South. The declination of the Sun
is North, when the day is more then 12 hours long: and South when it is less
then 12 hours long. And therefore having found the Meridian, Altitude and
Declination of the Sun, you may easily find the Latitude of the place after
this manner.

If the Sun has North Declination, then substract his Declination out of his
Meridian Altitude, and the remainder will be the Altitude of the Equinoctial,
or complement of your Latitude. But if the Sun has South Declination, then
add it to his Meridian Altitude: the Aggregate will be the height of the
Equinoctial, which subtracted from 90 degrees, there will remain the Latitude
of your place, or Altitude of the Pole above your Horizon.

As for Example, Anno Christi 1661. September 21. At Edinburgh I carefully
observed the Suns Meridian, Altitude, which I found to be 30 degr. 32 min. At
which time the Suns true place was Libra, 8 d. 35 m. 45 s. And his Declination
South, 3 d. 25 m. 12 s. Now because the declination is South, I add it to the
Suns Meridian Altitude.

d. m. The Meridian Altitude of the Sun observed. 30 32 The Suns declination
(because it is south) add, 3 25 The Agg. is the height of the Equinoctial. 33
57 Which subtracted from, 90 00 Rests the Latitude of Edinburgh, viz. 56 03

Another Example I shall give you. In the said year, upon the 10th of October,
at Edinburgh: I observed the Suns Meridian Altitude to be 23 d. 22 min. at
which time his true place was Libra, 27 d. 26 m. having South Declination, 10
d. 35 m. which ordered as aforesaid, it gives the Latitude of Edinburgh, 56 d.
3 m. as before. In these Examples, I have purposely omittted the Suns Meridian
Paralaxis Altitudinis, because I would not trouble you with such Nyceties;
neither is such a preciseness necessary for every common observation; for as
it is difficult to obtain (because it requires a peculiar Calculation, which
depends upon Trigonometry) so it is as rarely understood amongst the Vulgar.
Nevertheless, for the benefit of my Contrymen, I shall in a Chapter by it
self, demonstrate what it is, and also how to calculate it at all times.

CHAP. XXIX. To find the Diameter, Circumference, Solidity and Superficies of
any Sphere or Globe.
TO resolve these Geometrical Propositions, I shall use this Method, viz.

The Diameter of any Sphere, Globe, or Circle, being given to find the
Circumference thereof.

Multiply the given Diameter by 22. the Product divide by 7. the Quotient will
show the Circumference required.

Example, Suppose I have a Sphere, Globe, or Circle whose Diameter is 14
Inches: I demand how many Inches it is in Circumference? I say, as 7 is to 22.
so is the given Diameter 14. to the required Circumference 44 and so many
Inches it is round.

2. The Circumference of any Sphere, Globe, or Circle being given to find the
Diameter thereof.

Multiply the given Circumference by 7, the Product divide by 12, the Quotient
is the Diameter thereof.

Example, The Circumference aforesaid being 44. I demand how much is the
Diameter thereof. I say, as 22 is to 7. So is the given Circumference 44
Inches, to the required Diameter 14 Inches.

3. The Diameter and Circumference of any Sphere, or Globe, being given, to
find the Superficies thereof.

Multiply the Circumference by the Diameter, the product will be the
superficies of the Globe or Sphere, etc.

Example, Let the Diameter be 14 Inches, and the Circumference 44 Inches, the
one multiplied by the other, the product is 616 Inches, and so much is the
superficies of the said Globe or Sphere, as was required.

4. The Diameter of any Sphere or Globe being given to find the Crasitude or
Solidity thereof.

Multiply the given Diameter cubicaly, the product multiply (again) by a 11.
the last product divided by 21. the Quotient will show the Crasitude required.

Example, The Diameter of a Sphere or Globe being 14 Inches. I demand how many
Inches is contained in its solid capacity? -- 14 muliplyed cubicaly, the
product is 2744. This again by a 11 makes 30184. which divided by 21. the
Quotient is 1437 and 1 -- 3, and so many Inches it is in Solidity, or
Crasitude, as was required.

Here note, that a Cubical foot (that is 12 Inches every way) contains in it
1728 solid Inches.

CHAP. XXX. How to find the weight of a Globe or Ball of Metal or Stone,
without weighing them in Balances.
FIrst, Find the said capacity of the Globe or Ball exactly in Inches, as I
desired you in the preceding Chapter. Secondly, Consider its Metal, whither
it be Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron, etc. or Marble, or ordinary Freestone, find
the same (whatsoever Metal it be) in the following Table: and against it on
the left hand, you will find a Number, and in the top the common Radius of all
these Metals which known to find the weight of the Globe or Ball in ounces, I
use this Analagy.

As the Radius, is to the solid Inches of the Metal or Stone (named) so is the
left hand Number of the said Metal or Stone, to the ounces of the weight
thereof.

A most excellent Table showing the Weights and Measures of all Metals and
Stones.
The common Radius is a 1000. Left hand Number. Right hand number. 13200 Gold.
120 7880 Quicksilver. 140 6798 Lead. 160 6315 Silver. 180 4958 Brass. 200
4333 Iron. 230 4067 Tin. 250 1645 Marble. 680 1420 Ord. Freeston. 710

Example, I have an Iron Bullet of 8 Inches Diameter which contains
(according to the preceding Chapter) 268, 1 -- 5 solid Inches: I demand how
many ounces the said Bullet weighs? -- I say, as the Radius 1000 is to 268, 1
-- 5 Inches, so is the left hand Number 4333 to 1162 ounces, that is, 72 pound,
10 ounces, as was required. -- If the same Ball had been Silver, I demand the
weight thereof?

As the Radius a 1000, is to 268, 1 -- 5, so is the left hand number 6315 to
1693 ounces (and something more then a half) that is, 105 pound, 13 ounces (and
683 -- 1000 part of an ounce.)

In like manner, a round Bullet of ordinary Freestone of 8 Inches Diameter: I
demand how much it will weigh? I say, as the Radius 1000, is to 268, 1 -- 5 (the
solid capacity) so is 1420, to 380, 211 -- 250, that is, 23 pound, 12 ounces,
13 drop. Hence it appears, that a Silver, Iron and ordinary Freestone Bullet,
of equal Diameters, weighs as follows, viz. Silver 1693 ounces, Iron 1162,
and ordinary Freestone 380, by their differences you may find out their
several proportions, which one Metal bears to another in bodies of equal
Magnitudes and Diameters, by these three Examples. You may find the weight of
any material Globe or Bullet of whatsoever bulk, without weighing the same in
Scales or Balances.

This Table has yet another use; for if the weight of any Globe or Ball be
given in ounces, you may find the solid capacity thereof in ounces, thus. As
the Radius 1000, is to the weight of the metal or Stone (named) in ounces, so
is the right hand Number, to the solid capacity in Inches.

Example, An Iron Bullet of 8 Inches Diameter aforesaid, weighs 1162 ounces. I
demand the number of its solid capacity in Inches. -- I say, as the Radius
1000, is to 1162 ounces, so is 230 to 268 fere, the solid Inches contained
therein. More examples (in a thing so plain) were but superfluous.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the Planets Paralaxis Altitudinis, and how to calculate the
same at all times.
I Promised in the 28 Chapter preceding, to show you both a Demonstration of,
and also by Examples how, to Calculate the Paralaxis Altitudinis of the
Planets, for any time Assigned: And I am now come to perform what I there
promised, with as much brevity and facility as I can. -- Which take as
follows.

In this Figure, Z, B, A, I, H, represents the Meridian, K, C, G, the Orb of
the Sun (or any other Planet) D, the Center of the Earth, E, F, the Superficies
thereof. Z, the Zenith. E, I, the Horizon, C, the place of the Sun (or any
other Planet) in his Orb. The Line, D, C, B, represents the planets true
place, from the Center of the Earth, in the Meridian at, B. The Line, E, C, A,
his apparent place, as it appears from us at E. The Angle of the Paralax of
Altitude, is, A, C, B, (which is equal to E, C, D.) The Angle, A, E, I, is the
Angle of the apparent Altitude, of the Planet above the Horizon (which in this
Example we suppose to be 27 degr. 40 min.) whose Complement is, Z, E, A, (62
degrees. 20 min.) -- Here you may see that the apparent Altitude of the Planets, is
less from the Superficies (or place of Observation at E,) then from the Center
of the Earth; (at D,) from which place the Planet in his Orb appears higher in
the Meridian at B, then he does from E, in the Meridian at A, so that the Angle
of the Planets Paralaxis Altitudinis, is nothing else but the difference
between the true and apparent Altitude, in the Meridian or Circle of Altitude.

Here note, that the nearer a Planet is to the Horizon and Center of the Earth,
the greater is the Paralax thereof. And hence it is, that the Moon (because of
her Vicinity to the Earth) has the greatest Paralax of all the other Planets.
And that is a main reason why we have so few Solar Eclipses, and those few have
so little obscurity. Because frequently her Southern Paralax exceeds her
Northern Latitude (the greatest Eclipses happening always when they are equal,
and least when her Latitude is South) etc. These things being premised, I come
next to practice: And for Illustration, I shall add an Example of either of the
Luminaries, for to find their Paralaxis Altitudinis at any time Assigned.

First, an Example in the Sun.

Suppose the Altitude of the Sun to be (by observation) 27 degrees. 40 min. and his
distance from the Earth (by calculation) 101798 parts: I demand how much will
his Paralax of Altitude (then) be? -- To resolve this (and all such like)
Questions. I return to this annexed Diagram, for Demonstrations sake, where, In
the Triangle, C, D, E, we have known, [1] E, C, the distance of the Sun from
the Earth 101798. [2] E, D, the Semidiamiter of the Earth 68, 1 -- 2. [3] The
Triangle, C, E, D, 117 d. 40 m. which bisected, gives 58 degrees. 50 min. the half
sum of the opposite Angles unknown. Hence to find the Paralax of Altitude, A,
C, B. Say by this Analagy.

As the sum, is to the difference, so is the Tangent of the half sum of the
opposite Angles unknown, To the Tangent of an Arch: whose difference is the
Paralaxis Altitudinis required.

diagram demonstrating solving for the altitude of the sun The Operation.


E, C. 101798, 0-0 E, D. 68, 1-2 Logarithm. Sum of E, C, and E, D. 101866, 1-2
5, 008244 Difference 101729, 1-2 5, 007658 So is the Tangent of 58 d. 50 m. 00
s. 10, 218369 15, 226027 To the Tangent of 58. 47. 56. 10, 217783

Whose difference 2. 4. is the Angle, A, C, B, or the Suns Paralax of Altitude
as was required.

The second Example is of the Moon.

Suppose the Altitude of the Moon were found (by Observation) to be (as before)
27 degrees. 40 min. and her distance from the Earth (by Calculation) 3879. I demand
what, or how much will her Paralax of Altitude be at the time of the
Observation?

In the Triangle C, D, E, the Line C, E, represents the distance of the Moon
from the Earth 3879. the sid^ E, D, and Triangle C, D, E, being the same as
before.

The Operation is as follows.

E, C, 3879, 0-0 E, D, 68, 1-2 Sum of E, C, and E, D, 3957, 1-2 3,596322
Difference 3810, 1-2 3, 580982 So is the Tangent of 58 d. 50 m. 00 s. 10,
218369 13, 799351 To the Tangent of 57. 55. 47. 10, 203029

Whose difference 54. 13. is the Angle A, C, B, or Paralaxis Altitudinis of the
Moon at the time of the Observation, as was required.

CHAP. XXXII. To find the Lord of the hour for any time assigned.
FIrst find the time of the Suns rising (for that day wherein you would know
the Lord of the Hour) according to the 24 Chapter: Betwixt which, and the
Question propounded or assigned: Find the Intervall of hours and minutes, (which
for your greater facility in operation) you may reduce into minutes (by
multiplying your hours by 60.) the product shall be your dividend.

Secondly, Enter the Table following, with your Month on the Margent, and the
5, 10, 15, 20, 25, or 30 day on the top, (taking that day which is nearest) and
in the common angle you will find the length of the Planetary hour that day,
which is your Divisor, by which you are to divide the dividend aforesaid; the
Quotient shall show you how many Planets completely have ruled, and the
remainder (if there be any) is the Planet instantly ruling at the time of the
Question propounded or assigned: Which to denominate, consider the day of the
week in which the Question is propounded, And,

If the day be Sunday, give the first hour to the Sun, the 2 to Venus, the 3 to
Mercury, the 4 to the Moon, etc.

If the day be Monday, give the first hour to the Moon, the 2 to Saturn, the 3
to Jupiter, the 4 to Mars, etc.

If the day be Tuesday, give the first hour to Mars, the 2. to the Sun, the 3
to Venus, the 4 to Mercury, etc.

If the day be Wednesday, give the first hour to Mercury, the 2 to the Moon,
the 3 to Saturn, the 4 to Jupiter, etc.

If the day be Thursday, give the first hour to Jupiter, the 2 to Mars, the 3
to the Sun, the 4 to Venus, etc.

If the day be Friday, give the first hour to Venus, the 2 to Mercury, the 3 to
the Moon, the 4 to Saturn, etc.

If the day be Saturnday, give the first hour to Saturn, the 2 to Jupiter, the
3 to Mars, the 4 to the Sun, etc. and so you will easily find that Planet who is
Lord of the hour at the time assigned. For illustration of the Premises, I
shall propound an Example, with variety of operations, that you may choose the
easiest.

Example, I demand what Planet rules the 5 of August, (the day of the week
being Saturnday) at 45. min. past 9 in the morning.

According to the 24 Chapter, I find that the Sun rises the 5 of August, at 32
min. past 4 in the morning. Now because the Question is propounded in the
fore-noon, therefore I substract 4 h. 32 min. (the time of the Suns rising)
from 9 h. 45 min. (the time assigned) rests 5 h. 13 min. (which is the intevall
between the Suns rising and time of the Question propounded) which I reduce
into min (by multiplying by 60) the product is 313 min. for the dividend.

Secondly, in the Table following, against the 5 of August, I find that the
length of the Planetary hour is, 1 h. 15 min. or 75 min. by which I divide 313.
the Quotient is 4 and 13 min. remaining; that is, 4 Planets have compleetly
ruled, and the 5 is ruling, which to denominate; the day of the Question being
Saturnday; I give the first hour to Saturn, the 2 to Jupiter, the 3 to Mars,
the 4 to the Sun, and the 13 min. remaining to Venus: Wherefore I conclude,
that Venus is Lady of the hour (at the time of the Question propounded) and
has ruled 13 min. of her time. -- this is the first.

A most excellent Table of the length of the Planetary hours, for the Latitude
of 56 d. 20 m.
Names of the Months. 5 day 10 day 15 day 20 day 25 day 30 day H. M. H. M. H.
M. H. M. H. M. H. M. January 0 36 0 37 0 39 0 41 0 43 0 45 February 0 47 0 49 0
51 0 53 0 55 0 March 0 58 1 0 1 2 1 4 1 6 1 8 April 1 10 1 12 1 14 1 16 1 18 1
20 May 1 21 1 22 1 23 1 25 1 26 June 1 27 1 27 1 27 1 26 1 26 1 25 July 1 24 1
23 1 22 1 20 1 18 1 16 August 1 15 1 13 1 11 1 9 1 7 1 5 September 1 3 0 1 0 59
0 57 0 55 0 53 October 0 51 1 49 0 47 0 45 0 43 0 42 November 0 40 0 38 0 37 0
35 0 34 0 34 December 0 33 0 33 0 33 0 33 0 34 0 35 Length of the Planetary
hour in h. and m.

Variety in operation, the second is more brief by the Logarithmes, thus: m.
Logarith. Interval between the Sun rising, and time of the Question propounded:
reduced, is 313 2. 495544 Length of the Planetary hour in min. 75 1. 875061
Rests the number of Planets that have ruled, compleet, viz. 4. 4. 0. 620483

The third, last, and easiest of all, is this operation following, the day of
the week being Saturnday, Saturn begins to rule.

h. m. At the Suns rising, viz. 4. 32. And continues to rule 1. 15 length
Planetary h. Until 5 47 sum Then Jupiter begins 1 15 add And rules till 7 02
sum Then Mars begins 1 15 add and rules till 8 17 sum Then Sol begins 1 15 add
and rules till 9 32 at which time Venus begins to rule. This is the most easy
way of all others; for it requires neither Multiplication nor Division, but
performed only by a continual addition of the length of the Planetary hour, to
the time of the Suns rising, until you come to the time propounded, etc.

CHAP. XXXIII. Showing what Moon makes full Sea in most Seaport Towns in
Scotland, England, and Ireland, etc.
1. A South or North Moon makes full sea at Queenborough, Southampton,
Ports-mouth, Isle of Wight Beachy, the Spilts, Kentish-knock, half tide at
Dunkirk.

2. A South by west, or North by east Moon, makes full sea at Aberdeen,
Rochester, Malden, Redban, and west end of the Black-tail.

3. A South southwest, or North northeast Moon, at Graves-end, Downs, Rumney,
Tenet, Silly half tide; Blackness, Ramkins, Fernhead, Leith.

4. A Southwest by south, or Northeast by north Moon at Dundee, St. Andrews,
Lisbane, St. Lucas, Bell Isle, Holy-Isle.

5. A Southwest, or Northeast Moon, at London, Tinmouth, Hartlepole, Whitby,
Amsterdam, Gasconygne, Galizia.

6. A Southwest by west, or Northeast by east Moon, at Berwick,
Flamboroughhead, Burlington-bay, Ostend, Flushing Bordeaux, Fountnesse.

7. When the Moon is W. S. W, or E. N. E. it is full Sea at Scarburgh, quarter
tide, Lawrens, Mountis-bay Seaverin, Kingsail, Cork, Haven, Baltamore,
Dungarrin, Callis, Creek, Blay, seven Isles.

8. A W. by S. or E. by N. Moon, at Falmouth, Foy, Humber, Merles, Newcastle,
Dartmouth, Forby, Coldby, Gernsey, St. Mallows, Arbroth, Lisard.

9. An E. or W. Moon makes full sea at Plymouth, Waymouth, Hull, Lin, Lundy,
Antwerp, Holiness of Bristol, David's head, Concalo.

10. An E. by S. or W. by N. Moon at Bristol, and at Foulness at the Start.

11. An E. S. E. or W. N. W. Moon at Milford, Bridge Water, Ex-water,
Lands-end, Waterford, Cupcleer, Aberwarick, Texel.

12. A S. E. by W. or N. W. by W. Moon, at Portland, Peterport, Harflew, Hague,
St. Magnes sound, Dublin, Lambay, Macknels Castle.

13. A S. E. or N. W. Moon, at Pool, St. Helens, Isle of Man, Catnesse, Orkney,
Fair Isles, Dumbar, Kildren, the Basse Isle, the Casquers deep half tide.

14. A S. W. by S. or N. W. by N. Moon, at Needles, Exford, Laysto, South and
North Foreland.

15. A S.S.E. or N. N. W. Moon, at Yarmouth, Dover, Harwich, Firth, Bullein,
St. John's deluce, Calis Road.

16. A S. by E. or N. by W. Moon, at Rye, Winchley, Gorend, Thames Roads.

I have here added a peculiar tide Table for the honorable Cities of Aberdeen
and Dundee, the Town of Lies and Dumbar. For which places, you have no more
ado, but enter the Table with the Age of the Moon, and against the respective
places, you may know for ever, when it will be full sea in any of them, as by
one example I shall demonstrate.

Moons Age increas. days 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 decres. days 16 17
18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 Aberdeen. H. 1 2 3 3 4 5 6 7 7 8 9 10 11
11 12 M. 33 21 9 57 45 33 21 9 57 45 33 11 9 57 45 Dundie and S. Andrews. H. 3
3 4 5 6 7 7 8 9 10 11 11 12 1 2 M. 3 51 39 27 15 3 51 39 27 15 3 51 39 27 15
Leith. H. 2 3 3 4 5 6 7 7 8 9 10 11 11 12 1 M. 20 8 56 44 32 20 8 56 44 32 10 8
56 44 32 Dumbar H. 9 10 11 12 1 1 2 3 4 5 5 6 7 8 9 M. 48 36 24 12 0 48 36 24
12 0 48 36 24 12 12

I demand the time of full sea at Leith the 20 day of February, 1662. the said
day the Moons Age is 12. With which I enter the Table, and finding 12 the Moons
Age on the top of the Table, I descend the Column, until I come against Leith,
and I find a 11. 8. viz. a 11 h. 8 m. in the forenoon it is full sea at Leith
the 20 of February 1662. as was required. In like manner, the Moon being 12
days old, it will be full sea at Aberdeen at 10 h. at 11 m. past. At Dundie or
St. Andrews at 11 h. 51 m. and at Dumbar at 6 h. 36 min.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
REader, An urgent business into the West, occasioned my Remotion from the
Press, which did exceedingly Impede my necessary Attendance thereon.
Nevertheless, at my Return, I diligently examined the Printed Sheets, and I
cannot but highly commend the Diligence and Circumspection of the Printers: who
(not being acquainted with this kind of Learning (and which is more) not having
my Attendance for Correction of the Erratas, yet) have sufficiently acquitted
themselves. However, if thou, in thy perusal, meet with any faults; whither
Literal, Sylabical, Dictional or Sententional (for it is impossible, considering
the Premises, to evade some, or all of these, especially in a work of this
nature, etc.) I request thy courtesy to amend it with thy Pen, omitting all
censorious Imputations.

In the several Propositions of Astronomy, I confess, I should have been
somewhat more plain, in giving you the practical operations by the Sines and
Tangents, as I did there several Analogy's: But presupposing the ingenious to
understand the latter, he cannot but (with small pains) overcome the former.
Besides, it would have exceeded my limits in this place, to have illustrated
the whole Propositions in Astronomy by Precept and Example; but I should not
have been so brief, could I possibly have procured more time, which by no means
would be granted: And therefore I reserve these until a more convenient
opportunity. -- Farewell.

Die veneris, 18 Apr. 4 h. 30 m. A. M. 1662.
Soli DEO Gloria.
THE CONTENTS. CHAPTER I.
OF the Names and Natures of the Signs, Planets and Aspects. Page 1 Chap. 2. Of
several Terms of Art, necessary for all Students to understand. p. 3 Chap. 3.
Of the Systemn of the World, and Motion of the Earth. p. 5 Chap. 4. Of the
Eclipses of the Sun and Moon. p. 8 Chap. 5. To find how long the Effects of an
Eclipse continues, and when they begin and end. p. 13 Chap, 6. The Names of the
Regions, Cities and Towns, subject to the Signs and Planets. p. 15 Chap. 7. To
Prognosticate the Natural Portents of Eclipses. p. 17 Chap. 8. To find the
Lords of the Year, and four Quarters thereof. p. 19 Chap. 9. Of the
signification of the twelve Celestial Houses. p. 20 Chap. 10. Of the
Distances, Magnitudes and Colors of the seven Planets. p. 22 Chap. 11. Of the
Trees, Herbs, and Plants, under the government of the seven Planets. p. 28
Chap. 12. Of the particular Diseases which the Planets signify. p. 31 Chap.
13. Showing how to rectify a Nativity by the trutine of Herms. p. 32 Chap. 14.
Of the Year what it is, and the quantity thereof. p. 38 Chap. 15. Of the
Judgment of the Weather from the Celestial Bodies. p. 39 Chap. 16. How to
Prognosticate more particularly of the Weather by the Planets mutual Aspects.
p. 42 Chap. 17. Vulgar Observations of the changes of the Weather. p. 45 Chap.
18. Of the Winds, their Names and Natures. p. 47 Chap. 19. How to Prognosticate
what Winds will blow. p. 49 Chap. 20. Of Earthquakes, Thunders, Lightnings,
Comets, etc. their natural causes and significations. p. 50 Chap. 21.
Containing several Propositions in Astronomy. p. 53 Chap. 22. To find the true
time of the Suns rising and setting, with the length of the day and night for
any day of the Month assigned. p. 56 Chap. 23. To find the Golden Numbers,
Epacts, and age of the Moon for any year of God assigned. p. 59 Chap. 24. To
find the time of the Moons rising and setting, and how long She shines. p. 61
Chap. 25. To find the Dominical Letters, and days of the Week that begins
every Month, and Moveable Feasts for ever. p. 63 Chap. 26. Of the description
of the Quadrant, and how to find the Altitude of the Sun, Moon or Stars
thereby. p. 65 Chap. 27. How to find the Altitude of any Tower, Castle or
Steeple, etc. p. 67 Chap. 28. How to find out the Latitude of a place, or the
Poles Elevation above the Horizon. p 68 Chap. 29. So find the Diameter,
Circumference, Solidi^^ and Superficies of any Sphere or Globe. p. 7^ Chap. 30.
How to find the weight of a Globe or Ball of Metal or Stone, without weighing
them in Balances. p. 71 Chap. 31. Of the Planets Paralaxis Altitudinis, and
how to calculate the same at all times. p. 73 Chap. 32. To find the Lord of the
hour for any tim^ assigned. p. 76 Chap. 33. Showing what Moon makes full sea,
in most Seaport Towns, in Scotland, England, and Ireland. p. 7^
FINIS.

