THE COVENANT OF Gods free Grace, Most sweetly unfolded, and comfortably
applied to a disquieted Soul, from that Text of 2 SAMUEL 23. VER. 5.

Also a Doctrinall Conclusion, that there is in all such who are effectually
called, in-dwelling spiritual Gifs and Graces, wrought and created in them by
the Holy Ghost.

By that Reverend and faithful Minister of Gods Word, Mr. JOHN COTTON, Teacher
of the Church at Boston in NEW ENGLAND.

Whereunto is added, A Profession of Faith, made by the Reverend Divine, Mr.
John Davenport, in New England, at his admission into one of the Churches there.

Imprimatur,

JOHN DOWNAME.

LONDON, Printed M. S. for John Hancock, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Pope's Head Alley, 1645.

To all who have Interest in the COVENANT OF GRACE.
CHRISTIAN FRIENDS,
THese comfortable Notes being in the hands of a friend to the Author, who
commending the worth and excellency of them, thought not good to smother them
by burying them in oblivion, but to expose them to public view, for the
general good and establishment of troubled souls, that they understanding
their right and title to this sure and everlasting Covenant, may take comfort
to themselves, and be supported against all the tempestuous storms arising
from Satan and the world without, or the distempers of their own hearts within:
David was unsettled, and his family disordered, yet Gods Covenant is
everlasting, ordered, and sure. The condition that is required of us as part of
the Covenant, is the performance of these things; to believe, repent, and serve
the Lord in newness of life: But the power and ability by which we do them,
is a part of the Covenant on Gods part, to have new hearts, and new spirits,
whereby we come to repentance, and bringing forth fruit worthy of amendment of
life; this inward ability, and new frame of heart, by which we are renewed in
the spirit of our minds, the writing of his Law in our inward parts, that is a
branch of Gods Covenant: but the bringing forth the fruits of these inward
abilities and graces that are ingraffed in us by Christ, is required in us: As
for example; the grace and power of believing that God has promised (to give
it belongs to him) but to believe, to take hold of the promises, to accept of
Jesus Christ, to receive him as our Lord and Savior, and the gift of
righteousness by him is required as a condition on our part: As we are to
make use of the Covenant in the matter of our justification against the
gilt-of-sin; so it will be good for us to make use of it for sanctification
against the power of sin; when we are troubled with any strong lust or violent
temptation, which is too hard for us to overcome, know this for thy comfort,
that it is a part of the Lords own Covenant, to deliver thee from all thine
enemies, that thou may serve him in holiness and righteousness all the
days of thy life; he has promised to give the Holy Ghost, and to create a
new heart and a new spirit in us, and to cause us to walk in his ways: He has
promised, that if we be in trouble, and call upon him, he will deliver us; and
if we confess and forsake our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. If thou reapest any comfort
by that which follows, let God have all the glory. Vale.

THE SAINTS COMFORTS against Personal and Domestical Infirmities, etc.
2 SAMUEL 23.5. Although my house be not so with God, yet he has made with me
an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure.


THese words are part of the last Song or Psalm that ever David penned, and
therefore more sweet, savoury and spiritual. It is many times with Gods
children, as it is with the Sun, which shines most glorious when it is
nearest setting; the more corruption decays, the more grace increases, no
growing Christian, but the nearer he comes to Heaven, the more sweet and
spiritual are his Meditations; and therefore David lying in no known sin, his
last Song must needs be most heavenly and sweet. These are not the last words
of David, as it is said, verse. 1. but they are his last spiritual Psalm or
Song; and therefore full of heavenly matter, according to the strength of
spirit he was grown unto.

The 72. Psalm was the last in the Book of the Psalms, but this seems to be
after that, wherein he styleth himself The sweet Singer of Israel, verse 1.

This verse of the Text contains in it three principal parts:

David himself and his family, in the many duties God calls them unto; in
these words: Although my house be not so with God; not so, has reference to
the second and third verse, not walking according to the ways God called them
to walk in: What ways? verse 3. Fear of God, Righteousness and Justice; he
requires that the fear of God, righteousness and Justice should rule in a
Princes house.

For explication of the words, Though my house be not so with God, to wit,
though my house do not so walk in Gods fear and righteousness as he requires,
wherein he acknowledges his failings.

Again, when he says, not so, he means, his house was not so pure and clean,
so fruitful before God, as he required, verse. 4. God would have a man's spirit
to be as the light of the morning, clear without clouds, pure from all mixture
of darkness and corruptions; and our spirits and families fresh and fruitful,
as the grass, when followed with seasonable showers, and the pleasant beams of
the Sun, it grows most sweetly: So God would have his children, where they
enjoy good means of Grace, having dewes from heaven, and very comfortable
Sunshines over them, to grow thereby fresh and fruitful. But what said David?
Although my house be not so, not walking in our callings in the fear of God
and righteousness; although my house be not pure and clean, fresh and
fruitful, acknowledging his house to have failings herein.

David took to himself, in the midst of the disorders of his house, from the
orderlinsse of Gods Covenant, which, though his house was unsettled, and
unstayed, yet there was a sure Covenant, though his house was fleeting and
unstable, yet was there an everlasting Covenant; he brings in Gods Covenant
amplified by three arguments, contrary to the corruptions that was in his
family.

His family was Transitory, Gods Covenant is Everlasting,

His family was Disordered, Gods Covenant is Ordered,

His family was Unsettled. Gods Covenant is Sure.

though they be transitory, disordered, unsettled, yet Gods Covenant to him may
continue steadfast, firm, and sure, and this is all his desire. The word in the
Original, signifies also delight, It is all his delight, though God bring him
otherwise to no great matters, nay, though he should decay in these outward
things, yet this is all his desire, that Gods Covenant to him may remain firm
and sure.

The words being thus opened, diverse things may be raised from them: as,

though my house be not so with God, to wit, not walking according to my
calling in fear and righteousness; it is true, I should shine as the Sun in
the morning, without clouds with my family, but we are clouded with many
corruptions: the grass after Sunshines and rains, has always a green and
fresh color, but I and my house receive many showers and Sunshines, yet are
not we in the like manner fruitful and flourishing. David might well say, his
house had not the fear of God, when Absalom was so rebellious against him, as
to have plucked him out of his kingdom, when Amnon defiled his sister, and was
for it slain by Absalom, who further defiled his fathers Concubines, and that
in the view of the whole nation; there was neither fear of God, nor
righteousness to man, notwithstanding the many sweet showers they received
from the Prophets, they walked not answerable to the blessed means received,
but were cruel and rebellious; therefore, though God has called David to walk
with him in the fear of his Name, and to cause his family to do so, yet that
he should fall short of the grace manifested, he has just cause to complain,
and yet David's house is set for a pattern for all houses, Zach. 12.8. In that
day shall the Lord defend the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and he that is feeble
amongst them, at that day shall be as David, and the house of David shall be as
God, as the Angel of the Lord before them; in which place is showed that God
had especial regard to the house of David, and where David falls short, few
exceed it. David had a special care to rule and govern his house aright, Psalm.
101.1, 2. I will, says he, behave my self wisely, in a perfect way, I will
walk within my house with a perfect heart; yet notwithstanding all this, when
David looks back, and considers his own ways, and finds many disorders and
failings, his house is not so with God; therefore you may take it for granted,
that no godly man does keep so good an house, as to walk answerable in his
calling to the means of grace offered unto him.

No house walks according to their callings:

First, concerning the fear of God in your Christian callings, in every family
there be some of these vices:

1. Eye-service; children and servants are more careful to approve themselves
to their Parents and Masters then to God. 2. In every family you shall find
pride and haughtiness of mind and spirit, contrary to Gods Spirit, Romans
11.20. 3. You shall find drowsiness of spirit in the performance of good
duties, which implies likewise a want of the true fear of God; and this you
may find in the Family of our blessed Savior; they could not watch with him
one hour, notwithstanding his calling upon them, and stirring them up
thereunto, Matthew. 26.40. 4. You shall find a slownesse and dullness of
capacity, and understanding to apprehend any thing that good is, Luke 24.25. O
fools, and slow of heart to believe, etc. 5. You shall find hardness of
heart; the Disciples of our Savior, though they were continually with him,
enjoyed his glorious presence, daily conversed with him, saw many strange
visions, and great miracles, and thereby had many sweet showers from our
Savior himself, falling upon them; yet notwithstanding after all this, what
said our Savior unto them, As yet perceive ye not, nor understand? have you
your hearts yet hardened? Matthew. 8.17.
So likewise in our outward callings we are failing many ways in
righteousness one toward another; the husband is wanting to his wife, in not
giving her her due of love, or the fruit of love, and she back again to him:
Parents and Masters wanting to children and servants, and so likewise those
back again to their superiors, not giving and rendering to one another that
which God requires of them: you shall see Sarah wanting to Abraham, Genesis 16.5.
when she saw that Hagar had conceived by her husband, and she came thereby to
be despised of her, she imputed the occasion of the wrong offered to her by her
handmaid, wholly to her husband, and calls the Lord to judge between them,
notwithstanding she was most faulty her self in it, Genesis 16.5. So likewise are
husbands wanting to their wives in love, kindness, provision, protection, etc.
which is a want of righteousness; so children are wanting to their parents,
and one another; as Absalom, Adonijah; and Amnon in true natural affection to
his sister: sometimes they are malicious one to another, as Joseph's brethren of
Jacobs family: So likewise idleness and lying, as in Gehezi, 2 King. 15.25.
David had not dealt well with his sons, nor his sons with him, neither Eli with
his in their younger days; we should not so complain in our general calling
of hardness of heart, and want of life, and unprofitablenesse in good duties
toward God, if we were not so much wanting to one another in love and
righteousness; if we therefore would not have our hearts dull and unprofitable
in our general calling, we must then labor to dispose our selves aright in
our particular calling, Not so; he means, not answerable to the means of
grace: this is true in any family; some of the family will not be brought in,
no, not if there be strong means used, it will be but in hypocrisy;
notwithstanding all the sweet showers that fall upon them, and pleasant
Sun-shines whereof they daily partake, yet some will continue as ignorant as at
their first entrance into the family; and though many do settle themselves to
goodness, yet they rise not without clouds, there be many corruptions in them:
As they have much knowledge, so likewise shall you see them defiled with much
pride and vainglory. Husbands cannot bring in their wives, nor wives their
husbands, Parents their children, nor their servants; and though peradventure
they may bring in some, yet not all; neither this without many a cloud, many
sinful corruptions, lying, profaneness, unprofitablenesse; and when they have
brought them forward in any good way, they have many times such fears and
doupting of their estates, that they are ready to forsake all, and fall back
again; and if they come on to any profitable performance of good duties, yet
are they so wonderfully unsettled in their estates and conditions, that many
times, the further the day grows, the more cloudy it appears; such ado and
trouble is there to come to any setlednesse in good ways, they are so clouded
with fears of their estates, that if they come to be assured of Gods love,
they will a while love good duties, but afterward fall back again to a
customary performance, and rest themselves contented with the deed done, yea,
many times they break out into open failings, to the wounding of their own
souls; they prove like the highways, and barren places, rather more defiled,
then like the green grass, which is bettered by the showers that fall upon it;
men's hearts may be right before God, and they may have much care and diligence
to uphold in such a blessed condition, and yet come far short of what is
required of them, as you see in David, Although my house be not so with God,
etc. And what might be the reason of this?

From a secret purpose and counsel God has to have some unbelievers in every
family; Joh. 6.70. Have not I chosen you twelve, and behold one of you is a
Devil? If it were so in Christ's family, then we must not look to speed better;
there is no family wherein one is not a devil, his family being as a pattern
to all other families; it was not for want of means it so proved in his, it
being our Saviors continual practice and whole calling to publish Gods truth.
So for further instances, you may see in Adams family, Cain the first born, an
unbeliever. In Noah's family there is cursed Cham; in Abraham's family is
scoffing Ishmael; in Isaacs family profane Esau; in Jacobs family, brethren
against innocent Joseph: Moses had a profane wife, who counted him a bloody
husband for administering circumcision; Aaron had his Nadah and Abihu; Samuel
his sons, were bribe-takers, 1 Samuel 8.23. Eli his sons were faulty in the
priests office; David had his Absalom, Adonijah, and Amnon; Solomon amongst all
his wives, had not above two that were good; Asa his mother had a grove,
Jehosaphat a wicked son; Hezekiah had Manasses, who at the first was very
wicked; Josiah, all his sons were wicked: and so in all other families we see
it true, and therefore we can see no cause, why with others it should prove
better.

Centurion, he feared God with all his household, Acts 10.2. they submitted
themselves to all Gods Ordinances, though not in truth.

That may be true in the general;

If they did fear God in truth, will be removing, and it is like worse come in
their room; but if they should be all good, yet they who were good would be
wanting in the fear of God, and righteousness one toward another in any
answerable walking according to the means they do enjoy. So concerning the
house of the Jailor, the same answer may be given, though they be all generally
good, yet may they fall short of the right performance of many good duties to
God, and one to another.

The second Reason is from the vanity and curse that lies upon the creatures in
every condition of life: Every man in his best estate is vanity, Psalm. 62.10.
take them single, they are vanity; take them together, they are lighter then
vanity it self: If it was possible to assemble a company who are all good, yet
would they corrupt one another; yea, put what persons together you can, they
will hurt and defile one another, in stead of doing good, Heb. 12.23. If any
man could have a perfect family, he might then have an heaven upon earth,
which he shall not enjoy. In the Church and Congregation, you shall find some
wheat, some chafe, some good corn, some tares; so in the best families, you
shall find a mixture of good and bad together.

The third reason is from the mixture of flesh and spirit that is in every man:
We know but in part, we prophecy but in part, David himself was not so, how
could he expect it of his family? Though all our families should be brought on
to be godly, yet would they be corrupt in part, for so are the best here.

Learn we then hereby, David were not able to say, that his house were perfect
with God, what then may we say? we have not that means which he had, such
Teachers to instruct us, such guides whereby we might be brought forward,
neither are we compassed about with Prophets in a land of uprightness; where
shall we find an house that walks with God as David did? that grows as the
tender grass, and is as the Sun without cloud? We are therefore to charge our
selves with our follies and failings, and to humble our selves for them,
whether it be toward God, or toward one another: we should consider how we
are failing in the true fear of God, how subject we are to eye-service; and
although we can do little in reforming Kingdoms and Nation, yet we may take
care for our own houses, we may judge our selves and our families in our
manifold failings, we may judge our selves for our high-mindednesse,
drowsiness in good duties, for our evil slow heart to get hold of any
spiritual thing, for our customary performance. How do we start aside from
them upon every occasion? our common complaint is, we are wanting to God in his
fear and holy service; we are too strait hearted in the performance of good
duties: true cause there is why it may be so with us; yet this is but a branch
of the Covenant, and the reason of our failings in that is, because we are
wanting in righteousness one toward another; husbands walk not toward their
wives, nor their wives back again to them; Parents to their children, nor
children to their parents, etc. as they all ought to do, according to the Law
of God; and therefore we are to judge our selves for our uncleanness, for our
unprofitablenesse under the means we enjoy, and toward one another; and this is
the cause why such good means as are used, are not so powerful to prevail
with us: The Sun rises without cloud, and shines forth freely and
powerfully; if we be overclouded, and overshadowed with any inordinate unruly
passions, and unbeseeming behavior; if we rise so distempered, and the
corruption of our natures raise such vapors and mists in us, we are to judge
our selves for these, and to take upon us Joshuah's resolution, I and my house
will serve the Lord, Josh. 24.16. From this general reformation of families,
God may be pleased to spare the whole Land: as many times a man spares a Vine
that has but one branch and cluster of grapes upon it, if not altogether, yet
at least until such time as the grapes shall be ripe: So God seeing a cluster
of Christians here and there, because they cannot grow, if the Vine be cut up,
God will therefore therefore spare the whole.

Again, though God be purposed to send out his destroying Angel to lay waste a
place, yet then we have some helps to save our selves; There was but one good
house in Jericho, which was Rahabs the Harlot, yet God spared that for some
good service done unto him by her: so when we shall hold out the truth, and
sprinkle our selves with the blood of Christ, as the Israelites did, God seeing
the blood of Christ sprinkled upon us by our faith and repentance, we may be
saved from those destroying evils that overwhelm others.

David had a special care of planting his house well, and yet see what
corruptions are found even in his family; what disordered, incestuous and
bloody sons he had in his house; wherefore we may well complain of the
failings of our families, if we observe what want there is of the fear of God,
what formal and mere outside performing there is of many good duties; this
therefore should train us up in some patience and quietness of mind and
spirit, to walk wisely and humbly under Gods hand, and not to pine and murmur
at our estate and condition.

David speaks it with grief, it is then for David, and every good man, to use
all means they can, to reform their families, to call on them to fear God, and
to walk religiously one toward another, and not to suffer these good showers
and pleasant Sunshines, these profitable means to be bestowed in vain upon
them: you have a sweet promise, Isaiah 55.10, 11. For as the rain comes down,
and the snow from heaven, and returns not thither, but waters the earth,
and makes it bring forth and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and
bread to the eater; so shall my Word be that goes forth out of my mouth, it
shall not return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I please,
and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it: We are daily to entreat a
blessing upon the means, that it may be effectual to the end for which it is
sent.



Jacob, Genesis 35.1, 2, 3, 4. when God commanded him to go to Bethel and cleanse
his house, his care was accordingly, to reform what was amiss in his family,
as appears by his charge unto them, to put away the strange gods from them, to
cleanse themselves, and change their garments; if we change our dwellings and
not our sins, the same evils will follow us, whithersoever we go; consider we
therefore, if reigning corruptions are within us, no reigning sin whatever but
it is our God, we must therefore part with it, be it never so dear and near
to us, and pray unto God, that he would be pleased to give us strength to
subdue it, and bring it under, and not to be of their disposition that will see
no fault, that is not the way; that which is a strange thing in Gods sight, let
it be so in ours; let us gather together all our corruptions, and burn them in
sacrifices to God; it is the sin of a family that troubles a family, and that
when no means is used for healing it, v. 19.17.
Levit. 19.17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart; thou shall in
any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him: and when God sees
no corruptions nor filthiness in us, he will be readier to bless us, and
prosper us in all our ways: So then we must have nothing to do with our sins,
which do hinder all good things from us, but we must labor to gather them all
together, and offer them up in sacrifice to God, that they may vanish away in
smoke, that they be no more seen nor heard of.

David we see went further then thus, therefore we must not content our selves
that we enjoy the ordinances of God, but we must labor to find God in them,
and his blessing to us in the performance of them, or else all is little worth:
This was Hezekiahs Prayer, 2 Chronicles. 30. that the Lord would be merciful to
those of his people that prepared their hearts to seek him, although they were
not cleansed according to the purification of the Temple; the Lord heard his
Prayer, and healed their corruptions, because they sought God in his
Ordinances. Let us then also, following their example, seek God in his
Ordinances, labor to feel our wants in him, teach the same unto our families,
and seek him by prayer, that he would be found of us, that so we may do that
which becomes the Gospel of Christ. And so much for this point.

has made an everlasting Covenant with him, ordered in all things, and sure.

This you see evident in David here, Though my house be not so with God, yet
God has made with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure.
We have not walked in the fear of Gods Name, nor in righteousness toward
men, yet here is our comfort, the stability of the Covenant of God, though we
be wanting to God, yet cannot God be wanting to us: But for opening the point,
it is needful to know these four things.

David comforts himself in? ordered in all things? everlasting? sure?
From all these does David take comfort to himself against his own failings,
and the failings of his family.

Covenant here spoken of? This Covenant, in that he calls it everlasting and
sure, implies it to be a Covenant of Grace, in that it has such properties
annexed to it, which only belong to God; As,

First, everlasting, Jer. 32.40. I will make an everlasting Covenant with them,
etc. Again, it is said to be a Covenant of Grace, Romans 4.16. and it being of
Grace makes it sure, Jer. 31.33, 34. But this shall be the Covenant that I will
make with the house of Israel; after those days, says the Lord, I will put my
Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and will be their God,
and they shall be my people, etc. where he tells you of two Covenants: The
Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of Grace, this Covenant differs from the
other in six particulars.

Covenant of Works was made to Adam and all his posterity, Cain was within this
Covenant, Genesis 4.7. Romans 2.6. to the 10. Do well and you shall be accepted.
This everlasting Covenant is not made to Adam and his seed, but to Abraham and
his seed, Gal. 3.16. he says not to the seed as of many, but as to one of thy
seed, which is Christ, being spoken collectively; so likewise, Genesis 17.7.
Moreover, I will establish my Covenant beween me and thee, and thy seed after
thee in their generations for an everlasting Covenant, to be a God unto thee,
and to thy seed after thee.

Covenant of Grace is written in the fleshie tables of the hearts; the one
gives us duties to perform, but no strength wherewithal, the other affords
both.

Covenant of Works required perfect obedience in every man's person, Gal. 3.10.
For as many as are of the works of the Law, are under the curse; for it is
written, Cursed is every man that continues not in all things which are
written in the Law to do them, Deuteronomy. 27.17. If any man breaks this Covenant, he
brings a curse upon his own head thereby, no person is excepted; it is not so
in the new Covenant; God in that required perfect obedience, but in this he
requires it to be done either in our persons, or by our sureties, Matthew. 3.15.
Then Jesus answered, and said unto him, Let be now, for thus it becomes us to
fulfill all righteousness, Heb. 7.22.26. And it is translated, Testament,
because man has sureties to a Testament; therefore it is in the original,
(...), he does accept perfect obedience in Christ for us, though we cannot
perform perfect satisfaction, yet if our sureties do it for us, it is all one,
2 Cor. 8.12. God accepts at our hands a willing mind, and of childe-like
endeavors; if we come with childe-like service, God will spare us; a father
will accept the poor endeavors of his child for the thing it self.

Covenant of Works, the reward is given of justice according to works, Genesis
4.7. If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? and if thou do not well,
sin lies at the door, etc. Romans 2.6. to the 12th, Romans 4.4. To him that works
is the reward not reckoned of grace, but of debt; in the Covenant of Grace, God
rewards us not according to works, but according to his grace, accepting of our
desires and endeavors.

Cursed is he that continues not in all things that are written in the Law to
do them. Now, where there is cursednesse for sin, Gal. 3.10.
there is no pardon for sin: But in the Covenant of Grace there is a free
forgiveness of sin, with a promise, they shall be no more remembered against
us, Jer. 31.34. For I will forgive their iniquities, and remember their sins no
more.

Covenant of Grace cannot be so broken, as to bring confusion upon such who are
within it. And thus the Lord puts a difference between them, Hebr. 8.8.9.10.
For in rebuking them, he says, Behold, the days will come, says the Lord,
when I shall make with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah a new
Testament, not like the Testament that I made with their fathers in the day
that I took them by the hand, to lead them out of the land of Egypt, for they
continued not in my Testament, and I regarded them not says the Lord, etc. In
this place he opposes the one to the other, in regard the one may be broken,
and the other cannot; This Covenant of Grace God will not break, and though on
our parts it may be broken, yet because Christ has it in keeping, it shall
never be so broken, as to the destruction of the transgressour, Jer. 32.40. And
I will make an everlasting Covenant with them, that I will never turn away from
them to do them good; but I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall
not depart from me, etc. God will put his fear in our hearts, which shall work
in us holy care of keeping covenant with him. The fear of God possessing our
hearts, shall cause us, not to dare to commit any sin; and therefore, Heb. 8,
6. it is said to be established upon better promises. The old Covenant was
established upon our obedience, this promises us both to make us obedient, and
to keep us in a course of obedience; that Covenant promises no pardon upon
breaches, but this does, and further says, that they shall be remembered no
more, as Jer. 31.34.



(order) does signify unto us.

Psalm. 32.6. God did decree it, he set it down in the court of heaven, being
nothing else but an expression of the life of grace.

to order, does sometimes signify, to furnish or to provide, Prove. 9.2.
Wisdom is said to have killed her fatlings, to have mingled her wine, and to
have furnished her table; so this Covenant is provided for us, and furnished
with all blessings, spiritual and temporal.

directed, Job 32.14. This Covenant was directed to David, and the seed of
David, not left at random, but directed to fall aright upon some person, as it
were, as once it was said of Joseph, Deuteronomy. 33.16. Let the good will of him that
dwells in the bush, come upon the head of Joseph: So shall this Covenant of
Grace fall upon the heads of those for whom it is appointed.

in order, so is this word used, Lev. 18. It is said to be set in order, in
regard of the grounds, means, ends, parts and persons on whom it falls.

he will have mercy on whom he will have mercy, Romans 9.15.

Secondly, Gods everlasting love, Jer. 31.3. The Lord has appeared unto me of
old, say they; yea, I have loved thee with an everlasting love, and therefore
with mercy I have drawn thee.

Thirdly, from his free Grace, not respecting good or evil in the creature,
but the good pleasure of his will.



First, the Lord Jesus Christ, this Covenant was made with him from all
eternity, Ephesians. 1.3. Blessed be God, and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
which has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things in
Christ.

Secondly, in Christ, and by Christ, has God the Father sealed it unto us, by
his holy and blessed Spirit, Ephesians. 1.15.

Thirdly, by his Gospel has he delivered it unto us, 2 Timothy 1.10. Christ has
brought life and immortality to light by the Gospel; and this is the Instrument
whereby the grace of God is written in our hearts, 2 Cor. 3.3.



First, that God might be glorified in his free love; it sets forth unto us the
riches of his grace, Ephesians. 1.6.

Secondly, that Christ might thereby be glorified, Joh. 5.23.

Thirdly, God has appointed to glorify himself in the salvation of his
people, Ephesians. 2.2. 2 Timothy 1.9.



First, Grace.

Secondly, pardon of Sin.

Thirdly, subduing our rebellions.

Fourthly, outward blessings.

He will not take away his love from us, nor suffer his truth to fail, Psalm.
89.33, 34. For his love, you may read, Jer. 31.3. where the Lord tells his
people, that he had loved them with an everlasting love: So for pardon of sin,
Jer. 31.34. I will forgive your iniquities, and remember your sins no more:
Likewise for subduing our corruptions, Micah 7.18, 19. Who is a God like unto
thee, that pardons iniquities, and passes by the transgressions of the
remnant of his heritage; he retains not his anger for ever, because he
delighted in mercy? He will turn again, he will have compassion upon us; he
will subdue our iniquities, and will cast all our sins into the depth of the
sea: So likewise for outward blessings, Psalm. 84.11. The Lord is a Sun and
shield; The Lord will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he
withold from them who live uprightly. If outward blessings be denied to us,
yet will he not take away his mercy, Psalm. 89.28. My mercy will I keep for
evermore, and my Covenant shall stand sure; and so forward to the 34th verse of
the same Psalm.

Gal. 3.16. it was given to Christ, and in Christ to every godly man, Genesis
17.7. and in every godly man to his seed; God will have some of the seed of
every godly man to stand before him for ever.

a sure Covenant?

Ephesians. 1.4, 5. it was everlastingly purposed with God.

Psalm. 89.34. My Covenant I will not break, nor alter the thing gone out of my
mouth.

a sure Covenant?

Mal. 3.6. I am the Lord, I change not, therefore ye sons of Jacob are not
consumed.

Heb. 7.22. Who was made a surety of a better Testament.





that by two immutable witnesses they might receive strong consolation, Heb.
6.18. The Spirit of God is said to make it sure to us, both by the Spirit of
faith, looking for salvation by another; namely, Christ Jesus, Romans 4.16. and
by the Spirit of fear, He will put his fear into our hearts, that we shall
not depart from him, Jer. 32.40. And thus is the Covenant of God said to be
sure, Psalm. 89.34.36. My Covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that
is gone out of my mouth: I have sworn by my holiness, that I will not fail
David: So likewise a comfortable place have we in 2 Timothy 2.13. where the
Apostle says, though we believe not, yet he abides faithful, he cannot deny
himself.



Psalm. 89.35. It being a Covenant of Grace, is not abrogated by our failing,
though we remain unsettled, yet God continues constant: If his children walk
not with him, but rebel against him, what will he do? They shall feel the
smart of his displeasure, but his loving kindness will he not take from them,
Psalm. 89.30, 31, 32, 33.



quite, yet this Covenant remains firm, one and the same.



But to come to the Uses of the point, and in the

First place, David, Though my house be not so with God, though I and my
fathers house be not so with God, yet David takes comfort to himself,
concerning his condition from Gods Covenant; this was the root of his comfort,
that God had made a certain and sure Covenant with him, ordered in all things;
therefore apply we this wisely unto our selves: Let us search what our own
disorders, and the disorders of our families be, and let us acknowledge the
disorders of our selves and of our families what they be; let us acknowledge
also, that we and our families are not so with God; yet in all these disorders
we are to comfort our selves, that God has made an everlasting Covenant with
us, ordered in all things, and sure, though we are disordered, yet Gods
Covenant is not disordered, though we are sinful and wicked, yet God loves us
freely, he will pardon us freely, he will heal us thoroughly; so that we
shall not perish, notwithstanding our corruptions.



I am JEHOVAH, says the Lord, I change not, therefore ye sons of Jacob are
not consumed, Mal. 3.6.



David must be contented with Absalom, Abraham with Ishmael, Isaac with Esau,
Jacob with Simeon and Levi, CHRIST with Judas; and for the corruptions we see
in our families, we are to take comfort to our selves, that the Covenant of
God can heal all these iniquities, these iniquities in his due time he will
subdue. To subdue is a metaphor taken from beasts which have stiff necks, and
will not bow to the yoke.







having this seal upon it, The Lord knows who are his: What though a whole
kingdom be disordered, unconstant, and unsettled, though our kingdom be not so
as God requires, yet his Covenant is sure, he will deal well with us.

David did, this Covenant is ordered and sure, and that this is all our desire
and salvation, we are then out of danger, we need not to fear, our estates
and conditions are well enough, we are under the shadow, of his wings, where
nothing shall annoy or hurt us at any time.



I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed after thee, Genesis 17.7.



Abraham circumcised all his house by virtue of this, I am a God to thee, and
to thy seed, Genesis 17.7. So that unless they have abrogated this Covenant, it
follows them still, and they may claim it to themselves.

But how if neither of the former I can challenge to my self;

I confess then thy condition is so much the more to be pitied;



Paul, With a great sum of money have I purchased this freedom.

But purchase it we cannot; for going thus to work, the same answer shall be
made to us that was made to Simon Magus, Thy money perish with thee, because
thou have thought the gift of God may be purchased with money, Acts 8.18, 19.
The Papists therefore go the wrong way to work, who would bring themselves
within this Covenant by their large gifts to edify. What then shall we enter
into a course of service to be free of this Corporation? why then our best
endevors would come wonderful short of bringing us within the Covenant; we
may take much pains, and yet fall short; use much fasting and prayer, and yet
fail much of our performances of the best duties; yet notwithstanding, if we
give up our selves to be bound to this service, if we come to God, submit our
selves to him in all things, to do with us as he pleases, and as shall seem
good in his sight, submitting our selves to be ruled and squared by him in all
things, he shall have our whole hearts to do with us what he will; here is the
Covenant made up between God and a good Christian, God then offers himself to
us, he is ours, and we are his, Psalm. 27.8. When thou said, seek ye my
face, my heart said unto thee, thy face Lord will I seek.

You must herein resolve to take heed of all sin, labor to perform every good
duty, and be sorry you can do it no better; notwithstanding herein stands the
difference between one that serves an apprentiship to become free, and one that
enters into service to be with God. The apprentise must serve seven years
before he can become a free man, but the child of God is made free that first
day that he gives up himself to God; though thou be a servant to another man,
yet art thou the Lords free man, 1 Cor. 7.22. If we can but content our selves
to be the Lords servants, we shall be his freemen; yet herein are those
services suitable; in the beginning an apprentises service is very difficult,
he is exposed to much hardship, he knows not how to please Master or
Mistress; if he knew their minds, he would be willing to frame himself
accordingly: So when we come into Gods service, if he but a little hides his
face, we think presently we are cast off, and that we were never any of his;
but all this comes for want of experience of a Christian man's life, if you can
be content to break off from all your evil ways, and with all your hearts
cleave unto God, doubtless then God has made with you an everlasting
Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure.

If you be not in the Covenant, but your whole desire is, that you may, you
must labor to bring your selves into a good family, and that you may be fitted
for any service, you must deny your selves, and give up your minds, wills and
affections unto God, take Christ's yoke upon you; if he calls you to any
cross, stumble not at it, but bear it patiently, and wait upon him for a
deliverance out of it; and that you may the more earnestly strive to get within
this Covenant, consider, that in so doing, you shall certainly bring a blessing
upon you and yours; though you and your family be disordered, yet Gods Covenant
will remain firm and sure unto you; all estates, though never so free conveyed,
are nothing unto this; and therefore, as you love your selves, and would leave
a sure inheritance to those that shall come after, let your special care be,
how ye may attain to this, for even a kingdom without this, is but a poor
state.

David's humble thankfulness, 2 Samuel 7.18. Who am I, O Lord God, and what is my
fathers house, that thou have spoken of thy servants house for a great while to
come? We must walk fruitfully with God in the sense of this Covenant, in pardon
of sins, in beating down corruptions; there is no better sign that we are in
this Covenant, then to grow thankful for it, and humble under it, and
fruitful in communicating our experience unto others, and laboring to bring
them within the compass of it. Thus much for this Doctrine.

The third thing is the confining of David's desire and salvation to this
Covenant, whence observe:



This is evident in the Text, it is all his will, the will comprehends the
desire and the delight of a man; so that this Covenant is so complete, that a
man needs nothing more to salvation, or to satisfy his desires and these two
comprehend all that has been said of Gods Covenant: What is it, that he says,
it is all my salvation and desire? Salvation comprehends in it these two things:

First, a deliverance from dangers.

Secondly, a safe comfortable and glorious estate; So that salvation implies in
it safety, viz. deliverance from all dangers, Ps. 3.8. So also a safe,
comfortable and glorious estate in heaven: When David said, This is my
salvation, his meaning is, I had never been freed from danger, nor set in a
safe and glorious condition, but by virtue of this Covenant.

many discouragements, but God has made a covenant to deliver us.

viz.) the object and sum of all my desire, nothing but as it comes within
the compass of this, Gods glory is my desire; as all my desire is here, so all
my rejoicing; for the word which is here desire, in the first Pslam, v. 2. is
translated delight: all David's desire and delight was in this Covenant, he took
no comfort in his crown, nor that he was a sweet Singer of Israel, nor in his
children, though comely, nor in the ordinances of God, no further then they were
wrapped up to him in this Covenant of God, and the Reason is:



If a man were delivered from danger, unless by virtue of this Covenant, it is
a cold deliverance: For, if he be saved from drowning, the gallows may claim
his right of him; if the gallows cannot, hell fire will reach him, if he be not
within the compass of this Covenant; if he have credit and wealth in this
world, yet if not conveyed unto him by virtue of this Covenant, it is a
miserable estate; children, beauty, strength, gifts may be desired, if they
come under this Covenant.

No good thing will he withold from them that live a godly life, Psalm. 87.7.
All my springs, (says David) are in thee; God delights in us, when we are in
his Covenant, his Covenant reaches to his Church, and we being members of
that Church: Hence it comes to pass, that we partake of all the pleasant
springs of Gods love, and rich mercies to us in Christ Jesus.

For the Use of this point.

Psalm. 81.10. Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it, gape after greater
things then these, breath after this everlasting Covenant; Lift up your heads,
O ye gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors, and the King of glory
shall come in, Psalm. 24.9. Close you not therefore with these things, they will
yield you but little content; the wicked enlarge their desire as hell it self;
they will travel all the world over from Sea to Sea to get wealth; how then
should we enlarge our hearts, and gape wide after heavenly things that are of
an everlasting continuance, until we are in a safe and sure condition, and
let all our desires be after the Covenant of Grace?

Covenant of Grace, we may then lawfully comfort our selves in the enjoyment of
all other good things whatsoever, because all mercies and blessings spring up
from this Covenant of Grace; and herein should we fix all our desires, all our
salvation and delights, Jer. 9.23.24. Thus says the Lord, Let not the wise man
glory in his wisdom, nor the mighty in his might, nor the rich man in his
riches, but let him that glories, glory in this, that he understands and
knows me, that I am the Lord which exercises judgment and loving kindness
in the earth.

Covenant, to make account that he has full possession of his salvation, that
all his desires and delights are satisfied; if we have but this Covenant, we
do not well to desire any thing more: for in it are contained all things, and
having it, we have all things; are Gods children in any dangers? are they
overcome with any sorrows? let them but consider of this Covenant of God made
unto them in the blood of Christ, and they shall find comfort sufficient to
support them through all: Why doubt we of deliverance from sin, or any danger?
none evil can befall us by virtue of this Covenant; if we therefore want any
thing, let us consider what a covenant we are in.

Tim. 1.9. Who has saved us, and called us with an holy calling; we are put
into a covenant of salvation, let us therefore be thankful to God for it, and
doubt no longer.

Covenant, they must make use of it to the perfecting of their salvation, and
fulfilling of their desires. You will say, you find your sins not pardoned,
and you are (...)

troubled about them, if you be within this Covenant, your sins are pardoned
unto you. But you will say, still I find sin striving, and corruption breaking
forth; Well, have you given up your selves to be Gods servants, to bow and
submit your selves to his holy and blessed will in all things, here is then a
covenant for thee, promising pardon of sin, Micah 7.18.
who is a God like thee, forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin, and
passing by offenses.

But you will say, your corruptions are strong, and you cannot get power over
them.

Here is salvation to deliver thee from the bondage of thy sins.

But you will say further, you are subject to long sicknesses, and diseases
very tedious; yet notwithstanding here is consolation enough in this Covenant
for thee, to save thee at length out of all.

You will further say, you want the comfort of this Covenant; consider this is
a comfort making up your desires unto you, so far as the Lord sees meet; if in
crosses you would not depart from God, nor sit loose from him, God has
promised you shall not; therefore make use of it for this end: Do you that are
parents desire that your children, and all that belongs to you may do well in
this life? having this Covenant you have all, you only want a heart fitted and
disposed to apply it unto your self; plead you therefore with God, and entreat
him, that he would be pleased to make good this Covenant unto you. Thus much
for the third point raised from the words.

Further, says he, Although he make it not to grow, his meaning is, that
although God make not his family to grow in this world, but cause it to see
hard times, and undergo many crosses and troubles, yet this is his comfort, and
all the stay of his heart, and his salvation, That God has made with him an
everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and sure. So that the point to be
observed from hence is this:

Covenant of Grace must be to us the satisfying of our desires and delights,
and the sum of our salvation. This Covenant God made to us, and let that
suffice us in all; it was that wherewith God supported Paul when there was sent
unto him a messenger from Satan to buffet him, My grace (says the Lord) is
sufficient for thee. This Covenant of thy is sufficient to pardon sin, and to
heal sin; therefore, whether Paul prospered or prospered not in his spiritual
state, he must be contented, for Gods grace is sufficient for him: David saw
his house would fall upon strange changes in regard of the great failings of
his children, that they should be carried away captive, and in a manner, into
obscurity of darkness, through Gods withdrawing the light of his countenance
from shining upon them, occasioned by the great disorders that were before seen
in it; this his condition he might have seen in Ethan the Ezrabite, who lived
in his days, Psalm. 89 39. Though before he saw all this evil, yet this was
sufficient for him, though his house prospered not, that God had promised in
his Covenant that he would not forsake him and his, although he made them not
to grow; and the Reasons are:





Covenant is a certain ground for our eternal inheritance; although a man's
house may be turned upside down, yet notwithstanding here is our comfort, we
have our eternal happiness in the highest heavens, Luke 12.32. Fear not
little flock, it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you your inheritance.

Covenant reaches to us, unless we prosper in the world; we should rather be
men after Gods own heart, as David. See how David carried himself in the like
case and condition, he does rest himself in Gods Covenant, whether his house
grow or grow not; but we are of another spirit, though we know Gods Covenant
is everlasting and sure, yet unless our children be great ones, and all may
prosper in the world, according to the desire of our hearts, we think we have
no favor in the Covenant of Gods grace; alas, all things are counted otherwise
but as dry things, like Manna, which at length the children of Israel began to
loath and hate: As concerning the light afflictions, which are but momentary,
herein we should comfort our selves, that God will temper all to our
everlasting happiness, as in the issue thereof we shall see. This pride of
nature was the sin of Human, Est. 5.13. all availed him nothing as long as
Mordecai the Jew did not bow to him. If other men's sheafs may not bow to ours,
then we think all little worth besides; but this is a grievous sin against
God: it argues a base estimation of the Covenant of Gods grace; it is a sin to
be reproved and rooted out. We think, because God does not make our houses to
grow and flourish, that there is no contentment to be found in the Covenant of
Grace: This sin of pride was also in Hezekiah, in showing to the Babylonish men
all his garments and precious Jewels.

Covenant of Grace, though we should never grow great, nor rise high in this
world, nor in the things thereof, we must rest satisfied in and by the Covenant
of Gods grace. If David think it sufficient, so must we. What though we be
neglected in the world, and find no contentment in outward things, yet this
may serve to quiet the hearts of Gods children, that though they grow not much
in the world, yet having a part in the Covenant of Grace, they need not to
trouble themselves about any other thing that is wanting to them; this
condition is a happy condition.

Covenant with the Parents and Householders, and it shall descend upon them so
far as God does order it.

Covenant with their fathers, and undertaken to do them good, they will at
length prove the better for it, and God will make his Covenant good unto them;
all that God does exercise them withal, is that he may do them good at
length, Gods Covenant being an everlasting Covenant, their condition at last
shall be a glorious condition.

Covenant of God, that undoubtedly, at length it shall be well with them,
though God never make them nor theirs to grow in outward things, yet they may
rest upon the Covenant, there is enough for them. Rejoice we then in this
Covenant, for it is an everlasting Covenant; and let us make it our chiefest
happiness, that we have a part in it, though we and others seem not to our
selves to grow, yet we shall grow, so far as God sees it meet for us to grow,
although we for our parts perceive it not, Isaiah 3.10, 11. Say to the
righteous, it shall be well with them, for they shall eat the fruit of their
own doings, but woe to the wicked, for it shall be ill with them, for the reward
of his hands shall he given unto him. It shall be ill with Rome and her
adherents; the Covenant of Works shall be required at their hands.

A Doctrinall Conclusion.
That there be in all such as are effectually called and united unto Christ,
in-dwelling spiritual gifts of grace, wrought and created in us by the Holy
Ghost, that is, by the begetting whereof, we are begotten and renewed to a
spiritual life unto God, and so become fit members of his Church.
The opening of the terms of this Doctrine.

BY gifts of Grace, I mean holy qualities, the same which Philosophers call
virtuous habites, or good dispositions, whereby the faculties and affections of
the soul, which by corrupt nature are set upon a man's self, and earthly
things, and cannot savor the things of God (and so are said to be dead) are
hereby sanctified, and lifted up to God, and set upon him and heavenly things,
and so are said to be quickened and made alive to God. Whence we are said to be
begotten again to a lively hope, 1 Pet. 1.3. and the faith of the righteous is
opposed to the dead faith of vain men, Jam. 2.20. These gifts we say are
wrought, or created by the Holy Ghost, because they are the fruits or effects
of the Spirit of God in us, Gal. 5.22, 23. wrought by his Almighty creating
power out of nothing, Col. 2.12. Ps. 5 1.10. and thereby making us spiritual
men, 1 Cor. 2.15. And fit Instruments for Gods spiritual service, 1 Pet. 2.5.
and therefore every one of these gifts of grace, whereby any faculty or
affection of the soul is sanctified, it is called the spirit of such a faculty
or affection, as the sanctified disposition of the mind is called, The spirit
of a sound mind, 2 Timothy 1.7. The spirit of Faith is the gift of Faith, 2 Cor.
4.13. The spirit of love, or of the fear of the Lord, are the gifts of holy
love, and fear sanctifying such affections, 2 Timothy 1.7. Isai. 11.2. Further, we
say these gifts of grace are in-dwelling, and abiding in every child of God,
effectually called and united unto Christ; in as much as they are neither
mortified and extinguished in us (as some would have it) by our union with
Christ, (for mortification is of corrupt lusts, or of the body of sin in us,
Col. 3.5. Romans 6.6. not of the gifts of grace;) neither are these gifts of
grace transient and passing away, as they would be, if they were mere actions
of the Spirit, proceeding and passing from us: Nor are they abiding in the Holy
Ghost, (though he abides in us) because no created gifts or qualities abide in
him; (whatsoever is in him is himself:) but they are preserved in us by the
Holy Ghost (as they were wrought by him) and are also by him increased and
perfected in us, against the day of our dissolution, when we shall be presented
blameless without spot or wrincle before the presence of his glory.

Reasons of the point.

Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8. Add moreover (says he) to your faith virtue; and to
virtue, knowledge; and to knowledge, temperance; and to temperance, patience;
and to patience, godliness; and to godliness, brotherly kindness; and to
brotherly kindness, love: For, if these things be in you, and abound, they
make you, that you shall neither be barren, nor unfruitful in the knowledge of
our Lord Jesus Christ. From whence the Reason is concluded, thus: Faith,
Virtue, Knowledge, Temperance, Patience, Godliness, Brotherly-kindnesse, Love,
they are all in us, and make us fruitful in Christ. The Text is plain; but all
these are neither the Holy Ghost himself, for then one Holy Ghost should be
added to another; or one part of the Holy Ghost, should be added to another.
Nor are they the actions of the Holy Ghost proceeding from us; (for these
things are in us, and abounding in us, and consequently abiding in us; and they
cause us to bring forth actions meet for Christian profession: For they are
said to make us fruitful in the knowledge of Christ, verse. 8. Therefore they
are the gifts of grace abiding in us.

Tim. 1.6. Stir up (says Paul to Timothy) the gift of God which is in thee;
and verse. 14. that good Treasure (or thing) which was committed to thee, keep
by the Holy Ghost which dwells in us: where there is a plain difference
between the gift of God, and the stirring up of that gift, which is the
exercise of it, and the Holy Ghost which helped him to keep it, and to use it.



He speaks of both: verse. 5.) he puts Timothy in mind of the unfeigned
faith which (says he) is in thee, and which dwelt first in thy grandmother
Lois, and in thy mother Eunices, and now in thee also. Whence the Reason is
plain, If unfeigned faith, and other such like gifts of God, dwelt in Timothy,
and in his mother, and in his grandmother, then there be gifts of grace
accompanying salvation, that dwell in such as are effectually called. But the
former is plain out of the Text, therefore so is the latter. In 2 Cor. 6.6. the
Apostle says, He (with the other Apostles) approved themselves as the
Ministers of Christ, by pureness, by knowledge, by long-suffering, by
kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by love unfeigned.

Paul and the rest approved themselves as the Ministers of Christ; and
therefore he speaks of ministerial gifts, not of gifts accompanying
salvation.

The inference is naught; pureness, long-suffering, love unfeigned. In 1 Cor.
12.4. The Apostle says, there be deversities, (...), that is, of gifts of
grace, which he distinguishes from operations, verse. 6.



He speaks not only of ministerial gifts, but of all gifts of grace, by
which we are knit to Christ, and one to another, as head, and members of one
body; and in respect of which, The eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need
of thee; nor the head to the feet, I have no need of you, verse. 21.

Cor. 2.14. The natural man does not receive the things of God, nor of the
Spirit of God; and therefore does not receive Christ united to him.



True, Solomon was still a material Temple, (not a spiritual Temple, as we
are, 1 Pet. 2.5.) though God dwelt in it, because he wrought not gifts of
spiritual grace in the Temple, whereby it might live unto God.

In all union,

major) is plain, because the dis-junction is immediate: there is no middle way
can be given, but either we ^^st live a created life by some gifts of
spiritual grace created in us, or else we must live the uncreated life of the
Holy Ghost communicated to us. The latter Proposition (or minor) is as plain;
for no creature (if being finite) can live an increated life, which is
infinite; but we are creatures, and finite, and the life of the Holy God is
increated, and infinite; therefore we cannot live his life.



First, Eutiches taught otherwise, he was condemned for an Heretic in the
general Council of Chalcedon.

The comparison must be stretched no further then Christ intended to show the
mere conjunction between Christ and us, so far,

begotten in us: For the substance of the soul and body is not anew-created and
begotten; it is the same it was before, and the Holy Ghost cannot be said to be
created or begotten in us at all: but in conversion the Lord does create a new
heart in us, Ps. 51.10. and does regenerate, or renew a right spirit in us,
beside the Holy Ghost, of which he says in the next verse ( verse. 11.) Take
not thy holy Spirit from me. The Holy Ghost cannot be said to be created or
renewed, for he is no creature, nor was he ever old: And in Ezekiel. 36.26, 27.
he promises to put a new spirit within us, verse. 26. and withal, promises
to put his own Spirit within us, verse. 27. And his Spirit and our spirit are
made two distinct witnesses, Romans 8.16.

Covenant of Grace; thus: If there be a law written in our hearts under the new
Covenant, then either this is the Holy Ghost himself, or spiritual gifts of
grace wrought in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, whereby we are fitted and
enabled (through his leading) to walk in the Law of God, and to keep it. But
there is a Law written in our hearts under the new Covenant, Jer. 31.33. and
this Law is not the Holy Ghost himself, for it is the effect and work of the
Holy Ghost, 2 Cor. 3.3. where it is said to be written by him; now a Law, or an
Epistle written by any man, cannot be the man himself that wrought it.

Romans 8.5. Gal. 5.17. But the Holy Ghost in every good action does not turn the
course of my faculty and affection against their proper and voluntary bent; For
then we should not do good actions voluntarily, and then they would be
unwelcome and grievous to us, contrary to 1 John 5.3. and then we should lose
our reward, 1 Cor. 9.17.

Psalm. 65.5. So he is said to be our hope, Jer. 14.8. Psalm. 71.5. our love, our
love it self, 1 John 4.16.

to put our confidence, or to believe on him, 1 Pet. 2.6. Now if it were meant
God is the very grace of faith, or confidence which is in us, then when we
believe, or put our confidence on God, we should put God upon God, which were
absurd; and if something were lacking in our faith (as there is, 1 These. 3.10.)
then something were lacking in God: And if it were meant that God is the grace
of that hope which is in us, then when David prayed, he might not be ashamed of
his hope, he meant, that he might not be ashamed of his God.

Psalm. 119.49.

Cor. 13.13.) then God were a fruit of the Spirit, for that love which dwells
in us, is a fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22.

The Lord scatter our darkness, and lead us by his Spirit of light and truth,
into all truth, through Christ.

A Profession of Faith, made by the Reverend Divine, Mr. John Davenport, at his
admission into one of the Churches of God in New England, viz.
I believe with all my heart, and confess with my mouth.
1. Concerning the Scriptures.
THat all Scripture is by divine inspiration, or inbreathing of God (by
Scripture I mean, the Books of the old Testament, as Moses and the Prophets,
and of the new Testament) and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works, 1 Timothy 3.16, 17. and that in
all things which concern faith and obedience, whether in Gods Worship, or in
the whole conversation of men, it holds forth a most perfect rule, whereunto
nothing may be added, nor from it may ought be diminished, Deuteronomy. 4.2. Rev.
22.18, 19. Which also is so clear in truths necessary to salvation, that the
entrance into it gives light, yea, understanding to the simple, Psalm. 19.7.

2. Concerning the Godhead in the Unity of Essence, and Trinity of Persons.

That God is a Spirit most holy, immutable, eternal, every way infinite, in
greatness, goodness, power, wisdom, justice, truth, and in all divine
perfections, 1 Timothy 6.15, 16. Joh. 4.24. Isai. 6.6. Exodus 34.6, 7. And that in
this Godhead, are three distinct Persons, coeternall, coequall, and
coessentiall, being every one of them one and the same God, not three Gods, and
therefore not divided in essence, nature, or being, Deuteronomy. 4.3. but
distinguished one from another, by their several and peculiar relative
property; the Father is of none but of himself, the Son is begotten of the
Father before all worlds, the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the
Son, from all eternity, all together are to be worshipped and glorified.

3. Concerning the Decrees of God.
That God has unchangeably decreed in himself from everlasting, touching all
things, great and small, necessary, contingent, and voluntary, with all the
circumstances of them, to work, and dispose them according to the counsel of
his own will (yet without being Author of, or having fellowship with the sins
of any) to the praise and glory of his great name. And touching the eternal
estate of men, that God has according to his most wise, free, and unchangeable
purpose in himself, before the foundation of the world, chosen some in Jesus
Christ to eternal life, to the praise and glory of his grace, and rejected or
reprobated others to the praise of his justice.

4. Concerning Creation and Providence.
That in the beginning God made by his Word all things of nothing very good,
and made man, male and female, after his own Image righteous; and as a
faithful Creator does still uphold, dispose, and govern all things to the ends
for which they were created, having care especially for man, and amongst men,
chiefly for the righteous and believers; so that neither good nor evil befalls
any man without Gods providence.

5. Concerning the fall of man, and original sin.
That in as much as Adam was the root of all mankind, the Law and Covenant of
works was given to him, as to a public person, and to an head from whence all
good or evil was to be derived to his posterity: Seeing therefore that by the
subtilty of the Serpent, which Satan used as his Instrument, first Eve, then
Adam being seduced, did wittingly and willingly fall into the disobedience of
the Commandment of God; Death came upon all justly, and reigned over all, yea,
over Infants also which have not sinned after the like manner of the
transgression of Adam: Hence also it is, that all since the fall of Adam, are
begotten in his own likeness, after his Image, being conceived and born in
iniquity, and so by nature children of wrath, dead in trespasses and sins,
altogether filthy and polluted throughout in soul and body; utterly averse
from any spiritual good, strongly bent to all evil, and subject to all
calamities due to sin in this world, and for ever.

6. Concerning man's restitution.
That all mankind being thus fallen, yet the elect, and only they, are
redeemed, reconciled to God, and saved, not of themselves, neither by their own
works, but only by the mighty power of God, of his unsearchable, rich, free
grace and mercy, through faith in Jesus Christ, who of God is made unto us
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption; in the relation both of
a surety to satisfy God justice for us, and of an head to restore the Image of
God that was lost, and repair the nature that was corrupted in us.

7. Concerning the Person and Natures in Christ.
That the Lord Jesus, of whom Moses and the Prophets wrote, and whom the
Apostles preached, is, as touching his Person, the everlasting Son of God the
Father, by eternal generation, coessentiall, coequall, and coeternall, God
with him, and with the holy Ghost; by whom he made the world, and by whom he
upholdeth and governs all the works he has made: who also, when the fullness
of time was come, was made of a woman, of the Tribe of Judah, of the seed of
David and Abraham, viz. of Mary, that blessed Virgin, by by the Holy Ghost
coming upon her, and the power of the most high overshadowing her; and was in
all things like unto us, sin only excepted; so that in the person of Christ,
the two natures, the divine and humane, are truly, perfectly, indivisibly, and
distinctly united.

8. Concerning the Offices of Christ.
That Jesus Christ is the only Mediator of the new Testament, even of the
Covenant of Grace between God and man; the Prophet, Priest, and King of the
Church of God for evermore; and this office is so proper to Christ, as, neither
in the whole, nor any part thereof, it can be transferred from him to any
other. And to this office he was from everlasting, and in respect of his
Manhood, from the womb, called, separated, and anointed most fully with all
necessary gifts, as it is written, God has not measured out of the Spirit unto
him.

9. Concerning Christ's prophetical Office.
That Christ has perfectly revealed the whole will of God, so far as it is
needful for his people, either jointly, or severally to know, believe, or
obey, and that he has spoken, and does speak to his Church, in his own
Ordinances by those instruments whom he sends, and by his Spirit.

10. Concerning the Priesthood of Christ.
That Christ being consecrated, has appeared once to put away sin, by the
offering and sacrificing of himself, and has fully performed and suffered all
those things, by which, God through the blood of his cross, in a sacrifice of
a sweet smelling savor, might be reconciled to his elect; and having broken
down the partition wall, and finished and removed those ceremonial rites and
shadows, is now entered into the most holy place, (not made with hands) to the
very heavens and presence of God, where he for ever lives, and sits at the
right hand of Majesty, to make intercession for such as come unto the Throne of
Grace by that new and living way; and he makes his people a spiritual house,
and an holy Priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God
through him.

11. Concerning Christ's Kingly Office: 1. In general.
That Christ being risen from the dead, ascended up to heaven, set at the right
hand of God the Father, has all power in heaven and earth given to him, and
does exercise his power in his government of this world over all Angels and
men, good and bad, to the preservation and salvation of his elect, and to the
ruling and destruction of the reprobate; communicating and applying to his
elect, the benefits, virtue, and fruit of his prophecy, and priesthood to
their regeneration, justification, sanctification, preservation, and
strengthening in all their spiritual conflicts against Satan, the world and
the flesh, continually dwelling in them by his holy Spirit, begetting and
nourishing in them faith, hope, love, repentance, obedience, with peace and joy
unto immortality: but on the contrary, limiting, using, restraining the
reprobates his enemies, by his mighty power, as seems good in his divine
wisdom and justice, to their seduction, hardening and condemnation, till his
appearing in glory with his mighty Angels to judge both quick and dead; where
he will be, and separate all his elect from them for ever, punishing the wicked
with everlasting perdition from his presence; and joining together the godly
with himself in endless glory.

12. Concerning his Kingdom: 2. In special.
That in the mean time, besides his absolute rule in the world, Christ has
here on earth, a spiritual Kingdom in his Church, which he has purchased
and redeemed to himself as a peculiar inheritance, into the body whereof he
does by the power of his Word, and Spirit, gather his heople, calling them
through the Ministry of the Gospel out of the world, and from Idolatry,
superstition, and from all works of darkness to fellowship with Jesus Christ,
and by him with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, and with his people, making
them a royal Priesthood, an holy nation, a people set at liberty, to show
forth the virtues of him that has called them out of darkness into his
mavelous light, and uniteth them together as members of one body in his
faith, love, and holy order unto all general and mutual duties: and instructs
and governs them by those instruments and ordinances which he himself has
prescribed in his word for the edification of his body the Church.

13. Concerning the Application of Redemption.
That the Holy Ghost is sent by the Father and the Son to make application of
Redemption only to those whom the Father has by his eternal Decree given to
Christ, and for whom Christ makes intercession to his Father, and whom the
Father accepts in Christ unto fellowship of the everlasting Covenant of his
free Grace, having called them out of the world to fellowship with Jesus Christ
by the Gospel, made effectually to that end, by the mighty power and operation
of the Holy Ghost. Which grace of effectual calling is thus dispensed to a
poor lost sinner, awakened and humbled by the Law through the effectual
working of the spirit of bondage, judging himself worthy to be destroyed for
his sins; and seeing himself utterly destitute of all help or hope of himself:
The Lord, in the preaching of the Gospel by the powerful work of the Holy
Ghost, reveals the fullness and all-sufficiencie of that grace, and salvation
which is laid up in Jesus Christ, as the only suitable good to him; that he
also enableth him spiritually and savingly to apprehend Jesus Christ as given
him of the Father. And the same Spirit, having thus enlightened him, does leave
a supernatural virtue and impression of Gods love upon the soul, whereby the
soul is drawn to close with Christ, and with that grace of God in him so
entirely, that there is now nothing between Christ and the soul, but it
willingly parts with all things that hinder his enjoying of Christ; and by this
effectual calling all that are brought to Christ, are, 1. justified, that is,
absolved from sin and death, and accounted righteous unto life, for, and
through Christ apprehended, received, and relied upon by faith. 2. They are
adopted, that is, accepted for Christ's sake to the dignity of Gods children:
They are also, 3. sanctified, that is really changed by degrees from the
impurity of sin, to the purity of Gods Image; and lastly, they are glorified,
that is, changed from the misery or punishment of sin, unto everlasting
happiness, which begins in the inward sense of Gods love to them in Christ,
whence they have hope of glory, boldness in access to God, certainty of
salvation, peace, joy unspeakable; and it ends in their full perfection in
soul and body.

14. Concerning a particular instituted Church, and the Privileges thereof.
That it is a company of faithful and holy people, or persons called out of
the world to fellowship with Jesus Christ, and united in one Congregation to
him as members to their head, and one with another, by a holy covenant for
mutual fellowship in all such ways of holy worship of God, and of edification
of one toward another, as God himself has required in his Word of every
Church of Christ, and the members thereof.

15. Concerning the manner of gathering a Church.
That it is the duty of all Christians, having renounced all false ways of
Idolatrous, Antichristian, and superstitious worship, and of sin, and the world
(as to instruct and govern their own families according to God, so) to join
willingly together in Christian communion and orderly covenant, and by free
confession of the faith, and profession of their subjection to the Gospel of
Christ, to unite themselves unto peculiar and visible Congregations, wherein as
members of one body, whereof Christ is the head, they are to worship God
according to his Word: To this Church he has given royal privileges, as the
holy Oracles, the Promises, the Seals of the Covenant, his presence, love,
protection and blessing in a special manner, here all that acknowledge him to
be their Prophet, Priest, and King, are to be enrolled amongst his household
servants, and to present their bodies, and souls, and gifts, and solemn
services for a spiritual sacrifice acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. Being
thus united, they, to whom God has given gifts to interpret the Scriptures,
being approved by the Church, and appointed thereunto, may, and ought to teach
publicly the Word of God, by prophesying according to the proportion of faith
for edification, exhortation, and comfort of the Church, till such time as men
may be had, fit for such office or offices, as Christ has appointed to the
public Ministry of his Church; and then they are upon due trial, to proceed
to the choice and ordination of those officers according to God: and then the
officers are to dispense the seals of the Covenant, viz. Baptism to the seed
of the faithful in their Infancy, and to others not yet baptized, when by
profession of their faith they are added to the Church: And all of the Church
that are of years, and are able to examine themselves, must communicate also in
the Lords Supper in both kinds, viz. Bread and Wine.

16. Concerning the Sacraments.
That they are in the ordinance of God, signs and seals of Gods everlasting
Covenant with us, representing and offering to all receivers, but exhibiting
only to true believers the Lord Jesus Christ and all his benefits unto
righteousness, sanctification, and eternal life, through faith in his name,
to the Glory and praise of God.

17. Concerning the power of every Church.
That Christ has given the power of choosing Officers, and of receiving in, or
calling of any member, to the whole body together of every Church, and not to
any one member apart, or to more members sequestered from the whole, or to any
other Congregation to do it for them; yet so, as every Church ought to use the
best help they can hereunto, and the most meet member they have to pronounce
the same in their public Assemblies, if they want Officers. And to this
censure and judgment of Christ, duly and orderly dispensed, every member of
the Congregation, yea, and officer also how exellent, or learned soever he be,
is subject. Yet ought not the Church without great care and advice to proceed
against such public persons.

18. Concerning the Communion of Churches.
That although particular Churches be distinct and several Independent bodies,
every one as a city compact within it self, without subordination under, or
dependence upon any other but Jesus Christ, yet are all Churches to walk by one
and the same rule, and by all means convenient, to have the counsel and help
one of another, when need requires, as members of one body, in the common
faith under Christ their only Head.

19. Concerning Church Officers.
That Christ, when he ascended up on high, gave gifts unto men, and disposed
of them in several functions, and for public ordinary ministry, he gave
Pastors, Teachers, Elders, Deacons, helpers for the instruction, government,
and service of his Church, to the worlds end; and that none may usurp or
execute a Ministry in the Church, but such as are rightly called by the
Church, whereof they stand Ministers, and being so called, they ought to give
all diligence to fulfill their Ministry, and to be found faithful, and
unblamable in all things: And that this ministry is alike given to every
Church of Christ, with like and equal power, and commission to have and enjoy
the same as God offers fit men, and means, and the same rules are given to
all for the election and execution thereof in all places: which rules and laws
it is not lawful for those Ministers, or for the Church, wittingly to neglect
or transgress in any part. And those Ministers thus chosen, and executing
their office faithfully, every Church is bound to have them in singular love
for their works sake, to reverence them according to the dignity of their
office which they execute, and to provide for them, that they be not entangled
with the cares of this life, according to the Law of Christ: And this to do,
not as in way of courtesy or mercy, but out of duty to them in the Lord; and
having hope in God, that the resurrection shall be of the just and of the
unjust; of the just, to the resurrection of life, and of the unjust, to the
resurrection of condemnation.

20. Concerning giving every man his due.
That unto all men is to be given whatsoever is due to them, in regard of their
office, place, gifts, wages, estate, and condition; endeavoring our selves to
have always a conscience void of offense toward God, and toward men.

FINIS.

