AN ABSTRACT OR THE LAWS OF NEW ENGLAND, As they are now established.

two figures, one holding an olive branch or palm, with letters T and P

LONDON, Printed for F. Coules, and W. Ley at Paul's Chain, 1641.

AN ABSTRACT Of the Laws of New ENGLAND.
CHAP. I. Of Magistrates.
1 FIrst, All Magistrates are to be chosen. Deuteronomy. 1.13.17.15. Ex. 18.21.


First, By the free Burgesses.

Secondly, Out of the free Burgesses.

Thirdly, Out of the ablest men and most approved amongst them.

Fourthly, Eccl. 10.17. Ier. 30.21.
Out of the rank of Noble men or Gentlemen among them, the best that God shall
send into the Country, if they be qualified with gifts fit for Government,
either eminent above others, or not inferior to others.

2 The Governor has power with the Assistants to govern the whole Country,
according to the Laws established hereafter mentioned; He has power of
himself, and in his absence the Deputy Governor, to moderate all public
actions of the Commonwealth, as

First, To send out warrants for the calling of the general Court. Josh. 24.1.


Secondly, To order and ransacke all actions in the Court where he sits: as,
to gather Suffrages and Voices, and to pronounce Sentences according to the
greater part of them.

3 The power of the Governor with the rest of the Counselors, is

First, Number. 11.4 to 16.
To consult and provide for the maintenance of the State and People.

Secondly, Ex. 18.22. Deu. 17.8, 9. Ex. 32.25, 27.
To direct in all matters wherein Appeal is made to them from inferior Courts.

Thirdly, To preserve Religion.

4 To oversee the Forts and Munition of the Country, 2 Cor. 19.11.32 23.45. 6.
Ex. 17.9. Prove. 24.6
and to take order for the protection of the Country from foreign invasion,
or intestine sedition, as need shall require, with consent of the people to
enterprise wars.

And because these great affairs of the State cannot be attended, nor
administered, if they be after changed; therefore the Counselors are to be
chosen for life, 1 Kings 12.6.
unless they give just cause of removal, which if they do, than they to be
removed by the General Court.

4 The power of the Governor, Ex. 18.22.
sitting with the Counselors and Assistants, is to hear and determine all
causes whether Civil or Criminal, Deu. 1.16.17.
which are brought before him through the whole Commonwealth: Yet reserving
liberty of Appeal from him to the general Court.

5 Every Town is to have Judges within themselves, Deu. 16.18
whose power shall be once in the month, or in three months at the furthest to
hear and determine both Civil Causes and Pleas of less value, and crimes
also, which are not capital: Yet reserving liberty of Appeal to the Court of
Governor and Assistants.

6 For the better expedition and execution of Justice, and of all affairs
incident unto every Court. Deu. 16.18 Ier. 36.10. and 12.
Every Court shall have certain Officers, as a Secretary to inroll all the
Acts of the Court; And besides Ministers of Justice, to attach, and fetch, and
set persons before the Magistrates; and also to execute the Sentence of the
Court upon offenders: And for the same end, it shall be lawful for the
Governor or any one or two of the Counselors, 1 Samuel 20.24.25.
or Assistants, or Judges, to give warrant to an Officer, to fetch any
delinquent before them, and to examine the cause, Acts 5.26:27.
and if he be found culpable of that crime, to take order by surety or safe
custody for his appearance at the Court.

And further for the same end, and to prevent the offenders lying long in
prison, it shall be lawful for the Governor, with one of the Counsel, or any
two of the Assistants or Judges, to see execution done upon any offenders for
any crime that is not capital, according to the Laws established: Yet still
reserving a liberty of Appeal from them to the Court, and from an Inferior
Court to an Higher Court.

CHAP. II. Of the free Burgesses and free Inhabitants.
1 FIrst, All the free Burgesses excepting such as were admitted men before the
establishment of Churches in the Country, shall be received and admitted out
of the members of some or others of the Churches in the Country, such Churches
as are gathered or herafter shall be gathered with the consent of other
Churches already established in the Country, and such members as are admitted
by their own Church unto the Lords-Table.

2 These free Burgesses shall have power to choose in their own Towns fit and
able men out of themselves, to be the ordinary Judges of in feriour Causes, in
their own Town, and against the approach of the General Court to choose two or
three, as their Deputies and Committees, to join with the Governor and
Assistants of the whole Country, to make up and constitute the General Court.

3 This General Court shall have power,

First, By the Warrant of the Governor or deputy Governor, to assemble once
every quarter or half a year or oftener, a^ the affairs of the Country shall
require, and to sit together till their affairs be dispatched.

2 To call the Governor and all the rest of the public Magistrates and
Officers into place, and to call them also to accoumpt for the breach of any
Laws established, or other misdeameanour, and to censure them as the quality of
the fact may require.

Thirdly, To make and repeal Laws.

Fourthly, To dispose of all Laws in the Country, and to assign them to
several Towns or persons, as shall be thought requisite.

Fifthly, To impose a leavy of moneys, for the public service of the
Commonwealth, as shall be thought requisite for the provision and protection
of the whole.

Sixthly, To hear and determine all causes, wherein appeal shall be made unto
them, or which they shall see cause to assume, into their own cognizance or
judicature.

Seventhly, To assist the Governors and Counselors in the maintenance of the
purity and unity of Religion, and accordingly to set forward and uphold all
such good causes as shall be thought fit, for that end, by the advice with
consent of the Churches, and to repress the contrary.

Eighthly, In this general Court nothing shall be concluded but with Common
consent of the greater part of the Governors, or Assistants, together with the
greater part of the Deputies of the Towns, unless it be in election of
Officers, where the liberty of the people is to be preferred, or in judging
matters of offense against the Law, wherein both parties are to stand to the
direction of the Law.

Ninthly, All the householder of every Town, shall be accounted as the free
Inhabitants of the Country, and accordingly shall enjoy freedom of Commerce
and Inheritance of such lands, as the general Court or the several Towns
wherein they dwell shall allot unto them, after they have taken an Oath, or
given other security to be true and faithful to the State, and subject to the
good and wholesome Laws established in the Country by the general Court.

CHAP. III. Of the protection and provision of the Country.
1 FIrst, A Law to be made (if it be not made already) for the trayning of all
men in the Country fit to bear arms unto the exercise of military
Discipline; and withal another Law to be made for the maintenance of military
Officers and Forts.

2 Because fishing is the chief staple commodity of the Country, therefore
all due encouragement to be given, unto such hands as shall set forwards the
trade of fishing; and for that end a Law to be made. That whosoever shall apply
themselves to set forward the trade of fishing, as Fishermen, Mariners and
Ship wrights, shall be allowed, man for man, or some or other of the Laborers
of the Country, to plant and to reap for them, in the season of the year, at
the public charge of the Commonwealth, for the space of these seven years
next ensuing; and such Laborers to be appointed and paid by the Treasurer of
the Commonwealth.

3 Because no Commonwealth can maintain either their authority at home, or
their honor and power abroad, without a sufficient Treasury: a Law therefore
to be made for the electing and furnishing of the Treasury of the
Commonwealth, which is to be supplied and furnished.

1 By the yearly payment.

First, Of one penny, or half penny an Acre of Land to be occupied throughout
the Country.

Land in common by a Town to be paid for out of the Stock or Treasury of the
same Town.

Secondly, Of a penny for every beast, Horse or Cow.

Thirdly, Of some proportionable rate upon Merchants.

This rate to be greater or less as shall be thought fit.

2 By the payment of a barrel of Gunpowder, or such goods, or other munitions
out of every ship, that brings foreign Commodities.

3 By fines and mulcts upon trespassers beasts.

4 A Treasurer to be chosen by the free Burgesses out of the Assistants, who
shall receive and keep the Treasury and make disbursements out of it, according
to the direction of the general Court, or of the Governor or Counselors,
whereof they are to give an account at the general Court.

It shall pertain also to the Office of the Treasurer, to survey and oversee
all the munitions of the Country, as Cannons, Culvering, Muskets, Powder,
Match, Bullets, and to give account thereof to the Governor and Counsel.

5 A Treasury also or Magazin, or Storehouse to be erected, and furnished in
every Town, as Deuteronomy. 14.28. distinct from the Treasury of the Church, that
provision of Corn and other necessaries, may be laid up at the best hand, for
the relief of such poor, as are not members of the Church; and that out of it
such Officers may be maintained, as Captains and such like, who do any public
service for the Town: But chiefly this Treasury will be requisite for the
preserving of the livelihood of each Town within it self.

That in case the Inheritance of the Lands belong to any Town, come to be
alienated from the Townsmen, which may unavoydably fall out: Yet a supply may
be had and made to the livelihood of the Town by a reasonable Rent charge, upon
such alienations laid by the common consent of the Land-owners and Townsmen,
and to be paid unto the Treasury of the Town.

This Treasury to be supplied.

1 First, By the yearly payment of some small rate upon Acres of Land.

2 By fines or amerciaments put upon trespassours beasts.

A Town Treasurer to be appointed for the oversight and ordering of this chosen
out of the free Burgesses of the same Town, who is to dispose of things under
his charge, according to the directions of the Judges of the Town, and to give
account at the Towns Court to the Judges and free Burgesses of the Town or to
some elected by them.

CHAP. IV. Of the right of Inheritance.
1 FIrst, Forasmuch as the right of disposals of the Inheritance of all Lands
in the Country, lies in the General Court, whatsoever Lands are given and
assigned by the General Court, to any Town or person shall belong and remain
as right of Inheritance to such Towns and their successors, and to such
persons and to their heirs and Assigns as their propriety for ever.

Whatsoever Lands belong to any Town, shall be given and assigned by the Town
or by such Officers therein, as they shall appoint unto any person, the same
shall belong and remain, unto such person and his heirs and assigns as his
proper right for ever.

3 And in dividing of Lands to the several persons in each Town, as regard is
to be had partly to the number of the persons in family: To the more assigning
the greater allotment, to the fewer less, and partly by the number of beasts,
Number. 26.53 54. Number 35.3.
by the which a man is fit to occupy the Land assigned to him, and subdue it:
Eminent respect (in this case may be given to men of eminent quality and
descent) in assigning unto them more large and honorable accommodations, in
regard of their great disbursements to public charges.

4 Forasmuch as all Civil affairs are to be administered and ordered, so as
may best conduce to the upholding and setting forward of the worship of God in
Church fellowship. It is therefore ordered, that wheresoever the Lands of any
man's Inheritance shall fall, yet no man shall set his dwelling house above the
distance of half a mile or a mile at the furthest, from the meeting of the
Congregation, where the Church does usually assemble for the worship of God.

5 Inheritances are to descend naturally to the next of kin, Number. 27.7. to 11.
according to the Law of Nature, delivered by God.

6 If a man have more Sons than one, Deu. 21.17
then a double portion to be assigned, and bequeathed to the eldest Son,
according to the Law of Nature, unless his own demerit do deprive him of the
dignity of his Birthright. 1 Chr. 5.1^


7 The will of a Testatour, is to be approved, or disallowed by the Court of
Governors, and Assistants, or by the Court of Judges in each Town; yet not to
be disallowed by the Court of Governors, unless it appear either to be
counterfeit or unequal, either against the Law of God, or against the public
weal, or against the due right of the Legatours.

8 As God in old time, in the Commonwealth of Israel, forbad the alienation
of Lands from one Tribe to another, so to prevent the like inconvenience in the
alienation of Lands, from one Town to another it were requisite to be ordered.

1 First, that no free Burgess, or free Inhabitant of any Town shall sell the
Land allotted to him in the Town, (unless the free Burgess of the Town give
consent unto such sale, or refuse to give due price answerable to what other
offer without fraud) but to some one or other of the free Burgesses, or free
Inhabitants of the same Town.

2 That if such Lands be sold to any others, the sale shall be made with
reservation of such a rent charge to be paid to the Town Stock, or Treasury of
the Town, as either the former occupiers of the Land were wont to pay toward
all the public charges thereof; whether in Church or Town, or at least after
the rate of three shillings the acre or some such like proportion, more or
less, as shall be thought fit.

3 That if any free Burgesses, or free Inhabitants of any Town, or the heir
of any of their Lands, shall remove their dwelling from one Town to another,
none of them shall carry away the whole benefit of the Lands which they
possessed, from the Towns whence they remove: But if they shall keep the
right of Inheritance, in their own hands, and not sell it as before, then, they
shall reserve a like proportion or Rent charge out of their Land, to be paid to
the public Treasury of the Town, as has been wont to be paid out of it to
the ^ublike charges of the Town and Church, or at least after the rate of three
or five shillings an Acre, as before.

4 That if the Inheritance of a free Burgess, or free Inhabitants of any Town
fall to his daughters, as it will do for defect of heirs males, that then if
such daughters do not marry to some of the Inhabitants of the same Town where
their Inheritance lies, nor sell their Inheritance to some of the same Town
as before, that then they reserve a like proportion of rent charge out of their
Lands to be paid to the public Treasury of the Town, as has been wont to be
paid out of them, to the public charge of the Town and Church; or at least
after the rate of three or five shillings an Acre, provided always that
nothing be paid to the maintenance of the Church out of the Treasury of the
Church or Town, but by the free consent and direction of the free Burgesses of
the Town.

CHAP. V. Of Commerce.
1 FIrst it shall be lawful for the Governor with one or more of the
Counsel, to appoint a reasonable rate of prizes upon all such commodities as
are out of the Ships, to be bought and sold in the Country.

2 In trucking or trading with the Indians no man shall give them for any
commodity of theirs, Silver or Gold, or any weapons of war, either Guns or
Gunpowder, nor Sword, nor any other munition, which might come to be used
against our selves.

3 To the intent that all oppression in buying and selling may be avoided, it
shall be lawful for the Judges in every Town, with the consent of the free
Burgesses to appoint certain select men, to set reasonable rates upon all
commodities, and proportionably to limmit the wages of workmen and laborers,
and the rates agreed upon by them, and ratified by the Judges, to bind all the
Inhabitants of the Town. The like course to be taken by the Governor, and
Assistants, for the rating of prizes throughout the Country, and all to be
confirmed if need be by the general Court.

4 Just waights and balances to be kept between buyers and sellers, Lev.
19.35.36. Pro. 11.1. and 16.11. and 20.10. Deu. 24 10 11, 12, 13. Exodus 22.26,
27.
and for default thereof the profit so wickedly and corruptly gotten, with as
much more added thereto, is to be forfeited to the public Treasury of the
Commonwealth.

5 If any borrow ought of his neighbor upon a pledge, the lender shall not
make choice of what pledge he will have, nor take such pledge as is of daily
necessary use unto the debtor, or if he do take it, he shall restore it again
the same day.

6 No increase to be taken of a poor brother or neighbor, Ex. 22.25. Lev.
25.36 37.
for any thing lent unto him.

7 If borrowed goods be lost or hurt in the owners absence, the borrower is to
make them good, but in the owners presence wherein he sees his goods no other
wise used than with his consent, the borrower shall not make them good: If they
were hired, Ex. 22.14, 15.
the hire is to be paid and no more.

CHAP. VI. Of Trespasses.
1 IF a man's Swine or any other beast, or a fire kindled, Ex. 22.5, 6,
break out into another man's field or corn, he shall make full restitution
both of the damage made by them, and of the loss of time, which others have
had in carrying such Swine or beasts unto the owners, or to the fould.

But if a man put his beasts or Swine into another field, restitution is to be
made of the best of his own, though it were much better than that which were
destroyed or hurt.

2 If a man kills another man's beast, or dig and open a pit, Lev. 24.18 Ex
21.34.
and leave it uncovered, and a beast fall into it; he that killed the beast, or
the owner of the pit shall make restitution.

3 If any man's beast kill the beast of another, Exo. 21.35
the owner of the beast shall make restitution.

4 If a man's Ox or other beast, Ex. 21.28, 29, 30, 31.
gore or bite and kill a man or a woman, whether Child or of riper age, the
beast shall be killed, and no benefit of the dead beast reserved to the owner,
but if the Ox or beast were wont to push or bite in times past, and the owner
has been told it, and has not kept him in; then both the Ox or beast shall
be forfeited and killed, and the owner also put to death, or fined to pay what
the Judges and the persons dampnified shall lay on him.

5 If a man deliver goods to his neighbor to keep, and they be said to be
lost or stolen from him, the keeper of the goods shall be put to his oath
touching his own innocence, which if he take, and no evidence appear to the
contrary, he shall be quit, Ex ^.2, 1^ 1.
but if he be found false or unfaithful, he shall pay double unto his
neighbor.

But if a man take hire for the goods committed to him, and they be stolen, the
keeper shall make restitution: But if the beast so kept for hire dye or be
hurt, or be driven away, no man seeing it, then oath shall be taken of the
keeper, that it was without his default, and it shall be accepted: but if the
beast be torn in pieces, and a piece be brought for witness, it excuses the
keeper.

CHAP. VII. Of Crimes.
ANd first, of such as deserve capital punishment, or cutting off from a man's
people, whether by death or banishment.

1 First, Blasphemy. Lev. 24, 11 to 16. Idolatry. Deu. 13.10 15, 16.
Witchcraft. Ex. 22:18.20.27. Lev. 19 31. Consulters with Witches. Heresy. Zac.
13.3. False worship. Ex. 32.27, 28 Scandalous livers. 1 Cor. 5.5. Revilers ^f
Religion.
Blasphemy which is a cursing of God by Atheism or the like, to be punished
with death.

2 Idolatry to be punished with death.

3 Witchcraft which is fellowship by covenant with a familiar Spirit to be
punished with death.

4 Consulters with Witches not to be tolerated, but either to be cut off by
death, or by banishment.

5 Heresy which is the maintenance of some wicked errors, overthrowing the
foundation of Christian Religion, which obstinacy if it be joined with
endeavor, to seduce others thereunto to be punished with death: because such
an Heretic no less than an Idolater seeks to thrust the souls of men from
the Lord their God.

6 To worship God in a molten or graven Image, to be punished with death.

7 Such members of the Church, as do wilfully reject to walk after due
admonition, and conviction, the Churches establishment, and their christian
admonition and censures, shall be cut off by banishment.

8 Whosoever shall revile the Religion and Worship of God, and the Government
of the Church as it is now established, to be cut off by banishment.

9 Wilful perjury, Wilful perjury.
whether before the judgment seat or in private conference, to be punished
with death.

10 Rash perjury whether in public or in private, Rash per. jury.
to be punished with banishment, just it is that such a man's name should be cut
off from his people, who prophans so grossly the name of God before his people

11 Profaning of the Lords day, Sabbath breakers. Number, 15.32
in a careless and scornful neglect or contempt thereof to be punished with
death.

12 To put in practice the betraying of the Country, Treason.
or any principal fort therein to the hand of any foreign State, Spanish,
French, Dutch, or the like: contrary to the allegiance we ow, Vnreverend to
Magistrates. Number 12.1 14, 15. Reviling the Magistrate. Rebellion etc. 1 King.
22.8, 9. and 44. Rebellious Children. Deu. 21.18, 19.20. Ex. 21.15 Lev 20.9.
Murder. Ex. 21.12, 13. Number. 35.16, 17, 18. to 33. Genesis 9.6. Adultery. Lev. 20
10 Deu. 22.22, 23. Deu 24.25 26. Incest. Lev. 20.11, 12, 19.^0. Sodomy.
Buggery. Pollution etc. Lev. 20.18.19. Whordome. Ex. 21.16. Deu. 24.7.
Man-stealing. False witness.
and profess to our Dread Sovereign Lord King Charles, His Heirs and
Successors; whilst he is pleased to protect us as his loyal subjects, to be
punished with death.

13 Vnreverend and dishonorable carriage to Magistrates, to be punished with
banishment for a time, till they acknowledge their fault, and profess
reformation.

14 Reviling of the Magistrates in highest rank amongst us, to wit of the
Governors and Counsel to be punished with death.

15 Rebellion, Sedition, or Insurrection, by taking up arms against the
present Government established in the Country to be punished with death.

16 Rebellious children whether they continue in riot or drunkenness after due
correction from their parents, or whether they curse or smite their Parents, to
be put to death.

17 Murder which is a wilful manslaughter, not in a man's necessary and just
defense, nor casually committed, but out of hatred or cruelty, to be punished
with death.

18 Adultery which is the defiling of the marriage bed, to be punished with
death. Defiling of a woman espoused, is a kind of Adultery, and punishable by
death, of both parties; but if a woman be forced, then by the death of the man
only.

19 Incest, which is the defiling of any near of kin, within the degrees
prohibited in Leviticus, to be punished with death.

20 Unnatural filthiness to be punished with death, whether Sodomy, which is
carnal fellowship of man with man, or woman with woman.

Or Buggery which is carnal fellowship of man or woman, with beasts or fowls.

21 Pollution of a woman known to be in her flowers to be punished with death.

22 Whordome of a maiden in her fathers house, kept secret till after her
marriage with another, to be punished with death.

23 Man-stealing to be punished with death.

24 False witness bearing to be punished with death.

CHAP. VIII. Of other Crimes less heinous such as are to be punished with some
Corporal punishment or Fine.
1 FIrst rash and profane swearing and cursing to be punished.

1 First, with loss of honor, or office, if he be Magistrate, or Officer:
meet it is, their name should be dishonored who dishonor Gods name.

2 With loss of freedom.

3 With disability to give Testimony.

4 With corporal punishment either by stripes, or by branding him with a hot
iron, or boring through the tongue, who has bored and pierced Gods name.

2 Drunkenness, as transforming Gods Image into a beast, is to be punished
with the punishment of beasts: Pro. 26.3.
A whip for the ho^^e, and a rod for the fools back.

3 Forcing of a maid or a rape is not to be punished with death by Gods Law,
but

1 First, with Fine or penalty to the father of the maid.

2 With marriage of the maid defiled, Deuteronomy. 22 ^ 9.
if she and her father consent.

3 With corporal punishment of stripes for his wrong, as a real slander: And
it is worse to make a whore, than to say one is a whore.

4 Fornication to be punished. Ex. 22.16.


1 First, with marriage of the maid, or giving her a sufficient Dowry.

2 Secondly, with stripes though fewer, from the equity of the former Cause.

5 Mayming or wounding of a freeman, whether free Burgess, or free Inhabitant,
to be punished with a Fine; to pay

First, Ex. 22.18, 19. Lev. 24.19, 20.
for his cure.

Secondly, for his loss,

And with loss of member for member, or some valuable recompense.

But if it be but the mayming or wounding of a servant, Ex. 21.26.27.
the ser- is to go forth free from such a service.

6 If a man steal a beast, if it be found in his hand, Ex. 22.4, and 1, 22:3.
he shall make restitution two for one; if it be killed and sold, restitution is
to be made, of five Oxen for one: If the Thief be not able to make
restitution, then he to be sold by the Magistrate for a slave, till by his
labor he may, make due restitution.

7 If a Thief be found breaking a house by night, if he be slain, Ex. 22.2, 3
his smiter is guiltless, but in the day time, the Thief is to make full
restitution, as before, or if he be not able, then to be sold as before.

8 Slanders are to be punished,

First, with a public acknowledgment as the slander was public.

Secondly, by mulets or Fine of Money, when the slander brings damage.

Thirdly, by stripes if the slander be gross, or odious, against such persons
whom a man ought to honor and cherish: whether they be his Superiors, or in
some degrees of equality with himself and his wife.

CHAP. IX. Of the trial of Causes, whether Civil or Criminal, and the
execution of Sentence.
1 IN the trial of all Causes, no judgment shall pass, Deu. 19.10 17.6.
but either upon confession of the party, or upon the Testimony of two
witnesses.

2 Trial by judges shall not be denied, where either the delinquent requires
it in causes Criminal, or the Plaintiff or Defendant in Civil causes, partly
to prevent suspicion of partiality, of any Magistrates in the Court.

3 The Jurors are not to be chosen by any Magistrates, or Officers, but by the
free Burgesses of each Town, as can give best light, to the Causes depending in
Court, and who are least obnoxious to suspicion of partiality: And the Jurors
then chosen, to be nominated to the Court, and to attend the service of the
Court.

4 The sentence of judgment given upon Criminal causes, and persons shall be
executed in the presence of the Magistrates, or some of them at least.

5 No freeman whether free-Burgesse, or free-Inhabitant to be imprisoned, but
either upon conviction or at least probable suspicion, or some crime formerly
mentioned, and the cause of his imprisonment, be declared and tried at the next
Court following, at the furthest.

6 Stripes are not to be inflicted, but when the crimes of the offendour are
accompanied with childish or brutish folly, or with lewd filthiness, or with
stubborn insolency, or with brutish cruelty, or with idle vagrancy: But
whenstripes are due, not above 40 are to be inflicted.

CHAP. X. Of causes Criminal between our People and Foreign Nations.
1 IN case any of our people should do wrong to any of another Nation, Mat. 7
12.
upon complaint made to the Governor or some other of the Counsel or
Assistants, the fact is dilligently to be inquired into, and being found to be
true, restitution is to be made of the goods of offenders, as the case shall
require, according to the quality of the crime.

2 In case the people of another Nation have done any important wrong, Deuter.
20 10, 11. 2 Samuel 20.18, 19.
to any of ours, right is first to be demanded of the Governor of that people,
and Justice upon the malefactors, which if it be granted and performed, then
no breach of peace to follow.

3 If right and Justice be denied, and it will not stand with the honor of God
and safety of our Nation, that the wrong be passed over, then war is to be
undertaken and denounced.

4 Some Minister is to be sent forth to go along with the Army for their
instruction and encouragement. Deuteronomy. 20.2, 3, 4.


5 Men betrothed and not married, Deuteronomy. 20.5, 6, 7, 8. and 24.5.
or newly married, or such as have newly built or planted, and not received the
fruits of their Labors, and such as are fainthearted men, are not to be
pressed or forced against their wills to go forth to wars.

6 Captains are to be chosen by the Officers.

7 All wickedness is to be removed out of the Camp by severe discipline.
Deuteronomy. 23.9.14.


8 And in war from men of a corrupt or false Religion, 2 Chro. 25 7.8.
is not to be accepted, much less sought for.

9 Women, especially such as have not lain by man, Deu. 20.14
little children (...) and ^^erved for spoil.

10 Fruit Trees, Deuteronomy. 20.19.20.
whilst they may be of use for meat to our own Soldiers, are not to be cut
down or destroyed, and consequently no Corn.

11 The spoils got by war are to be divided into two pars, Number. 31.21.
between the Soldiers and the Commonwealth that sent them forth.

12 A Tribute from both is to bolevved to the Lord, Number. 31.18. and 47.
and given to the Treasury of the Church, a fifth part out of the
Commonwealth's part, and a 500 part out of the Soldiers part.

13 If all the Soldiers return again in peace, not one lacking, it is
acceptable to the Lord, if they offer over and above the former Tribute, a
voluntary oblation unto the Treasury of the Church for a memorial of the
Redemption of their lives, by the especial providence and Salvation of the
Lord of Hoasts.

The Lord is our Judge, The Lord is our Lawgiver, Isay. 33.22.
The Lord is our King, He will save us.
FINIS.
The Table of the Chapters.
CHAP. I. Of Magistrates. Page 1 CHAP. II. Of the free Burgesses and free
Inhabitants. Page ^ CHAP. III. Of the protection and provision of the Country.
Page ^ CHAP. IV. Of the right of Inheritance. Page ^ CHAP. V. Of Commerce. Page
8 CHAP. VI. Of Trespasses. Page 9 CHAP. VII. Of Crimes. Page 10 CHAP. VIII. Of
other Crimes less heinous such as are to be punished with some Corporal
punishment or Fine. Page 12 CHAP. IX. Of the trial of Causes, whether Civil
or Criminal, and the execution of Sentence. Page 13 CHAP. X. Of the Causes
Criminal between our People and Foreign Nations. Page 14
FINIS.

