THE MUSES MISTRESS: OR, A STORE-HOVSE OF RICH FANCIES.

By J. C.

Written at Succidanious hours during the Action at NEWARK.

With other high Rapsodies, extracted from the choicest Wits of our Age.

LONDON, Printed in the Year. 1660.

The Lions Tale; Occasionally grounded on our first Wars, and in private
Copies dispersed: with a great reward promised to whomsoever should discover
the Author.
THree witty Wags meeting by chance together,
Resolved to Billet at A notable place for strong tiple.
IT CVTS A FEATHER:
Where to allay the fury of their Ale,
Each in his Order was to tell a Tale.
The first a POET and a PROPHET too,
Begun this Story without more ado.
In Libia a Lion once there was,
Who did in mildness Others far surpass;
So meek he was, and so indulgent too,
Some made a doubt if he were One or no.
While Others furnished their ravenous feasts
Each day in the Week with several Kinds of Beasts,
Now with a mountain Goat, or butting Ram,
Now with a wanton kid, or harmless Lamb,
Now with a princely Stagge, or nimble Roe,
A velve^-headed Bu^k or bouncing Do;
Wherewith they stored, if we may trust the Fable,
In various dishes their Vitellian Table.
This courteous Lion was so humble grown
As he would scarce make usage of his own.
Others made booties of their Subjects, He
Both for their votes and voices made them free.
Others by their Projectors did devi^e
New Impositions, Lays, Monopolies,
And to enlarge their Purlue, found a feat
To lay excise upon the meat they eat.
No ancient forest Law but they were at it,
To swinge the infringer with a penal Statute.
None were exempted; for they would allege
A Lions will should be his privilege.
But these Examples could but little move
This tender Lion, who was made of love.
Herds might securely graze, or choose their way,
His royal Spirit scorned to make a prey
Of any Subject: nor stood they in danger:
If he were moved, it was a Princely anger:
And such as their submission quickly might
Attemper well when it was at the height.
But see how Lenity may be abused!
Those wronged him most, whom he had kindl'est used.
These ill-condition'd Beasts within a while
By the poisonous practice of the Crocodile,
Who for his subtle Council might be well
Styled amongst these Beasts the sole Achitophel,
With one joint voice, vote and unite consent
Begun to slight their Sovereigns government;
Whose sweet indulgence such contempt did bring
As none amongst them but would play the king,
Or represent his person, or else be
As like unto a King in Majesty,
Port, posture, presence, though by usurpation,
As their poor Cricket physnomy could fashion.
There might you see Bull, Tigre, Bore and Bear,
The Cat a Mount, Pard, Dromodarie, Dear,
The Griffin, Antilope, and Manticore,
The Scythian Ounce, and Cretan Minotaure,
The beak'd Rhinoceros and Porcupine,
The Hybris, Hyene, Wolves of Erycine,
The Libbard, Bugle, Camel, Elephant,
Which of all Beasts they made their Presidant,
For unto Him, they ought allegiance to,
Their knees were grown so stiff, they could not bow.
The Bever showed how he was in request
With all degrees, both with the worst and best:
But having found his Wool adulterate,
It was not held fit staple for the State.
The precious Bezer too would stand for one,
And of his stones erect a royal Throne.
The Horn'd-Beasts caused their Antlers to be sawne
That they might stalk like Lions ore the lawne.
And that they might be held more fit to reign,
Each got his curled front and braided maine.
These might you see rapt with Promethian heats,
To act the parts of Kingly Counterfeats.
Nor did these Great ones only thus aspire,
There sprung ambition in the Lower quire;
All had desire in sovereignty to share,
The Squirrell, Weasel, Ferret and the Hare,
The wanton Monkey, active Marmosite,
The shady Forests dainty Catomite,
The Reynald, Pollard, Vrchin and Baboun,
All held in competition for the Crown.
The Dormouse needs would to a Scepter creep,
Though he knew no vocation but sleep.
The stone-blind Mole straight left his pioning,
And though he saw no Court would act the King.
Nay those who differed most from Lions shape,
The skudding Coney, Badger, Ermin, Apo,
That in their Lawless Claims they might prevail,
Supplide their wants by purchasing a Tail.
In this anarchicall Seat None but would rule,
The Ass would be a King, the Queen a Mule.
Nay, what was worst of all, the Lions Jack,
Who from revolting should have kept these back,
Left his indeared Master, as if He
Resolved with rest to stand for Soveraigntie.
Unthankful Mungrell! that a Prince so just
Should in a Protean puffin place such trust.
Nor had he worth to make him look so big,
Only sleek skin, and courtly Periwigge:
A silken-civet-comfit-curtain-Sward,
Who with his paws a League contracted had.
The Elke likewise with his twice-branched head,
As if he had of curtsies surfeted,
Disloyal to his Sovereign Liege appeared,
By making head with that tumultuous Heard.
For that Amphibian temporizing Otter,
He gave but aim, and showed himself a Nuter.
These State-distractions bred so great a rent,
The Forest lost her face of government.
None of them all did in opinion suit,
One needs would sway the Empire absolute;
Others more popular, desire to see
The Monarchical State brought to Democracy;
Aristocratick, None, the or'e-voted Peers,
Feared lest the Rout should have them by the ears.
These having sought to force him from his throne,
Stickt not to say, his Cave was not his own.
Which to redress, and salve those wrongs were done him,
The loyal quick-ey'd Linx, as did become him,
Whose long experience politickly knew
By these Events what might e're long ensue;
Hyes to the Unicorn with winged speed,
And tells him how the Springs were poisoned;
Wishing that these might by his hoof be tried,
Which were corrupt and which were purifide:
For if his Art applide no remedy
The Beasts would perish of a Lethargy;
Having drunk so of their Lethpan Spring,
As they would forgot they ever had a King.
The Unicorn admitting no delay,
To-Brooks, Wells, Rivers makes his speedy way:
Where having dipped his Horn, He does restore
And make those wholesome were corrupt before,
Which brought this rare effect; those that were sick
Of the Colts evil, or were Lunatic,
Phrentrick, or Epileptick, or had knees
They could not bend, a general disease,
Or Liver-grown, or what Physicians call
Contagious or Epidemicall,
All received speedy cure, and by this water
Were quite transformed into an other nature.
Thus these Elpenors, who had lost their shapes,
And changed their Habits with the Slough of Snakes,
For by Circaean Spells they struck such shelves,
They neither knew their Sovereign nor themselves,
By the expert Unicorns divinest skill,
Were brought to spy and rectify their ill.
The loyal Linx unwilling to neglect
The issue of so glorious an effect,
Which was but in his Embrio, as he thought,
Till it to more perfection were brought;
Awakes the Lion, tells him roundly how
His long indulgence had made this ado;
Wished him to show himself, since his retire
From State-affayres had caused them to aspire.
Distinquish men (said he) He cannot strike
With equal hand that guerdons all alike.
"None with discretion ever him approved
"Who loved where scorned, and scorned where he was loved.
Let the Malignant party straight receave
What their licencious acts deserved have:
These to give foment to their foul disease
Threw on your Person such reports as these:
"He and his Branches could no comfort be,
"Nor merit the Style of royal Majesty,
"That Wicked Council which upon him wait,
"Were Agents to procure him all this hate.
If such words do not high Allegiance break,
It skills not much what saucy Subjects speak.
Observe this Maxim then; it will behove you,
For 't comes from him whose heart does truly love you:
"He, who no difference makes 'twixt friend and foe,
"Shall never know well how the world does go.
Nay, He shall sure before he see his end,
Foster ten foes for one endeared friend.
The well-condition'd Lion hearing this,
How they abused that Clemency of his,
For now so weak were his revenues grown,
He had no Laire nor Pasture of his own;
Roused himself up, and to the Forest goes
TO inflict condign punishment on those
Who had usurped a Sovereignty of State;
And that He might his Honor vindicate,
From the Elephant unto the silly Mouse
All summoned were to his Grand-Session-House.
But these State-proselites were all prepared
Before such time as they this Summons heard,
With a submissive Loyalty to wait,
And beg for pardon at the Palace gate.
Only the Camel and some five with him
For their bunch'd backs could no way enter in.
The rare-compassionate Lion straight appears,
Regreets his Subjects both with threats and tears;
And that He might with Power and passion woo them
He thus imparts his royal mind unto them.
O with what freedom (Sirs) could we forgive,
If it might stand with our prerogative,
Your Wild licentious factions! but since
These on our high endeared Honor trench,
We must extract some ill-digested blood,
"Who spares the ill, he ever spoils the good.
Some of you held us such a worthless thing
As we deserved not the Title of a King.
We must divested be of Style and Place;
Now tell me, Sirs, if ye were in my case
Would this admit your pardon? Naught held Ours
But was derived from that scrude power of yours.
Pasquills and Libels fixed on every Gate
To make us hateful to the eye of the State.
And these things past with all impunitie,
As if Pens held their year of Jubilee.
Lastly, How They so trecherously stout,
From our own purlue kept our presence out.
This Clause produced such passion, not an eye
Of all those numerous Convertites was dry.
The very Crocodile and Hyene seemed
Drilling down trickling tears, but they were feigned;
For by their private muttering below
All might collect this was a painted show;
"For who is the (jeer^^ they) would not rebel
"When such attempts as these fall out so well?
"Or who will not dare to aspire unto a Crown,
"When Treason may be pardoned so soon?
Which the Prince perceiving, how no honest zeal
Engaged their Hearts to Prince nor Common weal,
But glozing faith, which at such restless times
Might breed distractions in malignant minds,
And nurse fresh furies; On these and ten mo
Death was pronounced, and the rest let go,
With this advertisement; that if from thence
They ever swerved from their allegiance,
Or like dis-loyall Subjects, did not give
All freedom to his high prerogative,
They should lose Life's, lands, Liberties and State,
With Commons curse, times brand, and Princes hate.
This they subscibed to with joint expression,
While Vive le Roy closed this High Session.
When the other wags should have their Tales begun,
They fell asleep before this Tale was don.
Now what this Tell-tale told I dare tell you,
"The Tale's a Tale, but th'Morall may be true.
From NEWARK. I.C.

Upon the late Babel Parliament; no less pitifully then penitently Dissolved by
the late last Protector, Innocent Dick CROMWELL.
Dissolve Grand Synod, while we make your House
An Embleam of the Mountain and the Mouse.
Much was expected by East, West, South, North,
And from your Teeming Birth never less brought forth
Long Speches and small Sense; Those held the best
And wisest Senators that spoke the least.
One cries up Monarchy; admires a Crown;
Another Democratick votes it down.
The third Aristocratick; Others be
For none of these but Plato's Liberty,
Or Oligarchall State. -- Some side with time,
Could wish a King, but none of Stuarts line;
For that concerns their interest, and might fall
Heavy, in paying use and Principal
To their abused Creditor, whose wrong
Transcends the Expression of a mortal tongue.
Thus some would crown a Prince, but when all is don
They know not well what Head to put it on.
Next starts up the Fifth Monarchiall, whose pretense
Seems to pursue an Argument of Sense:
"As Senses in account are Five in number,
"States should be steered neither above nor under.
But One replied tartly: "Sir, you might
"Account five Pottles that you drunk last night
"For our State governors as well as these,
"Since you insist on Numbers, if you please.
Thus Judgment in distracted ranks appears
Till Union through disunion fell by the Ears;
But it proved Climias and Dametas Fight,
They challenged a Privilege of Right,
And that composed their Braule: -- So the Court broke up,
For it grew early, and high time to Sup:
Since which, when the Synod higher Matters handles
For more refreshing hours, they vote down Candles.
Next Morn, when dewy Sleep had cheered their brain,
Antaeus-like they entered Lists again;
Where with a vast expense of useless words,
Their Sole debate was for an House of Lords.
Some held it fit this Lordly House should sit,
Not to direct but to improve their wit:
And like Stars in their Own Horizon fixed,
To be with Ancient Peers of the Kingdom mixed.
But when These heard of Slingsby, Thimble by,
With Others of that See the Eglogue of the Mushrome in Musaeus.
Mushrome family,
They vowed they never would dishonor bring
By Sitting with a Thimble and a Sling,
To their Extraction: -- yet that Lower Fry
Who YEA and NO knew well enough to Cry,
That they might make some Act, took Special care,
which They performed in the OPERA; COMMON PRAYER;
Both quite suppressed; Small matter of the First,
For 'twas contrived to quench a Poets thirst,
A Malagasco knight: The last might be
"They knew not what was meant by Liturgy,
"Anthems, nor Antiphons: -- impute this chance
To no Schism then but only Ignorance.
But see how weak these Lordlings be! for yet
The Opera stand: Drake with his painted Fleet
Launceth amain like castles in the Air;
Though the vote hold firm for Stifling Common Prayer,
Which they Stand little need of, as Some say,
Having so little leisure yet to Pray.
The Cockpit holds up still for all the cost
Bestowed on Drakes Fleet and the Savage roast;
The Siege of Rhodes too, which presents more Scarrs
Then this Knight felt in all our Civil Wars;
Yet fought he with advantage we suppose,
Having the French to supersede his Nose.
But these be trifles; we must Scratch our pate
And mould the Constitution of our state,
And by the pencyle of an Artist show
Whether these Senators look Blew or no.
And now when the Door's shut up, and all dismissed,
Our Consul -- Colonels and Learned List
Of grave Justinians and Lapwings too,
Who never were taught more then Yes and No,
And with thin shells on Head, could scare on high,
Leaving their Nests before they learned to fly.
This Pasquill was writ before the Prote^^ors si^ple surprise.
We poor Plebeians much desire to know
Whether we have PROTECTOR yet or no?
How the Navy stands provided? by what ground
They steer their Course? what must be done at Sound?
When must the Army have the Arrears discharged?
When honest Cavaleers from Tower enlarged?
Whether that Fine which is on BARKSTEAD laid,
Must be remitted, or expressly paid?
And if He has not lately lost his Wits
By rendering his Lievetenancy to FITTS?
What posture of State policy? what Hand
Whether by mixed ot absolute Command
Must govern this distracted Isle? what way,
Or in what manner must we learn to pray?
What Clavis should inform us in the word
(From the leven of Assemblies bless us Lord;)
Whether the Quaker or the Neuter must
Lay Presbiteriall Principles in dust?
Whether the Armenian or Socinian shall,
If the world change, receive the higher call?
Shall not the Swede in his declining Reign
Lose our Esteem for all Will Lillies Chain?
And falling now upon these dangerous Shelves,
Should you by aydi^g Him, not lose your selves?
Did not your joint approved intelligence
Conceive such Power in your preeminence,
This Devination needs no Oedipus, if it were wrapped up in a darker Ridle, Says
deluded RICHARD.
As to give your Authentic Strength it is due,
The Protector ought more reverence to you
Then you to Him: and in plain terms aver
Him no Essential Prince but Titular?
Did your vote hold, the Act of Adultery
To be a Crime of that Mortality
As it deserved Death? -- Did't not appear
That this was first enacted out of Fear
Rather then Conscience; lest Some Ranter might
By your Defects incroach upon your Right?
But leaving these; How did your prudent Watch,
Seek by prevention to dive^t that Match
'Twixt Spain and France? an Act of Consequence,
Which should you frustrate by your providence,
It were a grand design, and such a feat,
It might procure a Kingdom by Escheat
To the Heir apparent: But both Pates and States
Must yield Submission to the will of Fates.
"Your Power in the House was such, none could withstand it,
"But there is an Upper House can countermand it.
-- BUT They Are dissolved; each hyes unto his home,
Like Bees to Hives without an honey-Combe:
For how were it possible They should b^ing more
Sucking rank poison from the Helebore?
"Fury, Distraction, Envy, Discontent
"Brought up both Front and Reere in the Regiment.
Now have we time to imagine, if you please,
The Burgess and his Bride being laid at ease,
How they discoursed; wherein She clearly shows
Her Native Appetite to foreign News.
For Scarcely had he yet imployd a Sense,
Or Consul, like paid due Benevolence,
Which by a quick conception might incline
To the Member of a Parliament in time;
Till she incounters her Endimion Hector
With this familiar secret Curtain Lecture.
"Tell me, my Dear, what may enacted be
"Since your Addresses took a leave of me:
And pinching him, quoth she, speak to me Slowthing,
"What have you done? He snorting answered -- Nothing.
"What a State-Clod is this! -- How sat those Scots
"And Irish in your Senate House? -- like Scots.
"What a sad Consul's this! Speak, who must pay
"The Army their arrears? -- whom they obey.
"Who may that be; Protector, or the Senate?
" -- Pray thee no more, I was not there this sennet.
"A careful Commonwealths man, trust me; could
"Your service to your Country be so cold?
"Surely such Members stood in need of Curing:
" -- So did the HOUSE too, for a dangerous Murren
" -- Had influence ore the Consuls: for Some did
" -- (To their advantage) ere their wits were tryde,
"A wise dispatch! -- But why sat you so long?
" -- We sat indeed, till we had lost our tongue,
" -- Our SPEAKER grew infirm, judicious CHUTE;
" -- How should we then hold out, when He stood mute?
" -- CHALLINER CHUTE, LISLEBONE LONG Recorder of LONDON, THOMAS BAMPFIELD
Recorder of EXCETER.
Yet one supplied him, weaker far though strong
" -- For CHUTE was pithy, but his Lungs were long;
" -- But One an other from their Office putts,
" -- For LISLEBONE LONG grew gangreen'd in his gutts:
" -- And BAMFIELD straight designed for the Chair,
" -- Heavens bless Him from his Predecessors air;
" -- Lest He sink suddenly into his Tomb,
" -- As many of our Senators have done.
" -- Nor skills it much if this Employment wear him,
" -- Being no flesh, nor fish, nor good red Hering.
"How fares your grave Petition of Advice?
" -- Quite lost in reputation of the Wise.
But for the Court -- design, what votes have done it?
" -- The Irish trouses, and the Scottish bonnet.
" -- Though since our Protectorians lost that point,
" -- For their State-noses now are out of joint.
"But what Disolv'd you? I shall council keep,
"Resolve me this, I Will give thee leave to sleep.
"Was it the Protector, or the House of Lords!
" -- No; but a Regiment of daring swords.
" -- That did the work; so as, I hold it vain
" -- For any Member to stand up again
" -- And there was Reason for it, our sould^^^^ say,
" -- For by this means they may injoyne their pay.
Well; by my vote, Men shall no more be sent,
Fenceforth let us have a Salique Parliament.
For though the Masculine be the worthier Gender;
The Feminine may prove as sound a Member:
Then to exclude us, were it not great pity,
Since wee'r held fittest for a Close Committee?
Sleep Salique Burgess; coople, coll and kiss,
No Burgess Place is either thine or His.
Our Sessions nurture no such Cubbs as you,
"New Consuls must bid Westminster adue.
The Good old Cause mounts now with Eagle wings,
Lopping light Heads off as it did the Kings:
And though their Number scarcely make a vote,
Prynns prating must not make them change their Note.
These two Poems, Entitled, THE LIONS TALE AND THE BRAINS-TRAP PARLIAMENT,
Were composed by the pregnanst Fancies and clearest Judgments of our time.
FINIS.

