CERTAIN QUERIES Tending to Accommodation and Communion of Presbyterian and
Congregationall Churches.

BY Mr JOHN COTTON late Teacher of the Church at Boston in New England.

Published by a Friend to whom the Author himself sent them over not long
before his Death.

LONDON Printed by M. S. for John Allen and Francis Eglesfield in Paul's
Churchyard. 1654.

Certain Queries tending to the mutual Accommodation and Communion of
Presbyterian and Congregationall Churches; delivered in 11 Propositions, and
humbly presented both to the Consideration and Examination of them according to
God;
BY Mr JOHN COTTON.
The 1. Querie.
Whether may it not be safely acknowledged, that the Congregations of
Christians subject to Presbyteriall Government, preaching and professing the
Truth of the Gospel, and not over-growne with ignorant and scandalous Persons,
are true and holy Churches of Christ?

BEcause, such Churches, (for the Matter of them) consist of visible Saints,
(at least a principal part of them) especially when they present themselves to
sit down before the Lord at his Table. And for the Form; they do agree
together in choosing their own Minister, in attending duly to the Ministry of
the Word and Sacraments, and in submitting to the Doctrine of the Gospel: which
implies a real and visible (though implicit) profession of the Covenant of
grace requisite to Church Estate.

Object. The Parish-Churches in England were Antichristian, if not in their
first Institution, yet at least for these many hundred years; and were never
since unchurched, nor new molded out of their Anchristian Apostasy.

Answ. 1. The Gospel of Christ was preached and received in England ten years
before it was i^. Rome (as may appear by Gildas, and may be inferred from
Baronius also, Annal Anno Christi 35.5. and 45.1.) and that by the Ministry of
Apostles and Apostolic men, who doubtless did at first institute Churches,
not after the Pattern of Rome (which then was not a Church) but according to
the Pattern of the Apostles. 2. Neither were they unchurched by the
Antichristian Apostasy which afterward grew upon them (as a Leprosy) but were
only corrupted and polluted, even in many fundamentalls, both in Doctrine,
Worship, and Government, which made them like unto the Israelites under the
Apostasy of Jezabel, the generallity being carried away by the Corruption of
the times, but a Remnant reserved (through grace) which bowed not the knee to
Baal. 3. Since the Beginning of the Reformation, many of the Church Members (by
the power of the Gospel) reformed to a new estate of visible Saints, and the
fundamental corruptions in Doctrine and worship were purged away, and both of
them so renewed as that the presence and power of Christ was discerned in the
face of the Ordinances. And for the Government, though it give not being (but
wel-being to Churches yet) it has also been growing more and more into better
order unto this day. In so much that Protestant Churches have renounced
fellowship with Antichrist and his Churches, and have separated from them in
Doctrine, Worship, and Government: which if it reach not to a new-churching,
yet it is a renuall of their Church estate, and a new moulding of them into a
more holy way of Administration of Church-Ordinances; so that now they stand as
Churches gathered out of the world both of Antichristians and of Pagans. The
Israelites after their Return from under the Apostasy of Jezabel, did neither
solemnly unchurch themselves of their former corrupt estate, nor Inchurch
themselves into a better new estate; but being called to Repentance by the
Kings Proclamation, and their hearts being bored of God to submit themselves
thereto, though they fell short of a full Purification, yet they were received
to the Lords Supper (the Passover) together with their Brethren of the purer
Church of Judah. 2 Chro. 30.18, 19, 20.


The 2d. Querie.
Presupposing then the Presbyterian Congregations to be true Churches, Whether
hence It will not clearly follow, that the Ministers called by them (being
otherwise men of Ministerial gifts) are true Ministers; and the Sacraments
administered by them are true Seals of the Covenant of Grace?

The 3d. Querie.
Nevertheless, Whether may it not be justly doubted, that the estate of both
Churches is sinfully defective; The Presbyterian, partly in their Materials,
in case the Members, diverse of them, be (not professed Saints, but) either
ignorant or scandalous, and apparently carnal and worldly: partly in their
Government, by the Presbyters of other Churches; which way of Government,
though it had place (in sundry Cases) in the National Church of the old
Testament, yea, and in the New Testament, might be practiced for a time by the
Apostles themselves (who were Oecumeniall Governors of all Christian
Churches:) yet the same was never delegated nor commended to the Pastors and
Teachers of particular Congregations? The Congregationall likewise how can they
be excused, in case there be any such as do admit all manner of Sects into
their Covenant and Communion; and will not allow the Civil Magistrates to
proceed to the Censure of seducing Heretics and profane Blasphemers?

The 4. Querie.
For the Healing of which defects; were it not much to be wished that the
Members of Presbyterian Churches, did once publicly profess their Faith and
Repentance before their partaking of the Lords Table? (as John Baptists
Disciples did before their Baptism, and as Members of Congregationall Churches
do before their Admission:) that so None such as were ignorant or scandalous
might be admitted to the Lords Table till they were duly approved to be Men of
knowledge, sound in the Faith, and blameless in conversation? And further
also, whether would it not much conduce to a more full and clear acceptance of
their Administrations, If their Elders in the Classis did put forth no
Authoritative Act, touching the Members of other Churches, but consultative
only; nor touching their own, but (upon hearing the advice of Fellow Elders
in difficult cases) to proceed each one with the Cognizance and Consent of his
own Church at home respectively?

The 5. Querie.
For want or Neglect hereof, Though the Members of Presbyterian Churches should
discern some Defects in the Order and Government of their Churches; yet
whether may they suddenly break off Communion with them till they have
convinced them of their Defects, and duly and patiently waited for their
Reformation?

It may seem No: For if we must take a more delatory course for the healing of
a private Brother, in a way of brotherly love, with much meekness and patience;
how much more ought we so to walk toward an whole Church?

The 6. Querie.
Such a Brother, though as yet remaining a Member of a Presbyterian Church yet
sensible of the Defects of his own Church, and being otherwise known to be
fit, why may be not lawfully and without scruple be received to partake at the
Lords Table (as occasion serves) in a Congregationall Church?

For such an one is both a Member of a true Church, and cleansed from the
defects of his own Church.

The 7. Querie.
Yea, suppose a godly Christian do continue Presbyterian in his Judgment, and
yet do approve also of a Congregationall way, and is destrous to join in
Covenant with a Congregationall Church, whether may be not in due order be
lawfully admitted and continued a Member of a Congregationall Church? Yea
further, Notwithstanding the different state and way of Presbyterian and
Congregationall Churches, and the Defects which the one or the other may
observe or surmize either in other; yet (even whilst they so stand and walk)
whether may not the Members of either without just offense, mutually
Communicate one with another (as occasion shall be offered) at the Lords Table?

The Affirmative seems probable; For as Error in Judgment about Discipline
is not an Heresy against the Foundation of Christian Religion. And the Apostle
instructs Christian Churches to receive the Christian Jews into their
Church Fellowship, who yet dissented from them about the obsetvation of
Leviticall Rites, which were as much discrepant from the Truth of the Gospel in
the Order of worship, as these other be in Order of Government.

Besides, God accepts cleanness of heart in his faithful servants in their
approaches to his Table, though there be defects in full cleansing, according
to the Order of the Sanctuary. 2 Chronicles. 30.18, 19, 20.

The 8. Querie.
If a godly Minister called to Office by a People professing Godliness (whether
under Episcopacy, or Presbytery) and afterward repenting of any known sin in
his way, shall be desirous of a more pure Reformation; whether may not his
godly people acknowledge his Ministerial Calling without sin?

Why not? For he had the Essence of a lawful Calling before, in the free
choice of his godly People, and in his own free acceptance of them and of
their Call. Nevertheless, if any of his godly People should stumble at his
former Calling, whether may not a more select Company and body of the People
renew their Call of him, and there to accept the Concurrence and Consent of the
rest of the Congregation? And whether may not he also do well (instead of
stiff standing upon the validiy of his former Calling) to condescend to renew
his Acceptance of them yea, and to receive a New Ordination from them, with
express designation to the Office, either of a Pastor or Teacher; and that
without prejudice or dishonor to his former Calling? For a renewed Act does not
invalidate (much less evacuate) the old, but clear it and confirm it (so
far as there is any thing of God in it) as in Scripture all Ingeminations
do. Saul was thrice Ordained King over Israel, 1 Samuel 10.1. and ver. 24. and
11.14, 15. thrice to the same Calling, and with several solemnities. Neither
is Ordination of the Essence of a Ministerial Calling, but a solemn Adjunct
of it; which may be renewed upon occasion of any New spiritual Employment, or
Function, Place or People, Acts 13.2, 3.

The 9. Querie.
If the godly Members of a Congregation formerly subject to Episcopacy, but
repenting of their sinful subordination thereunto, and (being studious of
Reformation) have solemnly Covenanted to endeavor the same, and have chosen
their former godly Ministers (one or more) into the Pastors or Teachers Office;
Whether may not those Ministers withhold their Ignorant and carnal Hearers
from the Lords Table (though they had their consent to their Election) until
they be able to discern the Lords Body, and be fit to receive it without
profaning it? But yet, in the mean time, whether may they not dispense some
other Ministerial Acts unto them, as to Preach the Word, and also to Catechize
them and their Families? And if hereby they shall attain unto so much knowledge
of the Principles of the Doctrine of the Gospel, as to profess before the
Church both their need of Christ and his Covenant to themselves, and the Seal
thereof unto their Seed, and also their own Duty of subjection unto Christ in
his Ordinances; and shall likewise be found free from any open scandal, or
else openly judge themselves for the same; Whether may it not be lawful for
the Minister to admit them to the Lords Table, and their Children to Baptism?

For it is not with such as with Ishmael and Esau, who though they were borne
in the Church, and sealed under the Covenant of Circumcision, yet when they
grew up to years, the one mocked at the Heir of the Covenant, and the other
despised the Birthright of the Covenant; and so the one was cast out, and the
other withdrew himself from the fellowship of the Church, and both of them
deprived their children of Circumcision. But such is not the Case here of these
we speak of; but rather they are like the Seed of the Israelites, who though
many of them were not sincerely godly, yet whilst they held forth the public
Profession of Gods People ( Deuteronomy. 26.3. to 11.) and continued under the wing of
the Covenant and subjection to the Ordinances; They were still accounted an
holy Seed (Ezr. 9.2.) and so their children were Partakers of Circumcision. Yea
further though themselves were sometimes kept from the Lords Supper (the
Passover) for some or other uncleanness, yet that debarred not their children
from Circumcision.

Against this, may it not seem vain to stand upon a Difference between the
Church of Israel and our Churches of the New Testament, in that theirs was a
National Church, and ours Congregationall? For the same Covenant which God
made with the National Church of Israel and their Seed, It is the very same
(for substance) and none other which the Lord makes with any Congregationall
Church and our Seed. When the Jews and their children were cut off from the
fatness of the Olive, we and our children were engrafted into their room and
estate, Romans 11.17, 19. so that we are now become (...), coheires,
concorporate, and compartners with them of the same promise in Jesus Christ,
Ephesians. 3.6.

The 10. Querie.
When any Christians desire to be admitted into the Church, and the Covenant
thereof, whether is it regular that the Elders should take all the Trial of
them in a private Consistory alone? unless it be in way of preparation, that
so they may more fitly and safely commend them to the public Trial of the
whole Church? But were it not meet, that the last Trial of Members, upon
which they (being approved) are received either into the Church in a
Congregationall way, or to the Lords Supper in a Presbyteriall way, should be
transacted before the Church?

For as no Members are to be cast out of the Church Communion, but by the
Judgment and Consent of the Church (as well the Brethren as the Elders) so
none should be received into the Communion of the Church, but with the
approbation and Consent of the Church.

The 11. Querie.
Whether is it just matter of Offense, If a Member of any Church, which lies
under the Leaven of Corruption, after the use of all good means for the
healing of the corruptions of his own Church (be it Presbyteriall or
Congregationall) and after long waiting for the same in vain, shall at the
length (for the peace and Comfort of his own Conscience, and out of
conscionable Desire to walk before the Lord in all purity) quickly and orderly
remove his Relation, and adjoyne himself to a Church more reformed, yet not
condemning the Church (as no Church) from which he removes?

For if a man may remove his habitation for outward easments and conveniences,
and then the removal of his Relation is easily granted without offense: Then
why may he not, for the ease of his Conscience, remove his Relation, though not
his Habitation? unless his Habitation were Jure divino, an inseparable Adjunct
to his Relation, or his relation to his Habitation? Christians (as Brethren)
are called of God to bear one another Burdens, Gal. 6.2. If it be a Burden to
stay in Communion, let his Brethren ease his Burden with a Dismission.

Glory be to God in Christ Jesus, and Peace to all his Israel.
UNto the aforesaid Queries of the Reverend Author, this also may b^^efly be
added, to make up the number round.

The 12. Querie.
Whether it be unlawful, or may be truly accounted a necessary cause of
Disorder or Confusion for godly Christians, living in several Precincts or
Parishes (not far distant, but so as they may ordainarily meet together in one
place) to join in Church Fellowship together, for mutual spiritual
edification?

That it is a very convenient and defirable thing for the Members of a
particular Congregation, to inhabit and dwell as near together as they may, in
regard of their meeting together upon all occasions, and of mutual
watchfullnesse over each other, and of spiritual helpfulnesse unto one
another, is easily granted by all: yet it will not therefore follow, that it is
an unlawful and disorderly thing for them to have their Abiding and Residence
in diverse Precincts and Parishes.

Indeed it is true, that it has been accounted by the Prelates and the
Prelaticall party, a very disorderly and unlawful thing, and that which did
expose to the greatest of their spiritual censures, for people ordinarily to
go to the Assemblies of Christians out of their own Parish. But their Account
does not make or prove it to be so: neither does it seem really and in truth to
be so: For,

1 The Constitution of Parochial or Parish Churches, is not of Divine, but of
humane Institution, and that too in the very darkest times of Popery and
Superstition, viz. about 700 years ago, as learned Mr. Seldom (in his Book of
Tithes, chapter 9.) seems to intimate. So that although it may seem a disorder, (in
regard of that limitation of Parishes) for the Parishioners of one place to
join themselves unto the Church Assemblies in another; yet not in regard of
any thing appearing to the contrary from the Scripture, which is the rule for
Christians to walk by, especially in matters belonging to
Church-Administration, and Government. Neither will it (I suppose) be affirmed
by any intelligent Christian (who understanding in any measure the true Nature
of a particular Church) that Parish-bounds are the constituting cause of a
particular Church or Congregation; for it cannot be maintained that every
individual person living in such a Parish bounds, is therefore a Member of
that Church there, except it can be proved, that professed Turks, or Jews, or
Indians (who through providence may be brought into the Land, and so
necessarily reside in some Parish or other, there being hardly any parcel of
ground free in any part of England, from belonging to the bounds of some Parish
or Town) are as real and true Members of the Church there, as any Christian
man or woman in the Parish. I conceive it neither any solecisme or Paradox to
affirm, that there may be a Parish where there is no true Church of Christ, and
a true Christian Church where there is no Parish.

2 It may seem too great a bondage and sl^very, both for any Church (whether
Presbyter: or Congregationall) to be forced to receive all into fellowship in
all the Ordinances, who have their habitation or residence in the same Parish
bounds with them: and also for particular persons to be necessitated to be of
this or that particular Congregation, in fellowship with such Members, and
under the Ministry of such a man, which they cannot find so suitable to their
spirits, and so profitable for their spiritual edification, as some others,
which may not be far off from them. And whereas it may fall out (which possibly
may come in here as an Objection) that the Minister, under whom a man lives,
is taken away by death, and another one called into his place and Office by the
generality of the Church, who may be as unsuitable unto the Spirit of this or
that Brother, as the Minister of the Parish where he dwells, or as any other,
shall not be bound to submit to the choice of the Church, or must the Church
suspend their choice upon the Negative vote of any one Brother? In such a case
it is lawful for that dissenting Brother, who cannot call such a man to be his
Minister, nor own him as his Pastor or Teacher, to desire a Letter of
dismission to some other Church and Officer, whom he can more freely and
comfortably close in his spirit withal, and I suppose that Church, with whom
he has fellowship at the present, is bound to yield unto his equal and just
desire, that so they may part in a loving and brotherly manner. We do
generally allow every servant so much liberty for his outward comfort and
advantage, as to choose his own Master, in whose Family, and under whose
Government and inspection he is to live, and why should not Christians also
(being made freemen by Christ) have as much liberty for their spiritual
comfort and edification, to chose the particular Church under whose teaching
and inspection they are to abide: And why else has the Lord (out of his
infinite goodness and wisdom) given out diversity of gifts to diverse of his
Servants in the Ministry, but to suite the variety of spirits and dispositions
in his people? Every lock not agreeing with every key; as our Reverend Author
was wont to express himself, speaking of this very thing.

3 Experience does also testify, de facto, that such a course is possible to
be used and practiced without making such disorder and confusion, as is
conceived by some: For notwithstanding it be practiced by some Churches (not
only Congregationall, but Presbyteriall also, and Classical) to have their
Members scattered up and down in several Precincts or Parishes, yet there have
not any such confusion and disorder followed thereupon: as we have seen by the
constant practice of our Brethren in the Congregations both of the Dutch and
French here amongst us in England, as viz. in London, Norwich, Canterbury,
C^lchester, and in such other places where they do inhabit; who although they
be dispersed throughout the Cities and Towns where they live, yet are not
thought, nor ever were by any (except possibly by some of the Lordly Prelates,
who out of their superstitious zeal did seek to undermine and dissolve their
Congregations) to be any occasion of disorder and confusion by their Meeting
together in their holy Assemblies, from all parts of the Cities and Towns
where they dwell. And why might not the like liberty be allowed unto the
English themselves, without any just fear of disorder thereby? There seems
nothing but custom against it, for had it been but the practice and course of
the English, as it has been of the other, certainly it would not be accounted
more disorderly then theirs is.

Only if (while the division by Parishes do continue) men do allow and
contribute, not only toward the Poor, but also toward the Preaching of the
word in their several Parishes, that the word may be dispensed all the Land
over, I should not gainsay it, as I suppose the brethren both of the French and
Dutch have been wont to do, in the several Parishes where they live.

Finally, Brethren be of one mind, live in Peace, and the God of Love and Peace
shall be with you.

FINIS.

