A BRIEF EXPOSITION Of the whole Book of CANTICLES, OR, SONG OF SOLOMON; Lively
describing the Estate of the Church in all the Ages thereof, both Jewish and
Christian, to this day: And Modestly pointing at the Gloriousness of the
restored Estate of the Church of the Jews, and the happy access of the
Gentiles, in the approaching days of Reformation, when the Wall of Partition
shall be taken away. A Work very useful and seasonable to every Christian;
but especially such as endeavor and thirst after the settling of Church and
State, according to the Rule and Pattern of the Word of God.

Written by that Learned and Godly Divine John Cotton, Bachelor of Divinity;
and now Pastor of the Congregation at Boston, in New England.

LONDON, Printed for Philip Nevil, at the sign of the Gun in Ivie-Lane, 1642.

THE CANTICLES, OR SONG OF SONGS opened and explained.
THE TEXT. CHAP. I.
THe Songs of Songs, which is Solomon's.





will be glad and rejoice in thee, we will remember thy love more then wine,
the upright love thee.



















14 My beloved is unto me, as a cluster of Camphire in the Vineyards of
En-gedi.








THE EXPLANATION.
Cant. 1. verse 1. The Song of Songs, which is Solomon's.



IT was the manner of ancient times, at Espousalls and Nuptials to indite and
sing Ruth 4. 11. 12.
(Epithalamia) love-songs: Psalm. 45.
The title of which Psalm may seem to be penned by one of the chief singers
of the Temple, (who now were all of them Prophets; 1. Chron. 25. 1. to 5.
Asaph, Heman, Jeduthun,) upon occasion of Solomon's marriage with Pharaohs
Daughter; for though she was a stranger by birth from the common wealth of
Israel, yet his marriage was lawful with her: And therefore, notwithstanding
this marriage, his love to God is still commended, 1. King. 3. 1.
Solomon made affinity with Pharaoh King of Egypt, and verse 3.
Solomon loved the Lord, etc. For, indeed herein Solomon was



Secondly, this Pharaohs daughter became a Proselite to the Jewish Religion,
Psalm 45. 10. -- 14.
Hearken (oh Daughter) and consider, and incline thine ear; forget also thine
own people, and thy fathers house. etc.

Now though that marriage song was penned upon that occasion; yet it ascends
far above all earthly respects of worldly marriage, and by a divine and
heavenly workmanship sets forth a heavenly marriage-song between Christ and
his Church: of like Argument was this song penned by Solomon himself; not to
express his affections to Pharaohs daughter, or hers to him, or the good parts
of either of them: no, nor the like respects to any Shunamite amongst the rest
of his wives, as some have vainly conceived; for then how absurd and monstrous
were some of his comparisons, likening his spouse to A company of Horses in
Pharaohs Chariot, her Head to Carmel, her Eyes to Fish pooles, her Nose to a
Tower, her Teeth to a flock of sheep, her whole Self to a terrible Army with
Banners? But his scope is to describe the estate of the Church toward Christ,
and his respect toward her, from his own time to the last judgment, as
afterward it shall appear.

Now, through this whole marriagesong this Decorum it keeps, that though the
Calamities of the Church be as well described throughout this song, as the
comfortable condition of the same in all ages; yet such dismal passages are
veiled and shadowed under some sweet and amiable resemblances, lest the joy of
a marriage feast should be darkened by unseasonable mention of so sad
occurences; Neither are all the passages of the estate of the Church in every
age here described, (for how can that be in so short a song?) but the chief
heads of things in every age are sweetly, and shortly, and lively, not only
pointed at, but decyphered. These verses contain

The title.
the title of the whole book, verse 1.





Title.
verse 6. -- 9.

In the title we have

A Song.

A Song of Songs.

Which is Solomon's.

The Song of Songs, Col. 3. 6.
etc. In Collos. 3. 16. there is mention made,







Amongst the Hebrews there were Psalms made to be sung with Instruments,
Psalms.
as well as with voice, and contained Arguments of all sort, for petition,
thanksgiving, and instruction.

Songs were chiefly made for the voice.

Hymns are properly praises of God; Songs.
though any of these are sometimes put for all. Hymns.






This Song contains the estate of the Church, as well in the worst as best
times; yet Solomon can as well sing in the misery of the Church; as in her
prosperity: And Psalm. 69. 2.
David has as well Psalms of his deep waters and calamities, as of his
greatest deliverances: And the holy ghost says, Phil. 4. 4.
Rejoice in the Lord always: And though singing be chiefly fit and requisite
in Jam. 5. 13.
mirth, yet we should be fit also for a Psalm in our affliction. But we
commonly in our ill hours are too sullen to sing, and in our merry moods our
spirits vanish away in carnal mirth and jolity; but whatsoever the estate of
the Church be, we should have our spirits as ready to sing as to pray.

law and custom of the Synagogue, which prohibited young men (under thirty
years of age) the reading and use of this book; but what age fitter for songs
then cheerful youth? And further, the amorousnesse of the dittie will not
stir up wantonness in any age, if the words be well understood: but rather,
by inflaming with heavenly love, will draw out, and burn up all earthly and
carnal lust; and, even as fire in the hand is drawn out by holding it to a
stronger fire, or as the light and heat of the Sun extinguisheth a kitchen
fire; so does heavenly love to Christ extinguish base kitchen lusts.

A Song of Songs: verse 1.
That is, a most excellent Song, the chiefest of Songs: as when they would
express the holy place, they say, The holy of holiest, Exodus 26. 33.
The Lord of lords, the King of kings, the Servant of servants, an Hebrew
superlative; so this is the chiefest Song, first of all Solomon's other Songs,
1. Kings 4* 32.
even of his thousand and five.

2. Sam. 23. 1.
the sweet singer of Israel, yet as Solomon's throne exceeded his in all other
magnificence: 1. King. 1. 47.
so did his name exceed his also; yet this is no disparagement to the other
Songs; so neither that some of David's Psalms should be styled Psalm. 16. 56,
57, 58, 52.
golden Psalms: Psalm. 12. 6.
All purified gold; yet some gold wrought more exquisitely then others, and
finer engraven then others; even some portion of the pure and holy word of God,
more exquisitely penned and polished then other.

The first Reason why this Song is more excellent then others, Reason.
is, because this Song speaks not only of the chiefest matter, to wit,
Christ and his Church; but also more largely then any of David's Psalms, and
with more store of more sweet and precious, exquisite and amiable Resemblances,
taken from the richest Jewels, the sweetest Spices, Gardens, Orchards,
Vineyards, Winecellars, and the chiefest beauties of all the works of God and
Man.

Secondly, Reason. 2.
this Song admits more variety of interpretation then any other, and also
of singular use: some have applied it to express the mutual affection and
fellowship between Christ and every Christian soul; some between Christ and
the Catholic Church; some to particular Churches, from Solomon's time to the
last judgment: And there is an holy and useful truth in each one of these
interpretations; but the last does exceedingly magnify the wonderful
excellency of this Song, making it a divine abridgement of the Acts and
Monuments of the Church. And that this book was chiefly penned to be such an
historical prophecy or prophetical history, may appear,



Chap. 4. 2. with 6. 6. and 2. 7. with 3. 5. and 8. 4. 3. 6. with 8. 5.

would intimate and imply a contradiction, Chap. 3. 3. 6. with chapter 5. 7, 8, 9.
if they were not spoken of several times and several persons.

Chap. 3. 6. and 6. 10. and 8. 5.
by the sudden admiration of some new persons and occurrences.

Chap. 1. 7, 8, 9. and 5. 10.
Welbeloved, Brother, Shepherd, O thou whom my soul loves, the chiefest of
ten thousand.



2. Pet. 1. 21.
Holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost: so that he must
needs be a Saint by S. Peter's confession; and not he only, but Christ himself
says, Luke 13. 28.
All the Prophets are in the kingdom of God. Now, all the Prophets came not
near this Prophet; and there was no Scripture but it was penned by a
Prophetical and Apostolical spirit; and though Solomon did fall, yet 2. Sam.
7. 14, 15.
If he commit Iniquity, I will chasten him with the rod of Men, etc. verse 15.
But my mercy shall not depart from him, as I took it from Saul. If some say, By
this it was meant that God would not take away his kingdom; to this it is
answered, he did take it away, but he would not deal with him as he dealt
with Saul: so then this tells us Solomon is a Saint in Heaven.

[ Which is Solomon's.] The text verse 1.
Solomon the penner of it, but a wiser then Solomon indicted it: The Holy Ghost
makes choice of his Instruments, according to the use he had to put them to;
to set forth the estate of his Church by the choycest treasures of nature: He
uses Solomon's spirit, which 1. King. 4. 29, 30.
was as large as the sand of the Sea shore. Deuteronomy. 34. 1. -- 4.
And as God led Moses to the top of mount Pisgah, to behold all the places and
situations of Israel: So he lifted up Solomon's spirit to the mountain of
Activitie, (that I may so speak,) where only all times to come are present,
to behold the estate of the Church throughout the present, and all after ages.

This is to teach us, as it was said before, Use 1.
that Solomon is a canonized Saint, else he had not been a Penman of
Canonical Scripture, canonized, not by Peter's pretended successors, who have
shamefully erred in this kind; but by 2. Pet. 1. 21.
Peter himself, yea by a greater then Peter or Solomon, even Luke 13. 28.
Christ Jesus: That promise 2. Sam. 7. 14, 15.
reaches further then to prefer Solomon before Saul in reserving the
kingdom to his posterity, which he took from Saul; for even from Solomon's
posterity the kingdom was cut off in Jechoniah: 2. Sam. 7. 12, 13, 14.
The promise therefore of mercy to Solomon above Saul reaches to the bestowing
of an heavenly kingdom upon him. Besides, in that place two blessings are
promised,

I will be his father, etc.





The 2. 3. and 4. verses sing and show forth the estate of the Church in
Solomon's time. Verse 5. the estate of the Church as well in Solomon's time as in
Rehoboams: The verses following to the ninth, the estate of the Church in all
the time of Rehoboam.

In the Church of Solomon's time four passages are chiefly observable. Solomon's
time four things.


God, Pro. 8. 34. 35.
1 King 3. 5. to 10. This is expressed, verse 2.

verse 3.
to the winning of the love and admiration of the sons of men.

verse 4.
the Courts of Solomon's Temple: or his care to bring on his people to the
public worship of God, and their respect of him in regard thereof.

verse 5.
and yet the keeping of the native beauty of the Church in many others.

[ verse 2.
Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, etc.] It is a prayer of the
Church, or (which is all one) some chief member of it, for a pledge of Christ's
sweet and familiar acquaintance, and love, and fellowship with her: Kisses are
pledges and incentives of love. Pro. 24. 26.
Men shall kiss his lips that answers upright words. This is the effect of
upright Answers, men kiss his lips; but God kissing a man's lips, is the cause
of man's answering upright words; his breathing into our mouths a right answer,
makes us speak accordingly: as, on the contrary, when one answers perversely,
unjustly, erroneously, Satan then has kissed them with his kisses, he has
sitten as a 1. Kings 22. 23, 24.
lying spirit in their mouths.

[ The kisses of his mouth,] which is more then the kisses of his lips; the one
is a silent gesture of love, the other implies also amiable speeches, when
Christ





Psalm. 119. 98. -- 100.
or



Isa. 57. 19.
I create the fruit of the lips, peace, peace, etc. Solomon's wisdom is the
grace of God, as wickedness is folly; Pro. 17.
The beginning of this wisdom is the fear of God, Eccles. 12. 13.
the end of it is the keeping of Gods Commandments: This wisdom whosoever
finds, finds Christ, Pro. 8. 22. 35.
the wisdom of the Father, in whom God is well pleased with us, Math. 3. 17.
and in whom he (as it were) kisseth us; This wisdom does not only enable
us to walk godlily to our salvation, but likewise fits us to go in and out
before our families, before our people, and so enlarges us to all duties of our
callings: And to walk in the ways of this wisdom, brings peace to our
souls, and to those that live under us: Pro. 3. 17.
All her paths are peace.

For thy love is better then wine.] The favor of God in giving wisdom, and
thereby peace to a man's self and others depending on him, is more worth then
wine, (that is) then whatsoever makes the heart of man Psalm. 104* 15. and 4. 6,
7.
glad. This prayer was powered out by Solomon, the chiefest member of the Church
in this time, Pro. 3. 13. -- 15. and 31. 6, 7.
when he prayed for wisdom, 1 King. 3. 5, 9, 11.
and preferred it before long life, Jud. 9. 13.
riches, victory over his enemies, etc.

Or else this whole verse may express the desire of the Church to Solomon, 2.
Chron. 1. 7, 10. 11.
that he would express his love to her by his divine sentences, Pro. 16. 10.
Eccles. 12. 9.
and books, and songs, which are better then their civil peace, 1 King 4. 25.
then the sitting under their own Vine and Fig Tree.

Because of the savor of thy good ointments.] Verse 3.
Good ointments are the gifts and graces of Gods spirit, Ioh. 2. 27.
But the anointing which ye have reccived of him, etc. so called, because they
heal a broken heart as Luke 10. 34.
oil: the oil of Gods grace heales the bruises of the soul.

Secondly, Isay 61. 3.
as oil does make the face to shine, Psa. 104. 15.
so do they.

Thirdly, Eccle. 8. 1.
Ex. 10. 23. -- 31.
as by the holy oils all the vessels of the Tabernacle were consecrated; so by
these graces all the vessels of mercy are consecrated to God.

Fourthly, by the ointment were anointed to their offices 1 Samuel 16. 3. and 10.
1.
Kings, Exodus 40. 13, 15.
Priests, 1 Kings 19. 16.
and some Prophets; Act. 1. 8. and 2. 4, 7.
so by these graces are we anointed to God our Father in Christ, Rev. 1. 6.
Kings, Priests and Prophets. Savor is the manifestation of these graces, as
ointments are manifested by their savor. Ioh. 12. 3.


Thy name is as an ointment powered forth:] Verse 3.
that is, precious, sweet, and famously renowned; therefore do the Virgins
love thee. The Virgins in this song are such as Christ has not yet espoused to
himself, Can. 8. 8.
nor spoken for in way of marriage; Can. 6. 8.
such as carnal Jews, or the Gentiles.

Love thee:] Verse 3.


That is, First, honorably esteem thee.

Secondly, affect thy sight and fellowship.

Thirdly, seek after thee. 1 King. 28. and 4. 31, 34. and 5. 7. and 10. 1. 7,
8, 9.
This was fulfilled in Solomon: His own people reverenced him, even all of
them; his name was famous in all nations round about him: all the Kings sent to
him, and of all people some came to hear his wisdom. 1 King. 10. 1, 2.
The Queen of Sheba comes from the uttermost parts of the earth to hear it,
and counts his people happy under it: 1 King. 5. 7.
Hiram King of Tire blessed God for his wisdom.

Draw me.] Verse 4.
It may well be the speech of Solomon to Christ, praying that Christ would draw
him to the Father, near unto him in holy duties, and promising to bring all
the people to run with him after God: Or it may be the speech of the Church
to Solomon, desiring him to draw them together, by public edicts and
proclamations, to the solemn duties of Gods worship, and promising to come
freely, to run together willingly in the times of such assemblies; which was
done. 2. Chro. 2. 2, 3.


[ The King has brought me into his chambers:] Verse 4.
That is, into those bride-chambers, where Christ familiarly converseth with
them; which were three:

First, the Tabernacle of Gibeon.

Secondly, the Arc at Jerusalem.

Thirdly, the Temple.

Into these 2. Chro. 1. 2. -- 6. 1. King. 8. 5. -- 14. -- 63.
Solomon brought the whole congregation of Israel to solemn sacrifices.

The words following in this verse, show a threefold respect which the people
bear to Solomon:

First, they rejoiced in him.

Secondly, they remember his love better then wine.

Thirdly, the upright love him.

Their rejoicing in him, is recorded 1. King. 8. 66.
: their remembrance of his love more then wine, is there also implied; for,
departing from the meeting with such glad hearts, they afterward remembered the
comfort thereof, as more blessed then the peaceable living under their own
Vine and Fig Tree: The love of the upright to him continued all his time, even
when his wives, and hollow-hearted subjects flattered him, and enticed him to
toleration of Idolatry.

But consider further, that Solomon, when he is here set forth as the desire,
praise and blessedness of all his people, he is then a type of Christ,
greater then Solomon; whose heavenly fellowship and instruction the Church
desires above wine: Verse 2.
whose graces are excellent and procuring him love and renown, of whom the
Church prays to be drawn, and who leads us to fellowship with God in holy
worship; whom therefore the people rejoice in, and remember his love above
wine: the upright love him.



a Magistrate love and reputation; when, being enriched with Gods graces, as
sweet ointments, he manifests the sweet savor thereof in all his
administrations. If any man desires a good name, if any man desires love and
respect, this is the way to get it; Fill your hearts with the good gifts and
graces of God: let Gods grace show forth it self in your speeches, in your
answers, in your practices; this ointment will be stronger to get a good name,
then any other noysom thing to hinder it: The Virgins will love you, for they
rejoice at your faith; Heb. 11. 2.
and by faith our elders were well reported of. By these Solomon got a good
name all the world over.





Draw me, Verse 4.
and I will run after thee.] If Solomon once be drawn, all the people will
come after rejoicing, when they shall see the Magistrate come.

Verse 2.
delighting in his company, in his ordinances: Thus did Paul, Phil. 3. 7, 8.
I count all things loss and dross for Christ: So David, Ps. 73. 25*
Whom have I in Heaven but thee?

I am black, Text ver. 5. to 9.
yet comely, etc.]

In these verses is described the estate of the Church.

First, of Israel and Judah, in the last days of Solomon, Verse 5.
and then of Rehoboam.

Secondly, of Judah alone. Verse 6.


Thirdly, of Israel alone after the Apostasy of the ten tribes. Ver. 7, 8*


Fourthly, of Judah alone, in respect of his civil condition under the service
of the King of Egypt. Verse 9.


I am black, Verse 5.
etc.] The Church is set forth by a double adjunction, the one contrary to the
other; I am black, yet comely; and both these by comparison:

First, Black.
black, as the tents of Kedar.

Secondly, comely, as the curtains or hangings of Solomon.

First, black, by the fall of Solomon 1. King. 11. 4. 9.
.

Secondly, by the folly of Rehoboam 1. King. 12. 14, 15.
.

Thirdly,

1. By Profaneness.

2. By Schism.

3. By Apostasy.

4. By the Rebellion of the ten tribes 1. King. 12. 16, 18, 19. Comely.
. Yet comely,]

First, by the present purity of Gods ordinances in the Temple. Psalm. 48. 1, 2.


Secondly, the constancy of the upright in cleaving to God, 2 Chronicles. 13. 10. --
12.
to the King, to the house of God, and David; the which was done in profession
by whole. Judah and Benjamin, and the Israelites inhabiting in the Cities of
Judah, but in truth, by the upright. 1. King. 12. 17, 20, 23.
.

Ye Daughters of Jerusalem, etc.] Children of the Church are called Daughters
rather then Sons, as being prered as a pure Virgin for Christ their husband. 2
Cor. 11. 2.
.

As the tents of Kedar, etc.] That is, of the Arabians, who were called
Scenith, or Nomede, for that they wandered up and down, feeding their flocks in
tents, which they made of Goats hair; a course stuff of it self, and, being
weather-beaten, the more homely and black: Hereto the Prophet alludeth when he
calls the Church of Israel Ezekiel. 23. 4.
Aholah, and Jerusalem Aholibah, my tent in her: for she was then as the
curtains of Solomon.

It was David's grief Psalm. 120. 5.
that he was long conversant in the tents of Kedar: the Church was now like to
these tents,

First, in their blackness, which resembled their adversity.

Secondly, in that she now lived among the enemies of her peace, the sons of
her mother being angry with her.

Thirdly, in that black and sad defection which laid the foundation of the
after Captivity, when the Church wandered to Babel; her tent being removed as
the curtains of Solomon, or, hangings; having the name from the coupling
together, Hortensis Flavius. Joseph. Ant. 8. 2.
Josephus says, that Solomon's hals were hung with hangings of Babilonian
tapestrie in their courses of suits, and the wall of Marble underneath most
curiously wrought with rich Imagerie: It seems also, each hanging inwardly
more rich then other. Such was the estate of the Church in time of public
defection, pure and richly graced in the upright members, whom the better one
inwardly knew, the more gracious they appeared.

Look not upon me, Verse 6.
because I am black, etc.]

This Verse has two parts: Two parts*


First, an admonition of the Church of Judah to the daughters of Jerusalem, not
to despise her, nor alienate themselves from her in regard of her blackness;
or, as it is in the Hebrew, Because I am she that am black.

Secondly, a rendering a threefold Reason:

First, of her blackness.

Secondly, of their not despising her for it.

A third Reason is*

First, from the highest cause of her affliction, The Sun has looked upon
me.

Secondly, from the isntrumental cause, The anger of her mothers children
against her.

Thirdly, for the meritorious cause, which she acknowledges was wholly in her
self; her not keeping well her own vineyard, aggravated by the diverse degrees,
though they made her the keeper of the vineyards.

Look not upon me:] Verse 6.
that is

First, with a scorching eye, Sun-burning me, making me still more black by
your disdain and separation; as the Sun is said to look upon, that is, with a
scorching eye.

Secondly, with a piercing eye, as the Vultures do, whereof Job speaks, Job
28. 7.
using the same word here used of the Sun, which spieth out what he may
fasten upon, any corruption or carrion.

The Sun:] Verse 6.
that is, God Ps. 84. 11*
has looked upon me with a scorching eye, in displeasure; for he was angry
with Solomon. 1 King. 11. 9. and 12. 24.
It came not by chance, or civil causes in polity, but by divine procurement;
and therefore the daughters of Jerusalem, to make such an use of it as not to
alienate themselves the more from God by it: That which comes from God should
draw us nearer to God; He did it to set us more Kings in the Commonwealth, as
Solomon had more Gods in the Church.

The sons of my mother were angry with me,] Verse 6.
That is, the ten tribes were offended: 1. King. 12. 16.
yea this anger of the tribes was excessive, when it brake forth into such
extremity; and therefore they rather to be reproved, then the Church disdained.

They made me the keeper of the Vines:]

First, God 1. Chro. 28. 4. -- 6.


Secondly, all the tribes 2. Sam. 5. 3.


Of the Vines,] that is, of all the Churches Psalm. 80. 8.


But mine own Vineyard have I not kept:] Isa 5. 1.
that is, Matthew. 21. 33.
not the Churches of Judah and Jerusalem, Idolatry and Superstition creeping in.

No not the Vines of mine own house, my wives Psalm. 128* 3.
from falling to Idolatry, and seducing my self to toleration of it.

Tell me, Verse 7.
oh thou, etc.] This verse contains,

First, a Prayer of the faithful dispersed throughout the ten tribes, and
commanded by Jeroboam to go no more to worship at Jerusalem, but to go to Dan
and Bethel, desiring to know whither to resort to find Christ feeding his
sheep Joh. 10. 27, 28.
that hear his voice.

Secondly, a Reason to prevent her turning aside to superstitious worship, by
following such teachers as will not be subordinate to Christ, depending upon
his direction; but companions with him, usurping to prescribe with like
authority as himself in his worship 1. King. 12. 28. -- 31.


If you know not.] This verfe contains Christ's answer: Verse 8.
where observe

First, a Compellation, Oh thou fairest amongst women.

Secondly, a Supposition, If thou know not; as if he should say, it is much
thou should not know.

Thirdly, a Direction to follow in this case.

First, the footsteps of the true sheep of Christ, who went up all to
Jerusalem 2. Chro. 11. 13, 14, 16.
.

Secondly, the tents of the Shepherds, the lawful Priests, who were there
also; 2. Chro. 13. 10, 11.
there they feed the kids and young ones, who else might in time grow rammish
and rank with superstitious and bad ministers.

I have compared thee.] Verse 9.
Here the civil estate of the Church of Judah is described; for after that the
recourse of the faithful Priests and Levites had strengthened the hand of
Rehoboam, 2 Chro. 11. 17. and 12. 1, 2.
he fell away, and most of Israel with him: wherefore God sent Pharaoh Shishak
(for all the Kings of Egypt were called Pharaohs) to subdue them to his
service. 2 Chr. 12. 2, 8, 9. ver. 8, 9.
So then the Church of Judah is here set forth,

First, by her service to Pharaoh, as if, like horses, they drew in Pharaohs
triumphant Chariot 2 Chro. 12. 8.
. Josephus says, this Shishak was Sefesteris, of whom Herodotus speaks; yea
of him says Diodorus Siculus, that he caused Kings as horses to draw in his
Chariots.

Secondly, by her acceptance to God in this service; I have compared thee to
the company of my horses; and so in the Hebrew, because they had submitted
themselves under Gods just hands 2 Chronicles. 12, 6. 12.
. If Solomon had spoken of any of his Wives or Concubines, it had been a
monstrous and absurd comparison to liken them to Coach-horses: Also because
this is a marriage-song, he sets down expressly no dismal thing to
interrupt bride-chamber joy, but vaileth the service under this magnificent
comparison darkly.



If Solomon shall set up other Gods, God will set up foreign Princes in his
kingdom: If he and his people will serve other Gods, God will cause his
Princes to draw in foreign Princes Chariots: If we be at unity with other
gods, God will be at enmity with us.

to the tents of Kedar: but draw these curtains aside, and you shall find
that Gods Church is comely, like to the curtains of Solomon. Run we not
therefore from the Church because of her blackness, but run to her, and
embrace her in her most sad defections.



them out, does blast her that she is tanned and sunburned: If then it be Gods
hand, let us pity the Church so much the more, and strive with God to renew the
light of his countenance upon her.





First, he repented of his fall, acknowledged his being wanting of keeping his
own Vine; and

Secondly, he wrote this song after his fall and repentance; else, if he had
foretold his fall, and repentance before it was done, it might seem like the
Jesuits popish repentance, who confess to their Priests their sin before they
commit it: But he penned it after his fall, to assure us the more of his
salvation, which some make doubt of.

2 Chro. 13. 14. 16.
suburbs and possessions. Christ calls those the fairest among women who here
enquire after him, and sell Mat. 19. 21, 27. Luke 18. 22, 28. Mar. 10. 21, 28.
all to follow him: so these that want means of salvation at home are desirous
to seek after them, and where they find them, there they go; and part with
any thing to enjoy the purity of Gods worship and ordinances; these in Gods
account are the worthiest Christians.

1 Kin. 18. 21.
not knowing whether to join with Rome or England? Verse 8.
Go then out by the footsteps of the flocks; where the faithful hearing
Christ's voice resort, and will not hear any voice but Christ's, follow those:
now times are such (blessed be God) as every one may find out where the Church
is; but in the case of blackness and darkness, enquire then

First, for such as will hear no voice but Christ's, and follow then the
footsteps of the flock: see where they feed, there join your selves.

Secondly, where you find faithful ministers Priests, as Aarons sons, and
Levites anointed with heavenly graces: Thither carry your kids, there plant
your families to be fed under such shepherds.

Verse 9.
God gives her up to the service of foreign Princes, to draw as horses in
Pharaoh chariots: And yet being humbled for this, God will have mercy on her,
and so dispose of it, that her service shall not be base, for God will make
them to draw his yoke, though they draw it in the yoke of foreign Princes, as
Rehoboam and his people did 2 Chro. 12. 2, 4, 8, 9.


Thy cheeks are comely with rows of jewels,] Ver. 10. to end.
the estate of the Church is here described, as it was in the days of Abijam,
in these words, Thy cheeks are comely with Jewels, and as it was in the days
of Asa, both in the same words, and in the words following to the end of the
eleventh verse.

Thy cheeks,] that is the outward face of the Church are comely with rows of
Jewels; that is with keeping their right place, and order, and manner of Gods
own ordinances.

This Abijam proclaims himself to all the house of Israel; 2 Chro. 13. 10,
11, 12.
But as for us (says he) the Lord is our God, we have not for saken him, the
Priests which minister unto the Lord are the sons of Aaron; and the Levites
wait upon that business, and they burn unto the Lord every morning and every
evening burnt sacrifices and sweet incense: the Show bread also they set in
order upon the pure table.

It was not so with the House of Israel, * though Abijahs heart was not so
upright as David's; Ver. 8, 9.
1 King. 15. 3.
yet the outward face of the Church, her cheeks (as it were) were comely with
the orderly keeping and observing the ordinances of God: yea and comely also
was the face of the Church, looking up to God in distress, 2 Chro. 13. 12, 18.
which moved him to deliver you from Jeroboam.

Thy neck with chains of Gold.] Ver. 10.


Chains of gold are wholesome laws, binding like chains, to keep the worship
of God and true Religion pure as gold; such Laws are called chains: Ps. 149.
8.
This was done in the days of Asa, when he removed the Altars of the strange
gods, pulling down the high places, breaking the Images, and cutting down the
groves; commanded Judah to seek the Lord God of their fathers, and the people
willingly submitted themselves 2 Chro. 14. 2, 3, 4, 5. and 15. 12. -- 15.
to enter into a covenant or law, that upon pain of death all the people
should seek the Lord only.

We will make thee.] Ver. 11.
This shows the forwardness of the people to join with Asa in reforming
Religion, and adorning the Church, as is recorded 2 Chro. 15. 10, -- 16.


Borders of gold:] That is the borders of the kingdom, Ver. 11.
pure as gold by clensing and putting away all the Idols out of all quarters of
Judah, yea and of Benjamin also, and mount Ephraim, the very skirts, and
frontiers, and borders of the kingdom 2 Chro. 15. 8.
.

[ Studs of silver,] Ver. 11.
In works of gold, are such eminent knobs as adorn the works with variety of
colors, and metal, and workmanship: Pro. 15. 11.


Such like eminent works which did adorn Asahs reformation of the Church, even
to the very borders were these three. 3. Things.


First, his renewing of the Altars of the Lord before the Porch. 2 Chro 15. 8.


Secondly, the deposing of his mother, from her Regency for her Idolatry sake,
and defacing her Idol. 2 Chro. 15. 16.


Thirdly, the consecrating, and bringing into Gods house, his fathers and his
own dedicated Vessels of gold and silver. 2 Chro 15. 18.


While the King sits at his table,] Ver. 12.
That is, whiles Jehosaphat sits at rest and peace, refreshing himself at
home, 2 Chro. 17. 15.
God establishing his kingdom in his hand, and giving him riches and honors
in abundance.

My spikenard,] Ver. 12.
An ointment of all others most precious, Plin. lib. 11. ca. 12. Idem ibid.
of all other spices spikenard is of greatest estimation: This the Apostle John
calls very costly, wherewith our Savior Christ was anointed by Mary.

By spikenard is here meant the preaching of the word, 2 Cor. 2. 16.
which is of all savours the most precious, even the savor of life unto life.

When Jehosaphat was established in rest and peace, he sent forth the Priests
and Levites, to carry the sweet savor of the word throughout all the cities
of Judah. 2 Chro. 17. 8, 9.


A bundle of Myrrh,] Ver. 13.
Myrrh is an odoriferous tree, Plin. lib. 12. ca. 16.
that sweateth out a sweet gum called Stacte, which is preferred before all
others.

This gum is also called from the tree Myrrh, his smell is strong and
fragrant, and fit to preserve from putrefaction; and it is of much use in
embalming, and God himself recounteth it amongst the principal spices. Exodus
30. 23.


Between my breasts,] Ver. 13.
The breasts are those that give milk; 1 Pet. 2. 2.
The sincere milk of the word to the Churches children, to wit, the Priests
and Levites: These when Jehosaphat sent forth to give milk to the cities of
Judah, he sent with them a company of Noble men, Religious Princes, who added
the more authority to the Priests and Levites, and are therefore themselves
said to teach in the cities of Judah 2 Chro. 17. 7.
. Thus these Princes were as a bundle of Myrrh amongst the Priests and the
Levites, to decide all controversies amongst the people, both in matters
concerning God and the King; to preserve the people, and one another free from
corruption in all matters, whether of Religion or civil Justice. 2 Chro. 19. 5.
-- 12.
Yea, and Jehoshaphat himself representing Christ the Churches wellbeloved
upon earth, he rested in the bosom of the Church as a bundle of Myrrh, sweet,
and strongly preserving the people from corruption: from Beersheba to mount
Ephraim he went about, throughout all the people to bring them back again to
the purity of Gods worship. 2 Chro. 19. 3, 4.


As a cluster of Camphire.] Ver. 14.
Camphire is a shrub for smell like unto Spikenard, wasting the obstruction of
the spleen, and by the very smell of it making men vegestiores, and firmiores,
more lively and more strong; Plin. lib. 21. ca. 18.
yea, and available also against the biteing of serpents: such was Christ to
his Church, when the children of Moab, 2 Chronicles 20. 12.
and Ammon, and mount Seir gathered themselves together against the children of
Israel in Engedi, for by the ministry of Jehaziel, he made Jehosaphat and his
people,

First, 2 Chronicles. 20. 14, 15, 16. -- 20.
more strong in faith, to rest on God and his word.

Secondly, more lively and heartily to praise God: verse 21. 22, 23, 24.
yea, and he saved them from their enemies, themselves not striking a stroke;
though their enemies the breed of the old Serpent put them before in great
fear. verse 3. -- 12.


Behold thou art fair my love, Ver. 15.
behold thou art fair:] The doubling of the words expresses the superlative
degree, by an usual Hebraisme, fair, fair, that is, very fair; which
shows the estate of the Church in Hezekiahs time, who returned and set the
Priests and Levites in their courses, restored their burnt sacrifices and
oblations, sanctified the Priests, 2 Chronicles. 29. and 30. and 31. ver. 1, 2.
called all the people to the Passover, prayed for their healing, took away
all the Images, groves, and high places.

[ Thou have Doves eyes:] Ver. 15.
That is, chaste and loathing uncleanesse, Plin. lib. 10. cap. 34.
as Pliny reports the Doves to be. Hezekiah loathed even the monuments of
Idolatry, even the brazen Serpent, (though sometimes Gods ordinance,) when
once the people went a whoring after it: So by this means, abuses crept into
the Church, in the days of Joram, 2 King. 18. 4.
Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, are not recorded till they come to be cleansed, lest the
joy of the marriage song should be darkened by the mention of so sad
occurrences; whence also it is, that the abuses that crept in after the death
of Hezekiah, in the days of Manasseth and Ammon, are not mentioned till their
cleansing came, recorded in the days of Josiah.

Behold thou art fair my beloved, Ver. 16.
yea pleasant, also our bed is green:] This is the estate of the Church in the
days of good Josiah, who reformed it to the like estate of purity and beauty
as in the days of Hezekiah, yea, in this he exceeded him, in taking away the
high places which Solomon had built for his wives Idols, 2 King. 23. 13.
as also some other corruptions of Ahaz, ver. 12. and besides, he made all the
people to worship the Lord only, and to serve him. 2 Chro. 34. 32, 33.


[ Yea pleasant,] It being more then fair, 2 Chr. 34 1. -- 7.
so young a man to work so great a work of reformation.

Our bed is green,] The house of God was the temple, the bed in the house were
the ordinances of God, wherein God was wont familiarly to embrace his spouse,
and she him.

These in Josiahs time flourished in greatest purity, 2 Chro. 35. 18.
so that there was no Passover like unto his.

Our bed is green,] It is an allusion to the spring time, when the worship of
God began to flourish again, after a winter time of myrie and dirtie
pollutions.

The beams of our house are Cedar, Ver. 17.
and our Rafters, or Walls, or Galleries of Fur,] These words set out the
beauty of the Church, 2 Chr. 34. 8. -- 14.
in regard of the repaires of the Temple made by Josiah.

The use is to observe the several beauties and ornaments of the Church, which
are,

Jeroboam made Priests of the basest of the people; and such defect or
corruption of Gods ordinances, is a blemish conspicuous in the face of the
Church.

Asa 2 Chro. 15. 13.
Whosoever would not seek the Lord God of Israel, should be put to death. 2
Chro. 34. 33.
And Josiah took away all the abominations out of all the Countries that
pertained to the Children of Israel, and made all that were present to serve,
even to serve the Lord their God.

were made for the good of the Church, and it was their profanesse and
rebellion that say, Psa. 2. 3.
Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us.



Ver. 13.
and by their authority to give the free passage to the word, and to prevent
dissturbances which else might be offered to Ministers in their Churches, yea
all Magistrates to prevent corruptions in matters, whether of Religion or
Civil Justice, is as if a bundle of Myrrh should lodge in the breasts of the
Church.

people in public calamities, and to save them from the malignity and venom
thereof, he is then as a cluster of Camphire to the Church in the vineyards of
Engedi, as he was to Jehosaphat and his people 2 Chto. 20. 12.
when they knew not what to do. Christ is an ornament, and encourages both
Priest, Prophet and Prince, to sing a Psalm of Thanksgiving: Verse 22.
And suppose enemies should be as a cluster in the border of the Church, how
easy a thing is it for God to strengthen, and be as a cluster of Camphire, to
strengthen and encourage them against these biting Serpents.

2 King. 18. 4.
as Hezekiah did the brazen Serpent, and to set each ordinance of God in his
place: the Church then is very fair, she has Doves eyes.

Josiah did, and to restore Gods worship to her native beauty and integrity: It
is a fair, yea, a pleasant thing to behold this forwardness in any, much more
in young Princes.

Pro. 7. 16.


Josiah, to root out such Superstitions, that though abuses crept into the
Church for three or four Princes lives, yet God can cleanse and reform her,
as he did in Josiahs time: God looks not at the corruptions of his Church,
thereby to loath her, but to heal her, and thereby to glorify his grace in
her recoverie, rather then his holiness in the discovery of her pollutions.

The bed is here mentioned in the spring of her flourishing, when it began to
wax green, not in the winter season of her dirtie pollutions; and before, the
chaste eyes of the Dove recorded, abhorring uncleanness, not the eyes full of
adultery, bringing spiritual pollutions into the Church: 2 Pet. 2. 14.
when there is any Superstitious worship, there it is overspread with winter,
but when it is purged, then is the bed green; when Gods ordinances are kept
pure, there Christ delights to be.

Plin. lib. 13. cap. 5. 16, 41.
says Pliny: Fur is acceptable for his sweetness, and while he grows,
for his height, straightness and perpetual greenness: Solomon's house or
Temple was of old a lively type, partly

First, of the humane body of Christ, the Temple of the deity. Ioh. 2. 19, 21.


Secondly, of the mystical body of Christ, Col. 2. 9.
his Church or congregation, 1 Cor. 3. 16. 1 Cor. 3. 16. and 6. 19.
Christ's humane body never decays, and therefore needs no repairing;
pairing; His mystical body the Church, if it fall into decay through
corruption of doctrine or worship, it may be most fitly repaired,

First, by laying in the walls of the Church such solid and eternal truths of
God, as may hold up the walls of the building.

Thus Luther restored the Church by laying this beam of Cedar, Luther.
the doctrine of free justification by Christ.

Secondly, by setting up such worship and works for the people to walk in, as
are truly sweet and amiable in Gods sight, springing from fresh and green
sincerity, growing up to the heavens; these are like galleries of fur,
whereas vows of perfection, and works of supererogation, and all other
relics and rags of Popery, are no better then rotten and moth-eaten wood,
fit fuel for the fire.

THE CANTICLES, OR SONG OF SONGS opened and explained.
THE TEXT, CHAP. 2.
I Am the rose of Sharon, and the lilly of the valleys.











by the Roes, and by the Hinds of the field, that ye stir not up nor awake
my love till he please.






















THE EXPLANATION.
Cant. 2. verse 1. I am the rose of Sharon, and the lilly of the valleys.

THe estate of the Church from Josiahs repair of the Temple, (in the last
verse of the last chapter) is described here,

First, before the captivity, verse 1. 2. under the last days of Josiah, 2
Kin. 23. 30, 34. and 24. 6, 17.
Iehohahaz, Iehojakim, Iehojachin and Zedechiah.

Secondly, in the captivity,

1. At home, the remnant, verse 3.

2. Abroad, in Babylon, verse 4. -- 7.

Thirdly, in the end, after the captivity, where is described,

1. Her calling out of captivity, to return and worship in Jerusalem, verse 8.
-- 13.

Secondly, her estate at Jerusalem till the days of the Maccabees, verse 14.
-- 17.

I am the rose,] The rose is first, lovely for beauty.

Secondly, sweet for smell, comforting both heart and brain.

Thirdly, wholesome for use and medicinable.

Of Sharon,] 1 Chro. 5. 16, 17. and 27. 29.
Sharon was a fruitful field lying under Bashan, where the herds were wont to
feed, Esaias 33. 9. and 35. 2.
excellent for fatness and fruitfulness.

And the lilly,] Matthew. 6. 28, 29.
The lilly is first fragrant,

Secondly fair, yet of the valleys, where the herds use to feed, 1 Chr. 27.
29.
as in Sharon.

These words then set forth the Churches complaint of that time, as some
Interpreters of chief worth have conceived it; though the words may as fitly
be uttered by Christ himself, to set forth both his own disposition and the
Churches estate.

The first, He was then the rose of the field, the lilly of the valleys, to
show, that when the Church despised him, to converse with her in the Temple,
and the worship there celebrated:

Chap. 1. ver. 16, 17 Ezekiel. 9. 3. and 10. 4, 9. and 11. 23. 16.
He was now ready to leave his Temple, and to be a Sanctuary to his Church
abroad.

Secondly, Christ is here described according to the estate of the Church of
that time, which wanted culture, ordering and dressing, thorns and briars
growing up in the Church, and not weeded out: 2 Samuel 23. 6.
The wicked are as thorns and briars, Mic. 7. 4.
and store of them growing up in the Church.

When the Church is as a garden enclosed, Cant. 4. 12.
then briars and thorns are weeded out; but neither Magistrate nor Minister did
his duty in removing offenses in those days: Matthew. 6. 28, 29.
so lillies of the field are taken for lillies neglected, which neither take
care for themselves, Verse 2. 3.
nor others take care for them.

Thirdly, As the rose of the field, or lillies of the valleys, or lilly amongst
the thorns, is continually,

First, subject to be pricked and rent with thorns.

Secondly, trodden underfoot by the herds of beasts, so the Church was then
subject,

1. To be vexed with the wicked growing up with her.

2. To be trodden under foot by the beasts of the field, the Babilonians, the
Egyptians.

2 Chro. 35. 22, 23, 24.
Josiah, how sweet a Roe! how fair a lilly! yet how untimely trodden down by
Necho: The other Kings were placed, displaced, 2 Chronicles. 36. 17.
imprisoned, and the whole kingdom with them, at the pleasure of the
Babylonians and Egyptians: and in the end, the whole Church laid wast by the
Babylonians.

Again, Christ is the rose and lilly, as being,

First, sweet with the savor of his graces.

Secondly, beautiful.

Thirdly, medicinable.

When the Church is corrupt in it self, it is yet fair and sweet in Christ;
Col. 3. 3.
In him our life is hid in our worst taking: He being white as a lilly by the
purity of his righteousness, we likewise are white as lillies in him clothed
with his righteousness.

As the Apple tree among the trees of the wood, Verse 3.
so is my beloved among the sons, I sat me down under his shadow with
great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my taste.] A tree first, not tall as
the Cedar of Lebanon, not strong as the Oaks of Bashan; but a tree of middle
stature, implying an inferior Magistrate, not so high and mighty as the
Monarchs of the world, yet such whose shadow yields,

First, refreshing to a man wandering and fainting in a wild forest.

Secondly, whose fruit is sweet and comfortable, such was Christ to his Church,
dispensing himself in; Gedaliah, whom 2 Kin. 25. 22.
Nebuchadnezzar made governor over the remnant of the people that were left in
the land.

First, under him, as under a shadow, they were fearelesse and safe 2 Kin. 25
23. -- 25.
: But after he was cut down, they were driven from under his shadow, and durst
stay no longer in their own country, which was left as a wild forest verse
26.
.

Secondly, they gathered,

First, much sweet summer fruit Ier. 40, 10. -- 12.
.

Secondly, much good Instruction and direction from Jeremiah and Baruch Ier.
40. 6 and 43. 6.
, who both lived with him.

Wine cellar,] Heb. Verse 4.
House of wine; not so fitly termed banqueting house, which Solomon expresses
by another name Eccles. 7. 2.
. A wine Cellar is a low vault, under the ground, dark, cold, raw and gloomy;
yet replenished with vessels of liquor, which refreshes and inlargeth the
heart, and opens the mouth.

This house, to the Church, was Babylon, whither God brought his people into
captivity, which at first view seemed doleful and heavy, but afterward yielded
to them many sweet tastes, yea deep draughts of Gods favor: Gods Spirit coming
upon men, makes them seem as full of new wine Acts 2. 13.
. It refreshes and enlarges the heart, and opens the mouth,

First, to the praise of God.

Secondly, to the edification of his Church; such a spirit God poured upon
Daniel, Ezekiel, Shadrach and his fellows Dan. 1. 19, 20.
in the captivity.

And his Banner over me was love.]

Banner.

First, for an ensign of defense to the Church.

Secondly, for a flagge of defiance to their enemies: how lovingly and
gloriously (as with a banner of love displaied) did God defend the three
children and Dan. 3. 25
Daniel himself Dan. 6. 22.
.

How did God offer defiance to Idolatry in the three children. Dan. 5. 16. --
18. and 6. 10.


Stay me with flaggons and comfort me with apples, Verse 5.
for I am sick of love.] I, the Church is here faint and sick, and ready to
swoone, for desire of further fellowship with Christ, and for her own help
desires,

First, Flaggons of wine to stay her.

Secondly, Apples to comfort her; as indeed apples do comfort the heart and
stomach, prevents swooning, and restraines poison Fernelius a Physician.
: Thus Daniel, through abundance of Revelations was faint and sick, and
desirous of more clear knowledge of his visions, and of the Churches
deliverance, and found the Dan. 8. 27. and 10. -- 12. verse 15. -- 19.
Angel ready to refresh and strengthen him: And the other members of the
Church feeling such sweet taste of Christ's presence amongst them in the
captivity, were (doubtless) earnestly desirous of more full enjoying him
perfectly,

First, by the Ministry of the Prophets, as by flaggons of wine.

Secondly, by the Magistracy of Daniel and his fellows, Dan. 2. 48, 49.
whom the King set up for inferior Magistrates, as by apples, the fruit of the
Apple trees.

His left hand is under my head, Verse 6.
his right hand does embrace me.]

The words may be either a narration how it is, or a prayer that it may be; so
in the orriginall, the blessings of Gods left hand are riches and glory, Prove.
3. 16.
and of his right hand length of days, or immortality: Riches and Honors God
conveyeth to us by the hand of the Magistrate, immortality by the hand of
Ministers.

The Church therefore desires God in her captivity, (which thing also God
granted) that,

First Princes should be the lifters up of her head, her nursing fathers and
mothers.

Secondly, Prophets and Priests might deliver to her the sweet testimonies of
Christ's embracing love, this was done 2 King. 25. 27. -- 30. Dan. 2. 48, 49.
by evil Merodach to Iehojakin, and by the Ministry of Daniel and Ezekiel.

The Princes allowed them great liberty, Ier. 29. 5, 6.
the Prophets dispensed heavenly and comfortable doctrine.

I charge you, Verse 7.
O ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes, and by the Hinds of the field, that
ye stir not up, nor awake my love till he please.] Heb. I adjure you, that
is, I cause you to swear by the Roes, and by the Hinds of the field, not by
them as the persons thou art to swear by, but by those for whose sake, and by
whose means they are to take themselves bound as by a solemn oath (not to
stir up or awake my love) that is, not to provoke Christ to exercise his
Church by any change of their estate, till it shall please himself.

These Roes and Hinds are wild and fearful creatures, easily and and swiftly
running away, yet otherwise willing to feed with the sheep, such were then the
Gentiles willing to converse with the Jews, and to come toward Religion: yet
if the estate of the Church should have proved more troublesome by any
indiscreet or offensive carriage of the Jews, they would soon have started
back from fellowship with them; for their sakes therefore the Church charge
her daughters, as by an oath, not to disturb the peace of Babel, not to seek
preposterously deliverance from thence, before the time that Christ had
appointed, lest it turned to the disturbance of her peace; and to the Ier. 29.
4. -- 9.
carrying away such Gentiles as were coming on to be Proselites.

the people would willingly assemble: The house of God was now repaired, and
the bed green Cant. 1. 16, 17.
: and the Church invites Christ to come in unto her, in it, yet he disposes
himself so, as more willing to call her abroad. So we may see, that
notwithstanding the purity and simplicity of Christ's worship, yet Christ is not
bound to any place; if things were never so reformed, yet he might leave us,
and go into the wild field. Rome has long doted on Peter's Chair, and
Jerusalem might as well have bragged of her privileges as any other place, but
Christ leaves them: Never rest we then in any outward estate, for Christ may
leave us. The Palatinate has been as reformed as any Church for doctrine, and
though they might say, their bed was green, and their beams were of Cedar,
and their rafters of Fur, yet God has left them: for do we think that if
God had been there, these things had befallen them that now are.

tolerated to grow up with them; yet God keeps the spirits of his children
sweet and pure, as roses and lillies in the midst of briars and thorns: be not
deceived then, for there may be Roses and lillies growing, where is nothing but
briars and thorns to scratch them: It is not straight no Church, when it is
there; for Christ can see his Church, though she be there.





First, to scratching and rending of thorns.

Secondly, to treading under-foot of the wild beasts Psalm. 80. 12, 13.
.

Magistrates, how to carry themselves toward the Church, to be as Appletrees
in a wood, wherein the Church travailing may find,

First, shadow of protection.

Secondly, sweet fruit of loving mercy.



with him: It was Daniels case, he was sick of love, so let it be with us for
want of Gods presence; and pray that God would refresh us with his presence,
and send good Ministers and good Magistrates to be as nursing fathers to his
Church. Esaias 49. 23.




1. By any indiscreet, or

2. Offensive carriage, for it is

First, a disturbance to Christ himself, he is stirred up and awaked, (as it
were) before he please.

Secondly, the Roes and Hinds of the field, young comers on in Religion, are
soon scared away by dangers and troubles arising against the Church; therefore
we should be careful and take heed we provoke not any dog to bark, for then
they will be gone: Let us therefore walk wisely, and inoffensively, that none
be discouraged, that Christ, who does sustain us, and refresh us, may dwell
with us for ever.

The voice of my beloved, Verse 8. to end.
behold he comes leaping upon the mountains, and skipping upon the hills.]

In these words are described,

First, the Churches deliverance out of captivity: where is laid down,

First, the preparation to the deliverance in the causes of it; which were

First, the voice of the beloved.

Secondly, the coming of the beloved, and that swiftly,

First leaping and skipping.

Secondly, as a young Heart or Roe Ver. 8, 9.
.

Thirdly, his besieging Babel and overcomming it set forth in three actions:

First, standing behind the wall.

Secondly, looking out at the windows.

Thirdly, showing himself through the lattice Ver. 8, 9.
.

Secondly, the calling out of captivity:

First, Verse 10, -- 13.
to go out of Babylon into their own Country; whereunto there are motives

First, from removal of impediments, verse 11.

Secondly, from store of opportunities, ver. 12, 13.

Thirdly, to worship God in public meetings in their own Country Ver. 14.
.

Secondly, the state of the Church returned into her own Country, in regard,

First, of opposition of enemies Ver. 15.
, subtle and ravenous: where is set forth,

First, their nature; they are foxes, little foxes.

Secondly, the harm they do; they spoil the vines.

Thirdly, there take us the foxes.

Secondly, of their communion with Christ's outward enemies, and inward abuses
restrained, partly, more plentiful and entire.

First, My beloved is mine, and I am his.

Secondly, Ver. 16.
Feeds amongst the Lillies.

Secondly, interrupted, and yet by turns Christ often and speedily, visiting
and succouring them, and that to the time of the coming of Christ, and the
abolishing of the shadows of the ceremonial Law Ver. 17.
.

The voice of my beloved.] Verse 8.
This was the report of Cyrus coming to besiege Babel, and his mustering
together of many Nations to that service; which rumor was discerned, by the
faithful, to be the accomplishment of the prophecies given them before, of
deliverance by Cyrus Esaias 44. 28. and 45. 1.
And therefore the Church hearing this rumor, suddenly acknowledges in it the
promise and voice of Christ Ier. 50. 42, 43, -- 46.
: and so it was no less grateful to them, then doleful and dreadful to the
Babylonians.

He comes leaping upon the mountains.

My beloved is like a Roe, Verse 9.
or a young Heart; behold he stands behind our wall, he looks forth at the
window, showing himself through the lattice.]

These words express the great expedition and speed which Cyrus made in his
journey against Babel, all the Nations lying in the way,

First, either of themselves setting open their gates to him, as weary of the
Babylonian yoke.

Secondly, or speedily surprised and subdued.

He stands behind the wall,] Laying siege to the walls of Babylon.

He looks forth at the windows:] That is, he gives some glimps of hope, of
further enlargement to the Church.

He shows himself through the lattice.] As in the original, any place
burned through in the siege of Babel, Cyrus diverting the course of Euphrates
another way, which before came through the midst of the City, burning up the
reeds, and drying up the water passages, he showed himself through the place,
and entered the City Ier, 30. 31, 32.
.

My beloved spoke and said to me, Ver. 10.
Rise up my love, my fair one, and come away:] That is, Cyrus made open
proclamation for my departure out of Babel, and return into into mine own
country Ezra 2. 1. -- 4.
. Though Cyrus was an heathen, and knew not Christ the beloved, Esaias 45. 4, 5.
yet the Church in Cyrus saw the hand and voice of Christ, using Cyrus as an
instrument for deliverance; whence Ezra says, Ezr. 1. 7.
the Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus.

For lo the winter is past, Ver. 11.
the rain is over and gone.]

That is, first, partly it was now spring time of the year, the winter and
rain were now over, which else might have hindered travail.

Secondly, the metaphorical winter of Babels captivity, and all the storms of
it were blown over; whence it is, the Caldean word is here used to signify
this winter, not the common Hebrew word.

The flowers appear on the earth, Ver. 12.
the time of the singing of birds is come, and the voice of the turtle is
heard in our land:]

Which, with the words following, is,

First, partly a description of the spring time, which invited them to this
journey.

Secondly, partly a setting before them of such conveniences, which, like to
the spring time, might invite them to this journey.

The flowers appear on the earth:] That is, even they of the people of the
Countries amongst whom they sojourned; they both,

First, praised God for their deliverance Ps. 126. 1. -- 3.
.

Secondly, furnished them with gold and silver, and other useful things for
their journey Ezr. 1. 4. 6. -- 8.
.

The time of the singing of birds is come:] To wit, that the Priests and
Levites should now sing and praise God in their own Countries; which they
thought unseasonable to do in a strange land Psa. 137. 3, 4.
.

The voice of the turtle is heard in our land.] That is, of Christ the
faithful spouse of his Church, who is mourning in Judea, because he finds
not his Mate (the Church) there. Ver. 13.


The fig tree puts forth her green figs, and the vines with the tender
grape give a good smell,] That is, the chief of the Fathers and Elders of the
people, they show themselves forward to countenance the journey, and to prepare
for it.

Arise my love, my fair one, and come away.] Being twice repeated Ver. 10, 13.
, it argues the people were slack to leave their states, which they had
planted themselves in at Babel; and therefore stood in need of calling on
again and again.

O my dove, Ver. 14.
that art in the clefts of the rock, in the secret place of the stayers, let
me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice, for sweet is thy voice, and thy
countenance comely.

O my dove.] That is, my chaste, innocent and fair spouse.

That art in the clefts of the rock, in the secret place of the stayers,] That
now do worship me in holes and corners.

Let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice:] Let me see thee
assembled into the face of a Church, in my Sanctuary, let me there hear thee
calling upon me, singing praise to me, speaking my word.

For sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance comely.]

First, the voice of the Church, at one and the same time,

First, rejoicing in Gods wonderful mercy.

Secondly, weeping and bewailing, partly,

First, their own unworthiness.

Secondly, the decays of the Church, in regard of former times Psa. 14. 6. 1,
-- 3. with Ier. 50. 4, 5. and Ezra 3. 11. -- 13. Ver. 15.
.

Take us the foxes, the little foxes that spoil the vines, for our vines have
tender grapes.] That is, restrain (the foxes, the little foxes) the enemies of
the Church, of greater or lesser power; Ezra 4. 2. -- 4. and 5. 3. Neh. 4. 1.
-- 3. Hest. 3. 8, 9.
such as were the Samaritans. These spoiled the vines, Ezr. 4. 4, 5, 23, 24.
hindered the proceeding of the building of the Temple, and the peace of the
Church. And therefore Tobiah said truly of himself and his fellows, that
they, as foxes, going upon the weak foundation of the walls of Jerusalem,
might easily demolish the same Neh. 4. 3
: Yet these foxes in the end were taken and restrained, First, partly by the
Edict of Darius Ezra 6. 11. -- 13.
: Secondly, partly by the hanging of Haman and his sons, and the destruction of
some other of the Jews enemies Heb. 7. 10. and 9. 14. -- 16 Ver. 16.
.

My beloved is mine and I am his.] The Church enjoys familiar and comfortable
Communion with Christ, these enemies being quelled Neh. 8.
.

She feeds among the lillies.] That is, among pure and fair Christians, all
corruptions being weeded out, both of strange wives Ezr. 10.
, of usury, of right of the Levites maintenance and ministration, Neh 13.
and profanation of the Sabbath.

Until the day break, and the shadows flee away: Ver. 17.
turn my beloved, and be thou like a Roe or a young Heart, upon the mountains
of Bether.

Turn my beloved.] That is, return often to visit and succor me.

As a Roe, or a young Heart upon the mountains of Bether.] That is, swiftly and
speedily, 2 Samuel 2. 29.
Bether being near to them on the other side Jordan; as who should say, Though
thou sometime turn from us, yet be not far, but ready ever and anon to
return and succor us.

Until the day break, and the shadows flee away.] That is, till Christ come,
and the Ceremonial shadows vanish.

Cyrus so much, but at Christ in him. Do they hear a rumor of a deliverance?
It is the voice of Christ, and it must needs be a strong voice which Christ is
the author of. The wisest Daniel, Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, they say it
is Christ, and all the rest yield; and the Church sees Christ come skipping:
Does it see Cyrus about the walls? She sees Christ there. Does she see Cyrus
showing himself through the lattice? She sees Christ there. Does she see when
he is possessed there, and makes proclamation to them to go up again to
Jerusalem? She looks at it as Christ's voice, saying, Ver. 13.
Arise my love my fair one, and come away.

So the holy Ghost teaches, what favor any does show to the Church, it is
Christ that does it; so take it, that if any good befall the Church, it is
Christ that does it; If any lead into captivity, Nebuchadnezzar, or any other,
it is Christ that leads her into a wine Cellar: If there be any noise or work
of deliverance, it is Christ that comes leaping and skipping: So in all the
calamities, and in all the blessings that befall the Church, ascribe all to
Christ: Job 1. 21. and 42. 10.
The same hand that gave, the same hand has taken away: Psalm. 12. 6, 11.
God turned the captivity of Job, and God turned again the captivity of his
people. This is a wonderful stay to Gods Church, and to every member of it;
for man cannot bring it into captivity, and bring it out again: Man's hand
cannot bring hard things upon the Church, nor bring her out again of them; for
if it were in men's hands, or in Satan's, or in our own hands, it would not go
well with us; but being in Christ's hands alone, it may be a stay and a comfort.

The patient abiding of the Saints shall not always be forgotten. Ps. 9. 18.
Suppose God leads his Church into captivity seven years, yea seventy years;
yet it will not always continue. This may serve to comfort us in the
distresses of the Church, at home or abroad; God will not always punish with
reproach or desolation, but the time will come these will be gone and flee away.

My love, my fair one. The Church of God, and the members of it are more
lovely in Gods sight by the hard times that pass over them: when this Church
had been seventy years in captivity, (a hard time it was, yet) they lost
nothing by it* they kissed his Rod, Ier. 12. 7, 8.
and sought God; and now he styles them lovely: He loathed them because they
loathed him; they were now tried and purified; before they were loathsome, but
are now lovely; before hated, but now loved. But see what a blessed use
chastisements are of to the Church: how loathsome soever we go into
captivity, when we defile our selves with lusts and sins, yet when we have
been thoroughly humbled with some crosses, how fair come we out! Pro. 3. 11
My son despise not the chastening of the Lord, neither be weary of his
correction. And why does God say, Deuteronomy. 8. 16. He proved them to do them good;
when he says, my love, it is more then lovely, it is love, it is love it
self; and fair one is more then fair? So, Ps. 119. 71.
It is good for me (says David) that I have been afflicted: so the Church
before her affliction was loathsome, foul, hated; but now she is fair and
lovely.

Thou art fair oh my love.]

winter: storms shall not always lie upon her, but they shall in the end blow
over: Ps. 125. 3.
The rod of the wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous.



builds under the stairs, where Christ sees her, but not publicly.

Verse 14.
her own voice is sweet and countenance comely in Gods estimation: Ioh. 16.
26, 27.
At that day ye shall ask in my name; and I say not to you that I will pray
the Father for you, for the Father himself loves you because ye have loved
me. Christ tells us, he shall have no great need to pray for us, for God
himself loves us, to hear our voice, and to see us; let us then not be
afraid to put forth our voices: labor then for such a spirit as to grieve for
our sins, and to rejoice in Gods mercies; for God is pleased with that: he
is a true citizen of Sion, that when he abounds in Gods mercies, yet he
weeps for his sins; and when he weeps for his sins, yet he is thankful
for Gods mercies.

Take us the foxes that spoil the vines: Verse 16.
There shall be ever some Sanballat, or Tobiah, or some other to be nibbling at
the Church of God: wonder not at this, for this will be so; but observe
touching these enemies of the Church,

First, they shall deal subtly and craftily with her.

Secondly, they may disturb and hinder her peace and proceedings; but

Thirdly, they shall in the end be restrained, as in Revel. 19. 20. And the
beast was taken, and with him the false Prophet that wrought miracles before
him, etc. These both were cast alive into a lake of fire burning with
brimstone. Therefore let such foxes know the time will come when Christ will
either take them, and chain them, and bind them up, as he did Sanballat,
Tobiah, Shether-boznai Ezra 6. 6, 7.
: or else hang them up, as he did Haman and his sons. Let men then take heed
that they do not push at the Church, for God will either chain them up, or
hang them out of the way.

him pledges of pure worshipping him; He feeds them with his ordinances, they
him with their sacrifices. And they that would procure Christ this, let them
provide for weeding out of their sins; as usury, wicked marriages,
profanations of Gods Sabbaths, etc. Such Churches shall be sweet, and much
sweet solace shall they enjoy one with another, Christ with them, and they with
him.

THE CANTICLES, OR SONG OF SONGS opened and explained.
THE TEXT. CHAP. 3.
BY night on my bed I sought him whom my soul loves, I sought him, but I
found him not.






















THE EXPLANATION.
Cant. 3. ver. 1. By night on my bed I sought him whom my soul loves, I
sought him, but I found him not, etc.

THis Chapter sets forth the estate of the Church from after the days of
Nehemiah, to the time of Christ's sojourning here on earth, in a twofold period:

First, under the Maccabees, ver. 1. -- 6.

Secondly, in John Baptist's time, verse 6. -- 11.

The state of the Church in the Maccabees time was, Verse 1.
partly, full of calamities, as a time of darkness, By night I sought him;
and partly sweetened with some more comfortable issue.

This calamity is set forth,

First, By resemblance to night, By night I sought him.

Secondly, By the absence of Christ, whom she sought in vain: Verse 2.


First, In her bed, verse 1.

Secondly, In the streets of the City, verse 2.

Thirdly, Amongst the watchmen, ver. 3.

The comfortable issue of her seeking Christ is set forth,

First, By her finding of him, verse 4.

Secondly, By her holding of him, ver. 4.

Thirdly, By her bringing of him into her mothers house, verse 4.

Fourthly, By her charge to the daughters of Jerusalem, to walk circumspectly,
that this estate be not interrupted, verse 5.

By night:] Verse 1.
that is, in time of darkness, and public calamity; when Antiochus
Epiphanes, the little horn waxed exceeding great, wasted the pleasant land,
cast some of the host and stars of heaven to the ground; when he took away
the daily sacrifice, and trod down the Sanctuary, Dan. 8. 9. -- 12.
and cast down the truth to the ground; when he robbed the Temple, murdered
the people, spoiled the City, made laws for profaning the Sabbath, for
offering Swines flesh, for neglecting Circumcision, when he set up the Statues
of Jupiter Olympias, the abomination of desolation in the holy place, when he
burnt the books of the Law, and made it death to have a Testament; when he
brake down the Altar and set up another, when he put women to death who had
caused children to be circumcised, and hanged children upon the necks of their
mothers, 1 Mac. 1. 23. to the end.

In my bed:] Not in my bed of ease and sloth, (as some take it) for what ease
could the Church take in the night time of calamity? Chap 1. 16. and 3. 7.
but in my bed, that is, in the place and duties of Gods worship, the Temple
and the ordinances.

I sought him whom my soul loves.] I desired and endeavored to have
fellowship with Christ, but I found him not, the Sanctuary being polluted and
the daily sacrifice taken away, and profane Idols set up in the place.

In the streets of the City:] Verse 2.
that is, in the open assemblies of the faithful, in the Synagogues, in the
cities of Judea and Jerusalem; but behold there Altars erected to Idols, and
incense burned, and the books of the Law cast into the fire 1 Mac. 1. 57. -- 59.
: Yea, behold the citizens of Jerusalem all fled and gone 1 Mac. 1. 40.
: and the rest went in procession to Bacchus 2 Mac. 6. 7.
.

The watchmen that go about the city:] Verse 3.
To wit the Levites, who answered her with silence; but a little after she
found succor at Modin, for the Priests, Mattathias and his sons, Judas,
Jonathan, and Simon, and the rest that went about to repair the ruins of the
Church and Commonwealth; to these the faithful Church repairing, 1 Mac. 2.
42, 43.
and finding deliverance and comfort, by Judas especially, or rather by Christ
in him 1 Mac. 3. 6, -- 8.
, She left him not till she had brought him into the Temple, where she soon
after cleansed the Sanctuary, and restored the purity of Gods worship, and
offered sacrifice according to the Law, so that she found great comfort and joy
in the duties of Gods worship 1 Mac. 4. 42, 46.
. Thus again found they Christ in a typical Savior, held him by faith, and,
with courage and zeal, brought him into the Temple and Sanctuary, the house
and chamber of her mother; that is, of the former Church of Israel, or of the
Catholic Church, for the Church of the former ages is the mother of the
latter; or the whole Church is the mother of each part in usual phrase of
Hebrew speech: The Temple is the house of both, the Sanctuary is the chamber of
her that bare her.

I charge you, Verse 5.
O ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes and by the Hinds of the field, that
ye stir not up, nor awake my love till he please.

I charge you, etc.] See the same words opened, Chap. 2. 7. The Church charge
all her daughters, all her members, to take heed, lest by their undiscreet
dealing, or any wicked practice, they stir up the neighbor Princes of Syria
and Egypt; not to disturb the peace of the Church, and to provoke Christ
again to leave them desolate; which though Jason and Menelaus and Alcimus
broke 2 Mac. 14. 14.
, yet they prevailed not so far, but Christ was still found in the Temple of
the faithful till his coming in the flesh.

Who is this that comes out of the wilderness lake pillars of smoke, Verse
6.
perfumed with mirrhe and frankincense, with all powders of the merchant?

Who is this that comes out of the wilderness.] This is a description of
John Baptist, and of the Church gathered by his Ministry in the wilderness:
which is set forth,

First, by the admiration and inquisitivenesse of the old Synagogue after him
and his baptism: Who is this that comes, or arises, etc. which was
fulfilled Ioh. 1. 19
: To whom the Jews sent Priests and Levites to ask him, Luke 3. 15.
Who art thou? and all men mused whether he were not the Christ.

Secondly, by the place of his arising, and the Church with him in the
wilderness Luke 3. 2. -- 4.
.

Thirdly, Mar. 1. 3, 4
by the manner of arising, like pillars of smoke, which

First, arises from fire, as the Church arose from zeal and fervencie of
John's ministry.

Secondly, ascends on high, as the propagation of this Church did, even to
Jerusalem Mat. 3. 5, 6.
.

Thirdly, fills the country, as the Church did with rumor and increase of it
Mat. 3. 5, 6.
.

Fourthly, by the excellent fragrancie and sweetness of the graces thereof
perfumed Chap. 1. 13.
, preserving from putrefaction: such was the powerful zeal of John and his
ministry, strongly fragrant as Myrrh, and preserving his hearers from
pharisaicall hypocricy; Mat. 3. 7. -- 10.
Frankincense is of like strong fragrancy, and of chief use in making of the
holy incense Exodus 30 34.
; by which prayer was signified Psa. 141 2.
, to intimate the fragrancy and fervency of his prayers, who taught all his
disciples to pray Luk* 11. 1.
.

With all powders of the merchant.] to wit, perfumed with the sweet graces of
God, Luke 1. 15.
filled with the holy Ghost above all Prophets, yea above all that were borne
of women Mat. 11. 9, 11.
; whence also he seasoned all sorts of his hearers with graces and directions
fit for their several callings Luke 3. 10. -- 14.
.

Fifthly, by the doctrine of John, who expressly preached the Lord Jesus
manifested in the flesh.

Behold his bed which is Solomon's, Verse 7.
threescore valiant men are about it, of the valiant of Israel.

Behold his bed which is Solomon's.] this doctrine the Church of that time
received and believed: In which doctrine, that first Church first discerned and
believed,

First, the Temple of Christ's body; for the bed Chap. 1. 16. and 3. 1.
was taken, as also it is here, for the Temple, which was the type of Christ's
body Ioh. 2. 19, 20.
.

Now, this as John pointed John 1. 29, 30.
, Behold the lamb of God; as here it is said, Behold his bed. This Temple it
is the Temple of Solomon, of Christ; in him the Godhead dwells bodily. Col.
2. 9.


Secondly, the guard of Angels attending it, Ioh. 1. 51.
to prevent the fear of Herod's enmity and others. Mat. 2. 13. 19.


Thirdly, the maker of his humanity, verse 9. King Solomon made himself a
Couch, the word may be translated Coach or Couch: this latter I rather take,
partly for the Etymologe of Apirion, fol. 38. to be fruitful as the brides bed
is, and partly for agreement with the former word Bed, ver. 7.

No earthly father, but Christ by his own Spirit made his own body, and his
own bed in his mothers womb Luke 1. 35.
.

Fourthly, the matter of it, the wood of Lebanon, for the Virgin Mary dwelt in
Nazareth of Galile at the foot of Lebanon.

As Solomon's Temple, the type of Christ's body, was made of the wood of Lebanon,
Hos. 1.
the Cedar which is free from corruption; so was the body of Christ sound from
seeing corruption Psalm. 16. 10.
.

Fifthly, the ornaments of it, which were

First, partly his offices:

1. Priestly, as pillars of silver abiding the fire of Gods wrath, and pure as
silver tried in the fire. Heb. 7. 26.


2. Prophetical, delivering us a word precious as gold, even as fine gold
Psalm. 19. 10.
.

3. Kingly, whence it is said, ver. 10. The covering of it of purple, the
royal ornament of Kings.

Secondly, partly, the affection wherein he undertook and executed these
offices, Verse 10.
love of the daughters of Jerusalem, ver. 10. All these John declares Ioh. 3.
29. to the end
.

Secondly, he exhorts and stirs up the faithful to behold,

First, Christ Ioh. 1. 29. -- end.
.

Secondly, Ver. 11.
The ornaments wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of his espousals.
The day of his espousals was the day when God the Father contracted him with
the Church Mat. 3. 17.
; whence after he is called the Bridegroom Ioh. 3. 29.
, and John the Bridegroomes friend, his Disciples the children of the
Bride-chamber: And the Church henceforward in this book is called the Spouse,
not before. The crown wherewith his mother crowned him, is the testimony of
Christ's sovereignty, which John and the faithful gave him Ioh. 1. 33, 34, 35,
49. and 3. 29. -- 36.
.

First of the estate of the Church under the Maccabees.



Cant. 2. 16.
My beloved is mine, and I am his, now seeks him every where, and with much
difficulty and anguish Verse 1, 2, 3.
. And so it is often with every true member of the Church, as we may see it was
with David Psalm. 119 24, 25. and 30. 6, 7, 8.
: so it is now with our brethren beyond the seas, whom you might have commended
a year or two ago, and have found Christ there; but now he is gone, she
seeks him but finds him not: See the Church of God sometime enjoyes all the
ordinances of God, sometimes none; so a Christian soul sometimes has Christ's
left hand under her head, Cant. 2. 6.
and his right hand to embrace her, soon after she finds him not so: We must
not condemn the Church for this; for they that are tenderly beloved of Christ
may sometimes seek him and not find him.

Judas Maccabeus, verse 4. for indeed it was extraordinary for the tribe of
Levi to take up the sword and scepter, which indeed belonged to Judah: so you
see when ordinary means fail, God will be found in extraordinary: Whosoever
then would find Christ, and seek him every where, they shall surely find him
either in his ordinances, or out of them.

verse 4. which is one Reason why Christ sometimes hides himself from us, that
we might seek him the more diligently, and, having found him, cleave to him
more steadfastly; and this God looks for at the hands of his.

ver. 5. being between the Syrians and Egyptians. It is a charge given by the
Church to her daughters, to take heed they stir not up her love, nor awake
Christ till he please.

Two Reasons are given for it*

First, It may provoke Christ of bring another estate upon the Church which
will not be good for it.

Secondly, in regard of fearful Christians, for they will start away; many
are willing to come into the Church, but if the profession of Christ be
troublesome and hot, they will not abide it: therefore this charge is needful
that we may walk holily, that Christ be not stirred up, nor these fearful
Christians discouraged. See this handled, Chap. 2. verse 7.

Thus far the first part, in the time of the Maccabees: Now Secondly of the
estate of the Church in John Baptist's time.

Verse 6.
to the admiration of observers: and so he can raise up our neighbor
Churches, now brought to a wilderness. This may comfort us in regard of them;
for though they be now desolate, yet we may hope a time will come when they
shall rise again.

Verse 6.
, Who is it that comes out of the wilderness like pillars of smoke,
perfumed with Myrrh and Frankincense, etc.

Verse 6.
as John did Luke 3. 10. -- 14.
, when the people came and said, What shall we do? He answered and said, He
that has two coats, let him impart to him that has none, etc. So John was
perfumed with graces for all men: for men must not come into the Ministry with
judgment and learning alone, for these may come from nature; but they must
come perfumed with graces, to keep themselves and others from putrefaction;
yea, they must labor for those graces which will give a strong sent to save
themselves and others.

Verse 7, 9.
no earthly father for him.

Psalm. 91. 11, 12.
and in him to the Church and all his members, Psalm. 34. 7.
verse 7, 8.

2 Kin. 6. 16, 17.
we may here see in Christ whatsoever is behoovefull for all our salvations.
Heb. 1. 14.
In regard of his Priestly office he is pure as silver, Rev. 5. 11. and 7. 11.
to cleanse our impurity, and to abide the fire: In regard of his Prophetical
office he is precious as gold, to enrich our poverty: In regard of his Royal
and Kingly office he is glorious as purple, Verse 10.
and clothed with it, to advance our baseness: His heart, or midst, is even
paved with love of us: His heart is an hearth (for so the word signifies)
whereon the fire of his love toward us burns continually; let us then love
the Lord Jesus again, and receive the seeds and fruits of his grace, and then
shall we see his heart flaming with love to us: and then whatsoever befalls,
bloodshed, war, captivity, etc. all comes from love; his whole heart is paved
with love.

abundant graces fill our empty souls.





THE CANTICLES, OR SONG OF SONGS opened and explained.
THE TEXT. CHAP. 4.
BEhold; thou art fair my love, behold, thou art fair, thou have doves eyes
within thy locks: thy hair is as a flock of goats, that appear from mount
Gilead.







are twins, which feed among the lillies.
























THE EXPLANATION.
Cant. 4. 1. -- 6. Behold, thou art fair my love, behold thou art fair, thou
have doves eyes within thy locks: thy hair is as a flock of goats, that
appear from mount Gilead, etc.

THis Chapter describes the estate of the Church in her periods:

First, in Christ's time, under his Ministry, verse 1. -- 6.

Secondly, after his ascension, under the Apostles, verse 7. -- 11.

Thirdly, after their departure, during the first ten persecutions, verse 12.
-- 16.

The Church in Christ's time is commended and described,

First, by her beauty in general, Behold, thou art fair my love, behold, thou
art fair.

Secondly, the beauty of her several parts, at that time most conspicuous, as

First, Of her eyes, verse 1.

Secondly, Of her hair, verse 1.

Thirdly, Of her teeth, verse 2.

Fourthly, Of her lips, verse 3.

Fifthly, Of her temples, verse 3.

Sixthly, Of her neck, verse 4.

Seventhly, Of her breasts, verse 5.

Secondly, the death of Christ falling out in her time, verse 6.

Behold thou art fair:] fair twice repeated implies, by an usual Hebraisme,
that she was very fair: and beloved twice repeated, argues her eminent beauty
was very conspicuous; such was the estate of the Church gathered by his
Ministry and flocking after him.

First, it was fair and beautiful, partly in her flocking after him Mat. 4.
25.
.

Secondly, leaving all to follow him, Mat. 19. 19 27.
hanging upon his mouth, and wondering at the gracious words and deeds coming
from him. Luke 19. 48. and 9. 43.


Secondly, In his both,

First, Ioh. 3. 29
presence with her, as her light.

Secondly, Ioh. 12. 35
decking of her by his Ministry.

This beauty of the Church was well known, yet ought to have been better
observed:

First of all, by the children of wisdom Mat. 11. 19.
.

Secondly, of all the Ioh. 12. 20, 21.
Greeks, even strangers Ioh. 12. 19.
of the Pharisees and Elders.

Thou have Doves eyes within thy locks:] Doves (as before Cha. 1. 15.) are
noted,

First, for their chastenesse.

Secondly, loathing of uncleanness: but there is with all in their eyes,

1. Cleanness.

2. Simplicity.

This implies that the Church at that time

First, saw more clearly sundry truths about Christ then the Fathers had done
Luke 10. 23, 24.
, or the present Governors Ioh. 9. 39.
.

Secondly, was of a simple and innocent look and demeanor Mat. 10. 16.
.

Thirdly, Ioh. 1. 47.
looked with a chaste eye, after Christ alone Ioh. 6. 68
.

Fourthly, loathed the uncleanness of Pharisaicall superstitions Mat. 15. 1, 2.
.

Within thy locks.] For their knowledge, though clear in many things, yet
perceived not sundry plain points: as,

First, the death and resurrection of Christ Luke 18. 32, 33, 34.
.

Secondly, the leaven of the Pharisees Mar. 8. 15
.

As the eye within locks of hair is hindered from discerning things lying open
before it. Luke 12. 1


Thy hair as a flock of Goats that appear from mount Gilead. Mat. 16 6
.]

Hair, though it hang long upon the head, yet it may in time either,

First, fall of it self.

Secondly, be cut off: so were the common Christians of that time (as it were)
hair,

1. For multitude.

2. Hanging on Christ the head.

3. Falling many of them from him:

First, either of themselves Ioh. 6. 66.
, Or

Secondly, cut off by the practices of the Mat. 27. 20.
Priests: Ioh. 12. 42, 43.
hence it was that Jesus durst not commit himself to them Ioh. 2. 23. -- 25.
.

As a flock of Goats,] which are wont,

First, to assemble themselves in companies; so did the people gather after
Christ.

Secondly, to be without a shepherd, as this people were Mat. 9. 36.
.

Thirdly, to feed a far off, and that somewhat dangerously, upon Rocks.

So that people came from far to hear Christ Mar. 8. 3
, and were in danger for feeding on him Ioh. 9. 22.
.

Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep that are even shorn, Verse 2.
which came up from the washing: whereof every one bear twins, and none is
barren among them.]

The sheep whereto these teeth are likened, are set forth,

First, by their even-shornenesse.

Secondly, by their cleanness, coming up from the washing.

Thirdly, by their fruitfulness, Every one brings forth twins, none barren.

First, even set, none gaping out.

Secondly, white and clean.

Thirdly, each answering to his fellow in the other jaw, none wanting, as it is
a praise to the teeth to be. The teeth are such as chew the meat, and prepare
it for the rest of the body; such in that Church were the Apostles, whom our
Savior calls a little flock Luke 12. 32.
: they were all,

First, even set, and even shorn, none bursting out beyond his fellows:
Peter's supremacy stretched not beyond the rest of the Apostles Mat. 16. 19.
compared with Ioh. 20. 23 and Mat. 18 18.
.

The teeth of innocent sheep are even set: They that have tushes longer then
the other teeth are hurtful and ravenous beasts, Mat. 20. 20, 25.
as Dogs, Bears, Lions, etc. Ten of the Apostles disdained the motion of
supremacy. Mar. 10. 40, 42.


Secondly, Luke 22. 24, 25.
came up from John's baptism, and therefore when Judas fell aaway, they must
needs supply his place out of the number of such as had continued with them
from John's baptism. Act. 1. 21. 22.


Secondly, they were suitable each one to his fellow, and therefore the seventy
were sent out by couples Luke 10. 1.
.

But especially they were fruitful in bringing home many lambs to Christ; and
hence the seventy returned with joy to Christ Luke 10. 17, 18.
; and Satan is said to fall down from heaven before them like lightning.

Thy lips are like a thread of Scarlet, Verse 3.
and thy speech is comely: thy temples are like a piece of a pomegranate within
thy locks.

Thy lips are like a thread of Scarlet, and thy speech is comely.] Both
signifying the delivery or utterance of the Doctrine of the Church at that
time, which was

First, as a thread slender (tenui filo,) not plump or swelling with humane
eloquence, but savouring of Fisher-like tenuitie and simplicity.

Secondly, as a thread of Scarlet; for as Scarlet or Purple is a princely and
royal wear, so their Doctrine was,

First, touching the kingdom of heaven Mat. 10. 7.
.

Secondly, though tender, yet deeply dyed in grain with royal Majesty and
authority of the Spirit of God.

Thy temples are like a piece of a Pomegranate within thy locks.] Temples of
the head are they by which the whole body watches or rests; they are such
therefore as watch over the body, and for it. The Pomegranate was of much use
in the old Tabernacle and Temple: Exodus 28. 34.
Aarons coat was hanged with Pomegranates and Bells; Bells for sound of doctrine
and prayer, Pomegranates for restraining and healing the distempers and
diseases of the people. Pomegranates are commended by Fernelius Fernel. p. 26.


First, for repressing the heat of Choler.

Secondly, the malignity, rottenness and agrimony of fevers.

Thirdly, the looseness of the belly.

Secondly, for comforting and strengthening the stomach and bowels, to the
keeping back all fainting Fernelius Method. medend. lib. 5. cap. 3.
. This office the Ecclesiastical governors of the Church do perform to it;
they repress the heat of fallings out among brethren, the notorious abuses,
the looseness, or distemprednesse of the people; they comfort the feeble, and
bind up the weak, and are therefore fitly resembled by Pomegranates, yea by a
piece of a Pomegranate: for it is not the whole body of the Pomegranate that
does this; but it, broken in pieces, by his juice and rind is medicinable.

Within thy locks:] Because though Christ established Discipline, and
delivered it to the Church in his time Mat. 18. 15, -- 17.
; yet it was not displayed, nor showed it self in open execution till after
his resurrection on 1 Cor. 5, 1. -- 6.
.

Thy neck is like the tower of David, Verse 4.
etc.] The neck is that part that joyneth head and body together; now that
which joyneth Christ and his Church together, is our faith: which faith in some
of the members of that Church in Christ's time, was observed to be strong and
great Mat. 8. 10. and 15. 28.
; and therefore is here fitly compared to the tower of David, for an Armory,
(whereof we read) Neh. 9. 25, 26.
whereon there hanged a thousand bucklers, all shields of mighty men. It seems
David's mighty men hanged up their shields in this Armory against times of
war; and so in like manner all the Worthies of Israel; all the faithful
before Christ, hanged their shields of faith upon Christ, in whom the faith of
his Church was as a strong Armory Heb. 11. 13.
. Faith is not so much a tower of strength in it self, as in Christ whom it
apprehends.

Thy two breasts are like two young Roes that are twins, Verse 5.
which feed among the lillies.

Thy two breasts are like two young Roes that are twins.] The breasts give
milk: now the breasts that give milk to the Church, the sincere 2 Pet. 2. 2.
milk of the word, are the Ministers, which in the Church of Christ's time were
first the Apostles; secondly, the seventy: and are therefore here called two
breasts, and both as Roes, because not tied to any certain place within all
the people of the Jews; for Roes stay not long in a place: And both as twins,
because of equal commission, being both sent alike to the whole house of
Israel, though, after the Resurrection, the Apostles commission was enlarged
further then that of the seventy.

Which feed among the lillies.] For they were sent not only among the Gentiles
or Samaritans, but amongst,

First, 10. Mat.
the lost sheep of the house of Israel.

Secondly, Mat. 10. 11.
the true-hearted or well-affected of the Israelites.

These faithful are here compared to the lillies,

First, for their whiteness and purity of innocence.

Secondly, for their amiablenesse.

Until the day break, Verse 6.
and the shadows flee away: I will get me to the mountains of Myrrh, and to
the hill of Frankincense.

Until the day break, and the shadows flee away.] That is, until the light
of the Gospel break forth, and the shadows of the Mosaicall Ceremonies
vanish.

I will get me to the mountains of Myrrh, and to the hill of Frankincense.]
That is, to the mounts, First of Olivet, Secondly, of Golgotha,
Where he suffered in the Garden, and on the Cross, and nailed to his Cross
all the shadows of the Law, and, in fulfilling them, Col. 2. 14.
abolished them.

Myrrh and Frankincense, are wont to be used in imbalming, and with such like
Christ himself at his death was to have been imbalmed, Joh. 19. 39, 40.
if his resurrection had not prevented the women. Luke 23. 46.
Besides, the passion of Christ was a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor to
God, and therefore the place thereof is fitly called the Mountain of Myrrh,
and hill of Frankincense; though otherwise the mountain of Myrrh may well be
Mount Calvary, or Golgotha, the place of his death; and the hill of
Frankincense mount Olivet, in regard of his ascension into Heaven; yea, even
Heaven it self, whither he ascended, may be well called the hill of
Frankincense for sweetness.

This first does teach us that a Church may be beautiful in Gods sight, though
consisting



Secondly, of such as were sometimes notorious offenders, as Publicans and
Harlots: and from hence

First, poor people,

Secondly, sinners, yea ugly sinners are to be exhorted to repentance and
seeking after Christ: It makes them truly amiable in Christ's eyes, though
otherwise in themselves never so mean and foul.

From hence also poor sinners may take comfort; though laden with the sense
of their deformities, they in Christ's eyes are very beautiful.

From hence also the Separatists may learn, that notwithstanding many abuses
in their teachers, or others of the Church, Mat. 23. 23.
as the Scribes and Pharisees whom the people were to hear, yet the Church may
be denominated from the better part very fair, as a heap of wheat, though
covered over with abundance of chafe.

Secondly, this may teach Ministers how to frame themselves to be amiable in
Gods sight, (viz.)

First, by carrying themselves evenly with their brethren.

Secondly, by cleansing their hearts and lives by the power of Baptism.

Thirdly, by fruitfulness, and faithfulness in their Ministry.

Fourthly, by not affecting carnal eloquence, but gracious and deep-dyed
powerful utterance; for swelling words of humane wisdom make men's preaching
seem to Christ (as it were) a blubber-lipt Ministry.

Fifthly, by restraining abuses and offenses amongst the people, and
strengthening and comforting the feeble minded.

Sixthly, by feeding their people with 1 Pet. 2. 2.
sincere milk, and not being dry nurses.

Seventhly, by taking most delight in conversing among lillies, their
well-affected people, though seeking also to win all, and therefore sometimes
conversing with them as the Physicians among the sick.

Verse 3.
the looseness and distemprednesse of the people, to comfort the feeble, and
bind up the weak, etc.

Fourthly, this may teach the people how to approve themselves to Christ, in
looking after Christ in knowledge, simplicity, chastity of Spirit, loathing
superstitions, and places of bad resort.

Aspicis ut veniunt ad candida tecta Columbae.

Thou see how Pigeons take their flight,

To houses that be fair and white.

For, what should Christians do in filthy Taverns, Alehouses, Stews, etc. in
strength of faith rooting and building themselves upon Christ.

Thou art all fair my love, Cant. 4. 7, -- 11.
there is no spot in thee.] In these words we have a description of the estate
of the Church soon after Christ's ascension, gathered and built up by the
Ministry of the Apostles, which they call the Apostolic or primitive Church.

This Church is here set forth,

First, by her complete beauty, her full fairness, ver. 7.

Secondly, by Christ's calling her to behold the calling of the Gentiles, ver. 8.

Thirdly, by the ravishing beauty of a sister Church at that time: 1. In one of
her eyes. 2. One chain of her neck.
verse 9.

Fourthly, by her love, which is set forth, 1. By the fairness of it. 2. By
the sweetness of it above wine,
verse 10.

Fifthly, by the flowingnesse, sweetness, and wholsomnesse of her doctrine, v.
11.

Sixthly, by the smell of her garments, like that of Lebanon, ver. 11.

Thou art fair:] The fairness of the Church was acknowledged before, but
never till now the perfect fairness. All complete fairness or beauty
stands in these three things:

First, in the integrity of all the parts and members of the body; for if any
be wanting, it is a maimed, a blemished body.

Secondly, in the Symmetry, or fit proportion of all the members one to another.

Thirdly, in the good complexion, or color of them all. Look what parts are
requisite for the complete integrity of a fair Church, they are all found in
the Apostolic Church in comely proportion of beauty; for look,

First, at their doctrine, and it was,

1. Free from all error, so far as it was dispensed by the Apostles,
Prophets, Evangelists of that time Act. 28. 22, 23.
, who likewise suffered no weeds of false doctrine to grow under them Rev. 2. 2.
.

2. Their doctrine was complete, even the whole counsel of God Act. 20. 27.
.

3. It was dispensed in powerful simplicity 1 Cor. 2. 4.
.

Secondly, look at their worship, and you may see, Act. 2. 37, 44. and 4. 4.


1. The purity of Gods ordinances, without mixture of humane inventions 1 Cor.
11. 23, 34. and 14. 26, 48.
.

2. Order, decency, edification of all aimed at in all the duties administered.

3. Fervency and frequency in prayer Act. 4. 31. and 13. 1. -- 3. and 14. 23.
and fasting.

Thirdly, look at their Christian communion, and you may see

1. Their unity one with another Act. 4. 32.
.

2. Love, and large-heartednesse one toward another Act. 4. 32.
, especially to their Ministers Gal. 4. 14, 15.
.

Fourthly, look to their Discipline, and you may see the Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, Presbyters, Pastors, Teachers, first, teaching; secondly,
exhorting; thirdly, ruling: and all by, first, preaching, secondly, writing,
thirdly, private conference, fourthly, good examples: (No Churches unprovided
of Presbyters, in the plural number Act. 14. 23.
.)

Thirdly, the Deacons providing for the poor, Act. 6. 3, -- 6.

Fourthly, both sorts chosen by the Church, Act. 6. 3, 5.

Fifthly, Excommunications dispensed upon weighty occasions, 1 Cor. 5. 3, -- 5
with 2 Cor. 2. 6, -- 8.
and with great reverence, and with good success.

Sixthly, Synods imposing no other but necessary things, either in themselves,
or for the present use of the Church, Act, 15. 26.

This comely frame and order of the Chruch Paul beholding, joyed in it Col. 2. 5
. The Church was now called a Spouse after Christ had taken our nature upon him.

Come with me from Lebanon. Verse 8.
(my Spouse) with me from Lebanon: look from the top of Amana, from the top
of Shenir and Hermon, from the Lions dens, from the mountains of the Leopards.

Come with me from Lebanon.] It is a famous hill in the uttermost border of
Israel northward: Amana a hill more northward on the west of Syria, looking
into Syria, Mesopotamia, Cilicia, and all Asia the less.

Hermon and Shenir.] Two names of the same hill, though happily given to diverse
parts, called also Syrion or Sien Deuteronomy. 3. 9. and 4. 48.
.

The Lions dens and mountains of the Leopards:] Jerusalem Mat. 21. 13.
and the Temple in our Saviors time was made a den of thieves and robbers;
Mar. 12. 17.
but in the Apostles time, Luke 19. 46.
after the Ascension, the Rulers grew more fierce and cruel, spilling the
blood of Stephen, and making havocke of the Church: So then, in this verse,
Christ calls his Church of the Christian Jews,

First, to behold from Lebanon, Hermon, Amana, the Church of the Gentiles
gathered in Antioch, Phenice, Cyrene, Cyprus, etc.

Secondly, to come out from those dens of ravenous persecutors at Jerusalem,
and to prepare her self to dwell among the Gentiles. Upon the persecution of
Stephen the faithful wandered into these parts, and preached the Gospel partly
to the Jews, and after to the Gentiles also Act. 11. 18. -- 20.
; whereupon great numbers of the Gentiles believed Act. 11. 21.
: Which when tidings thereof came to Jerusalem, it was as the voice of Christ
calling the Church of Jerusalem to send Barnabas to them, to see the Churches
there, and to establish them verse 22 -- 24.
. Afterward when the Church of the Gentiles increased in number and grace, and
the Jews increased and grew up in blasphemy and rage against the Gospel,
Christ called his Church at Jerusalem to leave those dens and mountains of
Lions and Leopards. Act. 22. 21 and 13. 46.


My sister. Verse 9.
] This implies that Christ now speaks not to the mother Church of the Jews,
but to a sister Church, the Church of the Gentiles; such a sister as is also a
spouse, a true Church, now first called a sister by reason of the accession of
the Church of the Gentiles.

Thou have ravished my heart, my sister, my spouse, thou have ravished my heart
with one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck.

Thou have ravished my heart, thou have ravished my heart.] This implies that
Christ was overcome exceedingly with the love of the Church: for such
repetitions imply, in the Hebrew Phrase, a superlative excellency.

This Church so affecting Christ was Antioch, the first Church of the Gentiles,
seated between Amana and Lebanon: for Barnabas, seeing the grace of God upon
them, was not a little glad of it, so that his spirit was stirred up to exhort
them to continue and grow up Act. 11. 23, 24.
: yea, he went out and sought Saul, to bring him among them verse 25, 26.
; and they both spent a whole year there, and did win much people, so that
that Church was first called Christian, verse 26
they first had their husbands name, the name of Christ first put upon them,
for the forwardness of his love to them, and theirs to him.

With one of thy eyes.] The eyes of the Church are several, according as the
Church may be severally considered: for if the Church be considered as
assembled together to public duties, so the Ministers of the Church are the
eyes, amongst whom they at Antioch excelled, as Agabus Act. 11. 27, 28. and 13.
1.
and others; among whom the Lord was especially delighted with Barnabas and
Saul, who were sent immediately by the Spirit of Christ to enlighten all the
neighbor Countries Act. 13. 2. to Act. 14. 27.
: So they two, joined in one office, were as one eye to enlighten all the
parts. But if the Church be considered in the members apart, the eyes thereof
are knowledge and faith Ioh. 8. 56.
: In this Church faith excelled, resting upon Christ alone without Moses his
Ceremonies, which the Jews would have thrust upon them Act. 15. 1, 2, 3.
.

With one chain of thy neck.] Chains signified Laws Cant. 1. 10.
binding as Chains. Now the Church of Antioch sending up Paul and Barnabas to
Jerusalem, about the contention which Cerinthus (as the stories think) and
others raised at Antioch concerning the necessity of the Ceremonial Laws;
Act. 15. 2.
the Apostles or Elders made a Law or decree to abrogate the Ceremonies, and
yet enjoyne some things, partly necessary in themselves, as to avoid
fornication; partly necessary to avoid the offenses of the Jews, as to abstain
from blood, etc. This Law the Apostles and Elders hanged as a chain upon the
neck of the Church of Antioch and other Churches Act. 15. 23. -- 29.
: whence that Church received great consolation Verse 31
, and the other Churches establishment and increase Act. 16 4, 5.
.

How fair is thy love my Sister, Ver. 10.
my spouse! how much better is thy love then wine! and the smell of thine
ointments then all spices!

How fair is thy love, my Sister!] Sister implies the same, and such like
gentile Churches, whose love is here set forth,

First, by the fairness of it.

Secondly, by the strength, sweetness, cheerfulness, implied in the
preferring it above wine.

How fair, and strong, and sweet, and cheerful was the love of the Church of
Antioch; which aforehand prepared a contribution of their own accord for the
poor Saints at Jerusalem, even Act. 11 29, 30.
every man according to his ability! The like or greater love seemed in the
poor Churches of Macedonia 2 Cor. 8. 1. -- 5.
. A fair love for poor men to send relief to others: A strong love for
deeply poor to send rich liberality; yet more strong and sweet to pray the
messengers with much entreaty to receive it, and a cheerful love to do all
this in abundance of joy, and beyond the Apostles own expectation.

This kind of benevolence the Apostle calls an odor of a sweet smell Phil.
4. 18.
; it was sweeter and better then wine. All this love showed to the poor Saints
Christ takes here as done to himself, as he will also take it at the last day.
Mat. 25. 35. -- 40.
The decays of this first love shows how great this love was at the first
Rev. 2. 2. -- 4.
.

The smell of thine ointments then all spices. Ver. 10.
] Ointments, are the graces of Gods Spirit Chap. 1. 3.
: These gave a sweet report far and near in those Primitive Churches Romans 1.
8.
.

Thy lips, Col. 2. 5.
O my spouse, 1 These. 1. 6. 7, 8.
drop as the honey-combe: Ver. 11.
honey and milk are under thy tongue, and the smell of thy garments is like
the smell of Lebanon.

Thy lips, O my Spouse, drop as the honey-combe: honey and milk are under thy
tongue.] This commends the Doctrine and Ministry of those first Churches, in
these four respects:

First, for the readiness and flowingnesse of it; it dropped forth of it
self, it needed not to be pressed and constrained, as an honey-combe.

Secondly, for the sweetness of it, as the honey or the honey-combe.

Thirdly, for the wholesomnesse of it, as milk.

The smell of thy garments is like the smell of Lebanon.] Lebanon is full of
sweet trees of spices growing in it, which yield a fragrant smell even a far
off. Garments are,

First, partly the wedding garments of Christ's righteousness.

Secondly, partly the gracious carriage wherewith they clothed themselves in
their outward conversation: They clothed and decked themselves with Christ,
not only to their Justification, but with his Spirit to their Sanctification;
which shows forth it self in their humility, meekenes, patience, honesty,
faithfulness, diligence, serviceableness of their outward carriage, so far
forth as that the Heathen smelled a sweet favor in their whole course; Phil.
4. 8
yea, 1 These. 4. 9. -- 11.
even in Trajans time, 1 Pet. 2. 12.
when the smell of garments was not so strong: yet what a sweet testimony does
Pliny himself (though a persecutor) give of them, 1 Ioh. 3. 22. 24.
when he said, he could find no fault with them but that they rose early,
Eusebius. lib. 3 cap. 30.
and went into the woods to sing Hymns to one Jesus? Plin. Epist. lib. 10.
Epist. 97.




This is the Church excellent for her Ministers, excellent for common
Christians, which had pure eyes of knowledge and faith; so that by how much
nearer any Church comes to this, by so much the fairer it is; and by how much
any Church comes short of it, by so much the fouler it is.

1 Cor. 11. 13, 14. 19. -- 22. and 14. and 15. Chap.
a denying the Resurrection, uncharitable going to Law, Incest, love feasts in
the Lords Supper, strange tongues in the public worship; and yet because the
Apostles stood out against these and reformed them, the Church still retains
her perfect beauty. In the Church of Ephesus there were false Apostles Rev. 2. 2
, yet it was a Church; so it is, corruptions not cut off defile a Church* As we
then desire the Church should be pure, leave we all our sins and corruptions
which may any way blemish the beauty of the Church.

Cant. 4* 1.
; but this Church gathered by his Apostles he calls, All fair Cant. 4. 7.
. It grieveth him not to ascribe thousands to himself, and ten thousands to
them; yea, he foretold it, Ioh. 14. 12
and promised it freely aforehand: How far was he from a Spirit of envy and
emulation, though indeed all their success was by his grace and blessing, as
Paul said, 1 Cor. 15. 10.
By the grace of God I am that I am? The contrary Spirit of emulation hinders
Churches from taking that which is their own from one another.



First, when Christ leaves a Church, and goes away with us from it; Come with
me from Lebanon (my spouse,) with me: So when Christ leaves and forsakes a
Church, we may leave it and go out with him.

Secondly, when a Church is become an universal spotted Leopard, and a cruel
Lion, blaspheming and persecuting the Gospel of Christ, as Act. 19. 9. and 13.
50, 51.


These things were found in Rome, from whence we departed not in England,
(blessed be the Lord) from whom the Separatists would have us to depart: But
Christ still vouchsafes to be with us, converting souls, feeding his lambs,
hearing our prayers; We may also worship Christ in truth without fear of
laws, yea with acceptance. When Christ goes, let all his faithful spouses go
with him; when there are dens of Lions, and men cannot keep the profession of
Christ, but fall into their mouths, then it is time to go: But are there
these causes now? does not Christ dwell here in the simplicity of his
ordinances? As long as Christ is here in England, let us not go away: Ioh. 6.
68.
but say, as Peter and John, Lord, to whom shall we go? thou have the words
of eternal life. As long as Christ is pleased to feed us, to drop milk and
honey into our souls, let us not depart.

Act. 11. 23.
, by abounding in helpfulnesse to the Saints, by procuring and keeping
faithful shepherds, by burthening the Church not with many chains of laws,
Verse. 9.
but only with few, and those necessary: all these are formerly mentioned in
the Church of Antioch. As ever we desire to have the Lord Jesus Christ to love
us, let us grow in knowledge, faith, and all saving graces of his Spirit, and
hereby show our love to him, and then we shall find Christ ravished with our
love.

Verse 10.
to wit, fair, strong, sweet, cheerful, in an enlarging our selves to the
relief of his poor Saints.

Verse 11.
(not to preach once a month, or quarterly, by the preaching of the Law, but)
to be full as the honey-combe dropping out of it self, to preach sweet
doctrine as honey, and wholesome as milk, for the nourishment of Christ's lambs.

The Pastors and Ministers of the Primitive Church did this without help of
Universities; what a shame then is this for us to come short of them in such
abundance of outward helps and means? Would thou be a faithful Minister?
let thy doctrine drop as honey, preach willingly, freely, sweetly, comfortably.

and man, that it may be like the smell of Lebanon, that men may smell a sweet
savor that come near them: let our hearts be inwardly furnished with the
graces of God as with sweet ointments; and our outward garments, our outward
conversation so directed with honesty, integrity, humility, meekness and
love, etc. that our names be not dishonored, much less God by our means.
Cast we aside stinking drunkenness, whoredom, Romans 13. 13, 14.
malice, covetousness, etc. And thus doing, we shall take away all offense;
so doing, Christ shall look at us as his fair spouse, and say, Thou art all
fair my love, verse 7.

Cant. 4. 12. to cha. 5. 2.
A garden enclosed is my sister, my spouse.]

After the Church gathered by the Ministry of the Apostles, next follows that
under the ten persecution; which is here described,

First, by her restraint, verse 13.

Secondly, by her privacy, verse 14.

Thirdly, by her fruitfulness, refreshing and watering others, verse 15.

Fourthly, by her prayer in this estate: wherein consider,

1. The Petitions; which are three,

First, for the arising of the wind, and coming into the South, verse 16.

Secondly, for favorable blasts of it, and that for this end, the flowing
forth of her spices.

Thirdly, that Christ would come into his garden, and eat his pleasant fruits,
verse 16.

2. Christ's answer thereunto:

First, he comes into his garden.

Secondly, he gathers and enjoys the fruits of it.

Thirdly, he fills his Churches friends with a large measure of plenty, Chap. 5.
1.

A garden:] Ver. 12.
The Church is here so called, as verse 13. an orchard; or as it is in the
original, a Paradise, as if this were the garden of Eden. All the world is as
a wilderness, or at least a wild field; only, the Church is Gods garden or
orchard, in these three respects,

First, as the garden of Paradise was the habitation of Adam in the estate of
innocence, so is the Church of all those who are renewed into innocence.

Secondly, as in that garden were all manner of pleasant and wholesome herbs
and trees growing, so in the Church are all manner of useful and savoury
spirits.

Thirdly, as a man walks in his garden to refresh himself; so does Christ
walk in his Church, yea and calls his friends thither to walk with him.

A spring, a fountain:] Not Because the Church is the fountain of grace; but
because, Christ being in it, it is the spring or fountain of the waters of
life unto all Zach. 13. 1.


A garden, Ps. 87. 7.
spring, fountain, enclosed, shut up, sealed;] Not by a pale or wall of
defense by Christian Magistrates, but rather shut up by restraint; for the word
signifies to enclose or shut up, as with locks and fetters.

Again, the Church prays for the enlargement of the flowing of her spices,
verse 16. and therefore her present shutting up was uncomfortable to her.

The Church was then said to be shut up,

First, because under the persecutions it was shut up in prisons, and other
places of punishment, as under locks and fetters.

Secondly, because the Church then assembled in private close places, woods,
dens, etc. and not in the open places of towns or cities.

Thirdly, because it was shut up from free access of forrainers, men without;
neither were the Emperors willing their Subjects should repair to them, nor
the Church willing to admit all promiscuously.

Thy plants:] Ver. 13, 14.
That is, thy children or members, as an orchard of Pomegranates, Camphire,
verse 14. Spikenard, Safron, Calamus, Cynamon. The children of the Church are
compared to these wholesome and sweet fruits, trees, herbs, in a double
respect.

First, because the virtues of these fruits and spices are especially seen when
they are cut and powered out, or beaten, or burned, or bruised: So it is with
the graces of Gods children; they are chiefly exercised by the hard dealing of
persecutors.

Secondly, there was in the faithful then persecuted a resemblance of the
virtues of these fruits and spices.

Pomegranates repress and restrain Pomgranats.
the heat of Choler, the malignity of fevers, the looseness of the belly, they
also comfort the stomach and bowels, and prevent faintings and swoonings.

Camphire with his sweetness of smell delights and strengthens the Spirits,
Camphire
cheereth up the mind, helps the stone, restraines ulcers.

Spikenard stays distillations from the head, Spikenard
strengthens the stomach, digesteth cold humors, helps conception.

Safron thinneth phlegm, Safron.
helps lethargies, coughs, and plurifies, furthereth digestion, comfort the
heart, redresses the rottenness of the other parts, which also are strengthened.

Calamus helps the passages of the urine, Calamus.
and the faults of the reins, helps also the womb and conception.

Cynamon strengthens and cheereth the spirits and mind, Cynamon
dries up rotten matter, helps against poison, warns and strengthens the
stomach to digestion.

Frankincese restrains and helps ulcers, gouts, Frankincense.
fluxes of blood, cleanses and glueth up wounds and ulcers.

Myrrh refreshes the brain, Myrrh.
dries up superfluous humors, helps straightness of breath, restrains
ulcers and itchinesse, fills ulcers and wounds with flesh.

Aloes cleanse tough phlegm and choler, Aloes.
dry up raw and cold humors, preserve the rest from putrefying, Fernelius de
method. medend. lib. 4. cap. 7, 9, 19, 21, 22, 26, 27. lib. 6. cap. 12, 13, 14,
15.
open obstructions, strengthen the stomach strongly.

Suitable to the virtues of these fruits and spices, persecution bred and
stirred up in the faithful graces of like efficacy, to restrain heats of
emulation, contention, ambition, to repress ulcers of malignity and
dis-affection one to another, to heal the coldness, hypocrisy, and
rottenness of their spirits; to stay distillations of cold raw matters,
dropping from the head Bishops of Rome; as also to strengthen appetite to the
word, to comfort the faint hearted, to knit the members together.

A fountain of gardens, etc.] Ver. 15.
For the Church, pouring out her confessions and martyrdomes for the truth,
propagated and watered many Churches; for, sanguis martyrum was semen
Ecclesiae, Joh. 4. 10.
a Well of living waters. The Church was not then dried up, but plentifully
stored with the graces of the spirit, Streams from Lebanon: The Churches were
stored with such graces of the Spirit, as streamed and issued out from the
mountains of Israel, the writings of the Prophets and Apostles.

Awake, or arise, Ver. 16.
O Northwind, etc.] The Churches desire that a wind might arise in the North,
and come into the South: to wit, that Constantine, borne in York, would come
into the southern parts, and take the Empire upon him, (and blow upon my
garden) driving away the blasts of Easterly persecutions, and breath favorably
and wholesomly upon the Church, cooling the tempestuous heats of the
persecutions which the Church endured. The Church prays not the South to
come, but the North to come into the South, else

First, the word blow, if it had reference to both winds, should have been of
the plural number.

Secondly, Northwinde and Southwinde blowing together, would interrupt and
cross one another by their contrariety.

That the spices thereof may flow forth:] Ver 16.
That the Gospel and ordinances of Christ and the graces of his children,
which were there restrained from their free manifestation by the persecutions,
might have free passage.

Let my beloved come into his garden, and eat of his pleasants fruits.] Le
Constantine come to them, and partake of the benefits of the Churches
serviceable graces to God and him.

THE CANTICLES, OR SONG OF SONGS opened and explained.
THE TEXT. CHAP. 5.
I Am come into my garden, my sister, my spouse, I have gathered my Myrrh with
my spice, I have eaten my honey-combe with my honey, I have drunk my wine with
my milk: eat, O friends, drink, yea drink abundantly, O beloved.







dropped with Myrrh, and my fingers with sweet smelling Myrrh, upon the
handles of the lock.





















lovely. This is my beloved, and this is my friend, O daughters of Jerusalem.


THE EXPLANATION.
Cant. 5. verse 1. I am come into my garden, my sister, my spouse, I have
gathered my Myrrh with my spice, I have eaten my honey-combe with my honey, I
have drunk my wine with my milk: eat, O friends, drink, yea drink
abundantly, O beloved.]

COnstantine came into the Church, Chap. 5. verse 1.
enjoyed the fellowship of it, did partake in all the parts of it, yea and
richly endowed it; so that the Church and all her friends did eat and drink,
yea and did drink abundantly of wealth, preferments, Cha. 4. 12.
etc. whence it was that she fell into a deep sleep.

Adam did, eating of the forbidden fruits, Genesis 3. 6 11, 12, 24 and 2. 17.
God will take his garden from us, and cast us out of it.



Mat. 5. 14.
yet it is sometimes also otherwise, enclosed, shut up, sealed.







pray, that God would now stir up a wholesome Northwinde, to blow favorably
upon the Churches beyond the seas, and strongly against their enemies.





I sleep, Cant. 5. ver. 2. to chap. 6. ver. 4.
but my heart waketh, it is the voice of my beloved that knocks, saying, etc.]

Now follows the description of the estate of the Church from Constantines
time to the time of restoring of the Gospel, and reforming of the Church by
the Ministry of Luther, and other late Divines.

After that Constantine had largely endowed the Church with peace, and wealth,
and honor; it fell into an estate of carnal security; which carnal security
is described,

First, by a comparison, resembling it to sleep; which sleep of hers is
amplified by the diverse conditions, yet my heart waketh.

Secondly, by the carriage of Christ toward her in this her sleep; where
observe,

1. The means he uses to awake and stir her up: which were,

First, calling to her and knocking, as verse 2.

Secondly, putting in his hand by the hole of the door, verse 4.

2. The success of those means, or the respect she gave to them, or the use
she made of them; which was double,

First, his calling and knocking she neglects wholly, upon very slight
pretenses and excuses, verse 3.

Secondly, his putting in his hand by the hole of the door,

1. She is affected with it, My bowels were moved for him, verse 4.

2. She upon it sought him: which is further set forth,

First, By the degrees of her seeking him:

1. She arose to open to him, verse 5.

2. Her hands and fingers dropped Myrrh upon the handles of the lock, verse 5.

3. She opened to her beloved, ver. 6.

Secondly, by the fruits or success of her seeking, where is interpreted the
fruit or success of these two degrees of her seeking, in regard,

1. Of Christ, he was gone, he had withdrawn himself, etc. verse 6.

2. Of the watchmen, of whom she asks not for her beloved; but they finding
her seeking Christ, they

First, smote her.

Secondly, wounded her.

Thirdly, took away her veil from her, verse 7.

Fourthly, she, not discouraged with this bad dealing and hard usage of the
watchmen, added a fourth degree in her seeking of Christ; she charge the
daughters of Jerusalem to move Christ for her, verse 8. The success or fruit
whereof is added, for upon this charge,

1. The daughters of Jerusalem are stirred and occasioned to enquire of her,
who Christ is, verse 9.

2. She by their enquiry is occasioned to describe him,

First, by his colors, verse 10.

Secondly, by his eminency, verse 10.

Thirdly, by his several members and parts, verse 11, -- 16.

Fourthly, by his amiablenesse, verse 16.

3. The daughters of Jerusalem by this her description of him, are stirred up
to affect him, and to promise their fellowship in seeking of him with her,
Chap. 6. 1.

I sleep:] Verse 2.
The Church surfeiting with abundance of prosperity in Constantines time,
neglected the purity and power both of doctrine and worship, and received
corruptions; of which were prayers to Saints, building of Temples to them,
Superstitious regard of their relics, Images, and their worship, Ceremonies
annexed to their sacraments, choice of meats, affecting and applauding Monkish
life, Purgatory, etc.

My heart waketh:] The Church was still awake,

First, to hearty devotion, according to their knowledge, and beyond it.

Secondly, to discern some such gross heresies as quenched the heart and life
of Christianity; as the impiety of Arius, denying the Godhead of Christ; of
Macedonius and Eunemius, denying the person of the holy Ghost; of Nestorius,
dividing the persons in Christ; of Eutiches, confounding their natures: other
straw and stubble built upon the foundation they neglected.

It is the voice of my beloved that knocks, saying, Open.] Christ used good
means to awaken his spouse, and to raise her up from this carnal security.

First, he calls to her in the voice of sundry good Divines, who complained
of the intolerable burden of humane inventions, wherewith the common
Christians were defiled and dabled, as Christ here complains: His locks and
hair were full of the drops of the night; August. ep. 119.
drops with coldness of Religion and darkness of ignorance engendered.

Secondly, he knocked by the raps and blows which Constantius, Valens, and
Julian gave to the Church; the two former persecuting the orthodox Bishops and
Ministers and other Christians, in favor of the Arians; and Julian making flat
Apostasy from the Church, and subtlely supplanting the nursing of Religion.

I put off my coat, Verse 3.
how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them?

I have put off my coat.] Thus upon slight pretense the Church refuses to
open to Christ: she pretends, Religion and the worship of God would appear too
naked, if it were not clothed with goodly and comely humane inventions; how
then should she in so naked a manner open to Christ? Humane inventions do not
clothe Religion, or the Church professing it with any comely ornaments; but, as
it were with warm blankets, lap her and lull her asleep in the bed of
perfunctorie worship and carnal security.

I do not here conceive that the Church acknowledges she has cast off her
garments of Christ's righteousness; for then how should she remain the spouse
of Christ? yea, how then should her heart have been otherwise then asleep
too? but only she pleads she should appear too naked if she should open
to Christ, if she should worship him in the simplicity and nakedness of his
simple ordinances.

I have washed my feet:] Not with the laver of regeneration, for that would
have been no impediment, but a furtherance to the pure worship of God; but
she had washed her feet, she had freed and cleansed her conversation from
defilements of secular affairs: she had taken up a devout regard of
virginity, or hermitish or monkish solitary retiredness; she being cleansed
and washed in these devices, cannot betake herself to worship the Lord in his
simple ordinances, and in the ways of her calling, without some defilement:
Thus marriage and worldly business (though both allowed by God, yet) seem a
defilement, in comparison of more strict superstitious devotion.

My beloved put in his hand by the hole of the door, Verse 4.
and my bowels were moved for him.

My beloved put in his hand by the hole of the door;] Or, My beloved put down
his hand by the hole of the door.] Either of which imply, that Christ did at
first use means for himself to open the door, when she would not;
attempting to remove the impediments which hinder him from enjoying his spouse:
First, put his hand by the hole of the door, when he stirred up Christian
Emperors, such as Martianus, and both the Theodosii, to call Synods, and to
command the Fathers assembled, to give all diligence to root out all heresies,
and depravations of doctrine and worship, that the pure and holy faith might
shine forth.

How easily might the Church, upon such encouragements, have broken the bars
and bolts of superstition crept into the worship of God, whereby Christ was
debarred from drawing near to them? The Bishops assembled in those Councels of
that time, condemned those gross heresies which blasphemed the doctrine of the
Trinity; but how deeply did they neglect to redress all other enormities and
corruptions? Besides, Christ is said to put in his hand by the hole of the
door, when he puts his spirit, which is the power and finger of God Mat. 12.
28. with Luke 11. 20.
, into the hearts of his people, whereby they are enlightened to know him
better, and stir up men honestly to seek after him. So Christ enlightened and
stirred up Leo Esauricus, Constantines son, and Leo Copronimus, to bend their
best endeavors to root out Idolatry, and to remove Images, which were one of
the chiefest abuses in Gods worship.

My bowels were moved for him.] These good Princes, and other Christians at
that time were strongly and inwardly affected to the purity of Gods worship, in
which alone Christ is found.

I rose up to open to my beloved, Verse 5.
and my hands dropped with myrrh, and my fingers with sweet swelling myrrh,
upon the handles of the lock.

I rose up to open to my beloved.] The Church under these good Emperors rose
up out of the blankets of these humane inventions wherewith she was covered,
in a bed of sleeping devotion, and endeavored to restore openly the simplicity
of Gods worship, rejecting Images and Idolatry.

My hands dropped with myrrh, and my fingers with sweet swelling myrrh, upon
the handles of the lock.] The endeavors of the Church were sweet and
delectable and acceptable to Christ, and savoury to the people, to preserve
them, as myrrh, from further persecution, when Constantine the son of Leo
Isauricus, called the seventh Constantinopolitan Council, and there truly and
solemnly convinced and condemned the worship of Images: As also when Charles
the Great did the like some forty years after, at a Synod in Frankford.

I opened to my beloved, Verse 6.
but my beloved had withdrawn himself, and was gone: my soul failed when he
spoke: I sought him, but I could not find him: I called him, but he gave me no
answer.

I opened to my beloved.] This attempt of the Church in executing in some
places the decrees of these synods was an opening of the door to Christ:
Images and Idolatry being shut forth, there is a door open for Christ to
enter.

But my beloved had withdrawn himself, and was gone.] Christ did not delight
to reveal himself in their public assemblies, though Images were in some
places well removed, both because those decrees for removing of Images were not
generally received and executed, through the coming in of the Bishop of Rome;
and because the worship of God was still full of heathenish and Jewish
superstitions, which Christ took no pleasure in.

My soul failed when he spoke:] The faithful in those times were assembled
with fear and grief, to consider how Christ now speaks to them afar off,
comes not near to their hearts and consciences; so that now, though they used
such means to find him as the times afforded, yet Christ did take no pleasure
in those means, in those worships, nor, to their sense, in those that used
them.

The watchmen that went about the City found me, Verse 7.
they smote me, they wounded me; the keepers of the walls took away my veil
from me.

The watchmen that went about the City found me:] These watchmen are the
Bishops and Ministers of that time; as also the keepers of the walls may well
be the Magistrates; for civil government is a wall of defense to the Church
of God.

They found me,] And yet the Church enquireth not of them, as she had done
before of other watchmen, Chap. 3. 3.
Have you not seen him whom my soul loves? for she knew these watchmen were of
another spirit, rather wolves in sheeps clothing, and more ready to beat her
from Christ, then to bring her to Christ. They smote me with censures of
excommunications, as Gregory the third Pope of Rome did Leo Isauricus for his
endeavors. Afterward, when sundry Christians, having intelligence that the
Bishops and Doctors were assembled in a Temple at Byzantium, to give sentence
for restoring of Images, in the days of the Empress Irene, came upon them,
and forced them with weapons to leave off such decrees; these people were
afterward dis-armed and banished into sundry Islands. Thus were the faithful
smitten with the censures of Excommunication by the watchmen of the City; of
banishment by the keepers of the walls.

They wounded me,] With the Canons of the second Council of Nice; whither that
Council, assembled in the Temple of Byzantium, and scattered by the people,
was afterward translated by the counsel of the Bishops of Rome. In this
Council Images were again restored, to the great grief of the godly, yea to
the wounding of their hearts. The sentence of a general Council in the
behalf of any error is no small wound to the whole Church.

They took away my veil from me,] when they forced the Bishops of Rhodes,
Nice, Neo-Cesarea, Hierapolis, and others to recantation, who before had
worthily opposed Images. To bring men to open recantation, to lay open their
nakedness, especially when they recant from the truth, is to take away the
veil.

I charge you, Verse 8.
O daughters of Jerusalem, if ye find my beloved, that ye tell him that I am
sick of love.

I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem.] The Church, finding her self so
hardly dealt with by the Ministers and Magistrates, would not give over her
search after Christ; yet now seeks him in the fellowship of private
Christians, and stirs them up to pray for her.

Tell him I am sick of love.] That is, in your prayers acknowledge that the
Church is ready to fail and perish for want of his presence and fellowship in
his public ordinances.

What is thy beloved more then another beloved, Verse 9.
O thou fairest among women? etc.]

The Christians, the daughters of Jerusalem, from this day forward, to the
days of Petrus Waldus (of whom the Waldenses took their name) were very
ignorant of Christ, and therefore they ask who he was, and wherein better then
another: But in stead of him they magnified the Church; Holy mother Church was
all in all with them: Her they acknowledged to be fairest among women, though
they see nothing in Christ better then in another.

My beloved is white and ruddy, etc.] Ver. 10.
Thus Petrus Waldus, a Citizen of Lions, opened Christ to the daughters of
Jerusalem, to the children of the Church, setting before them the white
innocence of true holiness in him, and the ruddy scarlet dye of his death. The
righteousness and death of Christ plainly, yet powerfully, opened by him,
brought many to behold Christ, and to profess him; who (when by persecution
stirred up against them by the Bishop of Rome they were dispersed into many
places) multiplied exceedingly; and being then called Albingenses, in many
battles fought against the soldiers which Pope Innocent the third had sent
against them, under conduct of Simon Mounteford, and others signed with the
cross: in many of which the Albingenses prevailed, helped by Reymund Earl of
Thelus, and Peter King of Aragon; though afterward they were overcome and
scattered further into many places of Christendom. So in regard of these
troops of many thousands, Christ is here called the standard* bearer, as the
word signifies, or the choice of ten thousand. Again, at that time Christ may
be said to be white and ruddy in regard of his members, who were then white
with innocence of life, yet ruddy, enduring persecution.

His head is as the most fine gold, Ver. 11.
his locks are bushie, and black as a raven.

His head is as the most fine gold.] Christ comes now to be described in his
members more particularly: This head of gold Christ showed on the earth in the
person of Frederick, the second Emperor of Rome, a Prince of much purity and
worth, as an head of the Church of fine gold: He contended with many Popes
about the headship of the Church, advanced the headship of Christ and of
himself, his Vicegerents, above he counterfeit head of the Popes Supremacy.
He wrastled for Christ against them with much difficulty, yet prevailed; so
that even in the popish schools his election of God was agreed and condescended
unto by sundry.

His locks are bushie, or curled, and black as a raven.] Curled black hair is
a sign of heat and courage, and wit in him that it grows upon: Such was the
Emperor himself, and such were the common Christians of that age that did
depend upon their Emperor; they stuck close to him: learned men with wit, more
then former ages had yielded, and soldiers with courage maintained his person
and cause.

His eyes are as the eyes of doves by the rivers of water, Ver. 12.
washed with milk, and fitly set.]

Doves, diving in rivers of waters, dive their bellies deep into the waters;
so that their eyes look close and narrowly upon it.

First, the eyes are here set forth by their care of the Church; he is not so
far off removed from it, that he had need of the Pope to be his visible Vicar
to look to it.

Secondly, by their mild innocence, implied, in that they are doves eyes and
washed with milk; whereas the Popes eyes were as hawks eyes, looking eagerly
after the prey.

Thirdly, by their fit standing, so as they may well look to the whole body;
whereas the Popes eyes cannot possibly watch to look well to the estate of the
Church so far off him.

To this purpose tended the doctrine of the faithful Divines in the following
age, such as Michael Cesenus, Petrus de Carbania, Johannes de Poliaco, and such
as followed them.

His cheeks are as a bed of spices, Ver. 13.
as sweet flowers: his lips like lillies, dropping sweet smelling myrrh.

His cheeks are as a bed of spices.]

Cheeks implie the outward face of the faithful Church, for the cheeks are a
place most conspicuous, which shows that the faithful of those times were as
beds of spices and sweet flowers, to wit, not gathered into any set garden, as
afterward in Luthers time, Cha. 6. 2.
but scattered here and there, yet of sweet and precious savor in the nostrils
of Christ: yea one Nicholaus de Bibrath, living about that time, compares
faith and piety in the Church to spice rare and dear.

His lips like lillies, dropping sweet smelling myrrh.] The doctrine of the
Church at those times was such as, like myrrh, served to preserve the
faithful from putrefaction, according to that, Rev. 2. 25.
That which ye have already, hold fast till I come. In the Primitive
Apostolic Church her lips dropped like an hony-combe, being of strong sweet
relish to delight and nourish to full growth: Can. 4. 11.
But the lips of this Church drop rather myrrh then honey; they rather
preserved some truth of grace, then yielded any abundant nourishment to
procure increase to the Church.

His hands are as gold rings set with the Berill: Ver. 14.
his belly is as bright Ivory overlaid with Saphires.

His hands are as gold rings set with the Berill:] Hands are instuments of
action; their being set with gold rings implies their purity and dignity: The
Berill cleereth moisture and dim sight: Franciscus Rudis, de Goma. libr. 2.
cap. 8. All these show that the Ministry of the Gospel should be then more
powerful; and indeed God, about that time, Anno 1300. stirred up Dantes,
Marcillius, Potavinus, Ocham, Gregorius Ariminensis, Petrarchus, Wickliffe, and
many more, whose Ministry brought on so many, that some have counted it the
first resurrection; yea, the Magistrates of that time, Ludovicus Bavarus the
Emperor, Philip of France, Edward the third of England, stood out in many
things against the Pope, as those whose hands had got more strength, and better
felt their own worth, and whose eyes were cleared to see more light then their
predecessors.

His belly as bright Ivory overlaid with Saphires.] The belly is an hidden part
of the body, yet such from which the rest is nourished; which fitly resembles
the Sacraments here, as also chapter 7. 2. which being hid from those that are
without, yet nourish the whole body, as an heap of wheat. The doctrine of the
Sacraments, and the pure administration of the same, was at this time restored
by John Wickliffe, and embraced by his followers, though condemned in the
Council of Constance. These Sacraments are said to be overlaid with Saphires,
whose property is to strengthen and cherish the principal solid parts, Rucus
Deginus l. 1. cap. 2.
because of the efficacy of the Sacraments truly taught and administered, to
strengthen and quicken Gods graces in us.

His legs are as pillars of marble, Ver. 15.
set upon sockets of fine gold: his countenance is as Lebanon, excellent as the
Cedars

His legs are as pillars of marble, set upon sockets of fine gold.] These two
legs seem to be John Hus, and Jerome of Prague, who stood constantly in defense
of the truth, even unto death, being established in the truth and grace of
God, as it were pillars of marble, set upon sockets of fine gold.

His countenance is as Lebanon.]

The faithful grew so plentifully in Bohemia, that they seemed even to the
adversary to be like a thick wood (as many and firm) which they were not able
to hew down; and therefore they were forced, in the Council of Constance, to
allow them the use of the cup in the Lords Supper, because they could not by
strong hand keep them from it.

Excellent as the Cedars.] The Cedar is a tree eminent for talenesse, and
soundness or durablnesse: such was then the face and countenance of the
Church, observed to grow up in conspicuous eminency, and in soundness of love
to the truth, that the Popish teachers were not able to corrupt them any
longer with their seducements.

His mouth is most sweet, Ver. 16.
yea, he is altogether lovely. This is my beloved, and this is my friend, O
daughters of Jerusalem.

His mouth is most sweet.]

The doctrine of the Gospel was taught more and more savourly by Johannes
Rochesana, and other Ministers in Bohemia.

He is altogether lovely, or desirable.] Christ then began again so to
dispense himself to his Church, in giving them the faith and sense of his
goodness, that now they saw or found nothing in Christ, or in the profession
of his name, but what was wholly desirable. Heb. 11. 26.
The rebukes of Christ began now to seem greater riches, then the treasures of
Egypt or Babylon in some former ages: they that saw the truth were often
brought to yield and recant; but these saw nothing to be more desired then
Christ. Besides, he is now called holy and desirable, because so many so
generally were stirred up to desire and seek reformation. The Regions were
white and ready to the harvest, else Luther had not found such good success in
his Ministry.

This is my beloved, and this is my friend.]

The doctrine of certainty of our adoption, Justification, Salvation, began now
more plainly to be discerned and acknowledged: Christ is not only fair and
desirable in himself; but then the Church could more boldly say, This is my
beloved, this is my friend.

THE CANTICLES, OR SONG OF SONGS opened and explained.
THE TEXT. CHAP. 6.
WHither is thy beloved gone, O thou fairest among women? whither is thy
beloved turned aside? that we way seek him with thee.









up from the washing, whereof every one bears twins, and there is not one
barren among them.
















THE EXPLANATION.
Cant. 6. 1. Whither is thy beloved gone? O thou fairest among women, whither
is thy beloved turned aside? that we may seek him with thee.]

THe Churches affectionate describing and praising Christ, Chap. 6. verse 1.
stirred up many then to look after Religion and Reformation.

Constantine had in the first verse enebriated the Church with wealth and
honor, and hereupon the Church falls into a long sleep, which she shook
not wholly off for many ages. No wonder then of that speech heard from heaven,
Hodie venenum concidit in Ecclesiam: Now is poison powered or fallen into the
Church.

is the true voice of Christ among them: This Church here could discern the
voice of Christ even in her sleep, how much more easily if she had been well
awake?















the fairest among women, but know not any eminent worth in Christ.



Luther was borne; yea, he showed himself glorious in sundry of them, in the
darkest times of Popery.



This is my beloved, this is my friend, O ye daughters of Jerusalem.

Jerusalem are converted and stirred up to seek after him.

Whither is thy beloved turned aside? that we may seek him with thee.

My beloved is gone into his garden.] Cant. 6. 2 -- 9.


The holy Ghost in these words descends to set forth the state of the Church
reformed by the Ministry of Luther, and other late Divines, as in the verse
following the calling of the Jews.

This reformed Church is diversely described:

First, by Christ's visitation of her, together with the ends thereof:

1 To feed in the gardens.



Secondly, by her mutual fellowship with Christ, verse 3.

Thirdly, by her degrees of rising: wherein she is likened to be, verse 4.

1 As Tirzah.

Jerusalem.

As an army with Banners.

Fourthly, by her members, ver. 5, 6, 7.

1 Eyes.

2 Hair.





Fifthly, by comparing the several reformed Churches, as amongst themselves,
and preferring one above the rest of the reformed Churches there:

1 As Queens, 60.

Concubines, 80.

Virgins without number, verse 8.

a Dove; and who,

First, to Christ is undefiled.

Secondly, to the whole Church as an only one, as a choice one.

Thirdly, to the rest:

1 Blessed, to the Daughters.

Queens and Concubines, verse 8. 9.

My beloved is gone down into his garden, Verse 2.
to the beds of spices, to feed in the garden, and to gather lilies.

My beloved is gone down into his garden:] The Church, which Christ next
visited, and wherein he was first found in that general Apostasy wherein the
Church sought Christ and could not find him.

In the former Chapter was the Church of Wittenburg reformed by the Ministry of
Luther, which was a garden; being

First, stored with variety of godly people, as sweet flowers set in order,
some teaching, some hearing.

Secondly, fenced in as with a hedge, pale or wall by the protection of
Frederick the good Duke of Saxony.

Thirdly, a place wherein Christ walked (as we do in our gardens) to refresh
himself and his friends.

Is gone down into his garden,] Descending from those famous Cities and
eminent places of Rome and Constantinople, into a mean country city.

To the beds of spices:] Because in Germany, at that time, sundry Christians
were called and sorted into several beds and companies in several places,
though not attaining at the first to be so many gardens, so many several
Churches.

To feed in the gardens.] In process of time, these several beds of spices
(companies of Christians) grew up to the fashion of just and full Churches in
Zurich, Stranburgh, Brassel, Berne, Geneva, besides those in Hassia and Prussia.

To feed,]

First, both himself with his peoples prayers, and other worship and obedience.

Secondly, his people with his word and sacraments, and other ordinances.

And to gather lillies; that is to gather and call more and more faithful
Christians out of a wild field of worldly people into the fellowship of his
Church, as it were, to gather lilies into his garden.

They are called lillies,

First, Mat. 6. 29.
for their fairness.

Secondly, Pro. 12. 26
for excellency, or eminency.

Thirdly, Mat. 6. 28, 29.
for Gods care in providing for them beyond their own labor and industry.

I am my beloveds, Verse 3.
and my beloved is mine: he feeds among the lillies.

I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine.] Which words imply four things:

First, that the Church had familiar fellowship with Christ in his holy public
ordinances; especially in the maine doctrine of pardon of sins by Christ's blood
alone, and of justification by faith.

Secondly, that she enjoyed this fellowship with him, before the time of her
deliverance out of a Babylonish, or Romish captivity: Chap. 2. verse 15.
for the same words are used upon the deliverance out of Babel, and enjoying
Gods ordinances in their own country; but with this difference: there the
Church says, My beloved is mine, and I am his; because, first, he delivered
her out of Babel before he gave her the free use of his ordinances; but here
the Church says, I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine; because she first
found Christ in his ordinances, before she enjoyed deliverance from subjection
to Rome; for Luther preached against the Popes pardons, before he rejected the
supremacy of the Pope.

Thirdly, their open profession of their fellowship with Christ, when the
Princes of Germany openly protested against the Mass, and other corruptions in
the Church, and avowed the defense of the reformation begun; Sleyden. lib. 6. 7.
whence they were afterward called Protestants.

4ly, Christ's gracious protection of those Churches, specially in their first
beginnings: for how should Luther (a poor Friar) have attempted and gone
through with so great a work, against such great and general opposition, and
in the end die quietly in his bed, if Christ had not held him as it were in his
arms?

He feeds among the lilies.] He refreshes himself and strengthens his
people, conversing amongst them, who strove for whiteness, and purity, and
reformation.

Thou art beautiful, Verse 4.
O my love, as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem, terrible as an army with banners.

Thou art beautiful as Tirzah.] Tirzah was the chief City of the Kingdom of
Israel, after they had separated themselves from Judah, until Samaria was
afterward builded 1 Kin. 14. 17. and 15. 33.
.

The City and Governers of it (the people having recourse to it for judgment,
rather then to Jerusalem) were at first in disgrace and obloquie with the Jews
for their schism and separation from the house of David at Jerusalem, and for
her rebellion against the King of Judah; but this did not diminish her beauty,
because this separation was from God.

Afterward Tirzah lost her beauty by erecting the golden Calves, 1 Kings 12. 24.
and falling off (not only from the idolatry of Solomon, wherein they did
well, but) from the true worship of God, restored and continued in the Temple
of Jerusalem. But Solomon here speaks of Tirzah while she retained her
beauty: And indeed the reformed Churches were in this like unto Tirzah; at
first in disgrace and obloquie for their separation from Rome, and rebellion
against the Emperor and other Princes; and yet never the less beautiful,
because this separation was from God, in regard of Idolatries of the Church of
Rome, greater then those of Solomon.

Thus the Duke of Saxony and the Landgrave of Hassia were proscribed as rebels
against the Emperor, and yet their cause was beautiful and good. The
faithful at that time in England were burned in King Henry the eighth's days,
as Heretics, and refractory Subjects or Rebels, yet beautiful in Gods sight.

Comely as Jerusalem.] In process of time the Church wore out the suspicion
and disgrace of heresy, and separation and rebellion, and was countenanced and
adorned by Royal Laws in the days of King Edward the sixth, and by Laws of
the Empire tolerating the Protestant Princes, so that the Church seemed as
Jerusalem, the state of Princes, the true Church of God, Psalm. 12. 2, 3 -- 5.
and at unity also within it self, wherein the comeliness consisted: for, as
Jerusalem had been three Cities, Zion, Salem, Millo, and all three were knit
together into one Jerusalem: so the three differences between Lutherans and
Calvinists in doctrine and discipline at Geneva, were all compacted together in
brotherly love, in their harmony of confessions.

Terrible as an army with banners.] The Church was beautiful as Tirzah in King
Henry the eighths time, comely as Jerusalem in King Edward the sixths time,
terrible as an army with banners in Queen Elisabeths time, when the Protestant
Princes grew formidable to the Emperor, England and the low Countries to the
Spaniard and Pope* How terrible was that overthrow which the Spaniard in 88.
received?

Turn away thine eyes, etc.] Verse 5.
The eyes, as above chap. 4. 9.
, of the Church assembled, are the ministers, or the members considered apart;
as first, knowledge; secondly, faith: In both respects the eyes of the Church
were wonderful amiable: so that Christ speaks affectionatly to the Church
after the manner of Lovers, ravished with the beauty of their Spouses.

Turn away thine eyes, for they have overcome me.]

What worthy Ministers did that first age of the Reformed Churches yield? Peter
Martyr.
as Luther, Calvin, Martin Bucer, Cranmer, Hooper, Ridley, Latymer, etc. What a
wonderful measure of heavenly light did they of a sudden bring into the
Church? and that out of the midst of darkness and Popery; from whence it
was, that the knowledge and faith of the Faithful then was wonderfully
enlarged far beyond the ignorance of former times.

The eyes of the Faithful in Christ's time lay under their locks, Chap. 4. 1.
as hindered from clear sight by many errors; but the eyes of the Faithful,
now seeing the truth much more plainly, are not hindered by such locks hanging
over them: How clear was their faith, that having seen him which was
invisible, Heb. 11. 27.
feared not the fierceness of their Kings and Princes, but endured patiently
fiery Persecutions, and bloody Massacres?

Thy hair is like a flock of Goats. Ver. 5. 7.


Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep which go up from washing.

As a piece of Pomgranat are thy temples within thy locks.

The estate of common Christians set out by the hair, and of the Ministers set
out by the teeth, and of the Church Governors set forth by the piece of
Pomgranat, was the same in the Church reformed, as in the Primitive Church,
Chap. 4. 1. -- 3.
where the description of these parts is used, and here repeated only with
this difference: The teeth are not so even cut in reformed Churches as in
Christ's time; some of them exceed their Brethren in Authority and Jurisdiction,
whereas those were framed to more brotherly love in Christ's time; whence the
teeth they are said to be even cut, which in these teeth is here left out; yet
both the Ministers of higher and lower rank, were as sheep flocking and
consorting together, washed with the Laver of Regeneration, fruitful and
powerful in their Ministry, and therefore are here described, as a flock of
sheep come up from the washing, whereof every one bears twins, Ver. 6.
and none is barren among them.



The Church is here visible, as in a Garden, in some of their eminent and
principal members. If then the Papists ask, where was the Church visible
before Luther? The Church how visible before Luther.
The answer is, it was visible, not in open Congregations indeed, as it were
Gardens; but in sundry members of the Church, as sweet spices and flowers,
growing here and there, whom the Popes and their Instruments, like wild Boares
sought to root out, and yet God preserves them.

Sometime, the Church finds Christ comfortably in her solemn assemblies,
when good Christians are met together to serve him in the simplicity of his
ordinances: sometimes when they can find no such Gardens, nor him in any place
openly worshipped, yet even then they seek him here and there where they can
find him.





Separatists.
who refuse to keep fellowship with reformed Churches, whom Christ yet keeps
fellowship with; Job 4. 17.
shall man be more pure than his maker? or the sons of mortal men more holy
than the sons of God?



I am my welbeloveds, Verse. 3.
and my welbelois mine.] The Church of Rome disdaines such a song as Heretical
presumption, to say, I am my welbeloveds, and he is mine.

I am my welbeloveds, and he is mine. Christ will keep himself powerful and
gracious amongst them, for their protection and comfort; he will not fail to
show himself theirs, when they fail not to show themselves his.

wonder if Christian assemblies be at first suspected, as Tirzah for sedition,
separation, etc. It is the lot of Gods Church, which when it grows up to be
better known, will appear to be as it is, comely as Jerusalem.



Cant. 2. 16. ver. 3.
The same have the Reformed Churches with Christ coming out of Romish Babylon.
Chap. ^.


There are threescore Queens, Verse. 8.
and fourscore Concubines, and Virgins without number.

This verse contains the last part of the description of the estate of the
Reformed Churches, which is a comparison of them together amongst themselves;
of whom some are,

First, Queens, and they are threescore.

Secondly, Concubines, and they are fourscore.

Thirdly, Damsels, and they without number.

Secondly, one is eminent above them all unto Christ: First, a Dove, Secondly,
undefiled.

Secondly, her self one.

Thirdly, her mother, an only choice one.

Fourthly, her daughter, blessed.

Fifthly, the Queens and Concubines commended her.

There are threescore Queens, Verse 8.
and fourscore Concubines, and Damsels, or virgins, without number.

Queens differ from Concubines in four respects:

First, Queens, or chief wives are taken into fellowship with their royal
husbands by solemn stipulation, Genesis 29. 22
and with consent and solemn rejoicing of friends: The Concubines are not so,
as Bilhah and Zilphah, etc. A man takes such to him rather by right of
Dominion, than by fellowship of Wedlock.

Secondly, Queens, or chief wives bring with them dowries to their husbands 1
King. 9. 16.
.

Hence, Acts 3.
Lesbonius to Lusitoles, in Matrimony, Sect. 2.
would not give his sister Without Dowry.
sine dote, lest he should seem to give her in Concubinatum potius quam in
Matrimonium: But Concubines were taken without dowry for the most part, as
Hagar, Bilhah, Zilphah, etc.

Thirdly, chief wives had the keys of the families in their own hands, they
had government of the house under and with their husbands. Hence it is that
Hagar, Genesis 16. 3.
though called Abraham's wife, verse 6.
yet is said to be in Sarahs hand, who also corrected her: verse 8.
the Angel calls her Sarahs maid, verse 8.
and she calls Sarah her Mistress, verse 9.
as likewise the Angel does.

Concubines, though secondary wives, yet were but as servants, save only they
were admitted to the fellowship of the bed.

Fourthly, chief wives brought forth children, to whom belonged the
Inheritance; whereas Concubines children had, for the most part only, some
gifts given them. Genes. 25. 5, 6.
That Dan and Naptali, Gad and Asher, the sons of Bilhah and Zilphah had
Inheritances among their brethren, was by extraordinary dispensation.

Queens then are such Reformed Congregations where such properties of Queens
are found: Christ (indeed) looks for no Dowry from us for his own use, he
needs nothing of ours, neither have we any thing to give him, but our own
nakedness, filthiness, and beggary. Ezekiel. 16. 5, 6.
Here therefore look at Christ in the persons of the Ministers, whose
Vicegerents they are, and Ambassadors also; and in whose name they being
married to the Churches, do beget children to Christ; 1 Cor. 4. 15
though Ministers considered in comparison with Christ, they are but as the
friends of the Bridegroom, not Bridegroomes themselves. John 3. 29.
Such Churches then, and Congregations are Queens, whom the Ministers and
Congregations do with mutual free consent choose either the other; as when the
people do give up themselves, 2 Cor. 8. 5.
first, to the Lord, and then to the Ministers by the will of God. Of this sort
are sundry Congregations in England, and very many in the Reformed foreign
Churches: other Congregations, which have Ministers, thrust upon them without
their liking and consent, and whom Ministers have to them by some clandestine
conveyances, are more like to Concubines.

Again, such Congregations as come to their Ministers with a good dowry, and
comfortable and honorable maintenance, they are like wives. Others who bring
little or no maintenance with them, are like to Concubines, though indeed the
former condition is more essential to lawful marriage; to wit, free consent,
and mutual stipulation on both sides; for as sometimes lawful wives have but
poor dowries, and Concubines sometimes bring large maintenance with them: so
some Congregations that freely consent to the acceptance of their Ministers can
allow them but slender maintenance, whereas some others upon whom Ministers
thrust themselves are richly endowed: Furthermore, such Congregations as enjoy
the power of the keys, they are as Queens, lawful wives. The keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven, are

First, the one of knowledge, Luke 11. 52.

Secondly, the other of Jurisdiction, Mat. 18. 18. and both of them mentioned,
Mat. 16. 19.

Where then a Congregation enjoys a faithful Ministry, opening an entrance
into the Kingdom of Heaven to penitent believers, and shutting it against
impenitent hypocrites and scandalous livers, there the power of the keys is
not wanting; and if withal they have liberty exercising Jurisdiction, there is
their Queen-like, or wive-like authority more complete. Of this sort are
diverse, both English and foreign Churches, though sundry Germane Churches
dispensing the keys of knowledge more corruptly in their Doctrine of the
Sacrament, and predestination, and neglecting the use of excommunication, do
rather turn to the condition of Concubines.

But such Churches as have no Preachers, or such as have no power in their
gifts to open and shut the Kingdom of Heaven, to the conscience and souls of
men, they are as Concubines.

Lastly, such Congregations where the people remain still ignorant in
darkness, and are not brought on to be begotten of God by the lively word of
Regeneration, but continue altogether ignorant, worldly, and profane; they are
as Concubines, whose children inherit not, though God may give them outward
blessings. But such Congregations where the word is lively to the begetting of
souls to an immortal inheritance, they are lawful wives, yea Queens: Of
this sort our English and foreign Churches have many, (God be blessed) though
the Church of Sardis has but a few names. Revel. 3. 4.


Damsels are without number, etc.] Damsels, or Virgins in this marriage song
are of less reckoning, as being yet either not spoken to in way of marriage by
Christ and his Ministers, or coily refusing him. Of this sort there were many
Churches at the first reforming of the Gospel, to whom for want of Ministers
Readers were sent; whence one of the Martyrs wished, that every able Minister
might have ten Congregations committed to his charge, till further provision
could be made; so that such Churches there were, even ten to one, abundantly
many that scarcely heard of Christ's knocking at their hearts by any
conscionable Ministry; yea, and how many be there at this day, that either do
want such Ministers as do espouse them to Christ, or else do coily deny their
motions, and stand out against Christ and their Ministers.

Of Queens he reckons threescore, of Concubines fourscore. A certain number
put for an uncertain; and of Churches, the less pure the greater.

Damsels he reckons without number.

First, partly, because they have been exceeding many of them, and are still
too many.

Secondly, partly, because Christ makes no account of them, as if they were
with him nullius numeri, not worth the reckoning.

But my Dove, Verse. 9.
my undefiled is one, etc.] A Dove is noted,

First, for her chastity;

Secondly, Mat. 10. 10.
mildness, or innocence: such are those Churches which go not a whoring
after any Superstition, or Idolatry, nor exercise that captivity of Tyranny
over their Sister Churches, which the Popish watchmen are taxed for; Cant. 5. 7.
that smote and wounded the Members of the Churches for seeking after Christ,
and took her veil from her, which are unspotted, unde filed, either

First, of Romish pollutions, or

Secondly, of wordly courses.

Is one; such congregations are

First, few, as one to 60. or 80.

Secondly, at unity, or brotherly love one with another, as one body, though
scattered into many places, as England, Scotland, Germany, etc. In all
Christendom, some Churches are more chaste, mild, and unspotted than others,
even of the same country; and yet such are but few, and though few, yet at
entire unity as one body.

The only one of her Mother, Verse 9*
the choycest one of her that bare her.] In the Hebrew phrase, the whole is the
Mother, the parts are the Members. The true Catholic Church of Christ is the
Mother of all Reformed Daughters; and these Daughter Churches that are most
chaste and mild, and undefiled, they are best esteemed, and best beloved of
the Mother Catholic Church, as coming nearest to her in chastity, innocence,
purity, etc.

The Daughters saw her, Verse 9.
and blessed her; yea, the Queens and the Concubines, and they praised her.]
These Daughters, whether they be the Members of the unspotted Churches
mentioned in the former verse, either of both, together with these Churches
that are as Queens and Concubines, do give honorable testimony of these
Congregations that are most reformed, and wish them all prosperity, the good
things of this life, and a better.

To bless is more than to praise: Praise is the acknowledging of any good
thing in her, but blessing is the acknowledgement:

First, of Divine good things: And

Secondly, those drawing the Churches and themselves therein nearer to God.

Who is she that looks forth as the morning, etc.] Verse. 10. 13.
In these verses, the calling and arising of the Church of the Jews is
described by six Arguments:

First, by the unexpectedness of her arising, joined with the admiration of
it, Who is she that looks forth, ver. 10.

Secondly, by the place of her arising, the morning or the East Countries.

Thirdly, by the degrees and beauty of her grace.

First, fresh as the morning.

Secondly, fair as the Moon.

Thirdly, bright and clear as the Sun.

Fourthly, terrible as an Army with Banners, ver. 10.

Fourthly, by Christ's visitation of her with the end of it, ver. 11.

Fifthly, by the unexpected helps which this Church found for her return, v.
12.

Sixthly, by the earnestness of her calling given her, Return, Return, four
times repeated.

Who is this that looks forth?] These words express the unexpected admirable
arising of a new Church; Chap. 3. 6.
and that after the Reformed Churches of the Gentiles; she is a Shulamite,
alluding to Salem the ancient name of Jerusalem, the Mother City of the JEWS.

This Church then thus arising, is that of the Jews which we look for; whose
beginning for sudden conversion of multitudes, shall be admirable to themselves
and others. Isa 66. 8. and 49. 12.


As the morning.] Her arising is resembled by the morning,

First, because this Church shall arise from the Eastern Countries. Rev. 16.
12.


Secondly, her arising shall be like a new Resurrection from the dead. Romans 11.
15.


Thirdly, her arising shall be speedily, Isa. 58. 8. and 60. 19, 20
as the same phrase intimates.

Fair as the Moon, bright as the Sun.] The Moon is fair by beauty
communicated to her from the Sun. Isa. 6. 19, 20. and 24. 23
In the Suns brightness is light, heat, refreshing, and all in a glorious
manner. The Citizens of that Church shall all at that time, Isa. 33. 24. and
60. 21.
or at least the body of them, have their sins forgiven them by the
righteousness of Christ imputed to them. Isai. 59. 21.
They shall enjoy abundant light of heavenly knowledge. Zech. ^4. 20 21.
They shall excel in purity of holiness. They shall abound in consolations to
the refreshing of themselves and others. Isa 66. 10. 11


Terrible as an Army with Banners.] Read Revel. 19. 14. 21. The Armies of the
Jews shall be terrible to the Turks and Tartars, Ezekiel. 38. and 39. cha.
and to the false Prophet then driven from Rome by ten Christian Princes, and
associating himself to the Turk for succor.

I went down into the Garden of Nuts.] The Jewish Synagogues, so called,
because of that voice of hardness and blindness drawn over their hearts,
Romans 11. 8. 10.
as it were a hard Nut-shell over the Kernel. 2 Cor. 3. 14. 15.


To see the fruits of the valleys.] Valleys lying in the shade between two
mountains, bring forth fruit late: so the Jews are long before they bring
forth fruit unto Christ.

To see whether the Vine flourished, and the Pomgranates budded.] The Jews,
that for hardness of heart, are like a Garden of Nuts; yet when their
conversion shall be wrought, will be as Vines and Pomgranates, bring sorth
sweet and wholesome fruits to the refreshing of GOD and Man. Judge. 9. 13.


Or ever I was aware, my soul made me like the Charets of Amminadib.] Or set
me upon the Charets of a willing people; not that any thing comes at unawares
to Christ in his own person; but because to his Ministers, that in his Name
shall go into this Garden of Nuts.

The Jews shall appear unexpectedly, prepared to embrace Christ's calling:
they shall find the Jews as Charets of willing people, ready to march with
them, whethersoever in Christ's Name they shall call; their soul should no
sooner desire it, but they should be set in all readiness; where also is
intimated the willing readiness of a willing people among the Gentiles, Isai
66. 20. and 49. 23. 24.
to convey the Jews into their own Country, with Charets, and horses, and
Dromedaries.

Return, Verse 13.
return, O Shulamite: return, return, that we may look upon thee: what will
ye see in the Shulamite? as it were the company of two armies.

Return, return, O Shulamite, return.] Isai 62. 67.
This call so often repeated, does imply.

First, the earnestness of the Ministers that shall call them.

Secondly, the haste that they would have them to make in going through with
their conversion.

That we may look upon thee, or behold thee.] It is the desire of the
Ministers, and of all the Faithful, to behold this glorious Church when she
shall be called.

What will ye see in the Shulamite?] But, as it were, the company of two
Armies, Genesis 32. 1, 2
or the host of Mahanaim.

This is spoken, either because the Jews shall, presently upon their
conversion, marshall, or rank themselves into Armies against Gog and Magog,
ver. 10. where she is said to arise terrible as an Army with Banners. Or else
taking the word properly; the holy Ghost compares the Jews to an host of
Angels, Genesis 32. 1.
which Jacob saw at Mahanaim; Zech. 12. 8.
as indeed the feeble in that day shall be valiant as the Angels of God. This
Interpretation seems to me to be the more likely, because her warlike
provision was before mentioned, ver. 10. Or otherwise, the holy Ghost may
allude to the host of Israel and Judah, which went to bring up David from
Mahanaim to Jerusalem, after the Israelites were brought to see their errors in
casting him off for Absalom; 2 Samuel 19 9. 10. 14. 43.
So shall the Jews at their conversion, assemble for the establishment of the
Kingdom and Throne of Christ among them, after they shall be brought to see
their foul errors in casting off Christ so unworthily so long a time.

his maintenance; If the word of God shall be powerfully dispensed amongst us,
and the opening and shutting of the Kingdom of Heaven, and withal the key of
Discipline be not neglected: If our Congregations bring forth many children to
God, partakers of the Heavenly Inheritance, then are our Congregations as
chief wives, as Queens to Jesus Christ. But if our Ministers find not
conjugall and free acceptance from us; if we be not willing to provide for them
comfortable and honorable maintenance; If the word be not so dispensed that
the people may find themselves either in good or evil estates; If our
Congregations bring not forth regenerate Christians to partake of the heavenly
Inheritance, then are they but as Concubines in the sight of God: If we have
yet no Ministers that woo us, 2 Cor. 5. 20
and beseech us to be reconciled to Christ; or if they do, yet we coily put
them off with delays, or refuses, then are we Damsels, but neither Queens
nor Concubines. But if we find all the properties of Queens belonging to us,
and withal, find a love and care to keep our selves chaste to Christ, and
innocent to man, and undefiled, and unspotted, both of the World and of Rome;
then are we Doves to Christ Jesus, choycest children of the true Catholic
Church.

A second Use is for a discerning of a different estate of all Christian souls,
and trial of our own estates before God; if our hearts have never yet been
called and knocked at by the lively word of Gods Ordinances, or if we have
coily put off our Repentance to this day, or refuse to hearken to Christ, then
are we Damsels. If we bring forth seed of Righteousness to Christ, by reason
we are under the government of such who will require it, and well may command
it of us, we are but as Concubines. But if we freely condescend to receive and
embrace Christ into our hearts with entire conjugall affection, and give up our
selves to him to bring forth the fruits of his Spirit, and are enabled to
govern our selves and families after his will, then are we Royal Spouses unto
Christ Jesus: And if beyond this we grow up to a holy jealousy against our
selves, and keep our selves to Christ chaste, innocent, and undefiled, and
endeavor to cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit; 2 Cor.
7. 1.
then are we as Doves unto Jesus Christ.







Gideons Fleece, dry; when the Gentiles are moystned with heavenly dew, they
shall again be moystened, when we shall seem dry in comparison of them.
Though Leah step first into Jacobs Bed, and so the less comely Church of the
Gentiles into the fellowship with Christ; yet the Church of the Jews, as
beautiful as Rachel, shall in the end find fellowship with Christ.

The glory of their calling appears in the Text, because the holy Ghost
describes her by comparisons, not fetched from earthly flowers, or metals, or
jewels; but from heavenly lights, the Morning, Moon, Sun.

It appears further in their unexpected and free readiness to embrace Christ.

The power of their calling appears in their earnestness, and zeal of their
Ministry in breaking the hard shell of their hearts wherewith they were
formerly enclosed. ver. 11. In stirring them up to fight manfully, and terribly
Gods battles against the enemies of the Church, ver. 13.

The Lord speedily hasten the coming of this Shulamite, that we may behold
her, Amen.

THE CANTICLES, OR SONG OF SONGS, opened and explained.
THE TEXT. CHAP. 7.
HOw beautiful are thy feet with shoes, O Princes daughter! the joints of thy
thighs are like Jewels, the work of the hands of a cunning workman.





which looks toward Damascus.




















THis Chapter to the end of the fourth ver. of the eighth Chapter, describes a
fourfold estate of the Jewish Church. When they shall come to be converted unto
the Lord: to wit,

First, as it shall be in gathering and growing up, v. 1. 5.

Secondly, as it shall be, grown up to her Stature and Maturity, v. 6, 7.

Thirdly, as it shall be further enlarged by the access of the Gentiles, ver.
8. 10.

Fourthly, as it shall multiply and stretch it self into the Country villages,
and throughout the Land of Israel, v. 11. -- v. 4. of Chap. 8.

That in ver. 11. the Church inviteth Christ, and with him her self to have
recourse into the Country Villages, is plain in the words of the former
verses, which set forth a threefold estate of the Shulamite converted, is
evident by the Repetition of the verses, ver. 3. 7. 8. and all with some
difference; and the breasts are so described, ver. 3. and set forth an unsettled
Ministry, quickly stirring up and down to gather this Church and the scattered
Members of it.

This Church then in gathering, is described by ten parts; Feet, Joints of
Thighs, Navell, Belly, Breasts, Neck, Eyes, Nose, Head, Hair.

How beautiful are thy feet with shoes, Verse 1.
O Princes daughter! the joints of thy thighs are like Jewels, the work of the
hands of a cunning workman.

How beautiful are thy feet with shoes, O Princes daughter!] In her feet shod
with shoes there is a threefold beauty: for it implies

First, her return out of captivity; as on the contrary, bare feet is a sign
of going into Captivity. Isa. 20. 2. 4.


Secondly, Deuteronomy. 25 9.
her challenging and recovery of her last Inheritance in Israel, Ruth 4. 7, 8.

Thirdly, her walking in that peace of conscience which the Gospel prepares:
Ephe. 6 15.
whereas he that walks barefoot, either gathers a thick brawny skin upon
the soles of his feet; or if his feet be more tender, he pricketh them ever
and anon with thorns, or little sharp stones as scruples: a conscience not
furnished with true peace, either waxes senseless and brawny, or else
scrupulous and anxious: all the three things are beautiful and glorious; as on
the contrary, it is a great disturbance and deformity to go into captivity, to
sell and foregoe a man's Inheritance, to walk unquietly and uncomfortably: and
if it be beautiful and glorious to return out of bodily captivity, and to
recover the earthly Inheritance; how much more is it together with these
outward things, to join a return out of spiritual captivity, and recovery of
an everlasting Inheritance, as the Jews shall do at their conversion?

O Princes daughter!] So called,

First, because they are born of God, the Prince of Princes.

Secondly, the Jews converted shall be of much glory and authority, Rev. 16.
12.
even as the Kings of the Earth.

The joints of thy thighs, etc.] The word signifies whole bones of the
thighs; they for their apt and ready turning in their conversion to God, are
like well wrought precious Jewels, the work of the hand of God, the Spiritual
workman of all the works of the Church.

Thy navell, etc. thy belly is like the navell, etc.] The navell and belly are
both hidden parts, not conspicuous to them without; and therefore set forth the
two Mysteries, or Sacraments of the Church, Baptism, and the Lords Supper. The
Navell, serving for the nourishing of the Infant in the womb, resembles
Baptism, nourishing Infants, and newborn babes in the womb of the Church.

It wants not liquor:

First, of the blood of Christ to justify us from sin.

Secondly, of the Spirit of Christ to sanctify and cleanse us from sin.

The belly: to wit, the Lords Supper, is as an heap of wheat, for store of
excellent, and sweet, and fine nourishment, set about with lillies; because
only the faithful pure Christians shall be admitted to partake in that
Sacrament.

The Lords Table shall not be set about with weeds, profane and scandalous
sinners, but with Lillies, worthy Communicants.

Thy two breasts (the Teachers of that Church) are like two young Roes: For
their agility, skipping up and down to suckle the converts; implying that the
first Ministry of the Jews, at the conversion of that people shall rather be
as the Evangelists, bound to no certain place, than as Pastors fixed to any
settled Congregation, which yet outwardly they shall be.

That are twins.]

First, for their likeness in disposition.

Secondly, brotherly equality.

Thy neck is as a Tower of Ivory: Verse. 4.
thine eyes like the fish pooles in Heshbon, by the gate of Bath-rabbim: thy
nose is as the tower of Lebanon, which looks toward Damascus.

Thy neck is as a tower of Ivory.] Chap. 4. verse 4.
The neck (as above) is the faith of the Church, joining Christ and his Church
together, as the neck does the head and body.

As a tower, for strength, of Ivory, for preciousnesse, 1 Pet. 1. 7.
for which faith is commended. 2 Pet. 1. 1.


Thine eyes are like the fish pooles in Heshbon, by the gate of Bath-rabbim.]
For the abundance of water, meaning teachers, that they shall yield even tears
of Repentance at their conversion, partly for the great wrong they had done our
Savior, Zech. 12. ^0
partly to consider the unspeakable and undeserved kindness of God toward
them. Ier. 3. 8. 9. and 50. 4.


Thy nose is like the tower of Lebanon, which looks toward Damascus.] There
was a double house of the forest of Lebanon, the one in Jerusalem, built by
Solomon, so called by way of resemblance; 1 King. 7. 2 and 10. 17.
In which he put his golden shields, whence Shishak taking them, is said to
take them out of Jerusalem: 1 King. 14. 25, 26.
of this house speaks Isaiah, Isa. 22. 8.

There was another house built in the forest of Lebanon as appears by this
place, which is said to look toward Damascus, to distinguish it from the other
which is in Jerusalem.

Lebanon it self stood in the utmost Confines of Israel Northward toward
Syria: and therefore this house built in Lebanon is said to look toward
Damascus the chief City of Syria. Now Lebanon being full of all manner of
sweet and fragrant trees, and shrubs, and spices; the Tower built in Lebanon
must needs be compassed with the sweet smelling odours, to the great refreshing
and delight of such as should lodge in it.

Hence the nose of this pure Church is compared to this Tower; because they
that dwell in this Church shall be wonderfully refreshed with the sweet odours
of the Ministry, 2 Cor. 2. 15.
which is the sweet savor of life unto life: as also with the savoury
conference of good Christians, and their faithful and godly conversation.

Thine head upon thee is like Carmel, Verse. 5.
and the hair of thine head like purple, the King is held in the galleries.

Thine head upon thee is like Carmel.] Carmel excelled for fruit, and fullness
in feeding Cattle, and therefore is reckoned with Lebanon, and Sharon, and
Bashan, Isai. 33. 9. and 35. 2.
famous for fertility.

The head of the Church under Christ is the Civil Magistrate. 1 Samuel 15. 17.
The meaning then is, that the Magistrate of this Church shall yield store of
sound and sweet nourishment to the people, by giving and maintaining free
passage to each holy Ordinance of God, and also by wholesome Laws, and lastly
by good example of godly life.

The hair of thy head like purple.] The hair; whether it be the common
Christians of the Church that hang upon Christ, or the Officers or Servants
that hang upon the Magistrates of that Church, they are like purple.

First, Isai. 33. 24 and 63. 1.
not only died in crimson blood of Christ.

Secondly, but also of a royal hue, as purple is a princely die; Cant. 7. 1.
all of them as Princes. Zech. 12. 8.


The Officers and Exacters shall be Peace and Righteousness. Rev. 16 12


These Officers shall not basely sharke for bribes, Isai. 60. 17. and 18.
nor exact for fees, nor oppress for filthy lucre, nor pick holes in men's
estates to trouble the people and enrich themselves; but like purple-clothed
Princes, be like their Ministers, and honor both their Ministers and
themselves with Peace and Righteousness.

The King is held in the Rafters.] For so the word is turned before, Cant. 1. 17
where the Rafters were understood partly of the Temple. Held, is always (to
my remembrance) used for holding by constraint, bound as a Prisoner. The
meaning may be then, That the King, or chief Magistrate is bound to be
present at the Ordinances of God in the Temple, as any other private Christian;
which is foretold expressly of this Church, Ezekiel. 46. 10.
when the people go into the Temple, the Prince is commanded to go in with
them, when they go out, he shall go out with them together; he shall come in
with the first, and go out with the last: Or what if it imply that their
greatest Magistrates shall submit themselves to be bound with the censures of
the Church, Psalm. 149. 6. 8. and 9. v. Isai. 49. 22.
according to that where the Psalmist tells of binding of Kings with the
Ordinances of God in the Church. And Isaiah foretells that Kings and Queens
shall bow down their faces toward the earth unto the Church, and lick the
dust of their feet; both their interpretations stand well together.

O Princes daughter! Yea, Christ then esteems us as Princes children: what
matter then if foolish Men account us Peasants, and our going with shoes as
straight in the instep? but we stand not, nor fall not to their judgments,
but to his who shall judge us to eternal happiness, or misery at the last
day: Mat. 5. 18.
He word must stand when eeaven and earth shall fall: 2 Timothy 2. 21
If he account us vessels of honor, we are so indeed, who is it that
dishonors us? If men should cast a vessel of gold or silver into the mire,
and trample upon it, yet the vessel is still a vessel of honor, good, and
rich, and precious; the mire may easily be washed off from such vessels. Be not
discouraged then from Christian courses by foolish fears of reproach: The
truth is, if we go on in sin, Christ esteems of us as base peasants, as ugly
and abominable in his sight, naked, bare, deformed, and defiled; yea, he
esteems our goings as going barefoot, which either, first, brawneth our feet
with a thick skin, that thereby we grow insensible and feel nothing: or
secondly, pricketh us with unnecessary scruples and fears.

due; to wit, to the hands of a cunning workman, the God of power and peace. We
might be also called as often to return, as the Shulamite in the last verse of
the former Chapter: and yet unless this cunning workman put the bones of our
thighs into joint, we shall not return to him.

Baptismes use.
because they yet receive no understanding, no benefit by the word: As if
Infants cannot receive nourishment by the Navell, though they can neither take,
nor chew, nor suck meat with hand or mouth: Baptism is the Navell by which
Infants are nourished in the Church.

Comfort in Baptism.
Does Satan detain thee from obeying thine effectual calling: Remember in
Baptism from thine Infancy thou wast admitted into the family of Christ; does
he trouble thee with fears and doubts, that thy sins are not pardoned?
behold thy baptism is full of liquor of Christ's blood, to justify thee from
all thy sins: Does Satan tempt thee to defile thy self with any sin?
Behold thou art washed solemnly in baptism from all sin, and will thou
defile thy self against thy baptism?

John 6. 55.
Christ's flesh is meat indeed, and his blood is drink indeed. There is
all-sufficient nourishment for an hungry soul; this serves to quicken our
appetite to this heavenly banquet.

Cleanse we ourselves then from all scandalous sins, yea, and from all
secret sins, to our best endeavors, so shall we be fit to be set about this
heap of wheat, the Lords Table.

v. 7, 8 But they must be breasts giving suck, not dry nurses; that is their
duty in every estate of the Church. Or if their people be grown up in Christ
to fitness for strong meat, Heb. 5. 12.
then They to be full in a stronger liquor than milk, as clusters of grapes,
full of wines.



First, Faith, to be

First, strong,

Secondly, precious, applying the precious promises, and making us rich with
them.

Secondly, Repentance to abound in brokennesse of spirit through godly sorrow,
melting into abundance of tears, or other affections suitable thereto.

Thirdly, obedience, to be

First, fragrant,

Secondly, and that with all manner of sweet fruits and good, that all that
converse with us may smell a sweet savor from our conversation.

Carmell, yielding some sweet and plentiful nourishment to the people.

First, by procuring free passage to Gods Ordinances, whence Iehoshaphats
Nobles are said to teach. 2 Chr. 1. 7. 7. 9.


Secondly, by making wholesome Laws.

Thirdly, by giving good example of life, to have no Officers hanging about
them of base demeanor, exactors, promotors, contentious persons, but such as
may execute it themselves and their Ministers, and for public Ordinances of
Gods worship; it is no disparagement to Magistrates to behave themselves
reverendly in them, and to submit themselves unto them as unto Christ.



First, that the Church was never so completely beautiful in all her parts, as
it shall be when the Jews are called. The Apostolic Primitive Church, though
all fair, yet wanted this headlike Carmel, a Christian Magistrate, yea and some
purity of the Sacrament. 1 Cor. 11. 20.


Secondly, in that he begins this description from the feet, and so
ascends to the head in order: It may seem the calling of the Jews shall
begin at first, rather with some of the lowest people, and so ascend higher and
higher to more eminent persons.

Thirdly, in that the Church neither here (where so many of her members are set
forth) nor in all this Song is described, by the beauty of her hands, or
fingers, we must not gather that therefore this Church will be barren of good
works God forbid, but rather conceive, Christ concealeth the mention of her
hands; to wit, her works, partly,

First, because the Harlot of Rome so delights so much to boast of her hands,
of her works, which indeed she wants: Christ had rather his Church should
abound in good works in silence, than boast of them, especially when they are
wanting.

Secondly, because it is he alone (and not we) that works all our works for
us. Isai. 26. 12.


Cantic. 7. verse. 6. -- verse. 4. of 8. Chap. How fair, Hos 14. 8.
etc. Ioh. 15. 5.


In these verses the holy Ghost goes on to describe the second estate of the
Jews Church, as is spoken above, Chap. 7. ver. 1. in ver. 6, 7. as grown up
to her full stature and maturiry.

For first, beauty is not observed till full growth; now here her beauty is
admired, ver. 6.

Secondly, her stature is expressly mentioned to be a Palm Tree. v. 7.

Thirdly, her breasts are here mentioned again, ver. 7. which shows that he
speaks not of the same estate of the same Church as asore: Besides the breasts
yielding wine in stead of milk, it is a sign the Church shall then be grown
to more maturity and fitness to be fed with stronger meat.

The Church of the Jews then come to her fuller growth is here described.

First, by her beauty, which is admirable, How fair! and joined with pleasure,
How pleasant art thou! especially for public worship so described, verse 6.

Secondly, by her stature resembled to a palm tree, ver. 7.

Thirdly, her breasts resembled to clusters of Grapes, ver. 7.

The third estate of this Church, as it shall be further enlarged by the
access of the Gentiles, is described, ver. 8. 10. and that

First, by Christ's climbing this palm tree, and taking hold of the boughs of
it, ver. 8.

Secondly, by the rich supply of nourishment from her breasts, ver. 8.

Thirdly, by the smell of her nose, resembled to Apples. ver. 8.

Fourthly, by the power of her Doctrine, ver. 9.

Fifthly, by her familiar fellowship with Christ, ver. 10.

The fourth estate of this Church, as it shall multiply, and stretch it self
into the Country villages, is described, ver. 11. to the 4. of the next
Chapter, and that

First, by the occasion of this increase, the Churches invitement of Christ to
visit the Country villages, ver. 11. 12.

Secondly, by the affectionate service of this Church to Christ, cha. 8. ver.
1. 2.

Thirdly, by Christ's affectionate embracing of her, ver. 3.

Fourthly, by the Churches desire for the continuance of this estate without
interruption, ver. 4.

How fair, Ver. 6.
and how pleasant art thou, O love for delights!

How fair!] The fairness and beauty to the Church implies sutably to what
is found in the natural beauty of the body.

First, a complete integrity of all the Members of this Church; where any
Member is wanting, there is deformity, beauty is blemished. This Church shall
want then no Ordinances of God, nor any such Members to whom the dispensation
of each Ordinance belongs.

Secondly, a fit proportion of all the Members of the Church one to another; no
swellings, no convulsions.

Thirdly, a good color in the outward face of things, all carried decently,
and in order: How fair! It implies admirable beauty in all these respects.

How pleasant for delights!] This word implies a ready willingness of this
Church to the public worship of God, which is here called delights; as being
the marriage bed wherein Christ most familiarly solaceth himself with his
Church.

This ready willingness of this Church was foretold, Psa. 110. 3.
and the willingness of this people to any service of of his is pleasant to
him. 2 Cor. 9. 7.


O love!] As if the Church were so lovely; that it were even love it self.

The five former verses described the Church in her several Members a part.
This verse considers the whole body met together in public duties.

This thy stature is like to a palm tree, Verse. 7.
and thy breasts to clusters of grapes.

This thy stature is like a palm tree.] This tree is eminent,

First, for her straightness.

Secondly, for her tallnesse.

Thirdly, Ier. 17. 8.
for her perpetual greenness and fruitfulness, as that

Fourthly, for her thriving under weight pressing it down.

Fifthly, for her easiness to be climbed, having many boughs, whereon to stay
hands and feet: Plin. lib. 13. cap. 4.
So shall the Church be eminent for uprightness thererein, for growing up
even against all oppositions of Gog and Magog, for ready entertaining of all
the faithful that shall come to her.

Thy breasts are like the clusters of the vine-grapes.] Their Ministers such
like in sour respects,

First, not few, as before, two young Roes, but many, as clusters,

Secondly, not stirring up and down as Roes, from place to place, but hanging
in their places.

Thirdly, full of strong liquor of sound Doctrine.

Fourthly, requiring some pressure in urging (though little) before they empty
themselves, but upon easy pressure doing it plentifully.

I said, Verse 8.
I will go up to the Palm Tree, I will take hold of the boughs thereof: now
also thy breasts shall be as clusters of the vine, and the smell of thy nose
like apples.

I said, I will go up to the Palm Tree, I will take hold of the boughs
thereof.] Christ speaks of himself to imply the readiness of his Members to
resort and flock to this Church of the Jews; for what Christ's Members do by
the guidance of his Spirit, he accounts it his own action. This forwardness
of the Gentiles to ascend and resort to Jerusalem, is elsewhere foretold more
plainly Zech. 8. 23.
.

Now also thy breasts as the clusters of the vine.] Isai. 60. 8. 11.
And that is notwithstanding the plenteous access of the Gentiles to the
Church. Here shall be no defect of Ministers to teach and feed them all; but
there shall be still a large supply of store, sweet and plentiful Teachers, as
clusters of grapes to refresh them all.

And the smell of thy nose like apples.] Notwithstanding this plenteous access
of the Gentiles, the life of common Christians intainted with Heathenish and
Popish unsavory pollutions; yet the Church her self, and they that live in it
shall smell a fragrant savor of the good conversation of the people.

The smell of thy nose.] Not which the nose yields, but which is yielded to
the nose, to thy savoury discerning shall be sweet and comfortable as that of
Apples

Before, when this Church consisted of her own people, her smell was as that
of Lebanon, v. 4. and now by the access of the Gentiles it shall not be
corrupt. Indeed when the Israelites came out of Egypt, the mingled of the
Gentiles with them, drew them away to murmuring and lusting; for this compare
Exodus 12. 38. with Numb. 11. 4. But no such contagion shall accrue to this
Church by the mingling of the Gentiles with them.

And the roof of thy mouth like the best wines, for my beloved, that goes
down sweetly, Verse 9.
causing the lips of those that are asleep to speak.

And the roof of thy mouth like the best wines. Hebr. Like good wine, going to
my beloved most straightly and rightly.] That is, the Doctrine of the Church
shall be as ever any most sweet and powerful, and comfortable, and generous
wine; it shall ever go, or tend directly to Christ, always aiming at the
preaching of him.

To go rightly, or straightly, implies the strength and generousnesse of
wine, when it sparkleth upward in the cup, as Prove. 23. 31. which here
expresses the lively vigor of the Churches Doctrine, in her preaching of
Christ, causing the lips of those that are asleep to speak. Such shall be the
sweet and powerful efficacy of the Doctrine of the Church then, as shall cause
the sleepy and drowsy professors, whether amongst us Gentiles, or amongst the
Jews, to open their mouths and speak plentifully to Gods praise. When the
Apostles spoke (the wonderful works of God) in strange tongues, some of the
people thought them to be full of new wine, but they were deceived, Acts 2. 11.
13.
and were willing so to account of them in mockery. But these people shall be
full of new wine of the Spirit and Word of God, to open their mouths to speak
as the Apostles did, the wonderful works of God.

I am my beloveds, Verse. 10.
and his desire is toward me.

This profession of the Church, that she is her beloveds, Argues,

First, her familiar fellowship with Christ.

Secondly, her faith, or confidence of her Interest in him, or his in her.

Thirdly, her open profession of the same.

That his desire is toward her, argues the strength of his affection toward
her, Genesis 3. 16. and 4. 7.
and it is the same word used *, which there implies two things,

First, the strength of their affection to their husband, and their elder
brother.

Secondly, the subordination and dependence thereof upon their will: the former
is here also meant, the latter does not stand with the sovereignty and headship
of Christ over his Church: Ephesians. 5. 23, 24.
Unless thus far, to intimate Christ's tender regard of the will and desire of
his Church; as he would be as unwilling to deny them, as loving husbands be to
deny their wives any thing. Verse. 11.


Come my beloved, let us go forth into the field: let us lodge in the villages.

In these words, the Church ininviteth Christ to visit the Country villages
about her, implying,

First, her prayers to Christ, that with her he might lodge there, plant and
set Churches there.

Secondly, her care to take and observe all opportunities to advance such a
work.

Let us get up early to the vineyards, let us see if the vine flourish, Verse.
12.
whether the tender grape appear, and the pomegranats bud forth, there will I
giv thee my loves.

Let us get up early to the vineyards, let us see if the vine flourish.]
Meaning if any opportunity should offer it self, to plant Religion amongst
them; then Christ and she might be forward to further the same.

Thirdly, her promise to Christ to employ her best endeavors to such a service.

There will I give thee my loves.] The love of the Church to Christ is
especially seen in feeding his Lambs and Sheep: Ioh. 21. 15.
She therefore offers to Christ free use of her dearest and best affections
to set forward such a work.

Fourthly, her discerning of some good beginning of such a work.

The Mandrakes give a smell, Verse. 13.
and at our gates are all manner of pleaseant fruits, new and old, which I have
laid up for thee, O my beloved.

The Mandrakes give a smell.] Which is a Country field herb, Genesis 30. 14.
yet amiable, which argues some fruits to be gathered in the Country.

And at our gates are all manner of pleasant fruits, new and old.] And
therefore, out of the abundance of her own store, she can supply the Country
with all fit helps, to her further gathering and establishment.

Which I have laid up for thee, O my beloved.] She professes her desire to
employ all her store to Christ's advantage, and therefore abounding with
Ministers, and other fit Officers for gathering and establishing the Country
Churches about her, she expresses her readiness to bring them out to his
service and use, as if they were some good household provision, laid up by her
for such a use. The access of the whole Land of Israel to the City is
profitable. The Land shall be called Belulah, Isai. 62. 4.
as well as the City Hephzibah. ver. 10. A Causey is cast up for a mutual
recourse of Country to City.

THE CANTICLES, OR SONG OF SONGS, opened and explained.
THE TEXT. CHAP. 8.
O That thou were as my brother that sucked the breasts of my mother! when I
should find thee out, I would kiss thee, yet I should not be despised.







5 (Who is this that comes up from the Wilderness, leaning upon her
beloved?) I raised thee up under the apple tree: there thy mother brought thee
forth, there she brought thee forth that bare thee.

















14 Make haste my beloved, and be thou like to a Roe, or to a young Heart upon
the mountain of spices.


THE Church of the Jews, both in City and Country thus gathered, do here
express her ardent affection to Christ, and due respect of him, which the old
Synagogue showed toward her whilst he was conversant amongst them in the
flesh. (Since says she) O that thou were as my brother, etc. Christ was made
our Brother by taking our Nature upon him at his Incarnation, and then he
sucked the breasts of the Church, attending to the Ministry of John, and other
Jewish Teachers: she therefore to show her affection, desires that he were now
amongst them conversant in their streets again in bodily presence, she would
not do then as the old Synagogue did, be ashamed of him, or come to him by
night; but she would kiss him, and embrace him in the open streets, and yet no
man should then despise her for her so doing, Ioh 4. 48, 49.
as they did; but every one should encourage her in her obsequiousness to him:
She would not reject him, Luke 4. 28, 29.
and thrust him out of the Synagogue, as her old Ancestors had done; but if she
found him without, she would lead him, and invite him into their Synagogue, or
Temple, there to instruct her, and teach her the will of her father; Mat. 27. 34
she would not give him gall to eat, and Vinegar to drink, as her forefathers
had done; but she would cause him to drink of the best delicate spiced wine,
and the juice of her Pomegranat.

His left hand should be under my head, Verse 3.
and his right hand should embrace me.]

The left hand of Christ is the Christian Magistrate, which shall in those
days support and advance the Church, and hold up her head.

His right hand is the faithful Ministers, Ezekiel. 34. 23, 24, 25.
which shall speak comfortable things to her heart, Dan. 7. 27.
and so embrace her, Isa. 62. for this also see, Cant. 2. 6.
I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, that you stir not up, nor awake my
love until he please.

The Church enjoying these great mercies and blessings from Christ, charge
all her daughters, members, to walk so thankfully, and fruitfully toward God,
and lovingly and helpfully one toward another, and so circumspectly, and
inoffensively to them which are without, that no occasion be given of their
alteration of their happy estate. When the Church gave this charge before, it
was in regard of the Roes and Hindes of the field; Chap. 2. verse 7.
fearful Christians coming on toward Religion, willing to flock, and feed,
and converse with the sheep, Chap. 3. verse 5.
yet ready to start and flee away upon any fear of danger of persecution; but
now no regard is had of these fearful ones; for they that shall then remain
fearful, Isai. 65. 25.
when the Church shall enjoy so great light and safety, they shall be quite
excluded from conversing with the Church.

For use, we may here learn

earnestly for their conversion, that we may behold the admirable fairness
thereof, and be delighted with her consolations. Isai. 66. 11. 12.




Christ may see all the world, as he did when Satan Eccles. 1. 2. 14. and 2.
11. 15. 17. 19. 22. 26.
showed it to him, Mat. 4. 8. 9.
and yet not admire it, Luke 4. 5. 6
yea, condemn it for vanity, as it is; but a well ordered Church, and ready,
he admireth.



grapes to refresh them with stronger liquor, be ready to pour out sweet and
comfortable liquor; but see some good calling to pressing you to it, let all
your Doctrine direct to Christ, and dispense it with such powerful efficacy of
the Spirit, that the drowsy sluggard may be raised up to some fruitfulness,
and more holy walking toward God.





of him, and more subjection to him.



That ye stir not up, etc. But in the Hebr. Why should you stir up, etc. As who
should say, when all things are thoroughly and fully reformed and settled: Why
should you go about any Innovation? This manner of charge was never uttered
before, Cant. 2. ver. 7. to the end.

(Who is this that comes up from the Wilderness, leaning upon her beloved?)
I raised thee up under the apple tree: there thy mother brought thee forth,
there she brought thee forth that bare thee.

Who is this that comes up from the Wilderness:] In these words the holy
Ghost sets out the calling and estate of two other Churches after the
calling of the Jews:

First, the one arising out of the Wilderness, ver. 5. 7.

Secondly, the other a little sister, ver. 8. 10. together with the estate of
the whole Church, as it shall then stand, from that time to the end of the
world, ver. 11. 14.

This Church coming up from the Wilderness is described,

First, by the unexpectedness of her arising, together with the admiration of
the Jewish Churches there, ver. 5. Who is this that comes up out of the
wilderness?

Secondly, by the place of her arising the Wilderness.

Thirdly, by her familliar fellowship with Christ, joined with her confidence
on him, leaning upon her beloved.

Fourthly, by the means of the gathering and raising of this Church, I raised
thee up under an apple tree, etc. ver. 5.

Fifthly, by her earnest desire of his deep affection to her, and continual
remembrance of her, Set me as a seal upon thine heart, as a seal upon thine
arm, ver. 6. which petition of hers is urged by a motive, taken from the
strength and depth of her affection to him, which she proves,

First, by comparing her affection as equal to three things most strong,

First, Death.

Secondly, to the Grave.

Thirdly, to vehement flames of fire, ver. 6.

Secondly, by comparing it to two things as less than her affection, though
they be also of great force,

First, to many waters, which cannot quench her affection of love.

Secondly, to the whole substance of any man's house, which would be contemned
if it were offered to withdraw her from Christ, ver. 7.

The calling and estate of the other Church, the little sister, is described by
three passages,

First, by the consultation of the elder Sisters; to wit, of the Jewish
Churches, and of that Church coming up out of the Wilderness, what they shall
do for her when she shall be spoken of, ver. 8.

Secondly, by a resolution what they shall do for her, suitable to what her
condition (as they shall find her) shall require, ver. 9.

Thirdly, a satisfaction given by this little Sister, to the elder, how her
estate stands, together with the cause thereof, Gods favor, that they may
the better know what courses to take for her, ver. 10.

The estate of the whole Church, as it shall stand after the conversion of the
Jews, and of those other Churches is set forth;

First, from Christ's care for them, expressed,

First, in his watchfulness over them in his own person, which he amplifies
by the less care which Solomon had of his vineyard, committing the keeping of
it to others, ver. 11, 12.

Secondly, in his charge to the Church, that he may hear her companions
hearkening unto her, ver. 13.

Secondly, by the Churches prayer unto Christ, that he may hasten the
translating of them into heaven in the end of the world, ver. 14.

Who is this that comes, etc.] Who these Churches should be that remain to
be called after the conversion of the Jews and Gentiles, we cannot conceive
any more fitly than the Churches of Assyria; secondly, of Egypt, of which we
read Isa. 19. 23. 25. When a Church shall be elected among the Jews,
signified by Ezekiels goodly Temple, the water of Gods Spirit shall flow from
thence Eastward, Ezekiel. 47. 1. 9.
go down into the Desert, and from thence spread themselves far and near.

This Desert, or Wilderness Eastward from Judah, is the Wilderness of Arabia,
whither Spiritual graces shall be conveyed by some coming from Jerusalem, and
from thence they shall be further carried into the East Countries, to the
gathering, and conversion of the Assyrians and others: Whence it is, that
Church arising from the Wilderness of Arabia, is said to lean upon her
beloved in an Arabian word; as when the holy Ghost was to speak of the
Babylonian Captivity (or Winter) being past, he uses the Babylonian or Caldean
word. Cant. 2. 11.
So then, when the Churches of Judea shall see such a goodly Church spring from
small help, out of the Wilderness of Arabia, beyond their expectation, they
shall say of her, Who is this that comes out of the Wilderness, leaning upon
her beloved? trusting by faith on him, and thereby attaining and enjoying
fellowship with him: for to lean is put as an act of faith or trusting Prove.
3. 5.
, and the gesture implies familiar love John 13. 2^. and 21. 20.
.

It raised thee under an apple tree.] Christ, or the Church of the Jews by his
power raised up his Church by the means of some inferior Magistrate, resembled
here by an Apple tree, as before Cant. 2. 3.
: For though he was not so high and mighty as the Cedars of Lebanon, or the
Oaks of Bashan; yet eminent he was, and his shadow good, and his fruit cordial
and comfortable.

And the means of the gathering of this Church, being at first but an
inferior Magistrate; the Church had more need and use of faith to lean upon
her beloved, when sovereign authority did not countenance the work.

There thy mother brought thee forth.] To wit, the Mother Church of the Jews,
or the Catholic, which is the Mother of us all. Gal. 4. 26.


Set me as a seal upon thy heart, Verse 6.
as a seal upon thine arm, for love is strong as death, jealousy is cruel
as the grave: the coals thereof are coals of fire which has a most vehement
flame.

Set me as a seal upon thine heart, as a seal upon thine arm.] That is, let
me be deep engraven as a seal is into thine heart or affection, and as a seal
on thine arm, let me be continually in thy sight and remembrance. And because
the heart is the seat of the will, and the arm of strength, therefore she
desires his deep affection and mighty strength and power always to be present
with her for her comfort and peace.

For love is strong as death.] Death shows his strength,

First, in subduing all sorts of people high and low, young and old.

Secondly, accepting no compassion, nor yielding to any opposition, but going
through with his work; such strength of love shall this Church show to Christ,
subduing all before her to the obedience of Christ, and not suffering any
impediment to detain her from him.

Jealousy is cruel as the grave.] Jealousy is a mixed affection of zeal or
fervent love, and carries at any corrivalls, a rage with wrath against them: So
fervent then shall the zealous love of this Church be to Christ, that she may
not endure any such things as shall steal away the peoples hearts from Christ,
or alienate or lessen his affection to her, but as the grave,

First, she shall devour all such things, and bury them out of sight, And

Secondly, there hold them under for ever.

The coals thereof are coals of fire, which have a most vehement flame.] The
ardency of this love shall as coals of fire,

First, inflame her in all her services to Christ:

Secondly, burn up as stubble all impediments.

First, All inward green lusts.

Secondly, outward entanglements.

(Vehement flame.) Hebr. Flames of God, that is, excellent or extraordinary;
for in Scripture Phrase, the things of God are transcendently excellent, as the
Harpes of God Rev. 15. 2.
, the Trees of God. Pal. 1. 3.


Flames of God, divine and vehement; and indeed this vehement love being
kindled by Gods heavenly Spirit, cannot be quenched with earthly things.

Many waters cannot quench love, Verse 7.
neither can the floods drown it: if a man would give all the substance of his
house for love, it would utterly be contemned.

That is, neither adversities, though never so many, or deep, or strong, as
many waters and floods, shall withdraw this love from Christ; nor all the
treasures, and pleasures, and credit, which the substance of any man's house
might procure us, shall be of any reckoning in comparison of Christ, to
withhold our hearts from him.

We have a little sister, Verse. 8
and she has no breasts, what shall we do for our sister, in the day when she
shall be spoken for.

We have a little sister, etc.] The Church of Judea and Assyria hearing of
some good people growing up, and coming on in Egypt, they are solicitous what
course to take for them for their growth and establishment.

(A little sister.) Isa. 19. 18.
In comparison of the Jews or Assyrians, for but five Cities in the Land of
Egypt speak the language of Canaan, and one of them shall be called the City of
destruction.

And she has no breasts.] No Ministers to give to them the sincere milk of the
word or the means of consolation in their oppressions and distresses. 1 Pet.
2. 2.
Isa. 9. 20.


In the day when she shall be spoken for.]

When the fullness of time shall come, that she shall grow up to such a
multitude of Professors, as may be fit to have a settled Church established
amongst them; for there is a company grown up to be a fit Spouse for Christ.
When there are so many good Christians as may constitute a well ordered Church.

If she be a wall, Verse 9.
we will build upon her a palace of silver: and if she be a door, we will
enclose her with boards of Cedar.

If she be a wall, we will build.] That is, if she have a Christian Magistracy;
for the Magistrate is a wall.

First, high, to keep out invasions of enemies; even so does he keep out
foreign evils from breaking in upon his people.

Secondly, close to keep in his people within bounds from breaking out into
disorder.

Thirdly, firm, whereon to rear (if occasion be) a silver Palace, whereon to
lay the frame of a good motion, or course to be taken for Public good.

Fourthly, a Wall of partition, to divide between right and wrong, to give
every man his own.

We will build upon her a silver palace.]

We will make her garment honorable and wealthy.

If she be a door.] That is, if she have faithful Ministers, which as a
door, open the way to Christ, that the people may go in and out, and find
pasture, in him: We will enclose her with boards of Cedar.] Cedar is a Timber
that will neither rot, nor breed worms, and so will endure always; Whence it
was that the Heathen made their Simulacbra Deorum, Plin. lib. 13. cap* 5.
Images of their gods of this wood, to make them seem eternal. These
Sister-Churches then promise, that if their little sister of Egypt have any
faithful Ministers, they will provide for their safety and peace, that they
be not discouraged, nor disturbed in their function.

I am a wall, Verse. 10.
and my breasts like towers: then was I in his eyes as one that found favor.

The little sister of Egypt resolves her sisters, that she wants neither
Christian Magistrates, nor faithful Ministers, so full of wholesome Doctrine,
as that her breasts swell like Towers; which yet she acknowledgeeth to be a
singular mercy and favor of Christ, and ascribes all her store to his praise:
Then was I as one that found favor in his eyes.

Solomon had a vineyard in Baal-hamon: Verse 11.
A place so fruitful that for excellency it was called the Lord of a
multitude, or the owner of great increase. He let out the vineyard unto
keepers, who paid him a great rent, even thousands for the fruit of it, and yet
had a good portion, certain hundreds for their own pains.

My vineyard which is mine, is before me: Verse 12.
thou (O Solomon) must have a thousand* and those that keep the fruit thereof,
two hundred.

To wit, I let not out my vineyard to others, but I kept it my self always;
let Solomon take his thousands for his fruits of his vineyard, and the Reapers
their hundreds; I will not so do, but take all the pains to keep my vineyard,
and reap all the gains of the fruits thereof to my self. The meaning is, when
Christ has gathered all these Churches of the Jews, Assyrians, Egyptians, and
neighbour-Nations, he will then keep his Church with his mighty power, that
neither Dragons, nor wild Bores, nor Foxes shall hereafter root it up, or make
havoc of it, as in time past they have done: This is expressly foretold, and
shall come to pass after the destruction of Leviathan the great Turk Isa. 27.
1. 3*
.

Thou that dwell in the gardens, Verse 13.
the companions hearken to thy voice, cause me to hear it.

Thou that dwell in the gardens.] The Participle being of the Feminine
Gender, shows that it is the Church, not Christ that is here spoken to, who
is said to dwell in the garden; to wit, in the particular Churches, as the sea
dwells in each particular Country sea; the German sea, the Spanish sea, the
Balticke sea, etc. So the Catholic Church is divided into particular
Churches, or the Jewish Mother Church dwells by her authority and directions
in all other Churches.

The companions harkening to thy word (or voice) cause me to hear it.] So the
words in the original which implies either that Church would have the Mother
Church of the Jews take care of all other Christian Churches, and give
directions unto them, and yet not as unto her handmaids, but as to her
companions; or else if the words be read according to the translation, The
companions hearken to thy voice, cause me to hear it: They imply, that after
the calling of these Churches, this shall be their constant estate to the
worlds end, they shall all

First, embrace one another as companions, not claiming Romish Supremacy.

Secondly, hearken to the voice and directions of the Mother Church, (in
Solomon's days for wisdom to him.)

Thirdly, continue in calling upon the Name of Christ without dissipation and
interruption to the end.

Make haste my beloved, Verse 14.
and be thou like to a Roe, or to a young Heart upon the mountain of spices.

This is the prayer of all the Churches; Now that all things are accomplished,
the which Prophets and Apostles have foretold, that Christ would hasten his
last coming as swiftly and quickly, as the swiftest of the creatures, the Roe,
or young Heart, to take them up with himself into the highest Heavens of the
Mountains of spices, where are all manner of spices, where are all manner of
sweet and fragrant and pleasant things, even fullness of joy at Gods right hand
for evermore. Psalm. 16. 11.
Thus is the end of the Revelations, The Spirit and the Bride, and every
faithful soul says in like sense, Rev. 22. 17. 20.
come Lord Jesus, come quickly:

that the Nations of the Gentiles shall not be cast off from the fellowship of
the Church, when the Jews are called, as the Jews were out of the Church,
that the Gentiles might be grafted in Romans 11. 19, 20.
; but even after their calling, new Churches of the Gentiles shall be brought
in; yea, their conversion shall bring from the dead into the world: Rom: 11.
ver. 12. 15.
What shall the receiving of them be, but life from the dead? yea, the Gentiles
shall bring their glory to it, Revel. 21. ver. 24.
yea, the cursed Canaanite shall not be excluded from partaking in this
blessing Ezekiel. 16. 55. 60. 61.
. How much more may we hope then that these Churches of Christendom, which
have suffered so much with Christ, and for him, under the Dragon, and the
Beast, and the Turk, shall partake with the glory of these Churches of the
Jews when the time shall come.

communion with Christ, labor we therefore to abandon it from us.









cutting off the breasts, or breaking down the walls of their small
neighbour-Churches.



Luke 12. 52.
, which neither enter in themselves, nor would suffer others: such are rather
Port-cullises, yea, gates of Hell.

1 Cor. 16. 10.
, See that Timothy be without fear among you.



Leviathan shall be punished, even Leviathan that crooked Serpent, and the
Dragon that is in the sea shall be slain; In that day sing ye unto her, Isa.
27. 1. 2.
a vineyard of new wine; yea, the Lord will keep it, he will water it every
moment, lest any hurt it, he will keep it night and day; yea, Christ will one
day free his Church from all oppression, and give free passage to all his
ordinances.

Roe or a young Heart upon the mountains of spices; to take us up into the
highest heavens, where are all manner of sweet and fragant and pleasant things,
even fullness of joy for evermore.

The faithful Spouses of Christ do earnestly desire his coming to judgment,
Psa. 16. 11.
but Harlots would put off his coming: 2 Timothy 4. 8.
A chaste wife, and a loyal Spouse desires her husband to send no more
letters, but to hasten his return, and come home; but a harlot would have her
husbands coming deferred; so they whose hearts are a whoring after the world,
neither desire Christ's coming, nor love his appearing. That we may therefore
show and approve our selves to be the true Spouses of Christ, desire his hasty
coming, and say, as Revel. 20. 20. Even so come Lord Jesus, come quickly,
Amen. The Lord work this good work and frame of grace in our hearts, for Jesus
Christ's sake, Amen. Alas who shall live when God does this? Number. 24. 23.

FINIS.

