THE Covenant OF GRACE: Discovering The Great Work of a Sinners Reconciliation
to GOD.

By JOHN COTTON, Minister at Boston in New England.

Whereunto are added: Certain Queries tending to Accommodadation between the
Presbyterian and Congregationall Churches.

Also, A Discussion of the Civil Magistrates Power in matters of Religion.

By the same Author.

LONDON: Printed by M. S. for Francis Eglesfield and John Allen, at the
Marigold, and Rising Sun in Paul's Churchyard. 1655.

TO THE Truly Virtuous and Religious, my ever honored and much esteemed
Friend, Mris. Catharine Hodson, The Sure mercies of David;
IF either Religion or Civility have any virtue to oblige, certainly I am much
your debtor; it would be but a Complement (which usually derives its Pedigree
from the vainest assentations) to promise any adequate satisfaction for those
many favors you were pleased to make me the subject of. The design of these
few lines is to testify to your self and the world, that I am really
thankful, or heartily desire to be so.

The following Treatise which concerns the Covenant of Grace, I commend rather
to your Practice then protection; It Is true, it is an Orphane, entertain it
for the Fathers sake, and I shall undertake you shall gain no mean
satisfaction for your pains.

The two smaller Tracts at the end, are of good use to those for whom they are
intended.

In the first the Reverend Author undertakes a good Office, which is, to become
Vmpire betwixt dissenting Brethren; Next to their not falling out, the best
thing is to agree: I have often thought, that if men did more attend to the
interests of grace, and were less particular in their ends, the quarrels
about the way would not be so endless.

As to that latter Tract, about the Magistrates power in matters touching the
first Table; Of late days it has fallen much under Question; wise and good
men who have attended to the Scripture with a single eye, have looked upon the
Magistrate as The Minister of God, a revenger to Execute wrath upon him that
does EVIL, Romans 13.4. under the name of Evil comprehending (...). Aristot.
Eth. 5. 13.
whatsoever is committed about holy things: Children are commanded obedience to
their Parents in all things, Col. 3.20. Felius (inquit Augustinus) Reges si
suam potestatem ad Dei cultuu^ maxim dilatandum, majestati ejus famulam
faciant. De civit. Dei. 5. c. 14.
All things, comprehend holy things, and the command of a father is less then
that of the Supreme Magistrate.

That which relates in this little Book to the Covenant of Grace, I commend to
your special meditations; every truth has its value, but not of equal
concernment unto all.

Amongst all the parcells of sacred Word, none more justly challenges our
serious study, and affectionate inquisition, then this mystery that has been
hid from ages and Generations, Colos. 1.26. comprehended in the Covenant or
Grace, which is a Constellation of great and precious Promises, communicating
the most beneficial influences of rich, everlasting and undeserved mercies, by
Jesus, Christ the Mediator of the Covenant, to the needs of lost, heavy laden
sinners.

This is the City of Refuge, and surest Sanctuary, to which distressed souls
have always fled, and found security when the ^owes and the waves of
temptation have beat upon them; here they have successfully cast the Anchor of
their hopes; for The Mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed, but my
kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the COVENANT of my peace be
removed, says the Lord that has mercy on thee. Oh thou afflicted and tossed
with tempests, and not comforted, I will, etc. Isai. 54.10,11,12. They only
know how much sweeter then the honey and the Honey comb, the Genesis 33.9,11. Esau
looks upon his substance, and says, (...) (...), I have much, or abundance.
Jacob looks upon his portion in Jehovah, and says, (...) (...), I have all
things. Thus it should be Translated.
large contents of the Covenant of Grace are, who have tasted the grace of that
Covenant.

The spiritual sense which you have of these things, has been so rightly
exercised, that your experience exceeds all the Arguments of knowledge that I
am able to administer. But this Covenant being our Grand Charter, and the great
reason of our hopes for another life, I refer you to the perusal of the
following Treatise, and shall in the mean time bespeak a blessing from Heaven
upon your meditations in it.

I Question not but still you pursue that thriving course in Religion, which
many are wanting to themselves in; and that is to keep off from unedifying
disputes and Questions, which have added nothing to Christianity, but discord,
scruple, and a loss of the vitalls of Godliness, besides the expense of
precious hours, which you have improved to more considerable advantages. You
run well, let nothing hinder you.

Hold fast that which you have wrought, that you may receive a full reward:
Live as much as you can to the interests of another world; For the Land of
IMMANUEL is an excellent soil, the purest air is above, where the Spirit
breaths freely, and the soul injoyes a condition proportionable to it self,
in as much as nothing can fit it, but that which bears some similitude to its
being.

Your warfare is not yet accomplished, as you must wrestle with God by prayers,
so you must wrestle with principalities and powers (...) de supercoelestibus
Ephesians 6.12. vide Mat. 10.32 (...), mei causa^ illius causa. vide Mat. 26.21. All
ye shall be offended because of me. (...).
A^OVI [or because of] heavenly things: The nature of Satan is to tempt, and we
have that in our natures fitted to comply with any temptation: Let him be
conqueror, or conquered, he is restless: He may go away for a season, till
God is pleased to let out his chain, and then he comes again. Be we faithful
to the death, and there is a Crown of life provided for us. Now the God of all
grace, 1 Pet. 5.10.
who has called us into his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after you have
suffered a while, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you. So prays

Your very much obliged Friend in the bonds of the Gospel. W. RETCHFORD^.

TO THE READER.
IF either Author or Matter may tend to commend any Treatise, I might take
occasion from both these respects to speak to the high commendation of all
these three ensuing Treatises; the Authors of them being such as whose
commendations are in the gates of all the daughters of Zion, and therefore need
not Epistles of Commendation from any others. The Name of Mr. John Cotton (the
Author of the two former) being like a precious Ointment powered forth; and
although his blessed soul be now amidst the spirits of just men made perfect in
the heavenly Jerusalem that is above; yet his holy works and labors left
behind him, do (and I trust ever will) speak to the Saints, to the Churches
here below, both in the present and also future Generations yet unborn. Neither
does the other ( viz. the third, that concerning the Power of Magistrates in
matters of the first Table) seem to claim any lower descent, being indeed a
Result of a meeting of diverse reverend and godly Elders of several Churches in
the Masa^usets Plantation in New England, An. 1646. where both the head and
heart of the forenamed reverend and precious man was also present, amongst
those approved workmen who need not to be ashamed.

And as for the Matter which they do treat of, it is the establishment of Peace
both Spiritual, viz. of a believing soul with the Lord in the Covenant of
Grace, as in the first Treatise: and Ecclesiastical, viz. between the Brethren
and Churches of the Presbyterian and Congregationall way, as in the second: and
also Political, viz. between Magistrates and people in point of power and
Jurisdiction, about matters belonging to the first Table, as in the third
Treatise. How well these things are here spoken unto, I shall willingly leave
to the godly and learned Readers to judge.

I shall only desire to give a brief account of the publishing of them to the
world, that the Reader may undoubtedly assure himself that these are neither
spurious Copies, nor surreptitiously put forth.

The Treatise of the New Covenant having been taken from the Authors mouth in
Preaching, was afterward presented unto him with desire of his perusal and
emendation of it; which being done (and indeed the interlinings of his own
hand do plainly testify his correcting of it) he delivered back, not long
before his death, into the hands of a Gentleman, (one of the Church in Boston
there) who coming over hither, and being about to return, left it with me to
take order for the Printing of it.

That of the Queries I had from the Reverend Author himself (my most Honored
friend) in a letter from him, with liberty (if it might be thought meet) of
publishing of it: At my coming over from that Country (which was about a year
before his death) he delivered unto me the same for substance, but in another
Form, viz. in 12 Propositions, and therefore did then express his
unwillingness to yield to the impression of them (being moved thereunto by a
Reverend Elder then present with us) by reason (as he said) they were set down
by way of Propositions; but afterward the Lord having directed him to mould
them in to another model (turning the twelve Propositions into eleven Queries)
he was pleased to send them over unto me as here they are presented. He was a
man of peace, of a very sweet spirit, and had a special faculty of composing
differences in the judgments of Brethren: and thus much I shall crave liberty
to testify of him, that, besides the multiplicity of occasions which was
constantly upon him, he was not without care about the Peace and welfare of the
Churches abroad; and notwithstanding his so vast a distance in body from the
Churches and Saints in his Native Country, yet he had great thoughts of heart
for the Division of his Brethren here, being seriously studious how to compose
and heal their breaches: He has sometimes said unto me being privately
together, Brother I perceive there is a great gravamen which the one party is
much offended at with the other, I pray let us study how we may ease and remove
it. From that solicitous care it was that he drew up these 11 Queries, unto
which (may it be without offense) I shall be bold to add one more to make up
the number even and round, the which I do presume that our Reverend and
honored friend would not have been averse unto, had he been on earth, to have
been consulted withal.

The third and last Treatise, being The Result of a Synod at Cambridge (as it is
styled by the Copy come to my hands) was lately sent over unto me from a
Reverend Friend (one that was present at that Assembly) desiring me earnestly
(intimating also that 'twas not his own desire only) to procure the Printing
of it, as conceiving it might prove, very useful for the present season.

Now these three little Treatises being in mine hand (through providence)
together, and each of them somewhat too small to put forth severally, I was the
more willing (especially apprehending them not to be altogether heterogeniall)
to join in one small Volume, and as they came from one and the same place, so
to send them forth as Companions together: and oh that the presence and
blessing of the Spirit of Christ may go along with them, making them useful
and profitable unto the Readers or Hearers of them!

THO: ALLEN.

BOOKS Sold by John Allen at the Rising Sun in Paul's Churchyard.
NOva Testament. Beza. fol. Doctor Holdsworths Works, complete. 4o. Mr. Caryl's
fifth Vollume, on Job. 4o. Mr. Greenhil's second Voll: on Ezekiel. 4o.
Gospel-Liberty, by Mr. Cradock. 4o. Mr. Lockiers Works. 4o. Andrew's
Catechisticall Doctrine. 8o. Simpson of Justification. 8o. Ainsworth's
Communion. 8o. Ainsworth's Arrow against Idols. 8o. Welsh Testament. 8o. The
Saints Desire, by Samuel Richardson. 8o. Gaul of Witches. 8o.
The Contents of the Treatise concerning the Covenant.
Doct. THat God in the Covenant gave himself to be a God unto Abraham and his
seed, and received Abraham and his Seed to be his people, and took Christ to be
the Mediator and Surety of this Covenant between both. Page 4. In which are
these 3 things. 1 That God gave himself to Abraham to be a God to him and his
Seed. 5. and 7. Here is considered, 1 What it is for God to give himself to
Abraham. 7. Viz. 1 The whole nature of God in his Persons and Attributes. 8. 2
All the Ordinances, Creatures, and works of God. 10.

2 The Order of Gods giving in the Covenant. 14. Viz. 1 God does first give,
and not the Creature. ibid. 2 God also is the first thing that is given. ibid.

3 The Manner of giving, viz. freely and for ever. 15. Obj. But the Lord
required that he should give himself back again. Answered. 16. Obj. The Lord
required him to circumcise his Seed, answered. 17.


2 How the Lord does take Abraham and his Seed to be his people. 5. and 19. By
preparing them by a spirit of Bondage. 20. Burning. 21.
By taking possession of them by his spirit. 24. Which spirit does Convince the
soul of unbelief. 25. Work Faith, and unites to Christ by some Promise of
grace. 26.

Qu. Whether may not true Faith be built on a Conditional Promise, answered.
29. see 56. From Union follows Communion with Christ in all spiritual
Blessings. 31. Viz. Relative, as Adoption ibid. Justification ibid.
Positive, wrought in us, as Sanctification. 34. Glorification. 35.



3 How the Lord did constitute Jesus Christ to be the Mediator of the Coven:
7. 36. By receiving him, the Son of the Virgin Mary, to be one person with the
second in the Trinity. ibid. By giving him to be a Covenant or a Mediator of
it, In filling him with all fulness, to be a King, Priest, and Prophet. 37.
In his performing whatever is required on our parts. ibid.



Use. 1 It teaches the difference between the Covenant of Works and of Grace.
39. 1 In the one, all is given upon the condition of obedience; in the other
not. ibid. 2 The Covenant of Grace is built upon a free Promise of Grace, the
other upon something else, as Ordinances, Duties, etc. 40. 3 In the
Continuance: the Benefits of the one (as Justification and Sanctification) do
abide, the other not so. 42. Two sorts of Hypocrites have a kind of
Sanctification. Viz Washed Swine, and Goats. 44. The Goats fall short of
Sheep in two things. 45. 1 Goats are Capricious, affecting eminency. ibid. 2
They are Rankish, not having the sweetness of sheep. 47.



4 In respect of the Mediator, both of the one and the other. ibid.
2 It yields an Argument against the Body of Arminianisme. 48. 3 Gods people
(...) to respect them that are under a Covenant of Works, and not be hopeless
of their Salvation. 49. 4 It helps to clear sundry Questions about the
Covenant. 51. 1 Qu. What is the first Gift that ever the Lord gives to the
Elect? 52. Ans. He gives Himself, and not saving Preparations first, ibid.
2 Qu. Whether are the Blessings of the Covenant given before faith to apply
them? 55. Ans. The Spirit is given to work faith. ibid.
3. Qu. Whether the Promise wherein the Lord gives Himself, be absolute or
conditional? 56. Ans. 'Ti^ absolute. ibid.
4. Qu. Whether a man's Union with Christ may be evidenced by his
Sanctification? Answered in four Propositions. 58. 1 Propos. That a
Sanctification which the Terrors of the Law may produce, is no evidence of
Union with Christ. ibid. Here three things are to be attended unto concerning
Sanctification. 60. 1 The Root from which it springs. 61. 2 The Rule by which
it is guided. 67. 3 The End at which it aims. 70.

2 Propos. That true Sanctification is many times dark unto a Christian. 74. 3
Propos. That true Sanctification is not discernable before Faith be discerned.
75. 4 Propos. There is a real Difference between legal and Evangelicall
Sanctification; and wherein it lies. 77.
5 Qu. Of what use are Promises (especially Conditional) if not to bring us
unto Christ? 86. Ans. There is a three fold use of them. 1 Before Union with
Christ, both for Doctrine. 87. Instruction. 88. Exhortation. 89.

And a threefold Effect also the Promises have before Union. Viz. Of
Illumination. 90. Affection, to despise all other things. ibid. Conviction, so
as to leave without excuse. 91.

2 In our Union with Christ. 92. 3 After our Union with Christ, and that many
ways. Viz. 1 For Doctrine, that all treasures are in Christ. 96. 2 For
Instruction where to look for Qualifications. ibid. 3 To stir up to Prayer.
97. 4 To help to discern our spiritual estate. 98. 5 To work the
Qualifications and Conditions of the Promises in us. 100. 6 To provoke to such
Duties as to which blessings are promised. 101. 7 To strengthen Faith. ibid.


6 Qu. To what use then serves the Law of God, which requires such and such
Conditions in us? Is not this to make it void unto Christians, as if they were
not under the Law at all? 106. Ans. It Is of special use both unto them that
are Carnal, either Elected, to make them see their sin. 108. Not Elected, to
harden them. 111.
Both by their Obedience to it. 112. Comfort in their Obed: ib.
Spiritual; being under the Rule of it. 114.
And the effects of their subjection to it, are, 1 They feel the Fatherly
displeasure of God for their transgressing of it. 119. 2 They believe Gods
gracious acceptance of their Obedience unto it. 120.
2 A Christian is not under the Law, i. e. under the Covenant of it; so as he
is not to 1 Look for life by his Obedience, nor to fear condemnation by the
breach of it. 124. 2 Seek for any blessing from his obedience, nor fear any
curse from his disobedience. 128. 3 Look for Conjugall Comfort, from his
Obedience 130. Divorce, from his Disobedience 130.
4 Claim his right to any Conditional Promise by his Obedience. Deny himself
the Blessing of the Promise because of his disobedience. 132.

Hence therefore 1 Let none accuse the Doctrine of the Covenant, of
Antinomianisme. 134. 2 The Servants of God may see how far they are freed from
the Law. 136. 3 Men may come to have some discerning of their spiritual
states. 137. 4 Gods people may learn how to build their Faith and Hope. 138.

7 Qu. If God gives Himself, and so if his Holy Spirit be in us, what need we
Gifts or Grace to work by? 141. Ans. 1. We cannot see God without the same.
143. 2 Thereby we are made fit Temples for the Holy Ghost. 145. Qu. But if
there be Gifts of Holiness in us, then what need the Holy Ghost to dwell in
us? ibid. Ans. 1 To keep those gifts in us. 146. 2 To act them in us. 147. 3 To
witness to us by them, to our comfort. ibid.
Qu. How are we to employ the gifts of Sanctification in us? 150. Ans. 1 See
that we receive them from Christ, and that Christ be all in all in them. ibid.
2 Trust not on them. 152. Either for The performance of any duty. 153
Justification from them. 160.

3 In point of witness, and how. 161. 4 In point of rejoicing. 162. 5 We are
to grow up in them to perfection. 164.

9 Qu. How does God give Himself to be a God Covenant with us? 170. Ans. 1 He
gave his Son out of his bosom for our Redemption. 171. 2 He gives us unto
Christ, and Christ unto us. 173. Qu. How does the Father give, and call us to
Christ? 174. Ans. By his Word. ibid. Spirit, Of Bondage. 175. Burning. 177.
Adoption. 184.



Hence we may learn to discern how we came to saving fellowship and union
with Christ. 192. There are four sorts that fall short of this Union with
Christ. ibid. Viz. Such as 1 Do bless themselves in regard of outward
blessings. ibid. 2 Find comfort in their Reformations, ibid. 3 Rest in a Faith
of their own making 193. 4 Wait upon Christ for Faith in their own strength.
195.








FINIS.
Some Faults to be Corrected by the Reader.
In the first Treatise.
Page. Line. 1 16 read through. 11 25 read Eschol. 29 14 for penitent, read
president. 31 2 blot out is it. 33 22 after us, make a period. 38 18 for
persons, r. person. 43 26 r. their. 44 22 r. Hypocrites. 46 23 for recrive, r.
receive. 48 1 for the, r. their. 49 21 for it is, r. is it not. 51 3 r.
prefidence. 53 2 after Christ, make? 60 7 for attained, r. attended. last line
but one, r. no easy. 71 last line, in the marg. for Answ. r. Quest. 77 2 for
exposit, r. proposit. 133 10 after 9, 10. make) 150 10 in the marg. for Quest.
3. r. Quest. 8. 197 11 for a as, r. as a. In the second Treatis.
Page. Line. 8 18 for as, r. an. 14 23 for quickly, r. quietly. 19 8 r. shall
not he be bound 20 6 after abide make this point? In the third Treatise
Page. Line. 6 last line but one, make a period after allow. 10 27 r. find. 14
last line but one, for at, r. of. 20 16 for strained, r. restrained. 22 26 for
and, r. an. 32 11 for speak, r. seek. 38 8 r. life, making wounds and marks.
52 2 after to, make a comma. 3, 4, 5 blot out all in the parenthesis. 55 3 for
aris'd, r. ariv'd, 59 24 for for acts, r. of acts. 63 12 for non coactive, r.
not coactive.

The NEW COVENANT, OR, A Treatise, unfolding the order and manner of the giving
and receiving of the Covenant of Grace to the Elect. As also: Showing the
difference between the Legallist and the true Christian. Being the substance of
sundry Sermons Preached by Mr COTTON At Boston in New England, some years
since, and corrected by his own hand, not long before his death.

LONDON: Printed by M. S. for Francis Eglesfield, and John Allen, at the
Marigold, and Rising Sun in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1654.

The NEW COVENANT, OR, A Treatise, unfolding the order and manner of the giving
and receiving of the Covenant of Grace to the ELECT.
ACTS 7.8. And he gave him the Covenant of Circumcision.


THis blessed Servant of God, Steven, being called to account concerning what
he had said touching Jesus Christ his destroying the Temple, it is the scope of
his whole discourse throout this Chapter, to justify the doctrine that he had
taught; that though Jesus of Nazareth should destroy that place, yet in so
teaching he taught not blasphemy. And this he does (in way of an holy History
or Narration) make evident in the first place from the sweet communion which
their Fathers had with God, before either Temple or Tabernacle was built; and
if so, then he would not have them look at it as unsafe for them, or as an
utter ruin to Religion, if that both the Temple and the Ordinances of the
Temple were destroyed in themselves, and fulfilled in him. And first, the
passages of Abraham's communion with God, Steven does relate and maintain,
before any of Moses his Customs were known.

God did effectually call him, which call he did also obey ( ver. 2, 3, 4.)
though as yet he knew no Circumcision.

God gives him a trial of his faith, wherein he found Abraham faithful, ver.
5, 6, 7. God promised to give him the Land of Canaan for a possession, but he
gave him not a foots breadth. He promised to give it unto his seed, when as yet
he had no Child: and when God gave him seed, yet they should sojourn in a
strange Land, and be in bondage 400 years.

God gave him the Covenant of Circumcision, in the words of the Text; and
Abraham in the strength of the blessing of God begat Isaac, and Circumcised
him according to Gods direction, and all this before Moses gave any Ordinances
unto them to keep, and before either Temple or Tabernacle was built. From hence
we have heard, That the soul may have very spiritual and gracious communion
with God, before it partake in Church Fellowship, or in any Seal thereof; for
Abraham's faith was thoroughly tried, before he had the Seal of Church Covenant
given him. We heard also this propounded, which is the words of the Text, that
God gave unto Abraham the Covenant of Circumcision; which Doctrine does imply
in it four principal parts, all of them serving to clear Stevens meaning, and
to prove his scope. 1 The Author and manner of dispensing it, God gave: so it
was by gift. 2 The Articles of it; and they are to be inquired into. 3 The
Confederates; and they are expressed, God on the one side, and Abraham and his
seed on the other side. 4 The Seal of it, Circumcision, which was the Seal of
Church Covenant.


These four parts do yield unto us so many Notes. The first of them was
formerly spoken unto in the last point formerly handled: Now for the second and
third parts, to wit, the Articles of the Covenant, and the Confederates, we
comprehend them both in this one Note.

Doctr. That in the Covenant which God made with Abraham, he gave himself to
be a God to Abraham, and to his seed, and received Abraham and his seed to be a
people unto himself: and the chiefest of this seed, the Lord Jesus Christ, he
took to be the Mediator or Surety of this Covenant between them both.

This is the sum of the Articles, and of the Confederates: What the Articles
be, is not here mentioned, but Genesis 17.7. they be (for to speak of Circumcision
before a Covenant, it is but a seal to a blank) where the Lord expresses
himself, thus saying, I will establish my Covenant between me, and thee, and
thy seed after thee in their Generations, for an everlasting Covenant, to be a
God unto thee, and unto thy seed after thee. As for other parts of the
Covenant, they were more properly unto Abraham himself, as to be exceeding
fruitful, to be the father of many Nations, those things were more peculiarly
proper unto Abraham, though they have a moral and universal use and force in
all the faithful, whom the Lord does make fruitful, and gives them a nail
in his Tabernacle. In the Covenant these three things are employed.

1 God gave himself to be a God unto Abraham, and to his seed. This is such an
Argument as the strength and wisdom of men and Angels cannot unfold: It is a
Catechism point, and by way of Catechism to be opened (as the Lord has
revealed it) I mean, plainly and familiarly.

2 God did receive Abraham and his seed to be his people, this is implied and
necessarily inferred by the Rule of Relatives; for if God do give himself to
be a God unto Abraham, and to his seed, and does not expressly prerequire it of
Abraham and of his seed, that they should give up themselves to be his people;
then it must of necessity follow, that the Lord will undertake to receive them
to be a people unto himself, and prevent them in that grace, and so he will
perform both his own part of the Covenant, and Abraham's part also; according
to what we read, Deuteronomy. 7.6,7,8. when as they were in a Land of Idols, and the
Lord lifted up his hand to have destroyed them there, yet he remembered and
wrought for his own Name sake: so that though they were far off, yet the Lord
(to make good his Covenant) brought them out of Egypt, and so from one
Covenant to another; by all which things it does appear, that the Lord will
keep our part of the Covenant also; and this is necessarily employed, in that he
promises to be a God unto Abraham, and to his seed; and there is no express
Restipulation pre-required on Abraham's part. We see this likewise held forth,
Deuteronomy. 29.1.13. where the Lord enters into another Covenant with them, in the
Land of Moab, besides the Covenant which he made with them in Horeb, and in
this Covenant he does establish them to be a people unto himself, as well as
give himself to them to be thrir God, verse. 13. and as God required it of them,
to circumcise the outward man, even the foreskin of their Children, so he will
also circumcise them, taking possession of them, and circumcising their hearts,
and taking away the stonynesse of them, and so fit them to be a Temple for
himself to dwell in.

3 The Lord in this Covenant takes the chiefest of Abraham's seed, even the
Lord Jesus Christ to be the Mediator and surety of the Covenant, and unto him
do all the Promises belong: so the Apostle does expound it, Gal. 3.16. -- and
so by him are all the Promises and blessings of the Covenant conveyed unto
Abraham, and to his seed (his faithful seed) all the world over, and therefore
he is called the Mediator of a better Covenant, Heb. 7.22. meaning of the
Covenant of Grace, Heb. 8.6. These three things do contain the sum of the
Covenant of Grace, and of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and would therefore be
plainly discovered unto Christians, as, 1 What is the meaning of this, that God
gave himself unto Abraham. 2 How does he take Abraham and his seed, and make
them his people. 3 How does he take Jesus Christ and make him the Surety of the
Covenant between them both;
for the Covenant is established, and so is a sure, firm and everlasting
Covenant. Now in this gift that God gave himself unto Abraham, observe three
things. 1 The Blessing given. 2 The Order in which it was given. 3 The Manner
of giving it.


In the Blessing given: When God does by Covenant give himself to be a God, it
does imply two things.

1 That God does give Himself, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, the
whole Nature of God and all the Persons: the Godhead, with all the Attributes
of that Nature, and all the Offices of those persons; for it is not a confused
God that vanishes away in a general imagination, but God distinctly
considered, in his Persons, Attributes, Properties, etc. Thus the Lord gives
himself to Abraham and to his seed, I will be a father unto you, 2 Cor. 6.18.
and that is not spoken unto the Jews only, but unto all the Israel of God: He
gives the Son also, Isa. 9.6. Joh. 3.16. And for the Holy Spirit, Jo. 16.7.13.
Isa. 59.21. This is my Covenant with them says the Lord, My Spirit that is
upon thee, and my words that I have put into thy mouth shall not depart, etc.
And this is it which the Apostle also says, Gal. 4.6. Thus the Lord gives
himself unto his Servants from one Generation to another. If therefore the
Lord, God the Father give himself, he will not be wanting to draw his people
unto the Son, Jo. 6.44. and what is the chief business and work that the Son
has to do about us? No man can have fellowship with the Father, but he must
have fellowship with Jesus Christ, so our Savior himself says, John 14.6. No
man can come unto the Father, but by me: This therefore the Lord Jesus Christ
will do for all the elect seed of Abraham, he will open their eyes to see,
that the Father did not draw them to damnation or utter desolation (though at
first that be their greatest fear) but unto salvation by him. This has he
promised to do, and if it be the work of the Spirit of God to establish us
both in the Father and the Son, then will he convince the world of sin, of
righteousness, and of judgment, John 16.8, to 11. and so will establish our
hearts in the comforts of the Lord our God; and this is that which the Apostle
prays for the Ephesians, Chap. 3.16. Hence it comes to pass, that what the
Lord would have us to do, he is present by his Spirit to teach us, and to
strengthen us, and so to do it for us. All these things does the Lord work for
Abraham, and for his Elect seed: So that look what is meet for a Father to do,
or for a Brother to do, or for the Spirit of God to do, that will the Lord
do unto his elect ones; and so he gives all his attributes, and they are even
God himself; and therefore when Moses desired to see his glory, and he desired
it from the grace that God had showed him, Exodus 34.6. the Lord proclaimed his
Name before him, Jehovah, Jehovah, strong, merciful, and gracious, etc. Thus
does the Lord give himself, and all the Persons in the Godhead (as they are
truly called) and Attributes, they are no more, nor no other then God himself.

2 And as God himself is employed; so when God is given by Covenant, all the
Ordinances and Creatures, and works of God are given also, for so it was in all
Covenants of old time; when Jehosaphat makes a Covenant with Ahab King of
Israel, 2 Kings 22.4. then I am as thou art, and my people as thy people, and
my Horses as thy Horses, and all that he has is for Ahabs service, as the King
goes, so goes his strength; so thus it comes to pass, that if the Lord of
Hoasts be for us, and give himself unto us, then also he gives unto us his
Eternal Election and Redemption, and whatsoever he has wrought for the
salvation of his Elect; He has not so dealt with any Nation ( Psalm. 147.20.)
but only with the Israel of God, unto them has he given his Laws and showed
them his judgments: And for his Creatures, they are all given to be for his
People, to whom he has given himself. If God be a God unto Abraham, then shall
all Gods people be for him, Melchisedeck shall bless him, Aner, Eshcot, and
Mamre, shall be Confederates with him; the Sun, Moon, and Stars shall fight in
their courses for the people of God; the Sea shall give way to pass through it
on dry ground, What ailed you ye streams of Jordan to go back? Why, all the
Creatures of God must stoop unto the people of God w^ he is in Covenant with
them. This is that which the Lord promises unto his people, Hos. 2.18. to 22.
when the Lord shall marry them to him in faithfulness; and 1 Cor. 3.22. This
is the large gift of Gods Covenant. Nay, and which is wonderful and beyond all
comprehension, when I say, all the Creatures and Ordinances of God are ours,
the very expression of the phrase does imply that the Lord gives himself to
be the staff and strength of them; so that you shall see the presence of God
in them, he will not only give a man wife and children, and Ordinances, and
providence, but he will be in all these, and bless his people in the
enjoyment of them all, so as that they shall enjoy God in all. Psalm. 16.5,6.
The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance. He saw the Lord in what he did
enjoy, and when he had any thing it was in God, and when he wanted any thing it
was supplied in him. The like did Jacob find, when his brother Esau came
against him with 400 men, and the Lord turned him from the fierceness of his
wrath; here was the Covenant of Abraham, the Lord gave him the mouth, and arms,
and tears of his brother Esau: what says Jacob to all this? Genesis 33.10. I have
seen thy face as though I had seen the face of God. He saw the power and mercy
of God in changing the countenance of his elder brother: and that is it which
sweetneth all that a man does enjoy, the lovingkindnes of God in all, is the
blessing of all; and this likewise does Jacob acknowledge, Genesis 33.5. These are
the Children which God has graciously given thy Servant; and so he looked at
them as Gods wives, and children, and servants, and Cattle; and this is the
very life of the Covenant of Grace, when as the Lord is wrapped up in all his
blessings, when as he gives himself, and in himself his Christ, and in
Christ Peter and Paul and all things unto his Church, 1 Cor. 3.22,23. Romans 8
32. This is the maine thing given, God himself, the God of the Covenant, his
Persons, Nature, Ordinances, Providence, and now Abraham is made the Lord of
the world: and so the Apostle does interpret it, Romans 4.13. the Promise that he
should be Heir of the world, etc. and this is that which Abraham did receive
in receiving the Lord to be his God.

2 In the Order of giving the Covenant, there is something to be observed.

1 God gives first, and not the Creature, it was not Abraham that gave unto
God first, for which of all the Creatures shall offer a Covenant unto the
Mighty God? Romans 11.35. the Lord has the pre-eminence in giving, for what
should Abraham give unto God, if God give not something unto him first? He is
the first giver.

2 He is also the first thing in order that is given; for, does he give the
world first, or Ordinances first? or any other spiritual or temporal
blessings first? No doubtless, the Lord is the first thing that he gives by
his Covenant, and with himself all things else also, Romans 8.32. And there is
the precedence of Jesus Christ, he is given, and in him all spiritual
blessings, as the Apostle says, Ephesians. 1.3. and this for the order of Nature
in giving the Covenant: not Obedience first, nor Faith first, nor any thing
else first, but himself is Donum primum and primarium, and in him, all his
goodness, Exodus 33.19.

3 For the Manner of giving; in that he gives himself, there is employed both
the freedom and eternity of the gift, firmness therefore and that unto
eternity. In that he gives himself, it must of necessity be done freely; for
what can any Creature give to purchase God? If a man could give thousands of
worlds they were not enough to purchase or redeem one soul; and if he had
millions of worlds to give, what were they all to purchase so great a gift as
God himself is? Therefore it must needs be of free gift, for the Creature can
do nothing to prevent God. God indeed may give with a purpose to receive back
again, as God does require this of Abraham, that he should have no other Gods
before him, etc. Genesis 17.1. But though Abraham shall perform this and all the
Commandments in an Evangelicall manner, yet God himself does undertake in
this Covenant to be the Author and finisher of this his faith and obedience,
Heb. 12.2. And this does argue the marvelous freedom of the Covenant of Grace,
for the Lord offers it out of his grace without the foresight of faith or
works, for he undertaketh to give both will and deed of his good pleasure,
Phil. 2.13.

Object. But it may be said, Did not the Lord exact it that he should give
himself back again? or else God would not give himself?

Answ. Truly then the Covenant had not been of free Grace, but as you see
sometimes great Princes will take in a Neighbor Nation into League with them,
and not tell them of it: so does the Lord deal with his Elect ones, otherwise
he should not at all intend it, nor ever give himself unto us, for we are not
able to give our selves unto him, for if Abraham did give himself, it was
because God did take him first, and therefore it is that the Apostle tells us
that the Lord took hold of Paul that he might take hold of the Lo^d, Phil.
3.12. I follow after, if that I may etc Deuteronomy. 32.6. If we give up our selves
unto the Lord, it is because the Lord has taken hold upon our hearts first.

Object. But does not the Lord require of him to Circumcise his seed the eighth
day?

Answ. So he does indeed, but the Lord gives him that also: God the Father
sees it needful for the confirmation of their Faith, and their everlasting
salvation, therefore he gives him Circumcision, and gives him the grace to
circumcise his Children: I think indeed the Lord does call for many things
under a Covenant of Grace, but so as that the Lord 1 Works those things in
them out of Grace, not give Grace out of works: 2 He will have them know, that
those things which they work are nothing without the working of his grace.
It is true, Abraham may circumcise Isaac, but who shall circumcise the heart
of Isaac? It is a small matter to circumcise the flesh: so it is a small matter
for us to baptize with water, but who must wash us from our sins, save only the
Lord our God? So that he does secretly intimate, that what his poor servants
do outwardly, he would do it in effect. The Children of Israel shall at the
Lords Commandment march about the City of Jericho seven days together, and
not speak a word, and hereby the walls of the City shall fa^l down flat: of
what use were these weapons to such an end? what would the Lord show his people
hereby? hereby he teaches them to know by what ability and power to bring
mighty things to pass, they shall do duties as the Lord commands them, but
he himself shall breath in them to make them effectual: for though we do
never so much, yet we cannot reach unto the accomplishment of any good thing.
Not by might, nor by strength, but by my Spirit; The Lord therefore by his
Spirit must work all our works for us. Here is the freeness of Gods Covenant,
in that the Lord gives himself first, Jer. 32 40. You may speak of Conditions
in this kind, but the Lord does undertake both for his own part and for our
parts also: for as the Covenant is free, so the Lord will freely maintain and
preserve all his Elect, and all from the immutable nature of God; it is not
possible that God should lie, Mal. 3.6. Hence springs our eternity and
perseverance ( Romans 11.29.) Phil. 1.6. Though the sense of the Covenant does
require it of Abraham to give himself back again unto the Lord, though that be
Abraham's duty, and the Lord does intend it, yet his intendment is to imply,
that he does receive Abraham and his seed to be his people for ever. Josh.
24.3. Thus (mind ye) the Lord deals in the Coven: of Grace, he looks
toward those that look not toward him, as is held forth, Hos. 3.3. where the
Lord bids the Prophet love a woman that was an Adulteress, and say unto
her, Thou shall be for me, and I will be for thee; This is a branch of the
Covenant, when the Lord does undertake to receive Abraham and his seed unto
himself, his giving himself unto them does breed a reciprocal returning of
them unto him.

Quest. Now it may be demanded, How did the Lord take Abraham and his seed to
be his people?

Answ. By a double Act, as 1 Of Preparation, not on Abraham's part, or on his
seeds part, but on his own part, the Lord prepared them. 2 The Lord did invest
him with the blessings of this Covenant.


1 For Preparation, the Lord prepares them by a double work of his Spirit,
which are manifest in all the seed of Abraham, Elect of God.

1 By a Spirit of Bondage, whereby he cutteth off the seed of Abraham from all
worldly intanglements and delights; thus God took Abraham, and brought him from
beyond the Flood, and so does he take men off from their Countries and Fathers
houses, he seperates them from all such things that he might draw them unto
himself: Thus he dealt with the Children of Israel, and called them to be a
singular people unto himself, and yet but in a Covenant of works, Deuteronomy.
7.6,7,8. Thus does the Lord deal with all those whom he receives to be a
people unto himself; and by this spirit of bondage he draws them from all
their sinful lusts and passions, so as that they can find no hope of mercy in
any thing; and this is properly a Seal of the Covenant of works, as the Spirit
of Adoption is a seal of the Covenant of Grace, Romans 8.15. Now by this bondage
the Lord first sets home unto the Consciences of men the weight and danger
of their sins, and it is the usual manner of God to give a Covenant of Grace
by leading men first into a Covenant of works (as it is his constant manner to
work by contraries) and so to thrust men out of doors that they may have
fellowship with himself at length; I had a gracious father (will the poor
soul say) but now I may go and shake my ears like a poor wretch) for so
indeed he is cast out of the Covenant and favor of God to his sense and
feeling; but thus the Lord does even shut him out of doors, that he may open to
him another and a better way.

2 The Lord also Prepares his people by a Spirit of Burning, which upon a
spirit of bondage he does shed abroad into the hearts of men: This we read of,
Mal. 4.1. It is spoken of the Ministry of John the Baptist, which did burn like
an oven against all the Scribes and Pharisees, and left them neither the root
of Abraham's Covenant, nor the branch of their own good works: he cutteth them
off from the Covenant of Abraham, Mat. 3.9. Think not to say that you have
Abraham to be your father, etc. and so by cutting them off from the root, he
leaves them no ground to trust on. From their good works the Lord Jesus Christ
also cutteth them off, Mat. 6.2.5.16. This was a Spirit of Burning, which the
Lord conveyed by the M nistry of Christ and of John Baptist, to burn up all the
Hypocrites like stubble, and the beauty of their works was blasted by it; and
this is Gods usual manner of dealing. Now there are many under a Spirit of
bondage, that never came under a Spirit of burning; yet many under a Spirit of
bondage do fear the Lord with some kind of reverence unto his Ordinances; for
as an Angel of God they received Paul, and yet, for many of them, they were but
under the Law, and therefore the Apostle says, He is afraid of them least he
has bestowed his labor in vain, Gal. 4.9,10,11. compared with ver. 21. where
he says, Tell me ye that desire to be under the Law, etc. A sign that this
bondage under which they were, did not only bind them under fear of wrath, but
did bind them also to obey the Ordinances of God with some kind of devout
reverence: Now you have many men that rest there, but when the Lord does carry
men further, then he sends a spirit of burning, thereby to blast all the
fruits and branches of their righteousness, and to burn up all, that under a
Covenant of works a man has wrought; and this is that which the Prophet Esaias
speaks of, Isa. 4.4. that the Lord will purge away the filth of the daughter
of Sion with a spirit of judgment and of burning. The one is a spirit of
sanctification, and the other is a consuming fire, which forceeth them not to
build any comfort upon any works that they have done. This may Hypocrites reach
unto in their judgments, so as that they may be convinced, that they have
neither root within them, nor branch growing upon them, and yet in the mean
while they may not come unto a Spirit of Adoption, but hereby also the Lord
uses to prepare his people. Some bless themselves in worldly courses, and
never come unto a spirit of bondage: some do find comfort in their
performances, and never saw the vanity of their own righteousness, but there
are those whom the Lord does carry further unto a spirit of burning, even unto
a sensible feeling of Gods wrath burning against whatsoever is as stubble (and
such is a man's own gifts, and parts, and worth) so that now the poor soul
finds that he has no root of any good Covenant, but sees it to be an
outward face of the Covenant that he does rest upon; and now he sees no green
branch of righteousness remaining, but all is blasted and broken in pieces,
according to what the Prophet Esaias says, Chap. 40.6,7. and so the Lord comes
to leave a man neither root nor branch, for by a spirit of bondage the Lord
blasteth all flesh: but when it comes unto the goodlinesse of flesh, that is
consumed by a Spirit of burning.

2 As God thus prepares us for himself, so he does give himself unto us, and
takes possession of us by his blessed Spirit. The Father gives himself and
his Son by his blessed Spirit (for the Spirit it is by which he does visit the
hearts of his people) and this is the main blessing of the Covenant of Grace.
For the better clearing of it, this may be demanded.

Quest. How does the Lord give himself unto his people, and his people back
again to receive him?

Answ 1. They being thus prepared, the Spirit of God takes up his seat in the
soul by making it a Temple unto himself, in the name of the Father and of the
Son, and so are they made an habitation of God through the Spirit, Ephesians. 2.22.
Gal. 4.6. And because ye are Sons, etc. where he speaks not of Sons by
actual regeneration, but by Gods Eternal Counsel. The same Spirit is also
called the Comforter, whom Jesus Christ has promised to send, John 16.7,8,9.
If I depart, I will send you the Comforter, and when he is come, he will
reprove the world of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment.: Of sin because
they believe not in me. This the holy ghost convinces men of, to be the
greatest misery of the soul, that they have not believed upon Jesus Christ.
And look as a Talent of gold or some weighty metal falling into a Vessel of
water, dasheth out all that is in the vessel to make room for it self: So the
Lord Jesus Christ coming into the soul, dasheth out all watery confidences, and
makes room for himself, so as that you may say the Eternal God is there; and
in very deed, because the heart of man is not only like unto water, but is
hard and stony, therefore the Spirit of God comes like fire, and melts the
iron stone of the heart, and softneth it into flesh, that now the soul is
utterly at a loss not only in regard of his sins, but in regard of his best
works also, and is most of all convinced of his unbelief. Now the Holy Spirit
of God bring thus shed abroad into the heart, at the very first entrance of it
into the soul, us it does chiefly convince the soul of Unbelief, so

2 The same Spirit works faith in the soul to yield himself unto the Lord,
and the soul being emptied of himself, now the Holy Ghost has infused Faith
to receive the Lord Jesus Christ; and this is a true saving work though the
soul thinks it self in a very sad condition, that he should so long live
without believing in Jesus Christ. But he is clearly convinced what his case
is, and how vain his best works are; and he lies under this work not only in
his judgment, but in his heart; he now freely submits unto the will of God.
So that the Spirit of God becomes unto the soul, not only as a Spirit of
burning to consume all that is like stubble, but does also melt the iron-stone
of the heart, and softneth it into flesh, that the word may take deep
impression in it: Now there is room for Jesus Christ, now faith is wrought
there, and now a soul can plead with God by faith in prayer; he sees there is
no former Covenant that he can plead, nor any righteousness of his own, but
such as Hypocrites will quarrel for, and rise up to maintain, as they did
against John Baptist, pleading their Covenant and their righteousness; with
these things a poor soul is not satisfied, but unto you that fear my name
shall the Sun of righteousness arise with healing in his wings, etc. Mal. 4.2.
Herein is employed such a reverent fear that dare not disaffect this kind of
yeeldingnesse to the Son. In the old Testament it is called Fear, in the new
Testament it is more generally called Faith; yet the Apostle says, Romans 11.20.
Be not high-minded, but fear, whereby he provokes them to live by Faith; and
indeed it is that, whereby the soul does yield unto the Lord: and this is
indeed our Effectual Calling; the Spirit of God taking possession in our
hearts, and working this faith in us, whereby we submit unto the Lord. This is
that faith in Jesus Christ that makes us one with Christ, for our effectual
calling brings us to be one with him, 1 Cor. 1.9. God is faithful by whom ye
are called into the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ. This fellowship or
communion stands in two things. 1 In the Unity of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17. 2
In the receiving of Faith on our parts:
so that by believing (which is the first thing we do) we yield unto the first
work of God; when this stronger man comes, we yield up all our Armor to him,
and herein stands our coming on to be in Christ and in God the Father, by
this Spirit of God that takes possession of the heart, and has not only burnt
up root and branch of our legal righteousness, but has also melted us unto a
soft frame to yield up our selves unto the Lord, and now we are fit for any
duty, the Lord having possessed us with his powerful presence, and this is true
spiritual Union between the Lord and our souls. By this faith the Creature
does yield up it self unto the Lord, which is also the work of the grace of
God in us, having brought us unto holy union with himself: Now this faith thus
wrought in our effectual calling, is not built upon any Conditional Promise
(I mean upon any Promise made to any gracious Condition penitent in us) nor can
it be built upon any, but upon the Absolute free Promise unto the soul,
according to what we read, Isa. 43.22. to 2^. Thou have not called upon me O
Jacob, but thou have been weary of me O Israel, thou have not brought me the
small Cattle, etc. See Calvin l. 3. justi^. c. 2. s. 29.
In all which we see the absolute freenes of the grace of God. So Ezekiel. 36.26.

Object. But you will say, Though some may be converted by such an absolute
Promise, yet some man's faith may be built upon a conditional Promise, unto a
gracious condition.

Answ. I pray you consider it: If it be a condition, it is to some good
Qualification or other, some good work or other of the Spirit of God in the
heart of a Christian: Was this work wrought before Conversion or after? Every
Christian knows, that all works wrought before Conversion are but dross and
dung, to apply Promises to such works, were indeed to build upon a sandy
foundation. What say you then to works after Conversion? All works after
Conversion are fruits of Faith, and if they proceed from faith, then faith went
before, then a man's faith was not built upon a conditional promise, how is it
possible that it should, when as all works after Conversion are fruits of
faith, or else they are no true sanctification, then faith went before in order
of Nature, and so was not built upon works, but works upon it. And therefore
all our best Divines do carry it thus; That faith closes with Christ upon a
Promise of free grace, otherwise (as says Calvin) Justi^. l. 3. c. 2. s. 29.
my faith would always be trembling and wavering as my works be. Upon a
Promise of free grace therefore my faith is built, as upon the Promise of God
in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, 2 Cor. 5.18,19. The word is it
may be spoken outwardly unto all Christians, but if God do set it home
particularly unto any soul, that man receives this gift of God, and it is made
his own: first he believes this Promise of free grace, and then afterward come
other Promises that do bear witness unto the right application of that
Promise unto the soul: but I am first bu^ upon a Promise of free grace, or
else there is no true closing with Jesus Christ. Well then, being thus united
unto Christ, from this Union with Christ, do flow all other blessings and
benefits of the Covenant of grace; and from hence springs Communion with
Christ in all spiritual blessings that the Lord has wrought for us in him,
and they are, two of them Relative blessings, as they are called by Divines,
and two of them Positive blessings: The two former are laid up in Gods own
hand, and are not created in us as the other two are.

1 For the Relative blessings, they are 1 Adoption. 2 Justification.


And they spring immediately (simul and semel) from the former Union with
Christ, for as soon as ever the spirit of God is in our hearts, and has
wrought faith, that we do not spurn against Jesus Christ, now is the Divine
nature of Christ in us, and we are now become the Sons of God as Christ
himself is.

Look as in a man's first natural conception, as soon as ever Adam does live,
there is an heir of Adam, even so soon as the soul lives: So it is in this new
spiritual birth, as soon as the Holy Ghost comes and has wrought this faith,
now is the seed of God in us, and the life of Christ, and the Spirit of God,
and now are we the Sons of God, Jo. 1.12. Immediately upon this Union with
Christ we are Sons by Adoption, and as we are Adopted, so likewise our sins are
now imputed unto Christ, and his righteousness unto us, and so our persons are
justified. For how and when was Adams sin imputed unto us? Psa. 51.5. Behold I
was shapen in iniquity, etc. so soon as ever there was life, it was the life of
Adam, now the imputation of Adams sin falls immediately upon the soul. So
when we do receive Christ by this living faith, having the life of Christ in
us, we have the righteousness of Christ also imputed to us: for what does the
Child in the womb, though it does neither good nor evil, but is merely
passive, yet sinful it is, and a Child of Adam. So also in this our
Regeneration, the soul acts not, but only receives Christ by that faith
which the Lord has wrought in it, whereby also it is made capable of the
privilege of Adoption, and so the Lord accounts us his Children, and
imputes the righteousness of his Son unto us, whereby we are justified. These
things do dwell in Gods bosom, and the meaning of them is afterward revealed
unto the soul, but communicated they are, both that of Adoption, and this of
Justification, by the gift of faith wrought in us, but we are still upon the
first work of Conversion, wherein a Christian is only passive and receptive,
and truly it must needs be so in the first work of God upon us.

2 Now for the Positive blessings that are wrought in us, they are: 1
Sanctification. 2 Glorification.


When we are called, then are we sanctified, then are we glorified, 1 Cor. 1.2.
As in our natural conception, as soon as ever the Child lives, Adams sin is
first imputed, and then there is a pronenesse in it to carry it captive unto
sin, and to make it backward unto any goodness: so when the life of Christ is
dispensed unto the soul, now the Lord comes to convey with it Justification,
and in it pardon of sin, and then there is a pronenesse in a justified person
to be lively in duty. If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit,
and by faith our hearts come to be purified, Acts 15.9. and the same Spirit
quickneth us unto holy duties; so that we live, yet not we, but Christ lives
in us, yea the Spirit sanctifying draws us into an holy Confederacy to serve
God in family, Church, and Commonwealth; and this sanctification grows and
increases more and more; for as corruption of Nature springs from the
imputation of Adams unrighteousness, so does sanctification spring from the
imputation of Christ's righteousness and thence flows a pronenesse unto that
which is good, and a backwardnes unto that which is evil; this is
Sanctification.

2 The other Positive gift is Glorification, which we read of, Romans 8.30. This
the Apostle Peter mentions, 1 Pet. 5.10. as that whereunto we are called, --
and in truth he has begun the work from the time that he first began to call
and sanctify us, 2 Timothy 1.9. From the very first time that God works upon
the soul graciously, there is a glorious work in that soul, and others may see
it though himself sees nothing that he has received.

Thus we see the second branch of the Doctrine opened, how the Lord does
receive Abraham and his seed unto himself, preparing them by a spirit of
bondage and of burning, and then savingly by the inhabitation of the blessed
Spirit, the same Spirit begetting Faith, we are alive in Jesus Christ, and so
come to be adopted and justified in him. Afterward the same Faith which at
first only receives Adoption and Justification, does now begin to stir a
little, and to breath forth into gracious desires and some holy mourning, and
begins now to put forth such works as the Holy Ghost carries the soul an
end in, working all our works in us and for us.

Now for the third and last part of the Doctrine, the Lord took the chiefest of
Abraham's seed to be the Mediator of this Covenant, unto whom all the Promises
were made, Gal. 3.16.

Quest. If the Lord gave him to be Mediator, how did he constitute him so to
be?

Answ. By a double Act;

First, by receiving Jesus Christ the Son of the Virgin Mary, to be one person
with the second in Trinity, hereby laying a ground of a firm Mediation between
God and us: for now comes Jesus Christ to be of Gods Nature, and therefore he
will be faithful unto God, and of our nature and therefore he will be
compassionate toward us. And here is the Root of all the life and power of
this Mediation, to wit, this personal Union between Jesus Christ and the
Father, which makes up a firm and everlasting communion between God himself,
and Jesus Christ.

Secondly, by Gods giving him to be a Covenant, Isa. 42.6. I will give thee for
a Covenant of the people, etc. That is, to be a Mediator of this Covenant.

1 To receive from God all the Offices and gracious gifts, whatsoever is
requisite to a King, Priest, and Prophet, all things he receives from the hand
of the Father, Col. 1.19. For it pleased the Father that in him should all
fulness dwell, thus he becomes a plentiful Redeemer: And as the Lord gave
him to be a Covenant, so he gives him also to work all things needful for
our Redemption: partly by his Passion, and obedience unto the death of the
Cross, and partly by fulfilling the whole Law, all righteousness for us. The
Lord Jesus Christ did fully accomplish whatsoever was requisite for him to
accomplish in his own Person.

2 He does perform all things needful for the Application of this redemption
unto our souls; and to this end, he it is that sheddeth abroad his Spirit into
our hearts, John 15.26. and 16.7. and when this blessed Spirit comes, he
applies unto the soul all the gracious redemption of Jesus Christ, by giving
him and all the fruits of his redemption, and by working all those blessed
works that the souls of his people come to be partakers of; and so performs
all those Conditions that are required on our parts: If it be needful for us
to have faith, he will work it in us: If it be needful for us to live a life
of Faith, he will help us so to live, for it is not of our selves, it is the
gift of God, Ephesians. 2.9. Thus has the Lord made him a complete Mediator of
this holy Covenant, and whatsoever we receive, we receive it from him; for unto
him first as the head of the Church are all blessings given, and unto us all
Promises in him are Yea and in him Amen, 2 Cor. 1.20. for though Christ be not
a sinner in his own persons, yet in respect of his Members, he is many times
lost in them, though not in himself; and poor in them, though not in himself;
for us therefore he receives the Promises of God, and that is the great
security of them, that they are laid up safe in him, and belong unto us if we
have Union with the head; and in him we perform whatsoever God requires,
whether we Pray, or Preach, or hear, we do all in the Name of Christ, going
forth in his strength and power, Col. 3.17. Thus is the Lord Jesus Christ a
firm Surety of the better Covenant, Stablished upon better Promises, Heb. 8.6.

Use 1. In the first place, This may teach us a broad difference between the
Covenant of works and the Covenant of Grace.

In the Covenant of works, the Lord offers himself as a Father, his Son as a
Redeemer, his Spirit as a Sanctifier, but this upon a condition of works, Thou
shall have no other Gods but me; and If they shall keep his Laws and obey his
voice, then they shall be a peculiar treasure unto him above all people, Exodus
19.5,6. This also they undertake to do, Deuteronomy. 5.27. All that the Lord our God
shall speak unto thee, we will hear it and do it; But O that there were such
an heart in them, verse. 29. When they rebelled, he did not pardon them
graciously; but the Angel whom he sends with them he bids them beware of
him, and obey his voice and provoke him not, For he will not pardon your
Transgressions for my Name is in him; In the Covenant of Grace he will, but not
in this; here is indeed a Conditional Redeemer and Savior, and so it is
expressed, Isa. 63.8,9,10. -- with many of them God was not well pleased,
almost with none of them, but overthrew them in the wilderness. Thus in the
Covenant of works all is given upon condition of obedience.

2 The Lord giving Himself, his Son, his Spirit upon condition, though it be
but to works, yet he is pleased to receive them into some kind of relative
Union, expressed Jer. 32.32. Which my Covenant they brake, although I was an
husband unto them. He was married unto them in Church Covenant, this was some
kind of Union, he was their God and they were his peculiar people, and yet the
Lord cast them off (a Generation of his wrath) from this Marriage Covenant
between them and him: from this Union there springs a kind of Faith, by which
the soul cleaves unto the Lord in some measure, else there could not be this
marriage union; and this faith is that which you read Psalm. 106.12,13. They
believed his words, they sang his praise, etc. So also Exodus 14.31. it is said,
They believed the Lord and his servant Moses. This is that faith which men may
receive, and yet may Apostate from it, spoken of, Heb. 6.3. to 6. and Luke
8.13. but all that faith was never grounded upon any free promise of grace, but
all was built upon Ordinances and Duties, and upon no higher ground. In the 2 Chronicles. 13.8. to 12. marvelously strong are the expressions of Abijah when
Jeroboam came against him, You think to withstand the Kingdom of the Lord in
the hand of David, etc. Where we see what faith he did express, and hereupon (
verse. 18.) The Children of Israel were brought under, and the Children of Judah
prevailed; and yet this Kings heart was not perfect with the Lord his God, 2
Kings 15.3. and yet (mind you) a strong confidence he had that the Lord was
with him, and that he would be present with his own Ordinances; there was
faith built upon fellowship with Ordinances, like unto that Faith in the
Scripture before alleged, Luke 8.13. Men are affected with the word, and
believe and find comfort, and all this springs from that Relative Communion
which they have with the Lord, they find refreshing in their way and work, and
many times take it for the very Seal of the Spirit of God. All which may and
oftentimes is found in Hypocrites; but here is the difference, in a Covenant of
works God gives himself Conditionally; in that of grace, Absolutely; in both
he makes a Covenant, in the one of Grace, the other of works, in which the
Voice of the Lord is, If you be true and faithful to me, then I will not
remove you, and in this Covenant is Faith found, whereby they lay hold upon the
head of the Sacrifice, but not on Christ: it is only built upon such changes
as they find in themselves, and will in the end vanish utterly away.

3 There is a difference also that springs from the fruits of these two
Covenants i^ their continuance; for tho in the Covenant of works there be a
semblance of Justification and Adoption, and a kind of Sanctification, yet they
endure but for a season, and therefore he calls them Lo-ammi, for ye are not
my people, and Lo-ruhamah, for I will no more have mercy, though sometimes they
were his people, and he then had mercy on them: They may also have pardon of
sin, that is forbearance of punishment for a season, Psalm. 78.37,38. Being full
of compassion he forgave their iniquity, and destroyed them not, yet they were
such whose heart was not upright with him, neither were they steadfast in his
Covenant. This is plainly held forth in the Parable, Matthew. 18.23. to the end.
When the Servant had not wherewith to pay his Lord, he fell down and worshipped
him, saying, Lord have patience with me and I will pay thee all, his Lord was
moved with compassion and loosed him and forgave him the debt, but when he had
not like compassion on his fellow servants, then his Lord was wroth and charged
all his iniquities upon him, and cast him into prison, until he should pay all
that was due to him. So that the Pardon is not everlasting, but only respite
from outward punishment, and from inward pangs of Conscience many times, and
this they take for pardon of sin, and acceptance with Jesus Christ, when indeed
they are deluded. So likewise there Sanctification is but for a moment, they
come at last to tread under foot the blood of the Covenant wherewith they were
sanctified, Heb. 10.29. for Christ was but a Conditional Redeemer unto them;
they had only gifts of Tongues, and utterance, and wisdom, and discerning of
spirits, and a common Faith; which things are not that Sanctification which is
a fruit of saving Faith, but only such gifts as do sanctify them unto the
work of the Ministry perhaps, or Magistracy, and fit them for household
Government, or the like; and so much Positive work there is in them as does
make them in some measure fit for the work or service they are called unto.

For a little more explaining of this, Is it the same with that Sanctification
which is in Gods Children? God forbid. All the men in the world are divided
into two ranks, Godly or Ungodly, Righteous or Wicked; of wicked men two sorts,
some are notoriously wicked, others are Hopocrites: Of Hypocrites two sorts
(and you shall find them in the Church of God) some are washed Swine, others
are Goats.

1 The Swine are those of whom our Savior Christ says, That they return unto
their wallowing in the mire; like unto these are such men who at the hearing of
some Sermon have been stomach sick of their sins, and have rejected their
wicked courses, but yet the swines heart remains in them, as a Swine when he
comes where the puddle is, will readily lie down in it: so will these men
wallow in the puddle of uncleanness when their conscience is not pricked for
the present: But these are a grosser kind of Hypocrites.

2 There is another sort that go far beyond these, and they are Goats, so
called, Matthew. 25.32,33. and these are clean Beasts such as chew the cudd,
meditate upon Ordinances, and they divide the hoof, they live both in a
general and particular calling, and will not be idle; they are also fit for
sacrifice; what then is wanting? Truly they are not sheep all this while, they
are but Goats, yet a Goat does loath that which a Swine will readily break
into; but where then do they fall short of the nature of sheep? A difference
there is, which stands principally in these particulars.

1 The Goat is of a Capricious nature, and affects Eminency, his gate also is
stately, Prove. 30.30. Agur reckons the He-goat among the 4 things that are
comely in going: And they are full of Ambition, they cannot abide swamps and
holes, but will be climbing upon the tops of mountains; there is not that plain
lowly sheepish frame that attends unto the voice of the Shepherd, to be led
up and down in fresh pastures: they attend upon their ends, and will outshoot
God in his own Bow, and therefore when they have done many things for Christ,
he will say unto them, Depart from me, ye workers of iniquity. More Eminency
they did affect, then they were guided unto. Thus it was with Jehu, who in his
zeal for God thought to promote himself, and herein he will not be persuaded
of his sin, and therefore going into crooked ways, he comes at length to
cleave unto the sins of Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin; yet
notwithstanding, you may recrive a Goat into Church Fellowship for all his
capricious nature, and he will be a clean creature, and of much good use. The
five foolish Mat. 25.2. were all of them Virgins, all of them abhorring
Idolatry, and all go forth to meet the Bridegroom, and yet they are foolish
and never shall you make them wise, to be all for Christ, only hearing and
obeying his voice.

2 They are of a Rankish nature all of them, specially the old Goats will have
an unsavory relish, far from that pleasant sweetness that is in a sheep; and
herein Hypocrites are greatly different from the sheep of Christ, as the
Prophet speaks, Ezekiel. 34.21, and they mar the Pastures with their feet, and
will be at length mudling the fair waters of the Sanctuary also; and in your
best sanctification they fall far short of a sheep-like frame of spirit,
diligently to hear the voice of the Shepherd, this will not be found in the
sanctification of the best Hypocrite under Heaven, they may go far and yet
fall away, and this is no Arminianism, but if you search the Scriptures
diligently, you will find these things to be true.

4 There is a fourth difference between the Covenant of works and of grace, in
respect of the Mediator, Gal 3.19. The Law was given and ordained by Angels in
the hand of a Mediator. Moses was a Mediator according to the works, and this
our Savior tells the Jews, John 5.45. You have one that accuses you, even
Moses in whom ye trust: And as for Jesus Christ, if he be given to be their
Redeemer, it is but according to their works, if they shall obey his voice, but
if they shall sin against him, he will overthrow them body and soul into the
nethermost Hell. But now in the Covenant of Grace, Jesus Christ has Obtained a
more excellent Ministry, to be the Mediator of a better Covenant, established
upon better Promises, Heb. 8.6. Thus we see in this first Use, the difference
between the Covenant of works, and the Covenant of Grace.

Use 2. I might also here (in the 2d place) from hence gather an Argument
against the whole body of Arminianism, for they look at no gift of God, but
merely upon the faith or works of the Creature foreseen: If God speak of
Election or any other gift of his grace, they tell you it is of Faith foreseen:
but we see how contrary it is unto this truth of God, for he gives himself
first in order of nature, before he gives any thing else accompanying
Salvation. He gave us Christ in his Eternal Counsel before Election, and so
does he also in our Effectual Calling; not any Grace before Christ, or power
to choose whether we will have him or not have him: but he is God, and first
gives himself, and with him faith, and so works our wills unto himself;
not otherwise, leaving it unto us to choose whether we will have him to be our
God or no. Many things in Popery and Arminianisme come to be consuted from
hence, and both are utterly rooted out; for in truth they hold forth no more
but a Covenant of works: And if we will not grant faith to be the cause of all
the blessed gifts of God, they will take it marvelously unkindly, but they were
as good deliver unto us another Gospel; for it is not of Grace, that Faith is
given us?

Use 3. This may also teach the people of God, to bear a gracious respect unto
those that are under a Covenant of works, and not forthwith to condemn them, as
if there were no hope of their Salvation: For God does not call any into
fellowship with himself in a Covenant of Grace, but ordinarily he first
brings them into a Covenant of works, and casts them out of doors by a
spirit of bondage and of burning, and then brings them in by the true door,
and Jesus Christ is that door, Joh. 10.9. Though the Children of the Faithful
be born under the outward dispensation of the Covenant of Grace, yet if they be
not of the Elect seed, they will chose life by their works, and so fall under
the Covenant of works, Gal. 4.24. to 30. So will Professors also, Gal. 4.21.
yea, the Elect themselves, before their Effectual Calling, will seek life by
their works. Hence those that are under a Covenant of works may belong unto the
Lord as well as my self, pray for them therefore. Paul was under a Covenant of
works, Steven prays for him, and as most conceive, that Prayer was
effectual unto his Conversion, and Paul was as dear unto the Lord in his
Eternal purpose, as Steven himself was: And thus Paul himself speaks of
Onesimus, He therefore departed for a season that he might be received for
ever: So may we say of men under a Covenant of works, the Lord may bring any of
them home unto himself by dashing all his works in pieces, and showing him the
presidence of his Spirit, though the Lord has melted him formerly in his
Prayers, and Preachings, and Hearing, and Sacraments, by a Spirit of burning;
yet the Lord will discover that he is but hardened by it into another lump of
pride against the Lord his God: And the Lord will also pluck away the caul from
their hearts, and then they will have none in Heaven but Christ, nor in the
earth in comparison of him, and then the Holy Ghost convinces them of this sin
above all their other sins, that they have not believed on Jesus Christ. Do
not therefore censure any such, as to say there is no likelihood that they
should have fellowship with Christ, for if the Lord make them to fall down
before him, and to yield up their spirits unto the Lord in holy reverence and
fear, these have now received some secret smoking affections (besides a Spirit
of burning) which the Lord will not quench.

Use 4.It may serve in the next place to clear up our judgments in sundry
passages that do concern the Covenant of Grace, by Answers unto these 6
Questions following.

Quest 1. What is the first gift that ever the Lord gives unto his Elect?

Answ. First of all he gives Himself, the Father, and the Son, and the Holy
Spirit; this is the foundation, and if you shall lay saving Qualifications in
the foundation before these, the foundation will lie uneasily, and the spirit
of a true Christian shall not lie long in peace, Christ must therefore be
first, and with him Faith to receive him; first he will make a Covenant with
us, and put his holy Spirit within us, and he comes in with Faith and Fear
that we never may depart from him: He gives us his Son, and all things else in
him, he gives us in him pardon of sins in our Justification, and in him some
degrees of glory also, and in him right unto all the Promises of the Covenant;
no other foundation but him. Take him first, for he is the first thing given:
He takes us by giving us Faith, and we take him by exercising our Faith on him.

Object.But whether does not the Lord give us some saving Preparations before
Jesus Christ, for there be those that are gracious Saints, that have conceived
that there are some gracious Qualifications, which the Lord gives to prepare
for Jesus Christ.

Answ. There be saving graces, which do sanctify us unto God our Father: but
whether they do make way for Jesus Christ, there proves a difference: but you
may discern the truth of the point. If the Lord do give any saving
Qualification before Christ, then the soul may be in a state of Salvation
before Christ, and that would be prejudicial unto the grace and truth of
Christ; for if there be no name given under Heaven whereby we must be saved,
but only Jesus Christ, nor his name, but in a way of fellowship with him, then
it will unavoidably follow, that whatsoever saving work there be in the soul,
it is not there before Christ be there; it is true, John Baptist was sent to
subdue all flesh by a spirit of burning, which burns up the Covenant of
Abraham, I mean their carnal confidence in it, and all their fruits of
righteousness; here were indeed preparations for Christ, but these were not
saving, they were still Children of wrath, Ye Serpents, ye Generation of Vipers
notwithstanding all this; John did indeed dispense poverty of Spirit, and yet
though they had received the Holy Ghost, they were not sensible of it, yet the
poverty of spirit was there, unto which the Promise was made, but then Jesus
Christ was there also, whether they knew it or knew it not, that is not greatly
material in this Argument. But if the Kingdom of Heaven was there, Jesus
Christ was there first, otherwise it will prove dishonorable unto the name of
Christ. Indeed there is a saving preparation before consolation in Christ, and
the manifestation of our gracious union with him; but for our first union,
there are no steps unto the Altar, Exodus 20. last. But Christ does prepare his
Tabernacle for himself to dwell in.

This is in the first place for Instruction concerning what is the first gift,
which the Lord gives unto the soul, before any work or Promise; he gives
saving communion in spiritual union with his Son; this stands firm from the
Tenor of the Covenant, and the nature of it, to my best understanding, and
therewith gives us Faith, and all other saving Qualifications and Conditions,
as it is held forth in the Scriptures of God.

Quest 2. In what order the Lord gives the Covenant and the blessings of it,
whether Faith before them, or those blessings before faith be able to apply
them?

Answ. He does give himself in working Faith, before Faith can be there, and
therefore it is the fruit of the Spirit that Faith is wrought in the soul, and
this Faith does receive the presence of the Lord Jesus Christ himself by his
Spirit, and it does also receive Adoption and Justification: but to be able
actually to apply it, our first birth will not bear it: for a man is as passive
in his Regeneration, as in his first generation, only the Lord gives us his
Spirit that does unite us unto Christ, which is received by Faith, together
with Adoption and Justification. And yet by the Act of believing we are
justified also, Gal. 2.26. that is, manifested to be justified in our own
consciences.

Quest. 3. Whether do we receive the Lord Jesus Christ in an Absolute or in a
Conditional Promise?

Answ. We know the Lord can convey himself in an Evangelicall Commandment, as
well as in a Promise, as we find it, Isa. 41.14. Fear thou not worm Jacob, I
will help thee, etc. He can also convey himself in a threatening to the Devil,
as unto our first Parents he did convey himself, wrapping up a Promise in it,
as Genesis 3.15. from whence the Lord gave them to suck a sweet and comfortable
Promise of his free grace: And when the like is conveyed in a Commandment, the
Lord undertaketh to work that which he so commands.

But now it is questioned, Whether the Promise wherein the Lord gives
himself, be Absolute or Conditional? Faith to receive Christ is ever upon an
Absolute Promise, if you will say it is a Promise to a Condition, what kind of
condition was it? there is no Condition before Faith, but a conditon of misery,
a lost condition, or if a gracious Condition, it is a Condition subsequent, not
prae-existent, no Condition before it, whereby a man can close with Jesus
Christ: and if it was a Condition after Faith, unto which the Promise was made,
then faith was there before, and whatsoever follows Conversion, is no ground
of Faith, but a fruit and effect of it; therefore I say our first coming on to
Christ cannot be upon a Conditional but upon an Absolute Promise.

And if ever the Lord minister comfort unto any man, true comfort upon good
grounds is ever built upon a Promise of free grace. If the witness be unto
Justification received, it is true indeed, a gracious Qualification, and a
Promise to it, may give good Evidence of it a posteriore. And so for
Sanctification, if the Lord come to bear witness unto a man's Sanctification,
then he does it from some work or other of his grace in him, as unto Abraham,
Genesis 22.12.

There is a fourth Question which is as a further branch of this fourth Use,
which I would not speak to, but that I might through the good hand of God, the
better clear things, that we may not stumble in our expressions in any
conference about the Covenant of Grace and works.

Quest. 4. Now forasmuch as you hear of a Sanctification under a Covenant of
works, it does imply that there is a Sanctification that is but transitory, and
not everlasting, nor immortal: Whether then may a man evidence his Union with
Christ, by his Sanctification?

Answ. I answer in four Propositions, that I might not leave any occasion of
scruple or difference about what is held forth in our Congregation, as being
that which does yield as much Agitation as any other Doctrine that is taught
among us, let me therefore shortly and plainly discover it, and let it be so
far received, as we see the life, and presence, and truth of the Spirit of God
revealing the doctrine of free Grace, according to the Scriptures.

Prop. 1. That a Sanctification, which the terrors of the Law may produce (that
is to say, such a Sanctification as may be found in a Covenant of works) is no
evidence or witness of our union with Christ. And I suppose there is no
difference there; but though there be no difference in men's judgments in this,
yet it is an easy thing for Christians to abuse their Evidence upon this very
ground, and as much upon this ground as upon any: For when Christians come to
be really wrought upon, and find themselves discouraged from sin, and so
reform their lives and give up themselves to obey the word, and find comfort
therein (and great consolation many times) in such a case as this, Christians
do much differ upon the point; yet I do not know any of all the Teachers in
the Country, that withdraw their consents from this doctrine, that such
Sanctification, as is wrought in Hypocrites, though it may reach to great
improvements, yet it is no evidence of Justification at all. And it has been
handled in another Congregation, and I think not without weight of truth; that
to distinguish in men between that Sanctification which flows from the Law,
and that which is of the Gospel, is a matter so narrow, that the Angels in
Heaven have much ado to discern who differ: a work fitter for Angels to cut
the scantling in it, then for the Ministers of the Gospel, though indeed there
be great difference of the one from the other. Now though this do not tend to
heal any difference in judgment, yet it is useful to heal a misprision of
sanctification that may be found in all Hypocrites of this Country, and
elsewhere.

Three things are to be attained unto in all sanctification. 1 From what Root
it springs. 2 By what Rule it is guided. 3 At what End it aims.


And commonly under one or other of these three, are put all the differences
between the one sanctification and the other.

I speak it that it may be searched, and (God is my witness) not to unsettle
the well-grounded comfort of any soul; but if any have built upon an unsafe
ground, or have built Hay or stubble, better it is to know it at first, whilst
there is hope in Israel, than when it is too late.

In those three things formerly mentioned, are all the differences between the
sanctification of Hypocrites, and of the Children of God, and they go so close
together, that you will say it is an easy matter to discern justification by
sanctification.

1 For the Root of it, the soul having fellowship with Christ, the Holy Ghost
comes into the soul, and works Faith in Jesus Christ, and this is the root
of all Christian sanctification, Ezekiel. 36.27. and for Faith, it is that which
purifieth the heart, Acts 15.9. and without faith it is impessible to please
God, Heb. 11.6. So that Faith must concur unto the rootednesse of our
sanctification in Christ: And the Apostle does attribute both these Roots unto
both sorts: Unto those Christians that shall afterward fall away to sin the
sin against the Holy Ghost, Heb. 6. They have tasted of the heavenly gift, and
were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, that heavenly Gift was Faith, which the
Apostle reckons chiefly among the Principles of Christian Religion, verse. 1.
A taste they had both of Faith and the Holy Ghost, yet from both these they fall
away.

You know what was said of Saul, 1 Samuel 10.10. The Spirit of God came upon him,
and so did it likewise upon Judas and Demas, acting them mightily in their
Administrations; and as they were thus carried along by the Spirit, so likewise
the spirit of bondage will marvelously prevail with the Sons of men to draw
them on to strong works of Reformation, from whence they reap no small
Consolation, but think and say (as Abijah did) that the Lord is with them
whilst they are with him: And as sometimes David said of himself, I believed,
therefore I spoke, so the Israelites also ( Psalm. 106.12.) believed and sang
the praises of the Lord upon the red sea shore, and yet were they but an
Hypocritical Generation; and if Hypocrites may work Miracles in the name of
Christ (as they did, and expostulate with Christ about it, Mat. 7.22.) then may
a temporary Faith work ordinary works in Christianity also: and therefore you
shall read ( Mat. 13.22.) that there is no fault found with the thorny soil
for their want of root, or depth of earth, for the want of both which the stony
soil was taxed; but look as it is with the branches of a Vine, what depth of
earth the root has, they have, it being grafted into the Vine though they be
but branches of the wild Olive, and will bring forth but wild fruit; for though
the branch of the wild Olive be grafted into the fat Olive, and may flourish
there, yet will it bring forth his own fruit, but in the root you will find
no difference. And yet there is a difference, but it is very hard to be
discerned.

Object. Yes (you will say) there is a plain difference, for an hypocrite is
ever full of himself, but a true Christian does all in faith, he seeks God
daily, and waits upon God daily, and these are not the ways of hypocrites.

Answ. Consider (I pray you) what the Word of the Lord holds forth as the
Root of this sanctification, and I will go no further than express
Scriptures. Isa. 58.2. They seek me daily; and this is spoken of hypocritical
Israelites, and for waiting, we often hear it spoken of the five foolish
Virgins, that they all went out to meet the bridegroom, Mat. 25.1. though
while they tarryed long, they all slumbred and slept, and so did the wise
Virgins also; and for more particular application of God unto themselves, we
find that also Hos. 8.2. Israel shall cry unto me, My God, we know thee; and
yet this Israel (in the same Scripture) had transgressed the Covenant, and cast
off the thing that is good. And for a further Act of faith, which is a staying
a man's self upon God, what says the Text, Isa. 48.2. They stay themselves
upon the God of Israel; and these were obstinate sinners, and their neck as an
iron sinew, and their brow as brass: there was not truth and uprightness;
True it was not, but how shall we know the difference? Truly it is hard to
perceive when men differ, and therefore it is not an easy matter to make such
use of Sanctification, as by it to bear witness unto Justification: and it
will be a very hard case and much more difficult, when men cannot feel the
presence of spiritual gifts, but want spiritual light: and when they do
find faith in themselves, they do find it in hypocrites also, even in
hypocrites also, even faith to seek the Lord, and faith to wait upon him, and
faith to apply him, saying, My God, and faith to stay upon the God of Israel;
and yet these men do vanish away in hypocrisy; this hypocrites may do;
seeing therefore what easines of error may befall Christians, whether this or
that grace be of the right stamp or no, it will behove Christians to be wary,
for even Eagle-eyed Christians will have much ado so to discern of
sanctification in themselves, before they see their justification, as to cut
off all hypocrites from having the like in them, for the sanctified frame of
Gods children, and that which seems to be like it in hypocrites, both of them
spring from the holy Ghost, and both from faith: but now the Spirit of God has
further work in his own people, beyond what he works upon others, though he
melts both, yet hypocrites are melted as iron, which will return again to
his former hardness, but his own people are melted into flesh, which will never
return to his hardness more, neither can they rest in any measure of softnes
unto which they have attained, but still are carried toward Jesus Christ: so
that the one is a temporary faith, and the other persevereth; though both work
in the name of Christ, yet this difference will be found between them, not only
when hypocrites come to be blasted, but even in the midden of their profession:
As for the faith of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, it is never president of its
own power, but his strength lies out of himself in Christ; whereas hypocrites
and legal Christians are confident of their faith, that they can make use of
it unto such and such ends, they think they need no more but look up to Christ,
and their work is at an end; and such strength they find in themselves, as
that they do not fear, but that they shall carry an end all their work to
Gods glory and their own: whereas the strongest faith even of the Thessalonians
(whose faith was such, as none of all the Churches went before them) if it be
not supplied and strengthened, they know, and the Apostle Paul knows that it
will warpe and shrink. This may we see by comparing, 1 These. 1.3. with Chap.
3.2,10. And the faithful people of God, Isa. 26.12. acknowledge Him to work
all their works for them. And therefore as there is a real difference in the
presence of the Spirit; so also in the work of faith in hypocrites, and the
children of God, for the one puts confidences in himself in the gift
received, and the other in Jehovah. This is the first difference of
Sanctification.

2. There is Difference also in the Rule whereby they are guided, though both
seek to the word of God and take delight in that, insomuch as you shall not be
able to difference them there, yet a great difference there is in the
apprehension of the word: the one is so consident of the comfort that he has
in the word, and he will be ready to take it ill at Gods hand, if he find not
acceptance before him: Now the other see the need they have of the Lord to
maintain their comfort for them. This manner of affection we find in David,
when the Lord had brought him and his people into a sweet frame and temper of
spirit to offer willingly toward the building of the Temple; what says David
now? Does he think this to be enough? No, no, but he prays to the Lord, 1 Chronicles. 29.18. O Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel our fathers keep this
for ever in the imagination of the thoughts of the heart of thy people, and
prepare their heart unto thee. Thus is he sensible that these comforts would
soon fail them, and they should again wax barren and uncomfortable. And
here is the nature of true Consolation in Christ, to look up unto the Lord to
preserve and maintain it, and so he is still drawn nearer and nearer to
Christ. But now though both attend unto the Word, as their Rule of
Sanctification, if you take it in the way, in which the one and the other hold
it forth, yet there is a great difference. Psalm. 119.6. Then shall I not be
ashamed, etc. Here is a Rule; what, may not hypocrites walk according to this
rule? Truly they profess no less, and they think it enough, if they have but
a Rule in their eye, and therefore under a spirit of bondage they are confident
and say, Whatsoever the Lord commands us, we will hear it and do it, Deuteronomy.
5.27. And what says Balaam; Though Balaack would give me an house full of
silver and gold, I cannot go beyond the Commandment of the Lord, Numb. 22.18.
and yet he loved the wages of iniquity; and indeed those that undertake so much
in their own strength, they come afterward to be weary of the Lord, and weary
of his Commandments: as Amos 8.5. and they say at last, It is in vain to
serve God, and what profit is it that we have kept his ordinances? Mal. 3.14.
These are but like washed swine, that will crop grass for a while in a fair
Pasture, but if you keep them long there, they will not delight in such manner
of feeding, but will rather choose to go into the mire; but as for goats they
will delight in the Commandments of the Lord, Isa. 58.2. It is not a very hard
thing unto them, nor grievous for them to keep solemn fasting days together,
they come willingly, they delight to come, therefore the difference will be
hardly discovered, and unles you be a Christian of a very clear discerning,
you will not find the difference.

Object. But an hypocrite will not delight in all Gods Commandments; if you
take Herod, he will delight in John Baptist's preaching, and reform many
things, but if it come to his not having his brother Philip's wife, then put
John into prison, and in the matter of Herodias off with John's head.

Answ. We see what hypocrites profess, Deuteronomy. 5.27. Whatsoever the Lord
commands us, we will hear it and do it: But you will say not always. It is
true, a difference in time will grow; but while they hold forth universal
obedience, where will the difference be discerned? Discerned it will be when
the Lord leads them forth with workers of iniquity, but many times they may
be lead on to their death before they be discovered. And therefore what will
the servants of God say? I have seen hypocrites (to outward view) well rooted,
and more comfortable than I my self; and for zeal and love, the Galathians
would have plucked out their eyes to have done Paul good; they thought
themselves blessed in his Ministry, blessed souls, they took themselves to be:
Whereas the dear servants of God have much ado to see so much goodness in
themselves, as upon that ground to fasten any evidence of their blessedness,
because hypocrites will go cheek by joule along with them.

Object. But you will say an hypocrite cannot aim at God as his last end, but
will out-shoot God in his own bow, and at the highest he seeks no more than
his own salvation, without respect unto the glory of God in it.

Answ. 3. the end. It is true and in time will appear that every hypocrite
thinks to outreach God in all the gifts that he has received; but in the
mean while it is much that an hypocrite will do, and so much that a poor
Christian will be put to much exercise to find a difference between himself
and him. Jehu did not only think that he had zeal for the Lord, as he said,
Come see my zeal for the Lord of hosts; but good Jonadab did likewise so
persuade himself, and therefore did readily join with him in his reformation:
and when he proclaimed a sacrifice for Baal, he thought that Jehu would not
pollute himself in the Temple of Baal. Thus therefore sometimes it comes to
pass, because that an hypocrite may for a long time find all his own ends
attained in seeking the glory of God, as Jehu did: but in conclusion, when a
man and his own glory must part, then either he must hold to his own honor,
or he must neglect it and keep him close to the honor of God: but in the
mean time what can I tell, will an honest soul say, but that I may shake
hands with, and bid farewell unto Gods glory, when his and mine lie at stake
together?

Answ.But may not a man perceive a plain difference when it comes to
persecution.

Answ. No: Persecution will not clear the difference, for though the stony
ground indeed fell off upon point of persecution, yet the thorny soil did not
so: many Papists have died for their Religion, and how much more then may some
hypocrites do it, yea, even give his body to be burned, and yet want Jesus
Christ, and everlasting salvation by him? 1 Cor. 13.3. Now when a poor
Christian comes, and sees how much such an one does magnify God, both in
doing and suffering, and yet falls away, it makes him conclude, surely I
also at the length shall turn away from the Lord. So that whether you look at
the Root, or Rule, or Scope and Bent of holiness, an hypocrite will carry all
things in so fair a way, that you shall hardly discover him to his very death,
and when a Christian comes to measure his own sanctification by this man's, he
will verily think the one to be as light as the other, and unles it be one
that has his wits well exercised, mavelous much ado he has to clear
himself in such a point as this. There be that think there is no reality in
hypocritical sanctification, but certainly it is a real work, and not a
mere counterfeit of spiritual gifts. There are indeed some that do merely
pretend it, and do but outwardly make fair weather in their profession, but
believe it, it is not so in all hypocrites: there is a real work in some.
Heb. 6.4,5. They are enlightened and have tasted, etc. which things are real
and not imaginary, God casting in their own ends, and their own glory in
their way, the servants of God have given them the right hand of fellowship,
and so long they have held out, that it was never known when they did
Apostate: yea, and so glorious may this sanctification be, that it may dazell
the eyes of the best of Gods children, and especially of poor Christians, and
most of all discourage when they are seen to fall away. This very point has
been one principal Root of Arminianisme, as another is, that men receive
Christ by their own Free will: they are able to prove that there is not only
a pretense in hypocrites, but real work, and so indeed the Scripture does
call it, sanctification, Heb. 10.29. Now hereupon they do believe that the
very best of the servants of God may depart from and forsake their justifying
faith; but therein they show the bleat of a goat, and in so saying they
condemn the generation of the righteous: it is true, that the best of their
Arminian righteousness may dye, for they have known no more but the way of
works. Thus much for the first Proposition.

Prop. 2. That, true Christian sanctification, which is a work of faith, is
many times dark to a sincere Christian. It is generally granted to be so in
the first conversion, and in time of temptation and desertion, as also when a
man looks at his justification, and at the glory of God; Woe is me, for I am
unclean (says the Prophet Isaiah) at such a time: there is so much power of
flesh, even in spiritual Christians, specially in young Christians, so much
power in their lusts and in their passions, as will put their best friends to a
stand what to think of them, and much more themselves, when as they come to be
pressed with the power of their corruptions, specially when they compare with
such hypocrites as run away with more freedom of spirit than themselves; for
sometimes their corruptions do less appear, and they are more free from
temptations, and not exposed to such sinful courses, which sometimes true
hearted Christians are subject unto. So a poor Christian is discouraged, and
an hypocrite emboldened, seeing himself more sanctified than the other in view.

Prop. 3. That, true sanctification of a sincere Christian is not discerned by
him, nor is indeed discernable, until he first discern his justifying faith.
A double ground of it, and so leave it to your christian disquisition and
search; they are both taken from the necessity of faith, both to the acceptance
of a man's person and work: there is a necessity of the activenes of faith in a
man's sanctification; The Lord had respect to Abel, and to his offering, Genesis
4.4. A man's person must first be accepted, otherwise all his work will not go
beyond the work of a legal Christian; and without faith it is impossible to
please God; no acceptance therefore without faith. It is also necessary to the
performance of all spiritual duties; for all sanctification is from that faith
which Christ does convey into the soul: Now if the just man live by his faith,
whether it be the life of sanctification, or consolation, then no Christian can
discern his sanctification to be lively, but he must discern his faith living
in it, he must see his faith deriving strength and grace and life from Christ,
or else he cannot approve his sanctification to be the sanctification of the
Gospel; for as there can be no true sanctification unless there be faith,
whereby the person is accepted, and whereby life is received to act in all
sanctification; so there can be no knowledge of sanctification, but there must
be knowledge of faith, whereby a man's person is accepted, and whereby strength
is conveyed to sanctification: for if a poor soul be doubtful of his
acceptance with the Lord, he is where he was, notwithstanding his
sanctification, and wants comfort, for this doubt remains, whether he be
accepted or no, which (until the Lord do manifest a man's faith unto him by
the revelation of the holy Ghost) he is still at a loss in it; for though true
sanctification be an evidence of a man's justification, yet it self must be
first evident. Thus we see by this third exposition, that a further light is
required to the light of sanctification.

Prop. 4. Notwithstanding this near resemblance between legal and
evangelicall holiness, yet there is a real difference between them, and such a
difference as is discernable to Christians, whose wite are exercised in the
ways of the Spirit, and in the word of God, and is discerned by the revelation
or manifestation of the Spirit of God, both of the state and work of good
Christians; and that ordinarily also: for I would not count it extraordinary,
being that which the Lord by his Spirit does usually reveal unto his people. A
real difference there is both in the Root and in the Rule, and in the Scope
which they aim at, and so it will appear to be at the last day. Math. 25.23.
Depart from me (says Christ) you workers of iniquity, I never knew you; though
they came and told him that they wrought by faith in him: indeed they stood in
some relation to him, but not as members to the head, only as branches to the
vine, which may be cut off, and yet the vine not maimed; but if the members
should be cut off any one from another, then is the body maimed, but Christ
will not suffer his body to be maimed: but take you never so many branches from
the vine, and it is not maimed, but will bring forth more: if therefore there
be no more fellowship between Christ and a Christian, than between the branches
and the vine, you may take them away and yet not hurt the vine. But wherein
should this relation stand? It is very hard to conceive, insomuch that those,
who have been most exact and diligent to enquire into it, have professed that
it is Angels work; very hard it is so to distinguish them from Gods own
children, so as not to discomfort poor christians, nor to imbolden hypocrites.
We must be tender therefore, that the least of Gods children may not want
their bread: better leave 99 sheep, than that one poor stray sheep should
not be sought after; and better an 100 hypocrites perish, than that one poor
Christian should want his portion: and yet it is not meet that hypocrites
should allow themselves in the estate and fellowship of the Saints, and yet
always bless themselves in their carnal condition. If you shall ask a
difference in the Root, both of them are partakers of the Holy Ghost;
Hypocrites may have a taste, and a poor Christian will fear that his best
fellowship with Christ is but a taste, and that manifold experience makes good.
Wherein then lies the difference? Does the Spirit of God leave the heart of an
Hypocrite stony and unmelted? It is so indeed with the stony, but not with the
thorny soil; for the hearts of some Hypocrites are melted, as iron stones,
they may come to melt about their own estates, through fear, and so all those
melt that want not depth of earth, as the thorny soil did not; but mind you,
they will grow hard again, as iron or lead will do after it is melted. Now
look at the Spirit of God when he comes to work effectually, and he does not
only melt the heart, but takes away the heart of stone, and gives an heart
of flesh; for it is not enough to break a stone, it will be a stone though it
be broken; but when the Lord changes it into flesh, then it will be hard no
more: But though a man may have many temptations, yet the Lord will keep his
heart soft for ever. And this is that which I do believe touching the witness
of Sanctification unto Justification.

You see what works of God are found in Hypocrites, and therefore what
dangerous deceits we are subject unto, if God be not more merciful.

Again, you see what state Christians are brought unto, when their Conversion
and Faith is wrought in them, and how it is not grounded upon the sight of
their sanctification, but is revealed in an Absolute Promise of free grace, and
so is the soul built up in the Assurance of its good estate, and grows
faithful through Christ, and not in Hypocrisy: This is the true rest of the
soul when it grows up in a lively Faith in Jesus Christ, and yet rests not
in this, that it is sanctified, but does look principally after Jesus Christ,
and blesses God for sanctification, making use of it for those ends for which
God has given it, but dares not rest in it as the ground of his blessedness.
This is the first difference between Hypocrites and Gods own Servants in the
root, though both may work in the name of Christ, yet, as the one is temporary,
and the other persevereth, so this difference you shall find between common and
sincere Christians, and that not only when Legal Christians are blasted of
God, but even then when they do most flourish in their profession. The true
Faith of the Gospel of Christ is never prefident of his own strength (though
they that have it sometimes be, as Peter, Mat. 26.33,35.) but it is out of
himself in Christ, whereas the Legal Christian is confident of his Faith,
that he can make use of it to these and these ends which are before him, he
thinks there is no more needful, but to look up unto Christ, and so his work
is done: whereas take you the strongest Faith of the Thessalonians, who were
grown to such height, that none of the Churches were before them, yet the
Apostle does not think their Faith strong enough, but prays for supply of
something lacking in their Faith, otherwise when it is at the best, it will
warpe: whereas one that has but a temporary Faith, is confident in the
strength of that faith, insomuch that it does not fear, but to carry an end his
profession in a safe course to Gods glory and his own. Thus we see there is a
real difference between the presence and work of the Spirit in an Hypocrite,
and in a Child of God. In particular, we see there is a difference in the Faith
which is given to both of them; the one has confidence in himself, the other
in Jehovah, Isa. 26.12,13. This is the first difference in the root of their
profession.

2 There is Difference also in the Rule by which they walk, though both seek to
the word, and delight in that, you shall not difference them there, yet this
difference you shall find in their apprehensions; the one is confident of his
comfort that he has in the word, the other sees need that the Lord should
maintain his comfort for him, 1 Chronicles. 29.18. David prays thus, etc. as
being sensible that this their comfortable frame of spirit would soon fail
them, and they would quickly grow liftlesse unto such spiritual works as then
they had been about; and this is the nature of true Consolation in Christ, it
makes a man to have recoure unto the Author of it to preserve it. Now though
both attend unto the word, yet here they differ, the one has enough if he can
see the Rule, like to the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 5.27. they have enough if they have
the rule, but a true Christian, attending rightly unto his rule, finds it
far off from him to walk according to it, unless the Lord be pleased so to
set it home unto him, as that by his power he may be carried an end in
obedience unto it: for though he know and see his Rule, yet he wants help to
rule his heart according to his rule; otherwise though the rule be straight,
yet his walking will be crooked, as a child will write crooked, though his line
be straight: So a Christian man is sensible how his feet and hands will shake
when he comes to walk or do any thing according to a rule; therefore he does
wholly look unto Christ, as being sensible of his own inability, unless he
find help and strength from him.

3 There is difference also in the scope and End which they aim at; though
both aim at the glory of God, yet both cannot attain unto this, to make the
glory of God their last end, but the one of these do secretly wind about to
his own glory in the end, as Jehu does, 2 Kings 10.16. Come see my zeal that
I have for the Lord, but he brings about his own glory by it: and here is
the maine deceit of the work, he seeks the glory of God in himself, and in
his own hand, whereas the principal care of Gods own people, is and ought to
be the glory of God in Jesus Christ. But the Hypocrite his chief care is to
have it seen that God is glorified by his hand, Come see the zeal that I have.

Object. You will say, Is it not a great glory unto God to be glorified by my
hand?

Answ. Yes, but there is a great deceit in it, for many a man will work much,
so far as his own glory is wrapped up in his actions, and like it well so long
as God may be glorified in him. But all this while he wants those single
affections after the glory of God, though in the hand of another.

But how then should a man seek to promote the glory of God? If it be the glory
of God in the face of Jesus Christ, that a man seeks after, he will then
rejoice as much that God may be glorified by his brother, as by himself; and
that is the spirit of a true Israelite indeed: So that the Name of Christ be
magnified, it is no matter by whom, I therein do rejoice, yea and will rejoice,
says the blessed Apostle, Phil. 1.18. If any man therefore aims at Gods
glory, then only when it may be an honor to him in his profession, no thank
to him for that; much close work may be found, so long as both are carried an
end together: But if when I hear that my Brother glorifieth God, I could have
wished that such a thing had been done or spoken by me, and it is the worse,
because it is not done by my hands: if that which is the rich goodness to my
Brother, be not also my rejoicing, it is because of the core of Hypocrisy in my
heart.

Thus have we seen particularly the difference between legal and Evangelicall
holiness.

We proceed still in the fourth Use, to a fifth Question.

If Jesus Christ be the first gift that is given to the Children of God, before
he gives right unto Promises, or to me to challenge Promises, yea, before he
gives me any other gifts of his saving Grace: then any soul may ask this
Question.

Quest. 5. Of what use are Promises, if it be not to bring me to Christ? yea
especially to what end are conditional Promises made (that is to say, Promises
to such and such Qualifications) if I may not take a Promise in one hand, and a
Qualification in the other hand, and bring them both to God, and lay hold upon
Christ with both hands, in the strength of this Promise made to this
Qualification? Thus arises the Question, if God give Jesus Christ first,
before any other blessing, as we read before, to Abraham and to his seed were
the Promises made (he means unto Christ) and all the Promises are in him Yea,
and in him Amen: No having of Promises then before Christ. To what purpose are
they given, if not to bring me unto Christ? It is a point needful to be
known, because we read Promises in Scripture daily, and certainly great use is
to be made of them; and if we shall make no other use of them, but to bring us
unto Christ, and God has not sanctified them to that end, then we shall take
them all in vain, and the Name of God that is called upon them.

Answ. There is a threefold use of Promises in Scripture. 1 Before our Union
with Christ. 2 In Union with him. 3 After Union with him.


1 Before our union with Christ there is a threefold use of Promises.

1 They are of use for Doctrine, to teach all the people of God, what great and
glorious things are laid up in Christ Jesus, even the unsearchable riches of
Christ, Ephesians. 3.8. and this all the Promises of God do hold forth. If the Lord
Promise to be your Father, your Husband, your Shepherd, your Head, your Root,
if he Promise to be any other blessing in the world to you, what ever Promise
you read or hear, the Lord shows you the unsearchable riches of Christ* and
that is no vain use of Promises, for a man to know by them the great good
things that are treasured up in Jesus Christ by the Father; therefore they are
called great and precious Promises, 2 Pet. 1.4. why so? because they declare
the great and precious privileges and blessings in Jesus Christ: therefore it
is that the Lord will have all his people to look at him in his word and
Promises, and to know what great good he has in store for all them that trust
in him, and seek after him in Jesus Christ. Thus all the Promises of Grace
declare his excellency: as Cant. 5.10. So do all the Promises declare him to
be a plentiful Savior, and a mighty Redeemer of all his people.

2 As they are of use for Doctrine, so for Instruction: It is good to know
them, but Instruction is a further thing, and distinct from Doctrine, 2 Timothy
3.16. By Instruction men are taught not only what to know, but what to do; to
know and see whither they should resort for the enjoyment of all those precious
blessings that God has laid up in Jesus Christ; and this is a precious use of
the Promises, that by them the soul should be thus instructed whither to go
for life and salvation, Isa. 45.22. Look unto me and be you saved, all the ends
of the earth. Here is a direction to me before I know whither to look, I do
not only see great things, and so vanish away, but I am directed to look and
be saved; thus are we taught of God likewise by his blessed Apostle, Acts
2.38,39. Repent and be baptized, etc. for the Promise is unto you, etc. Thus we
are taught by the Promises whither to look for life and salvation.

3 The Promises serve also for Exhortation, as the Scripture last alleged
holds forth: For so many blessings as you see propounded in the Promises, so
many invitations are there to provoke men's souls to come unto Christ; as old
Jacob sometimes provoked his Sons, Genesis 42.1,2. so says the Lord to the Sons
of men in his Promises, Why stand ye gazing in the want of this and that
blessing? Is there not pardon of sin, and all manner of blessings in Jesus
Christ? Thus is the soul exhorted, not only to look for mercy, but not to rest
till he may enjoy it. Though it be not the Promises that can by their own
power carry men an end, yet this is the end to which God gives them, to stir
up the Sons of men, not to rest in beholding the good things in the Promises,
but to exhort them to provoke themselves and one another, to look after the
Lord; thus did the Apostle Peter exhort the Jews, and testified to them of the
free grace of God in his Promises, Acts 2.40. and indeed the Promises are
strong grounds of Exhortation to stir up the spirits of all Gods people to look
to Jesus Christ, and to come unto him in whom such abundance of rich grace is
laid up. Thus do the Promises of God furnish both Ministers and people, with
Doctrine, with Instruction, with Exhortation, in their kinds.

Now there is a threefold effect that they have in some of all sorts, good and
bad, that live in the bosom of the Church.

1 They have a power of illumination; they will enlighten the minds even of
Hypocrites, and men endued with no more than common gifts, as well as the
people of God; of such the Apostle speaks, Heb. 6.4. who were once enlighted,
etc. and had tasted of the good word of God; An Hypocrite may have such a taste
of Christ in the Promises, and be

2 So affected with it, that he despises all other things in comparison of it;
so as that he comes to resolve for his part never to forgo him; and has so
much confidence in God, that he says with Haman, Whom will the King delight to
honor more than my self? and this illumination he takes to be a strong and
effectual Conversion unto the Lord.

3 The Promises have a work of conviction, if any man refuse or despise them,
they leave him unexcusable, Pro. 1.24,25,26, etc. Thus is their blood justly
upon their own head, that refuse and despise the Promises, and they aggravate
their condemnation another day; and to this end the Apostle makes use of a
precious Promise of God, Acts 13.38,39,40,41. A strange application of such a
gracious Promise; a sign, there is a power in the Promises, even unto this end.

Thus we see there is a marvelous gracious use of Promises before Union with
Christ; as to help Ministers and people with matter of Doctrine and
Instruction, and Exhortation; as also to awaken men unto Illumination, and
Affection, and Conviction, and to seal them up unto everlasting destruction, if
they turn their backs upon them.

2 As the Promises are of use before our Union with Christ, so In our union
with him they are of great use; for when the Lord gives himself to the soul,
he does it in a Promise; he comes unto the soul, riding (as it were) upon the
Chariot of a Promise, and begets Faith back again in the soul by the
Promise, whereby we receive Jesus Christ; though before him we can have no
Promise, yet in a Promise we do receive him. This is the very first stroke of
closing with Christ, he gives himself, and we take him as he offers
himself, even in an absolute Promise; such a like dispensation of himself we
read of, Acts 3.25,26. where Christ is offered in an Absolute Promise of free
grace, without any Qualification mentioned, Howbeit many of them that heard the
word believed, and the ^umber of the men were about five thousand about three
thousand of them believed before, so that here are two thousand that believe
upon this Absolute Promise, the Lord Christ is offered to them, and they
receive him by Faith. The like we read also, Acts 10.43,44. To him give all the
Prophets witness, that through his name, whosoever believes in him, shall
receive remission of sins. And while Peter yet spoke these words, the Holy
Ghost fell on all them which heard the words; to that the Holy Ghost gives
himself, and they receive him in an absolute Promise; and left it should be a
matter of absolute doubt unto any, consider thus much, that whereas the Lord
does unite himself to the soul, as a Father to a child, or as an Husband to a
wife, it is free: For did you ever know a true real Marriage made in a
Conditional Promise? Does a man say to his wife, If you prove a loving and a
kind wife, then I will be thine Husband? Or does a wife say to her Husband, If
you will take me and love and maintain me, and all the children that God shall
bless us with, then I will be your wife? Would not your soul rise against
such a Covenant as this? Now I beseech you consider whether we shall not put an
unspeakable dishonor upon the Covenant of free grace, to conceive and expect,
that if we carry our selves thus and thus, then God will be ours, and we his:
But if thus and thus, then he will cast us off; Has the Lord made such a
Covenant with his Elect? Indeed the Lord would have the Jews to know, that
though he were married to them, yet he would not continue that Covenant, but
upon condition of obedience; when they were disobedient, the Lord gave them a
bill of Divorce; but in the Covenant of Grace (spoken of, Hos. 2.19,20.) the
Lord gives himself, and you take him in an absolute Promise; and now the Lord
dwells in you, and the soul yields up it self unto God, to be wholly at
his disposing, and does not stint nor limit God upon this and this condition,
nor does the Lord so bind us to the performance of any condition, as that if it
be not found, the Covenant will be void, yet he requires many things of us (as
an Husband will do of his wife) as to be meek and lowly, etc. but if we fail,
the Covenant is not broken; therefore believe it, it does much dishonor the
Covenant of Grace, to lay the weight of our interest in it, upon any Condition
by which we might plead our right unto it. I confess that the Lord does
usually give himself in a future Promise, which makes us conceive that it is
not so absolute a Covenant: when persons give themselves one to another, they
give themselves absolutely, and not in a future Promise, and say, I take thee
to be my wife, and I take thee to be mine Husband; but all times are alike unto
God, that if the Lord say, I will marry thee to me in tender mercies, and
faithfulness, and loving kindness, he does that for the present, which he
promises to do; and again it breeds in the soul a Reciprocal Union, that
though it know not whether the Lord has given himself, yet this it finds,
namely, a patient waiting with hope, that the Lord will show mercy at the
length: as when a woman has a promise of marriage from her Husband, she
waits in hope until he give himself: so there is an Union or Contract, when
the soul does wait upon God, but when the Lord gives himself more fully,
then he speaks more plainly, and gives himself, not in a future, but in a
present Promise; and now the soul sees that the Lord has gracious fellowship
with him, for ever and ever.

Thus we see that promises are not vain things, but there are great use of
them, before our Union all promises are of excellent use: in our Union the Lord
gives himself in an absolute promise only, but to take Christ in a
Conditional promise, by virtue of the Condition, is incompatible to a Covenant
of Grace.

3 After our union with Christ, they are of more abundant use. They were of use
before we were in Christ, for Doctrine, and for Instruction, and for
Exhortation, but now they are of more efficacy in the same kind, and

1 They serve us for Doctrine, to teach us that there is not only free grace
in Christ, but there are gifts of grace in him, and all the treasures of the
good things of God are in him, and all the blessings of the promises made unto
Qualifications, are laid up in him also.

2 They serve for Instruction, to direct us whither to look for Qualifications,
and the blessings promised unto them also, namely, to the Lord Jesus Christ, to
receive the blessing through him, and the Qualification by the same hand; for
they are first fulfilled in him: there is no good Condition but it is found in
Christ, no blessing thereunto, but it is found in him also; in him therefore
they are to be sought for: so that though a poor soul see himself wretched,
and blind, and naked, yet he has an husband in whom all riches are laid up;
this he is taught to know by the promise, and directed also to go to Jesus
Christ, that enjoying him, he may enjoy all good things in him.

3 They are of use to stir up unto Prayer, for now I see that all these good
things are in Christ, and in him they must be enjoyed, if they be enjoyed at
all; hereupon the soul is set a work (the Holy Ghost concurring therewith) to
consider, Is there so much grace in Christ, and in him abundantly? Has the
Lord made so many gracious promises unto such and such gracious Qualifications?
whether then should I go, either for the one, or for the other, but unto
Christ, that he may work in us a spirit of Faith, of Love, and of a sound mind?
and whatsoever else we stand in need of? Give unto thy Servant a wise and an
understanding heart, says Solomon, when the Lord bad him ask what he should
give him, 1 Kings 3.9. Thus are the Servants of God stirred up by Conditional
promises, to seek unto the Lord for the supply of all their wants, for in him
are all good things laid up, and by him are they given unto his servants.

4 They are of use to help us to Know our spiritual state, and means to
discern thereof: All these qualifications to which the promises are made, are
fruits of the Spirit, and will more or less declare unto you, your sanctified
state, which is a marvelous blessing: Upon the promises made unto such
conditions, the Lord stirs up the hearts of his people, to seek for such
conditions to which the promises are made, and when the Lord has given them,
he then opens their hearts to see what he has given them, and so to discern
their sanctified estate. Now I know that thou fear me, seeing thou have not
withheld thy Son, thine only Son from me; so the Lord says to Abraham,
Genesis 22.12. wherein he bare witness to his work, and this does fill Abraham
with strong Consolation, together with the Oath of God unto him: for now the
Lord does not only know it, but cause him to know it also: so that if the Lord
does but breath in such fruit of the Spirit, if he does but give power to the
soul to do such a work unto which the promise is made, and do make it appear
unto the soul to be indeed such by the revelation of his blessed Spirit, then
does the Lord fill the soul with Consolation: But though the Holy Ghost
himself does not so sweetly and strongly breath, and clear up his own
Testimony, by the comfort which he gives unto the soul in such a promise, yet
a man by the Promise may (being enlightened of God) discern what God has done
for him; and hereby the soul may stay it self, Psalm. 9.18. The expectation of
the poor shall not perish for ever: When the poor soul is meekned by Gods
hand, and the Lord lets him so discern it, that now he quietly rests upon
the Lord, now the Spirit of God does help David along to be supported with some
stay; and besides the waiting of a Christian upon him, who has made the
promises, does make him yet more patient and hopeful. And this is a fourth use
of Conditional promises, to strengthen Faith.

5 They are of use to work all these qualifications in us, to which the
blessings are promised, by the exceeding precious Promises, we are made
partakers of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. and this is no small work or use of
these promises, that from them should spring all our gracious qualifications;
for the Lord having promised such blessings in them, these promises being
received and enjoyed, and meditated on by us, we beholding them, and the glory
of the Lord Jesus in them, are changed into the same Image from glory to glory,
even as by the Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18. This great power there is in
the Promises, to help an end the work of God in the soul of a Christian: so
that though they were never given to bring us to Christ, yet to this end they
were given, to work all those qualifications in us, to which the blessings are
promised. Yea, and they may truly be said to be given to bring us to Christ, in
this sense, That though our Faith be not begotten by any promises to gracious
qualifications prae-existent in us; yet they may beget such qualifications of
Faith, to which promises are made.

6 They are of use to stir up and provoke Christians to all such duties to
which blessings are promised; they stir them up effectually. The Lord makes a
Promise, 2 Cor. 6.17,18. And mark what use the Apostle makes of it, being a
conditional Promise, Chap. 7.1. Having therefore these Promises, etc. let us,
etc. implying, that the having of these Promises stirs up Gods people unto
duties; and the Lord is wont to breath in them, and so to set forwards the work
of cleansing of the hearts and ways of his servants.

7 They are of use further, to strengthen Faith: for the Lord that has made
such Promises, will accomplish them for his Servants, Genesis 32.9,10. Jacob there
puts the Lord in mind of his Promise, and said, O God of my father Abraham,
and God of my father Isaac, the Lord which said unto me, Return unto thy
Country, and to thy Kindred, and I will deal well with thee; and he was now
returned according to the appointment of God, but what now, does he plead the
condition? mind in the next words, I am not worthy the least of all the mercy,
and of all the truth, which thou have showed unto thy Servant? yet now though
he pleads not any worth at all, yet seeing the Lord had promised such a mercy
to him, he prays for it, ver. 11. Deliver me I pray thee from the hand of my
brother. Thus his faith is strengthened, though he does not plead any
worthiness to receive mercy. So also do absolute promises strengthen faith,
and the prayer of faith, 2 Samuel 7.13,14, etc, The Lord there promises David,
that he would build him an house, and that he would not take his mercy from his
Children, this stirs up and strengthens the faith of David, ver. 28, 29,
etc. This well ordered and sure Covenant of God was all his stay, and all his
salvation though his house was not so with God, 2 Samuel 23.5. So when the Lord
promises to heal the backslidings of his people, Ho. 14.5. their hearts are
strengthened to come unto the Lord, and say, O Lord thy words are true, let it
please thee to heal the backslidings of thy servants. Thus by the promises of
God, the Faith and faithful prayers of his servants, are both strengthened
together.

Now let me further say thus much, let us rightly discern what use to make of
the principal part of the Scriptures, take heed you do not close with
promises before we have Jesus Christ in them: especially take heed you make not
use of a promise to a gracious qualification, to give you your part in Christ,
neither be taken aside to make account that the Lord did give you himself
graciously in a conditional promise, for these are aberrations from the
Covenant of grace: consider therefore well what the promises be, and what use
the Lord would have us to make of them, it is not for a woman to take her
husbands inheritance before she take his person; and you know that all the
blessings and all the promises are (as it were) the Inheritance of the Lord
Jesus, given unto him and to no other but in his name, and therefore there is
not any soul under heaven that can challenge his Right in Christ at the first
by any promise, till Christ first be given, either in that promise, or in some
former: if you know that you are in Christ, you may know that the promises are
yours, otherwise you shall not be able to know your right in Christ by your
right in the promises; and therefore do not turn them upside down beyond the
scope and intendment of the promises of the Covenant of grace: we may take
occasion by them to admire the goodness and grace of God, as David did, Psalm.
31.19. Thus ought we to consider of them, and whither to look that we might
enjoy them, and the blessings in them: If you shall say we have been converted,
and have had gracious changes wrought in us; be not deceived, such work may
reach no farther than conviction, and you may come to turn your backs upon
Jesus Christ. Consider therefore did ever the Lord give himself to be one with
you; whenever the Lord does strike up the bond of Union, it is in a free
promise of his grace.

Trust not therefore upon every leaning of your soul upon conditional
promises, for so you may build upon a Covenant made upon a work, and so you
and your Covenant may fail together. But when you read how the Lord has made
such promises to such and such qualifications, then consider, that those things
are indeed requisite to be found in you, but who is there in heaven or earth
that can work them in you, there is none but Jesus Christ, and unless you
have him to be in you, you cannot have any of these things wrought in you. But
will a poor soul say, I am not able to reach the Lord Jesus Christ, therefore
all the promises do fall heavy upon a man, and he sees that they are too
burdensome, and too weighty for him: he does not say, here is the
qualification, and here is the blessing promised to it, and therefore I will
take it to my self, but one that is taught of God, does forthwith go and pray
unto God, that he will set him in the way of those blessings, and that so he
will make him partaker of them, he prays that God will give him his Son,
and that he will adorn him with his grace, as a bride of Jesus Christ. Thus
while the soul does look toward Jesus Christ, and grace in him, the Lord
does secretly transform him into the image of Christ, by working such
qualifications in him, and then bears witness to that sanctification, which
is wrought in his heart, thereby enlarging his soul with strong consolation in
Jesus Christ; and in the same way it is that the Lord does strengthen the faith
of his people to believe, that all those things, which God has promised, are
accomplished in Jesus Christ, and the Law fullfilled in me so far as Christ
is in me, and therefore I come unto God in prayer to make good those promises
unto me, in a right way, which would have been preposterously applied before
Christ was given: And this may serve for Answer to the 5th Question.

Quest. 6. We come now unto a sixth Question. If the Lord do give himself
first in the Covenant of his grace, this may then be a doubt and a question in
a Christian soul, If God give himself before any blessing, before any promise
in order of nature (though he gives himself always in a promise) if we
cannot claim any blessing from God at the first in any conditional promise,
therefore not by any condition in our selves, but as we received all things
from God, so we claim all things from him in Jesus Christ, and so do first
seek for him, and for all things in him: If thus, to what use then serves the
Law of God, which requires such and such conditions in us, do we not abrogate
the Law, and make it of none effect, and root it out from having any power
over Christians? And truly some, under pretense of the Covenant of grace, have
thought it altogether bootlesse to bind Christians unto the Law of God, and to
look at it as any part of the direction of their Course. Now because this is
an imputation usually reflected upon the Covenant of Grace, let us Confider
therefore and enquire to what use serves the Law of God, if God give himself
first unto his people in the Covenant of his grace.

Answ. Though the Lord gives himself freely to the soul, and his Son, and
all the blessings of the Covenant of grace, without respect unto any work of
the Law; yet the Law is of special and notable use unto all the sons of men,
both unto them that are not yet brought home unto God by converting grace, and
also to those that are regenerate in Jesus Christ. The Apostle Paul did observe
that the question would arise upon the doctrine of the Covenant of grace, Gal.
3.16,17,18. For if the blessing of Abraham came upon the people of God by Jesus
Christ, to what end then serves the Law, which came 430 years after? It
cannot disanull grace, to make the promise of God of none effect? to what end
then serves it? Some say it is of no use, others say that it is of such use
that they had rather renounce the Covenant of grace than it: but the Answer is,
it is of especial use both unto spiritual and carnal men.

First, unto carnal men, and they are of two sorts, some belong unto the
election of grace, though they be not yet called; others are not written in the
Lambs book of life, but will in the end finally perish, and the Law is yet of
use unto both sorts of them.

For the Elect, it is of use unto them; to aggravate their sin, and to multiply
it unto them as it were, that is to say, to aggravate the apprehension of the
heinousness of sin upon their Consciences, and to set home the burden of sin
unto their souls, thereby to drive them to feel their great need of the Lord
Jesus Christ, whom otherwise they should for ever have despised. Thus the
Apostle answers in the place aforenamed, The Law was added, because of
transgressions; that they might clearly appear, and be aggravated thereby,
that a man might plainly discern how he has made himself liable to the wrath
of God, by so manifold breaches of so many Commandments in one kind or other:
the Law gives clear knowledge of sin, and so much the more does it set on
the weight of it upon the Conscience, working fear in the heart, Romans 8.15.
And hence it is, that the Apostle tells us, Gal. 3.24. The Law was our
Schoolmasters to Christ; As a Schoolmasters drives his Scholar through
fear unto this or that duty, either to do it himself, or (if he cannot) to
get others to do it for him; so the Law of God drives the soul through fear
unto Jesus Christ; not that it does reveal Christ a Savior of free grace, but
the soul being once brought down under sense of sin by the terrors of the
Law, will readily and willingly hearken unto the news of Christ a Savior; for
being once made sensible of his own inability to redeem himself, and
unworthines to be redeemed from the wrath of God; now is the soul fitted to
hear the voice of the Gospel, now is the news of Christ beautiful and glad
tidings: And of this use is the Law unto the Elect of God, before they come
under the Covenant of the grace of God.

2. But of what use is the Law unto other men? First, the Disobedience of it is
of use. Secondly, the Obedience of it.


1. The Disobedience; for if men had not known sin, it had been some pretense,
though they had committed sin, but when men have the knowledge of the Law, and
yet commit sin willingly, now they have no cloak for their sin, Romans 1.21.
compared with 32. where the Apostle speaks of the great sin of the Gentiles,
and much more of the Jews, Who though they knew God, and the judgment of God,
and that they which commit such wickedness are worthy of death, yet not only
do the same, but have pleasure in them that do them. When a man shall not
only do such wickedness, but bless himself in it, this aggravateth a man's
condemnation, if men will not come unto Jesus Christ that they might have life,
Joh. 5.40. what says our Savior in such a Case, see verse. 45. Moses will
judge all those that please themselves in wickedness, and will not turn to the
Lord Jesus Christ. Thus there is use of the Law unto disobedient persons, their
disobedience will leave them without excuse, when they sin against their
consciences, and against the means which the Lord has administered unto them:
for though the Lord never gave them such grace as did accompany salvation, yet
such Illumination he did give them, that they needed not to have broken his Law
so many ways with such wicked hands as they have done: therefore when they
have been enlarged to perform many duties, and might avoid much sin, and yet
will sin against their consciences, and tread under foot those means of grace
that were committed unto them, It is then most righteous with God, that they
should be condemned.

2. Of what use is the Obedience of the Law unto such, whom Gods soul takes no
pleasure in? Truly it is of sad and dreadful use unto them, for it serves to
harden them in their sins, (though that be but an accidental use thereof)
their sins are thereby made out of measure sinful, Rom 7.13. They harden
their hearts marvellously. 1. By their Obedience to the Law. 2. By the Comfort
they find in that Obedience.


For the first of these; the Apostle Paul, Acts 23.1. had kept so good a
Conscience, that he knew not any sin against the Law that he had lived in, but
though he was unrebukeable, he did count it all loss afterward, Phil. 3.7,8.
Those things that before he thought had heen his gain, now he counts them
but dung that he may win Christ: when a man attaineth unto outward conformity
to the Law, he is then indeed ready to justify himself, and to think that it
is indeed good for poor sinful men to look for salvation by Jesus Christ:
but for himself he hops in his selfe-devotion, and that he is able to save
himself; these are such as justify themselves before men, to whom our Savior
speaks, Luke 16.15. And of whom he says, that Publicans and harlots shall
go into the kingdom of heaven before them. Mat. 21.31,32. For many times you
shall have the most deboist and profane more humbled and readier to hearken to
the voice of Christ, and sooner convinced of the necessity of the Covenant of
grace, than those that are morally righteous by the law, Romans 9.30,31,32. and
Chap. 10.21. Thus the Law becomes a snare unto them, and that which is of
singular and wholesome use unto the children of God, is made death unto them.
And as their obedience to the Law is thus a snare unto them; So, secondly, the
delight and comfort which they take in their obedience, is a greater snare than
the other; The stony and thorny soil did hear the word with joy, and so those
hypocrites, Isai. 58. did delight to approach unto God; but what followed upon
the delight which they took in God, and in holy duties, it made them ready to
expostulate with God, why he did not answer them according to their works: the
delight which they found did so fill their hearts with Assurance of the grace
of God, that they looked at their duties, as so many tokens of the love of God
unto their souls; and then when men come to find more comfort in their
obedience, than in the grace of God in Jesus Christ, it makes them ready to
expostulate with God touching the worth of their own righteousness. Isa. 57.10.
Thou have found the life of thine hand, therefore thou wast not grieved; So
long as a man finds life and comfort in his own performances, what need can
he see to be grieved for the want of Jesus Christ? or at the best, if he do
grieve and find his heart comforted in grieving, and delighting in the Course
of humiliation, he then thinks he has no need of being further solicitous
about his spiritual estate. Thus we see that the Law of God is of mavelous
use in the days of the Gospel; of great use unto those that belong unto God,
to break their hearts for sin, and to drive them to Jesus Christ; and for
others, the disobedience of the Law leaves them without excuse, that so disobey
it. Again, the obedience of it and comfort in that obedience does harden the
hearts of others from Christ.

2. But what say you then unto men that are under a Covenant of grace, and
brought unto fellowship with Christ therein? of what use is the Law of God unto
such? is it utterly antiquated? or is there any more to be done about it?

Answ. The Apostle answers this question, when he says, I am not without the
Law to God, but under the Law to Christ, 1 Cor. 9.21. So that (mind you) the
Law is of use unto the Apostle Paul, but how? As the Law comes under Christ,
so Paul comes under the Law; this is the sum of the Answer, but that would
be further explained. What means he, when he says, I am under the Law to
Christ? In some sense a Christian is freed from the Law, in some sense he is
under the Law; so far as the Law is any way besides or out of Christ, so
far the Apostle is without the Law; so far as the Law is under Christ, so
far he is under the Law; keep close to these two principles, and you shall
safely avoid rocks on every hand, thus by the use of the Law shall you not go
aside to a Covenant of works, nor by attendance unto grace, shall you neglect
the Law. How far is the Law under Christ? When it has brought the soul
nearer unto Christ, and in a remote manner prepared him: the Law is in Christ,
and you subject to it in him. 1. As the Law is given by Christ. 2. As in Christ
help is given to perform it. First, as the Law is given by Christ, as 1 These.
4.2,3. -- and many other Commandments he gave them, all which are legal
Commandments, and yet the Apostle gave them by the Lord Jesus. So Mat. 5. to
the end of the Chapter. Our Savior would not have us think, that he came to
destroy the Law, or the Prophets, but to fulfill them; and to that end he does
there expound the spiritual and true meaning of the Law; that whereas the
Pharisees held forth the outward letter of the Law to be observed only, as
thinking that unless a man did commit the act of murder, he was not guilty of
the breach of the sixth Commandment; and if he committed not the act of
Adultery, he transgressed not the seventh Commandment; and so of the rest; Our
Savior Christ expounds the Law more spiritually, showing that Anger against
a man's brother is a breach of the sixth Commandment, and whosoever shall look
on a woman to lust after her, has committed Adultery with her already in his
heart, and broken the seventh Commandment. Thus Christ has as it were revived
Moses; but as the Law given by Christ is not a Covenant of works, but a
Commandment of well-doing; and he having given it, we take our selves bound to
be subject unto it. The Apostle also presses the moral Law upon several
relations of men, Ephesians. 6.1,2,3. etc. It is an honor to Christ, that his
servants should be holy, as he is holy; it is for the glory of God, and he
requires it; the Apostle James presses it, Chap. 2.8. to the end of the
Chapter; If you fulfill the Royal Law, according to the Scripture, (Thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self) ye do well. And again, Whosoever shall
keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all. Thus we
see the Apostles of Jesus Christ put it upon Christians to keep the Law of
God; and Christ himself bears witness to the Law, for God will never justify
sin to be no sin, though he will justify the person of a sinner

Now as the Lord Jesus gives the Law, and as it were renueth it, so he does
also give his Spirit unto his servants, enabling them to keep it. Jer. 31.33.
and Ezekiel. 36.27. Now this Law would he not write in the hearts of his people,
nor give unto them his holy Spirit, enabling them to keep it, were it not his
will in Jesus Christ, that the Law should be the Rule of holiness and
righteousness unto his people; hence it is that the children of God, though they
be not under the Covenant of the Law, yet take themselves to be bound to the
obedience of it, for if Christ have given the Law as well as Moses, and if he
have ratified it by giving them his Spirit to teach and strengthen them to
keep it, though not perfectly, yet sincerely, then they take themselves bound
to obey the Law, though they be under the Covenant of grace; for do we make
void the Law through faith? God forbid; yea, we establish the Law; for what
need have Christians of free justification by Christ, if they were not bound
unto the obedience of the Law by the Commandment of the Law? therefore the free
justification of men under a free Covenant of grace does establish the
obedience of the Law; otherwise what need they run to Christ to save them from
the Curse of the Law? Why do we still run to Christ for the continuance of our
Justification, but that we find our selves ungodly Creatures against the
righteous and holy Law of God? Therefore if God have given men the Law, and his
Holy Spirit to strengthen them in the obedience of it, and his grace to save
them from the curse of it, then Christians are to know, that they are bound to
keep the Law, they lie under the authority of it, and dare not pluck their
necks from under that yoke.

Now there are diverse effects springing from the subjection of Gods people to
the Commandment of the Law.

1 As they take themselves bound to the obedience of it, so they believe and
many times feel the fatherly displeasure of God, when they transgress it; now
the transgression of the Law could not bring them under the displeasure of God,
unless they were bound unto the Commandment of the Law: This displeasure
David was sensible of, Psalm. 38.1,2,3, etc. where he makes many complaints,
which do all of them spring from the conscience of the disobedience of the
Law, which God has framed in the hearts of his servants, whereby they reflect
upon their sin as the ground of all the distempers, which lie upon their bodies
or minds. This is the first effect of the subjection of Gods people to his Law,
they lie under the faith and sense of the danger of the disobedience of it.

2 They are under the faith and sense also of Gods gracious acceptance of their
ways, when they are suitable to the blessed directions of his word; not that
they can raise therefrom their justified estate, but by the same Spirit of
God, whereby they are helped to obey the Commandments of God, they do see the
Lords gracious approbation of them in their poor and weak endeavors; for the
Lord knows the way of the righteous, that is, acknowledges and approves it,
Psalm. 1.6. When the Lord by his Spirit boweth the hearts of his people unto
obedience, then he knows and accepts their obedience, Genesis 22.12. Thus the
Lord bears witness unto his Servants, that he does accept their works; so
that they sensibly know and believe, that the Lord does acknowledge their
poorest and weakest endeavors, unto which they are carried forth by his
Spirit, in the Obedience of his word: this the Prophet David confirms, Psalm.
18.20. to 26. where he speaks of his righteous dealing with Saul, and whereas
his enemies laid it to his charge that he was an enemy unto Saul, the Lord
bears him witness, that he had walked toward Saul with a good conscience; now
the Lord having led him an end to deal justly, and righteously, and purely
with Saul, having kept him from all the malice and outrage of Saul, and
maintained his cause against him, and delivered him out of his hands, whom the
Lord had now rejected, herein the Prophet sees the Lord accepting him, when in
the name of his Son, by the power of his Spirit, he is helped to attend unto
the Commandments of God. This is commfortable unto a Christian spirit, when
the Lord bears witness unto his soul, that he has an eye to all the
Commandments of God. And all this argues, that the servants of God, being in a
state of grace in Jesus Christ, have looked at themselves as bound by the
Commandments of the Law, and as being under the Law to Christ, who has given
the Law and power unto his servants sincerely to keep it, both by writing in
their hearts a Law of obedience, and by putting his Holy Spirit within them;
for if the people of God were not sensible of their bounden duty to the
observation of the Law of God, they would neither have faith nor sense of Gods
fatherly displeasure, when they negligently break these Laws; neither would
they be sensible of Gods acceptance of their conformity thereunto. But we know
what the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 1.12. For our rejoicing is this, the Testimony
of our Conscience, etc. And truly the Lord does often bear witness unto the
integrity of his Servants, against the oppositions of men. So he did to
Abraham, to David, to Paul, and to sundry of the Servants of God, though they
are not wont to build their safe estate thereupon: Yet this kind of Gods
acceptance of their ways and obedience, they do discern, etc. yet in their
best obedience, which they do perform, they see the need they have to go unto
God for justifying grace, because if they have failed in any one circumstance,
their best righteousness is polluted, therefore they have need of Jesus Christ
to cover the failings of their most strict performances; this Nehemiah was
sensible of, when he had been very faithful in reforming the abuses of the
Sabbath, and of many other Ordinances of God; and though the Lord had helped
him to undertake the Reformation with much dexterity and success, yet for all
this he runs unto Christ for acceptance and pardon, Nehem. 13.22. And what
would he have done if he had been conscious of some gross sin? He would then
much more have run to the Lord Jesus. Thus the Law is established by faith, for
there is no justified person but is very apprehensive of his sins, and so of
his continual need of Christ, whose blood cleanses us from all sins, John
1.7. and who is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us
from all unrighteousness, verse. 9. who is an Advocate (if any man sin) and a
Propitiation for our sins, Chap. ^.1,2. And what do all these things argue,
but that a Christian, being under the Covenant of the grace of God, does submit
himself unto this yoke of God. Thus far then a Christian is under the Law to
Christ, so far as the Law is under Christ; he is under the Command of Christ,
and under his power and displeasure, if he negligently sin against the Law, and
unto Christ he runs for pardon and cleansing, and unto him he comes for
acceptance of his obedience; so that he has no use of the Law but unto Christ,
and in and under him.

But how is a Christian not under the Law?

So far forth as the Law is not under Christ, I mean so far as it is without
Christ, freely justifying us by his grace, so far a Christian is freed from
under the Law. In one word, a Christian man, under a Covenant of grace, is not
under a Covenant of works, Romans 6.14. You are not under the Law, but under
grace. He means, not under the Covenant of the Law, nor under the power and
authority of the Law, as of their Husband, Romans 7.1,2,3,4. The husbandly
jurisdiction of the Law is taken away. The Law is not made for a righteous man,
1 Timothy 1.9. That is, not the Covenant of the Law; for else we are under the
Commandments of the Law to Christ: But the Jewish Teachers taught more, to wit,
the Covenant of the Law unto salvation: Not but that the Law is good if a man
use it lawfully.

But how shall a man use it lawfully? for it is not given unto a righteous man,
but he reckons up the breaches of every Commandment, and unto them it is
given; To the lawless and disobedient, to the ungodly and sinners, etc. 1 Timothy
1.9. The Covenant of the Law is given to such (and to none but such) to
convince them of their sins against the Law, to humble them to the death, and
to drive them out of themselves, and all confidence in themselves.

But how does it appear that the Covenant of the Law is not given to the
Children of God?

From hence it is manifest, because a Christian man neither looks for
justification and silvation from his obedience to the Law, nor seareth
condemnation, though he fail in his obedience, and this is a fruit of his
exemption from under the Covenant of the Law; for if a man should look for life
by his obedience to the Law, and fear condemnation by the breach of it, this
would bring a man under the Covenant of the Law; for the sanction of the
Covenant of the Law is Life to them that obey, and to them that disobey death
and the curse; but a Christian looks not for life by his obedience, and that
is plain, Psalm. 143.2. Romans 3.20. Therefore no hope of salvation from our
obedience to the Law.

But me thinks (you will say) a Christian may fear his condemnation, because
of his disobedience to the Law?

Truly this is a great snare, and this doctrine will be scandalous to many a
poor soul, but without cause; indeed if God give a man to be under the
Covenant of grace, and not to see it, then he may fear; but if a man know
himself to be under the Covenant of grace, then he does not fear condemnation
from his disobedience; notable to this purpose is the confidence of David,
Psalm. 49.5. where the Prophet calls upon all people in the world to take
notice of it, both men of high and low degree: Wherefore should I fear in the
days of evil, when the iniquities of my heels shall compass me about?
Wherefore? Truly if there be any fear in the world, one would think this should
procure it? what should a man fear, if not this: David yet professes it, and
would have all men to know it, that there is no cause therein why a Christian
man should fear; wherefore should I fear? etc. Though it should follow you to
the Stocks, or to Prison, yet there is no cause why it should make you fear.
Men that trust themselves in their wealth, and boast themselves in the
multitude of their riches, none of them can by any means redeem his brother,
nor give to God a ransom for him, that be should still live for ever, and not
see corruption. Had David had nothing but the wealth of his Kingdom, he might
have feared well enough, but here is his confidence, verse. 15.

But will not this make a Christian wanton against God, and cause him to abuse
his liberty to hardness of heart?

No, no, this is the kindly melting of a godly heart, to consider a Redeemers
love, drawing him from the power of the grave, and that he should by his sins
pierce the Lord Jesus Christ, this melts him more than all his other sins,
especially considering the abounding grace of God, which where sin has
abounded, abounds much more. Thus when a man does not look for life by his
own righteousness, but knows the Redemption of souls to be more precious
than so, this shows a man not to be under a Covenant of works, and then his
very iniquity shall not make him afraid, there is such a state in Christianity,
and let all men know it.

But will not all men think the worse of Christian profession?

No, David will have all men know it, that they may see the difference between
all worldly confidences, and the confidence of Christians; all the glory of
worldly men will leave them to be like the Beasts that perish, and cannot
redeem their souls, that the Lord only might be exalted in his Redeemed.

2 As a Christian looks not for salvation by his obedience to the Law, nor
fears condemnation by his disobedience: So neither does he seek for any
blessing from his obedience, nor fear any curse from his disobedience. And
therefore if there be any Promises of blessing made to any obedience (though
God should help him to as much obedience as might be) he does not look for any
blessing from that obedience, Romans 4.4,5,6. He looks not for his blessedness
from his works, though he should perform all the conditions to which the
Promises are made, yet he expects all his blessing from free Justification
and union with the Lord Jesus Christ: Blessed is the man to whom the Lord
imputes not sin; this is the blessedness of Christians. It is true, the Lord
does bless the workings of his servants, and accept them, Mat. 25.34,35,36. --
Thus Christ blesses them, but they are not sensible of their good deeds, so as
to expect blessings for their obedience sake, and therefore they make answer,
and say, Lord when saw we thee an hungry, and fed thee, or thirsty, and gave
thee drink etc? Neither do they fear the curse of God, or that their sins
should separate them from God; those that are under the law indeed are cursed,
if they do not continue in all things that are written in the Law to do them:
But this Curse is removed from the Elect by Jesus Christ.

3 This also is a third effect of the freedom from the Covenant of works, that
a Christian does not look for conjugall comfort from his obedience, nor fear
conjugall divorce, from his disobedience. In a Covenant of works it is with a
man as it was with Leah ( Jacobs wife (who expected love and fellowship from
her Husband, because of her fruitfulnes, Genesis 29.32,34. but thus does not a man
under a Covenant of grace, for when he has done all he can, he is ready to
say, I am an unprofitable servant, Luke 17.10. and does not challenge God for
any of his dealing with him, he sees he deserves not his daily bread, and so
looks for no reward from his good works; though the Lord will graciously
acknowledge his servants in what they do according to his will, yet they are
not wont to plead any such thing, which is very observable in the practice of
Jacob, Genesis 32.9,10, etc. where he does not press the performance of Gods
Commandment to procure any blessing, but acknowledges his unworthiness, and
looks for grace from the Promise of God; Deliver me I pray thee from the hand
of my brother, for thou said, I will surely do thee good. Nor does a Child
of God fear divorce by his disobedience, though it have been very great.
Sometimes the people of God have not only rejected the servants of God, but
the Lord himself. 1 Samuel 8.7. But when Samuel had pressed hard upon them for
their sin, Cha. 12. and they were truly humbled, then Samuel said unto them (
ver. 20, 21, 22.) Fear not, etc. Therefore fear you not, he will not cast you
off: So that (mind you) a poor Christian does not fear divorce from his
disobedience, for if we should look for blessings from the one, or cursings
from the other, we walk as not under Christ, but under the Law: But he that is
freed from the Covenant of works, is freed also from expecting salvation, or
fearing damnation for what he does: He knows the Lord will hide his face from
him, if he do evil, but he knows the Lord will not cast him off for ever,
yet he dares not commit sin, but being under grace, he is the more affected if
he shall at any time displease God, and procure chastisement to himself, and
by this means the Lord does mortify his distempers; on the other side, if he
do well, he will not say now my Husband will cleave unto me, and dwell with
me: No, no, we are freed from the Law, Romans 7.4. But we were not so, if we look
for conjugall love from God for our obedience to the law; it is true, if a man
be married to the Law, his obedience unto it will supply comfort unto him, but
if we be dead unto the Law, we have no life in it, nor by it, but only in
Jesus Christ, from whom we expect our comfort; indeed we are troubled that we
should sin against the grace of God, otherwise we look not at our obedience or
disobedience to make us accepted or rejected.

4 And finally, the soul does not claim his right unto any Conditional
Promise by his performance of the condition, nor does he deny himse fe the
blessing that the Promise may reach forth unto him, though he be wanting in
obedience to this or that Commandment: Pregnant for this purpose is the
example of Jacob (which we mentioned before, Genesis 32.9,10. who though he had a
plain and a full Promise of God to do him good, if he would return unto his
Country, and to his kindred, yet when he did return according to the word of
God, he claimed not his interest in that Promise, for that he had done as God
commanded him, but I am less than the least of thy mercies, and yet he comes
unto the Lord for the performance of his Promises: but upon this ground, only
for the sake of mercy and truth. Deliver me I pray thee, for thou said, I
will surely do thee good, verse. 11, 12. So that (mind you) though the soul can
make use of a conditional Promise, and come to God for the blessing of it, yet
not expecting it in the least manner by virtue of his obedience; and truly this
is the freedom of a Christian soul, whereas another man, if he have kept the
Commandment, and performed the condition, he then looks for acceptance from
God; as if the Lord make this Promise, that He that confesses and forsakes
his sin, shall find mercy: This man confesses his sin unto God, and forsakes
it, and therefore he looks for mercy: But this is not the manner of Gods
people, and yet if they look for any mercy, it is in the way of God, but not
for their own goodness, their hope is in the faithfulness and free grace of
God; they may make mention to the praise of God, how he has guided them, and
carried them an end in his own ways, yet they challenge nothing for any thing
that they have done, but put the Lord in mind of his free Promise; that as of
his free grace he has freely promised, so from the same grace he may make good
what he has promised.

Use 1. If any therefore shall accuse the Doctrine of the Covenant of free
grace, of Antinomianisme, and say it teaches men freedom from the Law of
Moses, and if they commit any sin, they plead they are not bound unto the Law;
we see how false such an aspersion would be, for all the people of God know
that the Lord is an avenger of every such wickedness; There is none under a
Covenant of Grace that dare allow himself in any fin, for if a man should
negligently commit any sin, the Lord will school him thoroughly, and make him
sadly to apprehend how unworthily he has made bold to abuse and imbeazle the
treasures of the grace of God. Shall we continue in sin that grace may
abound? God forbid. None that have a portion in the grace of God dare allow
himself in sin; but if through strength of temptation he be at any time
carried aside, it is his greatest burden. 2 Samuel 12.8,9. compared with 13.
Has not the Lord (says Nathan) done these and these things for thee?
Wherefore then have thou despised the Commandment of the Lord? Then David
confesses, I have sinned. It pierced him to the heart to consider it, that he
should abuse his neighbors wife, and kill her husband, and above all, that he
should commit that wickedness against God that had dealt so graciously with him.

So that the children of the Covenant of grace will only tell you, that they
are free from the Covenant of the Law, but not from the Commandment of it: for
as it is given by Jesus Christ, and ratified in the Gospel, and as Christ has
given us his Spirit, enabling us to keep it, we are under it, so far as to
take our selves bound by the Authority of it: and if we do trangresse against
it, we know it is sin in the sight of God, and therefore it is, that the soul
in such a case is sensible of the wrath and displeasure of God, whether it be
his own sin, or the sin of his brethren; therefore he runs unto God for
mercy, which he would not do, if he did not know that his desert according to
the Law did utterly cut him off from mercy; else would he never pray for pardon
of sin, nor rejoice when the Lord helps him to do that which is right and
just in his sight, nor bless the Lord for strengthening him unto obedience,
unless he thought it to be his duty; and therefore.

Use 2. It is of use also to Teach the servants of God, how far we are freed
from the Law; to wit, from the Covenant of it, so that we neither look for
justification, nor salvation from it; and let it not be grievous to any soul,
that a Christian should say, he does not fear condemnation by his
disobedience, he will be apt to fear in this kind, until he be assured of
the favor of God; but when he knows his portion in the Covenant, then indeed
he does not fear condemnation by his sin, nor does he think, that the Lord
will cleave unto him because of his fruitfulnes: he casts not off his
comfort, nor looks at himself as divorced from Christ, because of his
barrennes, nor does he look for his daily bread from all his obedience, but
expects all goodness and blessing from the treasures of the free grace of
God.

Use 3. This may also serve to Teach men some discerning of their own spirits
and state; if you look for justification no longer than you are obedient, and
fear eternal condemnation, then you are disobedient; if you are afraid of
divorce from Christ because of your sins, or if you look for any virtue or
challenge right to any promise by virtue of any well-doing of your own, in
such a case, either you are under a Covenant of works, or you are gone aside
to a Covenant of works; and if ever the Lord open your eyes, and bestow his
free grace upon you, you will know your redemption from such dependances as
these be. I know a Christian man that has not been clearly taught the
distinct differences between these two Covenants, may be misled into dangerous
ways that might tend unto the utter undoing of his soul; but it is a sin of
ignorance, and the Lord will not leave his servants, but clear up his truth
and grace unto them.

Use 4. May serve to Teach the servants of God, that desire to walk in a way
of constant obedience, how to build their faith and hope; truly if they be
grounded upon your own obedience or righteousness of sanctification, if they
depend upon you, you will find your hearts ever unsettled: you may find
comfort, as under the Law you shall, for the Law will cast in comforts upon a
man because of his obedience, if he be married to the Law; but if you shall
believe that Christ is yours, and comfort your selves because you have been by
the power of the Law constrained to duties, and restrained from sin, and
thereupon build your conjugall communion with Christ, you will find your souls
full of sadness and fear ere long; especially if you have true grace in your
hearts: and therefore it is the faithfullnes and tenderness of the grace of God
unto his people, that when Christians come into this Country, though they have
been mavelous eminent in our native Country, yet here they cannot pray
fervently, nor hear the word with profit, nor receive the Seals with Comfort,
they wonder what is become of their old prayers, and hearings, and Sacraments,
and of their lively spirits in holy duties, truly the Lord has disinabled them
(as it were) from such things, because they did build their union and
fellowship with Christ upon them; that so they might know the freedom of the
grace of God, that justifies the ungodly; then will the poor soul be glad to
seek after the Lord Jesus Christ, and say (as the people of God sometimes did,
Hos. 2.7.) I will go and return to my first husband, for then it was better
with me, than now: now the soul will plainly see and discern that he closed
not with his true husband when as he built so much hope and comfort upon his
duties; therefore he will find himself weak and dead (as it were) to all
spiritual duties, and can find no life in them, no comfort from them; and it
is the mavelous goodness and free grace of God unto such a soul, whom the
Lord will not suffer to bless himself in his works; for if a man should lay
the foundation of his comforts in them, and be ready as it were to take it ill,
if he should not find God accepting his works; Wherefore have we fasted, and
thou regardest it not? Isa. 58.3. If a man rejoice in the sparks which he has
kindled, this shall he have at the hands of God, he shall lie down in sorrow,
Isa. 50.11. Whereas the light of God shall graciously break forth unto the
servants of God that wait upon him, though they be for present in darkness, and
see no light; trust not therefore in any legal comforts, but wait upon the
free grace of God, both to justify, sanctify, comfort and glorify your
souls. This is the way of constant peace, and if the Lord do at any time
check his servants when they walk in by-ways, it is that he might build them
upon a sure foundation, so that their salvation will not lie upon their
obedience, nor damnation upon their disobedience. This is the way of constant
peace and s^ety unto all the Israel of God.

Quest. 7. This Doctrine may serve in the next place to Answer a seventh
Question touching the necessity of sanctification. For it may be demanded, If
the Lord will give himself unto the soul in the Covenant of his grace, not
only his Attributes but his Person, all that is God, is given by virtue of
this Covenant; If God has himself not only chosen us to life and glory, but
given his Son to redeem us, and holy Spirit to sanctify us, Ezekiel. 36.27.
What need is there then of Sanctification? for if the holy Ghost will dwell in
us, he can take our wits and understandings, and understand all our meditations
for us without any such actual concurrence of ours, as might be requisite for
that end; if the Lord give himself to be my righteousness and holiness, what
need I then these gifts of holiness? so that this in sum is the Question, If
the Lord will give unto us himself, what need we these gifts to work any
thing, which God is much more able to perform than we can be? this springs
naturally from the doctrine.

Though the Lord give us himself and his holy Spirit to dwell in us, yet is it
needful that we should be endued with all the gifts of the Spirit of grace
that do accompany salvation. You will say what need is there then that the holy
Ghost should dwell in us, or will not these carry an end our souls unto
immortality? Truly we have need that the Lord should give us his holy Spirit to
dwell in us, notwithstanding all the gifts of his grace, though they indeed are
necessary conditions to be found in the souls of all Gods servants, Heb.
12.14. Follow peace with holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord; as
if he made it not only of absolute necessity unto salvation in another world,
but for a comfortable condition in this world; follow peace and holiness: as if
they were ready to fly away from a man; and indeed the Original word does
imply no less, for [(...)] does signify the pursuit of something that flees
from a man, as peace will many times fly from one, and a man shall have much
ado to attain unto it, Psalm. 120.6,7. it is not easily attained unto,
therefore should not be suffered to depart, but held fast when it is enjoyed:
And so for holiness, the Apostle would have us make an holy kind of pursuit
after it, as if it were still withdrawing it self from us, which comes
through the corruptions of our hearts, for we are soon weary of holy duties,
as prayer, or conference, or the like: if holiness be in any thing, it soon
grows wearisome to flesh and blood; but though our weak and feeble nature
will be withdrawing us from holiness, yet the Lord would have us to follow it,
and pursue it; and so shall a man be withdrawn from the world, and from the
temptations and bad examples thereof: do not say, what, shall we be wiser than
our fathers, and is not moderation best in all things? but consider what the
Apostle says, follow still after it, even unto perfection, and his words do
intimate the Reason of it, Without which no man shall see the Lord; for what is
holiness in its own nature? it is that which gives God his due, as
righteousness gives man his due; this is a maine ground why we are so slow in
works of holiness; for were they of another nature, and did they serve our
turns more (as we think) we should not then account them tedious; if a man
were to sit and tell money all day long, this is for my self (says a man) and
for my profit, and if it were for another, we should not think the time long,
it may be, about that work neither: but (mind you) when it comes to any thing
which does concern the Lord, then its so sarre above a man's reach, whatsoever
we have to do in the things of God, that we should soon be weary of reaching
forth our hands all the day long unto the Lord, and to be constantly for God,
from God, and with God in all our actions; our base spirits are soon ready to
be withdrawing from the Lord, therefore the Apostle bids us, Follow after
peace and holiness without which etc. so that great is the necessity of holiness,
and worthy to be followed after; for though a man's own heart, and the world,
and men, and Satan withdraw us from it, yet follow after it; for without it no
man shall see God; there is a kind of holiness which some men have attained
unto many a fair day ago, but it is a thousand to one whether it be the holiness
that does accompany salvation, for that holiness is not easily attained unto,
but the other will easily cleave close unto a man. Now if you shall ask me,

Quest. Wherefore the Lord will have us pursue after holiness? and what needs
it? if the Spirit of holiness dwell in me by an Everlasting Covenant (if it did
withdraw from us as it did from Adam, it was another matter, but) though it may
be quenched in us, yet it abides for ever; what need then of gifts of
holiness?

Answ. That one word may be sufficient which we find, 2 Timothy 2. If any man
purge himself from these evils, he shall be etc. This shows us why gifts of
holiness are requifite to be in Gods people, namely, that they might become meet
instruments in the hand of God, and fitted unto every good word and work;
therefore it is, that the Lord will have us to be filled with all the gifts of
righteousness, and fruits of his Spirit; that we might be the more fit Temples
for the holy Ghost to dwell in, and this is the principal Reason of the point.

Quest. If then there be such gifts of holiness, what need the holy Ghost dwell
in us? is it not enough that he should shed abroad these things into our
hearts? cannot the Lord carry an end the work of our salvation by these gifts?

Answ. There is need that the holy Ghost should dwell in us notwithstanding. 1.
To keep these gifts in us. 2. To Act them in us. 3. To witness unto our
souls by these, for our comfort, and the good one of another. Some Scriptures
for all these.

1. That there is need of the holy Ghost, that he should keep these in us. 2 Timothy 1.14. there is a worthy thing committed unto us; how shall we keep it?
not by our own wit or wisdom, careful watchfullnes and faithfullnes (though
such things ought not to be wanting) but the charge is, Keep those things, by
the holy Ghost which dwells in us; we stand in need of gifts to be fit
instruments in the hand of God: we stand in need of the Spirit of God to
maintain that which God gives us; though Adams gifts were in perfection, yet
not having the holy Ghost to keep them for him, they all fly from him as soon
as ever he had tasted of the forbidden fruit, and left him naked and desperate;
therefore in the Covenant of grace, the Lord gives the holy Ghost to keep
strong possession in his servants against the strong man armed.

2. Its the holy Ghost that Acts the gifts given to us, and enableth them in
us: for the holy Ghost, who keeps possession, does derive continued strength
into our faith, which puts life into all the gifts of God: and if you shall
ask, how love, and patience, and all the rest of the gifts of God do work?
The holy Ghost stirs up faith to look unto Christ, who returns strength
by his Spirit unto faith, and so faith works by love, and by meeknes, and by
all the rest of the fruits of the Spirit: thus the Spirit of God acts
according to what we read, Romans 8.14. Come to any holy duty, and it is the holy
Ghost that leads you along and acts in you; so Ezekiel. 36.27. and 2 Pet.
1.2^. it is the Spirit of God that moves us to any good work, and that acts
the gifts of his grace in us.

3. It is the same Spirit of God also that witnesses to these gifts, and
shows what gifts he has given us; for such is the blindness of the nature of
all the sons of men, and it is a wonder to see, that generally Christians, when
the Lord first works these gifts in them, not one of a thousand but they
think they are in a sad and fearful condition, and so they are very
uncomfortable when they have greatest cause of rejoicing. But now least that we
should always mistake that which the Lord has given us, we have received the
Spirit of God, that we might know the things that are freely given unto us of
God, 1 Cor. 2.12. He indeed takes his own time to discover it unto us, to
some sooner, to some later; but this is his intendment, that he might honor
his grace upon us by all the rich and gracious gifts, which he has given us.
He does also reveal unto us the duties which he helps us to do; ^om. 9.1.
The holy Ghost, that wrought in him this brotherly love, bears him witness
also that he does not lie, and that he had continual sorrow in his heart, and
that he could have wished to have been accursed from Christ, that they might be
saved; it grieved him so much that the whole Nation should be destitute of the
Lord Jesus Christ.

Thus we see what need there is that the holy Ghost should dwell in us, to
keep all the gifts of his grace in us, to Act them according to his will, and
to discover to us what gracious gifts the Lord has wrought in us, and what
duties he has helped us to do, that we may be able to give Account of them,
by the holy Ghost that dwells in us, and bears witness with us. We see
there is a necessity both of the gifts of grace, that we may be fit Temples for
the holy Ghost to dwell in, and fit instruments for him to work by; there is
need also the holy Ghost should dwell in us, for the causes we have spoken
unto; And I might add this, to comfort us in all the changes that may come
upon us; it is a strong Scripture which we read in John 15.26. When the
Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit
of truth, which proceeds from the Father, he shall testify of me (our
Divines have no place of more clear evidence to prove the procession of the
Spirit from the Father) And the same Spirit testifies to us, both what mighty
redemption he has wrought for us, and what grace he has wrought in us; this
the holy Ghost shall testify, even he that proceeds from the Father; and
this is the comfort of Gods people. Thus we see both these points opened to us.

Quest. 3. How may we then employ and improve this sanctification which the Lord
has given us, and which he keeps and acts in us by his Spirit, and
whereunto he bears witness? How, or to what end shall we employ it, seeing
the Lord undertaketh to do these things for us?

Answ. If the Lord Jesus Christ by his Spirit gives us these gifts, it is our
part then first to see that we do not rest in any Sanctification which does
not spring from Christ, conveyed unto us by his Spirit conveying us to him, the
Spirit knitteth us unto Christ, and Christ unto us; he works Faith in us to
receive whatsoever the Lord gives unto us, and by the same Faith works all
our holiness for us, 1 Cor. 1.30. Christ is made unto us, etc. Therefore we
are to see him the principal author of all these things in us, and for us;
this is the principal comfort of all gifts (Christ given in them) and the
glory of all our safety; and so far as any of these lies in our
Sanctification, we ought to see that it be Sanctification in Jesus Christ; and
then it is so, when the Lord gives us to look unto the Lord Jesus in it, and
to it in him; and as we look for our holiness to be perfect in Jesus Christ,
so we look for continual supply of it from him; and this it is to make Christ
our Sanctification, when as whatsoever gift the Lord gives us, we go not
forth in the strength of it, but in the strength of Jesus Christ. There may be
a change in the soul, which may spring from a spirit of bondage, and may
captivate our consciences unto the Law, that may restrain us from sin, and
constrain us unto duty: but such holiness springs not always from our
union with Christ, for there may be a conscience of duty without sense of our
need of Christ; as it was with the Israelites at Mount Sinai, Deuteronomy. 5.27,28,29.
Go thou near (say they to Moses) and hear all that the Lord our God shall say,
and speak thou unto us, all that the Lord our God shall speak unto thee, and we
will hear it, and do it. They have well said, all that they have spoken,
says the Lord. O that there were an heart in them, that they would fear me,
etc. This I say therefore is the first thing to be attended unto, as ever ye
would make a right use of your holiness, see that it be such as flows from
Jesus Christ, and that there be not only an heart awed with the Law, but
waiting upon Christ to be all in all in us and to us, so shall we neither
neglect the gifts of God in us, nor Christ and his Spirit, but shall give due
honor unto all of them together.

2 This may also Teach all Christians, not to trust upon the gifts of their
holiness, though they do spring from the Holy Ghost himself, though they be
such as are unchangeable, though they spring from Jesus Christ, and knit our
souls in union with him; yet trust not in the gifts themselves; the Lord
lays it down as the Apostasy of Israel, Ezekiel. 16.14,15. Trust not therefore
in any of these, but let all our confidence be in Jesus Christ, not in any of
the gifts of his Spirit whatsoever. For a little further opening of it.

1 Trust not in any gifts that you have received for the performance of any
duty; for it is not the strongest Christian that is able to put forth a good
thought, 2 Cor. 3.5. but our sufficiency is of God, John 15.5. And the Apostle
Paul cannot only not do any great matter by his own strength and grace, but
nothing at all without Jesus Christ; and therefore he gives us to understand,
that it is God that works in us both to will and to do, Phil. 2.13. If
therefore we have any new work to do, look to the Lord Jesus Christ afresh by
Faith, that he may carry an end all our works in us and for us; otherwise it is
not any strength or grace in us, that can produce any good work, word, or
thought; and therefore (mind you) the Apostle makes it a principle of
Christian Religion, that the just man lives by faith, and he often mentions
it, Gal. 2.20. The life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of
the Son of God; where he puts it into his own experience: Why, did not he
live by love, and patience, and zeal? etc. Yes, truly they were lively in him,
if ever in any man, besides our blessed Savior: and yet notwithstanding he
never attributes life to any of these gifts of his, but if he speak of life,
he makes this his universal life, I live by the faith of the Son of God; and
I am able to do all things through Christ which strengthens me, Phi. 4.13.
This is the true savor of a Christian spirit, that when gifts are at the
highest, the heart is then at the lowest, 1 Cor. 15.9,10. the Apostle Paul
there acknowledges himself to be as one born out of due time; for (says he)
I am less than the least of the Apostles, not meet to be called an Apostle,
because I persecuted the Church of God; yea but by the grace of God I am what I
am and his grace, which was bestowed on me, was not in vain, but I labored
more abundantly than they all, yet not I, but the grace of God in me. This is
truly spiritual sanctification, that when the soul is full of the Holy Ghost,
and gifts of the Holy Ghost, yet he is like a man in great penury, as having
nothing of himself, this is a marvelous spiritual poverty, and you shall ever
find (and I desire the Lord would open the hearts of his people to know what I
speak) that if Christians have fallen, their greatest falls have been in their
most eminent and exemplary gifts. If you shall mark the sins of all the
servants of God, they have been chiefly found in the very exercise of their
best gifts; let us take a little taste of them, that we may learn to use our
gifts in the strength of Jesus Christ. Abraham a man full of Faith, none went
beyond him in the old nor new Testament, yet if you read of any failing in him,
it is in regard of the acting of Faith: what made him afraid not once but the
2d time, that his wife would be taken from him by Pharaoh? Genesis 12. by
Abimelech, Chap. 20. had not the Lord promised to bless him wheresoever he
came, Genesis 12.2. He had so much of the knowledge and grace of God shining in
him, that Sarah needed not to have dissembled, and Abimelech (a poor Heathen)
could say as much, Chap. 20.16. Behold thy Husband is to thee a covering of the
eyes to all that are with thee, and with all other: thus she was reproved: As
if he should say, thou need no shifts and lies for thy protection, and to be
a veil unto thee. This a poor Heathen can discern, that a man that has God
with him, needs no other shifts nor covering to defend and shelter him. Thus
we see that these great failings of Abraham were proper acts of unbelief.

Moses a meek man, none like him for meekness on the face of the earth, there
is but one sin storied of him after he came to the Government of that state,
and this was his failing, Hear now you Rebels, must we fetch you water out of
this rock? so he lift up his hand, and with his rod he smote the rock twice,
Numb. 20.10,11. They provoked Moses as meek as he was; sometimes when Aaron and
Miriam dealt as peremptorily with him, he was not moved from the meekness of
his spirit: But now he falls into passion, and this was the very sin for
which the Lord excluded him out of Canaan, Numb. 27.12,13,14. it was the breach
of this royal grace, Chap. 20.12. Because ye believed me not, to sanctify me
in the eyes of the Children of Israel, therefore you shall not bring this
Congregation into the Land which I have given them. Which words show us the
reason of his failing in the grace wherein he so much abounded, Because ye
believed me not. The Lord will have him know, that he must live by his Faith in
his meekness; if any man think himself to be a meek man, and nothing shall
over-wrastle him there, if you believe not in God, but in your meekness, your
confidence will soon fail you.

Peter. a man full of courage, and you read of two of his principal failings,
and both in point of courage; he failed in the high Priests hall at the voice
of a damsel; and in the porch at the speech of another maid, and the third
time, at the voice of one that stood by. Math. 26.69. etc. Whereas afterward,
when he lived by faith, he became undaunted before the whole Council, Act.
4.13. Another failing of his in point of courage we read of Gal. 2.12. He
feared those of the Circumcision; whereas before he did eat with the Gentiles
etc. Thus the Apostle Peter's eminent gifts, did not bring forth their fruits.
Know therefore that the best of all your gifts, faith, courage, meeknes,
wisdom, love to your brethren, will fail, if you trust in them, and you will
be most apt to fail there wherein you do most excel.

If a man be wise, he shall fail in that point, and it may be in nothing so
much as in that, even in those things wherein he thinks he walks most
wisely; and such an one will find most trials in point of his wisdom, and
the like will be found in all other graces, and all to this end, to teach the
Israel of God to know that no man lives by his wisdom, nor by any thing in
himself, but by Faith in Jesus Christ, whom God has given unto his people,
and who is only able to give new supplies of his spirit unto his servants, to
act every gift which he has given them.

I might have mentioned the example of Sarah, a meek and a quiet godly spirited
woman, subject and obedient to her Husband, and called him Lord, whose
daughters you are while you do well, 1 Pet. 3.6. and yet you know, one of her
greatest failings was in point of reverence to her Husband, Genesis 16.5. When she
saw that she was despised, she said to her Husband, Thou do me wrong, etc.
Where is the reverence of Sarah now? Will you have the daughters of Sarah to
imitate her herein? What had her Husband done? There was no fault in him in
this matter, she had no reason to tax him upon this point, it was her own
Counsel, verse. 2. that he should go in to her maid, that I may have Children
by her; therefore there was no color of any just complaint on her part, yet
see this meek spirited woman failed in the point of her meekness herein, and
did express no greater failing all her life long, that we read of; she was
weak in Faith once, but there was great reason for that, her womb was dead, and
her Lord (as she called him) was old also: Nor does the Angel so much blame her
about it, but that action wherein she most failed, was in that grace wherein
she most abounded. And though every grace of the Spirit be of great force when
the Lord does act and move it, yet let a man go forth in the strength of his
greatest gifts, and if ever his heart fail him, it will be in them. Think not
when you have done all you can, that you are worthy of any thing, but say that
you are unprofitable servants: For though sanctification be the way wherein the
Lord will pour out all his blessings upon his servants, yet he does require
them to boast in none of their excellencies, but look at them all, as freely
given them of God; and consider, that the right unto all, springs from
fellowship with Jesus Christ, that so not only the gift it self is grace, but
the blessing that follows upon the gift is grace also; and suppose that we
have attained all that we pray for, shall we then exalt our own gifts? No, but
let us say with Jacob, I am less than the least of all the mercies and truth
which thou have showed unto thy servant.

Do not trust, as not upon gifts, nor upon duties performed by those gifts, to
reach the blessing; so look not for your Justification from thence at all; for
the Apostle is plain, that he looked not for any thing for his righteousness
before his conversion; and after his conversion, he counts it all as dross
and dung, that he might win Christ, Phil. 3.6,7,8. And, for our faith, they are
not to be trusted upon as grounds of our Faith; for all the gifts of our
sanctification are fruits of our Faith; and therefore our Faith is said to
work by love, Gal. 5.6. and so it does by all other gifts of the Spirit, and
if they be fruits of Faith, then Faith is not built upon them.

And thus much of the second Use which Christians are to make of their
Sanctification.

3 There is in the next place a point of Witness, which this Sanctification
does yield, and the Spirit of God with it; the water bears witness to the
blood, and the blood to the water, and the Spirit unto both, 1 John 5.6,7,8. A
man's own Spirit bears witness also, Romans 8.16. And therefore as a witness
of God unto our Faith, we may lawfully hear what it speaks: But this is the
life of a true Evidence, that all these gifts of God do not bear witness any
further then a man sees the Lord Jesus working them in him, and for him; for
it is Faith that makes all the graces of the Gospel active; and it is a
condition so requisite, that unless our works be of Faith, and flow from it,
they are not acceptable before God, Heb. 11.6. Therefore unless Faith carry an
end our works, they are not works of holiness, such as should bear witness to
the soul; therefore the Apostle does stir up the Corinthians unto this mainly,
Examine your selves, whether you are in the faith, 2 Cor. 13.5. And if he do
exhort them to Examination, it is in point of Faith, and therefore Reverend
Forbes of Middleburgh (who has written a Sermon upon that Text) says well,
That unless men find faith in their holiness, none of all their
sanctification will become a sound witness of the grace of God unto them; but
if Faith be found, then you shall see Jesus Christ accepting you, and breathing
in you, except ye be reprobates.

There is a marvelous gracious witness that Sanctification gives unto him
that lives by Faith in Jesus Christ, if it be in Christ, and work from him,
and for him. This only is that sanctification which the Lord commends unto
his servants to seek after it.

4 A fourth Use of our sanctification is, that the Spirit of God helps us by
it in point of Rejoicing; and therefore it is that you shall see the Servants
of God rejoicing in their holiness, so does the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 1.12. --
This is our rejoicing, the testimony of our conscience, etc. He rejoices at
what the Lord does by him, and with him, Gal. 6.4. But what is it that makes
the Apostle rejoice before God? When he rejoices in his work before the Lord,
you shall ever find him rejoicing at the Lords acting these gifts in him, and
blessing him in his work. Let us look upon two or three Scriptures for this
end, 1 Timothy 1.12,13. So that (mind you) as he ^eeth God giving him these gifts,
and enabling him unto the work, so he blesses God in that behalf. You shall
find him also blessing God that had prospered this work of the Ministry
wheresoever he came, 2 Cor. 2.14. The Lord working in him and for him, makes
him to triumph and to over-wrastle all the difficulties that he meets
withal. The Lord had given him gifts, and taught him to exercise those gifts,
and does accept him, and therefore he expresses himself in a marvelous strong
speech, Phil. 1.20,21. I am in nothing ashamed, etc. for to me to live is
Christ, and to dye is gain. To me to live is Christ; as if he had said, I have
no life but from Christ, I put forth no act of life but for Christ; this is the
sum of all his conversation; and if Christ be his life, then death will be his
advantage, and Christ will be magnified in either.

Thus we see how the Saints of God have made use of their Sanctification; they
are careful to see that it flow from Christ, and yet when they have it they
dare not trust in their best gifts for the least duty, neither do they look
for their Faith from their best gifts, but they expect their best gifts to flow
from their Faith: They make use of the testimony of their holiness when they
see Christ in it, and Faith in it, and the Spirit of God carrying them along in
the ways and duties thereof. Thus they see their holiness, and take comfort in
it, and from the witness of it, as that by which the Lord dispenses comfort
unto his people, when they receive it from the hands of Christ, and by Faith in
him, by which they are taught of God to carry an end their whole conversation
in his name.

5 Furthermore, as we receive it from Christ, and trust not in it, but in
Christ, and receive the witness of it in Christ, and in the Holy Spirit of
Christ; and as we receive joy and comfort also which the Lord does minister to
us in a Sanctified course by his Holy Spirit, so we grow up and perfect our
holiness which we have received in his name.

There is growth in grace, this Sanctification is not bedrid, Christians are
not as weak now, as they were seven years ago, nor do they stand at a stay,
but go forward in Christianity; and hereupon the Apostle exhorts the
Ephesians, Chap. 4.16. To speak the truth in love, that they may grow up into
him in all things which is the head, even Christ: Implying, that men that enter
into the ways of holiness, ought to grow on unto perfection in the fear of
God, Job 17.9. And many sweet means the Lord has appointed for this end; the
communion of Gods people tends hereto, Prove. 13.20. He that walks with the
wise, shall learn wisdom: All the Ordinances of God are appointed for this
end also, to beget and increase Faith and holiness; therefore a Christian in
the use of all these Ordinances, does not stand at a stay, but is still
thriving and growing, and that not in his own strength, but in the strength of
Jesus Christ, seeking for his acceptance and help in every duty he goes about;
and this is that the Apostle does exhort the Colossians unto, Chap. 2.6,7. This
ought Christians mainly to attend unto, that as you see the branch, the more
juice it sucketh, the more fruitful it is; so also it becomes the people of
God to know, that the more need we stand in to be fruitful, the more need we
have to derive a continual fresh supply from the Lord Jesus Christ; that by
his Spirit renewing grace in us, we may be enlarged, and carried an end in the
ways of God; whereas otherwise, the hearts of Christians would soon fail to
go on in those things wherein they desire to be growing up unto perfection.

What is the reason that so many servants of God are not so lively in their
profession as they were wont to be many years ago? Truly we attend upon
Ordinances, but it is only upon the outward act of them, and not upon Jesus
Christ in them; this is many times wanting in the hearts of Gods people; but
truly if this be our constant frame, and we do not recover our selves, then
is not our sanctification such as flows from fellowship with Jesus Christ;
for you shall find this to be true, that there is no gift of Christ, nor no
sanctification accompanying salvation, but it does knit us nearer and nearer
unto Christ; and the more we are filled with true spiritual gifts, the more
empty we are of our own strength, and self conceits; and so we ought to be,
otherwise we shall constantly find this, that if the Lord do not preserve
this empty frame in us, the more full we are of any gift, the more full shall
we be of our own strength, and consequently the less need shall we feel of
Christ; and if this be our constant frame, it will be a sad argument that our
best sanctification will not endure but fall away, unless we be knit unto
Christ by the Spirit of his grace; for by all true sanctification we are the
more knit unto him, so that if any man would know whether the superscription of
Christ and his Image be stamped upon his sanctification, this you shall ever
find to be the stamp of the grace of Christ, that the more you receive from
him, the more you stand in need of him; in so much that notwithstanding all the
gifts of the Spirit, there is not the ablest Minister of the New Testament, but
(if his gifts flow from the Spirit of Christ, and knit you unto Christ) you
will find as great need to cleave unto Christ, as ever you did the first day
when you came trembling into the Pulpit. If therefore we feel our selves
full, so that the more we have received, the more sufficient we are, and go
not about the duties we have in hand in fear and trembling, but in
selfe-confidence, if this be our usual and constant practice, it is but
counterfeit Christianity; I do not say that the gifts are counterfeit, for
they are from the Spirit of God, and men may by them be very serviceable to
Church and Commonweal, but this is certain, that the stronger and the more
your gifts are, if you sit loose from Christ, the emptier your hearts are of
him. But you will say, may not a Christian be full of himself, and depend upon
the strength of his own gifts? Yes, God forbid I should deny that, for the
best Christians have gone astray in the exercise of their best gifts; and
hereupon Abraham has been wanting in faith, Moses in meeknes, Peter in
courage, and Sarah in her modesty, they have been so apt to trust upon those
graces of God, wherein they have most abounded, that they have principally
failed therein: but this you shall find, that (if they have been overtaken
once or twice) as the burnt child dreads the fire, so they grow to be more
sensible of their need of Christ, more fearful of departing from him, more
careful to cleave unto him, that they might grow up in his Name unto all well
pleasing in his sight. If therefore there be a sanctification that stands at
a stay in any man, it is a great suspicion whether the gifts thereof flow from
fellowship with Christ, or no; if gifts be truly spiritual, a man shall
usually grow up in them, Habenti dabitur. Employ them, and multiply them; but
if you employ the gifts you have received, in your own strength, and you are
now full of your own sanctification, truly this is but frothy work, and does
not convey true nor lively nourishment and comfort: but the comfort and life is
to him that in his most spiritual gifts and best performances, is empty of
himself, and only full of Jesus Christ, to live or dye is his advantage.

This is the Use which I would commend unto you touching your Christian
sanctification. Thus we see sundry things have been cleared from this doctrine
concerning the Covenant of grace. There remains another thing to be resolved
and cleared from the doctrine; for if God in the Covenant of his grace do give
himself to be a God to Abraham, and to his seed, It is then to be enquired,
How God the Father gives himself, and how the Son, and how the holy Ghost
gives himself; for these are the fundamentalls of the Covenant of grace, and
necessary to be opened for clearing the doctrine of it.

Quest. How God the Father does give himself to be a God in Covenant to
Abraham, and to his seed, that is, to the faithful seed of Abraham.

Answ. All the Persons in Trinity concur in works ad extra, in works upon the
Creature. They give themselves by a Threefold work or Act.

1. The first Act of God is (having chosen us in his Son) He gave forth his
own Son out of his bosom for the redemption of Abraham and his seed; that
is the first and fundamental of all the rest that God does put forth, or any
other Person in Trinity, for the applying of the Covenant unto the hearts of
his people; And God in giving his Son does give himself, Isai. 9.6. Joh.
10.30. and 1 John 2.23. Romans 5.8. Joh. 3.16. And as God gives us his Son, so
he gives us all things else in his Son, Romans 8.32. So then this is the first
and the great work of God, that he has given his Son out of his own bosom,
to take our nature upon him, to lead a miserable life, and to dye a cursed
death, and in him has given all his Attributes, his mercy, and power unto the
sons of men; an undoubted sign that God intends to give himself in the
Covenant of grace unto his people, when he gives Jesus Christ himself in that
Covenant, as he does expressly, Isa. 42.6. where we may see that God gives
another, even that God the Father gives God the Son. Thus it is a gift of
the Covenant that God gives his Son to be the foundation of the Covenant,
and the chief blessing of it. And Chap. 49.8. He speaks to the same purpose.
No man has seen God at any time, (Joh. 1.18.) nor can see him; nor will God
the Father have immediate fellowship with any creature; but the only begotten
Son of the Father, the Lord has given him that he might reveal him; Thus
we may perceive that the Lord is gracious and mavelous gracious in that he
gives us his Son, his dear Son, the second Person in Trinity; and thus he
says to his Elect; I will be a God unto thee, and give thee my Son that
shall redeem thee out of all distress and danger. Thus does the Lord for his
people, and it is a clear evidence of his grace, and shows that his love
unto his people is beyond all banks and bottom; for the Lord to give us his
Son, and this Son so soon as he was promised, his people saw him a far
of. Joh. 8.56. Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it, and
was glad. For when the Lord Jesus Christ was promised unto him, Genesis 17.16,17.
and the Lord had said unto him, I will bless Sarah and give thee a son of
her, yea I will bless her, etc. Then Abraham fell upon his face and laughed;
he did rejoice that the Lord would give him a Savior out of his loins: how it
could be brought to pass it may be he knew not, but by a spirit of Prophecy
did he discern it no doubt. This is the first work of God in giving himself
by Covenant, and this was done long ago before we were borne; he gave him in
his eternal counsel when he did elect us in him: he gave him when he sent him
into the world. But this is more when

2. He gives us unto his Christ by Covenant, and draws us unto him, and
gives Christ unto us also. And this grace of God comes nearer us; the other
did leave us like lambs in a large pasture, but now as He gives us unto
Christ, so he gives him unto us, and both in present possession. And this the
Father does, Joh. 6.44. for no man (says Christ) can come to me, except the
Father which has sent me draw him; and every one that has heard and learned
of the Father comes unto me. Now this kind of hearing and learning of the
Father, is a strange kind of learning which the Lord Teaches the soul by --
when he draws him unto Christ, an effectual Teaching and powerful. 1 Cor.
1.9. This is your effectual calling; and this is the Lords giving us unto his
Son, John 6.37. All this is properly the work of the Father. Men are said to
be well given when they give themselves to their books, to their works, and
business, but this we may well say, that we are indeed well given when the
Lord gives us unto his Son; for otherwise we are but in all ill state, which
way soever we are given.

Quest. If you shall ask, How the Father gives us, and calls us, and
draws us into fellowship with his Son? (for they are Scripture-phrases, and
all of them of like value in Scripture-sense.)

Answ. In a word, The Lord draws us unto his Son by his Spirit, and
calls, us as by his word, so by his Spirit also, and gives us by his word
and Spirit unto Jesus Christ. In this thing I shall speak no more unto you,
than what you have often heard, and I suppose long ago received; As that the
Lord calls his people out of their sins by the light of the Law, and by the
Spirit of bondage; he sets home the Law effectually unto the soul, and
thereby draws us from sin and from the world in some measure, that we have
now no mind to those things which before we were full of delight in, whether
they be sins against the Law, or sins against the Gospel: it is the Lords
usual dealing by his Spirit to set home sins against both in so much that
thereby we come to be afflicted with some kind of trembling and fear and
torment about our spiritual estate. And thus it was with Saul (who afterward
was Paul) Acts 9.3,4,5,6. when Christ called unto him out of heaven, and
challenged and convinced him of sin, he all trembling and astonished said,
Lord, what will thou have me to do? So it was with the Jailer, Acts 16.29.
After the Lord had shaken his heart with an earthquake (which is a sanction of
the Law, and a ratification of it, as all Gods judgments are) he called for a
light, and sprang in, and came trembling to Paul and Silas. Thus the Lord
draws men out of themselves, and their finfull ways by a spirit of bondage,
whereby they are convinced of sin, and desert of Gods wrath, are greatly and
deeply afflicted with fear: concerning which the Apostle Paul says, 2 Timothy
1.7. God has not given us the Spirit of fear (or bondage) but of power, of
love, and of a sound mind, etc. Such fear also the Apostle John speaks of, 1 John 4.18. when he says, Perfect love casts out fear, for fear has
torment; which comes from the sense of a man's estate; whereby he is forced to
cry out many times, and to say, woe worth my soul, that ever I was borne, for
the Lord causes the to possess all my sins, and presses me down to the
nethermost hell. This is one work of the Spirit of bondage, by which the Lord
draws the soul out of it self and sins, though of it self the spirit of
fear goes no further than to shake a man's carnal confidence; which is
accompanied with Anguish and Torment, 1 John 4.18. Rev. 9.3. and 11.10.

Besides this Spirit of Bondage, the Lord has another work, which is called a
Spirit of Burning, Mal 4.1. The day comes, etc. This is a Spirit of burning;
let us speak unto it a little; the Prophet says, I shall leave them neither
root nor branch. There are two things in the root.

1. The first is the Root of Abraham's Covenant, which this people much trusted
upon; and that is it of which John Baptist speaks, Now the axe is laid to the
root of the Tree, etc. and this he spoke ( Mat. 3.9.) after he had said,
Think not to say within your your selves, We have Abraham to our father,
verse. 8. So that all the confidence that they had in Abraham's Covenant, and
Temple, and Tabernacle, and such things, is burnt up, and so they have no root
left them to stand upon. And this is one thing intended by the Root. But

2. Secondly, there is something more in it, for with this Spirit of burning,
the Lord by the power of this Spirit does cut us off from any power of our own
natural gifts, and parts, and spiritual gifts also, whereby we thought to lay
hold on Jesus Christ; and we are cut off hereby from all the confidences that
we have in our own sufficiency; when once the Lord intends to bring a soul
unto himself; for there is an usual pre^idence that we have in our own
state, though the Lord have cut us off from hope in the righteousness of our
parents, and from boasting of his Ordinances, yet we think there is some power
still left us, and therefore we hope and will seek in our own strength, that
the Lord may reveal himself to us in mercy and peace; but when the Lord
comes nearer unto us, he will show us how unable we are to take up the least
good resolution, we shall find our selves, like bruised reeds unable to hold
up our heads; for Christ came to seek and to save that which was lost, so that
Christ will not declare himself to seek us until we be lost, and therefore
he says, Math. 16.24. If any man will come after me, let him deny himself,
and follow me; And according hereunto it is that those converts, Acts 2.37. do
cry out when they were pricked in their heart, and said unto Peter, and to the
rest of the Apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do? Hence it is also
that the poor souls that came unto Christ, Math. 12.20. were like bruised
reeds that could not hold up their heads, for the Lord in this case bruiseth
them, and lays them low, that they see no more hope of mercy, nor likelihood
that God should show them any hope. Thus does the Lord burn up the Root of
Abraham's Covenant wherein men trust, and the Root of all our
selfe-sufficiency, that now we find our selves dried up and our strength
consumed, that now we are not able to think as of our selves a good thought.

And again the Lord by this spirit of burning does burn up all our branches
also, how fair and green soever they have been; All our fastings, and
humiliations, and almsdeeds, and prayers, such things as the Pharisees much
boasted in, Math. 6.1,2,3. etc. but these things are all burnt up. The fruit of
bondage works unto fear, and now all the hope is that a man sets upon
reformation; but if the Lord love a man's soul, he will not let him stay there,
but goes further with him, and shows him that his prayers and fastings, are
all empty and fall short of the life and power of Jesus Christ; but yet the
soul is not quite out of hope, though the Law cannot save me, if it cannot, I
must get me unto Jesus Christ, and lay hold upon him for salvation; as if all
were to be had by faith in Jesus Christ, if once we can lay hold upon him, and
nothing else were required but faith in Christ, and thereby my laying hold upon
him: I see plainly (says a man in this case) that there is no hope in me, as
has been rightly observed, and therefore I Will trust upon Jesus Christ, and give
up my self to him: but now if the Lord love thy soul, he will not suffer thee
there to rest, he will not leave thee so, He will press thee further. How
come thou by faith in Christ? Why, thou tookest it up of thine own accord,
thou thoughtest all thy gifts and duties were in vain, and therefore now thou will believe in Jesus Christ: Is it so easy a matter? Can any man come unto
Christ except the Father draw him? And is thy faith any more than a resolution
of thine own, when thou wast convinced of the emptiness of thine own gifts
and abilities? When this spirit of burning has blasted this thy faith also,
and that by the clear evidence of the Gospel put upon it. Now says the soul,
I see that I am not in Christ, though I said that I would trust in Christ, yet
I see, it is not every one that says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven. Now I see it is not my faith (such a Faith as mine is) that
will reach Jesus Christ; it is not a faith of my own undertaking that will
serve the turn. I see now Christ alone must work this great work in me, and
Christ in the way of his own Ordinances, therefore I must look for it in his
word, and in the fellowship of the Sacraments; therefore I will look up unto
the Lord in all these, and wait for him, and seek him therein: And I hope I
can seek and wait in that way, though I can do nothing else, and so the poor
soul makes account that in time he shall find Christ in the Ordinances, and
so hammereth out a faith from thence, and therein blesses himself. Now (mind
you) the Spirit of God (when the Lord God the Father will draw home the soul
thoroughly to Jesus Christ) will burn up all thy confidence; for if thy soul
be not utterly lost, so long as it has any root, or power in it self, it is
not come to an utter self-denial; though I cannot work I will believe, and
if I cannot believe, I can wait that I may believe, and so here is still the
old root of Adam left alive in us, whereby men seek to establish their own
righteousness. This old root puts forth it self, and will not suffer the
soul to be wholly from Christ and for Christ alone, and all because there is a
sprigge of Adam left in the soul; whence it is, that the soul is marvellously
apt to have hope and confidence more or less from some virtue or power in
himself, therefore its no small matter to be cut off from Adam; that's contrary
to nature; As says the Apostle, Romans 11.24. this is a mavelous strong work,
when the Spirit of God comes to act things contrary to nature; for nature is
fully possessed, that what God commands, I am able to do it: nature will not
be persuaded to the contrary; If I hear God command any thing, I will do it
(says a carnal heart) and if I cannot do it, I will believe, and if I cannot
believe I will wait, and I can wait that I may believe; this is still but
nature: Now when the Lord comes indeed to ingraffe us into Jesus Christ, this
is quite contrary to nature. Why, wherein is it so contrary? I answer, whereas
nature is active for it self, now it comes to pass, that whereas a soul has
been stirring and busy in his own strength, at length the Spirit of God, by
the mighty power of his grace, being shed abroad into the soul, does burn up
root and branch, not only the root of Abraham's Covenant, but all the fatness
of the root of the Wild Olive, by which we are fat and lively to all spiritual
work in our own apprehensions; so that we work in our own strength, until
the Lord come and cut us quite down, and make us to see that there is not the
least good thought, as of our selves, and therefore unless the Lord be
wonderfully gracious unto us, we cannot be saved, till it come unto this, the
soul is not fit for Jesus Christ.

Thus the Spirit of God may work powerfully in the hearts of men, and burn up
their root and branch, and this a spirit of burning may do, and yet leave the
soul in a damnable condition for ought I know, and such as many a soul may be
in, and yet never come to enjoy saving fellowship with Jesus Christ; therefore
as this is one arm of God stretched forth for the salvation of his people, when
he draws them out of themselves, by a Spirit Of Bondage Burning
toward Christ: So

2 There is a further work of God in drawing us home thoroughly and effectually
to Jesus Christ, when he gives the Spirit of Adoption, which reaches beyond
all the former work; he has cut us off from our selves, and now we stand in a
state quite contrary to nature, and if any saving work be wrought in us, it is
quite contrary to nature; if any thing fall upon the heart and soul of a man,
to bring his will to this pass, to lie down at Gods feet, that he knows not
what to do, and yet whatsoever the Lord calls him unto, he is willing, if it
were possible to be done, he would run through fire and water to do it: but he
finds himself unable to do any thing, and now he will tell you that to
believe is as impossible for him as to build a world: why then bid him wait,
wait? says he, I, but I cannot wait, and if I seek the Lord, I cannot find
him, and I see others of Gods servants wrought upon graciously, but
dead-hearted I, nothing will work upon me; now in such a case as this, the
Spirit of God comes into the heart of a Christian, and takes possession of
the soul for Jesus Christ, and so draws the soul to Christ, and makes it
there to stay, and there to lie down, and to be willing to be drawn yet nearer
and nearer unto Christ, and to be carried an end by him, to take all from him,
and to give all the glory to him. This Spirit of Adoption does give a man a
Son-like frame to lie prostrate at his Fathers will, like unto the Prodigal
Son, Luke 15.17,18,19. who when he came to himself, and saw how unable he was
to provide for himself, and how unworthy he was that his Father should do any
thing for him, he came and lay down at the feet of his Father, for he is
unable and unworthy of any mercy. Now this stooping of the heart unto God, and
yielding unto him to do with us as seems good in his own eyes, is such a
prostration of the heart, wherein the Lord has taken possession of the soul,
that now a man is led unto fellowship with Christ, that there is None in Heaven
but him, none in the earth in comparison of him that the soul desires after;
and now a man waits upon Christ to see what he will do for him; and though
he cannot tell you that he waits, yet he does wait, that he may be helped of
God, to depend upon him. Thus he receives all from Christ, and gives all unto
him. This is the Fathers drawing of the soul, which is expounded to be the
hearing and learning of the Father, of which John speaks, chapter 6.45. He that
has heard and learned of the Father, comes unto me; which is, when the Lord
has drawn the soul out of his natural corruptions, legal reformations,
pretenses of Faith, and waiting upon Christ in his own strength for Faith, if
it be wanting: Then when the soul does lie at his feet to be disposed of
according to the will of God, and is in some measure subject unto the Lord,
though not so much as he could desire; and therefore now the soul does not
content or bless himself in any gifts or works of his own, but yields
himself humbly to the Lord, to work in him both will and deed of his own good
pleasure, and to teach him how to seek, and wait, and believe, and long after
Jesus Christ, these things he waits for: Otherwise until he be thus taught
of God, the soul will always think that he can do something; and is not able
to come out of himself to utter denial of himself; but if any man will come
unto Christ, he must deny himself, even all his own gifts, and parts, and
good works whatsoever; for a man is never utterly denied, until there be
nothing left of which a man can say, This I am able to do, or this is an
hopeful thing in me; and when it comes to this pass, then will the soul lie
down at the will of God, and acknowledge, that if the Lord would never show him
mercy, just and righteous are his judgments. Now when the soul and will of a
Christian are convinced of these things, as well as his judgment, that now he
waits upon Christ as well that he may be able to wait and seek the Lord, as
he does for any other good thing from the Lord, he waits now upon the Lord
for a poor spirit, and cannot perke up himself, no more then a bruised Reed
can do. Thus when it comes unto saving work, the will and soul of a man is
so cast down, that a man cannot tell what to make of himself, but there he
lies to see what the Lord will do with him, whether he will reach forth the
hand of salvation unto him or no. In this case the soul is left utterly void,
and has in himself neither root nor branch, but sees how unable he is in
himself to believe or wait; nor can he tell whether Jesus Christ be his
portion, and now does the Lord take possession, and fill the empty soul.

If you ask me how this spirit comes into the soul to make it thus to stoop
unto Christ?

You shall find that the Lord uses to convey himself unto the soul in some
word of Promise of the Gospel that shows unto the soul the riches of the
grace of God in Jesus Christ; something or other is declared of Christ. This
word being taught in the public Ministry of the word, or brought to
remembrance in some spiritual duty, as Prayer, or Conference, or the like,
(for I will not limit the Holy One of Israel) yet usually it is done in the
Ministry of the Gospel; and though the Lord does not limit himself, yet he
does limit us to attend upon the means which he usually works by; but
whatsoever the way be, this is the manner of Gods working, he does universally
come into the soul in some word or other of his grace; as for instance, that in
2 Cor. 5.19. or that in 1 Timothy 1.15. In some such word of his grace he comes
and puts life into the soul, and makes it somewhat quies, and causes it to
see that there is hope in Israel, and the Lord is able, and there is riches
enough in Christ to save me. By such kind of work it is that the Lord brings
the souls of his servants effectually to Christ, and now has God the Father
given us unto him, and until now thou never came unto him savingly. This is
the second Act whereby God the Father gives himself unto the soul.

The third act or work follows both these, as soon as ever the Lord has
given this selfe-denying spirit unto the soul, and has made it like unto a
bruised Reed, or like a Traveller that is out of his way, and willing to take
any man by the hand that will lead him into his way again; when the soul is
in such a frame, the Lord comes with a third act of Reconcilement. The first
work was of Conviction, the second of Prostration, the third of Reconciliation.
This is the third work of the Father, though there is in all these works a
concurrence of the whole Trinity, yet some are more proper unto each Person, as
our Catechismes teach us, and we are not wont to scruple such expressions in
them. God the Father created us, and we cannot expound it; but as God the
Father created us at the first, so he does again create you, or else if we
acknowledge it in the one, and not in the other, we do wrong unto God, even to
the Father. Well, he is then reconciled unto us, having given unto us the
Spirit of his Son; and now he does pronounce us reconciled unto him, this is
the work which is spoken of Romans 5.10. and this is the work of God the Father,
according to that was before alleged, 2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ
reconciling the world, etc. Now there are two acts of God as fruits that follow
hereupon, and both of them done at once upon the soul.

1 The first is Adoption, whereby he makes us his Children, as Gal. 4.4,5,6.
and John 1.12. So that now we are the Brethren of Christ, and the Sons of the
Eternal God; Adoption is properly the work of the Father, but Christ being the
natural Son of God, we must be knit unto him, before we can be accounted Sons.

2 The second is Justification, Romans 8.33,34. This is the Fathers work, and it
is principally attributed unto him to forgive our iniquities, and to make
reconciliation in Christ Jesus. And look as it is in our natural Being, so
soon as ever we have received natural life from Adam, we become the Sons of
Adam, and his sin is imputed unto us: so it is in the new birth, as soon as
ever the life of Christ is shed abroad into our hearts, so soon are we Heirs
of Christ, and the righteousness of the second Adam is imputed unto us now to
our Justification, as the sin of Adam before was to our Condemnation.

Use 1. The Doctrine it self is but an Use, but I desire that we may all of us
apply it unto our selves. It will be a help to us for our Instruction, to Teach
us how we came to saving fellowship with God in Jesus Christ, and wherein lies
our spiritual union with Christ, and how it is wrought and obtained; and this
is necessary, for as it has been observed by others, so we may now gather it
from what we have heard, that there be 4 sorts of men that fall short of this
union with Christ.

1 You have some that bless themselves in their natural estate, it may be
they are rich, and honorable among men: well, they bless themselves in that
estate, and will never go any further.

2 There is another sort that are convinced of the danger of their natural
estate, they dare not rest there, and hereupon they fall upon Reformations, and
so to duties of Humiliation, and such like, wherein they find (as they
conceive) such a blessed change, and so much comfort as does satisfy them: And
indeed God does comfort men in their Reformations, for God will have no man
lose by him, Mat. 6.2,5. Hypocrices have their reward for their Aim and for
their Prayers. Herod when he heard John, reformed many things, and heard him
gladly, Mark 6.20. Here was a great change, and doubtless much comfort in that
gladness, yet these men never had the work of God the Father, to burn up all
that they had received by any strength of their own.

3. A third sort go a step beyond these, they have been convinced that they
went forth ^o Reformation in their own strength: they plainly see it, and
discern it, and therefore they know that it is impossible to be saved by the
righteousness of the Law, and that it is not of works, neither of one kind,
nor of another; they are convinced that Faith only must do the deed, and upon
this ground they will take up Faith to believe in Christ for salvation, and
that Faith, which formerly they have pitched upon their good duties, they will
now pitch upon Christ; but still it is the same Faith, for the root is not yet
burnt up, the old corruption still remains in them, and so here is your old
faith still translated from one object to another; it was fastened before upon
your duties and reformations, and now upon Christ (though by creature-strength)
and now a man is ready to plead and say, If God had not loved me, he would
never have set me upon such reformations, nor have enlarged me with such
comforts, if he had not been well pleased with me in Jesus Christ. And though I
have been sometimes burnt up touching my hope in reformation, yet I have
translated my Faith to Jesus Christ; but how came you to do that? Why, I saw
my hopes in my own reformation would not serve my turn, and therefore I
believed in Jesus Christ, and now shall nothing draw me from him, nor pull me
from my confidence, for I have built upon some word of God, and some Promise of
his made unto such reformation as I have set upon, and is not this true Faith
in Jesus Christ? This is far from true Faith, it is no other but a strong
fallacy whereby the Devil does cheat men, and in truth this Faith is but a
Faith of a man's own making (that I may so speak) it is no more than a spirit
of Burning at the best, that has burnt up his confidence in his own works,
and taught him to resolve in his judgment to believe on Jesus Christ.

4 There is a fourth sort also that fall far short of Christ too, and yet go
beyond all these; they go beyond works, and beyond this Faith also which we have
spoken of, which was not a lively Faith in Christ whereby we are justified, but
men justify themselves by it, God does not justify them. Now this fourth sort
come plainly to see that their Faith is shaken, and they dare not look God in
the face, to justify the truth of their Faith before him; it is true, many an
heavenly spirited man cannot tell what will become of him, nor can he tell
whether his Faith be sound, but many an Hypocrite also is so far convinced,
that he cannot tell what will become of him, nor can he say that his Faith is
right, nor that he is able to believe: What says the soul now in such a case
as this? He will say, I see it is not my Reformation, nor my Faith that will
serve the turn, what is it then? I see that now I must wait upon Christ that I
may believe, and unto him I must seek for help. Is not this soul in a state
of everlasting fellowship with Christ? Truly this is that which the Lord many
times brings the souls of his Servants unto, but he leaves them not there,
if he mean to do them good; for I would examine again, how came thou to
wait upon Jesus Christ? thou have been driven out of conceit of thy former
Faith, and so have been forced, and have seen a necessity to wait upon Christ
for Faith, or else thou can not believe; force of Argument has constrained
thee thus far; if thou have taken up a course of waiting only upon this
ground, here is a spark of old Adam still kept alive in thee: Thou art able to
seek and wait upon Christ, and yet I cannot promise thee that thou have any
part or portion in him. But a soul will say, Has not the Lord made gracious
Promises to all those that seek for him? Has he not said that all they are
blessed that wait for him? Isa. 30.18. And am not I wrapped up hereby in a
bundle of grace and peace? Mind you, there is no promise of life made to those
that wait and seek in their own strength, who being driven to it, have taken it
up by their own resolutions; though I grant it is true, that every one that
waits for, and seeks the Lord aright, is driven unto it by the Lord, yet if
ever the Lord mean to save you, he will rend, as it were the caul from the
heart, I mean he will pluck away all the confidence you have built upon; a as
man would rend the intralls of a Beast from him, so the Lord will bring you to
a flat denial of your selves, and that you have neither good will nor deed, as
of your selves: And, you will find, you know not what God will do with you,
but this you know, that whatsoever he does he is most righteous. When the
Spirit of God comes as a Comforter, he will in this manner convince the soul
of a man that he has heretofore hung upon his reformations for hope and
comfort, but now he is brought plainly to see and flatly to deny, that he has
so much as one drop of the fatnes of the true Olive tree in him, when he most
trusted unto his own excellencies. Now a man being thus far brought on, does
not only deny himself in his judgment, but in his will, and is ready to say
as David sometimes did, If the Lord say he has no pleasure in me, here I am,
let him do unto me as seems him good. The Lord is righteous in all that
comes upon me: this only the soul has for his support in such a case, the
Lord is able to do all for me that I stand in need of: If he show me no mercy,
he is just, if he be gracious I shall live to praise him. Now when a man's will
is thus subdued, that he has no will of his own to be guided by, but only
the will of God; this is true brokennesse of heart, when not only the
judgment, but the heart and will is broken. The soul being thus convinced,
that neither his working, nor believing, nor waiting, nor seeking, as of
himself, will do him any good, there is no mercy that he can challenge for any
goodness sake of his own; then comes the Holy Ghost in some declaration of
Gods free love, and takes possession of the heart, and then the soul
begins to pant after Jesus Christ, and nothing in Heaven but him, nor in the
Earth besides him. The soul being thus wrought upon, begins to put forth it
self toward the Lord Jesus, but the Holy Ghost having taken possession
before, helps our infirmities, Romans 8.26,27. He alone must help us, and no
other.

FINIS.
CERTAIN QUERIES Tending to Accommodation and Communion of Presbyterian and
Congregationall Churches.

BY Mr JOHN COTTON late Teacher of the Church at Boston in New England.

Published by a Friend to whom the Author himself sent them over not long
before his Death.

LONDON Printed by M. S. for John Allen and Francis Eglesfield in Paul's
Churchyard. 1654.

Certain Queries tending to the mutual Accommodation and Communion of
Presbyterian and Congregationall Churches; delivered in 11 Propositions and
humbly presented both to the Consideration and Examination of them according to
God;
BY Mr JOHN COTTON.
The 1. Querie.
Whether may it not be safely acknowledged, that the Congregations of
Christians subject to Presbyteriall Government, preaching and professing the
Truth of the Gospel, and not over-growne with ignorant and scandalous Persons,
are true and holy Churches of Christ?

BEcause, such Churches, (for the Matter of them) consist of visible Saints,
(at least a principal part of them) especially when they present themselves to
sit down before the Lord at his Table. And for the Form; they do agree
together in choosing their own Minister, in attending duly to the Ministry of
the Word and Sacraments, and in submitting to the Doctrine of the Gospel: which
implies a real and visible (though implicit) profession of the Covenant of
grace requisite to Church Estate.

Object. The Parish-Churches in England were Antichristian, if not in their
first Institution, yet at least for these many hundred years; and were never
since unchurched, nor new molded out of their Anchristian Apostasy.

Answ. 1. The Gospel of Christ was preached and received in England ten years
before it was in Rome (as may appear by Gildas, and may be inferred from
Baronius also, Annal. Anno Christi 35.5. and 45.1.) and that by the Ministry of
Apostles and Apostolic men, who doubtless did at first institute Churches,
not after the Pattern of Rome (which then was not a Church) but according to
the Pattern of the Apostles.

2. Neither were they unchurched by the Antichristian Apostasy which afterward
grew upon them (as a Leprosy) but were only corrupted and polluted, even in
many fundamentalls, both in Doctrine, Worship, and Government, which made them
like unto the Israelites under the Apostasy of Jezabel, the generallity being
carried away by the Corruption of the times, but a Remnant reserved (through
grace) which bowed not the knee to Baal.

3. Since the Beginning of the Reformation, many of the Church Members (by the
power of the Gospel) reformed to a new estate of visible Saints, and the
fundamental corruptions in Doctrine and worship were purged away, and both of
them so renewed as that the presence and power of Christ was discerned in the
face of the Ordinances. And for the Government, though it give not being (but
wel-being to Churches, yet) it has also been growing more and more into better
order unto this day. In so much that Protestant Churches have renounced
fellowship with Antichrist and his Churches, and have separated from them in
Doctrine, Worship, and Government: which if it reach not to a new-churching,
yet it is a renuall of their Church estate, and a new moulding of them into a
more holy way of Administration of Church-Ordinances; so that now they stand as
Churches gathered out of the world both of Antichristians and of Pagans. The
Israelites after their Return from under the Apostasy of Jezabel, did neither
solemnly unchurch themselves of their former corrupt estate, nor Inchurch
themselves into a better new estate; but being called to Repentance by the
Kings Proclamation, and their hearts being bored of God to submit themselves
thereto, though they fell short of a full Purification, yet they were received
to the Lords Supper (the Passover) together with their Brethren of the purer
Church of Judah. 2 Chro. 30.18,19,20.

The 2d. Querie.
Presupposing then the Prerbyterian Congregations to be true Churches, Whether
hence It will not clearly follow, that the Ministers called by them (being
otherwise men of Ministerial gifts) are true Ministers; and the Sacraments
administered by them are true Seals of the Covenant of Grace?

The 3d. Querie.
Nevertheless, Whether may it not be justly doubted, that the estate of both
Churches is sinfully defective; The Presbyterian, partly in their Materials,
in case the Members, diverse of them, be (not professed Saints, but) either
ignorant or scandalous, and apparently carnal and worldly: partly in their
Government, by the Presbyters of other Churches; which way of Government,
though it had place (in sundry Cases) in the National Church of the old
Testament, yea, and in the New Testament, might be practiced for a time by the
Apostles themselves (who were Oecumeniall Governors of all Christian
Churches:) yet the same was never delegated nor commended to the Pastors and
Teachers of particular Congregations? The Congregationall likewise how can they
be excused, in case there be any such as do admit all manner of Sects into
their Covenant and Communion; and will not allow the Civil Magistrates to
proceed to the Censure of seducing Heretics and profane Blasphemers?

The 4. Querie.
For the Healing of which defects; were it not much to be wished that the
Members of Presbyterian Churches, did once publicly profess their Faith and
Repentance before their partaking of the Lords Table? (as John Baptists
Disciples did before their Baptism, and as Members of Congregationall Churches
do before their Admission:) that so None such as were ignorant or scandalous
might be admitted to the Lords Table till they were duly approved to be Men of
knowledge, sound in the Faith, and blameless in conversation? And further
also, whether would it not much conduce to a more full and clear acceptance of
their Administrations, If their Elders in the Classis did put forth no
Authoritative Act, touching the Members of other Churches, but consultative
only; nor touching their own, but (upon hearing the advice of Fellow Elders
in difficult cases) to proceed each one with the Cognizance and Consent of his
own Church at home respectively?

The 5. Querie.
For want or Neglect hereof, Though the Members of Presbyterian Churches should
discern some Defects in the Order and Government of their Churches; yet
whether may they suddenly break off Communion with them till they have
convinced them of their Defects, and duly and patiently waited for their
Reformation?

It may seem No: For if we must take a more delatory course for the healing of
a private Brother, in a way of brotherly love, with much meekness and patience;
how much more ought we so to walk toward an whole Church?

The 6. Querie.
Such a Brother, though as yet remaining a Member of a Presbyterian Church yet
sensible of the Defects of his own Church, and being otherwise known to be
fit, why may he not lawfully and without scruple be received to partake at the
Lords Table (as occasion serves) in a Congregationall Church?

For such an one is both a Member of a true Church, and cleansed from the
defects of his own Church.

The 7. Querie.
Yea, suppose a godly Christian do continue Presbyterian in his Judgment, and
yet do approve also of a Congregationall way, and is desirous to join in
Covenant with a Congregationall Church, whether may he not in due order be
lawfully admitted and continued a Member of a Congregationall Church? Yea
further, Notwithstanding the different state and way of Presbyterian and
Congregationall Churches, and the Defects which the one or the other may
observe or surmize either in other; yet (even whilst they so stand and walk)
whether may not the Members of either without just offense, mutually
Communicate one with another (as occasion shall be offered) at the Lords Table?

The Affirmative seems probable; For as Error in Judgment about Discipline
is not an Heresy against the Foundation of Christian Religion. And the Apostle
instructs Christian Churches to receive the Christian Jews into their
Church Fellowship, who ye^ dissented from them about the observation of
Leviticall Rites, which were as much discrepant from the Truth of the Gospel in
the Order of worship, as these other be in Order of Government.

Besides, God accepts cleanness of heart in his faithful servants in their
approaches to his Table, though there be defects in full cleansing, according
to the Order of the Sanctuary. 2 Chronicles. 30.18,19,20.

The 8. Querie.
If a godly Minister called to Office by a People professing Godliness (whether
under Episcopacy, or Presbytery) and afterward repenting of any known sin in
his way, shall be desirous of a more pure Reformation; whether may not his
godly people acknowledge his Ministerial Calling without sin?

Why not? For he had the Essence of a lawful Calling before, in the free
choice of his godly People, and in his own free acceptance of them and of
their Call. Nevertheless, if any of his godly People should stumble at his
former Calling, whether may not a more select Company and body of the People
renew their Call of him, and there to accept the Concurrence and Consent of the
rest of the Congregation? And whether may not he also do well (instead of
stiff standing upon the validiy of his former Calling) to condescend to renew
his Acceptance of them, yea, and to receive a New Ordination from them, with
express designation to the Office, either of a Pastor or Teacher; and that
without prejudice or dishonor to his former Calling? For a renewed Act does not
invalidate (much less evacuate) the old, but clear it and confirm it (so
far as there is any thing of God in it) as in Scripture all Ingeminations
do. Saul was thrice Ordained King over Israel, 1 Samuel 10.1. and ver. 24. and
11.14,15. thrice to the same Calling, and with several solemnities. Neither is
Ordination of the Essence of a Ministerial Calling, but a solemn Adjunct of
it; which may be renewed upon occasion of any New spiritual Employment, or
Function, Place or People, Acts 13.2,3.

The 9. Querie.
If the godly Members of a Congregation formerly subject to Episcopacy, but
repenting of their sinful subordination thereunto, and (being studious of
Reformation) have solemnly Covenanted to endeavor the same, and have chosen
their former godly Ministers (one or more) into the Pastors or Teachers Office;
Whether may not those Ministers withhold their Ignorant and carnal Hearers
from the Lords Table (though they had their consent to their Election) until
they be able to discern the Lords Body, and befit to receive it without
profaning it? But yet, in the mean time, whether may they not dispense some
other Ministerial Acts unto them, as to Preach the Word, and also to Catechize
them and their Families? And if hereby they shall attain unto so much knowledge
of the Principles of the Doctrine of the Gospel, as to profess before the
Church both their need of Christ and his Covenant to themselves, and the Seal
thereof unto their Seed, and also their own Duty of subjection unto Christ in
his Ordinances; and shall likewise be found free from any open scandal, or
else openly judge themselves for the same; Whether may it not be lawful for
the Minister to admit them to the Lords Table, and their Children to Baptism?

For it is not with such as with Ishmael and Esau, who though they were borne
in the Church, and sealed under the Covenant of Circumcision, yet when they
grew up to years, the one mocked at the Heir of the Covenant, and the other
despised the Birthright of the Covenant; and so the one was cast out, and the
other withdrew himself from the fellowship of the Church, and both of them
deprived their children of Circumcision. But such is not the Case here of these
we speak of; but rather they are like the Seed of the Israelites, who though
many of them were not sincerely godly, yet whilst they held forth the public
Profession of Gods People ( Deuteronomy. 26.3. to 11.) and continued under the wing of
the Covenant and subjection to the Ordinances; They were still accounted an
holy Seed (Ezr. 9.2.) and so their children were Partakers of Circumcision. Yea
further though themselves were sometimes kept from the Lords Supper (the
Passcover) for some or other uncleanness, yet that debarred not their children
from Circumcision.

Against this, may it not seem vain to stand upon a Difference between the
Church of Israel and our Churches of the New Testament, in that theirs was a
National Church, and ours Congregationall? For the same Covenant which God
made with the National Church of Israel and their Seed, It is the very same
(for substance) and none other which the Lord makes with any Congregationall
Church and our Seed. When the Jews and their children were cut off from the
fatness of the Olive, we and our children were engrafted into their room and
estate, Romans 11.17,19. so that we are now become (...), coheires, concorporate,
and compartners with them of the same promise in Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 3.6.

The 10. Querie.
When any Christians desire to be admitted into the Church, and the Covenant
thereof, whether is it regular that the Elders should take all the Trial of
them in a private Consistory alone? unless it be in way of preparation, that
so they may more fitly and safely commend them to the public Trial of the
whole Church? But were it not meet, that the last Trial of Members, upon
which they (being approved) are received either into the Church in a
Congregationall way, or to the Lords Supper in a Presbyteriall way, should be
transacted before the Church?

For as no Members are to be cast out of the Church Communion, but by the
Judgment and Consent of the Church (as well the Brethren as the Elders) so
none should be received into the Communion of the Church, but with the
approbation and Consent of the Church.

The 11. Querie.
Whether is it just matter of Offense, If a Member of any Church, which lies
under the Leaven of Corruption, after the use of all good means for the
healing of the corruptions of his own Church (be it Presbyteriall or
Congregationall) and after long waiting for the same in vain, shall at the
length (for the peace and Comfort of his own Conscience, and out of
conscionable Desire to walk before the Lord in all purity) quickly and orderly
remove his Relation, and adjoyne himself to a Church more reformed, yet not
condemning the Church (as no Church) from which he removes?

For if a man may remove his habitation for outward easments and conveniences,
and then the removal of his Relation is easily granted without offense: Then
why may he not, for the ease of his Conscience, remove his Relation, though not
his Habitation? unless his Habitation were Jure divino, an inseparable Adjunct
to his Relation, or his relation to his Habitation? Christians (as Brethren)
are called of God to bear one another Burdens, Gal. 6.2. If it be a Burden to
stay in Communion, let his Brethren ease his Burden with a Dismission.

Glory be to God in Christ Jesus, and Peace to all his Israel.
UNto the aforesaid Queries of the Reverend Author, this also may briefly be
added, to make up the number round.

The 12. Querie.
Whether it be unlawful, or may be truly accounted a necessary cause of
Disorder or Confusion for godly Christians, living in several Precincts or
Parishes (not far distant, but so as they may ordinarily meet together in one
place) to join in Church Fellowship together, for mutual spiritual
edification?

That it is a very convenient and desirable thing for the Members of a
particular Congregation, to inhabit and dwell as near together as they may, in
regard of their meeting together upon all occasions, and of mutual
watchfullnesse over each other, and of spiritual helpfulnesse unto one
another, is easily granted by all: yet it will not therefore follow, that it is
an unlawful and disorderly thing for them to have their Abiding and Residence
in diverse Precincts and Parishes.

Indeed it is true, that it has been accounted by the Prelates and the
Prelaticall party, a very disorderly and unlawful thing, and that which did
expose to the greatest of their spiritual censures, for people ordinarily to
go to the Assemblies of Christians out of their own Parish. But their Account
does not make or prove it to be so: neither does it seem really and in truth to
be so: For,

1 The Constitution of Parochial or Parish Churches, is not of Divine, but of
humane Institution, and that too in the very darkest times of Popery and
Superstition, viz. about 700 years ago, as learned Mr. Seldom (in his Book of
Tithes, chapter 9.) seems to intimate. So that although it may seem a disorder, (in
regard of that limitation of Parishes) for the Parishioners of one place to
join themselves unto the Church Assemblies in another; yet not in regard of
any thing appearing to the contrary from the Scripture, which is the rule for
Christians to walk by, especially in matters belonging to
Church-Administration, and Government. Neither will it (I suppose) be affirmed
by any intelligent Christian (who understanding in any measure the true Nature
of a particular Church) that Parish-bounds are the constituting cause of a
particular Church or Congregation; for it cannot be maintained that every
individual person living in such a Parish bounds, is therefore a Member of
that Church there, except it can be proved, that professed Turks, or Jews, or
Indians (who through providence may be brought into the Land, and so
necessarily reside in some Parish or other, there being hardly any parcel of
ground free in any part of England, from belonging to the bounds of some Parish
or Town) are as real and true Members of the Church there, as any Christian
man or woman in the Parish. I conceive it neither any solecisme or Paradox to
affirm, that there may be a Parish where there is no true Church of Christ, and
a true Christian Church where there is no Parish.

2 It may seem too great a bondage and slavery, both for any Church (whether
Presbyter: or Congregationall) to be forced to receive all into fellowship in
all the Ordinances, who have their habitation or residence in the same Parish
bounds with them: and also for particular persons to be necessitated to be of
this or that particular Congregation, in fellowship with such Members, and
under the Ministry of such a man, which they cannot find so suitable to their
spirits, and so profitable for their spiritual edification, as some others,
which may not be far off from them. And whereas it may fall out (which possibly
may come in here as an Objection) that the Minister, under whom a man lives,
is taken away by death, and another one called into his place and Office by the
generality of the Church, who may be as unsuitable unto the Spirit of this or
that Brother, as the Minister of the Parish where he dwells, or as any other,
shall not be bound to submit to the choice of the Church, or must the Church
suspend their choice upon the Negative vote of any one Brother? In such a case
it is lawful for that dissenting Brother, who cannot call such a man to be his
Minister, nor own him as his Pastor or Teacher, to desire a Letter of
dismission to some other Church and Officer, whom he can more freely and
comfortably close in his spirit withal, and I suppose that Church, with whom
he has fellowship at the present, is bound to yield unto his equal and just
desire, that so they may part in a loving and brotherly manner. We do
generally allow every servant so much liberty for his outward comfort and
advantage, as to choose his own Master, in whose Family, and under whose
Government and inspection he is to live, and why should not Christians also
(being made freemen by Christ) have as much liberty for their spiritual
comfort and edification, to chose the particular Church under whose teaching
and inspection they are to abide: And why else has the Lord (out of his
infinite goodness and wisdom) given out diversity of gifts to diverse of his
Servants in the Ministry, but to suite the variety of spirits and dispositions
in his people? Every lock not agreeing with every key; as our Reverend Author
was wont to express himself, speaking of this very thing.

3 Experience does also testify, de facto, that such a course is possible to
be used and practiced without making such disorder and confusion, as is
conceived by some: For notwithstanding it be practiced by some Churches (not
only Congregationall, but Presbyteriall also, and Classical) to have their
Members scattered up and down in several Precincts or Parishes, yet there have
not any such confusion and disorder followed thereupon: as we have seen by the
constant practice of our Brethren in the Congregations both of the Dutch and
French here amongst us in England, as viz. in London, Norwich, Canterbury,
Colchester, and in such other places where they do inhabit; who although they
be dispersed throughout the Cities and Towns where they live, yet are not
thought, nor ever were by any (except possibly by some of the Lordly Prelates,
who out of their superstitious zeal did seek to undermine and dissolve their
Congregations) to be any occasion of disorder and confusion by their Meeting
together in their holy Assemblies, from all parts of the Cities and Towns
where they dwell. And why might not the like liberty be allowed unto the
English themselves, without any just fear of disorder thereby? There seems
nothing but custom against it, for had it been but the practice and course of
the English, as it has been of the other, certainly it would not be accounted
more disorderly then theirs is.

Only if (while the division by Parishes do continue) men do allow and
contribute, not only toward the Poor, but also toward the Preaching of the
word in their several Parishes, that the word may be dispensed all the Land
over, I should not gainsay it, as I suppose the brethren both of the French and
Dutch have been wont to do, in the several Parishes where they live.

Finally, Brethren be of one mind, live in Peace, and the God of Love and Peace
shall be with you.

FINIS.
The RESULT OF A SYNOD AT CAMBRIDGE IN New England, Anno. 1646. CONCERNING The
Power of Magistrates in matters of the First Table. Nature and Power of Synods;
and other matters thereunto belonging.


LONDON Printed by M. S. for John Allen and Francis Eglesfield in Paul's
Churchyard. 1654.

The Result of the Disputations of the Synod, or Assembly, at Cambridge in
New England, Begun upon the first day of the 7th Month, An. Dom. 1646.
About the power of the Civil Magistrate in matters of the first Table; and
also about the grounds of Synods, with their power, and the power of calling of
them. Being drawn up by some of the Members of the Assembly, deputed thereunto,
and being distinctly read in the Assembly, it was agreed thus far only, That
they should be commended unto more serious consideration against the next
Meeting.
TOuching the Question of the Civil Magistrate in matters of Religion, we
shall crave leave to narrow and limit the state of it in the manner of the
Proposal of it, and shall therefore propound it thus.

Quest. Whether the Civil Magistrate in matters of Religion, or of the first
Table, has power civilly to command or forbid things respecting the outward
man, which are clearly commanded and forbidden in the word, and to inflict
suitable punishments, according to the nature of the transgressions against the
same, and all this with reference to godly peace?

Answ. The want of a right stating of this Question, touching the Civil
Magistrates power in matters of Religion, has occasioned a world of Errors,
tending to infringe the just power of the Magistrate, we shall therefore
explain the terms of the Question, and then confirm it in the Affirmative.

By [Commanding, Forbidding, and Punishing] we meant the coercive power of the
Magistrate, which is seen in such acts. By [Matters of Religion commanded or
forbidden in the word, respecting the outward man] we understand indefinitely,
whether those of Doctrine or Discipline, of faith or practice; his power is not
limited to such matters of Religion only, which are against the light of
Nature, or against the Law of Nations, or against the fundamentalls of
Religion; all these are matters of Religion, which may be expressed by the
outward man, but not only these; therefore we say not barely thus [In matters
of the first Table] but join therewith [In matters of Religion] that all
ambiguity may be avoided, and that it may be understood as well of matters
which are purely Evangelicall, so far as expressed by the outward man, at well
as of other things. And we say, [Commanded or forbidden in the word] meaning of
the whole word, both of the Old and New Testament; exception being only made
of such things which were merely Ceremonial, or otherwise peculiar to the
Jewish polity, and cleared to be abolished in the New Testament: By which
limitation of the Magistrates power to things commanded or forbidden in the
word, we exclude any power of the Magistrate, either in commanding any new
thing, whether in doctrine or discipline, or any thing in matters of Religion,
which is beside or against the word, or in forbidding any thing which is
according to the word.

1 Hence he is not to mould up and impose what Erastian form of Church polity
he pleases; because if there be but one form commanded now of God, he cannot
therefore command what form he will.

2 Hence he is not to force all persons into the Church, or to the
participation of the seals; because he is not thus commanded.

3 Hence he is not to limit to things indifferent, which are neither commanded,
nor forbidden in the word, without apparent expediency or inexpediency of
attending the same. By that expression [cleerly] commanded or forbidden in the
word, we understand that which is clear, either by express words, or necessary
Consequence from the Scripture; and we say clearly commanded or forbidden in
the word. Not simply that which the Magistrate or others think to be clearly
commanded or forbidden; for they may think things commanded, to be forbidden,
and things forbidden, to be commanded; but that which is in it self in such
sort clear in the word, de jure, the Civil Magistrate in these days since
Christ's ascension, may and ought to command and forbid such things so cleared
in the word, albeit de facto, oft-times he do not. [Sutably inflicting
punishments according to the nature of the transgressions] This clause needs
not much explication, being so plain of it self; some things commanded and
forbidden in the Law of God, are of a smaller nature in respect of the Law of
man, and in this respect it is true which is often said, that De minimis non
curat lex, i. e. Man's Law looks not after small matters, but other things
commanded or forbidden in Gods Law, are momentous, and of a higher nature, and
though small in themselves, yet weighty in the consequence or circumstance. And
in this case if he inflict a slight paper punishment when the offense is of an
high nature; or contrariwise, when he inflicts that which is equivalent to a
capital punishment, when the offense is of an inferior nature, he does not
punish sutably. There are sundry rules in the word in matters of this sort, as
touching the punishment of Blasphemy, Idolatry, Heresy, profanation of the
Lords day, and sundry other like matters of Religion, according to which
Magistrates of old have held, and others now may observe proportions, in making
other particular Laws in matters of Religion, with sanctions of punishments,
and inflicting the same, they inflict suitable punishments: Only let it be here
remembered, that though we grant the Civil Magistrate his power thus to
command, forbid and punish in matters of Religion, clearly re^ealed in the
word, ye^ it is one thing what he may and must do, and another thing when and
how he must exercise his power to all persons under his Jurisdiction; for some
such persons may not be at all acquainted with the true God, or have any
knowledge of Christ, or of the word, but as yet are Pagans: Now touching such,
the Magistrate should take care, that the best means be seasonably and wisely
used with them, according to their capacities, to bring them first to the
knowledge of the true God, and of his word, and to convince them of the
falsehood and vanity of their gods, whom they worship, etc. and afterward, as
there is cause, to put forth acts of his coercive power toward them, as
Scripture-rules and examples will allow others, though they are Christians, yet
such as are not clearly instructed or enlightened in matters clearly set down in
the Word; in this case the civil Magistrate is to inform and convince, and
not to proceed suddenly till all just means are used to leave him convinced, of
which it is more meet for the Magistrate than for the offending person to
judge, who it may be will never say he is convinced. We live in times wherein
many men are perversely carried, and will regard no reason, but go full against
the light of it, and of common sense too, sometimes rather than confess the
truth when convinced of it; such an obstinate fool is not to be answered
according to his folly by any further reasonings, Pro. 26.4. A whip is fitter
(says Solomon) for such a back. By this, which has been already spoken
touching the acts and rule of the Magistrates coercive power in matters of
Religion, the impertinency and invalidity of many objections against this his
power will appear, as,

1. That thereby the civil Magistrate is made the Churches King, and Lawgiver;
which would be true if he might command or forbid any thing, which was not
first commanded or forbidden of the Lord, who is the Churches Lawgiver, which
we say he may not.

2. That thereby he is made to have dominion over men's faith; when he does no
more by our position but press them to that faith, which he, that has indeed
dominion over the same, has prescribed.

3. That thereby tyranny is exercised over men's tender consciences, and true
liberty of conscience is infringed; when as he de jure commands nothing but
that which, if men have any tenderness of conscience, they are bound in
conscience to submit thereto, and in faithful submitting to which is truest
liberty of conscience, conscience being never in a ^er or better estate of
liberty here on earth, than when most engaged to walk according to Gods
Commandments.

4. That thereby Christians become servants of men; when the Magistrate only is
to enjoyne what his Master and theirs has commanded, or to forbid the
contrary, and consequently in submitting thereto are but servants to Christ in
man.

5. That thereby men are made hypocrites and time-servers; as if to command men
to walk according to the Word, and to forbid the contrary, were to make men so
contrary to the Word as are time-servers and hypocrites.

6. That thereby a sluice is opened to let in all manner of false religions, and
corrupt opinions into the Church: supposing the Magistrate be of any false
religion, or corrupt in his judgment; yea, that were the way to set up a Pope
in a Christian Commonwealth, for Religion must turn as he turns. When as the
question is touching the Magistrates power of commanding or forbidding not what
he in a Popelike way shall please, or what his own spirit shall like best, but
what God has commanded or forbidden in the Word; and the position subjecteth
him to the Word as to the supreme Law, and does not set him up Popelike above
the Scriptures, or allow him to make his sense of scripture, to be Scripture,
or to make humane traditionall Cannons to be as much of force as Scripture to
bind men's consciences etc. but the position rather condemns any such power as
gular, usurped and not approved of God, which swerveth from that rule of the
exercise of his power in matters of religion; namely, the Scriptures; and the
contrary to that objected would rather follow, that if there must be no King or
civil power among Gods professed Israel, coercively to restrain forbidden
evils in Religion, then every man would hold and do as he list, as if every
one were a Pope; and then Micah's Idolatry and any other abominations may be
set up.

7. That thereby the civil Magistrate is put upon many intricate perplexities
and hazards of conscience, how to judge in and of matters of Religion.

But this does not hinder the Magistrate from that use of his coercive power,
in matters commanded or forbidden in the first Table, no more then it does
hinder him from the like power in matters of the second Table; none being
ignorant what perplexing intricacies there are in these as well as in the
former; as conscientious Magistrates find by daily experience; yet such as
object this will not deny this power in the latter, and why then in the former;
the objection proves the difficulty of his knowing of Gods mind in his place,
and if it had been objected against Church Officers power in Churches, or the
power of Parents and Masters in their families, it would have proved the same;
but it follows not, its difficult for a man in authority to know the utmost of
his duty in his place, therefore its not necessary for him to do his duty in
his place.

They which inaugurated Joash to be King, 2 Chronicles. 23.11. they put upon him the
testimony (as the Hebrew words used to be expounded) to show that it was his
duty as a King not only to know the testimony or book of Gods Law, but
authoritatively to establish what was written in it.

8. That thereby persons are put upon acting with doubting consciences; the
Magistrates Injunctions being ofttimes not clear to such as are to obey them,
and so they are thereby compelled to sin. When the position affirms this
power in matters cleared in the Word, which if not cleared to this or that
subject in a Christian Commonwealth, that is his own fault, by his own
ignorance of matters which he is bound to know, to bring any such snare upon
his conscience, and in such a case he may desire the Magistrate to use the best
means to clear up the matters enjoined or forbidden, to be commanded or
forbidden in the Word; but neither of these hinder but that the Magistrate is
to command or forbid that which God has commanded or forbidden; even that
which Christ has commanded or forbidden, should not then be urged upon men's
consciences by Church Officers, or Church Censures be executed against
obstinate gaine-sayers, because through error in judgment, and corruption in
conscience, men will say th^nd after all means used for convict^, they may
still affirm that they think otherwise, or at best that they still doubt of
the matters in question, yea albeit the matters be fundamental.

9. That hereby Christians are discouraged from seeking more light or hindered
from embracing or following such new light as the Saints expect in these latter
days. When as its evident that the commanding and forbidding things cleared in
the Word, to be good or evil, does neither express what light men have from
the Word, nor discourage from more light in and from the same, as not in
matters of the second Table, so neither of the first.

10. That thereby conscientious men especially, will come to suffer, because
Magistrates may think things commanded or forbidden of God, and accordingly
ratify them by their authority, which God did never command or forbid, when as
the question is not concerning Magistrates enjoining what they think, but what
is the mind of God; nor can the pressing of the mind of God commanding what
he requieth, and forbidding the contrary, be any just or proper cause of
suffering to men truly conscientious.

The Magistrate may indeed through mistake command or forbid things, respecting
not only the first but the second Table. But this does not deprive civil
Magistracy therefore of coercive power, as not in matters of the second, so
neither of the first Table; but in this case Christians must be content to
suffer in either, albeit withal the Magistrate do break his rule.

11. That thereby we shall encourage and harden Papists and Turks in their
cruel persecutions of the Saints; whereas for the Magistrate to command or
forbid according to God, as it is not persecution, so neither does it of it
self, tend to persecution. Power to press the Word of God and his truth, does
not give warrant to suppress or oppress the same: the times are evil indeed
when the pressing of obedience to the rule shall be counted persecution.

12. That thence are caused all the wars in Christendom at this day; when it
is evident that the pressing men to obey the will and word of God in matters
either of the second or first Table, is not of it self any cause of war, but
the lusts rather of such as abuse their power contrary to the Word.

By this already spoken we have seen the ruin of twelve of our opposites
Castles in the air, imaginarily framed to withstand the civil Magistrates
coercive power in matters of Religion.

Let us now in the next place consider at the object of this coercive power of
the Magistrate, which in the state of the question we call the (outward man)
the things wh ch the civil Magistrate, as such, does command or forbid, he
commands or forbids with immediate respect to the outward man. The
Magistrate as a Magistrate looks immediately at the external acts of the
body, and not at the internal acts of the soul, its his property as a civil
Ruler to attend only the duties and sins which appear in the walk of the
outward man. Thus Calvin, Beza, Chemnitius, Gerard, and other Protestant
Divines generally.

Quest. Hereby also other objections receive answer; as first, Must Magistrates
punish any man for being of a corrupt judgment, or barely for an error in his
judgment, or for having a corrupt hear, and sundry lusts in it?

Answ. We say no: because whilst he keeps his opinion to himself, and
whilst his lusts are confined within his breast, he is to be left to the sword
of the Spirit, and to the Word of God, thereby only to be convinced; the
Magistrates power only extending to the outward man, but if either his mental
errors, or hearts lust break out into open expression and view, and become
scandalous and spreading, then they become breaches of rules by the outward
man, yea, tend to infringe that outward godly peace, of which he is to be a
preserver, and so in both respects he is to deal with the same.

Object. 2. Must a Magistrate command men to believe with all their heart, to
repent and mortify their sins and lusts?

Answ. We say no: because these appertain to the inward man and soul of man,
to attend so far as they are inward, but if we speak of any outward
profession of these, so far he may command as to profess the faith by
coming to hear the Word, and to repent by public fasting and prayer. And if
Princes have no power in such external things, then have they no power
instrumentally to remove the wrath of God from their Kingdoms by general
humiliations.

Briefly now of the manner and means of the exercise of this power, included in
that phrase [civilly] we say not ecclesiastically, as if he might put forth his
power in a Church way, and by Church-weapons or censures, but civilly or in a
civil way or by civil censures or punishments.

Whence also other objections are answered, as that the weapons of our warfare
are not carnal but spiritual; and that Paul shows a way of redressing all
offenses, 1 Cor. 5.5. 2 Timothy 2.25. and Faith comes by hearing, and not by
whipping: when these places rather intend and show a Church way of healing
Church offenses: and do no more exclude a Political way of healing offenses
in a Christian Commonwealth, than an Economicall way of redressing disorders
in the Family; so the other place shows a spiritual means of drawing men to
the Faith; so that neither are pertinent to the case of the Civil power,
acting civilly; nor does this Assertion, That the Magistrate is to be a terror
to all evil works, (applying the same to evil works forbidden in the first
Table) any more exclude the use of Church Discipline therein: then it does in
matters of the second Table, if applied thereunto; for the Church may proceed
in her way to censure Ecclesiastically one and the same thing, whether it be
against the first or second Table, which the Magistrate does punish civilly.

The last thing to be explained in the state of the Question is, touching the
coercive power of the Magistrate, namely, Godly peace. Now by Godly peace (to
which the Magistrate immediately looks) we mean a peaceable living, as in all
honesty, so in godliness, as the Apostle has it, 1 Timothy 2.1,2. So far as any
matters of Religion, coming under the Magistrates cognizance as a public
Officer in the Commonwealth, do either further or hinder such a peace of a
Christian Commonwealth, so far is he to put forth his coercive power
accordingly.

Hereby also, with reference to things before explained, other Objections may
receive answer, as

1 Will you have Magistrates put forth their coercive power to the full, in
Laws, with Sanctions of punishments; as that men shall pray in their Families,
so long, or so often, or else suffer? That a Minister in preaching, if he exceed
a just hour, he must suffer, and the like? we say, if either the matters be
merely circumstantiall, or if they be matters of less moment, and such as do
not of themselves any way infringe public peace, or that they are not
pertinatiously and tumultuously maintained to the disturbance of public peace,
in all such like cases, wherein the Civil Magistrate's end is not entrenched
upon, he may not exercise the coercive power of his Authority, with sanction,
or execution of punishments.

2 Will not this Thesis arm and stir up the Civil power in Old England,
against godly Orthodox ones of the Congregationall way: or exasperate Civil
power in New England, against godly, moderate, and Orthodox Presbyterians, if
any such should desire their liberty here? we conceive no, except the civil
disturbance of the more rigidly, unpeaceably, and corruptly minded, be very
great; yet betwixt men godly and moderately minded on both sides, the
difference upon true and due search is found so small, by judicious, Orthodox,
godly, and moderate Divines, as that they may both stand together in peace and
love; if liberty should be desired by either sort here or there so exercising
their liberty, as the public peace be not infringed: The state of the Question
in the explication thereof, will rather quench then kindle any such coals
against either: If indeed persons professing either the Congregationall or
Presbyteriall way, will shelter or close, either with other Blasphemous,
Heretical, or Schismatic Tenants, which tend to break the peace of the
Congregationall way there where a Presbyteriall way is authorized to be the
general way of the Churches, or the Presbyteriall way here, where the
Congregationall way is authorized to be the general way of the Churches, there
they may be strained by the power of the Civil Magistrate, as disturbers and
breakers of godly peace, the conservation whereof is the Civil Magistrates end
and work, unto which he is to attend.

Having thus cleared the state of the Question, we shall now come to some
Arguments from Scripture, which confirm the Affirmative part of the question
so stated; and the Arguments are taken some from the old, some from the New
Testament. Of the former sort there are three.

From the Old Testament.
Argum: 1
1 In that it is evident that Rulers of old, and those Rulers in the
Commonwealth of Israel, they are commended in Scripture for the exercise of
such power in the matters of the first Table; and therefore it is according to
the mind of God that now civil Rulers do the like. Abraham, who was not an
ordinary master of a family, but a Prince among them, Genesis 23.6. He is
commended for laying the force of his command upon those under his power, in
matters of Religion, Genesis 18 19. And if he had been considered as a Master, yet
less would not be granted that way to a Ruler of a Commonwealth, than of a
Family, but rather more. Job as a civil Ruler, as a King in an Army of persons
under his command, did not leave each of them to chose out their own way of
Religion or justice, but he chose it, he determinatively set it down for them.
I sat as King in an Army, I chose out their way, etc. Job 29.25. The King of
Ninivey, with his Princes, did not barely commend that duty of fasting and
prayer, to his people, as very convenient to be attended, yet leaving them to
their liberty to omit the same: but he positively commands the same, that the
wrath of God might be prevented, (...)
Jonah 3.7. The word is used for a coercive command or decree, Ezra 4.21. and
6.11. Dan. 3.10,11. and 29. and 6.7,8,9. and 13. and the act of the civil
Authority of Ninivey, having so much influence into the people act, Jonah
3.5,6, and 7. verses compared, is implicitly commended by Christ, in his
commendation of the repentance of the men of Ninevey; and so of the King and
Princes of Ninevey, whose hearts were so thoroughly touched, as to improve their
authority to further that civil work of Ninevy's repentance. The examples of
Moses Joshua, David, Solomon, Asa, Jehosaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah Nehemiah, etc.
are obvious to every ordinary eye, which looks into the Scripture.

Object. They of old were Types, therefore their examples are not now of force
for our imitation.

Answ. We suppose the Objection intends not by Type, and exemplar for
imitation, as Type in a general sense is used, 1 Cor. 10.6. compared with 11.
for this were to overthrow the scope of the Objectors, but rather it means a
Type strictly taken, namely that they in that exercise of their power, did but
shadow out Christ's Kingly power; but of this the opposites give only a barren
assertion, without proof, and that will not carry it. But we shall answer it
more particularly.

1 Then such may as well say, those Rulers did shadow out Christ in the
exercise of their power in matters of the second Table, and therefore are not
therein imitable, which none will affirm. Solomon typed out Christ in subduing
of enemies, relieving the opressed, procuring the peace of the state, Psalm. 72.
Must not Princes therefore do the like?

2 Those that make that Objection, they use to put it thus, The Kings of Israel
were such Types; but such an one was not Abraham, nor Job, nor Nehemiah, who by
a Coercive Law injoined the sanctifying of the Sabbath, Neh. 13. nor the King
of Ninevey, nor was that wicked King of Israel, Ahab, a type of Christ, which
should have put that blaspheming Benhadad to death [whence that sharp reproof
of him for not doing it, 1 Kings 20. To say nothing of Darius and
Nebuchadnezzars Decrees this way, which are recorded in way of commendation
thereof, Ezra 6. and Dan. 3.29.

3 Solomon himself (who if any were types of Christ therein, he was) sets
it down by direction of the Spirit as a moral duty of each King indefinitely,
that (howsoever de facto, many do otherwise, yet de jure) he scatters away
all evil with his eye, Prove. 20.8. meaning all public evil which comes
within his ken; as a King or public person, whether the evil be against the
first or second Table; unless any make exception, and say, that either there
are no sins against the first Table coming under the Magistrates view, or
though they do, yet they are not evil.

4 It was a stated doctrine in the time of Job (who by the most judicious is
thought to live before Moses) and it is attested and approved by the Holy
Ghost, that sins against the first Table, as Idolatry, was iniquity to be
punished by the Judges, Job 31.26,27,28. as well as sins against the second
Table, as Adultery, ibid. verse. 9. and 11.

Object. Those Rulers of old did thus as Members of the National Church of the
Jews, the same persons being Members of Church and Commonwealth; but it is
not always so now.

Answ. 1 Then at least where Magistrates are Members of Churches, they may in
these days exercise such power.

2 Though they were Members both of Church and State, yet they were to put
forth their Coercive power civilly, not as Members of the Church, but of the
State, else it had been to confound Church and State, yea, to make God (which
directed to it) to be the author of that confusion.

3 They were to punish such to whom they stood in no Church relation at all,
but merely Civil, for sins against the first Table. Hence Ahab was blamed for
not punishing Benhadad blaspheming God, as if a God of the Hills, but not of the
valleys: Hence Nehemiah's resolution to punish even any of those strangers
which should profane the Sabbath, chap. 13.

4 Job, and those Judges mentioned in his time, as bound to punish Idolatry,
were no Members of the Jewish Church.

Object. If you make the example of the Princes of Israel, acting Coercively in
matters of Religion for Magistrates imitation, why do not you make the Levites
a pattern also to Ministers now, to act as they did civilly, in civil censures?

Answ.1 It Is not clear that the Levites d d act any further than by counsel, or
at most by some general consent to that which the Princes were formally to Act.

2 If the Levites did act in matters of the State by a peculiar liberty, it
does not follow, that this can invalidate the Rulers power, then acting in
matters of Religion; as if by a peculiar liberty also, unless the Objection
could be bottomed on the proportion betwixt the Levites then, and the Rulers
then: Thus, that as the Levites which by special liberty (proper to those
times, and so not imitable now) did intermeddle in matters peculiar to
Magistrates, so the Magistrates then did intermeddle in matters peculiar to the
Priests, by a liberty proper to those times; and this would be cross to
express Text, 2 Chronicles. 26.16. where Vzzias meddling with Priestly matters of
offering Incense, is made a transgression against the Lord, for which he was
afterward ruined.

3 We make the Levites intermedling juditially in Civil matters, therefore not
imitable, because what they are supposed to do that way, was by a liberty
peculiar to that time; but we make the example of the civil Rulers acting their
Coercive power in matters of Religion, imitable, because not peculiar to the
Jewish Church, as appears, in that what power they that way exercised, the same
in substance did Job, and other Judges in his time, by Divine direction and
approbation, put forth; yea the judicial act of Nebuchadnezzar in punishing
Ahab and Zedekiah with death, not for their Adultery only (a sin against the
second Table) but for their false doctrine (a matter of Religion) was of Gods
appointment, Jer. 29.21. with 23. and hence by Gods appointment was this
execution of Gods vengeance on them, made a proverbial Curse, verse. 22.

Argum: 2
A second Argument is, in that it is recorded as a most desperate and accursed
estate of old, that they had no King or chief Ruler in Israel, to restrain, as
Adultery, and Murder (sins against the second Table, Judges 19.1. with chap.
20.) so Idolatry (a sin against the first Table, chap. 17.1. and 18.1.
compared) but every man had his liberty, to do what was right in his own eyes.

Argum: 3
The third Argument is, in that it is recorded as a matter of special guidance
and direction of God, and acknowledged by Ezra, inspired by the Spirit, as a
special mercy of God to his people, that Artaxerxes an Heathen King, had an
heart to put forth his coercive power injoyning things commanded of God, and
forbidding, with sanction of suitable punishments, the evils, whether against
the Laws of the King, or against the Laws of God, whether concerning
Religion, or righteousness: whence we argue, that this use of the civil power
was of God of old, and therefore the same is as well of God now. Artaxerxes was
indeed an instrument in the hand of Christ, but not therefore a Type of Christ:
Nor was this of the nature of a mere Jewish judicial Law, because injoining
punishments, moral offenses being punishable; and yet not therefore of a mere
judicial nature, or merely against a judicial Law; besides this act of
Artaxerxes respected civil matters, and matters of the second Table (which none
will challenge as not imitable) as well as matters of Religion. And that which
some object, that he did this for fear of wrath, rather confirms the morality
of the use of such power, then otherwise. For what ground of fear in not
putting forth such coercive power, if the omission of it were not sinful? Yea,
if the use of such a coercive power in matters of Religion, were not according
to Gods mind (as our opposites say) he might rather more groundedly have feared
Gods wrath for such an high offense, as usurpation of a power which the Lord
disliked, and forbade.

Thus much of the first head of Arguments from the Old Testament; those from
the New follow, and they are four.

From the New Testament.
Argum: 1
The first is taken from Romans 13. If God will have every soul in and of the
Churches, and that of Rome, as well as others, to be subject to civil
Magistrates, as being powers ordained of God, v. 1. an Ordinance of God, v. 2.
a terror not to good works, but to evil, v. 3. the ministry of God for their
good, v. 4. and that for conscience sake, v. 5. Then Magistrates are to put
forth coercive power in such matters of Religion, respecting the outward man.
But the former is true, ergo, the latter.

Object. All this may be true, and yet verified only in matters of the second
Table, and is extended to matters of the first, yet only to such things as are
against the Law of Nations, or the light of Nature, and so no proof of that for
which it is urged. He is a terror to evil works, but it is not said he is so
to all evil works.

Answ. 1 If all this be restrained according to the intent of the Objection,
then is none to have praise, approbation, encouragement from Civil Authority,
by reason of matters of Faith, or of Religion, but for matters of
righteousness only: or if for any matters of Religion, yet only for such as
stand with the light of nature, and Law of Nations, as the third Verse must be
Expounded. For if it be supposed, that it is an act of Justice (whereof the
Magistrate is Minister) to distribute rewards in any matters of Religion, that
appears in the walk of the outward man, and respect godly peace in way of
encouragement, it must needs be an act of like justice, to distribute
punishments to the contrary. The Magistrate being, according to the Apostles
distribution, a Minister of God, as well when he encourages good, as when he
represseth and punishes evil.

2 The Objection would make only offenses against the rules of the second
Table, or at most, those that are against the Law of nature and Nations (which
come under the view of the Magistrate, as a public Minister of God) to be
evil works, and not other sins of like public cognizance and concernment,
respecting other matters of Religion. For if both sorts of offenses are evil,
he being a terror to evil works indefinitely, which come to his public
cognizance, he is a terror ex officio, to both; and it is vain to say, he
says evil works, not all evil works; for so he says, he is not a terror to
good works, but says not, to all good works, and therefore if that indefinite
(good works) be not equivalent to that general (all good works) he may then it
seems be a terror to some good works which come under his public cognizance.

3 We are yet to speak of that limitation, where the New Testament allows the
civil Magistrate power, as in matters of righteousness, so in matters of
Religion; so far namely as the light of nature, and Law of Nations extends in
matters of the outward man, which come to his public view: but restrains him
from meddling further in any matters of Religion, of like public cognizance and
concernment. That Scripture ground of this distinction and restriction, would
be produced.

Object. I, when Paul wrote this Epistle to the Romans, their Rulers were
Pagans, and what coercive power was it likely they would put forth in any
matters of Religion, unless against the true Religion, as undermining their
Paganism; Crying down the same as worship of Devils, and teaching them to
cast off their Heathen Gods as no Gods? They did not look at Jesus Christ as
their Supreme Lord, but as a new upstart God in comparison of their Roman Gods;
and to make penal Laws against false doctrine or Religion, had been to make
Laws against themselves as well as others, and to make Laws against the
present light of their own consciences.

Answ. This no way weakneth, but strengthens what we have said: For if even
those Pagan Rulers in Paul's time, were (by their Office Ministers of God) then
bound to improve their Authority for the ratifying and establishing of his
Laws, and for those of the first, as well as second Table, and then bound by
their Office (as Ministers of God) to rule for him, and the exacting of his
rule in and over their subjects. And that they did not know, and do thus, it
was their sin. Many of them thought plurality of wives, fornication, rash
divorces, incestuous marriages, usury, etc. no sin, and it may be said, if they
had made Laws against these, they had made Laws against themselves, and the
light of their own consciences, as thinking in their seduced, blinded
consciences, that these were lawful; yet all will say, they were all Ministers
of God, and bound to know and do otherwise. Nero is branded for a beastly
person, a Lion, in that he abused that Authority of his, which of right should
have been improved for encouragement of Paul in his Ministry and doctrine, to
be a means to endeavoure to destroy and devour him, 2 Timothy 4.17.

2 A second Argument is taken from 1 Timothy 2.1,2. We are to pray that we may
have such Magistrates as may act Authoritatively in matters of Religion and
piety, as well as of righteousness and honesty; therefore it is the mind of
God, that civil Magistrates should put forth their power in the one as well as
in the other.

Object. Yea but some have said, If you now allow civil Rulers power in matters
of Religion, they will persecute us.

Answ. The Apostle does not answer; pray therefore in these persecuting times
of Romish Emperors, that they may not meddle at all coercively in matters of
Religion, as being to usurp power not belonging to them; but rather pray that
they may use this power which they have aright, or as we may peaceably exercise
acts of Religion, as well as honesty; nor does he say, pray that they may deal
in matters of Religion negatively, that is, so as authoritatively to hinder any
from disturbing any Christian in that which he takes up for truth or piety; or
in any opinion which he may hold, and yet be a godly man; no more then he
says, pray that they may deal so in matters of honesty, as to hinder any from
disturbance in any supposed course of honesty, yea in any acts of dishonesty,
which may be incident to one, that yet in the main is godly, for that were to
pray to be let alone in all ungodliness or dishonesty: Nor does he say, pray
that every one may live according to his Conscience, or hold out any opinion,
Tenent, or practice, suiting with his conscience, so it race not the foundation
of godliness; but pray for them, that we may live in all godliness peaceably,
or that we may with quietness and encouragement so carry it, as will stand
with godliness it self, yea with godliness in the highest degree of it, or
any part of it, in all godliness.

A third Argument is taken from Isa. 49.23. which though a Scripture of the
Old, yet respecting the days of the New Testament, and the substance of the
Argument stands thus. It is the mind of God that civil Rulers in the days of
the New Testament should Authoritatively act in spiritual things, which are to
the Church as milk; therefore it is his mind that in these days they should
act Authoritatively in matters of Religion, we say to act Authoritatively,
because to act as Fathers and Mothers, and therefore not to act merely
alluringly (as some say) or in a general way of countenance, but coercively:
Fathers act fatherly in commanding, in forbidding, and in punishing, as well as
in kissing, and giving good words; in taking the rod, as giving an Apple; nor
does he say, they should be Nurses, as if they were to take upon them to act
officially in Preaching or in administration, whether of Church seals, or of
Church censures. The nature of the similitude forbids it. Nurse-fathers cannot
give milk to the Child, but Nurse-fathers, and Nurse-mothers, to take
Authoritative care, what milk either Church Officers, or any others yield forth
to the Church, to see that it be good, and accordingly to reward and encourage
it, to look that it be not bad, but coercively to restrain it, at least from
being milked forth to the Churches hurt: Albeit if kept within the breast that
bred it, it is out of their cognizance; nor is this spoken of Heathen Rulers,
as Pagans, not Christians, but of such which though as civil Rulers they
command in matters of Religion, or righteousness, yea as Members of the Church
they obey the Church, stooping to its doctrine and discipline so, they lick up
the dust of the Churches feet.

4 A fourth Argument is taken from Zech. 13.2,3,4,5,6. it is Prophesied of as
an approved act, of the zealous Members of the purest Churches to be in the
days of the Gospel, to make use of the coercive power of the civil Magistrate
in matters of doctrine (a matter of Religion:) therefore it is the mind of God
that in these days such coercive power in matters of Religion should be
exercised; nor may any here restrain these words to Church Censures, it being
not the use of the Holy Ghost to express Church Censures greater and lesser,
by taking away the life, wounds, and works in the hands, but rather proves
that power of civil Authority to inflict death in some cases of false doctrine,
and some other reproachful corporal punishments, in some cases of errors which
are not of moment as the other.

Thus much for the Arguments proving the Position; we shall briefly now take
off two or three general Objections, and then come to a close of this Question.

The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but spiritual: Therefore no such
use now to the people of God of such carnal weapons as the penal Laws or
censures of Civil Magistrates in matters of Religion.

It Is the unhappiness of the most of the Arguments in the late Pamphlets and
Pleas for Liberty, used against this Coercive power of the Magistrate in some
cases which we plead for, that if they be forcible, they conclude universally,
even against that coercive power which our opposites allow to him in matters of
the second Table, and so far also of the first, as in things against the light
of nature, and Law of Nations: And of this we have a taste in this Argument; for
besides the mistake of applying this, as if meant of other persons, then of
Church Officers (contrary to the very scope of the Text) the Argument
concludes against the use of Civil Magistrates power by Civil Rulers in
matters of the second Table, as well as of the first, because spiritual
weapons are as weighty to pull down strong holds against the second Table, as
well as against the first: Of like nature is that Objection, Christ's Kingdom
is not of this world, this (if of any force) excluding wholly, takes away the
Magistrates power in both Tables.

Object. 2. The Church has sufficient power to reach her ends, in curbing or
curing offenses in any matters of Religion; therefore what need is there of
such coercive power therein of the Civil Magistrate.

Answ. 1. Suppose it were granted, that therefore the Church, as a Church,
stood not in need thereof: yet the Church, considered as a Civil Society, stood
in need thereof, and so far the state of the question were yielded. Or what if
the Church had no need, yet in respect of other subjects enjoying the light of
the Gospel, though not actually of the Church, as persons not yet joined to any
Church, or such as are actually cast out of the Church, that power might be
most needful; else they might vent things as well against the light of nature,
as Law of Nations, or deny things obstinately, which are fundamental, albeit
not against the light of nature, or Law of Nations; as for example, that Jesus
Christ is the Redeemer and only Mediator; that the Scriptures are the word of
God, etc. should yet not be restrained: yea, that were to suppose some under
the shining of the Gospel, left of the Lord in a lawless condition (in respect
of any Authority to restrain them) in matters of Religion; the Civil power may
not meddle with them, and Ecclesiastical cannot, as not being actually of the
Church.

2 The Church has sufficient power to reach her ends, in curbing and curing
offenses of the second Table; yet none will thence conclude, that therefore no
need to the Church therein, of the Coercive power of the Magistrate.

3 The Church aims at restraint from infection of others, as well as amending
the parties themselves; now supposing the Church casting out a person for
obstinate holding of Heretical Tenants, yet the Church cannot now restrain
him any further in any Ecclesiastical way, but that he may now do more
mischief in spreading his Tenent then ever, unless the Magistrate also
exercise his Coercive power.

4 The Church may in case by clamorous noise, made in the Assembly, or
otherwise by faction, be hindered from the exercise of its power to cencure, and
so although it have power enough to act, yet it will need the Magistrates help
to exercise that power, unless we durst plead as some (it seems do) that in
this case the Elders may act by corporal force to redress it, as Phineas the
Priest did, in killing Zimri, and Cozbi, disturbing the Congregation, on then
humbling themselves before God; but we say, that was extraordinary, as was the
act of Samuel in cutting Agag in pieces; of Elijah in putting Baals Priests to
death; and Peter's act against the life of Ananias and Saphira; nor would we
plead the Priests example, 2 Chronicles. 26. in thrusting out Vzziah out of the
Temple, or such like Arguments; supposing that the Priests of old, and the
Levites might, by a dispensation peculiar to those times, be allowed more
liberty of acting in matters of a Civil nature, both in the great Synedrian,
and other where, then any of us dare say is imitable by, or allowable to
Churches, or Church Officers now.

Object. Thirdly and lastly, the tares are commanded to be let alone, Mat.
13.29,30. Therefore what Authority has the Magistrate to restrain or punish
men now under the Gospel, but rather to leave Christians to the liberty of
their own Consciences?

Answ. This is a Parable, and therefore to be taken in the scope and substance,
and not according to the circumstances thereof, as Peter Martyr notes in this
case. Now the scope of part of the Parable, is not to be a direction unto us,
what we shall do in point of exercise of any power with us, but conteins
simply a doctrine of providence; what God will order to be the condition of his
visible Church in this world, and therefore to show, that Christ intended not
any rule of precept of our duty in this sentence of the Parable, verse. 29, 30.
(Nay let both grow together) he does not in his after exposition of the
several branches of the Parable, insist at all on the branch mentioned, to
give any explication thereof; and if it were any direction, it must either look
to Civil or Church power; if to Civil power, then since the tares are expressly
interpreted to be the Children of the Devil, and such as offend, and do
iniquity, and are as reprobates to be burned, or damned, verse. 38. Then the
worst wretches that live, Murderers, Buggerers, Traitors, etc. must be all let
alone in their sins, and only left to Christ's Judgment at the last day. And
our opposites have least reason to stretch this Parable, as respecting any
restraint of the use of the Civil power, when the very scope of it, is not to
tell us touching the state of the Civil Kingdom in this world, but rather of
the state of the Kingdom of God, or the Ecclesiastical part of the world (the
visible Church) and if it look at any restraint of the use of power, it
strikes rather at the use of Church power; but if it look at Church power,
then the Churches are not to censure Heretics, no, not though obstinate,
contrary to Titus 3. No incestuous, adulterous, covetous Church Members;
contrary to 1 Cor. 5. And that the Parable never intended any abridgement of
either powers in the just exercise thereof, is evident in that it speaks

1 Of such an extirpation of Offenders as is only possible to Angels armed
with Christ's power; and

2 Of an universal extirpation of all, and every reprobate, from among the
company of the Elect; neither of which hinders, but that

1 To such particular offenders as may be rooted up by Civil and Church power,
without danger and hurt to godly ones; as are obstinate seducers, Heretics,
and they may and ought so to be.

2 Such particular Offenders, which by their continuance amongst Gods people,
do overrun, and overtop them, in such sort as they are hurt and endangered
by them, and they cannot grow and thrive spiritually by reason of them, they
may and ought to be rooted out by both powers; for if there be any force in the
Parable in this way, it is to show, that the tares are to be suffered, in
reference, not to the hurt, but to the good of the wheat; so that which tends
to the corrupting, blasting, and destruction of the wheat, is therefore to be
removed, because hurtful and pernicious to the wheat; so that our opposites
would gain nothing to their cause, by pressing this Parable, as directory that
way to us; but we rather (upon the reasons before going) conceive it to be set
down not as a direction, or any Command of Christ enjoining us thus or thus to
do; but as a doctrinall instruction, that God may and will in his providence
suffer for a time, mixtures of good and bad together, elect and reprobate, in
his visible Church; nor are we to fret, or be discontented at his providence in
it, or to think that by any course we can take, it will be otherwise, whilst,
and where ever we are in this world; like to that speech of Paul, 1 Cor. 5 10.
Now in the close of all, let it be considered whose doctrine does most infringe
true liberty of conscience; those which would have every Christian left to the
liberty of his own conscience, in matters of Religion, which at least are not
against the light of nature, Law of Nations, or those that maintain the
forenamed power of the Magistrate; for suppose the Magistrate be a Christian,
he must be left to the liberty of his Conscience too, as well as others: Now if
left to the Lesbian warping rule, what if he in his own Conscience, through
temptation and error, be in most things a Papist, which may stand with the Law
of Nature and Nations, or suppose he in Conscience deny Jesus Christ to be the
Mediator, or such and such Books in the Old and New Testament to be the word
of God, yea, or that there is any use of the Scriptures, but we must only
depend on Revelations; and herein the Law of nature and Nations leaves him: Now
he in Conscience thinks, he is bound to establish this as a Rule to all others,
which to him is the truth; and in conscience to oppose all contrary doctrine,
what then will become of subjects liberty? The word is not made the rule to
regulate this Rulers Conscience, according as we say it should; for if that
were so his Rule, there were a remedy and way to bring him to the Rule; but his
conscience, judgment, and fantasy, touching the Rule that is by this Tenent
made his Rule, according to which he must be left freely to act without
restraint. The mischiefs necessarily following this, if once cried up, we leave
to such of our opposites sadly and seriously to consider of.

The Nature and Power OF SYNODS.
The Second Question.
Quest. 2. WHat be the grounds from Scripture to warrant Synods?

Answ. In answer to this Question, we shall propound to consideration three
Arguments from Scripture, and five Reasons.

Arguments.
Argum: 1
Taken from Acts 15. An orderly Assembly of qualified Church-messengers (Elders
and other Brethren) in times of controversy and danger, concerning weighty
matters of Religion, for the considering, disputing, finding out and clearing
of the truth, from the Scripture, and establishing of Peace amongst the
Churches, is founded upon Acts 15.

But a Synod is an orderly Assembly of qualified Church-messengers (Elders and
other Brethren) in times of controversy and danger, concerning weighty matters
of Religion, for the considering, disputing, finding out, and clearing of the
truth, from the Scriptures, and establishing of peace amongst the Churches.
Ergo, A Synod is founded upon Acts 15.

Distin: 1 For the confirming of this Argument, three distinctions are to be
premised, and some Objections to be satisfied. The first distinction is for the
clearing of the question; the other with the satisfaction to the Objection, for
the clearing of the Text.

The necessity of Synods is either 1 Absolute. 2 Respective.


Synods are not necessary Absolutely, i. e. unto the being, but respectively,
i. e. unto the wel-being of Churches.

Distin: 2 In this Synod some things are first Extraordinary, and not
Exemplary, some whereof were certainly so, and the rest may seem to be so unto
diverse. As 1 The Quality of some of the Members, sc. Apostles, v. 6.23. 2 The
Style, v. 28. 3 The manner of the Imposition of their Sentence, as immediately
and politically binding, at least as some Expound the place. 4 The Object upon
whom they imposed the keeping of their Decrees, viz. absent Churches, verse. 23.
chap. 16.4. some of which were neither called, nor had ordinary Members, or
Messengers there.


Others were Ordinary, ergo Exemplary, as 1 The public meeting of
Churchmessengers, Elders, and other Brethren. 2 The propounding of matters to
be considered. 3 The disputing of them, v. 7. 4 The joint resolutions of the
questions, out of, and according to the Scriptures, v. 15, 16. 5 The
declaration and delivery thereof unto the Churches, to be accepted of, and kept
by them, Acts 16. v. 4. 6 Order in all.


The Apostles were Elders and Members of every Church, ergo, here were
assembled Elders and Messengers of all Churches, ergo, in some respect it may
be called an universal Counsel.

Distin: 3 Hence look upon what was extraordinary, so it may warrant the
greatest Counsel; look upon what was ordinary therein, and so it warrants the
smallest Counsel.

In this Synod are to be considered the Substantials: Matter and Form.
Circumstantials: Constantly, such as necessarily accompany every Synod.
Occasionally, which accompany the Synod pro hic and nunc (i e.) according to
the circumstances of this time and this place.


That which is commanded as continually binding, Acts 15. is the
circumstantials of a Synod, the constant circumstantials, and such occasionally
as are to edification, pro hic and nunc. These two last distinctions rightly
applied, may satisfy many lighter Objections, which we shall not therefore
trouble the Reader with.

Argum: 2 Taken by proportion from Gal. 2.2.
If in times of Controversy, about weighty matters of Religion, the Assembling
together of Apostles (who knew the truth before they came on to the Synod, and
one of them was greater than all particular Churches) was needful for the
testifying to the carrying on of the truth (which is less than the finding
out, testifying to, carrying on of the truth) if warranted out of the
Scripture; then the Assembling together of Churches by themselves, or by
Church-messengers (either of which is a Synod) to the finding our, testifying to,
and better carrying on of the truth, is warrantable out of the Scriptures.

But in such times of controversy, the Assembling together of Apostles (one of
whom was greater than all particular Churches) for the testifying to, and
better carrying on of the truth, is warranted out of the Scripture, Gal. 2.2.

Ergo, In such times of controversy, the Assembling together of Churches by
themselves, or by the Church-messengers (either of which is a Synod) for the
finding out, testifying to, and better carrying on of the truth, is warranted
out of the Scripture.

The Argument proceeds from the greater to the lesser, thus; If the truth in
times of weighty controversies had need of the help of the Assembling together
of Apostles, then in like times it has much more need of the Assembling
together of Churches. If Apostles at such times had need of the help of other
Apostles, then Churches in like times had need of the help of other Churches.

Such Assemblies, the examples whereof are recorded and approved in the
Scripture, are warranted out of the Scriptures.

Argum: 3
But the orderly Assembly of the qualified people of God, for the considering
of matters of Religion, in times of weighty controversies, are such Assemblies,
the examples whereof are recorded, and commended in the Scriptures, erg. The
orderly Assembly of qualified persons for the considering of matters of
Religion, in times of weighty controversies, is warranted out of the Script:

Minor proved.
Ezra 7.14. Ezra inquires of the Lord (id est) consults of the worship of God.
1 Chronicles. 13.2. David consults with the Congregation concerning the carrying of
the Ark to its place. 2 Chr. 30.2. Hezekiah had taken Counsel of all his
Princes, and all the Congregation on in Jerusalem, to keep the Passover in the
second month. The approved examples of the godly, of imitable and useful
nature in practical cases, is a rule unto us.

Reason 1 From the Causes.
When the cause of a Synod remains, there opportunity being had, the
warrantable use of Synods remains. But under the Gospel the causes of Synods
remain, ergo.

Under the Gospel the use of Synods is warrantable.

The Causes of Synods are either preventing, removing of, or recovering from
errors and divisions; or providing for, preserving of, or restoring of truth
and peace in matters of Religion.

Reason 2 From the End of Synods.
Where there is use of the Ends of Synods, namely to clear and declare the
truth from scripture, in times of weighty controversy, there the use of Synods
is warrantable.

But under the Gospel there is use of the end of Synods, namely to clear and
declare the truth from Scripture, in times of weighty controversy, ergo.

Under the Gospel the use of Synods is warrantable.

Preheminency of knowledge, concerning Church matters, is in the Synod; hence
the question is aris'd to the Synod.

Church Authority is only placed in the Churches; hence the cause remains
with the particular Churches.

Reason 3 From the Communion of Churches.
That which is the greatest external means of the Union of Churches, in one
judgment, and consequently an especial help to preserve communion of
particular Churches, is of warrantable use.

But a Synod is the greatest external means to Unite Churches in one
judgment, by conferring apprehensions for the concurring in the same Sentence:
ergo, a Synod is of warrantable use.

Reason 4 From the Efficacy of Church-Administrations.
That without which particular Churches in diverse of their Administrations are
in danger to run in vain, is of warrantable use:

But without the approbation of other Churches for the end whereof Synods are
an especial means, particular Churches are in diverse of their Administrations
in danger to run in vain, from the example of the Apostles, Gal. 2.2.

Ergo, Synods are of warrantable use.

Reason 5 From the Nature of Church Matters.
If the weighty Transactions of each particular Church are such (and so
concerning particular Neighboring Churches) as that it is meet that all
Neighboring Churches should be acquainted and consulted with thereabout, and
Synods be the fittest means for that end; then Synods be of warrantable use:

But the weighty Transactions of all particular Churches are such (and so
concerning all particular Neighboring Churches) as that it is meet that all
neighboring Churches be acquainted and consulted with thereabout; and Synods
be the fittest means to that end, ergo, Synods are of warrantable use.

Quod tangit omnes, spectat ad omnes. The Cognizance of that belongs to all,
whose practice concerns all.

Objections against the urging of that Synod, Acts 15. as an example warranting
our ordinary SYNODS.
Object. 1. Paul and Barnabas, and the other Brethren sent by the Church of
Antioch, were sent unto the Elders and Apostles, verse. 2. but we do not read
that the Churches were sent unto, which in ordinary Synods order calls for.

Resp. 1. Though it be not in so many words expressed that the Churches were
sent unto, yet it cannot be denied but they might be sent unto implicitly,
though not explicitly.

2 It Is not to be doubted, but that the Church of Antioch, and the Church of
Jerusalem, walked by the same rule: As therefore Paul and Barnabas went not to
this Assembly without the cognizance of the Church of Antioch, so we may well
think the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem came not to this Assembly without
the cognizance of the Church of Jerusalem.

3 Considering the extraordinary power of the Apostles: It is a sufficient
acknowledgment of the liberty of Churches, that they had orderly and seasonable
notice of the Assembly, were present at it, and were joined together with the
Apostles in the conclusions of it; all which are manifest from the Text, either
in express words, or just Consequence from thence, verse. 4.22,23.

Object. 2. Our Synods consisting only of such Members as are Messengers of
Churches, seem not to be exemplified by that, Acts 15. because that Assembly
was constituted not of Messengers of the Church of Antioch, and the whole
Fraternity of the Church of Jerusalem.

Resp. 1. It Is not to be doubted but the Apostles and Elders were present,
according to the desire of the Church of Jerusalem, and so were as Messengers.

2 It Is all one upon this point, whether a Church be present by the Fraternity
it self, or by their Messengers: If convenience of the place, and transaction
of affairs will permit, it is at the choice of the Fraternity to be present
immediately, or to send their Messengers.

3 What the Fraternity of Jerusalem did here, the like may the Fraternity of
any Church in like cases do with us; as the Church of Cambridge (for instance)
now if they please.

4 Where the Fraternity is present formally, there the Messengers are present
virtually.

5 In such cases where the presence of the Fraternity immediately, or sending
of Messengers are occasional circumstances (of which before) it is in the
liberty of the Fraternity to do as they judge most for their Edification.

Object. 3. The judgment of the question in our Synods or Assemblies,
ordinarily proceeds jointly from the Messengers of all Churches; at least the
major part of them. But the judgment concerning matters agitated in that
Synod, Acts 15. seems to proceed from one part thereof only, namely the Church
of Jerusalem, as appears by the Letters sent from thence, not mentioning any
part of that judgment, as proceeding from the Church Messengers of Antioch.

Resp. 1. We may distinguish between the Synods passing for acts of judgment
upon the Question discussed, and the sending of that judgment passed by the
Synod. That the Messengers of the Church of Antioch did judge jointly with the
Church of Jerusalem, concerning the matters agitated in that Synod, appears
thus: In every regular discharge of the duty of the Church-messengers in a
Synod where there is a concurrence of ability, right, and duty, to pass an
actual judgment, as declarative to the truth, there was an actual judgment.

But such was the case in this Synod, ergo.

The Reason why the judgment of the Church of Jerusalem, and not of the
Messengers of the Church of Antioch, is only made mention of in the letter,
might be, because the judgment of the Church-Messengers of Antioch was already
known to the Church; nor had they any doubt of their Messengers concurrence
with the Church of Jerusalem in the present Conclusions; if there were any
doubt in that respect, they were personally present to satisfy it.

2 Because the contrary minded had already signified their non acquiescence or
not resting, either in the judgment of the Church of Antioch, or their
Messengers, in the delivery of the Decrees of the Synod unto Churches, there
appears not any cause out of the Text, to doubt the delivery of the same, as
the joint judgment of them all, but the contrary.

Object. 4. A party may not be a Judge. Paul and Barnabas were parties in this
business, Acts 15. ergo.

Resp. 1. Paul and Barnabas here are not properly parties, in that they act not
their own case, but the case of the truth, and that as sent from the Church.

2 Though they be supposed to be parties, yet it is not universally true, that a
party may not be a Judge.

As 1 In case the party offended be a society: or some public person
equivalent.

2 In case the party in such acts of judgment, be freed from error; which was
the present condition of the Apostles, guided in their administrations by an
infallible spirit.

Object. 5. This Synod, Acts 15. (...) Septuag. (...) some call it (...), vid.
Schindl. Lexi.
so speaks, as having power to lay the truth of God (cleared and declared by
it) as a burden upon the Churches, v. 28. which our ordinary Synods seem not
to have power to do.

Resp. The notion or term [burthen] may be taken politically (i. e.) for a
truth imposed by virtue of Church power and Authority: this though the Apostles
as Apostles might do, yet if they did so in this place (which we rather
conceive not) it was extraordinary, and Consequently not Exemplary.

Or the word Burden, may be taken for the charging of the Church to receive
and yield Obedience in the Lord unto the truth, discussed, cleared, and orderly
commanded to them: In which sense if we take it here according as it is taken in
diverse places elsewhere, Pro. 30.1. and 21.1. Rev. 2.24. then the style or
manner of speaking is exemplary.

OF THE POWER OF Synods.
The Third Question.
Quest. 3. WHat is the Power of a Synod?

Resp. The Power of a Synod Is Decisive Directive, and Declarative
of the truth, by clearing and evidencing the same out of the word of God; non
coactive, yet more than discretive.

For the better understanding hereof, consider that Ecclesiastical Power is

1 Decisive, in determining by way of discussion and disputation, what is
truth, and so consequently resolving the Question in weighty matters of
Religion, Acts 15.16,28. and 16.4. This belongs to the Synod.

2 Discretive, in discerning of the truth or falsehood that is determined; this
belongs to every Believer.

3 Coactive or judicial (for we omit to speak in this place of Official
judgment) in judging of the truth determined Authoritatively, so as to impose
it with Authority, and to censure the disobedient with Ecclesiastical censure,
1 Cor. 5.12. Mat. 18.17. This belongs to every particular Church.

The judgment of a Synod is in some respect superior, in some respect
inferior to the judgment of a particular Church; it is superior in respect
of direction; inferior in respect of jurisdiction, which it has none.

Quere. How, and how far does the sentence of a Synod bind?

Answ. We must distinguish between the Synods declaration of the truth, and the
political imposition of the truth declared by the Synod.

The Synods declaration of the truth binds not politically, but formally only,
(i. e.) in foro interiori (i. e.) it binds the conscience, and that by way of
the highest institution that is merely doctrinall. The political Imposition of
the truth declared by the Synod, is Ecclesiastical, or Civil: Ecclesiastical,
by particular Churches, and this binds not only formally, but politically, in
foro exteriori, i. e. it binds the outward man, so as the disobedient in
matters of offense, is subject unto Church censure, affirmatively, toward
their own Members; negatively, by non communion, as concerning others, whether
Church or Members. Supremi Magistratu^ approbatio est supremu^ (ut soquuntar)
arrestum. Fr. Hom. disp. 18. Th. 4. and disp. 17. These. 3.
Civil, by the Magistrate strengthening the truth thus declared by the Synod,
and approved by the Churches, either by his mere Authoritative suffrage,
assent, and testimony, (if the matter need no more) or by his authoritative
Sanction of it by Civil punishment, the nature of the offense so requiring.

In this orderly proceeding of the Churches, and Civil Magistrate together in
their respective political imposition of the truth cleared and declared by the
Synod, we are to be understood to speak of such a place wherein the Christian
Magistrates walk together orderly, referving Ecclesiastical binding power to
the particular Churches, where either there is no Magistrate, or the Magistrate
is wanting in his duty; as also civil power to the Christian Magistrate, where
the Churches are wanting to their duty.

The Fourth Question.
Quest. 4. To whom belongs the power of calling a Synod?

Answ. For satisfaction to this Question, we shall propound one distinction,
and answer three Queries.

Distin: The power of calling Synods is either Single Authoritative, belonging
to the Magistrates. Ministerial, belonging to the particular Churches.
Mixed When both proceed orderly and jointly in the use of their several powers.



Arguments, proving the Authoritative Power of Calling SYNODS, to belong to the
Magistrate.
1 Because the Magistrate is Custos utriusque Tabulae, i. e. Charged with the
custody of both Tables; That he is keeper of the second Table is granted, that
he is keeper of the former, is sufficiently proved in the first Question.

2 From the recorded and approved examples of godly Kings in the Scriptures:
David, 1 Chronicles. 23.2. Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 29.4. Josiah, 2 Kin. 23.1,2.

3 From the nature of such great Assemblies: Though Synodicall Assembling be
spiritual, yet mere assembling of a multitude together (which a Synodicall
Assembly presupposes) is a Civil act, and therefore cannot in good policy be
suffered without the consent of the Magistrate.

4 From the necessary (though not essential) requisites to the being of a
Synod, as place, time, manner of meeting, peace, all which need the consent of
the Magistrate in case of violent disturbance: the Churches as such, having no
civil power to defend them, cannot but want the assistance of the Magistrate,
that they may meet and transact the matters of the Synod in safety and
quietness.

5 From the proportion that the Magistrates Con-coactive or calling power of a
Synod, holds with his confirmation of the conclusions of the Synod; the same
reason that warrants his confirming power for the better strengthening the
observation of the conclusions of the Synod, warrants his calling power for the
better being of the Synod.

Arguments proving the Ministerial Power of Calling Synods (which may be fitly
called a power of liberty, because Churches therein have no Authority one over
another) to belong unto the particular Churches.
1 From that famous example, Acts 15. where the Synod meets, and site, without
the call of Civil Authority; there being then no Christian Magistrate.

2 Because the power of the constitution of Synods, as properly such, firstly
resideth with, arises from, and lastly returns to particular Churches.

3 Because the power of the Magistrate tends not to the being, but to the
better being of Synods; and added thereunto is accumulative, not privative (i.
e.) it adds strength to it, but takes not any power from it: Hence a Synod may
in ease be without any consent of the Magistrate, but cannot be without some
consent, explicit or implicit, of the Churches.

4 Because the Lord Jesus has invested the Churches with sufficient
Ecclesiastical power in the best Ecclesiastical manner, to attain their
Ecclesiastical end, which yet were not, if they had not power of themselves by
joint consent to call a Synod.

Queries.
Querie 1 In what case may the Magistrate proceed to call a Synod without the
consent of the Churches?

Answ. The Magistrate in case the Churches be defective, and not to be
prevailed with, for the performance of their duty, (just cause so requiring)
may call a Synod, and the Churches ought to yield obedience thereunto.

But notwithstanding the refusal, he may proceed to call an Assembly, and that
for the same end that a Synod meets for, namely, to consider of, and clear the
truth from the Scriptures, in weighty matters of Religion: But such an Assembly
called and gathered without the consent of the Churches, is not properly that
which is usually understood by a Synod, for though it be in the power of the
Magistrate to Call, yet it is not in his power to Constitute a Synod, without
at least the implicit consent of the Churches: Because Church-Messengers, who
necessarily presuppose an explicit (which order calls for) or implicit
consent of the Churches, are essential to a Synod.

Querie 2 In what case may the Churches call a Synod without the consent of the
Magistrate?

Answ. In case the Magistrate be defective, and not to be prevailed with for
the performance of his duty; just cause, providence, and prudence concurring:
The Churches may both Call and Constitute a Synod: The Reason why the Churches
can Constitute a Synod without the consent of the Magistrate, although the
Magistrate cannot constitute a Synod without the consent of the Churches, is
because the essentialls of a Synod, together with such other cause, as is
required to the being (though not so much to the better being) of a Synod,
arises out of particular Churches: as appears from the following Enumeration
of the Causes thereof: The Essential Cause: Remote The Authoritative Call of
the Magistrate. Next The Ministerial Call of the Churches.
The Material Cause: The Members of the Synod (i. e.) qualified
Church-Messengers. The Formal Cause: The meeting together of such
Church-Messengers in the name of Christ. The Final Cause: To confider of, and
clear the truth in question from the word of God.


Querie 3 In case the Magistrate and Churches are both willing to proceed
orderly in the joint exercise of their several Powers, whether it is lawful
for either of them to call a Synod without the Consent of the other?

Answ. No; they are to proceed now by way of a mixed Call (i. e.) orderly and
jointly in the use of their several Powers. That which learned Parker speaks
of the Power of particular Churches, concerning Calling of SYNODS, holds also
in this case concerning the Power of the Magistrate; Their Powers are diverse,
yet in respect of exercise they ought not to be diverse, nor divided the one
from the other, as before.

The Churches desire, the Magistrate Commands; Churches act in a way of
liberty, the Magistrate in a way of Authority. Moses and Aaron should go
together, and kiss one another in the Mount of GOD.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader;
BY reason of the Death of the Reverend Author, and the far distance of his
loving Friend (the Publisher of this Book) some faults may have escaped the
Press, for the which the Printer desires excuse.

Vale.

