POEMS On several OCCASIONS.

WRITTEN By CHARLES COTTON, Esquire

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Basset, at the George (...)

THE TABLE.
ODE to Coelia. Page 1. The Expostulation. 3. Sonnet. 5. The Tempest. 6. Ode to
Coelia. 8. The Picture. 9. Elegy. 11. Taking leave of Chloris. 16. Song. 19.
Resolution in four Sonets of a Poetical Question, concerning four Rural
Sisters. 21. 2 Sonnet. 22. 3 Sonnet. 23. 4 Sonnet. 24. On my pretty Marten 26.
The New Year, to Mr. W. T. 33. The joys of Marriage. 36. Ode to Love. 44. Song.
46. Elegy. 48. In Coccam Epig. de Monsieur Maynard. 50. Epig. writ in Calista's
Prayer Book. 51. Song. 52. A Phillis. Madrigal. 54. Ode to Chloris. 55. Ode.
57. To John Bradshaw, Esquire 59. Winter de Monsieur Marigny. 62. On Rutt, the
Judge. 66. On Sim and Simon. ibid. Virelay. 67. Madrigal. 68. La Illustrissima,
on my dear Sister Mrs. Ann King. ibid. Chanson a Boire. 74. The Angler's
Ballad. 76. Epistle to John Bradshaw, Esquire 82. Anacreontick. 88. Burlesque upon
the great Frost. 90. Clepsydra. 105. Eclogue. 108. To my dear Friend Mr. Isaac
Walton. 144. To the Countess of Chesterfield, on the Birth of her first Son.
116. To Chloris. 118. Old Tityrus to Eugenia. 112. Epistle to John Bradshaw,
Esquire 126. Epistle to John Bradshaw, Esquire 129. The Retirement. 133. Rondeau. 140.
To Cupid. 141. Ode to Aelia. 143. Sonnet. 146. Stanzes de Monsieur Bertrand.
147. The Eighth Psalm paraphrased. 149. Advice. 152. Lyrick, ^x Cornelio
Gallio. Trans. 154. Amoret in Masquerade. 156. Estreines to Calista. 162.
Epigram de Mons. des Ports. 165. Epigram de Mons. Cotin. 166. Epigram de Mons.
Maynard. 167. A Voyage to Ireland Burlesque. 168. Canto 2. 177. Canto 3. 188.
The Storm to the Earl of -- 199. Ode. 212. Paraphrased from An^creon. 217. Hymn
on Christmas day. 219. Saphick Ode. 225. Morning Quatrains. 226 Noon Quatrains.
233. The Night. 237. Evening Quatrains. 241. Night Quatrains. 243. Ode. 249.
Ode de Monsieur Racan. 250. Contentation. 252. Sanzes de Mons. Scudery. 260.
Melancholy. 263. Hope. 269. Epistle to the Earl of -- 274. Beauty. Pindarick
Ode in answer to Mr. Cowley. 280. Rondeau. 284. Woman. 285. The World. 291. Q.
Cicero, de mulierum Levitate. 296. Ode Despair. 297. Sonnet. 299. Sonnet. 300.
Sonnet. 301. Sonnet. 302. Poverty. 303. Death. 308. On the Death of the E. of
Ossory. 314. Ode Bachique. 319. Epistle to Sir Clifford Clifton, then sitting
in Parliament. 322. Contentment. 331. Epigram. 337. Scribere Jussit Amor. 338.
Epigram. ibid. Daybreak. 339. Song. 341. Forbidden Fruit. 342. The Picture.
344. On one who said he drank to clear his Eyes. 345. The Separation. 346.
Another of the same. 348. On the great Eater of Gray's-Inn. 349. Epitaph on
Mrs. Ann Stanhope. 352. Song. 353. Epitaph on M. H. 354. The Retreat. 356. The
Sleeper. 357. The Token. 359. Song. Montross. 360. Song. 361. A Journey into
the Peak* 363. New Prison. 365. Her Name. 367. Epitaph on Mr. Robert Port. 370.
Song. ibid. Sir William Davenant to Mr. Cotton. 372. The Answer. 374. To Mr.
John Anderson. 376. Les Amors. 380. Elegy. 382. Her Hair. 385. Song. 391. The
Surprise. 392. The Visit. 395. Epigram. De Lupo. 398. On Upstart. ibid. Epitaph
on Mrs. Mary Draper. 399. Coelia's Fall. 400. Eclogue. 403. Her Sigh. 407.
Epitaph on Mr. Radcliff Stanhope. 409. On the Lord Derby. 411. On Marriot. 414.
To Coelia's Ague. 418. A Valediction. 420. Loves Triumph. 425. A Rogue. 428.
The Contest. 430. The False one. 432. Ode Valedictory. 434. To Mr. Lely, on his
Picture of the Lady Isabella Thynn. 436. Ode to Chloris. 432. Taking leave of
Chloris. 440. Ode. 443. Ode. 446. Ode. 449. An Old Man's Gift to a fair Lady.
451. In Amorem Medicum. 454. Ballad. ibid. On Annel-seed Robin. 457. Ode to
Chloe. 458. Ode to Chloris from France. 460. An Invitation to Phillis. 463. The
new Entertainment to Phillis. 467. Ode to Coelia. 471. Ode to Cupid. 472. The
Tempest. 474. The Litany. 476. To some Great Ones. 480. To the Memory of
Richard Lovelace. 481. To Poet E. W. etc. 483. Dialogue. 485. Chorus. 491.
Epitaph on Robert Port, Esquire 492. To Cupid, a Foolish Poet, etc. 493. Philoxipes
and Policrite, etc. 497. To Mr. Alexander Broom. 511. On Tobacco. 514. Laura
Sleeping. 519. Laura Weeping. 521. Sonnet. 524. Sonnet. 525. Sonnet. 526.
Sonnet. 527. To Sir Aston Cockayne, on Captain Hannibal. 528. In imitation of a
Song in the Play of Rollo. 529. To Sir Aston Cockayne, on his Tragedy of Ovid.
530. Epigram de die Martis and Veneris. 531. Ode to Love. 533. The Second Epod
of Horace Translated. 536. Horat. Ode 9. Lib. 3. 540. Mart. Lib. 1. Epig. 20.
542. Stanzes de Mons. Theophile. ibid. Her Heart and mine. 545. Epig. to
Charinus, out of Johannes Secundus. 546. Ode of Johannes Secundus Translated.
547. Epig. out of Hieron Amaltheus. 548. Loves World out of Astrea. 549. Mart.
Epig. 84. Lib. 10. 553. Ep. 93. Lib 11. 553. Ep. 58. Lib 1. ibid. Ep. 48. Lib
1. 544. Ep. 65. Lib 1. ibid. Ep. 3. Lib 1. 555. Ep. 88. Lib 2. ibid. Ep. 9. Lib
3. 556. Ep. 28. Lib 3. ibid. Ep. 26. Lib 3. 557. Ep. 32. Lib 3. ibid. Ep.
52.Lib 3. 558. Ep. 78. Lib 4 ibid. Ep. 86. Lib 4. 559. Ep. 46. Lib 5. ibid. Ep.
44. Lib 5. 560. Ep. 32. Lib 7. ibid. Ep. 47. Lib 10. 561. Ep. 3. Lib 8. 562.
Ep. 19. Lib 8. 563. Ep. 23. Lib 8. 564. Ep. 47. Lib 8. ibid. Ep. 21. Lib 8.
565. Ep. 35. Lib 8. 566. Ep. 53. Lib 8. ibid. Ep. 59. Lib 8. 567. Ep. 100. Lib
7. ibid. Ep. 41. Lib 8. 568. Ep. 103. Lib 11. ibid. Ep. 7. Lib 12. 569. Ep. 20.
Lib 12. ibid. Horat. lib. 1. Carmin. Ode 8. ad Lydiam. 570. Epig. Johan.
Secundo. 571. Tria Mala, ex eodem. ibid. Horat. Epod. 15. 572. Ode de
Theophile. 573. Elegy de Theophile. 575. Madrigal, out of Astrea. 586. Upon the
death of Cleon, out of Astrea. 582. Song of Hylas, out of Astrea. 586. Sonnet,
out of Astrea. 590. A Paraphrase. 591. An Essay on Buchanan's first Book de
Sphaera. 592. Cornel. Galli. Eleg. 1. 594. Epig. ex Catullo. 608. De Catella
Publ. Mart. Epig. 100. lib. 1. 610. Echo ad Pictorem Ausonii Epig. 611. De
Myrone and Laid Auson. Epig. 612. De Vita beata, paraphrased from the Latin.
613. Epig. de Monsieur Maynard. 615. Ode de Monsieur Racan. 618. Epig. Tho.
Mori, de Luxu and Libidine. 623. Idem in Avarum. 624. Idem in Digamos. ibid.
Stanzes de Mons. de Scudery. 625. Epitaph Monsieur Maynard. 628. On Cation a
Dwarf, etc. 629. Epig. de Mons. Maynard. 630. Idem in Coccam. ibid. Idem in
Coccam. 631. Epig. de Mons. Maynard. 632. The sixth Ode of Horace's Is It. Book
of Lyricks. ibid. Epig. de Mons. Corneille. 634. Epig. de Mons. Cotin. 635.
Epig. de Mons. de Bensuarade. 636. Madrigal on Queen Dido Trans. i^^d. Sede
d'Amore, from Cavalier Guarini. 637. Foco di Sdegno, from Guarini. 638.
Risposta del Tasto. 639. Winter. 640. An Elegy on the Lord Hastings. 655. The
Battle of Yvry. 657.
POEMS On several Occasions.
To Coelia.
ODE.
I.
GIve me my heart again (fair Treachery)
You ravished from me with a smile,
Oh! let it in some nobler quarrel die
Than a poor Trophy of your guile.
And Faith (bright Coelia) tell me, what should you,
Who are all Falsehood, do with one so true?
II.
Or lend me yours awhile instead of it,
That I in time my skill may try,
Though ill I know it will my bosom fit,
To teach it some Fidelity;
Or that it else may teach me to begin
To be to you what you to me have been.
III.
False and imperious Coelia, cease to be
Proud of a Conquest is your shame,
You triumph over an humble Enemy,
Not one you fairly overcame.
Your eyes alone might have subdued my heart,
Without the poor confed'racy of Art.
IV.
But to the power of Beauty you must add
The Witchcraft of a sigh and tear
I did admire before, but yet was made
By those to love; they fixed me there:
I else, as other transient Lovers do,
Had twenty loved ever this as well as you.
V.
And twenty more I did intend to love,
Ever twenty weeks are past and gone,
And at a rate so modish, as shall prove
My heart a very civil one:
But oh, (false fair!) I thus resolve in vain,
Unless you give me back my heart again.
The Expostulation.
I.
HAve I loved my Fair so long,
Six Olympiads at least,
And to Youth and Beauties wrong,
On Virtues single Interest,
To be at last with ceorn oppressed?
II.
Have I loved that space so true,
Without looking once awry,
Lest I might prove false to you,
To whom I vowed Fidelity,
To be repaid with Cruelty?
III.
Was you not, oh sweet! confess,
Willing to be so beloved?
Favor gave my Flame increase,
By which it still aspiring moved,
And had gone out, if disapproved.
IV.
Whence then can this change proceed?
Say; or whither does it tend?
That false heart will one day bleed,
When it has brought so true a Friend
To cruel and untimely end.
Sonnet.
WHat have I left to do but dye,
Since Hope, my old Companion,
That trained me from my Infancy,
My Friend, my Comforter is gone?
Oh fawning, false, deceiving Friend!
Accursed be thy Flatteries,
Which treacherously did intend
I should be wretched to be wise:
And so I am; for being taught
To know thy guiles, have only wrought
My greater misery and pain:
My misery is yet so great,
That, though I have found out the Cheat,
I wish for thee again in vain.
The Tempest.
I.
STanding upon the margent of the Main,
Whilst the high boiling Tide came tumbling in,
I felt my fluctuating thoughts maintain
As great an Ocean, and as rude, within;
As full of Waves, of Depths, and broken Grounds,
As that which daily laves her chalky bounds.
II.
Soon could my sad Imagination find
A Parallel to this half World of Flood,
An Ocean by my walls of Earth confined,
And Rivers in the Channels of my Blood:
Discovering man, unhappy man, to be
Of this great Frame Heaven's Epitome.
III.
There pregnant Argosies with full Sails ride,
To shoot the Gulphs of Sorrow and Despair,
Of which the Love no Pilot has to guide,
But to her Sea-born Mother steers by Prayer,
When, oh! the Hope her Anchor lost, undone,
Rolls at the mercy of the Regent Moon.
IV.
It Is my adored Diana, then must be
The Guid'ress to this beaten Bark of mine,
It Is she must calm and smooth this troubled Sea,
And waft my hope over the vaulting Brine:
Call home thy venture Dian then at last,
And be as merciful as thou art chaste.
To Coelia.
ODE.
I.
WHen Coelia must my old day set,
And my young morning rise
In beams of joy so bright as yet
Never blessed a Lovers eye,
My State is more advanced, than when
I first attempted thee;
I su'd to be a Servant then,
But now to be made Free.
II.
I Have served my time Faithful and True,
Expecting to be placed,
In happy Freedom, as my due,
To all the Joys thou have:
Ill Husbandry in Love is such
A Scandal to Love's power,
We ought not to mispend so much
As one poor short-lived hour.
III.
Yet think not (Sweet) I Am weary grown,
That I pretend such haste,
Since none to surfeit ever was known,
Before he had a taste;
My Infant Love could humbly wait,
When young it scarce knew how
To plead; but, grown to Man's estate,
He is impatient now.
The Picture.
I.
HOw, Chloris, can I ever believe
The Vows of Women kind,
Since yours I faithless find,
So faithless, that you can refuse
To him your shadow, that to choose
You swore you could the substance give?
II.
Is It not enough that I must go
Into another Clime,
Where Feather-footed Time
May turn my Hopes into Despair,
My youthful Dawn to bristled Hair,
But that you add this torment too?
III.
Perchance you fear Idolatry
Would make the Image prove
A Woman fit for love;
Or give it such a soul as shone
Through fond Pigmalion's living stone,
That so I might abandon thee.
IV.
O no! 'twould fill my Genius room,
My honest one, that when
Frailty would love again,
And, failing, with new objects burn,
Then, Sweetest, would thy Picture turn
My wandering eyes to thee at home.
Elegy.
GOds! are you just, and can it be
You should deal man his misery
With such a liberal hand, yet spare
So meanly when his Joys you share?
Durst timorous Mortality
Demand of this the reason why?
The Argument of all our Ills
Would end in this, that it is your Wills.
Be it so then, and since it is fit
We to your harsh Decrees submit,
Farewell all durable content,
Nothing but woe is permanent.
How strangely, in a little space,
Is my State changed from what it was,
When my Clorinda with her Rays,
Illustrated this happy place?
When she was here, was here, alas!
How sadly sounds that, when she was!
That Monarch ruled not under sky,
Who was so great a Prince as I:
And if who boasts most Treasure be
The greatest Monarch, I was he*
As seized of her, who from her Birth
Has been the Treasure of the Earth:
But she is gone, and I no more
That mighty Sovereign, but as poor,
Since stripped of that my glorious trust,
As he who grovels in the dust.
Now I could quarrel Heaven, and be
Ringleader to a Mutiny,
Like that of the Gygantick Wars,
And hector my malignant Stars;
Or, in a tamer method, sit
Sighing, as though my heart would split;
With looks dejected, arms across,
Mourning and weeping for a loss
My sweet (if kind as heretofore)
Can in two short-lived hours restore.
Some God then, (sure you are not all
Deaf to poor Lovers when they call)
Commiserating my sad smart,
Touch fair Clorinda's noble heart
To pity a poor su^^erer,
Disdains to sigh, unless for her!
Some friendly Deity possess
Her generous Breast with my distress!
Oh! tell her how I sigh away
The tedious hours of the day;
Hating all light that does not rise
From the gay Morning of her eyes:
Tell her that Friends, which were to be
Welcome to men in misery,
To me, I know not how, of late
Are grown to be importunate:
My Books which once were wont to be
My best beloved Company,
Are (save a Prayer Book for Form)
Left to the Canker or the Worm:
My Study's Grief, my Pleasure Care,
My Joys are Woe, my Hope Despair,
Fears are my Drink, deep Sighs my Food,
And my Companions Solitude.
Night too, which Heaven ordained to be
Man's chiefest Friend's my Enemy,
When she her Sable Curtain spreads,
The whole Creation make their beds,
And every thing on Earth is blessed
With gentle and refreshing Rest;
But wretched I, more pensive made
By the addition of that shade,
Am left alone, with sorrow roar
The grief I did but sigh before;
And tears which, checked by shame and light,
Do only drop by day, by night
(No longer awed by nice respects,)
Gush out in Floods and Cataracts.
Ill life, ah Love, why is it so!
To me is measured out by woe,
Whilst she, who is that life's great light,
Conceals her Glories from my ^ight.
Say, fair Clorinda, why should he
Who is thy Virtue's Creature be
More wretched than the rest of men
Who love and are beloved again?
I know my passion, not desert,
Has given me interest in a heart,
Truer than ever Man possessed,
And in that knowledge I am blessed;
Yet even thence proceeds my care,
That makes your absence hard to bear;
For were you cruel, I should be
Glad to avoid your cruelty;
But happy in an equal flame,
I, Sweetest, thus impatient am:
Then since your presence can restore
My heart the joy it had before,
Since liberal Heaven never gave
To Woman such a power to save,
Practice that Sovereign power on one
Must live or dye for you alone.
Taking leave of Chloris.
I.
SHE sighs as if she would restore
The life she took away before;
As if she did recant my doom,
And sweetly would reprieve me home*
Such hope to one condemned appears
From every whisper that he hears:
But what do such vain hopes avail,
If those sweet sighs compose a gale,
To drive me hence, and swell my sail?
II.
See, see, she weeps! Who would not swear
That love descended in that tear,
Boasting him of his wounded prize
Thus in the bleeding of her eyes?
Or that those tears with just pretense
Would quench the fire that came from thence?
But oh! they are (which strikes me dead)
Crystal her frozen heart has bred,
Neither in love nor pity shed.
III.
Thus of my merit jealous grown,
My happiness I dare not own,
But wretchedly her favors wear,
Blind to my self, unjust to her
Whose sighs and tears at least discover
She pitties, if not loves her Lover:
And more betrays the Tyrant's skill,
Than any blemish in her will,
That thus laments whom she does kill.
IV.
Pity still (Sweet) my dying state,
My flame may sure pretend to that,
Since it was only unto thee
I gave my life and liberty;
However my life's misfortune's laid,
By love I Am pitty's object made.
Pity me then, and if thou hear
I Am dead, drop such another tear,
And I am paid my full arrear.
Song.
I.
FIe pretty Doris! weep no more,
Damon is doubtless safe on shore,
Despite of wind and wave;
The life is Fate-free that you cherish,
And it is unlike he now should perish
You once thought fit to save.
II.
Dry (Sweet) at last, those twins of light,
Which whilst eclipsed, with us it is night,
And all of us are blind:
The tears that you so freely shed,
Are both too precious for the Dead,
And for the Quick too kind.
III.
Fie, pretty Doris! sigh no more,
The Gods your Damon will restore,
From Rocks and Quicksands free;
Your wishes will secure his way,
And doubtless he, for whom you pray,
May laugh at Destiny.
IV.
Still then those Tempests of your breast,
And set that pretty heart at rest,
The man will soon return;
Those sighs for Heaven are only fit,
Arabian Gums are not so sweet,
Nor Offerings when they burn.
V.
On him you lavish grief in vain,
Cannot be lamented, nor complain,
Whilst you continue true:
That man's disaster is above,
And needs no pity, that does love
And is beloved by you.
Resolution in four Sonnets, of a Poetical Question put to me by a Friend,
concerning four Rural Sisters.
Sonnet. I.
ALice is tall and upright as a Pine,
White as blaunch'd Almonds, or the falling Snow,
Sweet as are Damask Roses when they blow,
And doubtless fruitful as the swelling Vine.
Ripe to be cut, and ready to be pressed,
Her full cheek'd beauties very well appear,
And a year's fruit she loses every year,
Wanting a man t'improve her to the best.
Full fain she would be husbanded, and yet,
Alas! she cannot a fit Lab'rer get
To cultivate her to her own content:
Fain would she be (God wot) about her task,
And yet (forsooth) she is too proud to ask,
And (which is worse) too modest to consent.
Sonnet. II.
MArg'ret of humbler stature by the head
Is (as it often falls out with yellow hair)
Than her fair Sister, yet so much more fair,
As her pure white is better mixed with red.
This, hotter than the other ten to one,
Longs to be put unto her Mothers trade,
And loud proclaims she lives too long a Maid,
Wishing for one t'untie her Virgin Zone.
She finds Virginity a kind of ware
That Is very very troublesome to bear,
And being gone, she thinks will never be mist:
And yet withal the Girl has so much grace,
To call for help I know she wants the face,
Though asked, I know not how she would resist.
Sonnet. III.
MAry is black, and taller than the last,
Yet equal in perfection and desire,
To the one's melting snow, and t'other's fire,
As with whose black their fairness is defaced:
She pants as much for love as the other two,
But she so virtuous is, or else so wise,
That she will win or will not love a prize,
And but upon good terms will never do:
Therefore who her will conquer ought to be
At least as full of love and wit as she,
Or he shall never gain favor at her hands:
Nay, though he have a pretty store of brains,
Shall only have his labor for his pains,
Unless he offer more than she demands.
Sonnet. IV.
MArtha is not so tall, nor yet so fair
As any of the other lovely three,
Her chiefest Grace is poor simplicity,
Yet were the rest away, she were a Star.
She Is fair enough, only she wants the art
To set her Beauties off as* they can do,
And that is the cause she never heard any woo,
Nor ever yet made conquest of a heart:
And yet her bloud's as boiling as the best,
Which, pretty soul, does so disturb her rest,
And makes her languish so, she is fit to die.
Poor thing, I doubt she still must lie alone,
For being like to be attacked by none,
She Has no more wit to ask than to deny.
On my pretty Marten.
COme, my pretty little Muse,
Your assistence I must use,
And you must assist me too
Better than you use to do,
Or the Subject we disgrace
Has obliged us many ways.
Pretty Matty is our Theme,
Of all others the supreme;
Should we study for it a year,
Could we choose a prettier?
Little Mat, whose pretty play
Does divert us every day,
Whose Caresses are so kind,
Sweet, and free, and undesign'd,
Meekness is not more disarming,
Youth and modesty more charming;
Nor from any ill intent
Nuns or Doves more innocent:
And for Beauty, Nature too
Here would show what she could do;
Finer Creature never was seen,
Half so pretty, half so clean.
Eyes as round and black as Sloe,
Teeth as white as morning Snow;
Breath as sweet as blowing Roses,
When the Morn their leaves discloses,
Or, what sweeter you will allow,
Breath of Vestals when they vow,
Or, that yet does sweeter prove,
Sighs of Maids who die for Love.
Next his Feet my praise commands,
Which methinks we should call hands,
For so finely they are shaped,
And for any use so apt,
Nothing can so dext'rous be,
Nor fine handed near as he.
These, without though black as Jet,
Within are soft and supple yet
As Virgins Palm, where Man's deceit
Seal of promise never set.
Back and Belly soft as Dawn,
Sleeps which peace of Conscience crown,
Or the whispers Love reveal,
Or the kisses Lovers steal:
And of such a rich perfume,
As, to say I dare presume,
Will out-ravish and out-wear
That of the fulsome Milliner.
Tail so bushy and so long,
(Which t'omit would do him wrong)
As the proudest she of all
Proudly would be fanned withal.
Having given thus the shape
Of this pretty little Ape,
To his Virtues next I come,
Which amount to such a sum,
As not only well may pass
Both my Poetry and Dress
To set forth as I should do it,
But Arithmetic to boot.
Valor is the ground of all
That we Mortals Virtues call;
And the little Cavalier
That I do present you here,
Has of that so great a share,
He might lead the World to war.
What the Beasts of greater size
Tremble at he does despise,
And is so composed of heart,
Drums nor Guns can make him start:
Noises which make others quake,
Serve his Courage to awake.
Libyan Lions make their Feasts
Of subdued Plebean Beasts,
And Hyr^anian Tigers prey
Still on Creatures less than they,
Or less armed; the Russian Bears
Of tamer Beasts make massacres.
Irish Wolves devour the Dams,
English Foxes prey on Lambs.
These are all effects of course,
Not of Valor, but of Force;
But my Matty does not want
Heart t'attack an Elephant.
Yet his Nature is so sweet,
Mice may nibble at his feet,
And may pass as if unseen,
If they spare his Megazine.
Constancy, a Virtue then
In this Age scarce known to men,
Or to Womankind at least,
In this pretty little Beast
To the World mght be restored,
And my Matty be adored.
Chaste he is as Turtle Doves,
That abhor adult' rate Loves;
True to Friendship, and to Love,
Nothing can his Virtue move,
But his Faith in either given.
Seems as if 'twere sealed in Heaven.
Of all Brutes to him alone
Justice is, and Favor known.
Now is Matty's excellence
Mearly circumscribed by sense,
He for judgment what to do
Knows both good and evil too,
But is with such virtue blessed,
That he chooses still the best,
And wants nothing of a Wit
But a Tongue to utter it:
Yet with that we may dispense,
For his Signs are Eloquence.
Then for Fashion, and for Meine,
Matty's fit to court a Queen;
All his motions graceful are*
And all Courts outshine as far
As our Courtiers peakish Clowns,
Or those peaknils Northern Loons,
Which should Ladies see, they sure
Other Beasts would never endure;
Then no more they would make suit
For an ugly pissing-coat
Rammish Cat, nor make a pet
Of a bawdy Mamoset.
Nay, the Squerrel, though it is
Pretty'st Creature next to this,
Would henceforward be discarded,
And in Woods live unregarded.
Here sweet Beauty is a Creature
Purposely ordained by Nature,
Both for cleanness and for shape
Worthy a Fair Ladies lap;
Nor her Bosom would disgrace,
Nor a more beloved place.
Live long, my pretty little Boy,
Thy Master's Darling, Ladies Joy,
And when Fate will no more forbear
To lay his hands on him and her,
Even then let Fate my Matty spare,
And when thou dy'st then turn a Star*
The New-year.
To Mr. W. T.
HArk, the Cock crows, and you, bright Star,
Tells us the day himself's not far;
And see where, breaking from the night,
He guilds the Western hills with light.
With him old Ianus does appear,
Peeping into the future Year
With such a look as seems to say
The prospect is not good that way
Thus do we rise ill sights to see,
And against our selves to Prophecy,
When the Prophetic fear of things
A more tormenting mischief brings,
More full of Soul-tormenting Gall
Than direst mischiefs can be^all.
But stay! but stay! methinks my sight,
Better informed by clearer light,
Discerns sereneness in that brow,
That all contracted seemed but now:
His reverse face may show distaste,
And frown upon the ills are past;
But that which this way looks is clear,
And smiles upon the Newborn year.
He looks too from a place so high,
The year lies open to his eye,
And all the moments open are
To the exact discoverer;
Yet more and more he smiles upon
The happy revolution.
Why should we then suspect or fear
The Influences of a year
So smiles upon us the first morn,
And speaks us good so soon as born?
Pox on it! the last was ill enough,
This cannot but make better proof;
Or at the worst, as we brushed through
The last, why so we may this too;
And then the next in reason should
Be superexcellently good:
For the worst ills we daily see,
Have no more perpetuity
Than the best Fortunes that do fall;
Which also bring us wherewithal
Longer their being to support,
Than those do of the other sort;
And who has one good year in three;
And yet repines at Destiny,
Appears ungrateful in the case,
And merits not the good he has.
Then let us welcome the new guest*
With lusty Brimmers of the best;
Mirth always should good Fortune meet,
And renders even disaster sweet:
And though the Princess turn her back,
Let us but line our selves with Sack,
We better shall by far hold out,
Till the next year she face about.
The Ioys of Marriage.
HOw uneasy is his Life
Who is troubled with a Wife!
Be she never so fair or comely,
Be she never so foul or homely,
Be she never so young and toward,
Be she never so old and froward,
Be she kind with arms enfolding,
Be she cross and always scolding,
Be she blithe or melancholy,
Have she Wit or have she Folly,
Be she wary, be she squandring,
Be she staid, or be she wandering*
Be she constant, be she fickle,
Be she fire, or be she ickle,
Be she pious or ungodly,
Be she chaste or what sounds odly:
Lastly, be she good or evil,
Be she Saint, or be she Devil;
Yet uneasy is his Life
Who is married to a Wife.
If fair she is subject to temptation,
If foul her self's solicitation,
If young and sweet she is too tender,
If old and cross no man can mend her,
If too too kind she is over clinging,
If a true scold she is ever ringing,
If blithe find Fiddles, or y'undoe her,
If sad then call a Casuist to her,
If a Wit she will still be jeering,
If a Fool she is ever fleering,
If too wary then she will shrue thee,
If too lavish she will undo thee,
If staid she will mope a year together,
If gadding then to London with her,
If true she will think you don't deserve her,
If false a thousand will not serve her,
If lustful send her to a Spittle,
If cold she is for one too little,
If she be of the Reformation,
Thy House will be a Convocation,
If a Libertine then watch it,
At the window thou may catch it,
If chaste her pride will still importune,
If a Whore thou know thy Fortune:
So uneasy is his Life
Who is married to a Wife.
These are all extremes I know,
But all Womankind is so,
And the Golden Mean to none
Of that cloven Race is known;
Or to one if known it be,
Yet that one's unknown to me.
Some Vlissean Traveller
May perhaps have gone so sar,
As to have found (in spite of Nature)
Such an admirable Creature.
If a Voyager there be
Has made that discovery,
He the famed Odcombian gravels.
And may rest to write his Travels.
But alas! there is no such woman,
The Calamity is common,
The first rib did bring in ruin,
And the rest have since been doing,
Some by one way, some another,
Woman still is mischief's mother*
And yet cannot Man forbear,
Though it cost him never so dear.
Yet with me it is out of season
To complain thus without reason,
Since the best and sweetest fair
Is allotted to my share:
But alas! I love her so
That my love creates my woe;
For if she be out of humor,
Straight displeased I do presume her.
And would give the World to know
What it is offends her so:
Or if she be discontented,
Lord, how am I then tormented!
And am ready to persuade her
That I have unhappy made her:
But if sick I then am dying,
Meat and Medicine both defying:
So uneasy is his Life
Who is married to a Wife.
What are then the Marr'age Joys
That make such a mighty noise?
All Is enclosed in one short Sentence,
Little Pleasure, great Repentance;
Yet it is so sweet a Pleasure,
To repent we scarce have leisure,
Till the pleasure wholly fails,
Save sometimes by Intervals:
But those intervals again,
Are so full of deadly pain,
That the pleasure we have got,
Is in Conscience too dear bought.
Pox on it! would Womankind be free,
What needed this Solemnity,
This foolish way of coupl'ing so,
That all the World (forsooth) must know?
And yet the naked truth to say,
They are so perfect grown that way,
That if it only be for pleasure
You would marry, take good leisure,
Since none can ever want supplies
For natural necessities;
Without exposing of his Life
To the great trouble of a Wife.
Why then all the great pains taking?
Why the sighing? why the waking?
Why the riding? why the running?
Why the artifice and cunning?
Why the whining? why the crying?
Why pretending to be dying?
Why all this clutter to get Wives,
To make us weary of our Lives.
If Fruition we profess
To be the only happiness,
How much happier then is he,
Who with the industrious Be
Preys upon the several Sweets
Of the various Flowers he meets,
Than he who with less delight
Dulls on one his Appetite?
Oh it is pleasant to be free!
The sweetest Miss is Liberty;
And though who with one sweet is blessed
May reap the sweets of all the rest
In her alone, who fair and true,
As Love is all for which we sue,
Whose several Graces may supply
The place of full variety,
And whose true kindness or address
Sums up the All of happiness;
Yet it is better live alone,
Free to all than ti'd to one,
Since uneasy is his Life
Who is married to a Wife.
ODE.
To Love.
I.
GReat Love, I thank thee, now thou have
Paid me for all my sufferings past,
And wounded me with Nature's Pride,
For whom more glory it is to die
Scorned and neglected, than enjoy
All Beauty in the world beside.
II.
A Beauty above all pretense,
Whose very scorns are recompense,
The Regent of my heart is crowned,
And now the sorrows and the woe,
My Youth and Folly helped me to,
Are buried in this friendly wound.
III.
Led by my Folly or my Fate,
I loved before I knew not what,
And threw my thoughts I knew not where:
With judgment now I lvoe and sue,
And never yet perfection knew,
Until I cast mine eyes on her.
IV.
My Soul, that was so base before
Each little beauty to adore,
Now raised to Glory, does despise
Those poor and counterfeited rays
That caught me in my childish days,
And knows no power but her eyes.
V.
Raised to this height, I have no more,
Almighty Love, for to implor^
Of my auspicious Stars or thee,
Than that thou bow her noble mind
To be as mercifully kind
As I shall ever faithful be.
Song.
I.
SAd thoughts make have and kill me out,
I live too long in pain;
It Is dying to be still in doubt,
And death, that ends all miseries,
The chief and only favor is
The wretched can obtain.
II.
I have lived long enough to know
That life is a Disease,
At least it does torment me so,
That Death, at whom the happy start*
I court to come, and with his Dart
To give me a release.
III.
Come, friendly Death, then strike me dead,
For all this while I die,
And but long dying nothing dread;
Yet beign with grief the one half slain,
With all thy power thou will gain
But half a Victory.
Elegy.
AWay to the other world, away,
In this I can no longer stay;
I long enough in this have stayed
To see my self poorly betrayed,
Forsaken, robbed, and left alone,
And to all purposes undone.
What then can tempt me to live on,
My Peace and Honor being gone!
O yes! I still am called upon
To stay by my affliction.
Oh fair affliction! let me go,
You best can part with me I know;
It Is an ill natured pride you take
To triumph over the fool you make,
And you loose time in trampling over
One, whilst you might make twenty more.
Your eyes have still the conquering power
They had in that same dangerous hour
They laid me at your beauties feet,
Your Roses still as fair and sweet;
And there more hearts are to subdue,
But, oh! not one that is half so true.
Dismiss me then t'eternal rest,
I cannot live but in your Breast;
Where, banished by Inconstancy,
The world has no more room for me*
In Coccam.
Epigram De Monsieur Maynard.
THy cheeks having their Roses shed,
And thy whole Frame through Age become
So loathsome for all use in bed,
That it is much fitter for a Tomb;
Cocca, thou should not be so vain,
Although thy Eloquence be great,
As to expect it should obtain
That I should do the filthy Feat:
And that same Engine in your hand
You cherish, court, and flatter so,
Now you have made him bravely stand,
Is not so charitable though,
As in his vigorous youth to be
A crutch to your Antiquity.
Writ in Calista's Prayer Book. An Epigram OF Monsieur de Malherbe.
WHilst you are deaf to love, you may,
Fairest Calista, weep and pray,
And yet, alas! no mercy find;
Not but God's merciful, it is true,
But can you think he will grant to you
What you deny to all Mankind?
Song.
I.
HOw comes it to pass with so little ado
That I Have broke all my Fetters and Chains
And that no remembrance of all my great woe
But like that of a Tale now remains?
I no more for a Star now do Phillis esteem,
And all her Perfections to me now do seem
But like Dreams when I Have malted my Brains.
II.
I am now quite ashamed to see how she looks,
And no more the same Fair that before,
Those Beauties all gone put me so off the hooks,
And so troubled my Coxcomb of yore;
I Now see all the shot that she made was false fire,
And those murdering Charms I so much did admi^
Were defects, mere defects, and no more.
III.
The Sun, or yet Love, are no more in her eyes,
They Are as dim as a Nail's in a door,
She Is so far with her Charms from gaining a prize,
That I doubt she must now run of the ^core;
And for that we call Mistress so monst'rous* unfit
To any man living that has Grace or Wit,
That she is s^arce good enough for a Whore.
IV.
Yet, Sot that I was, I did once cry and blubber
For this damnable piece of Infection,
Which none could have done but an Owl and a Lubber,
But his sense would have been his Protection;
And for which on my self I will now pass this Sentence,
That to the hour of my death I will weep for repentance
That I ever did weep for affection.
V.
Farewell then, O Phillis! it is the Gods pleasure
That I reason might see to forsake you,
To open my eyes, then out of my loves treasure
Please t'accept of this farewell I make you;
It Is a Complement that is most justly your due,
And but what in times past I took kindly from yo^
Ugly Phillis, a Whoreson's Pox take you.
A Phillis.
Madrigal.
JE plaigrois, Philis, un jour
A son Petitesse d'Amour
De mon martyr, and mon malheur;
De ce que par son Caprice,
Sans procez, and sans Justice
L'enfant m'avoit navrez le Caeur.
La dessus le pitit Drole
M'a promis sur la parole
Enter ses beaux flesches uvoraees d'or,
D'en choisir encore une autre
Et de fair autant au vostre,
Le seutez vous, Philis, encore?
ODE.
To Chloris.
I.
FAir and Cruel, still in vain
Must I adore, still, still persevere,
Languish still, and still complain,
And yet a Medicine for my Fever
Never, never must obtain?
II.
Chloris, how are you to blame,
To him that dies to be so cruel
Not to stay my falling frame,
Since your fair eyes do dart the fuel
That still nourishes my ^lame?
III.
Shade those Glories of thine eye,
Or let their Influence be milder,
Beauty, and disdain destroy
Alike, and make our Passions wilder,
Either let me live or die.
IV.
I have loved thee (let me see;
Lord, how long a time of loving!)
Years no less than three times three,
Still my flame and pain improving,
Yet still paid with cruelty.
V.
What more would thou have of me?
Sure I Have served a pretty season,
And so proved my constancy,
That methinks it is but reason
Love or Death should set me free.
ODE.
I.
WAs ever man of Nature's framing
So given over to roving,
Who have been twenty years a taming
By ways that are not worth the naming,
And now must die of loving?
II.
Hell take me if she been't so winning
That now I love her mainly,
And though in jest at the beginning,
Yet now I Would wondrous fain be sinning,
And so have told her plainly.
III.
At which she cries I do not love her,
And tells me of her Honor;
Then have I no way to disprove her,
And my true passion to discover,
But straight to fall upon her.
IV.
Which done, forsooth, she talks of wedding,
But what will that avail her?
For though I am old Dog at Bedding,
I Am yet a man of so much reading,
That there I sure shall fail her.
V.
No, hang me if I ever marry,
Till Womankind grow stancher,
I do delight delights to vary,
And love not in one Hulk to tarry,
But only Trim and Launch her.
To John Bradshaw, Esquire
I.
COuld you and I our Lives renew,
And be both young again,
Retaining what we ever knew
Of Manners, Times, and Men,
II.
We could not frame so loose to live,
But must be useful then,
Ever we could possibly arrive
To the same Age again;
III.
But Youth's devoured in Vanities
Before we are aware,
And so grown old before grown wise,
We good for nothing are:
IV.
Or, if by that time knowing grown,
By reading Books and Men,
For others Service, or our own,
It Is with the latest then.
V.
Happy's that man, in this estate,
Whose Conscience tells him still,
That though for good he comes too late,
He never did any ill.
VI.
The satisfaction flowing thence,
All dolours would assuage,
And be sufficient recompense
For all the ills of Age:
VII.
But very few (my Friend) I fear,
Whom this ill Age has bred,
At need have such a Comforter
To make their dying Bed.
VIII.
It Is then high time we should prepare
In a new World to live,
Since here we breath but panting air,
Alas! by short reprieve.
IX.
Life then begins to be a pain,
Infirmity prevails,
Which, when it but begins to reign,
The bravest Courage quails;
X.
But could we, as I said, procure
To live our lives again,
We should be of the better sure
Or the worst sort of men.
WINTER.
De Monsieur Marigny Directed to Sir Robert Cok^.
BLeak Winter is from Norway come,
And such a formidable Groom,
With His Icled beard, and hoary head,
That, or with cold, or else with dread,
Has frighted Phoebus out on's wit,
And put him int' an Ague Fit:
The Moon too, out of reverend care
To save her beauty from the Air,
And guard her pale Complexion,
Her Hood and Vizard Mask puts on:
Old gray-pate Saturn too is seen,
Muffled up in a great Bear's skin:
And Mars a quilted Cap puts on,
Under his shining Morion:
And in these posting Luminaries
It but a necessary care is,
And very consonant to reason,
To go well clad in such a season.
The very Heaven it self, alas!
Is now so paved with liquid Glass,
That if they have not (on the other side)
Learned in their younger days to slide,
It is so slippy made withal*
They cannot go two steps but fall.
The Nectar which the Gods do troll,
Is frozen in the Celestial Boul,
And the Cup Bearer Ganimed
Has capp'd his frizled flaxed head.
The naked Gemini, God wot,
A very scurvy Rhume have got;
And in this coldest of cold weathers,
Had they not been warm wrapped in Feathers,
Mercury's heels had been, I trow,
Peppered with running Kibes ever now.
Nor are these Deities, whom Love
To men has tempted from above
To pass their time on Earth, more free
From the cold blast than the others be.
For Truth, amidst the blustering Rout,
Cannot keep her Torch from blowing out.
Justice, since none would take her word,
Has for a Wastcoat pawned her Sword;
And it is credibly related,
Her Fillet's to a Quoife translated.
Fortune's foot's frozen to her Ball,
Bright Crystal from her nose does fall,
And all the work she now intends,
Is but to blow her fingers ends.
The Muses have the Schools forsook
To creep into the Chimney nook,
Where, for default of other wood,
(Although it goes to his heart's blood)
Apollo, for to warm their shins,
Makes fires of Lutes and Violins.
The Trout and Grailing that did rove
At liberty, like swift winged Dove,
In Ice are crusted up and pent,
Enslaved with the poor Element.
It Is strange! but what is more strange than these,
Thy Bounties, Knight, can never freeze,
But even amidst the Frost and Snow
In a continued Torrent flow;
Oh! let me come and live with thee,
I Winter shall nor feel nor see.
On Rutt the Judge.
RVTT, to the Suburb Beauties full well known,
Was from the bag scarce crept into a Gown,
When he, by telling of himself fine tales,
Was made a Judge, and sent away to Wales:
'Twas proper and most fit it should be so,
Whither should Goats but to the Mountains go?
On Sim and Simon.
THough Sim, whilst Sim, in ill repute did live,
He yet was but a Knave diminutive;
But now his name being swelled two letters bigger,
Simon's a Knave at length, and not in figure.
Virelay.
THou cruel Fair, I go
To seek out any Fate but thee,
Since there is none can wound me so,
Nor that has half thy cruelty;
Thou cruel Fair, I go.
For ever then farewell,
^Tis a long leave I take, but oh!
To tarry with thee here is Hell,
And twenty thousand Hells to go;
For ever though farewell.
Madrigal.
TO be a Whore, despite of Grace,
Good Counsel and an ugly face,
And to distribute still the Pox,
To men of wit
Will seem a kind of Paradox;
And yet
Thou art a Whore, despite of Grace,
Good Counsel and an ugly face.
La Illustrissima.
On my Fair and Dear Sister, M^^ Anne King.
OFTEN have I loved, but never aright,
Till the other day I saw a sight
That shot me through and through with conquering (...)
A Beauty of so rare a frame
As does all other Beauties shame,
And renders Poetry to praise it lame.
Poor sotted Poets, cease to praise
Your Laura's, Cynthia's, Lydia's,
Fondly adored in your mistaken days,
Tell me no more of golden hair,
Of all ill colors the worst wear,
And renders beauty terrible as fair.
Almanna's curls are black as night,
Thorough whose Sable ring's a white,
Whiter than whiteness, strikes the wounded sight.
Tell me no more of arched brows,
Nor henceforth call them Cupid's Bows,
Which common praise to common form allows.
Hers, shining, smooth, and black as Jet,
Short, thick, and even without ^ret,
Exceed all Simile and counter^eit.
Study no more for Eulogies,
For English gray, or French blew eyes,
Which never yet but of a Fool made prize.
Almanna's eyes are such as none
Could ever dare to gaze upon,
But in a trice he found his heart was gone.
Those lights the coldest blood can thaw,
And hearts by their attraction draw,
As warm chafed Jet licks up a trembling straw.
No more for cheeks make senseless Posies
Of Lillies white, and Damask Roses,
Which more of fancy than of truth discloses.
In hers Complexion's mixed so,
That white and red together grow,
Like Lovers blood sprinkled on Virgin Snow.
Cease, cease of Coral Lips to prate,
Of Rubies, and I cannot tell what,
Those Epithets are all grown stale and flat.
Almanna's rosy lips are such,
To praise them is for wit too much,
Till first inspired by their most blessed touch.
No more hang teeth upon a string,
And ropes of Pearl for Grinders bring,
Your Treasure is too poor an Offering.
Comparisons do hers no right,
Ivory's yellow in their sight,
Which are than all things but themselves more white.
No more of Odours go in quest
As ^ar as the remotest East,
Thence to perfume a Ladies rotten Chest.
Her breath, much sweeter than the Spring
With all its joined perfumes can bring,
Gives life and happy life to every thing.
Tell me no more of Swan-white breasts,
Which you call little Cupid's nests,
In those you praise fit for such wanton guests:
Almanna's ten times whiter are
Than those of the supremest fair,
But yet, alas! no Loves inhabit there.
Oh! set your wits no more of the last,
To praise a Nymph's contorted Waste,
By such admirers fit to be embraced;
Here is a shape, and such a one
As regulates Proportion,
And but to see is half Fruition.
Tell me no more Poetic lies,
Of hard, cold, crusted, marble thighs,
Hopeless and fond impossibilities;
Hers, by the rule of Symmetry,
Although unseen, we know must be
Above the poor report of Poetry.
Tell me no more of Legs and Feet,
Where Grace and Elegancy meet,
But leave your lying, and come here to see it;
Here Is shape, invention that disgraces,
And when she moves the charming Graces
Both number, figure, and adjust her paces:
But to this shape there is a mind
From flesh and blood so well refined,
As renders her the Glory of her Kind.
On the World's Center never yet
Were Form and Virtue so well met,
Nor priceless Diamond so neatly set.
Beauty, but Beauty is alone,
But Fair Almanna's such a one
As Earth may glory in, and Heaven may own.
Almanna is the only she
Deserves the general Eulogy,
The praise of all the rest is Poetry.
Chanson a Boire.
I.
COme let us mind our drinking,
Away with this thinking;
It never, that I heard of, did any one good;
Prevents not disaster,
But brings it on faster,
Mischance is by mirth and by courage withstoo^
He never can recover
The day that is over,
The present is with us and does threaten no ill;
He Is a Fool that will sorrow
For the thing called to morrow,
But the hour we have in hand we may weild as we wi^^
II.
There Is nothing but Bacchus
Right merry can make us,
That virtue particular is to the Vine;
It fires every creature
With wit and good nature,
Whose thoughts can be dark when their noses do shine?
A night of good drinking
Is worth a year's thinking,
There Is nothing that kills us so surely as sorrow;
Then to drown our cares Boys
Let Us drink up the Stars Boys,
Each face of the gang will a Sun be to morrow.
The Angler's Ballad.
I.
AWay to the Brook,
All your Tackle out look,
Here Is a day that is worth a year's wishing;
See that all things be right,
For it is a very spite
To want tools when a man goes a fishing.
II.
Your Rod with tops two,
For the same will not do
If your manner of angling you vary;
And full well you may think,
If you troll with a Pink,
One too weak will be apt to miscarry.
III.
Then Basket, neat made
By a Master in's trade,
In a belt at your shoulders must dangle;
For none ever was so vain
To wear this to disdain,
Who a true Brother was of the Angle.
IV.
Next, Pouch must not fail,
Stuffed as full as a Mail,
With Wax, Cruels, Silks, Hair, Furs and Feathers,
To make several Flies
For the several Skies,
That shall kill in despite of all weathers.
V.
The Boxes and Books
For your Lines and your Hooks,
And, though not for strict need notwithstan^ing,
Your Scissors, and your Hone
To adjust your points on,
With a Net to be sure for your landing.
VI.
All these being on,
It Is high time we were gone,
Down, and upward, that all may have pleasure;
Till, here meeting at night,
We shall have the delight
To discourse of our Fortunes at leisure.
VII.
The day's not too bright,
And the wind hits us right,
And all Nature does seem to invite us;
We have all things at will
For to second our skill,
As they all did conspire to delight us.
VIII.
Or stream now, or still,
A large Panier will fill,
Trout and Grailing to rise are so willing;
I dare venture to say
'Twill be a bloody day,
And we all shall be weary of killing.
IX.
Away then, away,
We loose sport by delay,
But first leave all our sorrows behind us;
If misfortune do come,
We are all gone from home,
And a fishing she never can find us.
X.
The Angler is free
From the cares that degree
Finds it self with so often tormented;
And although we should slay
Each a hundred to day,
It Is a slaughter needs never be repented.
XI.
and though we display
^ll our Arts to betray
What were made for man's Pleasure and Diet;
^et both Princes and States
^ay, for all our quaint Bates,
Rule themselves and their People in quiet.
XII.
We scratch not our pates,
Nor repine at the Rates
Our Superiors impose on our living;
But do frankly submit,
Knowing they have more wit
In demanding, than we have in giving.
XIII.
Whilst quiet we sit
We conclude all things ^it,
Acquiescing with hearty submission;
For, though simple, we know
That soft murmurs will grow
At the last unto downright Sedition.
XIV.
We care not who says,
And intends it dispraise.
That an Angler t'a Fool is next neighbor;
Let him prate, what care we,
We Are as honest as he,
And so let him take that for his labor.
XV.
We covet no Wealth
But the Blessing of Health.
And that greater good Conscience within;
Such Devotion we bring
To our God and our King,
That from either no offers can win.
XVI.
Whilst we sit and fish
We do pray as we wish,
For long life to our King James the Second;
Honest Anglers then may,
Or they have very foul play,
With the best of good Subjects be reckoned.
Epistle to John Bradshaw Esquire
I.
FRom Porto Nova as pale wretches go
To swing on fatal Tripus, even so,
My dearest Friend, I went last day from thee,
Whilst for five Miles, the figure of that Tree
Was ever in my guilty Fancy's eye,
As if in earnest I Would been doomed to die
For, what deserved it, so unworthily
Stealing so early, Jack, away from thee.
And that which (as't well might) increased my fe^^
Was the ill luck of my vile Chariotier,
Who drove so nicely too, to increase my dread,
As if his Horses with my vital thread
Had Harnessed been, which being, alas! so weak
He feared might snap, and would not it should brea^
Till he himself the honor had to do it
With one thrice stronger, and my neck to boot.
Thus far in hanging posture then I went,
(And sting of Conscience is a punishment
On Earth they say the greatest, and some tell
It is moreo'er the only one in Hell,
The Worm that never ^lies being alone
The thing they call endless Damnation:)
But leaving that unto the Wise that made it,
And knowing best the Gulf, can best evade it,
I Will tell you, that being passed through High-gate, there
I was saluted by the Country Air,
With such a pleasing Gale, as made me smell
The Peak it self; nor is it a Miracle,
For all that pass that Portico this way
Are Transontani, as the Courtiers say;
Which supposed true, one then may boldly speak,
That all of the North-side High-gate are in the Peak;
And so to hanging when I thought to come,
Waked from the Dream, I found my self at home.
Wonder not then if I, in such a case
So overjoyed, forgot thee for a space;
And but a little space, for, by this light,
I thought on thee again ten times ever night;
Though when the night was come, I then indeed
Thought all on one of whom I Would greater need:
But being now cured of that Malady,
I Am at full leisure to remember thee,
And (which I Am sure you long to know) set forth
In Northern Song my Journey to the North.
Know then with Horses twain, one sound, one lame
On Sunday's Eve I to St. Alban's came,
Where, finding by my Body's lusty state
I could not hold out home at that slow rate,
I found a Coachman, who, my case bemoaning,
With three stout Geldings, and one able Stoning,
For eight good Pounds did bravely undertake,
Or for my own, or for my Money's sake,
Through thick and thin, fall out what could befall,
To bring me safe and sound to Basford-hall.
Which having drank upon, he bid goodnight,
And (Heaven forgive us) with the Morning's light,
Not fearing God, nor his Vicegerent Constable,
We roundly rolling were the Road to Dunstable,
Which, as they chim'd to Prayers, we trotted through,
And before elev'n ten minutes came unto
The Town that Brickhill height, where we did rest,
And dined indifferent well both man and beast.
'Twixt two and four to Stratford, 'twas well driven,
And came to Tocester to lodge at Even.
Next day we dined at Dunchurch, and did lie
That night four miles on our side Coventry.
Tuesday at Noon at Lichfeild Town we baited,
But there some Friends, who long that hour had waited,
So long detained me, that my Chariotier
Could drive that night but to Vttoxiter.
And there the Wedn'sday, being Market Day,
I was constrained with some kind Lads to stay
Tippling till afternoon, which made it night
When from my Hero's Tower I saw the light
Of her Flambeaux, and fancied as we drove
Each rising Hillock was a swelling wave,
And that I swimming was in Neptune's spite
To my long longed-for Harbor of delight.
And now I Am here set down again in peace,
After my troubles, business, Voyages,
The same dull Northern clod I was before,
Gravely enquiring how Ewes are a Score,
How the Hay-Harvest, and the Corn was got,
And (...) or no there is like to be a Rot;
Just the same Sot I was ever I removed,
Nor by my travel, nor the Court improved;
The same old fashioned Squire, no whit refined,
And shall be wiser when the Devil's blind:
But find all here too in the self-same state,
And now begin to live at the old rate,
To bub old Ale, which nonsense does create,
Write lewd Epistles, and sometimes translate
Old Tales of Tubs, of Guyenne, and Provence,
And keep a clutter with the old Blades of France,
As D' Avenant did with those of Lombardy,
Which any will receive, but none will buy,
And that has set H. B. and me awry.
My River still through the same Chanel glides,
Clear from the Tumult, Salt, and dirt of Tides,
And my poor Fishing-house, my Seat's best grace,
Stands firm and faithful in the self-same place
I left it four months since, and ten to one
I go a Fishing ever two days are gone:
So that (my Friend) I nothing want but thee
To make me happy as I Would wish to be;
And sure a day will come I shall be blessed
In his enjoyment whom my heart loves best;
Which when it comes will raise me above men
Greater than crowned Monarchs are, and then
I Will not exchange my Cottage for White Hall,
Windsor, the Lauvre, or the Escurial.
Anacreontick.
FILL a Boul of lusty Wine,
Briskest Daughter of the Vine;
Fill't until it Sea-like flow,
That my cheek may once more glow.
I am fifty Winters old,
Blood then stagnates and grows cold,
And when Youthful heat decays,
We must help it by these ways.
Wine breeds Mirth, and Mirth imparts
Heat and Courage to our hearts,
Which in old men else are lead,
And not warmed would soon be dead.
Now I Am sprightly, fill again,
Stop not though they mount to ten;
Though I stagger do not spare,
It Is to rock and still my Ear;
Though I stammer it is no matter,
I should do the same with water;
When I belch, I am but trying
How much better it is than sighing;
If a tear spring in mine eye,
It Is for joy not grief I cry:
This is living without thinking,
These are the effects of drinking.
Fill a main, (Boy) fill a main,
Whilst I drink I feel no pain;
Gout or Palsy I have none,
Hang the Chollick and the Stone;
I methinks grow young again,
New blood springs in every vein,
And supply it (Sirrah) still,
Whilst I drink you sure may fill:
If I nod, Boy, rouse me up
With a bigger fuller Cup;
But when that, Boy, will not do,
Faith even let me then go to,
For it is better far too lie
Down to sleep than down to dye.
Burlesque.
Upon the Great Frost.
To John Bradshaw Esquire
YOU now, Sir, may, and justly, wonder
That I, who did of late so thunder
Your frontier Garrison by th'Ferry,
Should on a sudden grow so weary;
And thence may raise a wrong conclusion,
That you have bob'd my Resolution;
Or else that my Poetic Battery,
With which so smartly I did patter ye,
(Though I am not in that condition)
Has shot away her Ammunition;
Or (if in kindness peradventure
You are more gentle in your censure)
That I my writing left pursuing,
'Cause I was weary of ill doing.
Now of these three surmizes any,
Except the last, might pass with many;
But such as know me of the Nation,
Know I so hate all Reformation,
Since so much harm to do I Have seen it,
That in my self I Will never begin it;
And should you under your hand give it,
Not one of twenty would believe it.
But I must tell you in brief Clauses,
If you to any of these Causes
Impute the six weeks Truce I Have given,
That you are wide, Sir, the whole Heaven:
For know, though I appear less eager,
I never mean to raise my Leaguer,
Till or by storm, or else by Famine,
I force you to the place I am in;
Your self sans Article to tender,
Unto Discretion to surrender;
Where see what comes of your vain glory,
To make me lie so long before ye.
To show you next I want no powder,
I thus begin to batter louder;
And for the last vain Hope that fed ye,
I think I Have answered it already.
Now, to be plain, although your Spirit
Will ill, I know, endure to hear it,
You must of force at least miscarry,
For reasons supernumerary:
And though I know you will be striving
To do what lies in mortal living,
And may, it may be, a month double
To lie before you give me trouble,
(Though with the stronger men but vapor ill)
And hold out stiff till the end of April,
Or possibly a few days longer,
Yet then you needs must yield for hunger,
When, having eaten all Provisions,
You Are like to make most brave Conditions.
Now having friendship been so just to,
To tell you what you are like to trust to,
I Will next acquaint you with one reason
I Have let you rest so long a season,
And that my Muse has been so idle;
Know Pegasus has got a Bridle,
A Bit and Curb of crusted water,
Or if I called plain Ice no matter,
With which he now is so commanded,
His days of galloping are ended,
Unless I with the spur do prick him,
Nay, rather though I whip and kick him;
He who unbidden used to gambol,
Can now nor prance, nor trot, nor amble,
Nor stir a foot to take his airing,
But stands stiff froze, like that at Charing,
With two feet up, two down, it is pity
He Is not erected in the City.
But, to leave fooling, I assure ye
There never was so cold a Fury
Of nipping Frost, and pinching weather,
Since Eve and Adam met together.
Our Peak, that always has been famous
For cold wherewith to cramp and lame us,
Worse than it self, did now resemble a
Certain damned place called Nova Zembla,
And we who boast us humane Creatures,
Had happy been had we changed features,
Garments at least, though theirs be shabbed,
With those who that cold place inhabit,
The Bears and Foxes, who sans question
Than we by odds have warmer Vests on.
How cold that Country is, he knows most
Has there his Fingers and his Toes lost;
But here I know that every Member
Alike was handled by December:
Who blew his nose had clout or fist all
Instead of snivel filled with Crystal*
Who drew for Urinal ejection,
Was b'witch'd into an odd erection,
And these, Priapus like, stood strutting,
Fitter for Pedestal than rutting:
As men were fierce, or gentle handed,
Their Fists were clutch'd, or Palms expanded;
Limbs were extended, or contracted,
As use or humor most affected;
For, as men did to the air expose 'em,
It caught and in that figure froze 'em;
Of which think me not over ample:
If I produce you here example.
Where, though I am believed by scarce one,
None will, I hope, suspect the Person,
Who, from Lies he far remote is,
Will give in verbo sacerdotis:
One going to discharge at will-Duck
Had for his recompense the ill luck,
(Or my Informer's an Impostor)
To be in that presenting posture,
Surpised with his left eye fast winking,
Till by good fires, and hot things drinking,
He thawed, to the beholders laughter,
Unto it self a few hours after.
Two Towns, that long that war had waged;
Being at Football now engaged
For honor, as both sides pretended,
Left the brave trial to be ended
Till the next Thaw, for they were frozen
On either part at least a dozen;
With a good handsome space between 'em,
Like Rolle-rich stones, if you have seen 'em,
And could no more run, kick, or trip ye,
Than I can quaff off Aganippe;
Till Ale, which crowns all such pretenses,
Mull'd them again into their senses.
A Maid compelled to be a gadder,
T'abate th'extension of her Bladder,
Which is an importuning matter,
Was so supported by her water,
To ease her knees with a third Pillar,
That as she sat the poor distiller
Looked on the tripod, like the famous
Astrologer hight Nostradamus.
These stories sound so very odly,
That though men may be pretty godly,
One should though store of Mustard give 'em,
Ever they expect they should believe 'em.
But, to allure your Faith a little,
What follows true is to a tittle:
Our Country Air was, in plain dealing,
Some weaks together so congealing,
That if, as men are rude in this age,
One spit had in another's visage,
The Constable by the back had got him,
For he infallibly had shot him.
Nay, Friend with Friend, Brother with Brother,
Must needs have wounded one another
With kindest words, were they not wary
To make their greetings sideways carry;
For all the words that came from gullets,
If long were slugs, if short ones Bullets.
You might have read from mouths, ( sans Fable,)
Your humble Servant, Sir, in Label;
Like those, (yet theirs were warmer Quarters,)
We see in Foxe's Book of Martyrs.
Eyes that were weak, and apt to water,
Wore Spectacles of their own matter;
And Noses that to drop were ceased,
To such a longitude increased,
That who ever wrung for ease or losses,
Snap'd off two handfulls of Proboscis.
Beards were the strangest things, God save us,
Such as Dame Nature never gave us!
So wild, so pointed, and so staring,
That I should wrong them by comparing
Hedg-hogs, or Porcupine's small Taggers
To their more dangerous Swords and Dagg^rs.
Mustachio's looked like Hero's Trophie^
Behind their Arms in the Herald's Office;
The perpendicular Beard appeared
Like Hop-poles in a Hop-yard reared:
'Twixt these the underwoody Acres
Looked just like Bavius at a Baker's,
To heat the Oven mouth most ready,
Which seemed to gape for heat already.
In mouths with salivation flowing,
The horrid hairs about 'em growing,
Like Reeds, looked in confused order,
Growing about a Fish-pond's border.
But ^tay my self I caught have tripping,
(This Frost is perilous for slipping)
I Have brought this stupifying weather,
These Elements, too near together;
The bearded therefore looked as Nature,
Instead of forming humane Creature,
So many Garrisons had made us,
Our Beards to our Sconces Pallisadoes.
Perukes now stuck so firm and steadfast,
They all were riveted to headfast;
Men that bought Wiggs to go a wooing,
Had them made natural now and growing;
But let them have a care, for truly
The hair will fall 'twixt this and July.
The tender Ladies, and the Lasses,
Were vitrifi'd to drinking-Glasses,
Contrived to such an admiration,
After so odd fantastic fashion,
One scarce knew at which end to guzzle,
The upper or the lower muzzle.
The Earth to that degree was crusted
That, let me never more be trusted
(I speak without Poetic Figure)
If I don't think a lump no bigger
Than a good Wall-nut, had it hit one,
Would as infallibly have split one,
As Cannon-shot, that killing's sure at,
Had not both been alike obdurate.
The very Rocks, which in all reason
Should stoutli'st have withstood the season,
Repetrisi'd with harder matter,
Had no more privilege than water:
Had Pegasus struck such a Mountain,
It would have failed him for a Fountain;
'Twas well Pernassus, when he started,
Proved to his hoof more tenderhearted,
Or else of Greece the sullen Bulley,
And Trojan Hector, had been dully
In threadbare Prose, alas! related,
Which now in Song are celebrated;
For steed Poetic never had whinny'd
Greek Iliad, or Latin Aeneid;
Nor Nero writ his ribble rabbles,
Of sad Complaints, Love, and strange Fables:
Then too Anacreon and Flaccus
Had never made Odes in praise of Bacchus,
And taught blind Harpers for their bread sneak,
From Feast to Feast to make Cats dead squeak.
Nor Martial given so great offenses,
With Epigrams of double Senses.
Rhyme then had never been scanned on Fingers,
No Ballad-makers then, or Singers,
Had ever been heard to twang out Meetre,
Music than which back droans make sweeter:
Of Poetry, that writing mystic,
There had not extant been one Dystich;
And, which is worst, the noblest sort on it,
And to the World the most important
Of the whole Poetical Creation,
Burlesque, had never been in fashion.
But how have I this while forgot so
My Mistress Dove, who went to pot too,
My white Dove that was smoking ever,
In spite of Winter's worst endeavor,
And still could so evade or fly him,
As never to be pinnion'd by him,
Now numbed with bitterness of weather,
Had not the power to stir a Feather,
Wherein the Nymph was to be pitti'd,
But flag'd her wings and so submitted.
The Russian bound though, knowing's betters,
Her Silver feet in Crystal Fetters,
In which Estate we saw poor Dove lie,
Even in Captivity more lovely:
But in the fate of this bright Princess
Reason it self you know convinces,
That her pinniferous fry must die all,
Imprisoned in the Crystal Vial;
And doubtless there was great Mortality
Of Trout and Grailing of great Quality,
Whom Love and Honor did importune
To stick to her in her misfortune,
Though we shall find, no doubt, good Dishes
Next Summer of Plebean Fishes,
Or, if with greater art and trouble
An old Patrician Trout we bubble,
In better Liquor swim we'll make him
By odds than that from whence we take him.
Now though I have in stuff confounded,
Of small truths and great lies compounded,
Given an account, that we in England
May, for cold weather, vie with Green-land,
I have not yet the main reason given,
Why I so very long have driven
My answer to the last you sent me,
Which did so highly complement me:
Know therefore that both Ink and Cotton
So desperately hard were gotten,
It was impossible by squeezing
To get out either truth or leasing:
My Fingers too, no more being jointed,
My Love and Manners disappointed;
Nay, I was numbed on that strange fashion,
I could not sign an Obligation,
(Though Heaven such a Friend never sent me)
Would one a thousand pounds have lent me
On my own Bond; and who is it buckles
To writing, pray, that has no knuckles?
But now I Am thawed beyond all Conscience
Into a torrent of damned Nonsense:
Yet still in this our Climate frigid
I Am one day limber, next day rigid;
Nay, all things yet remain so crusty,
That were I now but half so lusty
As when we kissed four months agon,
And had but Dutch Goloshoes on,
At one run I would slide to Lon --
But surely this transforming weather
Will soon take leave for altogether,
Then what now Lapland seems in May,
You Will swear is sweet Arcadia.
Clepsydra.
I.
WHY, let it run! who bids it stay?
Let us the while be merry;
Time there in water creeps away,
With us it posts in Sherry.
II.
Time not employ'd's an empty sound,
Nor did kind Heaven lend it,
But that the Glass should quick go round,
And men in pleasure spend it.
III.
Then set thy foot, brave Boy, to mine,
Ply quick to cure our thinking;
An hourglass in an hour of Wine
Would be but lazy drinking.
IV.
The man that snores the hourglass out
Is truly a time-waster,
But we, who troll this glass about,
Make him to post it faster.
V.
Yet though he flies so fast, some think,
It Is well known to the Sages,
He Will not refuse to stay and drink,
And yet perform his stages.
VI.
Time waits us whilst we crown the hearth,
And dotes on Rubie Faces,
And knows that this Carier of mirth
Will help to mend our paces:
VII.
He stays with him that loves good time,
And never does refuse it,
And only runs away from him
That knows not how to use it:
VIII.
(...) only steals by without noise
From those in grief that waste it,
(...) lives with the mad roaring Boys
That husband it, and taste it.
IX.
(...) moralist perhaps may prate
Of virtue from his reading,
(...) all but stale and foisted chat
To men of better breeding.
X.
^^me, to define it, is the space
That men enjoy their being;
^is not the hour, but drinking glass,
Makes time and life agreeing.
XI.
(...) wisely does oblige his fate
Does cheerfully obey it,
and is of Fops the greatest that
By temperance thinks to stay it.
XII.
Come, ply the Glass then quick about,
To titillate the Gullet,
Sobriety's no charm, I doubt*
Against a Cannon-Bullet.
Eclogue.
Corydon, Clotten. Corydon. RIse, Clotten, rise, take up thy Pipe and (...)
The Sheepherds want thee, it is (...) Holy Day;
And thou, of all the Swains, were wont to be
The first to grace that great Solemnity.

Clotten. True, Corydon, but then I happy was*
And in Pan's favor had a Minion's place:
Clotten had then fair Flocks, the finest Fleece
These Plains and Mountains yielded then was his
^^ese auspitious times the fruitful Dams
^^ught me the earliest and the kindli'st Lambs;
(...) nightly watch about them need I keep,
Pan himself was Sheepherd to my Sheep;
(...) now, alas! neglected and forgot
(...) all my offerings, and he knows me not.
(...) bloody Wolf, that lurks away the day,
(...) night's black palm beckons him out to prey
(...) the cover of those guilty shades,
Folds but mine the ravenous Foe invades;
(...) there he has such bloody havoc made,
(...) all my Flock being devoured or strayed,
(...) have lost the Fruits of all my pain,
(...) no more a Sheepherd but a Swain.

^orydon. So sad a Tale thou tell me, that I must
^w thy grief (my Clotten) to be just,
(...) mighty Pan has thousand Flocks in store,
(...) when it pleases him, can give thee more,
(...) has perhaps afflicted thee, to try
Virtue only, and thy Constancy.
Repine not then at him that thou art poor,
'Twas by his bounty thou were rich before;
And thou should serve him at the same free (...)
When most distressed, as when most fortunate.

Clotten. Thus do the healthful still the sick (...)
And thus men preach when they would fain seem (...)
But if in my wretched Estate thou were,
I fear me thy Philosophy would start,
And give thee over to an afflicted Sense,
As void of Reason as of Patience.
Had I been always poor, I should not be
Perhaps so discontent with Poverty,
Nor now so sensible of my disgrace,
Had I never known what Reputation was;
But from so great a height of happiness
To sink into the bottom of distress
Is such a change as may become my care,
And more than, I confess, I well can bear.

Corydon. But art thou not too sensible, my (...)
Of those few losses thou have lately had?
Thou art not yet in want, thou still do eat
Bread of the finest Flower of purest Wheat;
Who better Syder drinks, what Sheepherd's board
Does finer Curds, Butter, or Cheese afford?
Who wears a Frock, to grace a Holy Day,
Spun of a finer Wool, or finer Gray?
Whose Cabin is so neatly swept as thine,
With Flowers and Rushes kept so sweet and fine?
Whose name amongst our many Sheepherds Swains
So great as thine is throughout all these Plains?
Who has so many Friends, so pretty Loves?
Who by our bubbling Fountains and Green Groves
Passes away the Summer heats so well?
And who but thee in singing does excel?
So that the Swains, when Clotten sings or plays,
Lay down their Pipes, and listen to his Lays?
Wherein then can consist, I fain would know,
The Misery that thou complain'st of so?

Clotten. Some of these things are true, but, Corydon,
That which maintained all these, alas! is gone,
The want of Wealth I reckon not distress,
But of enough to do good offices;
Which growing less, those Friends will fall away;
Poverty is the ground of all decay;
With our Prosperities our Friendships end*
And to misfortune no one is a Friend,
Which I already find to that degree,
That my old Friends are now afraid of me,
And all avoid me, as good men, would fly
The common Hangman's shameful company.
Those who by Fortune were advanced above,
Being obliged by my most ready love,
Shun me, for fear least my necessity
Should urge what they are unwilling to deny,
And are resolved they will not grant; and those
Have shared my Meat, my Money, and my Cloath^*
Grown rich with others Spoils as well as mine,
The coming near me now do all decline,
Least shame and gratitude should draw them in,
To be to me what I to them have been;
By which means I am stripped of all supplies,
And left alone to my own Miseries.

Corydon. In the relation that thy grief has made,
The World's false friendships are too true displayed;
But, courage man, thou have one Friend in store,
Will never forsake thee for thy being poor:
I will be true to thee in worst estate,
And love thee more now than when Fortunate.

Clotten. All goodness then on Earth I see's not lost,
I of one Friend in misery can boast,
Which is enough, and peradventure more
Than any one could ever do before;
And I to thee as true a Friend will prove,
Not to abuse but to deserve thy love.

To my dear and most worthy Friend, Mr. Isaac Walton.
WHilst in this cold and blustering Clime*
Where bleak winds how I, and Tempests roar,
We pass away the roughest time
Has been of many years before;
Whilst from the most tempest'ous Nooks
The chillest Blasts our peace invade,
And by great Rains our smallest Brooks
Are almost navigable made;
Whilst all the ills are so improved
Of this dead quarter of the year,
That even you, so much beloved,
We would not now wish with us here;
In this estate, I say, it is
Some comfort to us to suppose,
That in a better Clime than this
You our dear Friend have more repose;
And some delight to me the while,
Though nature now does weep in Rain,
To think that I have seen her smile,
And happily may I do again.
If the all-ruling Power please
We live to see another May,
We'll recompense an Age of these
Foul days in one fine fishing day:
We then shall have a day or two,
Perhaps a week, wherein to try,
What the best Master's hand can do
With the most deadly killing Fly:
A day without too bright a Beam,
A warm, but not a scorching Sun,
A Southern gale to curl the Stream,
And (Master) half our work is done.
There whilst behind some bush we wait
The Scaly People to betray,
We'll prove it just with treacherous Bait
To make the preying Trout our prey;
And think our selves in such an hour
Happier than those, though not so high,
Who, like Leviathans, devour
Of meaner men the smaller Fry.
This (my best Friend) at my poor Home
Shall be our Pastime and our Theme,
But then should you not deign to come
You make all this a flattering Dream.
To the Countess of Chesterfield, on the Birth of her first Son.
MAdam, let an humble stranger
Give you Joy without the danger
Of correction from your brow;
And I fancy it is not easy
For the rudest to displease ye,
You Are in so good an humor now.
Such a Treasure you have brought us,
As in gratitude has taught us
To praise and bless your happy Womb;
And since you have obliged so many,
You cannot but expect sure (can ye?)
To be thanked at least by some.
A more wished for Heir by Heaven
Never to Family was given,
Nor a braver Boy to boot;
^iner never was born before him,
One may know who got and bore him,
And now a days it is hard to do it.
You Copy well, for which the rather,
Since you so well have hit the Father,
Madam, once more try your skill
To bring of the other Sex another
As Fair, and Good, and like the Mother,
And double 'em after when you will.
To Chloris.
Stanzes Irreguliers.
I.
LOrd! how you take upon you still!
How you crow and domineer!
How! still expect to have your will,
And carry the Dominion clear,
As you were still the same that once you were!
II.
Fie, Chloris, it is gross mistake,
Correct your error, and be wise,
I kindly still your kindness take,
But yet have learned, though love I prize,
Your froward humors to despise,
And now disdain to call them Cruelties.
III.
I was a Fool whilst you were fair,
And I had Youth t'excuse it,
And all the rest are so that Lovers are;
I then my self your Vassal swear,
And could be still so; (which is rare;)
Nay, I could force my will
To love, and at a good rate still,
But on condition that you not abuse it;
I am now Master of the Gate,
And therefore, Chloris, it is too late
Or to insult, or to capitulate.
IV.
It Is Beauty that to Womankind
Gives all the Rule and Sway,
Which once declining, or declined,
Men afterward unwillingly obey;
Your Beauty 'twas at first did awe me,
And into Bondage, woeful Bondage draw me;
It was your Cheek, your Eye, your Lip,
Which raised you first to the Dictator-ship.
V.
But your six months are now expired,
It Is time I now should reign,
And if from you obedience be required,
You must not to submit disdain,
But practice what you have seen me do,
And love and honor me as I did you;
That will an everlasting peace maintain,
And make me Crown you Sovereign once again.
VI.
And Faith consult your Glass, and see
If I have not reason on my side;
Are those eyes still the same they use to be?
Come, come, they are altered, 'twill not be denied;
And yet although the Glass be true,
And show you, you no more are you,
I know you will scarce believe it,
For Womankind are all born proud, and never, never leave it.
VII.
Yet still you have enough, and more than needs,
To rule a more Rebellious heart than mine;
For as your eyes still shoot my heart still bleeds,
And I must be a Subject still,
Nor is it much against my will,
Though I pretend to wrestle and repine:
Your Beauties sweet are in their height,
And I must still adore,
New years, new Graces still create,
Nay, maugre Time, Mischance and Fate,
You in your very ruins shall have more
Than all the Beauties that have graced the World before.
Old Tityrus to Eugenia.
I.
EVgenia young, and fair, and sweet,
The Glories of the Plains,
In thee alone the Graces meet
To conquer all the Swains:
Tall as the Poplar of the Grove,
Straight as the winged shaft of Love,
As the Spring's early Blossoms white,
Soft as the Kisses of the light,
Screne and modest as the Morn,
Ever Vapors do from Fens arise,
To dim the Glory of the Skies,
Untainted, or with Pride, or Scorn,
T'oblige the World, bright Nymph, thou sure wa^^ born.
II.
O! be still fair, thou charming Maid,
For Beauty is no Crime;
May thy Youth's Flower never fade,
But still be in its prime:
Be calm, and clear, and modest still,
Oblige as many as you will,
Still, still be humble, still be sweet,
By those ways conquer all you meet;
But let them see it is undesign'd,
Natural Virtues, not put on
To make a prize of any one,
The native goodness of your mind,
And have a care of being over-kind.
III.
That Is (my Eugenia) a mistake
That noblest ardours cools,
And serves on the other side to make
Damned overweening Fools.
Be courteous unto all, and free,
As far as Virgin-modesty;
Be not too shie, but have a care
Of being too familiar;
The Swain you entertain alone,
To whom you lend your hand or lip,
Will think he has you on the hip,
And straight conclude you are his own,
Women so easy, men so vain are grown.
IV.
Reserv'dness is a mighty Friend
To Form and Virtue too,
A shining merit should pretend
To such a Star as you;
It Is not a Roundelay well played,
A Song well sung, a thing well said,
A Fall well given, a Bar well thrown,
Should carry such a lovely one.
Should these knacks win you, you will be
(Of all the Nymphs that with their Beams
Gild swift Columba's Crystal Streams)
Lost to the World, your self, and me,
And more despised than freckled Lalage.
V.
Maintain a modest kind of State,
It Is graceful in a Maid;
It does at least respect create,
And makes the Fools afraid.
Eugenia, you must pitch upon
A Sylvia, not a Corydon;
'Twould grate my Soul to see those Charms
In an unworthy Sheepherd's Arms.
A little coldness (Girl) will do,
Let baffled Lovers call it Pride,
Pride's an excess of the better side,
Contempt to arrogance is due,
Keep but state now, and keep't hereafter too.
Epistle to John Bradshaw Esquire
II.
SIR, you may please to call to mind,
That Letters you did lately find
From me, which I conceived were very kind;
So hearty kind, that by this hand Sir,
Briefly, I do not understand Sir,
Why you should not vouchsafe some kind of answer*
What though in Rhyme you are no proficient?
Your Love should not have been deficient,
When downright Prose to me had been sufficient.
It Is true, I know that you dare fight Sir,
But what of that? that will not fright Sir;
I know full well your Worship too can write Sir.
Where the Peace therefore broken once is,
Unless you send some fair Rosponses,
I doubt there will ensue some broken Sconces.
Then dream not valor can befriend you,
For if I justly once suspend you,
Your Sanct'ary, nor your Club, can yet defend you;
But, fairly Sir, to work to go;
What the Fiend is the matter, trow,
Should make you use an old Companion so?
I know the life you lead adays,
And, like poor Swan, your foot can trace
From home to Prayers, thence to the forenam'd Viz. ^he Sanct^ary.
place:
And can you not from your Precation*
And your as daily Club-Potation,
To think of an old Friend find some vacation.
It Is true you sent a little Letter,
With a great Present, which was better,
For which I must remain your humble Debtor,
But for th'Epistle, to be plain,
That Is paid with Interest back again,
For I sent one as long at least as twain.
Then mine was Rhyme, and yours but Reason;
If therefore you intend to appease one,
Let me hear from you in some moderate season.
It Is what you are bound to by the tie
Of Friendship first, then Equity,
To which I^ll add a third, called Charity.
For one that is banished the Grand Mond
Would sometimes by his Friends be owned,
It Is comfort after whipping to be moan'd.
But though I Am damned t'a People here,
Than whom my Dog's much civiller,
I hear from you some twice or thrice a year.
Saints that above are placed in Glory,
Unless the Papists tell a Story,
Commiserate poor Souls in Purgatory,
Whilst you, Sir Captain, Heaven remit ye,
Who live in Heaven on Earth, the City,
On me, who live in Hell, can have no pity.
In faith it looks unkind! pray mend it,
Write the least Scrip you will, and send it,
And I will bless and kiss the hand that penned it.
Epistle to John Bradshaw, Esquire
III.
WHat though I writ a tedious Letter,
Whereas a shorter had been better,
And that 'twas writ in Moor-lands Meter,
To make it run, I thought, the sweeter,
Yet there was naught in that Epistle,
At which your Worship ought to bristle;
For though it was too long, 'twas civil,
And though the Rhyme, it is true, was evil,
I will maintain 'twas well meant yet,
And full of heart, though void of wit:
Why, with a Horse-Pox, then should you,
I thought my Friend, keep such ado;
And set Tom Weaver on my back,
Because I have not forsooth the knack
To please your over-dainty ear;
(Impossible for me I fear)
Nor can my Poesy strew with Posies
Of Red, White, Damask, Provense Roses,
Bears-ears, Anemonies, and Lillies,
As he did in Diebus illis?
What man! all Amblers are not Couryats,
Neither can all who Rhyme be Laureats:
Besides the Moor-lands not a Clime is,
Nor of the year it now the time is
To gather Flowers, I suppose,
Either for Poetry or Prose;
Therefore, kind Sir, in courteous fashion,
I wish you spare your expectation.
And since you may be thin of clothing,
(Something being better too than nothing)
Winter now growing something rough,
I send you here a piece of Stuff,
Since your old Weaver's dead and gone,
To make a Fustian Wastcoat For Rhimes take a new Figure.
on.
Accept it, and I Will rest your Debtor,
When more Wit sends it, I Will send better.
And here I cannot pretermit
To that Epitome of Wit,
Knowledge and Art, to him whom we
Saucily call, and I more saucily
^resume to write the little d.
All that your Language can improve
Of Service, Honor, and of Love:
After whose Name the rest I know
Would sound so very flat and low,
They must excuse, if in this case
(...) wind them up Et Caetera's.
Lastly, that in my tedious Scribble
I may not seem incorrigible,
I will conclude by telling you
(And on my honest word it is true)
I long as much as new made Bride
Does for the Marriage Even Tide;
Your plump Corpusculum t'imbrace,
In this abominable place:
And therefore when the Spring appears,
(Till when short days will seem long years)
And that under this scurvy hand,
I give you, Sir, to understand,
In April, May, or then abouts,
Doves People are your humble Trouts,
Be sure you do not fail but come
To make the Peak Elysium;
Where you shall find then, and for ever,
As true a Though not (...) so good a Poet.
Friend as was Tom Weaver.
The Retirement.
Stanzes Irreguliers.
To Mr. Isaak Walton*
I.
FArewell thou busy World, and may
We never meet again:
Here I can eat, and sleep, and pray,
And do more good in one ^hort day,
Than he who his whole Age out-wears
Upon thy most conspicuous Theaters,
Where naught but Vice and Vanity do reign.
II.
Good God! how sweet are all things here!
How beautiful the Fields appear!
How cleanly do we feed and lie!
Lord! what good hours do we keep!
How quietly we sleep!
What Peace! what Unanimity!
How innocent from the lewd Fashion,
Is all our business, all our Conversation!
III.
Oh how happy here is our leisure!
Oh how innocent our pleasure!
Oh ye Valleys, oh ye Mountains,
Oh ye Groves and Crystal Fountains,
How I love at liberty,
By turn to come and visit ye!
IV.
O Solitude, the Soul's best Friend,
That man acquainted with himself do make,
And all his Maker's Wonders to intend;
With thee I here converse at will,
And would be glad to do so still;
For it is thou alone that keep'st the Soul awake.
V.
How calm and quiet a delight
It is alone
To read, and meditate, and write,
By none offended, nor offending none;
To walk, ride, sit, or sleep at one's own ease,
And pleasing a man's self, none other to displease!
VI.
Oh my beloved Nymph! fair Dove,
Princess of Rivers, how I love
Upon thy flowery Banks to lie,
And view thy Silver stream,
When gilded by a Summer's Beam,
And in it all thy wanton Fry
Playing at liberty,
And with my Angle upon them,
The All of Treachery
I ever learned to practice and to try!
VII.
Such streams Rome's yellow Tiber cannot show,
The Iberian Tagus, nor Ligurian Po;
The Meuse, the Danube, and the Rhine,
Are puddle-water all compared with thine;
And Loire's pure streams yet too polluted are
With thine much purer to compare:
The rapid Garonne, and the winding Seine
Are both too mean,
Beloved Dove, with thee
To vie Priority:
Nay, Tame and Isis, when conjoined, submit,
And lay their Trophies at thy Silver Feet.
VIII.
Oh my beloved Rocks! that rise
To awe the Earth, and brave the Skies,
From some aspiring Mountain's crown
How dearly do I love,
Giddy with pleasure, to look down,
And from the Vales to view the noble heights above!
IX.
Oh my beloved Caves! from Dog Star heats,
And hotter Persecution safe Retreats,
What safety, privacy, what true delight
In the artificial Night
Your gloomy entrails make,
Have I taken, do I take!
How often, when grief has made me fly
To hide me from Society,
Even of my dearest Friends, have I
In your recesses friendly shade
All my sorrows open laid,
And most secret woes entrusted to your privacy!
X.
Lord! would men let me alone,
What an over-happy one
Should I think my self to be,
Might I in this desert place,
Which most men by their voice disgrace,
Live but undisturbed and free!
Here in this despised recess
Would I maugre Winter's cold,
And the Summer's worst excess,
Try to live out to sixty full years old,
And all the while
Without an envious eye
On any thriving under Fortune's smile,
Contented live, and then contented die.
Rondeau.
THou Fool! if madness be so rife,
That, spite of wit, thou wilt have a Wife,
I Will tell thee what thou must expect,
After the Honey-Moon neglect,
All the sad days of thy whole Life:
To that a World of Woe and Strife,
Which is of Marriage the effect,
And thou thy woe's own Architect,
Thou Fool!
Thou Wilt nothing find but disrespect,
Ill words in the scolding Dialect,
For she will all Tabor be, or Fife;
Then prithee go and whet thy Knife,
And from this Fate thy self protect,
Thou Fool!
To Cupid.
I.
FOnd Love, deliver up thy Bow,
I am become more Love than thou;
I am as wanton grown, and wild,
Much less a Man, and more a Child,
From Venus born, of chaster kind,
A better Archer, though as blind.
II.
Surrender without more ado,
I am both King and Subject too,
I will command, but must obey,
I am the Hunter and the Prey,
(...) vanquish, yet am overcome,
And Sentencing receive my Doom.
III.
No springing Beauty scapes my Dart,
And every ripe one wounds my Heart;
Thus whilst I wound, I wounded am,
And, firing others, turn to flame,
To show how far Love can combine
The Mortal part with the Divine.
IV.
Faith, quit thine Empire, and come down,
That thou and I may share the Crown,
I Have tried the worst thy Arms can do,
Come then, and taste my power too,
Which (howsoe'er it may fall short)
Will doubtless prove the better sport.
V.
Yet do not; for in Field and Town,
The Females are so loving grown,
So kind, or else so lustful, we
Can neither err, though neither see;
Keep then thine own Dominions, Lad,
Two Loves would make all Women mad.
To Aelia.
ODE.
POOR antiquated Slut, forbear,
Thy Importunity's so strong,
^t will, I fear, corrupt the Air,
And do an universal wrong.
Be modest, or I swear and vow,
I neither can nor will be kind;
Pox on it! now thou do clamorous grow,
There Is no enduring in the wind.
Whilst silence did thy thoughts betray,
I only was the sufferer;
But now thy Lungs begin to play,
All the whole Province suffers here.
Faith, Aelia, if thou be'st so hot,
That nor Satiety; nor Age,
Can cool the over-boiling Pot,
Nor thy edullient Lust assuage,
Yet be so charitably kind,
Though damned thou art resolved to be,
As not to poison all Mankind
By fulsome importunity.
But sure it is time we should give over,
And if I mourn my time misspent,
How much for fifty years of Whore
Ought thou, poor Aeli^, to repent?
Yet, if in spite of all advice
Thou needs wilt importune me still,
I am not so reclaimed from Vice,
But I can satisfy thy will:
And 'twill to my advantage be;
For should I new amors begin,
Delight might damn me, when with thee
The penance expiates the sin.
Sonnet.
GO, false one, now I see the cheat,
Your love was all a Counterfeit,
And I was galled to think that you,
Or any she, could long be true.
How could you once so kind appear,
To kiss, to sigh, and shed a tear,
To cherish and caress me so,
And now not let but bid me go?
Oh Woman! Frailty is thy name,
Since she is untrue you are all to blame,
And but in man no truth is sound:
It Is a fair Sex, we all must love it,
But (on my conscience) could we prove it,
They all are false even under ground.
Stanzes de Monsieur Bertaud.
I.
WHilst wishing Heaven in his ire
Would punish with some judgment dire
This heart to love so obstinate;
^o say I love her is to lie,
Though I do love t'extremity,
Since thus to love her is to hate.
II.
^ut since from this my hatred springs,
that she neglects my Sufferings,
And is unto my love ingrate,
^y hatred is so full of ^lame,
^ince from affection first it came,
That it is to love her thus to hate.
III.
I wish that milder Love, or Death,
That ends our Miseries with our breath,
Would my affections terminate;
For to my Soul, deprived of peace,
It is a torment worse than these
Thus wretchedly to love and hate.
IV.
Let Love be gentle or severe,
It is in vain to hope or fear
His grace or rage in this estate,
Being I from my fair one's Spirit
Nor mutual love, nor hatred merit,
Thus foolishly to love and hate.
V.
^r, if by my example here
(...) just and equal do appear,
She love and loath who is my fate,
^rant me, ye powers, in this case,
^oth for my punishment and grace,
That as I do, she love and hate.
The eighth Psalm paraphrased.
^.
O Lord, our Governor, whose potent sway
All Powers in Heaven and Earth obey,
^hroughout the spacious Earth's extended frame
How great is thy adored Name!
^hy Glories thou have seated, Lord, on high,
Above the Empirean Sky.
2.
Out of the mouths of Infants, newly come
From the dark Closet of the Womb,
Thou have ordained powerful Truth to rise,
To baffle all thine Enemies;
That thou the furious Rage might calm again,
Of bloody and revengefull men.
3.
When on thy Glorious Heavens I reflect,
Thy work, almighty Architect,
The changing Moon and Stars that thou have mad^
T'illuminate night's sable shade:
4.
Oh! what is man, think I, that Heaven's King
Should mind so poor a wretched thing;
Or Man's ^rail Offspring, that Almighty God
Should stoop to visit his abode?
5.
For thou createdst him but one degree
Below the Heavenly Hierarchy
Of blessed and happy Angels, and did crown
Frail Dust with Glory and Renown.
6.
Over the works of thy Almighty hand
Thou giv'st him absolute command,
And all the rest that thou have made
Under his feet have subject laid;
7.
All Sheep, and Oxen, and the wilder breed
Of Beasts that on their Fellows feed;
8.
The Air's Inhabitants, and scaly brood,
That live and wanton in the Flood,
And whatsoever does either swim or creep
Thorough th'investigable Deep:
9.
Throughout the spacious Earth's extended frame
How great is thy adored Name!
Advice.
I.
GO, thou perpetual whining Lover,
For shame leave off this humble Trade,
It Is more than time thou gav'st it over,
For sighs and tears will never move her,
By them more obstinate she is made,
And thou by Love, fond, constant Love, betrayed.
II.
The more, vain Fop, thou su'st unto her,
The more she does torment thee still,
Is more perverse the more you woo her,
When thou art humblest lays thee lower,
And when most prostrate to her will
Thou meanly begg'st for life, does basely kill,
III.
By Heaven it is against all Nature,
Honor and Manhood, Wit and Sense,
To let a little Female Creature
Rule on the poor account of Feature,
And thy unmanly patience
Monstrous and shameful as her Insolence.
IV.
Thou may find forty will be kinder,
Or more compassionate at least,
If one will serve, two hours will find her,
And half this 'doe for ever bind her
As firm and true as thine own Breast,
On Love and Virtue's double Interest:
V.
But if thou can not live without her,
This only she, when it comes to it,
And she relent not, (as I doubt her),
Never make more ado about her,
To sigh and whimper is no boot;
Go, hang thy self, and that will do it.
Lyrick.
Ex Cornelio Gallo Trans.
LYdia, thou lovely Maid, whose white
The Milk and Lilly does outvie,
The pale and blushing Roses light,
Or polished Indian Ivory,
Dishevel, Sweet, thy yellow hair,
Whose Ray does burnished Gold disprize,
Disclose thy neck so white and fair,
That does from snowy shoulders rise.
Virgin, unvail those starry eyes
Whose Sable brows like arches spread,
Unvail those Cheeks, where the Rose lies
Streaked with the Tyrian Purple's red.
Lend me those Lips with Coral lined,
And kisses mild of Doves impart,
Thou ravishest away my mind,
Those gentle kisses wound my heart.
Why suck'st thou from my panting Breast
The youthful Vigor of my Blood?
Hide those twin-apples, ripe, if pressed,
To spring into a milky Flood.
From thy expanded bosom breath
Perfumes Arabia does not know;
Thy every part does love bequeath,
From thee all excellencies flow.
Thy bosome's killing-white then shade,
Hide that temptation from mine eye;
See not I languish, cruel Maid!
Will thou then go, and let me die?
Amoret in Masquerade.
BLess me! wonder how I Am struck
With that Youth's victorious look!
So much Luster, so much Grace,
Never broke from humane face;
Fond Narcissus was an Ass,
Cynthia's Love a Moon-Calf was,
Ganimede, that bears Jove's Boul,
Was a Chit, Paris an Owl,
And Adonis, with th'fine Miss,
Was a Puppy-Dog to this.
Women, now lay by your Charms,
Here is one has other Arms,
And of greater power too,
Than your Megazines can show:
All your Beauties, all your Arts,
Conquering or deceiving hearts,
You may spare and let alone,
We shall henceforth be by none
Conquered, but this peerless one.
Yet I have a Lover been,
Several Beauties I have seen,
Nor in Love am yet so rude,
But I Have often been subdued;
Nor so old but that again,
Once more struck I might have been,
By some Glances, or some Features
Of those little Female Creatures,
Had I but escaped this night,
Seeing of this charming sight:
But now having seen those eyes,
I all Female force despise;
Yet my flame I cannot approve,
It Is but a prodigious love,
And there can be little joy
In thus doting on a Boy,
Who, although he love again,
Never can reward my pain:
Yet methinks it cannot be,
There is in it some Mystery,
Nature sure would never so use me,
Nor Instinct so much abuse me,
As my Reason thus to blind,
But there is something in the wind.
^ have ever a loather been
Of the foul Italian Sin,
And yet know not where the bliss is
^n a little Stripling's kisses.
My heart tells me, to those eyes
There belongs a pair of thighs,
^Twixt whose Ivory Columns is
Th'Ebor folding door to bliss:
And this Spring, all that we see
^trut with such Formality,
^uff, and strive to look so big,
^ but Pallas in a Wigg;
And though his countenance he does set
To a good pitch of counterfeit,
Yet he cannot hide the while,
^enus dimple in his smile;
Were the Story not cold fled,
and the party long since dead,
^should swear a thousand Oaths,
Hellen 'twere in Paris cloths;
But there I should wrong him yet,
Hellen was not half so sweet,
For all Greeks and Trojans arming,
Nor is Venus half so charming.
Pretty Monsieur, I must pry
More into your Symmetry;
Those fine Fingers were not made
To be put to th'fighting trade,
And that pretty little arm,
Methinks threatens no great harm;
Wastes, which Thimbles will environ,
Are not to be shell'd with Iron,
And those little Martin-nests,
Which swell out upon your Breasts,
With Steel are not to be pressed,
But whereon for Kings to rest;
Your soft Belly, not unlike,
May sometimes feel push of Pike,
But there will be Balsom found
In the Spear to heal the wound;
Nor those thighs yet, by their leaves,
Were, I take it, made for Greaves;
Nor yet do you walk so wide,
As you used to ride astride,
But look your Saddle, when you do,
Be well stuffed and pummell'd too.
Next, those pretty Legs and Feet
Never were spurred and booted yet,
I dare swear it. Come, tell truth,
Are you not a cloven Youth?
See, he laughs, and has confessed,
God-a-mercy for the Jest:
Monsieur Amoret let me
Your Valet de Chamber be,
I will serve with humble duty
Both your Valor and your Beauty,
You shall all day Master hight,
But my Mistress, Sir, at night:
Which if you will please to grant
To your humble Supplicant,
Since you wear your Wigg so ^eatly,
And become your Clothes so neatly,
He has sworn, who thus beseeches,
You shall always wear the Breeches.
Estreines.
To Calista.
I.
I Reckon the first day I saw those eyes,
Which in a moment made my heart their prize
To all my whole futurity,
The first day of my first new year,
Since then I first began to be,
And knew why Heaven placed me here;
For till we love, and love discreetly too,
We nothing are, nor know we what we do.
II.
Love is the Soul of Life, though that I know
Is called Soul too, but yet it is not so,
Not rational at least, until
Beauty with her diviner light
Illuminates the groaping will,
And shows us how to choose aright;
And that is first proved by th'objects it refuses,
And by being constant then to that it chooses.
III.
Days, Weeks, Months, Years, and Lustres take
So small time up in the Lover's Almanac,
And can so little Love assuage,
That we (in truth) can hardly say,
When we have lived at least an Age,
A long one, we have loved a day.
This day to me, so slowly does time move,
Seems but the Noon unto my Morning Love.
IV.
Love by swift time, which sickly passions dread,
Is no more measured than it is limited:
That passion where all others cease,
And with the fuel lose the flame,
Is evermore in its increase,
And yet being love, is still the same:
They err call liking Love, true Lovers know
He never loved who does not always so.
V.
You who my last love have, my first love had,
To whom my all of love was, and is paid,
Are only worthy to receive
The richest New-years-gift I have,
My love, which I this morning give,
A nobler never Monarch gave,
Which each New-year I will present anew,
And you will take care, I hope, it shall be due.
Epigramme de Monsieur des-Portes.
SOme four years ago I made Phillis an offer,
Provided she would be my Wh -- re,
Of two thousand good Crowns to put in her Coffer,
And I think should have given her more.
About two years after, a Message she sent me,
She was for a thousand my own,
But unless for an hundred she now would content me,
I sent her word I would have none.
She fell to my price six or seven weeks after,
And then for a hundred would do;
I then told her in vain she talked of the matter,
Than twenty no farther I Would go.
The Other day for six Ducatoons she was willing,
Which I thought a great deal too dear,
And told her unless it would come for two shilling,
She must seek a Chapman elsewhere.
This Morning she is come, and would fain buckle gratis,
But she is grown so fulsome a Wh -- re,
That now methinks nothing a far dearer rate is,
Than all that I offered before.
Epigramme de Monsieur Cotin,
I Perish of too much desire
If she inexorable prove,
And shall with too much Joy expire
If she be gracious to my love.
Thus naught can cure my wounded Breast,
But I most certain am to die,
Or by the ill by which possessed,
Or by the happy remedy.
Epigramme de Monsieur Maynard.
OLD Fop, why should you take such pains
To paint and Perriwig it so?
My nobler love, alas! disdains
To stoop so infamously low.
Time, that does mow the fairest Flowers,
Has made so very bold with yours,
You should expect to be denied;
The Footmen can no more endure ye,
And if no sport in Hell, assure ye,
You Will never more be occupi'd.
A Voyage to Ireland in Burlesque.
THE Lives of frail men are compared by the Sages,
Or unto short Journies, or Pilgrimages,
As men to their Inns do come sooner or later,
That is, to their Ends; (to be plain in my matter;)
From whence, when one dead is, it currantly follows,
He has run his Race, though his Goal be the Gallows;
And this it is, I fancy, sets Folk so a madding,
And makes Men and Women so eager of gadding;
Truth is, in my youth I was one of those People
Would have gone a great way to have seen an high Steeple,
And though I was bred amongst the Wonders of the Peak,
Would have thrown away Money, and ventured my neck
To have seen a great Hill, a Rock, or a Cave,
And thought there was nothing so pleasant and brave*
But at Forty years old you may (if you please)
Think me wiser than run such errands as these;
Or, had the same humor still ran in my Toes,
A Voyage to Ireland I never should have chose:
But to tell you the truth on it, indeed it was neither
Improvement nor pleasure for which I went thither;
I know then you will presently ask me, for what?
Why, faith, It was that makes the Old Woman trot;
And therefore I think I Am not much to be blamed
If I went to the place whereof Nick was ashamed.
Oh Couriate! thou Traveller famed as Ulysses,
In such a stupendous labor as this is
Come lend me the Aids of thy hands and thy feet,
Though the first be pedantick, the other not sweet,
Yet both are so restless in Peregrination,
They Will help both my Journey, and eke my Relation.
'Twas now the most beautiful time of the year,
The days were now long, and the Sky was now clear,
And May, that fair Lady of splendid renown,
Had dressed herself fine, in her flowr'd Tabby Gown,
When about some two hours and an half after Noo^*
When it grew something late, though I thought it too soon,
With a pitiful voice, and a most heavy heart,
I tuned up my Pipes to sing loath to depart,
The Ditty concluded, I called for my Horse,
And with a good pack did the Jument endorse,
Till he groaned and he farted under the burden,
For sorrow had made me a cumbersome Lurden:
And now farewell Dove, where I Have caught such brave Dishes
Of overgrown, golden, and silver-scal'd Fishes;
Thy Trout and thy Grailing may now feed securely,
I Have left none behind me can take 'em so surely;
Feed on then, and breed on, until the next year,
But if I return I expect my arrear.
By pacing and trotting, betimes in the Even,
Ever the Sun had forsaken one half of the Heaven,
We all at fair Congerton took up our Inn,
Where the Sign of a King kept a King and his Quee*
But who do you think came to welcome me there?
No worse a man, marry, than good Master Mayor,
With his Staff of Command, yet the man was not lame,
But he needed it more when he went, than he came;
After three or four hours of friendly potation
We took leave each of other in courteous fashion,
When each one, to keep his Brains fast in his head,
Put on a good Nightcap, and streight-way to bed.
Next Morn, having paid for boiled, roasted, and Bacon,
And of sovereign Hostess our leaves kindly taken,
(For her King (as 'twas rumor'd) by late pouring down,
This morning had got a foul flaw in his crown,)
We mounted again, and full soberly riding,
Three miles we had rid ever we met with a biding;
But there (having over night plied the Tap well)
We now must needs water at place called Holmes Chapel;
A Hay! quoth the foremost, Ho! who keeps the House?
Which said, out an Host comes as brisk as a Louse,
His hair combed as slick, as a Barber he would bin,
A Cravat with black Ribbon ti'd under his chin,
Though by what I saw in him I streight'gan to fear
That knot would be one day slipped under his ear:
Quoth he, (with low Congy) what lack you my Lord*
The best Liquor, quoth I, that the House will afford:
You shall straight, quoth he, and then calls out, Mary*
Come quickly, and bring us a quart of Canary:
Hold, hold, my spruce Host, for in the Morning so early*
I never drink Liquor but what is made of Barley;
Which words were scarce out, but, which made me admire,
My Lordship was presently turned into Squire;
Ale, Squire, you mean, quoth he, nimbly again,
What, must it be purl'd? no, I love it best plain:
Why, if you will drink Ale, Sir, pray take my advice,
Here Is the best Ale in the Land, if you will go to the price*
Better, I sure am, never blew out a stopple,
But then, in plain truth, it is six pence a Bottle:
Why, Faith, quoth I, Friend, if your Liquor be such,
For the best Ale in England, it is not too much;
Let Us have it, and quickly; O Sir! you may stay,
A Pot in your pate is a mile in your way:
Come, bring out a Bottle here presently, Wife,
Of the best Cheshire Hum he ever drank in his Life.
Straight out comes the Mistress in Wastcoat of Silk,
As clear as a Milk-maid, and white as her Milk,
With Visage as oval and slick as an Egg,
As straight as an Arrow, as right as my Leg;
A court'sie she made, as demure as a Sister,
^ could not forbear, but alighted and kissed her,
Then ducking another with most modest mien,
The first word she said, was, wilt please you walk in?
I thanked her, but told her, I then could not stay,
For the haste of my business did call me away;
She said she was sorry it fell out so odd,
But if, when again I should travel that Road,
^ would stay there a night, she assured me the Nation
Should no where afford better accommodation:
Mean while my spruce Landlord has broken the Cork,
And called for a Bodkin, though he had a Fork;
But I show him a Skrew, which I told my brisk (...)*
A Trepane was for Bottles had broken their skull*
Which, as it was true, he believed without doubt,
But 'twas I that applied it, and pulled the Cork out*
Bounce, quoth the Bottle, the work being done,
It roared, and it smoked, like a new fired Gun;
But the shot missed us all, or else we'd been routed,
Which yet was a wonder, we were so about it;
Mine Host poured and filled, till he could fill no fu^^^*
Look here, Sir, quoth he, both for Nap and for colo^*
Sans bragging, I hate it, nor will I ever do it,
I defy Leek, and Lambhith, and Sandwich to boo^*
By my troth he said true, for I speak it with tears,
Though I have been a Toss-pot these twenty goo^* years,
And have drank so much Liquor has made me Debtor,
In my days, that I know of, I never drank better*
We found it so good, and we drank so profoundly*
That four good round Shillings were whipped (...) roundly;
And then I conceived it was time to be jogging,
For our work had been done, had we staid the other Noggin.
From thence we ^et forth with more mettle and spright,
Our Horses were empty, our Coxcombs were light,
Over Dellamore Forest we, Tantivy, posted,
Till our Horses were basted as if they were roasted;
In truth, we pursued might have been by our Host,
And I think Sir George Booth did not gallop so fast,
Till about two a Clock after Noon, God be blessed,
We came safe and sound, all to Chester in the West.
And now in high time 'twas to call for some Meat,
Though drinking does well, yet some time we must eat;
And In Faith we had Vict'als both plenty and good, Where we all laid about us
as if we were wood:
Go thy ways, Mistress Anderton, for a good Woman,
Thy Guests shall by thee never be turned to a Common,
And whoever of thy entertainment complains,
Let him lie with a Drab, and be pox'd for his pains.
And here I must stop the Carier of my Muse,
The poor Jade is weary, 'lass! how should she choose,
And if I should farther here spur on my Course,
I should, questionless, tire both my Wits and my Horse*
To night let us rest, for it is good Sunday's Even,
To morrow to Church, and ask pardon of Heaven*
Thus far we our time spent, as here I have penned it,
An odd kind of Life, and it is well if we mend it;
But to morrow (God willing) we'll have t'orher bout,
And better or worse be it, for Murder will out,
Our future Adventures we'll lay down before ye,
For my Muse is deep sworn to use truth of the Story.
Canto 2.
AFter seven hours sleep, to commute for pains taken,
A man of himself, one would think, might awaken,
But riding, and drinking hard, were two such spells,
I doubt I Would slept on, but for jangling of Bells,
Which, ringing to Mattens all over the Tow^*
Made me leap out of Bed, and put on my Gown,
With intent (so God mend me) I have gone to the Choire,
When straight I perceived my self all on a fire;
For the two fore-nam'd things had so heated my blood,
That a little Phlebotomy would do me good:
I sent for Surgeon, who came in a trice,
And swift to shed blood, needed not be called twice,
But tilted Steeletto quite thorough the Vein,
From whence issued out the ill humors amain;
When having twelve Ounces he bound up my arm,
And I gave him two Georges, which did him no harm:
But after my bleeding I soon understood
It had cooled my Devotion as well as my Blood,
For I had no more mind to look on my Psalter
Than (saving your presence) I had to a Halter;
But like a most wicked and obstinate Sinner,
Then sat in my Chamber till Folks came to dinner:
I dined with good stomach, and very good cheer,
With a very fine Woman, and good Ale and Beer;
When my self having stuffed than a Bag-pipe more full,
I fell to my smoking until I grew dull;
And therefore to take a fine nap thought it best,
For when Belly full is bones would be at rest;
I tumbled me down on my Bed like a swad,
Where O the delicious Dream that I had!
Till the Bells, that had been my morning molesters,
Now waked me again, chiming all in to Vespers;
With that starting up, for my man I did whistle,
And combed out and powdered my locks that were grizle,
Had my cloths neatly brushed, and then put on my Sword,
Resolved now to go and attend on the word.
Thus tricked, and thus trim, to set forth I begin,
Neat and cleanly without, but scarce cleanly within;
For why, Heaven knows it, I long time had bin
A most humble obedient Servant to sin;
And now in Devotion was even so proud,
I scorned (forsooth) to join prayer with the Crowd*
For though courted by all the Bells as I went,
I was deaf, and regarded not the Compliment,
But to the Cathedral still held on my pace,
As 'twere, scorning to kneel but in the best place;
I there made my self sure of good Music at least,
But was something deceived, for 'twas none of the best;
But however I staid at the Churches commanding
Till we came to the peace passes all understanding,
Which no sooner was ended, but whir and away,
Like Boys in a School when they have leave got to play,
All save Master Mayor, who still gravely stays
Till the rest had left room for his Worship and's Mace:
Then he and his Brethren in order appear,
I out of my stall and fell into his rear;
For why, it is much safer appearing, no doubt,
In Authority's Tail, than the head of a Rout.
In this reverend order we marched from Prayer;
The Mace before me borne as well as the May'r;
Who looking behind him, and seeing most plain
A glorious Gold Belt in the rear of his Train,
Made such a low Congey, forgetting his place,
I was never so honored before in my days;
But then off went my sclp-case, and down went (...) Fist,
Till the Pavement, too hard, by my knuckles was kiss^^*
By which, though thick-scull'd, he must understand this,
That I was a most humble Servant of his;
Which also so wonderful kindly he took,
(As I well perceived both b'his gesture and look,)
That to have me dogged home, he streightway appointed,
Resolving, it seems, to be better acquainted;
I was scarce in my Quarters, and set down on Crupper,
But his man was there too, to invite me to Supper;
I start up, and after most respective fashion
Gave his Worship much thanks for his kind Invitation,
But begged his excuse, for my stomach was small,
And I never did eat any Supper at all;
But that after Supper I would kiss his hands,
And would come to receive his Worship's commands:
Sure no one will say, but a Patron of Slander,
That this was not pretty well for a Moorelander;
And since on such reasons to sup I refused,
I nothing did doubt to be holden excused;
But my quaint Repartee had his Worship possessed
With so wonderful good a conceit of the rest,
That with mere Impatience he hoped in his Breeches
To see the fine Fellow that made such fine Speeches:
Go, Sirrah, quoth he, get you to him again,
And will and require in his Majesty's Name,
That he come; and tell him, obey he were best, or
I Will teach him to know that he is now in West-Chester*
The man, upon this, comes me running again,
But yet minced his Message, and was not so plain;
Saying to me only, good Sir, I am sorry
To tell you my Master has sent again for you;
And has such a longing to have you his Guest,
That I, with these ears, heard him swear and protest,
He would neither say Grace, nor sit down on his Bum*
Nor open his Napkin, until you do come.
With that I perceived no excuse would avail,
And, seeing there was no defense for a Flail,
I said I was ready Master May'r to obey,
And therefore desired him to lead me the way:
We went, and ever Malkin could well lick her ear,
For it but the next door was, forsooth, we were there;
Where lights being brought me, I mounted the Stairs,
The worst I ever saw in my life at a Mayor's,
But every thing else must be highly commended;
I there found his Worship most nobly attended,
Besides such a Supper as well did convince,
A May'r in his Province to be a great Prince:
As he By which you may note, that either the man was mistaken, o^ the Mayor
was not so good as his word, when he said he would not sit down till I came.
sat in his Chair, he did not much vary,
In state, nor in face, from our Eighth English Harry;
But whether his face was swelled up with fat,
Or puffed up with Glory, I cannot tell that:
Being entered the Chamber half length of a Pike,
And cutting of faces exceedingly like
One of those little Gentlemen brought from the Indies,
And skrewing my self into Congeys and Cringes,
By then I was half way advanced in the Room
His Worship most rev'rendly rose from his Bum,
And with the more Honor to grace and to greet me,
Advanced a whole step and an half for to meet me;
Where leisurely doffing a Hat worth a Tester,
He bad me most heartily welcome to Chester;
I thanked him in Language the best I was able,
And so we forthwith sat us all down to Table.
Now here you must note, and it is worth Observation,
That as his Chair at one end of the Table had station,
So sweet Mistress May'ress, in just such another,
Like the fair Queen of Hearts, sat in state at the other;
By which I perceived, though it seemed a Riddle,
The lower end of this must be just in the middle;
But perhaps it is a Rule there, and one that would mind it
Amongst the Town-Statutes it is likely might find it.
But now into th'Pottage each deep his Spoon claps,
As in truth one might safely for burning one's chaps,
When straight, with the look and the tone of a Scold,
Mistress May'ress complained that the Pottage was cold,
And all long of your fiddle-saddle, quoth she;
Why, what then, Goody two-shoes, what if it be?
Hold you, if you can, your tittle-tattle, quoth he.
I was glad she was snapp'd thus, and guessed by th'discourse,
The May'r, not the gray Mare, was the better Horse;
And yet for all that, there is reason to fear,
She submitted but out of respect to his year;
However, 'twas well she had now so much grace,
Though not to the Man, to submit to his place;
For had she proceeded, I verily thought
My turn would the next be, for I was in fault;
But this brush being past we fell to our Diet,
And every one there filled his Belly in quiet.
Supper being ended, and things away taken,
Master Mayor's Curiosity 'gan to awaken;
Wherefore making me draw something nearer his Chair,
He willed and required me there to declare
My Country, my Birth, my Estate, and my Parts,
And whether I was not a Master of Arts;
And eke what the business was had brought me thither,
With what I was going about now, and whither:
Giving me caution, no lie should escape me,
For if I should trip, he should certainly trap me.
I answered, my Country was famed Staffordshire;
That in Deeds, Bills, and Bonds, I was ever writ Squire;
That of Land, I had both sorts, some good, and some evil,
But that a great part on it was pawned to the Devil;
That as for my Parts, they were such as he saw;
That indeed I had a small smatt'ring of Law,
Which I lately had got more by practice than reading,
By sitting of the Bench, whilst others were pleading;
But that Arms I had ever more studi'd than Arts,
And was now to a Captain raised by my deserts;
That the business which led me through Palatine ground
Into Ireland was, whither now I was bound;
Where his Worship's great favor I loud will proclaim,
And in all other places where ever I came.
He said, as to that, I might do what I list,
But that I was welcome, and gave me his fist;
When having my Fingers made crack with his gripes,
He called to his man for some Bottles and Pipes.
To trouble you here with a longer Narration
Of the several parts of our Confabulation,
Perhaps would be tedious, I Will therefore remit ye
Even to the most reverend Records of the City,
Where doubtless the Acts of the May'rs are recorded,
And if not more truly, yet much better worded.
In short, then we pip'd, and we tippled Canary,
Till my Watch pointed one in the Circle Horary;
When thinking it now was high time to depart,
His worship I thanked with a most grateful heart;
And because to great men Presents are acceptable,
I presented the May'r, ever I rose from the Table,
With a certain fantastical Box and a Stopper;
And he having kindly accepted my offer,
I took my fair leave, such my visage adorning,
And to bed, for I was to rise early in the Morning.
Canto 3.
THe Sun in the Morning disclosed his light,
With complexion as ruddy as mine over night;
And over th'Eastern Mountains peeping up's head,
The Casement being open, espied me in bed;
With his Rays he so tickled my lids that I waked,
And was half ashamed, for I found my self naked;
But up I soon start, and was dressed in a trice,
And called for a draught of Ale, Sugar, and Spice;
Which having turned off, I then call to pay,
And packing my Nawls, whipped to Horse, and away
A Guide I had got, who demanded great vails,
For conducting me over the Mountains of Wales;
Twenty good shillings, which sure very large is;
Yet that would not serve, but I must bare his Charges;
And yet for all that, rode astride on a Beast,
The worst that ever went on three Legs, I protest;
It certainly was the most ugly of Jades,
His hips and his rump made a right Ace of Spades;
His sides were two Ladders, well spur-gall'd withal;
His neck was a Helve, and his head was a Mall;
For his color, my pains and your trouble I Will spare,
For the Creature was wholly denuded of hair,
And, except for two things, as bare as my nail,
A tuft of a Mane, and a sprig of a Tail;
And by these the true color one can no more know,
Than by Mouse-skins above stairs the Merkin below:
Now such as the Beast was, even such was the Rider,
With a head like a Nutmeg, and legs like a Spider;
A voice like a Cricket, a look like a Rat,
The brains of a Goose, and the heart of a Cat;
Even such was my Guide, and his Beast, let them pass,
The one for a Horse, and the other an Ass.
But now with our Horses, what sound and what rotten,
Down to the Shore, you must know, we were gotten;
And there we were told, it concerned us to ride,
Unless we did mean to encounter the Tide;
And then my Guide laboring with heels and with hands,
With two up and one down, hopp'd over the Sands,
Till his Horse, finding th'labour for three Legs too sore,
Fol'd out a new leg, and then he had four:
And now by plain dint of hard spurring and whipping,
Dry-shod we came where Folks sometimes take Shipping;
And where the Salt-Sea, as the Devil were in it,
Came roaring, to have hindered our Journey to Flint*;
But were, by good luck, before him got thither,
He else would have carried us no man knows whither.
And now Her in Wales is, Saint Taph be her speed,
Gotts plutter her taste, some Welch-Ale her had need;
For her ride in great haste, and was like shit her Breeches,
For fear of her being caught up by the Fishes;
But the Lord of Flint Castles no Lord worth a Louse,
For he keeps never a drop of good drink in his House;
But in a small House near unto't there was store
Of such Ale, as (thank God) I never tasted before;
And surely the Welsh are not wise of their Fuddle,
For this had the taste and complexion of puddle.
From thence then we marched, full as dry as we came;
My Guide before prancing, his steed no more lame,
Over Hills, and over Valleys uncouth and uneven,
Until 'twixt the hours of twelve and eleven,
More hungry and thirsty than tongue can well tell,
We happily came to St. Winnifred's Well;
I thought it the Pool of Bethesda had been
By the Cripples lay there, but I went to my Inn
To speak for some Meat, for so Stomach did motion,
Before I did farther proceed in Devotion;
I went into th'Kitchin, where Vict'als I saw,
Both Beef, Veal, and Mutton, but all on it was raw,
And some on it alive, but it soon went to slaughter,
For four Chickens were slain by my Dame and her Daughter;
Of which to Saint Win. ever my vows I had paid,
They said I should find a rare Frigassey made;
I thanked them, and straight to the Well did repair,
Where some I found cursing, and others at Prayer,
Some dressing, some stripping, some out and some in,
Some naked, where Botches and Boiles might beseen,
Of which some were Fevors of Venus I Am sure,
And therefore unfit for the Virgin to cure*
But the Fountain, in truth, is well worth the sight,
The beautiful Virgin's own tears not more bright*
Nay, none but she ever shed such a tear,
Her Conscience, her Name, nor her self were more clear:
In the bottom there lie certain stones that look white,
But streaked with pure red, as the Morning with light,
Which they say is her blood, and so it may be,
But for that; let who shed it look to it for me.
Over the Fountain a Chapel there stands,
Which I wonder has escaped Master Oliver's hands;
The floor's not ill paved, and the Margent of the Spring,
Is enclosed with a certain Octagonal Ring;
From each Angle of which a Pillar does rise,
Of strength and of thickness enough to suffice
To support and uphold from falling to ground
A Cupolo wherewith the Virgin is crowned.
Now 'twixt the two Angles, that fork to the North,
And where the cold Nymph does her Basin pour forth,
Under ground is a place, where they bathe, as it is said,
And it is true, for I heard Folks Teeth hack in their head;
For you are to know, that the Rogues and the Whores
Are not let to pollute the Springhead with their sores.
But one thing I chiefly admired in the place,
That a Saint, and a Virgin, endu'd with such Grace,
Should yet be so wonderful kind a well-willer,
To that whoring and filching Trade of a Miller,
As within a few paces to furnish the Wheels,
Of I cannot tell how many Water-mills:
I Have studi'd that point much, you cannot guess why,
But the Virgin was, doubtless, more righteous than ^*
And now for my welcome, four, five, or six Lasses,
With as many Chrystalline liberal Glasses,
Did all importune me to drink of the Water
Of Saint Winnefreda, good Thewith's fair Daughter:
A while I was doubtful, and stood in a Muse,
Not knowing, amidst all that choice, where to choose,
Till a pair of black eyes, darting full in my sight,
From the rest of the fair Maidens did carry me quite;
I took the Glass from her, and, whip, off it went,
I half doubt I fansi'd a health to the Saint;
But he was a great Villain committed the slaughter,
For St. Winnefred made most delicate water.
I slipped a hard Shilling into her soft hand,
Which had like to have made me the place have profaned,
And giving two more to the Poor that were there,
Did, sharp as a Hawk, to my quarters repair.
My Dinner was ready, and to it I fell,
I never ate better meat that I can tell;
When having half din^d, there comes in my Host,
A Catholic, good, and a rare drunken Tossed;
This man, by his drinking, inflamed the Scot,
And told me strange stories, which I have forgot;
But this I remember, 'twas much on's own Life,
And one thing, that he had converted his Wife.
But now my Guide told me, it time was to go,
For that to our beds we must both ride and row;
Wherefore calling to pay, and having accounted,
I soon was down stairs, and as suddenly mounted:
On then we traveled, our guide still before,
Sometimes on three Legs, and sometimes on four,
Coasting the Sea, and over Hills crawling,
Sometimes on all four, for fear we should fall in;
For underneath Neptune lay shalking to watch us,
And, had we but slipped once, was ready to catch us:
Thus in places of danger taking more heed,
And in safer traveling mending our speed,
Redland-Castle and Abergoney we passed,
And over against Connaway came at the last:
Just over against a Castle there stood,
Of The right hand the Town, and of the left hand a Wood;
'Twixt the Wood and the Castle they see at high water
The storm, the place makes it a dangerous matter;
And besides, upon such a steep Rock it is founded,
As would break a man's neck, should he escape being drowned:
Perhaps though in time one may make them to yield,
But it is pretty'st Cob-Castle ever I beheld.
The Sun now was going t'unharness his Steeds,
When the Ferry-boat brasking her sides against the Weeds,
Came in as good time, as good time could be,
To give us a cast over an arm of the Sea;
And bestowing our Horses before and abaft,
Over god Neptune's wide Cod-piece gave us a waft*
Where scurvily landing at foot of the Fort,
Within very few paces we entered the Port,
Where another King's head invited me down,
For indeed I have ever been true to the Crown.
The Storm*
To the Earl of --
HOw with ill Nature does this World abound!
When I, who ever thought my self most sound,
And free from that infection, now must choose
Out you, (my Lord,) whom least I should abuse
To trouble with a Tempest, who have none
In your firm Breast t'afflict you of your own;
But ^ince of Friendship it the nature is,
In any accident that falls amiss,
Whether of sorrow, terror, loss, or pain,
Caused or by Men or Fortune, to complain
To those who of our ills have deepest sense,
And in whose favor we have most confidence.
Pardon, if in a Storm I here engage
Your calmer thoughts, and on a Sea, whose rage,
When but a little moved, as far outbraves
The tamer Mutinies of Adria's Waves,
As they, when worst for Neptune to appease
The softest curls of most pacifick Seas;
And though I Am vain enough half to believe
My danger will some little trouble give,
I yet more vainly fancy 'twill advance
Your pleasure too, for my deliverance
'Twas now the time of year, of all the rest,
For slow, but certain Navigation best;
The Earth had dressed her self so fine and gay,
That all the World, our little World, was May;
The Sea too, had put on his smoothest face,
Clear, slick, and even as a Looking-glass;
The rugged Winds were locked up in their Gaoles,
And were but Zephyrs whispered in the Sails;
All Nature seemed to court us to our woe;
Good God! can Elements dissemble too?
Whilst we, secure, considered not the whiles
That greatest Treasons lie concealed in smiles.
Ab^ard we went, and soon were under Sail,
But with so small an over-modest Gale,
And to our Virgin Canvass so unkind,
As not to swell their laps with so much wind,
As common courtship would in breeding pay
To Maids less buxom and less trim than they.
But of this Calm we could not long complain,
For scarcely were we got out to the Main
From the still Harbor but a League, no more,
When the false Wind (that seemed so chaste before)
The Ship's laced Smock began to stretch and tear*
Not like a Suitor, but a Ravisher;
As if delight were lessened by consent,
And tasted worse for being innocent.
A Sable Curtain, in a little space,
Of thick wove Clouds was drawn over Phoebus face*
He might not see the horror of the fight,
Nor we the comfort of his heavenly light:
Then, as this darkness had the Signal been,
At which the furious Storm was to begin,
Heaven's loud Artillery began to play,
And with pale flashes made a dreadful day:
The Center shook by these, the Ocean
In hills of Brine to swell and heave began;
Which growing Mountains, as they rolling hit,
To surge and foam, each other broke and split,
Like men, who, in intestine storms of state,
Strike any they nor know, nor yet for what;
But with the stream of fury headlong run
To war, they know not how nor why begun.
In this disorder straight the winds forlorn,
Which had lain ambush'd all the flattering Morn,
With unexpected fury rushes in,
The ruffling Skirmish rudely to begin;
The Sea with Thunderclaps alarmed before,
Assaulted thus anew, began to roar
In Waves, that striving which should fastest run,
Crowded themselves into confusion.
At which advantage Aeolus brought on
His large spread Wings, and main Battallion*
When by opposing shoars the flying For
Forced back against the Enemy to flow,
So great a conflict followed, as if here
The Enraged Enemies embattel'd were;
Not only one another to subdue,
But to destroy themselves and Nature too.
To paint this Horror to the life, weak Art
Must want a hand, Humanity a heart,
And I, the bare Relation whilst I make,
Methinks am brave, my hand still does not shake*
For surely since men first in Planks of wood
Themselves committed to the faithless Flood,
Men born and bred at Sea, did never behold
Neptune in such prodigious furrows rolled;
Those winds, which with the loudest terror roar,
Never so stretched their lungs and cheeks before;
Nor on this floating stage has ever been
So black a Scene of dreadful ruin seen.
Poor Yacht! in such a Sea how can thou live?
What ransom would not thy pale Tenants give*
To be set down on the most desperate shore,
Where Serpents hiss, Tigers and Lions roar,
And where the men, inhumane Savages,
Are yet worse Vermin, greater Brutes than these?
Who would not for a danger that may be
Exchange a certain ruin that they see?
For such, unto our Reason, or our fear,
Ours did in truth most manifest appear;
And how could we expect a better end,
When Winds and Seas seemed only to contend,
Not which should conquer other in this War,
But in our wreck which should have greatest share?
The Winds were all let loose upon the Main,
And every wind that blew a Hurricane,
Nereus's whole power too mustered seemed to be,
Wave rode on wave, and every wave a Sea.
Of our small Bark gusts rushed the trembling sides
Against vast billows that contained whole Tides,
Which in disdainful fury beat her back
With such a force, as made her stout sides crack,
Against others that in crowds came rolling in,
As if they meant their liquid walls between
T'engage the wretched hulk, and crush her flat,
And make her squeeze to death her dying freight.
Sometimes she on a Mountain's ridge would ride,
And from that height her gliding Keel then slide
Into a Gulf yawning, and deep as Hell,
Whilst we were swooning all the while we fell;
Then by another billow raised so high,
As if the Sea would dart her into th'Sky,
To be a Pinnace to the Argosie;
Then down a precipice so low and steep,
As it had been the bottom of the Deep:
Thus whilst we up and down, and to and fro,
Were mis^^ably tossed and bandi'd so,
'Twas strange our little Pink, though never so tight,
Could weather't so, and keep her self upright;
Or was not funk with weight of our despair,
For Hope, alas! could find no ank'ring there:
Her Prow, and Poop, Star-board, and Lar-board side
B'ing with these Elements so hotly pli'd,
'Twas no less than a Miracle her seams
Not ripp'd and opened, and her very Beams
Continued faithful in these loud extremes;
That her tall Masts, so often bowed and bent
With gust on gust, were not already spent;
That all, or any thing indeed withstood
A Sea so hollow, such a high wrought Flood.
Here, where no Sea-man's Art nor strength avails,
Where use of Compass, Rudder, or of Sails,
There now was none; the Mariners all stood
Bloudless and cold as we; or though they could
Something, perhaps, have helped in such a stress,
Were every one astonished ne'ertheless
To that degree, they either had no heart
Their Art to use, or had forgot their Art.
Meanwhile the miserable Passengers,
With sighs the hardest, the more soft with tears,
Mercy of Heaven in various accents craved,
But after drowning hoping to be saved.
How often, by fear of dying, did we die?
And every death, a death of cruelty,
Worse than worst Cruelties provoked impose
On the most hated, most offending Foes.
We fansi'd death riding on every Wave,
And every hollow seemed a gaping Grave:
All things we saw such horror did present,
And all of dying too were so intent,
Every one thought himself already dead,
And that for him the tears he saw were shed.
Such as had not the courage to behold
Their danger above deck, within the Hosd
Uttered such groans in that their floating Grave,
As even unto terror terror gave;
Whilst those above pale, dead, and cold appear,
Like Ghosts in Charon's Boat that sailing were.
The last day's dread, which none can comprehend,
But to weak fancy only recommend,
To form the dreadful Image from sick fear,
That fear and fancy both were height'ned here
With such a face of horror, as alone
Was fit to prompt Imagination,
Or to create it where there had been none.
Such as from under Hatches thrust a head
T'enquire what news, seemed rising from the dead,
Whilst those who stayed above, bloudless with fear,
And ghastly look, as they new risen were.
The bold and timorous, with like horror struck,
Were not to be distinguished by their look;
And he who could the greatest courage boast
However within, looked still as like a Ghost.
Ten hours in this rude Tempest we were tossed,
And every moment gave our selves for lost;
Heaven knows how ill prepared for sudden death,
When the rough winds, as they would been out of breath,
Now seemed to pant, and panting to retreat,
The Waves with gentler force against us beat;
The Sky cleared up, the Sun again shone bright,
And gave us once again new life and light;
We could again bear sail in those rough Seas,
The Seamen now resume their offices;
Hope warmed us now anew, anew the heart
Did to our cheeks some streaks of blood impart;
And in two hours, or very little more,
We came to Anchor Faulcon-shot from shore,
The very same we left the Morn before;
Where now in a yet working Sea, and high,
Until the wind shall veere, we rolling lie,
Resting secure from present fear; but then
The dangers we escaped must tempt again;
Which if again I safely shall get through,
(And sure I know the worst the Sea can do)
So soon as I shall touch my native Land,
^'ll thence ride Post to kiss your Lordship's hand.
ODE.
Is It come to this, that we must part?
Then Heaven is turned all cruelty,
And Fate has neither eyes nor heart,
Or else (my Sweet) it could not be.
She Is a blind Deity I Am sure;
For woeful sights compassion move,
And Heavenly minds could never endure
To persecute the truest love.
Love is the highest attribute
Of powers unknown we Mortals know;
For that all homage we commute
From that all good, and Mercies flow.
And can there be a Deity
In those eternal seats above,
Will own so dire a Cruelty,
As thus to punish faithful Love?
Oh Heavenly Powers! be good and just,
Cherish the Law your selves have made,
We else in vain in Virtue trust,
And by Religion are betrayed.
Oh! punish me some other way
For other sins, but this is none;
Take all the rest you gave away,
But let my dearest Dear alone.
Strip me as into The World I came,
I never shall dispute your will,
Or strike me dumb, deaf, blind or lame,
But let me have Chlorinda still.
Why was she given me at all?
I thought indeed the Gift too great
For my poor Merit; but withal
I always knew to value it.
I first by you was worthy made,
Next by her choice; let me not prove
Blasphemous, if I Am not afraid
To say most worthy by my love.
And must I then be damned from Bliss
For valuing the Blessing more,
Be wretched made through Happiness,
And by once being rich more poor?
This Separation is, alas!
Too great a punishment to bear,
Oh! take my life, or let me pass
That li^e, that happy li^e, with her.
O my Chlorinda! could thou see
Into the bottom of my heart,
There Is such a Mine of Love for thee,
The Treasure would supply desert.
Let the King send me where he please,
Ready at Drum and Trumpet's call,
I Will fight at home, or cross the Seas,
His Soulder, but Chlorinda's Thrall.
No change of Diet, or of Air,
In me can a Distemper breed;
And if I fall it should be fair,
Since it is her blood that I Am to bleed.
And sitting so I nothing fear
A noble she of living fame;
And who shall then be by, nay hear,
In my last groans, Chlorinda's Name?
But I am not proscribed to die,
My Adversaries are too wise;
More rigor and less Charity
Condemns me from Chlorinda's eyes.
Ah cruel Sentence, and severe!
That is a thousand deaths in one;
Oh! let me die before I hear
^ sound of Separation.
And yet it is decreed, I see,
The Race of men are now combined,
Though I still keep the Body free,
To persecute a Loyal mind.
And that is the worst that Man can do,
To banish me Chlorinda's sight,
Yet will my heart continue true,
Maugre their power and their spite.
Mean while my Exit now draws nigh,
When, Sweet Chlorinda, thou shall see
That I have heart enough to die,
Not half enough to part with thee.
(...). Paraphrased from Anacreon.
THe Earth with swallowing drunken showers
Reels a perpetual round,
And with their Healths the Trees and Flowers
Again drink up the Ground.
The Sea, of Liquor spuing full,
The ambient Air does sup,
And thirsty Phoebus at a pull
Quaffs off the Ocean's cup.
When stagg'ring to a resting place,
His business being done,
The Moon, with her pale platter face,
Comes and drinks up the Sun.
Since Elements and Planets then
Drink an eternal round,
It Is much more proper sure for men
Have better Liquor found.
Why may not I then, tell me pray,
Drink and be drunk as well as they?
On Christmas Day.
Hymn.
I.
RIse, happy Mortals, from your sleep,
Bright Phospher now begins to peep,
In such apparel as never dressed
The proudest daybreak of the East:
Death's Sable Curtain 'gins disperse,
And now the blessed Morn appears,
Which has longed and prayed for him
So many Centuries of years,
To defray th'arrears of sin.
Now through the joyful Universe
Beams of Mercy and of Love
Shoot forth comfort from above,
And Choires of Angels do proclaim
The Holy Jesus blessed Name.
II.
Rise Sheepherds, leave your Flocks, and run,
The Soul's great Sheepherd now is come;
Oh! wing your tardy feet, and fly
To greet this dawning Majesty:
Heaven's Messenger, in tidings blessed,
Invites you to the Sacred place,
Where the blessed Babe of Joy,
Wrapped in his Holy Father's Grace,
Come's the Serpent to destroy,
That lurks in every humane Breast.
To Judah's Beth'lem turn your feet,
There you shall Salvation meet;
There, in a homely Manger hurled,
Lies the Messiah of the World.
III.
Riding upon the Morning's wings,
The joyful Air Salvation sings,
Peace upon Earth, toward men good will,
Echoes from every Vale and Hill;
For why the Prince of Peace is come,
The glorious Infant, who this Morn
(By a strange mysterious Birth,)
Is of his Virgin Mother born,
To redeem the Seed of Earth
From foul rebellious heavy doom.
Travel Magi of the East,
To adore this sacred Guest;
And offer up (with reverence,)
Your Gold, your Myrrh, and Frankincense.
IV.
At th'teeming of this Blessed Womb
All Nature is one Joy become;
The Fire, the Earth, the Sea, and Air,
The great Salvation do declare:
The Mountains skip with Joy's excess,
The Ocean's briny billows swell
Over the surface of their Lands,
And at this Sacred Miracle
Floods do clap their liquid hands,
Joy's Inundation to express;
Babes spring in the narrow rooms
Of their tender Mothers Wombs,
And all for Triumph of the Morn
Wherein the Child of bliss was born.
V.
Let each religious Soul then ris^
To offer up a Sacrifice,
And on the wings of Prayer and Praise
His grateful heart to Heaven raise;
For this, that in a Stable lies,
This poor neglected Babe is he,
Hell and Death that must control,
And speak the blessed Word, be free
To every true believing Soul:
Death has no sting, nor Hell no prize
Through his Merits great, whilst we
Travel to Eternity,
And with the Blessed Angels sing
Hosannah's to the Heavenly King.
Chorus.
RIse then, O rise, and let your voices
Tell the Spheres the Soul rejoices.
In Beth'lem this auspicious Morn,
The Glorious Son of God is born.
The Child of Glory, Prince of Peace,
Brings Mercy that will never cease,
Merits that wipe away the sin
Each Humane Soul was forfeit in;
And washing off the fatal stain,
Man to his Maker knits again:
Join then your grateful Notes, and sing
Hosannah's to the Heavenly King.
Saphick Ode.
HOw easy is his Life, and free,
Who, urged by no necessity,
Eats cheerful Bread, and over night does pay
For's next day's Crapula.
No suitor such a mean estate
Invites to be importunate,
No supple flatt'rer, robbing Villain, or
Obstreperous Creditor.
This man does need no Bolts nor Locks,
Nor needs he start when any knocks,
But may on careless Pillow lie and snoar,
With a wide open door.
Trouble and Danger Wealth attend,
An useful but a dangerous Friend,
Who makes us pay, ever we can be released,
Quadruple Interest.
Let Us live to day then for to morrow,
The Fool's too provident will borrow
A thing, which through Chance or Infirmity,
It Is odds he never may see.
Spend all then ever you go to Heaven,
So with the World you will make even;
And men discharge by dying Nature's score,
Which done we owe no more.
The Morning Quatrains.
I.
THe Cock has crow'd an hour ago,
It Is time we now dull sleep forgo;
Tired Nature is by sleep redressed,
And Labor's overcome by Rest.
II.
We have outdone the work of Night,
It Is time we rise to attend the Light,
And ^'er he shall his Beams display,
To plot new business for the day.
III.
None but the slothful, or unsound,
Are by the Sun in Feathers found,
Nor, without rising with the Sun,
Can the World's business ever be done.
IV.
Hark! Hark! the watchful Chanticler,
Tells us the day's bright Harbinger
Peeps over the Eastern Hills, to awe
And warn night's sovereign to withdraw.
V.
The Morning Curtains now are drawn,
And now appears the blushing dawn;
Aurora has her Roses shed,
To strew the way Sol's steeds must tread.
VI.
Xanthus and Aethon harnessed are,
To roll away the burning Carr;
And, snorting flame, impatient bear
The dressing of the Chariotier.
VII.
The sable Cheeks of sullen Night
Are streaked with Rosy streams of light,
Whilst she retires away in fear,
To shade the other Hemisphere.
VIII.
The merry Lark now takes her wings,
And longed-for days loud welcome sings,
Mounting her body out of sight,
As if she meant to meet the light.
IX.
Now doors and windows are unbar'd,
Each-where are cheerful voices heard,
And round about Good-morrows fly,
As if Day taught Humanity.
X.
The Chimnies now to smoke begin*
And the old Wife sits down to spin,
Whilst Kate, taking her Pail, does trip
Mulls swollen and stradl'ing Paps to strip.
XI.
Vulcan now makes his Anvil ring,
Dick whistles loud, and Maud does sing,
And Silvio with his Bugle Horn
Winds an Imprime unto the Morn.
XII.
Now through the morning doors behold
Phoebus arrayed in burning Gold,
Lashing his fiery Steeds, displays
His warm and all enlight'ning Rays
XIII.
Now each one to his work prepares,
All that have hands are Laborers,
And Manufactures of each trade
By opening Shops are open laid.
XIV.
Hob yokes his Oxen to the Team,
The Angler goes unto the stream,
The Wood-man to the Purlews highs,
And laboring Bees to load their thighs.
XV.
Fair Amarillis drives her Flocks,
All night safe folded from the Fox,
To flowery Downs, where Collin stays,
To court her with his Roundelays.
XVI.
The Traveller now leaves his Inn
A new days Journey to begin,
As he would post it with the day,
And early rising makes good way.
XVII.
The slick-fac'd Schoolboy Sachel takes,
And with slow pace small riddance makes;
For why, the haste we make, you know,
To Knowledge and to Virtue's slow.
XVIII.
The Fore^horse gingles on the Road,
The Waggoner lugs on his Load,
The Field with busy People snies,
And City rings with various cries.
XIX.
The World is now a busy swarm,
All doing good, or doing harm;
But let us take heed our Acts be true,
For Heaven's eye sees all we do.
XX.
None can that piercing sight evade,
It penetrates the darkest shade,
And sin, though it could escape the eye,
Would be discovered by the Cry.
Noon Quatrains.
I.
THe day grows hot, and darts his Rays
From such a sure and killing place,
That this half World are fain to fly
The danger of his burning eye.
II.
H^s early Glories were benign,
Warm to be felt, bright to be seen,
And all was comfort, but who can
Endure him when Meridian?
III.
Of him we as of Kings complain,
Who mildly do begin to reign,
But to the Zenith got of power,
Those whom they should protect devour.
IV.
Has not another Phaeton
Mounted the Chariot of the Sun,
And, wanting Art to guide his Horse,
Is hurried from the Sun's due course.
V.
If this hold on, our fertile Lands
Will soon be turned to parched Sands,
And not an Onion that will grow
Without a Nile to overflow.
VI.
The grazing Herds now droop and pant,
Even without labor fit to faint,
And willingly forsook their Meat
To seek out cover from the heat.
VII.
The lagging Ox is now unbound,
From larding the new turned up ground,
Whilst Hobbinal alike o'er-laid,
Takes his course dinner to the shade.
VIII.
Cellars and Grottos now are best
To eat and drink in, or to rest,
And not a Soul above is found
Can find a refuge under ground.
IX.
When Pagan Tyranny grew hot,
Thus persecuted Christians got
Into the dark but friendly Womb
Of unknown Subterranean Rome.
X.
And as that heat did cool at last,
So a few scorching hours over passed,
In a more mild and temperate Ray
We may again enjoy the day.
The Night.
Written by Monsieur le Comte de Cremail.
Stanzes.
I.
OH Night! by me so often required,
Oh Night! by me so much desired,
Of my Felicity the cause,
Oh Night! so welcome to my eyes,
Grant, in this horror of the Skies,
This dreadful shade thy Curtain draws,
That I may now adore this Night
The Star that burns and gives me light.
II.
Spread over the Earth thy Sable Veil,
Heaven's twinkling sparklets to conceal,
That darkness seems to day t'improve;
For other light I do need none
To guide me to my lovely one,
But only that of mine own love;
And all light else offends my sight,
But hers whose eye does give me light.
III.
Oblivion of our forepass'd woes,
Thou Charm of sadness, and repose
Of Souls that languish in despair,
Why do thou not from Lethe rise?
Do thou not see the whole World snies
With Lovers who themselves declare
Enemies to all noise and light,
And cove^ nothing but the Night?
IV.
At her transparent Window there
Thou Wilt see Aminta's eye appear,
That, like a Sun set round with Ray,
The shadows from the Sky shall chase,
Changing the color of its face
Into a bright and glorious day;
Yet do not fear this Sun so bright,
For it is a mighty Friend to Night.
V.
Rise then, loved Night, rise from the Sea,
And to my Sun Aurora be,
And now thy blackest Garment wear;
Dull sleep already thee forgoes,
And each-where a dumb silence does
Thy longed-for long approach declare;
I know the Star that gives me light,
To see me only stays for Night.
VI.
Ha! I see shades rise from th'Abiss,
And now I go the Lips to kiss,
The Breasts and Eyes have me deceived;
Oh Night! the height of my desire,
Can thou put on so black attire
That I by none can be perceived,
And that I may this happy Night
See the bright Star that gives me light?
VII.
Oh that my dusky Goddess could
In her thick Mantle so enfold
Heaven's torches, as to damp their fire,
That here on Earth thou might for ever
Keep thy dark Empire, Night, and never
Under the Waves again retire;
That endless so might be the Night,
Wherein I see the Star my light!
Evening.
Quatrains.
I.
THE Day's grown old, the fainting Sun
Has but a little way to run,
And yet his Steeds, with all his skill,
Scarce lug the Chariot down the Hill.
II.
With Labor spent, and Thirst oppressed,
Whilst they strain hard to gain the West,
From Fetlocks hot drops melted light,
Which turn to Meteors in the Night.
III.
The Shadows now so long do grow,
That Brambles like tall Cedars show,
Mole-hills seem Mountains, and the Ant
Appears a monstrous Elephant.
IV.
A very little little Flock
Shades thrice the ground that it would stock;
Whilst the small Stripling following them,
Appears a mighty Polypheme.
V.
These being brought into the Fold,
And by the thrifty Master told,
He thinks his Wages are well paid,
Since none are either lost, or strayed.
VI.
Now lowing Herds are each-where heard,
Chains rattle in the Villains Yard,
The Cart's on Tail set down to rest,
Bearing on high the Cuckolds Crest.
VII.
The hedge is stripped, the Clothes brought in,
Nought's left without should be within,
The Bees are hiv'd, and hum their Charm,
Whilst every House does seem a Swarm.
VIII.
The Cock now to the Roost is pressed:
For he must call up all the rest;
The Sow's fast pegg'd within the Sty,
To still her squeaking Progeny.
IX.
Each one has had his Supping Mess,
The Cheese is put into the Press,
The Pans and Bowls clean scalded all,
^ear'd up against the Milk-house Wall.
X.
And now on Benches all are sat
^n the cool Air to sit and chat,
till Phoebus, dipping in the West,
shall lead the World the way to Rest.
Night.
Quatrains.
I.
THE Sun is set, and gone to sleep
With the fair Princess of the Deep*
Whose Bosom is his cool Retreat,
When fainting with his proper Heat:
II.
His Steeds their Flaming Nostrils cool
In Spume of the Cerulean Pool;
Whilst the Wheels dip their hissing Naves
Deep in Columbus's Western Waves.
III.
From whence great rowls of Smoke arise
To overshade the Beauteous Skies;
Who bid the World's bright Eye adieu
In gelid tears of falling Dew.
IV.
And now from the Iberian Vales
Nights sable Steeds her Chariot hales,
Where double Cypress Curtains skreen
The gloomy Melancholic Queen.
V.
These, as they higher mount the Sky,
Ravish all Color from the Eye,
And leave it but an useless glass,
Which few, or no Reflections grace.
VI.
^he Crystal Arch over Pindus's Crown
^ on a sudden dusky grown,
and all is with Funeral Black o'respread,
^s if the Day, which sleeps, were dead.
VII.
^o Ray of Light the Heart to cheer,
^^t little twinkling Stars appear;
which like faint dying embers^ly,
^t nor to work, nor travel by.
VIII.
^erhaps to him they Torches are,
^ho guide Night's Sovereign's drowsy Car,
and him they may befriend so near,
^ut us they neither light, nor cheer.
IX.
(...) else those little sparks of Light
^re Nayls that tire the Wheels of Night,
which to new stations still are brought,
(...) they roll o'r the gloomy Vault.
X.
Or Nayls that arm the Horses hoof,
Which trampling over the marble Roof,
And striking Fire in the Air,
We Mortals call a shooting Star.
XI.
That Is all the Light we now receive,
Unless what belching Vulcans give,
And those yield such a kind of Light
As adds more horror to the Night.
XII.
Nyctimine now freed from day,
From sullen Bush flies out to prey,
And does with Feret note proclaim
The arrival of the usurping Dame.
XIII.
The Rail now cracks in Fields and Meads,
Toads now forsake the Nettle-beds,
The timorous Hare goes to relief,
And wary Men bolt out the Thief.
XIV.
The Fire's new raked, and Hearth swept clean
By Madg, the dirty Kitchen Queen,
The Safe is locked, the Mouse-trap set,
The Leaven laid, and Bucking wet.
XV.
Now in false Floors and Roofs above,
The lustful Cats make ill-tun'd Love,
The Ban-dog on the Dunghill lies,
And watchful Nurse sings Lullabies.
XVI.
Philomel chants it whilst she bleeds,
The Bittern booms it in the Reeds,
And Reynard entering the back Yard,
The Capitolian Cry is heard.
XVII.
The Goblin now the Fool alarms,
Haggs meet to mumble over their Charms;
The Nightmare rides the dreaming Ass,
And Fairies trip it on the grass.
XVIII.
The Drunkard now supinely snores,
His load of Ale sweats through his Pores,
Yet when he wakes the Swine shall find
A Cropala remains behind.
XIX.
The Sober now and Chaste are blessed
With sweet, and with refreshing rest,
And to sound sleeps they have best pretense,
Have greatest share of Innocence.
XX.
We should so live then that we may
Fearless put off our Clotts and Clay,
And travel through Death's shades to Light;
For every Day must have its Night.
Ode.
GOOD night, my Love, may gentle rest
Charm up your Senses till the Light,
Whilst I with Care and Woe oppressed,
Go to inhabit endless Night.
There, whilst your Eyes shall grace the Day,
I must in the despairing shade,
Sigh such a woeful time away,
As never yet poor Lover had.
Yet to this endless Solitude
There is one dangerous step to pass,
To one that loves your sight so rude,
As Flesh and Blood is loath to pass.
But I will take it to express
I worthily your Favors wore,
Your merits (Sweet) can claim no less,
Who dies for you can do no more.
Ode de Monsieur Racan.
Ungrateful cause of all my harms,
I go to seek amidst Alarms
My Death, or Liberty;
And that is all now I Have left to do,
Since (cruel Fair) in serving you
I can nor live nor dye.
The King his Towns sees desert made,
His Plains with armed Troops o're-spread,
Violence does control;
All Is Fire and Sword before his Eyes,
Yet has he fewer Enemies
Than I have in my Soul.
But yet, alas! my hope is vain
To put a period to my pain,
By any desperate ways,
`Tis you that hold my Life enchain'd,
And (under Heaven) you command,
And only you, my days.
If in a Battel's loud'st Alarms,
I rush amongst incensed Arms,
Invoking Death to take me,
Seeing me look so pale, the Foe
Will think me Death himself, and so
Not venture to attaque me.
In Bloody Fields where Mars does make
With his loud Thunder all to shake,
Both Earth, and Heaven to boot;
Man's power to kill me I despise,
Since Love, with Arrows from your Eyes,
Had not the Power to do it.
No, I must languish still unblest,
And in worst Torments manifest
My firm Fidelity;
Or that my Reason set me free,
Since (Fair) in serving you I see,
I can nor live nor dye.
Contentation.
Directed to my Dear Father, and most Worthy Friend, Mr. Isaac Walton.
Heaven, what an Age is this! what Race
Of Giants are sprung up, that dare
Thus fiy in the Almighty's Face,
And with his Providence make War!
II.
I can go no where but I meet
With Malcontents, and Mutineers,
As if in Life was nothing sweet,
And we must Blessings reap in Tears.
III.
O senseless Man, that murmurs still
For Happiness, and does not know,
Even though he might enjoy his Will,
What he would have to make him so.
IV.
Is it true Happiness to be
By undiscerning Fortune placed,
In the most eminent Degree,
Where few arrive, and none stand fast?
V.
Titles and Wealth are Fortune's Toyls
Wherewith the Vain themselves ensnare?
The Great are proud of borrowed Spoils,
The Miser's Plenty breeds his Care.
VI.
The one supinely yawns at rest,
The other eternally does toil,
Each of them equally a Beast,
A pampered Horse, or laboring Moyl.
VII.
The Titulado^s often disgraced,
By public hate, or private frown,
And he whose Hand the Creature raised,
Has yet a Foot to kick him down.
VIII.
The Drudge who would all get, all save,
Like a brute Beast both feeds, and lies,
Prone to the Earth, he digs his Grave,
And in the very labor dies.
IX.
Excess of ill got, ill kept Pelf,
Does only Death, and Danger breed,
Whilst one rich Worldling starves himself
With what would thousand others feed.
X
By which we see what Wealth and Power
Although they make men rich and great,
The sweets of Life do often four,
And gull Ambition with a Cheat.
XI.
Nor is he happier than these,
Who in a moderate estate,
Where he might safely live at case,
Has Lusts that are immoderate.
XII.
For he, by those desires misled,
Quits his own Vine's securing shade,
TO expose his naked, empty head
To all the Storms Man's Peace invade.
XIII.
Nor is he happy who is trim,
Trick't up in favors of the Fair,
Mirrors, with every Breath made dim,
Birds caught in every wanton snare.
XIV.
Woman, man's greatest woe, or bliss,
Does ofter far, than serve, enslave,
And with the Magic of a Kiss,
Destroys whom she was made to save.
XV.
Oh fruitful Grief, the World's Disease!
And vainer Man to make it so,
Who gives his Miseries increase
By cultivating his own woe.
XVI.
There are no ills but what we make,
By giving Shapes and Names to things;
Which is the dangerous mistake
That causes all our Sufferings.
XVII.
We call that Sickness, which is Health,
That Persecution, which is Grace;
That Poverty, which is true Wealth,
And that Dishonor, which is Praise.
XVIII.
Providence watches over all,
And that with an impartial Eye,
And if to Misery we fall,
`Tis through our own Infirmity.
XIX.
`Tis want of foresight makes the bold
Ambitious Youth to danger climb,
And want of Virtue, when the old
At Persecution do repine.
XX.
Alas, our Time is here so short,
That in what state soever `tis spent,
Of Joy or Woe does not import,
Provided it be innocent.
XXI.
But we may make it pleasant too,
If we will take our M^asures right,
And not what Heaven has done, undo
By an unruly Appetite.
XXII.
`Tis Contentation that alone
Can make us happy here below,
And when this little Life is gone,
Will lift us up to Heaven too*
XXIII.
A very little satisfies
An honest, and a grateful heart,
And who would more than will suffice,
Does covet more than is his part.
XXIV.
That man is happy in his share,
Who is warm clad, and cleanly fed,
Whose Necessaries bound his Care,
And honest Labor makes his Bed.
XXV.
Who free from Debt, and clear from Crimes,
Honors those Laws that others fear,
Who ill of Princes in worst Times
Will neither speak himself, nor hear.
XXVI.
Who from the busy World retires,
To be more useful to it still,
And to no greater good aspires,
But only the eschewing ill.
XXVII.
Who, with his Angle, and his Books,
Can think the longest day well spent,
And praises God when back he looks,
And finds that all was innocent.
XXVIII.
This man is happier far than he
Whom public Business often betrays,
Through Labyrinths of policy,
To crooked and forbidden ways.
XXIX.
The World is full of beaten Roads,
But yet so slippery withal,
That where one walks secure, `tis odds
A hundred and a hundred fall.
XXX.
Untrodden Paths are then the best,
Where the frequented are unsure,
And he comes soonest to his rest,
Whose Journey has been most secure.
XXXI.
It is Content alone that makes
Our Pilgrimage a Pleasure here,
And who buys Sorrow cheapest, takes
An ill Commodity too dear.
XXXII.
But he has Fortunes worst withstood,
And Happiness can never miss,
Can covet naught, but where he stood,
And thinks him happy where he is.
Stances de Monsieur de Scudery.
FAIR Nymph, by whose Perfections moved,
My wounded heart is turned to flame,
By all admired, by all approved,
Endure at least to be beloved,
Although you will not love again.
Aminta, as unkind as fair,
What is there that you ought to fear?
For cruel if I you declare,
And that indeed you cruel are;
Why the Reproach may you not hear?
Even Reproaches should delight,
If Friendship for me you have none,
And if no Anger, I have yet
Enough perhaps that may invite
Your hatred or Compassion.
When your Disdain is most severe,
When you most rigorous do prove,
When frowns of Anger most you wear,
You still more charming do appear,
And I am more and more in Love.
Ah, let me, Sweet, your sight enjoy,
Though with the forfeit of my Life,
For fall what will, I Would rather dye,
Beholding you, of present Joy,
Than absent, of a lingering grief.
Let your Eyes lighten, till expiring
In flame, my Heart a Cinder lie,
Falling is nobler than retiring,
And in the glory of aspiring,
`Tis brave to tumble from the Sky.
Yet I would any thing embrace
Might serve your Anger to appease,
And if I may obtain my grace,
Your steps shall leave no print, nor trace
I will not with Devotion kiss.
If, Tyrant, you will have it so,
No word my Passion shall betray,
My wounded Heart shall hide its woe;
But if it sigh, those Sighs will show,
And tell you what my Tongue would say.
Should yet your Rigor higher rise,
Even those offending Sighs shall cease,
I will my Pain and grief disguise;
But, Sweet, if you consult mine Eyes,
Those Eyes will tell you my Disease.
If the utmost my Respect can do,
Still will your Cruelty displease,
Consult your Face, and that will show
What Love is to such Beauty due,
And to the state of my Disease.
Melancholy.
Pindarick Ode.
I.
WHat in the name of wonder's this
Which lies so heavy at my heart,
That I even Death it self could kiss,
And think it were the greatest Bliss*
Even at this moment to depart!
Life, even to the wretched dear,
To me's so nauseous grown,
There is no ill, I Would not commit,
But proud of what would for^eit it,
Would act the mischief without fear,
And wade through thousand lives to lose my own.
II.
Yea, Nature never taught me bloody Rules;
Nor was I yet with vicious precept bred;
And now my Virtue paints my cheeks in Gules,
To check me for the wicked thing I said.
`Tis not then I, but something in my Breast,
With which unwittingly I am possessed,
Which breaths forth Horror to proclaim
That I am now no more the same:
One that some seeds of Virtue had;
But one run resolutely mad,
A Fiend, a Fury, and a Beast,
Or a Demoniack at least,
Who, without sense of Sin, or shame,
At nothing but dire mischiefs aim,
Egged by the Prince of Fiends, and Legion is his Name.
III.
Alas! my Reason's overcast,
That Sovereign Guide is quite displac't,
Clearly dismounted from his Throne,
Banished his Empire, fled and gone,
And in his room
An infamous Usurper's come,
Whose Name is sounding in mine Ear
Like that, methinks, of Oliver.
Nay, I remember in his Life,
Such a Disease as mine was mighty rise,
And yet, methinks, it cannot be,
That he
Should be crept into me,
My skin could never contain sure so much Evil,
Nor any place but Hell can hold so great a Devil.
IV.
But by its symtomes now I know
What is that does torment me so,
`Tis a disease,
As great a Fiend almost as these,
That drinks up all my better blood,
And leaves the rest a standing Pool,
And though I ever little understood,
Makes me a thousand times more Fool.
Fumes up dark vapors to my Brain,
Creates burnt Choler in my breast;
And of these nobler parts possessed,
Tyrannically there does reign,
Oh when (kind Heaven) shall I be well again.
V.
Accursed Melancholy, it was Sin
First brought thee in;
Sin lodged the first in our first Father's Breast,
By Sin you are nourish't, and by Sin increast,
You Are man's own Creature, he has given thee power,
The sweets of Life thus to devour.
To make us shun the cheerful Light,
And creep into the shades of Night,
Where the sly Tempter ambush't lies
To make the discontented Soul his prize.
There the Progenitor of guile,
Accosts us in the old Serpent's style;
Rails at the World as well as we,
Nay, Providence it self's not free;
Proceeding then to Arts of Flattery,
He there extolls our Valor and our Parts,
Spreads all his Nets to catch our Hearts,
Concluding thus; what generous mind
Would longer here draw breath,
That might so sure a Refuge find
In the repose of Death!
Which having said, he to our choice presents
All his destroying Instruments,
Swords and Steeletto's, Halters, Pistols, Knives,
Poisons, both quick and slow, to end our Lives,
Or if we like none of those fine Devices,
He then presents us Pools and Precipices;
Or to let out, or suffocate our breath,
And by once dying to obtain an everlasting Death.
VI.
Avaunt thou Devil Melancholy,
Thou grave and sober Folly;
Night of the Mind, wherein our Reasons grope
For future Joys, but never can find hope.
Parent of Murders, Treasons, and Despair,
Thou pleasing and eternal care:
Go sow thy rank and poisonous seeds
In such a soil of mind as breeds,
With little help, black and nefarious deeds;
And let my whiter Soul alone,
For why should I thy sable weed put on,
Who never meditated ill, nor ill have never done!
VII.
Ah, `tis ill done to me, that makes me sad
And thus to pass away,
With sighs the tedious Nights, and does
Like one that either is, or will be mad.
Repentance can our own fowl souls make pure,
And expiate the foulest Deed,
Whereas the thought others offenses breed,
Nothing but true amendment one can cure.
Thus man, who of this world a member is,
Is by good nature subject made
To smart for what his fellows do, amiss,
As he were guilty, when he is be is betrayed,
And mourning for the vices of the Time,
Suffers unjustly for another Crime.
VIII.
Go foolish Soul, and wash thee white,
Be troubled for thine own misdeeds
That Heavenly sorrow comfort breeds,
And true contrition turns delight.
^et Princes thy past services forget,
Let dear-bought Friends thy Foes become,
though round with misery thou art beset,
With Scorn abroad, and Poverty at home,
^eep yet thy hands but clear, and Conscience pure,
And all the ills thou shall endure
Will on thy Worth such luster set
^s shall outshine the brightest Coronet.
and Men at last will be ashamed to see,
That still,
For all their malice, and malicious skill,
^hy mind revive as it was used to be,
and that they have disgraced themselves to honor thee.
Hope.
Pindarick Ode.
I.
HOPE, thou darling, and delight
Of unforeseeing reckless Minds,
Thou deceiving Parrisite,
Which no where Entertainment, finds
But with the wretched; or the vain;
`Tis they alone fond Hope maintain.
Thou easy Fool's chief Favorite;
Thou fawning Slave to slaves, that still remains
In Galleys, Dungeons, and in Chains;
Or with a whining Lover love to play,
With treacherous Art
Fan^ing his Heart,
A greater Slave by far, than they
Who in worst Durance wear their Age away.
Thou, whose Ambition mounts no higher,
Nor does to greater Fame aspire,
Than to be ever found a liar:
Thou treacherous Fiend, deluding Shade,
Who would with such a Phantom be betrayed,
By whom the wretched are at last more wretched made
II.
Yet once, I must confess, I was
Such an overweening Ass,
As in Fortunes worst distress
To believe thy Promises;
Which so brave a change foretold,
Such a stream of Happiness,
Such Mountain hopes of glittering Gold,
Such Honors, Friendships, Offices,
In Love and Arms so great Success;
That I even hugged my self with the conceit,
Was my self Party in the cheat,
And in my v^ry Bosom laid
That fatal Hope by which I was betrayed,
Thinking my self already rich, and great:
And in that foolish thought despised
The advice of those who out of Love advised;
As I Would soreseen what they did not foresee,
A Torrent of Felicity,
And rudely laughed at those, who pitying wept for me.
III.
But of this Expectation, when 't came to `t,
What was the fruit?
In sordid Robes poor Disappointment came,
Attended by her Handmaids, Grief and Shame;
No Wealth, no Titles, no Friend could I see,
For they still court Prosperity,
Nay, what was worst of what Mischance could do,
My dearest Love forsook me too;
My pretty Love, with whom, had she been true,
Even in Banishment,
I could have lived most happy and content,
Her sight which nourish't me withdrew.
I then, although too late, perceived
I was by flattering Hope deceived,
And called for it t'expostulate
The Treachery and foul deceit:
But it was then quite fled away,
And gone some other to betray,
Leaving me in a state
By much more desolate,
Than if when first attack't by Fa^e,
I had submitted there
And made my courage yield unto despair.
For Hope, like Cordials, to our wrong
Does but our Miseries prolong,
Whilst yet our Vitals daily wast,
And not supporting Life, but pain
Call their false friendships back again
And unto Death, grim Death abandon us at last.
IV.
In me, false Hope, in me alone,
Thou thine own Treach'ry have outdone:
For Chance, perhaps may have befriended
Some one the have labored to deceive
With what by thee was never intended,
Nor in thy power to give:
But me thou have deceived in all, as well
Possible, as impossible,
And the most sad Example made
Of all that ever were betrayed.
But thou have taught me Wisdom yet,
Henceforth to hope no more
Than I see reason for,
A Precept I shall never forget:
Nor is there any thing below
Worth a man's wishing, or his care,
When what we wish begets our woe,
And Hope deceived becomes Despair.
Then thou seducing Hope farewell,
No more thou shall of Sense bereave me,
No more deceive me,
I now can countercharm thy Spell,
And for what is past, so far I will be even,
Never again to hope for any thing but Heaven.
Epistle to the Earl of --
TO write in Verse, O Count of mine,
To you, who have the Ladies nine,
With a wet finger, at your call,
And I believe have kissed 'um all,
Is such an undertaking, none
But Peakrill bold would venture on:
Yet having found, that, to my woes
No help will be procured by Prose,
And to write that way is no boot,
I Will try if Ryming will not do it.
Know then, my Lord, that on my word,
Since my first, second, and my third,
Which I have pestered you withal,
I Have heard no syllable at all,
Or where you are, or what you do;
Or if I have a Lord, or no.
A pretty comfort to a man
That studies all the ways he can
To keep an Interest he does prize
Above all other Treasuries.
But let that pass, you now must know
We do on our last Quarter go;
And that I may go bravely out,
Am trowling merry Bowl about,
To Lord, and Lady, that and this,
As nothing were at all amiss,
When after twenty days are past,
Poor Charles has eat and drunk his last.
No more Plum-porridge then, or Pie,
No Brawn with Branch of Rosemary,
No Chine of Beef, enough to make
The tallest Yeoman's Chine to crack;
No Bag-pipe humming in the Hall,
Nor noise of Housekeeping at all,
Nor sign, by which it may be said,
This House was once inhabited.
^ may perhaps, with much ado,
Rub out a Christmas more, or two:
Or, if the Fates be pleased, a score,
Bur never look to keep one more.
Some three Months hence, I make account
My Spur-gall'd Pegasus to mount,
When, whither I intend to go,
My Horse, as well as I, will know:
But being got, with much ado,
Out of the reach a Stage or two,
Though not the consci^nce of my shame,
And Pegasus fallen desperate lame,
I shake my stirrups, and forsake ^im,
Leaving him to the next will take him;
Not that I set so lightly by him,
Would any be so kind to buy him;
But that I think those who have seen
How ill my Muse has mounted been,
Would certainly take better heed
Than to bid money for her Steed.
Being then on foo^, away I go,
And bang the hoof, incognito,
Though in condition so forlorn,
Little Disguise will serve the turn,
Since best of Friends, the World's so base,
Scarce know a man when in Disgrace.
But that is too serious. Then suppose,
Like trav'ling Tom, Coriat.
with dint of Toes,
I Am got unto extremest shore,
Sick, and impatient to be over
That Channel which secured my state
Of Peace, whilst I was fortunate,
But in this moment of distress,
Confines me to unhappiness:
But where is the Money to be had
This surly Neptune to persuade?
It is no less than shillings ten,
Gods will be bribed as well as men.
Imagine then your High-lander
Over a Cann of muddy Beer,
Playing at Passage with a pair
Of drunken Fumblers for his Fare;
And see I Have won, oh, lucky chance,
Hoist Sail amain, my Mates, for France;
For^une was civil in this throw,
And having robbed me, lets me go.
I Have won, and yet how could I choose,
He needs must win, that cannot lose;
Fate send me then a happy wind,
And better luck to those behind.
But what advantage will it be
That Winds and Tides are kind to me,
When still the wretched have their woes,
Wherever they their Feet dispose?
What satisfaction, or delight
Are ragousts to an appetite?
What ease can France or Flanders give
To him that is a Fugitive?
Some two years hence, when you come over,
In all your State, Ambassador,
If my ill Nature be so strong
TO outlive my Infamy so long,
You Will find your little Officer
Ragged as his old Colors are;
And naked, as he is discontent,
Standing at some poor Sutlers Tent,
With his Pike cheek't, to guard the Tun
He must not taste when he has done.
Hump, says my Lord, I Am half afraid
My Captain's turned a Reformade,
That scurvy Face I sure should know,
Yes faith, my Lord, it is even so,
I am that individual he:
I told your Lordship how 'twould be.
Thou did so, Charles, it is confessed,
Yet still I thought thou were in jest;
But comfort! Poverty's no Crime,
I Will take thy word another time.
This matters now are coming to,
And I Am resolved upon it; whilst you,
Sleeping in Fortune's Arms, near dream
Who feels the contrary Extreme;
Faith write to me, that I may know
Whether you love me still, or no;
Or if you do not, by what ways
I Have pulled upon me my disgrace;
For whilst I still stand fair with you,
I dare the worst my Fate can do;
But your opinion long I find,
I Am sunk for ever to mankind.
Beauty.
PINDARICK ODE.
In Answer to an Ode of Mr. Abraham Cowley's upon the same Subject.
I.
BEauty! thou Masterpiece of Heavens best skill,
Who in all shapes and lights art Beauty still,
And whether black, or brown, tawny, or white,
Still strik'st with wonder every judging sight;
Thou triumph, which do entertain the Eye
With Admirations full variety.
Who, though thou variest here and there,
And trick'st thy self in various colored hair,
And though with several washes Nature has
Thought fit thy several Lineaments to grace,
Yet Beauty still we must acknowledge thee,
Whatever thy Complexion be.
II.
Beauty, Love's Friend, who help'st him to a Throne,
By Wisdom Deify'd, to whom alone
Thy Excellence is known,
And never neglected but by those have none;
Thou noble Coin, by no false slight allayed,
By whom we Lovers Militant are paid,
True to the Touch, and ever best
When thou art brought unto the Test,
And who do still of higher value prove,
As deeper thou art searched by Love.
He who allows thee only in the Light
Is there mistaken quite,
For there we only see the outer skin,
When the Perfection lies within;
Beauty more revishes the Touch than Sight,
And seen by Day, is still enjoyed by Night,
For Beauty's chiefest Parts are never seen.
III.
Beauty, thou Active, Passive good!
Who both enflam'st and cool'st our Blood!
Thou glorious Flower, whose sovereign juice
Does wonderful Effects produce,
Who, Scorpion-like, do with thee bring
The Balm that cures thy deadly sting.
What pity it is the fairest Plant
That ever Heaven made
Should ever ever fade,
Yet Beauty we shall never want:
For she has off-sets of her own,
Which e're she dies will be as fairly blown,
And though they blossom in variety,
Yet still new Beauties will descry,
And here the Fancy's governed by the Eye.
IV.
Beauty, thy Conquests still are made
Over the Vigorous more than the Decayed;
And chiefly over those of the Martial Trade;
And whom thou conquer'st still thou keep'st in thrall,
Until you both together fall,
Whereas of all the Conquerours, how few
Know how to keep what they subdue?
Nay, even froward Age subdues thee too.
Thy Power, Beauty, has not bounds,
All sorts of men it equally confounds,
The young and old does both enslave,
The proud, meek, humble, and the brave,
And if it wounds, it only is to save.
V.
Beauty, thou Sister to Heavens glorious Lamp,
Of ^iner Clay, thou finer stamp!
Thou second Light, by which we better live,
Thou better Sexe's vast prerogative!
Thou greatest gift that Heaven can give!
He who against thee does inveigh,
Never yet knew where Beauty lay,
And does betray
A deplorable want of Sense,
Blindness, or Age, or Impotence:
For Wit was given to no other end,
But Beauty to admire, or to commend;
And for our Sufferings here below
Beauty is all the recompense we know:
It Is then for such as cannot see,
Nor yet have other sense to friend
Adored Beauty, thus to slander thee,
And he who calls thee madness let him be,
By his own doom from Beauty doomed for me.
Rondeau.
FOrbear (fair Phillis) Oh forbear
Those deadly killing frowns, and spare
A heart so loving, and so true,
By none to be subdued, but you,
Who my poor life's sole Princess are.
You only can create my care;
But offend you I all things dare;
Then lest your cruelty you rue
Forbear;
And lest you kill that heart, beware,
To which there is some pity due,
If but because I humbly sue.
Your anger therefore, sweetest fair,
Though mercy in your Sex is rare,
Forbear.
Woman.
Pindarick Ode.
I.
WHat a bold Theme have I in hand,
What Fury has possessed my Muse,
That could no other subject choose,
But that which none can understand!
Woman, what Tongue, or Pen is able
To determine what thou art,
A thing so moving, and unstable,
So Sea^like, so investigable,
That no Land Map, nor Sea-man's Chart,
Though they show us snowy Mountains,
Chalky Cliffs, and Crystal Fountains,
Sable Thickets, golden Groves,
All that man admires and loves,
Can direct us to thy heart!
Which, though we seek it night and day
Through vast Regions Ages stray,
And over Seas with Canvas wings make way;
That Heart the whiles,
Like to the floating Isles,
Our Compass evermore beguiles,
And still, still, still remains Terra Incognita.
II.
Woman! the fairest sweetest Flower
That in happy Eden grew,
Whose sweets and graces had the power
The World's sole Monarch to subdue,
What pity it is thou were not true.
But there, even there, thy frailty brought in sin,
Sin that has cost so many Sighs and tears,
Enough to ruin all succeeding Heirs,
To Beauties Temple let the Devil in.
And though (because there was no more)
It in one single story did begin;
Yet from the Seeds shed from that fruitful Core,
Have sprung up Volumes infinite, and great,
With which th'ore charged world does sweat,
Of women false, proud, cruel, insolent;
And what could else befall,
Since she her self was President
Who was the Mother of them all;
And who, although Mankind indeed was scant,
To show her malice, rather than her want,
Would make a loathsome Serpent her Gallant.
III.
O mother Eve, sure 't was a fault
So wild a Rule to give,
E're there were any to be taught,
Or any to deceive.
'Twas ill to ruin all thy Offspring so,
E're they were yet in Embrio,
Great mischeifs did attend thy easy will,
For all thy Sons (which usually are
The Mothers care)
For ever lost, and ruined were,
By thy instructing thy fair Daughters ill.
What Is he that dares his own fond choice approve
Or be secure his spouse in Chaste;
Or if she be, that it will last,
Yet all must love.
Oh Cruel Nature that does force our wills
To Embrace those necessary ills!
Oh negligent, and treacherous eyes,
Given to man for true and faithful spies;
How often do you betray you trust,
And joined Confederate with our lust,
Tell us that Beauty is, which is but flesh, that flesh but Dust.
IV.
Heaven, if it be thy undisputed will
That still
This charming Sex we must adore,
Let us love less, or they love more;
For so the Ills that we endure,
Will find some ease, if not a cure:
Or if their hearts from the first Gangrene be
In^ected to that desperate degree
As will no Surgery admit;
Out of thy love to Men at least forbear
To make their faces so subduing fair,
And if thou will give Beauty, limit it*
For moderate Beauty, though it bear no price,
Is yet a mighty enemy to Vice,
And who has Virtue once, can never see
Any thing of Deformity
Let her Complexion swart, or Tawny be,
A Twilight Olive, or a Midnight Ebony.
V.
She that is chaste, is always fair,
No matter for her Hue,
And though for form she were a Star,
She Is ugly, if untrue:
True Beauty always lies within,
Much deeper, than the outer skin,
So deep, that in a Woman's mind,
It will be hard, I doubt, to find;
Or if it be, she is so derived,
And with so many doors contrived,
Harder by much to keep it in.
For Virtue in a Woman's Breast
Seldom by Title is possessed,
And is no Tenant, but a wandering Guest.
VI.
But all this while I Have soundly slept,
And raved as Dreamers use:
Fie! what a coil my brains have kept
TO instruct a saucy Muse
Her own fair Sex to abuse.
It Is nothing but an ill Digestion
Has thus brought Women's Fame in question,
Which have been and still will be what they are,
That is, as chaste, as they are sweet and fair;
And all that has been said
Nothing but ravings of an idle Head,
Troubled with fumes of wine;
For now, that I am broad awake
I find it is all a gross mistake,
Else what a case were his, and thine, and mine?
The World.
ODE.
I.
FIE! What a wretched World is this?
Nothing but anguish, grie^s, and fears,
Where, who does best, must do amiss,
Frailty the Ruling Power bears
In this our dismal Vale of Tears.
II.
Oh! who would live, that could but dye,
Dye honestly, and as he should,
Since to contend with misery
Will^ do the wisest Man no good,
Misfortune will not be withstood*
III.
The most that helpless man can do
Toward the bett'ring his Estate
Is but to barter woe for woe,
And he even there attempts too late,
So absolute a Prince is Fate.
IV.
But why do I of Fate complain;
Man might live happy, if not free,
And Fortunes shocks with ease sustain,
If Man would let him happy be:
Man is Man's Foe, and Destiny.
V.
And that Rib Woman, though she be
But such a little little part;
Is yet a greater Fate than he,
And has the Power, or the Art
To break his Peace; nay break his Heart.
VI.
Ah, glorious Flower, lovely piece
Of superfine re^ined Clay,
Thou poyson'st only with a Kiss,
And dartest an auspicious Ray
On him thou meanest to betray.
VII.
These are the World, and these are they
That Life does so unpleasant make,
Whom to avoid there is no way
But the wild Desert straight to take,
And there to husband the last stake.
VIII.
Fly to the empty Deserts then,
For so you leave the World behind,
There Is no World where there are no Men,
And Brutes more civil are, and kind,
Than Man whose Reason Passions blind.
IX.
For should you take a Hermitage,
Though you might escape from other wrongs,
Yet even there you bear the rage
Of venomous, and slanderous tongues,
Which to the Innocent belongs.
X.
Grant me then, Heaven, a wilderness,
And there an endless Solitude,
Where though Wolves howl, and Serpents hiss,
Though dangerous, it is not half so rude
As the ungoverned Multitude.
XI.
And Solitude in a dark Cave,
Where all things hushed, and silent be,
Resembles so the quiet Grave,
That there I would prepare to flee,
With Death, that hourly waits for me.
De Vita Beata.
Paraphrased from the Latin.
COme, you are deceived, and what you do
Esteem a happy Life's not so;
He is not happy that excells
In The Lapidary's Bagatells;
Nor he, that when he sleeps does lie
Under a stately Canopy;
Nor he, that still supinely hides,
In easy Down, his lazy sides;
Nor he, that Purple wears, and sups
Luxurious Draughts in golden Cups;
Nor he, that loads, with Princely Fare,
His bowing Tables, whilst they will bear;
Nor he, that has each spacious Vault
With Deluges of Plenty fraught,
Culled from the fruitful Libyan Fields,
When Autumn his best Harvest yields:
But he whom no mischance affrights,
Nor popular applause delights,
That can unmoved, and undismayed
Confront a Ruffians threatening blade:
Who can do this; that man alone
Has power Fortune to disthrone*
Q. Cicero, De mulierum levitate.
Transl.
COmmit a Ship unto the Wind
But not thy Faith to Womankind,
For the Oceans waving billows are
Safer than Woman's faith by far.
No Woman's good, and if there be
Hereafter such a thing as she,
It Is by, I know not what, of Fate,
That can from bad, a good create.
Despair.
ODE.
IT is decreed, that I must die,
And could lost men a reason show
For losing so themselves, it is I,
Woman, and Fate will have it so.
Woman, more cruel, than my Fate,
From thee this sentence was severe,
It Is thou condemn'st me, fair ingrate,
Fate's but the Executioner.
And mine must be Fate's hands to strike
At this uncomfortable life,
Which I do loath, cause you dislike,
And court cold Death to be my wife.
In whose embraces though I must
Fail of those Joys, that warmed my heart,
And only be espoused to dust,
Yet Death, and I shall never part.
That Is one assurance I shall have,
Although I wed Deformity,
And must inhabit the cold Grave,
More than I, Sweet, could have with thee.
And yet if thou could be so kind,
As but to grant me a Reprieve,
I Am not to Death so much inclind,
But I could be content to live.
But so, that that same life should be
With thee, and with thy kindness blessed;
For without thee, and all of thee,
'Twere dying only with the rest.
But that, you will says, too arrogant,
T'enslave your Beauties, and your will,
And cruelty in you to grant,
Who saving one, must Thousands kill.
And yet you Women take a pride
To see men dye by your disdain;
But thou will weep the Homicide,
When thou conside^'st whom thou have slain.
Yet don't; for being as I am,
Thy Creature, thou in this estate,
To Life, and Death have equal claim,
And may kill him thou did create.
Then let me thine own Doom abide,
Nor once for him o'recast thine eyes,
Who glori^s, that he lived, and died
Thy Lover, and thy Sacrifice.
Sonnet.
WHY do thou say thy Heart is gone,
And no more mine, no more thine own?
But, past retrieve, for ever wed,
By sacred Vow, to another Bed?
Why do thou tell me that I lie
Bound in the same perplexed tie,
And that our now divided Souls
Are cold, and distant as the Poles?
Do thou not know, when first our Loves*
Were plighted in the secret Groves,
Our hearts were changed with equal Flame,
Say, Chloris, then how can it be?
Could thou give me, or I give thee?
No, no, our selves are still the same.
Sonnet.
HOW should thou love, and not offend?
Why, Cloris, I will tell thee how,
As thou did once, so love me now,
And lie with me, and there is an end.
Thou only art enjoined (my Sweet)
To keep thy Reputation high,
And that indeed is Secrecy,
Since all do err, though all not see it.
Then fairest, fearless of all blame,
That sacred Treasure of thy Name
Into my faithful Arms commit;
Thou once did trust me with thy Fame,
I then was just and true to it,
And, Chloris, I am still the same.
Sonnet.
CHloris, whilst thou and I were free,
Wedded to naught but Liberty,
How sweetly happy did we live,
How free to promise, free to give?
Then, Monarch's of our selves, we might
Love here, or there, to change delight,
And tied to none, with all dispense,
Paying ^ach Love its recompense.
But in that happy freedom, we
Were so improvidently free,
To give away our liberties;
And now in fruitful sorrow pine
At what we are, what might have bin,
Had thou, or I, or both been wise.
Sonnet.
WHY do thou say thou love me now,
And yet proclaim it is too late,
When bound by folly, or by Fate,
Thou can no further grace allow?
Repeat no more that killing Voice,
Thou beauteous Victrice of my heart;
Or find a way to ease my smart,
Maugre thy now repented choice.
It Is not too late to love, and do
What Love and Nature prompt thee to,
Whilst thus thou tryumph'st in thy prime,
Thou may discreetly love, and use
Those Pleasures thou did once refuse:
But to profess it were a Crime.
Poverty.
Pindarick Ode.
I.
THou greatest Plague that Mortals know!
Thou greatest Punishment!
That Heaven has sent
To quell and humble us below!
Thou worst of all Diseases and all Pains
By so much harder to endure,
By how much thou art hard to cure,
Who having robbed Physicians of their brains,
As well as of their Gain
A Chronical Disease does still remain!
What Epithet can fit thee, or what words thy ills explain*
II.
This puzzles quite Aesculapian Tribe
Who, where there are no Fees, can have no wit*
And make them helpless Medicines still provide,
Both for the sick, and poor alike unfit.
For inward griefs all that they do prepare
Nothing but Crumbs, and Fragments are*
And outwardly apply no more
But sordid Rags unto the sore.
Thus Poverty is dressed, and Dose't
With little Art, and little Cost,
As if poor Rem'dies for the Poor were fit
When Poverty in such a place does sit,
That it is the grand Projection only that must conquer it.
III.
Yet Poverty, as I do take it,
Is not so Epidemical
As many in the world would make it,
Who all that want their wishes Poor do call;
For if who is not with his Divident
Amply content,
Within that acceptance fall,
Most would be poor, and peradventure all.
This would the wretched with the rich confound;
But I not call him Poor does not abound,
But him, who snared in Bonds, and endless strife,
The Comforts wants more than Supports of Life;
Him whose whole Age is measured out by fears,
And though he has wherewith to eat,
His Bread does yet
Taste of affliction, and his Cares
^is purest Wine mix and allay with Tears.
IV.
It Is in this sense that I am poor,
And I Am afraid shall be so still,
^bstrep'rous Creditors besiege my door,
And my whole House clamorous Eccho's fill;
From these there can be no Retirement free,
From Room to Room, they hunt, and follow me;
They will not let me eat, nor sleep, nor pray,
But persecute me Night, and Day;
Torment my body, and my mind,
Nay, if I take my heels, and fly,
They follow me with open Cry,
At Home no rest, Abroad no Refuge can I find.
V.
Thou worst of Ills! what have I done,
That Heaven should punish me with thee?
From Insolence, Fraud, and Oppression,
I ever have been innocent and free.
Thou were intended (Poverty)
A scourge for Pride, and Avarice,
I never was tainted yet with either Vice;
I never in prosperity,
Nor in the height of all my happiness,
Scorned, or neglected any in distress,
My hand, my heart, my door
Were ever opened to the poor;
And I to others in their need have granted,
E're they could ask, the thing they wanted,
Whereas I now, although I humbly crave it,
Do only beg for Peace, and cannot have it.
VI.
Give me but that, ye bloody Persecutors,
(Who formerly have been my suitors)
And I Will surrender all the rest
For which you so contest.
For Heavens sake, let me* but be quiet,
I Will not repine at Cloths, nor Diet,
Any habit never so mean,
Let it be but whole, and clean,
Such as Nakedness will hide,
Will amply satisfy my pride;
And for meat
Husks, and Acorns I will eat,
And for better never wish;
But when you will me better treat,
A Turnip is a Princely dish:
Since then I thus far am subdued,
And so humbly do submit,
Faith, be no more so monstrous rude,
But some Repose at least permit;
Sleep is to Life, and Humane Nature due*
And that, alas, is all for which I humbly sue.
Death.
Pindarick Ode.
I.
AT a Melancholic season,
As alone I musing sat,
I fell, I know not how, to reason
With my self of Man's Estate,
How subject unto Death, and Fate:
Names that Mortals so affright,
As turns the brightest Day to Night,
And spoils of Living the Delight,
With which, so soon as Life is tasted,
Lest we should too happy be,
Even in our Infancy,
Our joys are quash't, our hopes are blasted;
For the first thing that we hear,
(Used to still us when we cry)
The Nurse to keep the Child in fear,
Discreetly tell's it, it must die,
Be put into a hole, eaten with worms;
Presenting Death in thousand ugly forms,
Which tender minds so entertain,
As ever after to retain,
By which means we are Cowards bred,
Nurs't with unnecessary dread,
and ever dream of dying, 'till we are dead.
II.
Death! thou Child's Bugbear, thou fools terror,
Ghastly set forth the weak to awe;
Begot by fear, increast by error,
Whom none but a sick Fancy ever saw,
Thou who art only feared
By the illiterate, and timorous Heard,
But by the wise
Esteemed the greatest of Felicities.
Why, sithence by an Universal Law,
Entailed upon Mankind thou art,
Should any dread, or seek to avoid thy Dart,
When of the two, Fear is the greatest smart?
O senceless Man, who vainly flies
What Heaven has ordained to be
The Remedy
Of all thy Mortal pains, and miseries.
III.
Sorrow, Want, Sickness, Injury, Mischance,
The happy'st Man's certain Inheritance,
With all the various Ills,
Which the wide World with mourning ^ills,
Or by Corruption, or Disaster bred,
Are for the living all, not for the dead.
When Life's Sun sets, Death is a Bed
With sable Curtains spread,
Where we lie down
To rest the weary Limbs, and careful Head,
And to the Good, a Bed of Down.
There, there no frightful Tintamarre
Of Tumult in the many headed Beast,
Nor all the loud Artillery of War,
Can fright us from that sweet, that happy Rest,
Wherewith the still, and silent Grave is blessed;
Nor all the rattle, that above they keep,
^reak our repose, or rouse us from that everlasting sleep.
IV.
The Grave is priviledg'd from noise, and care,
From Tyranny, and wild oppression,
Violence has so little power there,
Even worst Oppressors let the dead alone:
We Are there secure from Princes frowns,
The Insolences of the Great,
From the rude hands of barbarous Clowns,
And Policies of those that sweat
The simple to betray, and cheat:
Or, if some one with Sacrilegious hand,
Would persecute us after Death,
His want of Power shall his Will withstand,
And he shall only lose his breath;
For all that he by that shall gain,
Will be Dishonor for his pain,
And all the clutter he can keep
Will only serve to rock us whilst we soundly sleep,
V.
The Dead no more converse with Tears,
With idle Jealousies and Fears,
No danger makes the Dead man start,
No idle Love torments his heart,
No loss of Substance, Parents, Children, Friends,
Either his Peace, or Sleep offends;
Naught can provoke his anger, or despite,
He out of combat is, and injury,
It Is he of whom Philosophers so write,
And who would be a Stoic let him dye,
For whilst we living are, what Man is he,
Who the Worlds wro^gs does either feel, or see,
That possibly from Passion can be free!
But must put on
A noble Indignation
Warranted both by Virtue, and Religion.
VI.
Then let me dye, and no more subject be
Unto the Tyrannizing powers,
To which this short Mortality of ours,
Is either preordain'd by Destiny,
Or bound by natural Infirmity.
We nothing, whilst we here remain,
But Sorrow, and Repentance gain,
Nay, even our very joys, are pain;
Or being past,
To woe, and torment turn at last:
Nor is there yet any so sacred place,
Where we can sanctuary find,
No Man's a friend to Sorrow, and Disgrace;
But flying one, we other mischiefs meet;
Or if we kinder Entertainment find,
We bear the seeds of Sorrow in the Mind,
And keep our frailty, when we shift our feet.
Whilst we are Men we still our Passions have,
And he that is most free, is his own slave,
There is no refuge, but the friendly Grave.
On the Death of the Most Noble Thomas Earl of Ossory.
Carmen Irregulare.
I
ENough! Enough! I'l^ hear no more,
And would to Heaven I had been deaf before
That ^atal Sound had struck my Ear:
Harsh Rumor has not left so sad a note
In her hoarse Trumpet's brazen throat
To move Compassion, and enforce a Tear.
Methinks all Nature should relent, and droop,
The Center shrink, and Heaven stoop,
The Day be turned to mourning Night,
The twinkling Stars weep out their Light,
And all things out of their Distinction run
Into their primitive Confusion.
A Chaos, with cold Darkness overspread,
Since the Illustrious Ossory is dead.
II.
When Death that fatal Arrow drew,
Ten Thousand hearts he pierced through,
Though one alone he outright slew;
Never since Sin gave him his killing Trade,
He, at one shot, so great a slaughter made;
He needs no more at those let fly,
They of that wound alone will dye,
And who can now expect to live, when he,
Thus fell unpriviledg'd we see!
He met Death in his greatest Triumph, War,
And always thence came off a Conqueror,
Through rattling shot, and Pikes the Slave he sought,
Knocked at each Cuirass for him, as he fought,
Beat him at Sea, and baffled him on shore,
War's utmost fury he out-brav'd before:
But yet, it seems, a Fever could do more.
III.
The English Infantry are Orphans now,
Pale Sorrow hangs on every Souldiers-brow:
Who now in Honor's path shall lead you on,
Since your beloved General is gone?
Furl up your Ensigns, case the warlike Drum,
Pay your last honors to his Tomb;
Hang dow your Manly heads in sign of woe;
That now is all that your poor Loves can do;
Unless by Wi^^^r's Fire, or Summer's shade
To tell what a brave Leader once you had:
Hang your now useless Arms up in the Hall,
There let them rust upon the sweating Wall;
Go, Till the Fields, and with inglorious Sweat,
An honest, but a painful living get:
Your old neglected Callings now renew,
And bid to glorious War a long adieu.
IV.
The Dutch may now have Fishing free,
And, whilst the Consternation lasts,
Like the proud Rulers of the Sea,
Show the full stature of their Masts;
Our English Neptune, deaf to all Alarms,
Now soundly sleeps in Deaths cold Arms,
And on his Ebon Altar has laid down
His awful Trident, and his Naval Crown.
No more shall the tall Frigate dance
For joy she carrys this Victorious Lord,
Who to the Capstain chained Mischance,
Commanding on her lofty board.
The Sea it self, that is all tears,
Would weep her soundless Channel dry,
Had she unhappily but Ears,
To hear that Ossory could dye.
Ah, cruel Fate, thou never struck'st a blow,
By all Mankind regretted so;
Nor cannot be said who should lament him most,
No Country such a Patriot e're could boast,
And never Monarch such a Subject lost.
V.
And yet we knew that he must one day dye,
That should our grief assuage;
By Sword, or Shot, or by Infirmity;
Or, if the^e failed, by Age.
But He, alas! too soon gave place
To the Successors of his Noble Race:
We wished, and coveted to have him long,
He was not old enough to dye so soon,
And they to finish what he had begun,
As much too young:
But Time, that had no hand in his mischance,
Is fitter to mature, and to advance
Their early hopes to the Inheritance
Of Titles, Honors, Riches, and Command,
Their Glorious Grandsir's Merits have obtained,
And which shines brighter than a Ducal Crown,
Of their Illustrious Family's Renown;
Oh, may there never fail of that brave Race,
A man as great, as the great Ossory was,
To serve his Prince, and as successful prove
In the same Valor, Loyalty, and Love;
Whilst his own Virtues swell the cheeks of Fame,
And from his consecrated Urn does Flame
A Glorious Pyramid to Botel^^s Name*
Ode Bachique.
De Monsieur Racan.
NOW that the Day's short and forlorn,
Dull Melancholy Capricorn
To Chimney-corners Men translate,
Drown we our Sorrows in the glass,
And let the thoughts of Warfare pass,
The Clergy, and the third Estate.
II.
Menard, I know what thou have writ,
That spritely issue of thy Wit
Will live whilst there are men to read:
But, what if they recorded be
In Memory's Temple, boots it thee,
When thou art gnawn by Worms, and dead?
III.
Henceforth those fruitless studies spare,
Let Us rather drink until we stare
Of this immortal juice of ours,
Which does in excellence precede
The Beverage which Gannimede
Into the Immortals Goblet pours.
IV.
The Juice that sparkles in this glass
Makes tedious Years like Days to pass,
Yet makes us younger still become,
By this from laboring thoughts are chac't
The sorrow of those Ills are past,
And terror of the Ills to come.
V.
Let us drink brimmers then, Time's fleet,
And steals away with winged feet,
Haling us with him to our Urn,
In vain we sue to it to stay,
For Years like Rivers pass away,
And never, never do return.
VI.
When the Spring comes attired in Green,
The Winter flies, and is not seen:
New Tides do still supply the Main:
But when our frolic Youth's once gone,
And Age has taken possession,
Time nere restores us that again.
VII.
Deaths Laws are Universal, and
In Princes Palaces command,
As well as in the poorest Hutt,
We Are to the Parcae subject all,
The threads of Clown's and Monarchs shall,
Be both by the same Cizors cut.
VIII.
Their rigours which all this deface,
Will ravish in a little space,
What ever we most lasting make,
And soon will lead us out to drink,
Beyond the pitchy Rivers Brink,
The waters of Oblivion's Lake.
Epistle to Sir Clifford Clifton, then sitting in Parliament.
WHEN from thy kind hand, my dearest, dear brother,
Whom I love as thou had been the Son of my Mother,
Nay, better, to tell you the truth of the story,
Had you into the World but two minutes before me;
I received thy kind Letter, good Lord, how it eased me
Of the villainous Spleen that for six days had seized me:
I start from my Couch, where I lay dull and muddy,
Of my Servants inquiring the way to my Study,
For, in truth, of late days I so little do mind it,
Should one turn me twice about I never should find it:
But by help of direction, I soon did arrive at
The place where I used to sit fooling in private.
So soon as got thither, I straight fell to calling,
Some call it invoking, but mine was plain bawling;
I called for my Muse, but no answer she made me,
Nor could I conceive why the Slut should evade me.
I knew I there left her, and locked her so safe in,
There could be no likelihood of her escaping:
Besides, had she escaped, I was sure to retrieve her,
She being so ugly that none would receive her:
^ then fell to searching, since I could not hear her,
^ ^ought all the shelves, but never the nearer:
^ tumbled my Papers, and rifled each Packet,
Threw my Books all on heaps, and kept such a racket,
Disordering all things, which before had their places
Distinct by themselves in several Classes,
That who'd seen the confusion, and looked on the ware,
Would have thought he had been at Babylon Fair:
At last, when for lost I had wholly resigned her,
Where can thou imagine, dear Knt, I should find her?
Faith, in an old Drawer, I late had not been in,
Twixt a course pair of sheets of the Houswifes own spinning,
^ Sonnet instead of a coif her head wrapping,
happily took her small Ladyship napping.
Why how now, Minx, quoth I, what is the matter ^ pray,
That you are so hard to be spoke with to day?
Fie, fie on this Idleness, get up, and rowze you,
For I have a present occasion to use you:
Our Noble Mecoenas, Sir Clifford of Cud-con,
Has sent here a Letter, a kind and a good one:
Which must be suddenly answered, and finely,
Or the Knight will take it exceeding unkindly;
To which having some time sat musing and mute,
She answered sh'ad broke all the strings of her Lute;
And had got such a Rheum with lying alone,
That her Voice was utterly broken and gone:
Besides this, she had heard, that of late I had made
A Friendship with one that had since bin her Maid;
One Prose, a slatternly ill-favored toad,
As common as Hackney, and beaten as Road,
With whom I sat up sometimes whole Nights together,
Whilst she was exposed to the Wind and weather.
Wherefore, since that I did so slight and abuse her,
She likewise now hoped I would please to excuse her.
At this sudden reply I was basely confounded,
I star'd like a Quaker, and groaned like a Roundhead
And in such a case, what the Fiend could one do?
My conscience convinced her Reproaches were true
To swagger, I durst not, I else could have beat her,
But what if I had, I Would been never the better,
To quarrel her then had been quite out of season,
And ranting would never have reduced her to reason;
I therefore was fain to dissemble Repentance,
I disclaimed and forswore my late new Acquaintance.
I kissed her, and hugged her, I clapped her, and chuck't her*
I push't her down backward, and offered to have --
But the Jade would not buckle, she pish't and she pouted,
And wrigling away, fairly left me without it:
I caught her, and offered her Money, a little,
At which, she cried that were to plunder the Spittle:
I then, to allure her, proposed to her, Fame,
Which she so much despised, she pish't at the name;
And told me in answer, that she could not glory at
The Sail-bearing Title of Muse to a Laureat,
Much less to a Rhymer, did naught but disgust one,
And pretended to nothing but pitiful Fustion.
But oh, at that word, how I rated, and called her,
And had my Fist up, with intent to have mauled her:
At which, the poor Slut, half afraid of the matter,
Changing her note, 'gan to wheedle and flatter;
Protesting she honored me, Jove knew her heart,
Above all the Peers of the Poetical Art:
But that of late time, and without provocation,
I had been extremely unjust to her Passion.
Me thought this sounded, I then laid before her,
How long I had served her, how much did adore her;
How much she her self stood obliged to the Knight,
For his kindness and favor, to whom we should write*
And thereupon called, to make her amends,
For a Pipe and a Bottle, and so we were Friends.
Being thus made Friends, we fell to debating
What kind of Verse we should congratulate in:
I said 't must be Doggr^l, which when I had said,
Maliciously smiling, she nodded her head,
Saying Doggrel might pass to a friend would not show it,
And do well enough for a Derbyshire Poet.
Yet mere simple doggrel, she said, would not do^^,
It needs must be galloping doggrel to boot,
For Amblers and Trotters, though the had thousands of feet,
Could never however be made to be fleet;
But would make so damnable slow a progression,
They Would no^ reach up to Westminster till the next Session*
Thus then unto thee* my dear Brother, and Sweeting,
In Canterbury Verse I send health and kind greeting,
Wishing thee honor, but if thou be cloyed we't,
Above what thy Ancest^y ever enjoyed yet;
May thou (...) where ^ow seated, without fear of blushing,
Till thy little fat (...) grow to the cushin.
Give his Majesty Mo^y* no mattter who pays it,
For we never can want it ^o long as he has it;
But, were Wisdom to trust saucy Counsel in Letters,
I Would advise thee beware falling out with thy betters;
I have heard of two Dogs once that fought for a bone,
But the Proverb's so greazy, I Will let it alone;
A word is enough to the wise; then resent it,
A rash Act than mended is sooner repented:
And, as for the thing called a Traitor; if any
Be proved to be such, as I doubt there is too many;
Let him even be hanged up, and never be prayed for,
What a pox were blocks, gibbets, and gallowses made for?
But I grow monstrous weary, and how should I choose,
This galloping Rhyme has quite jaded my Muse:
And I swear, if thou look for more posting of hers,
Little Knt, thou must needs lend her one of thy Spurs.
Farewell then, dear Bully, but never look for a Name,
For, expecting no honor, I will have no shame:
Yet, that you may ghess at the Party that writes to you,
And not grope in the dark, I Will hold up these Lights to you.
For his Stature, he is but a contemptible Male,
And grown something swab with drinking good Ale;
His Looks, than your brown, a little thought brighter,
Which gray hairs make every year whiter and whiter,
His Visage, which all the rest mainly disgraces,
Is warp't, or by Age, or cutting of Faces.
So that, whether 't were made so, or whether 't were marred,
In good sooth, he is a very unpromising Bard:
His Legs, which creep out of two old-fashioned Knapsacks,
Are neither two Mill-posts, nor yet are they trap-sticks;
They bear him, when sober, bestir 'em and spare not,
And who the Devil can stand when they are not?
Thus much for his Person, now for his condition,
That Is sick enough full to require a Physician:
He always wants Money, which makes him want ease,
And he is always besieged, tho himself of the Peace,
By an Army of Duns, who batter with Scandals,
And are Foemen more fierce than the Goths or the Vandals.
But when he does sally, as sometimes he does,
Then hey for Bess Iuckson, and a Fig for his Foes:
He Is good Fellow enough to do every one right,
And never was first that ask't, what time of Night:
His delight is to toss the Cann merrily round,
And loves to be wet, but hates to be drow'nd:
He fain would be just, but sometimes he cannot,
Which gives him the trouble that other men have not.
He honors his Friend, but he wants means to show it,
And loves to be rhyming, but is the worst Poet.
Yet among all these Vices, to give him his due,
He has the Virtue to be a true Lover of you.
But how much he loves you, he says you may ghess it,
Since nor Prose, nor yet Meeter, he swears can express it.
Stances de Monsieur Bertaud.
I.
WHilst wishing, Heaven, in his ire,
Would punish with some Judgment dire,
This heart to Love so obstinate;
To say I love her, is to lie,
Though I do love to Extremity,
Since thus to love her, is to hate.
II.
But since from this my hatred Springs,
That she neglects my Sufferings,
And is unto my love ingrate;
My hatred is so full of flame,
Since from affection first it came,
That it is to love her, thus to hate.
III.
I wish that milder Love, or Death,
That ends our miseries with our Breath,
Would my Afflictions terminate,
For to my Soul, deprived of peace,
It is a torment worse than these,
Thus wretchedly to love and hate.
IV.
Let Love be gentle, or severe,
It is in vain to hope, or fear
His grace, or rage in this Estate;
Being I, from my fair ones Spirit,
Nor mutual Love, nor hatred merit,
Thus sencelesly to Love, and Hate.
V.
Or, if by my Example here
It just, and equal do appear,
She love, and loath who is my Fate;
Grant me, ye Powers, in this case,
Both for my punishment and grace,
That as I do, she Love, and Hate.
Contentment. Pindarick Ode*
I.
THou precious Treasure of the peaceful mind,
Thou Jewel of Inestimable price,
Thou bravest Soul's Terrestrial Paradise,
Dearest Contentment, thou best happiness
That Man on Earth can know,
Thou greatest gift Heaven can on Man bestow,
And greater than Man's Language can express;
(Where highest Epithets would fall so low,
As only in our dearth of words to show,
A part of thy perfection; a poor part
Of what to us, what in thy self thou art)
What Sin has banished thee the World,
And in thy stead despairing Sorrow hurld
Into the breasts of Humane kind;
Ah, whether art thou fled! who can this Treasure find*
II.
No more on Earth now to be found,
Thou art become a hollow sound,
The empty name of something that of old
Mankind was happy in, but now,
Like a vain Dream, or Tale that is told,
Art vanished hence we know not how.
Oh, fatal loss, for which we are
In our own thoughts at endless War,
And each one by himself is made a Sufferer!
III.
Yet 'twere worth seeking, if a Man knew where,
Or could but ghess of whom t'enquire:
But it is not to be found on Earth, I fear,
And who can best direct will prove a Liar,
Or be himself the first deceived,
By none, but who'd be cheated too, to be believed.
IV.
Show me that Man on Earth, that does prosess
To have the greatest share of happiness,
And let him, if he can,
Forbear to show the Discontented Man:
A few hours Observation will declare,
He is the same that others are.
Riches will cure a Man of being poor,
But often creates a thirst of having more,
And makes the Miser starve, and pine amidst his store.
V.
Or if a plentiful Estate,
In a good Mind, good Thoughts create,
A generous Soul, and free,
Will Mourn at least, though not repine,
To want an overflowing Mine
Still to supply a constant Charity;
Which still is Discontent, what e're the Motive be.
VI.
The ambitious, who to place aspire,
When raised to that they did pretend,
Are restless still, would still be higher;
For that is a Passion has no end.
It Is the minds Wolf, a strange Disease,
That even Saciety cannot appease,
An Appetite of such a kind,
As does by feeding still increase,
And is to eat, the more it eats, inclined.
As the Ambitious mount the Sky,
New prospects still allure the Eye,
Which makes them upwards still to fly;
Till from the utmost height of all,
Fainting in their Endeavor, down they fall,
And lower, than at first they were, at last do lie.
VII.
I then would know where lies the happiness
Of being Great,
For which we blindly so much strive, and press,
Fawn, Bribe, Dissemble, Toil, and Sweat;
Whilst the Mind Tortured in the doubtful quest,
Is so Sollicitous to be at rest;
Nay, when that Greatness is obtained, is yet
More Anxious how to keep, than it was to get
Unto that glorious height of tickle Place,
And most, when unto honor raised, suspects disgrace.
VIII.
Were Men contented, they would sit still,
Embrace, and hug their present state,
Without contriving Good or Ill,
And have no conflicts with the Will,
That still is prompting them, to Love, to Hate,
Fear, Envy, Anger, and I cannot tell what,
All which, and more, do in the mind make War,
And all with Contentation inconsistent are.
IX.
And he who says he is content,
But hides ill nature from Men's sight;
Nor can he long conceal it there,
Something will vent,
For all his cunning, and his care,
That will disclose the Hypocrite.
A Man may be contented for an hour
Or two, or three; perhaps a Night;
But then his pleasure wanting Power,
His taste goes with his Appetite.
Frailty the peace of Humane life Confounds;
Flesh does not know, Reason obeys no bounds.
X.
But it is our selves that give this frailty sway,
By our own promptness to obey
Our Lust, Pride, Envy, Avarice;
By being so confederate with vice,
As to permit it to Control
The Rational immortal Soul,
Which, whilst by these subjected, and oppressed,
Cannot enjoy it self, nor be at rest;
But, or transported is with Ire,
Pu^^'t up with vain, and empty Pride;
Or languishes with base desire,
Or pines with the Envy it would hide.
And (the Grave Stoic let me not displease)
All Men that we converse with here,
Have some, or all of their disturbances,
And rarely settled are, and clear.
If ever any mortal then could boast
So great a Treasure, with that Man it is lost;
And no one should, because none truly can,
Though sometimes pleased, say, he is a contented Man.
Epigram.
FIE, Delia, talk no more of Love,
It galls me to the Heart,
You Threescore are, I doubt above,
For all your plaist'ring Art.
And therefore spare your pains you may;
For though you press me Night and Day,
I cannot do that my Soul abhors:
Or by your Art's assistance, though I might
Prevail upon my appetite,
I dur'st not couple, though I swear
With you, of all the World, for fear
Of Cuckolding my Ancestors.
Scribere jussit Amor.
Ad Candidum Scriptorem.
UT tibi versiculos recito, tu, Candide, scribis:
Carmina si mea sunt, sunt tua scripta tamen.
In Mendacem.
EPIG.
MEndax, it is said thou art such a Liar grown,
That thou have renounced all Truth, and it is well done;
Lying best fits our Manners and our Times;
But, pray thee, Mendax, do not praise my Rhymes.
Daybreak.
I.
STay, Phoebus, stay, and cool thy flaming Head
In the Green bosom of thy liquid Bed:
Betray not, with thine envious Light,
The embraces of an happy Night;
For her fair blushes, if thou dare to rise,
Will, by Eclipse, hoodwink thy saucy Eyes.
II.
Lest Lovers do upbraid thy beamy Car,
With the pale glory or the inferior Star,
And henceforth dare to say, in scorn,
Sol's Ray is wain'd to Phaebe's horn,
And, for his Treason to a Lovers bliss,
Suffers Actaeons Metamorphosis.
III.
Why should we rise to adore the rising Sun,
And leave the Rites to greater Lights undone?
Or quit her warm, and spicy nest,
Because the Morn peeps through the East,
To scortch in thy rude flames, to toil, and sweat,
When in Loves fire we melt without thy heat?
IV.
When from my passionate Embraces she
Springs, as ashamed to be surpised by thee,
The pillows surrow'd brows descry
A wrath for thy discovery,
Swell, and wax pale at thy insulting height,
For rage to be deprived of her dear weight.
V.
Then stay, or lash thy Pampered Horses still,
To show a swift obedience to her Will,
And blushing, bow as low as Night,
Lest I pursue thee, by thy Light,
And lock the Morning-Doors to stop thy Race,
Imprisoning so in Clouds thy tell^tale Face.
SONG
Set by Mr. Coleman.
I.
WHy, Dearest, should thou weep, when I relate
The story of my woe?
Let not the swarthy Mists of my black Fate,
O'recast thy Beauty so,
For each rich Pearl lost on that score,
Adds to mischance, and wounds your Servant more.
II.
Quench not those Stars, that to my bliss should Guide,
Oh, spare that precious Tear!
Nor let those drops unto a deluge Tide,
To drown your Beauty there,
That cloud of Sorrow makes it Night,
You lose your Luster, but the World its Light.
Forbidden Fruit.
I.
PIsh! it is an idle fond excuse,
And Love, enraged by this abuse,
Is deaf to any longer truce.
II.
My Zeal, to Lust you still impute,
And when I justify my suit,
You tell me, It Is Forbidden Fruit.
III.
What though your Face be Apple-ro^nd,
And with a Rosy color Crowned?
Yet, Sweet, it is no Apple found.
IV.
Nor have you ought resembling more
That fatal Fruit the Tree once bore,
But that indeed your Heart's a core.
V.
It Is true, the bliss that I would taste,
Is something lower than the wast,
And in your Gardens Center placed.
VI.
A Tree of Life too, I confess,
Though but Arbuscular in dress,
Yet not forbidden ne'retheless.
VII.
It is a tempting golden tree,
Which all Men must desire that see,
Though it concerned Eternity.
VIII.
Then, since those blessings are thine own,
Not subject to Contrition,
Then, Fairest, Sweetest, grant me one.
IX.
Thy Dragon, wrapped in drowsiness,
Never thinks whose bed thy beauties bless,
Nor dreams of his Hesperides.
The Picture.
Set by Mr. Laws.
HOW, Chloris, can I e're believe
The Vows of Womankind,
Since yours I faithless find,
So faithless, that you can refuse
To him your Shadow, to whom, to choose,
You swore you could the Substance give.
II.
Is 't not enough that I must go
Into another Clime,
Where Feather-footed Time
May turn my Hopes into Despair,
My downy Youth to bristled Hair,
But that you add this torment too?
III.
Perhaps you fear m^ Idolatry
Would make the Image prove
A Woman fit for Love;
Or give it such a Soul, as shone
Through fond Pigmalion's living bone;
That so I may abandon thee.
IV.
Oh, no! 'twould fill my Genius's room,
Mine honest one, that when
Frailty would love again,
And faultring with new Objects burn,
Then, Sweetest, would thy Picture turn
My wandering Eyes to thee at home.
On One, who said, He drank to clear his Eyes.
AS Phoebus, drawing to his Western Seat,
His shining Face bedewed with beamy Sweat,
His flaming Eyes at last grown blood-shot-red,
By Atoms sprung from his hot Horses speed,
Drives to that Sea green Bosom of his Love's,
And in her Lap his fainting Light improves;
So Thyrsis, when at the unresisted flame
Of thy fair Mistress's eye, thine dull became,
In sovereign Sack thou did an Eye Salve seek,
And stol'st a blessed dew from her rosy Cheek:
When straight thy lids a cheerful vigor wore,
More quick and penetrating than before.
I saw the sprightly Grape in glory rise,
And with her Day thy drooping Night surprise,
So that, where now a giddy darkness dwells,
Brightness now breaks through liquid Spectacles
Had Adam known this cure in Paradise,
He Would escaped the Tree, and drunk to clear his Eyes.
The Separation.
I.
I Ghess'd none wretched in his love,
But who his Mistress's scorn did prove,
Nor judged him happy, but whose fire
Was paid with mutual desire:
But sad Experience tells,
In both extremes there dwells
A destiny, which so malignant is
To make Man wretched in his greatest bliss.
II.
The brightest Beauty I adore,
That consecrated Earth e're bore,
The sweetest Person, fairest Mind,
That ever met in Womankind;
And (which afflicts me) am
Met with an equal flame:
For, had she hated me, her scorn might have
Condemned my Infant-love to its blessed Grave.
III.
But such it is nourisht by her grace,
As Time, nor Objects can deface,
To such a faith, as cannot be
Compelled from its Integrity.
But oh, the unwelcome cause,
Of superstitious Laws!
That us, from our mutual Embraces tear,
And separates our bloods, because too near.
Another of the same.
I.
AT what a wild malicious rate,
Blind, cruel Deity,
Do thy keen Arrows fly!
Sure the art not God of Love, but Hate,
Bold Tyrant-Child, that can endure
To make a Wound admits no Cure.
II.
An Happiness can wait upon
Strangers, that distant are,
As North and Southern Star,
But we, though born under one Zone,
Who in one Root, one Cradle lay,
In Love must be less blessed than they.
III.
Ah! that is the cause why we must run,
Like streams sprung from one Source,
Each in a various course,
The fiction Incest so to shun:
When better, that we mixed, it were,
Than other Rivers ravished her.
But I Will pursue her, till our floods agree,
Alpheus I, and Areth^sa she.
On the great Eater of Gray's Inn.
OH! for a lasting wind! that I may rail
At this vile Cormorant, this Harpey-male:
That can, with such an hungry have, devour
A years Provision in one short lived hour.
Prodigious Calf of Pharoah's lean-rib'd Kine,
That swallowest Beef, at every bit a Chine!
Yet art thy self so meagre, Men may see
Approaching Famine in thy Phys'nomy.
The World may yet rejoice, thou were not one
That shared Jove's mercy with Deucalion;
Had he thy grinders trusted in that boat,
Where the whole Worlds Epitomy did float,
Clean, and Unclean had died, the Earth found a wan^
Of her irrational Inhabitant:
It Is doubted, there their fury had not cea'st,
But of the humane part too made a Feast;
How Fruitless then had been Heaven's charity?
No Man on earth had lived, nor Beast, but thee.
Had thou been one to feed upon the fare
Stored by old Priam for the Grecian War;
He, and his Sons had soon been made a prey;
Troys ten years Siege had lasted but one day;
Or thou might have preserved them, and at once
Chop't up Achilles, and his Mirmydons.
Had thou been Bell, sure thou had saved the Lives
OF the cheating Priests, their Children, and their Wive^,
But at this rate, 'twould be a heavy tax
For Hercules himself to cleanse thy jakes.
Oh! that kind Heaven to give to thee would please
An Estridge-maw, for then we should have peace.
Swords then, or shining Engines would be none,
No Guns, to thunder out Destruction:
No rugged Shackles would be extant then,
Nor tedious Grates, that limit freeborn Men,
But thy Gut-pregnant womb thy paws do fill
With spoils of Natures good, and not her ill.
'Twas the Inns of Courts improvidence to own
Thy Wolvish Carcass for a Son 'o the Gown:
The danger of thy jaws, they never foresaw;
For, Faith! I think thou have devoured the Law.
No wonder the art complained of by the Rout,
When very Curs begin to smell thee out.
The reasons Southwark rings with howlings, are,
Because thou rob'st the Bull-Dogs of their share.
Beastly Consumer! not content to eat
The wholesome quarters destined for Men's meat,
But Excrement, and all: nor will thou ^ate
One entrail, to inform us of thy Fate:
Which will, I hope, be such an ugly Death,
As hungry Beggars, can in cursings breath,
But I have done, my Muse can scold no more,
She to the Bearwards Sentence turns thee over,
And, since so great's thy Stomach's tyranny,
For writing this, pray God, thou eat not me.
An Epitaph on my Dear Aunt, Mrs. Ann Stanhope.
FOrbear, bold Passenger, forbear
The verge of this sad Sepulcher:
Put off thy shoes, nor dare to tread
The Hallowed Earth, where she lies dead:
For in this Vault the Magazine
Of Female virtue's stored, and in
This Marble Casket is confined
The Jewel of all Womankind.
For here she lies, whose Spring was Crowned
With every grace in Beauty found;
Whose Summer to that Spring did suit,
Whose Autumn cracked with happy Fruit.
Whose Fall was like her Life, so spent,
Exemplary, and Excellent.
For here the fairest, chastest Maid,
That this Age ever knew, is laid:
The best of Kindred, best of Friends,
of most Faith, and of fewest Ends;
Whose Fame the Tracks of Time survives;
The best of Mothers, best of Wives.
Lastly, which the whole Sum of praise implies,
Here she, who was the best of Women, lies.
SONG.
Set by Mr. Coleman.
I.
SEE, how like Twilight Slumber falls
T'obscure the glory of those balls,
And, as she sleeps,
See how Light creeps
Through the Chinks, and Beautifies
The rayie fringe of her fair Eyes.
II.
Observe Loves feuds, how fast they fly,
To every heart, from her closed Eye,
What then will she,
When waking, be?
A glowing Light for all to admire,
Such, as would set the World on fire.
III.
Then seal her Eyelids, gentle Sleep,
Whiles cares of her mine open keep;
Lock up, I say,
Those Doors of Day,
Which with the Morn for Luster strive,
That I may look on her, and live.
An Epitaph on M. H.
IN this cold Monument lies one,
That I know who has lain upon,
The happier He: her Sight would charm,
And Touch have kept King David warm.
^ovely, as is the dawning East,
^as this Marble's frozen Guest;
^s soft, and Snowy, as that Down
^dorns the Blow-balls frizled Crown;
^s straight and slender as the Crest,
^r Antlet of the one beamed Beast;
(...) as the odorous Month of May:
^s glorious, and a light as Day.
Whom I admired, as soon as knew,
and now her Memory pursue
^ith such a superstitious Lust,
that I could fumble with her Dust.
She all Perfections had, and more,
^^empting, as if designed a Whore,
(...) so she was; and since there are
(...), I could wish them all as fair.
Pretty she was, and young, and wise,
And in her Calling so precise,
That Industry had made her prove
The sucking School-Mistress of Love:
And Death, ambitious to become
Her Pupil, left his Ghastly home,
And, seeing how we used her here,
The raw-bon'd Rascal ravished her.
Who, pretty Soul, resigned her Breath,
To seek new Letchery in Death.
The Retreat.
I
I Am returned, my Fair, but s^e
Perfection in none but thee:
Yet many Beauties have I seen,
And in that Search a Truant been,
Through Fruitless Curiosity.
I Have been to see each blear-eyed Star,
Fond Men durst with thy light compare;
And, to my admiration, find,
That all, but I, in Love are blind,
And none but Thee, divinely fair.
III.
Here then I fix, and now grown wise,
All Objects, but thy face, despise,
(Taught by my folly) now I swear,
If you forgive me, never to err,
Nor seek Impossibilities.
The Sleeper.
WHat a strange lump of Laziness here lies,
That from the light of Day bolts up his Eyes!
Thou look, when God created thee, as if
^e had forgot t'impart his breath of Life.
That the art with Seven sleepy Fiends possessed,
A man would judge, or that bewitched at least.
It is a curse upon thee, without doubt,
And Heaven for Sin, has put thy Candles out.
I could excuse thee, if this Sloth could be
Bred by the venom of Infirmity;
But it is in Nature's force impossible,
Her whole Corruption makes not such a spell,
Though thou an abstract had ingrost of all
Ills, and Diseases Apoplectical.
Were thou not Male, I should guess thee the Bride
Cut out of sleeping Adam's senceless side;
But that I do this doubtful Quaere find,
Whether such Sloth can spring from humane kind?
If so, thy Mother in conception,
With Wine, and Dormice fed her Embrion;
Or, when he did the penitential deed,
Thy drowsy Father voided Poppy-seed,
I should believe th'had'st drunk in Lethes deep
But that I see, the ast not forgot to sleep.
Sleep without end, which justifies the Theme
That thus informs, Man's life is but a Dream.
Just such is thine; and since it is so profound,
It Is well if thou wak'st at the Trumpets sound.
The Token.
I
WEll, cruel Mistress, though you are too unkind,
Since thus my banishment's by you designed,
I go, but with you leave my heart behind.
II.
A truer heart, I Am sure you never wore,
It Is the best Treasure of the blind God's store,
And, truly, you can justly ask no more.
III.
Then blame me not, if curious to know,
I ask, on what fair Limb you will bestow
The Token, that my zeal presents you now?
IV.
I shall expect so great an interest
For such a Gift, as to have that Gemm possessed,
Not of your Cabinet, but of your Breast.
V.
There fixed, 'twill glory in its blessed remove,
And flaming by degrees a Vigil prove,
Icy Disdain to thaw, nay, kindle love.
Song. Montross.
I.
ASk not, why sorrow shades my brow;
Nor why my sprightly looks decay?
Alas! what need I Beauty now,
Since he, that loved it, died to day.
II.
Can ye have Ears, and yet not know,
Mirtillo, brave Mirtillo's slain?
Can ye have Eyes, and they not flow,
Or Hearts, that do not share my pain?
III.
He Is gone! he is gone! and I will go;
For in my Breast, such Wars I have,
And thoughts of him perplex me so
That the whole World appears my grave.
IV.
But I Will go to him, though he lie
Wrapped in the cold, cold Arms of Death:
And under yo^ sad Cypress-tree,
I Will mourn, I Will mourn away my Breath.
SONG.
I.
PRe'^hee, why so angry, Sweet?
It Is in vain,
To dissemble a Disdain,
That Frown in the infancy I Will meet,
And kiss it to a Smile again.
II.
In that pretty Anger is
Such a grace,
As Loves fancy would embrace,
As to new Crimes may Youth entice,
So that Disguise becomes that Face.
III.
When thy rosy Cheek thus checks
My offense,
I could sin with a pretense:
Through that sweet chiding Blush there breaks,
So fair, so bright an Innocence.
IV.
Thus your very frowns entrap
My desire,
And inflame me to admire
That Eyes, dressed in an angry shape,
Should kindle, as with amorous fire.
A Journey into the Peak.
To Sir Aston Cockain.
SIR, Coming home into this Frozen Clime,
Grown cold, and almost senceless, as my Rhyme,
I found that Winters bold impetuous rage
Prevented Time, and antidated Age
For in my Veins, did naught but Crystal dwell,
Each Hair was frozen to an Icicle.
My flesh was Marble, so, that as I went,
I did appear a walking Monument:
'T might have been judged, rather than Marble, Flint*
Had there been any spark of fire in it.
My Mistress looking back, to bid good Night,
Was Metamorphos'd like the Sodomite.
Like Sinon's horse, our horses were become,
And since they could not go, they slided home;
The hills were hard, to such a quality,
So beyond Reason in Philosophy,
If Pegasus had kicked at one of those,
Homer's Odysses had been writ in Prose.
These are strange stories, Sir, to you, who sweat
Under the warm Sun's comfortable heat;
Whose happy Seat of Pooley far out-vies
The fabled Pleasures of blessed Paradise:
Whose Canaan fills ^our House with wine and Oil,
Till't crack with burdens of a fruitful Soil:
Which House, if it were placed above the Sphere,
Would be a Palace fit for Jupiter.
The humble Chapel, for Religious Rites,
The inner Rooms, for honest, free delights;
And Providence, that these miscarry loath,
Has placed the Tower a Sentinel to both:
So that there is nothing wanting to improve
Either your Piety, or Peace, or Love.
Without, you have the pleasure of the Woods,
Fair Plains, rich Meadows, and transparent Floods;
With all that is good and excellent, beside
The tempting Apples by Euphrates side;
But that which does above all these aspire,
Is Delphos brought from Greece to Warwickshire.
But oh, ungodly Hodge! that valued not
That saving juice o'^h' oenigmatick pot.
Whose charming virtue made me to forget
T'enquire of Fate; else I had staid there yet,
Nor had I then once da^'d to venture on
The cutting Air of this our Frozen Zone.
But once again, dear Sir, I mean to come,
And thankful be, as well as troublesome.
New Prison.
YOU Squires of the shade, that love to tread
In gloomy Night, when Day's in bed;
That court the Moon, supposing she
Likes such a watchful Industry:
Read here a Story, it will make
Your Eyelids droop, when she is awake.
It Is not the horrid noise of Wars,
Consequent Chances, Wounds and Scars,
The dangers of the foaming Deep,
Nor all the Bugbear Fates, that keep
Fond Men in awe, Ho^goblins, Sprites,
Dire Dreams in dark and tedious Nights,
A troubled Conscience, nor the sense
Of man's despairing Diffidence,
That can present so sad a face
Of black Affliction, as this place.
The sneaking Rascals, low^ie Whores,
The creaking of the dismal Doors,
That stink of stinks that fumes within,
(Symptoms of Beasts that dwell therein)
So rot the Air, Cameleons could
Not live unpoyson'd with such Food;
There Is reason for it, no Mortal can
Step from the Excrement of Man;
And that which should however be sweet,
Is like the rest; I mean, their meat;
The Locusts of the wilderness
Are Sweetmeats to their Nasty Mess.
I could say more; the Place provokes me,
But that the vile Tobacco choaks me.
Her Name.
I.
TO write your Name upon the Glass,
Is that the greatest you will impart
Of your Commands? when, Dear, alas!
'Twas long since graven in my Heart?
But you foresee my Heart must break, and sure
Think It in that brittle Quarry more secure.
II.
My Breast impregnable is found,
Which nothing, but thy Beauty, wracks,
Than this frail Metal far more sound,
That every Storm and Tempest cr^cks.
And, if you add Faith to my Vows and Tears,
More firm, and more transparent it appears.
III.
Yet, I obey you, when, behold!
I tremble at the forced fact,
My hand too saucy and too bold,
Timorously shivers at the act;
And 'twixt the wounded glass, and the harder stone,
I hear a murmuring Emulation.
IV.
It Is done; to which let all hearts bow,
And to the Tablet sacrifice;
Incense of loyal Sighs allow,
And Tears from wonder-strucken Eyes;
Which, should the Schismatics of Sion see,
Perchance they would break it for Idolatry.
V.
But, cursed be that awkward hand
Dares raze the glory from this frame,
That, notwithstanding thy Command,
Tears from this glass thy adored Name;
Whoever he be, unless he do repent,
He Is damned for breaking thy Commandment.
VI.
Yet, what thy dear will here has placed,
Such is its unassured state,
Must once, my Sweetest, be defaced,
Or by the stroke of Time, or Fate;
It must at last, however, dissolve, and die,
With all the World, and so must thou, and I.
Epitaph
On Mr. Robert Port.
HEre lies he, whom the Tyrants rage,
Snatched in a venerable Age;
And here, with him, entombed do lie
Honor, and Hospitality.
SONG.
Set by Mr. Coleman.
I.
BRing back my Comfort, and return,
For well thou know that I
In such a vigorous passion burn,
That missing thee, I die.
Return, return, insult no more,
Return, return, and me restore
To those sequestered joys I had before.
II.
^bsence, in most, that quenches Love,
And cools the warm desire,
(...) ardour of my heat improves,
And makes the flame aspire;
(...) Opinion therefore I deny,
(...) term it, though a Tyranny,
(...) Nurce to Faith, and Truth, and Constancy.
III.
(...) Dear, I do not urge thy stay,
That were to prove unjust
(...) my desires; nor Court delay:
But ah! thy speed I must;
(...) bring me back the stolen Delight
(...) from me in thy speedy flight,
(...) my tedious Day, my longing Night,
Sir William Davenant
To Mr. Cotton.
I.
UNlucky fire, which though from Heaven deriv'^
Is brought too late, like Cordials to the Dea^
When all are of their Sovereign Sense deprived,
And Honor, which my rage should warm, is fled.
II.
Dead to Heroic Song this Isle appears,
The Ancient Music of victorious Verse,
They taste no more than he his Dirges hears,
Whose useless Mourners sing about his He^se.
III.
Yet shall this sacred Lamp in Prison burn,
And through the darksome Ages hence invade
The wondering World, like that in Tully's Urn,
Which, though by Time concealed, was not decay'^
IV.
and Charles, in that more civil Century,
^hen this shall wholly fill the voice of Fame,
^he busy Antiquaries then will try
^o find amongst their Monarchs coin, thy Name.
V.
(...) they will bless thy Virtue, by whose fire
(...) keep my Laurel warm, which else would fade,
(...), thus enclosed, think me of Natures Quire,
which still sings sweetest in the shade.
VI.
^o Fame, who rules the World, I lead thee now,
those solid Power the thoughtful understand,
whom, though too late, weak Princes to her bow,
^he People serve, and Poets can command.
VII.
and Fame, the only Judge of Empire past,
^all to Verona lead thy Fancies Eyes,
^here Night so black a Robe on Nature cast,
(...) Nature seemed afraid of her disguise.
To Sir William Davenant.
In Answer to the Seventh Canto, of the Third Book of his Gondibert, directed
t^ my Father.
Written by Sir William, when Prisoner in the Tower. 1652.
I.
OH happy Fire! whose heat can thus control
The rust of Age, and thaw the frost of Death,
That renders Man immortal, as his Soul,
And swells his Fame with everlasting Brea^^
II.
Happie's that Hand, that unto Honors Clime
Can lift the Subject of his living praise,
That rescues Frailty from the Sithe of Time,
And equals glory to the length of days.
III.
Such, Sir, is yours, that, uncontrolled as Fate,
In the black bosom of o're-shading Night,
Can Sons of immortality create,
To dazzle Envy with prevailing Light.
IV.
In vain they strive your glorious Lamp to hide
In that dark Lanthorn to all noble minds,
Which, through the smallest cranny is descried,
Whose force united no resistance finds.
V.
Blessed is my Father, that has found his Name
Amongst the Heroes, by your Pen revived,
By running in Time's wheel his thriving Fame,
Shall still more youthful grow, and longer lived.
VI.
Had Alexander's Trophies thus bee^ reared,
And in the circle of your Story come,
The spacious Orb, full well he might have spared,
And reap't his distant Victories at home.
VII.
Let Men of greater Wealth than Merit cast
Medals of Gold for their succeeding part;
That paper-Monument shall longer last,
Than all the rubbish of decaying Art.
To my Friend Mr. John Anderson.
From the Country.
I.
YOU that the City-Life embrace,
And in those Tumults run your race,
Under the th'aspect of the Celestial face
Of your bright Lady:
You, that to Masks, and Plays resort,
As if you would rebuild the Court,
We here can match you with our Countrey-sport,
As near as may be.
II.
For, though it is good to be so nigh
Rich wine, and excellent Company:
Yet, John, those Pleasures you full dear do buy
Some times, and seasons.
For you but Tributaries are,
Awed by the ^urious men of War:
We Countrey-Bumkins then are happier far
For many reasons.
III.
First, we have here no bawling Duns,
Nor those fierce things ycleped Bums,
No Cuckold-Constable, or Watch here comes
To apprehend us.
And then we have no unwholesome Da^es
To broil us in their bawdy flames,
Nor need enquire after Physicians names,
That may befriend us.
IV.
And next, we have excelling Ale,
Most high, and mighty, strong, and stale:
And, when we go, we need no other Bail
Than our own word, Sir,
When you all Day are fain to sit,
Send Paper-pellets of small wit,
Your Tickets; and, when none of them will hit,
Pawn Cloak, or Sword, Sir,
V.
Then we outdo your Beauties, that
You Entertain with Cost, and Chat,
That make you spend your precious Time and Fat,
And yet are steadfast:
We here have homely willing Winn,
With bucksome Bess, and granting Iinn,
All full and plump without, and warm within,
That cracked the Bed fast.
VI.
And then, for Mirth, we have much more
Than you, for all your various store,
For we prefer Bag pipes, so loud, before
Lute, or Cremona*
We caper with Tom Thump, in the Hall,
Measures beyond Corant, or Brawl;
And when we want a match for Ciceley, call
A roba bona.
VII.
We have too errant Knights so stout,
As honest Hobinol and Clout,
With many an other stiff and sturdy Lout,
That play at wasters,
Shoe the wild Mare, and lick the board,
That for stiff Tuck, or cutting Sword,
For Man, or Woman, care not of a Turd,
But their own Masters.
VIII.
Thus every of our petty toys
Outvies your greatest dear bought joys:
Then to thy freedom from the City-noise,
I Will drink a Beer-jack:
And now the Spring comes on apace,
Sweet flowers crown the Earth's green face
Nor can I doubt, but thou will have the grace
T^o wish thee here, Jack.
Les Amors.
I.
SHe, that I pursue, still flies me;
Her, that follows me, I fly;
She, that I still court, denies me:
Her, that courts me, I deny.
Thus in one Web we are subt'ly wove,
And yet we mutiny in love.
II.
She, that can save me, must not do it,
She, that cannot, fain would do:
Her love is bound, yet I still woe it:
Hers by love is bound in woe.
Yet, how can I of Love complain,
Since I have love for love again.
III.
This is thy work, imperious Child,
Thine's this Labyrinth of love,
That thus have our desires beguiled,
Nor see how thine arrows rove.
Then prithee, to compose this stir,
Make Her love me, or me love Her.
IV.
But, if irrevocable are
Those keen shafts, that wound us so;
Let me prevail with thee thus far,
That thou once more take thy Bow;
Wound Her hard heart, and by my troth,
I Will be content to take them both.
ELEGY.
HOw was I blessed when I was free
From Mercy, and from Cruelty;
When I could write of Love at ease,
And ghess at Passions in my peace;
When I could sleep, and in my Breast
No lovesick Thoughts disturbed my rest:
When in my brain of her sweet face
No Torturing Idea was,
Not Planet-struck with her Eyes Light,
But blessed with Thoughts as calm as Night!
Now I could sit and gaze to Death;
And vanish with each sigh, I Breath:
Or else in her victorious Eye
Dissolve to tears, dissolving dye,
Nor is my Life more pleasant than
The Minutes of condemned Men,
Tossed by strange Fancies, wrack't by Fears,
Sunk by Despair, and drowned in Tears,
And dead to Hope; for, what bold H^
Dares hope for such a Bliss as she?
And yet I am in love; ah! who
That ever saw her, was not so?
What Tigers unrelenting Seed,
Can see such Beauties, and not bleed?
Her eyes two sparks of Heavenly fire,
To kindle, and to charm desire,
Her Cheeks Aurora's blush, her Skin
So delicately smooth, and thin,
That you my see each azure Vein,
Her Bosoms Snowy whiteness stain:
But with so rich a Tincture, as
China 'bove baser metals has,
She Is crowned with unresisted Light
Of blooming Youth, and vigorous Spr'ite,
Careless charms, unstudied sweetness,
Innate virtue, humble greatness,
And modest freedom, with each grace
Of Body, and of Mind, and Face,
So pure, that Men, nor Gods can find
Throughout that Body, or that Mind
A fault, but this, to disapprove,
She cannot, or she will not love.
Ah! then, some God possess her heart
With mine uncessant vows, and smart,
Grant but one hour that she may be
In love, and then she will pity me.
Is it not pity such a ghest,
As Cruelty, should arm that Breast
Against a love assaults it so?
Can Heavenly minds such rigor know?
Then make her know, her Beauties must
Decay, and molter into Dust:
That each swift Atome of her glass,
Runs to the ruin of her face;
That those fair blossoms of her Youth,
Are not so lasting as my truth,
My lasting firm Integrity:
Tell her all this, and, if there b^
A* Lesson to present her Sense
Of more persuading Eloquence,
Teach her that too, for all will prove
Too little to provoke her Love.
Thus dying people use to rave,
And I am grown my Passions slave;
For fall I must, my lot's Despair,
Since I Am so worthless, she so fair.
(...), Her Hair.
ODE.
I.
WElcome, blessed Symptom of Consent,
More welcome far,
Than if a Star,
In stead of this bright Hair,
Should beautify mine Ear,
And light me to my banishment,
II.
Methinks I Am now all sacred fire,
And wholly grown
Devotion:
Sensual Love's in chains,
And all my boiling Veins
Are blown with sanctified desire.
III.
Sure she is Heaven it self, and I,
In fervent zeal,
This lock did steal,
And each Life-giving Thread,
Snatched from her beamy Head,
As once Prometheus from the Sky.
IV.
No: it is a nobler Treasure: She
(Won to believe)
Was pleased to give
These rays unto my care:
The Spears have none so fair,
Nor yet so blessed a Deity.
V.
^et knows she not what she has done,
She Will hear my Prayers,
And see my Tears;
She Is now a Nazarite
Robbed of her vigorous Light,
^or her resisting Strength is gone.
VI.
now could glory in my Power,
And in pretense
Of my suspense,
Revenge, by kissing those
Twins, that Natures pride disclose,
^y Languishing and tedious hours.
VII.
^et I Will not triumph: but, since she
Will that I go
Thus wrapped in woe,
I Will tempt my prouder Fate
T'improve my Estimate,
And justle with my Destiny.
VIII.
As well I may, thus being sure,
Whether on Land
I firmly stand;
Or Fortunes footsteps trace,
Or Neptunes foamy face,
Mischance to conquer; or endure.
IX.
If, on a swelling Wave I ride,
When Eolus
His winds lets loose,
Those winds shall silent ly,
And moist Orion dry,
By virtue of this charming guide.
X.
Or, if I hazard in a Field,
Where Danger is
The sole Mistress,
Where Death, in all his shapes,
Commits his horrid rapes,
And he, that but now slew, is killed;
XI.
Then in my daring Crest I Will place
This plume of light
T'amaze the sight
Of The fiercest Sons of Mars,
That rage in bloody Wars;
And make them fly my Conquering face.
XII.
Thus in her favor I am blessed;
And, if by these
Few of her rays
I am exalted so,
What will my Passions do
When I have purchased all the rest?
XIII.
They must continue in the same
Vigor, and force,
Better, nor worse:
I loved so well before,
I cannot love her more,
Nor can I mitigate my Flame.
XIV.
In Love then persevere I will
Till my hairs grow
As white as Snow:
And, when in my warm Veins
Naught but trembling cold remain
My youthful love shall flourish still.
SONG.
I.
JOIN once again, my Celia, join
Thy rosy Lips to these of mine,
Which, though they be not such,
Are full as sensible of bliss,
That is, as soon can taste a kiss,
As thine of softer touch.
II.
Each kiss of thine creates desire,
Thy odorous Breath inflames Loves fire,
And wakes the sleeping coal:
Such a kiss to be I find
The Conversation of the Mind,
And whisper of the Soul,
III.
Thanks, Sweetest, now you are perfect grown,
For by this last kiss I Am undone;
Thou breathest silent Darts,
Henceforth each little touch will prove
A dangerous stratagem in Love,
And thou will blow up Hearts.
The Surprise.
I.
ON a clear River's flowery side,
When Earth was in her gaudy pride,
Defended by the friendly shade
A woven Grove's dark entrails made,
Where the cold clay, with flowers strewn,
Made up a pleasing solitude;
^Twas there I did my glorious Nymph surprise,
There stole my pa^sion from her killing Eyes,
II.
The happy Object of her Eye
Was Sidney's living Arcady;
Whose amorous tale had so betrayed
Desire in this all-lovely Maid;
That, whilst her Cheek a blush did warm,
I read Loves story in her form:
And of the Sisters the united grace,
Pamela's vigor in Philoclea's Face.
III.
As on the brink this Nymph did sit,
(Ah! who can such a Nymph forget?)
The floods straight dispossessed their foam,
Proud so her mirror to become;
And ran into a twirling Maze,
On her by that delay to gaze;
And, as they past, by streams succeeding force,
In losing her, murmured to obey their course,
IV.
She read not long, but closed the Book,
And up her silent Lute she took,
Perchance to charm each wanton thought,
Youth, or her reading had begot.
The hollow Carcass echoed such
Airs, as had birth from Orphe^'s touch,
And every snowy finger, as she played,
Danced to the Music that themselves had made.
V.
At last she ceased: her odorous Bed
With her enticing Limbs she spread,
With Limbs so excellent, I could
No more resist my factious blood:
But there, ah! there, I caught the Dame,
And boldly urged to her my flame:
I kissed: when her ripe Lips at every touch
Swelled up to meet, what she would shun so much.
VI.
I kissed, and played in her bright Eyes,
Discoursed, as is the Lovers guise,
Called her the Authress of my woe:
The Nymph was kind, but would not do,
(...), she was kind, which made me bold,
(...) as her denials cold.
But, ah! at last I parted wounded more
With her soft pity, than her Eyes before.
The Visit.
I.
DArk was the silent shade, that hid
The fair Castanna from my sight:
The Night was black (as it had need,)
That could obscure so great a light.
Under the concave of each Lid
A flaming ball of beauty bright,
Wrapped in a charming slumber lay,
That else would captivate the Day.
II.
(Led by a passionate desire,)
I boldly did attempt the way;
And though my dull Eyes wanted fire,
My seeing Soul knew where she lay,
Thus, whilst I blindly did aspire,
Fear to displease her made me stay,
A doubt too weak for mine intent,
I knew she would forgive, and went.
III.
Near to her Maiden-Bed I drew,
Blessed in so rare a chance as this;
When by her odorous Breath I knew
I did approach my Love, my Bliss:
Then did I eagerly pursue
My hopes, and found, and stole a kiss:
Such as perhaps Pygmalion took,
When cold his Ivory Love forsook.
IV.
Soft was the sleep sat on her Eyes,
As softest down, or whitest Snow;
So gentle rest upon them lies,
Happy to charm those Beauties so;
For which a thousand thousand dies,
Or living, live in restless Woe;
For all that see her killing Eye,
With Love, or Admiration dye.
V.
Chaste were the Thoughts that had the power
To make me hazard this Offense;
I marked the sleeps of this fair Flower,
And found them full of Innocence;
Wondering that hers, who slew each hour,
Should have so undisturbed a Sense;
But, ah! these Murders of Mankind
Fly from her Beauty, not her Mind.
VI.
Thus, while she sweetly slept, sat I
Contemplating the lovely Maid,
Of every Tear, and every Sigh
That sallied from my Breast, afraid.
And now the Morning Star drew nigh,
When, fearing thus to be betrayed,
I softly from my Nymph did move
Wounded with everlasting Love.
De Lupo.
Epigram.
WHen Lupus has wrought hard all day,
And the declining Sun,
By stooping to embrace the Sea,
Tells him the Day's nigh done;
Then to his young Wife home he hies
With his sore labor sped,
Who bids him welcome home, and cries,
Pray, Husband, come to bed.
Thanks, Wife, quoth he, but I were blessed,
Would thou once call me to my rest.
On Vpstart.
UPstart last Term went up to Town,
There purchased Arms and brought them down*
With Welborne's then he his compares,
And with a horrid loudness swears
That his are best; for look, quoth he,
^ow gloriously mine gilded be;
Thine's but a Threadbare Coat, he cried,
Compared to this, who then replied:
If my Coat be Threadbare, or rent, or torn,
There Is cause; than thine it has been longer worn.
Epitaph
On Mrs. Mary Draper.
I.
READER, if thou cast thine Eye
On this weeping Stone below:
Know, that under it does lie
One, that never Man did know.
II.
Yet of all Men full well known
By those beauties of her Breast:
For, of all she wanted none,
When Death called her to her rest.
III.
Then, the Ladies, if they would
Dye like her, kind Reader tell,
They must strive to be as good
Alive, or it is impossible.
Caelia's Fall.
I.
CAELIA, my fairest Caelia, fell,
Caelia, than the fairest, fairer,
Caelia, (with none I must compare her)
That all alone is all in all,
Of what we fair, and modest call,
Caelia, white as Alabaster,
Caelia, than Diana chaster,
This fair, fair Caelia, grief to tell,
This fair, this modest, chaste one fell.
II.
My Caelia, sweetest Caelia, fell,
As I have seen a Snow-white Dove
Decline her Bosom from above,
And down her spotless body fling
Without the motion of the wing,
Till she arrest her seeming fall
Upon some happy Pedestal:
^o soft this sweet, I love so well,
^^is sweet, this Dove-like Caelia, fell.
III.
^^lia, my dearest Caelia fell,
As I have seen a melting Star
Drop down its fire from its Sphere,
Rescuing so its glorious sight
From that paler snuff of light:
Yet is a Star bright and entire,
As when 'twas wrapped in all that fire:
^ bright this dear, I love so well,
^his dear, this Star-like Caelia fell.
IV.
And yet my Caelia did not fall
As grosser Earthly Mortals do,
But stoop't, like Phoebus, to renew
Her luster hy her Morning rise,
And dart new Beauties in the Skies.
Like a white Dove, she took her flight,
And, like a Star, she shot her Light;
This Dove, this Star, so loved of all,
My Fair, Dear, Sweetest, did not fall.
V.
But, if you will say my Caelia fell,
Of this I Am sure, that, like the Dart
Of Love it was, and on my Heart;
Poor Heart alas! wounded before,
She needed not have hurt it more:
So absolute a Conquest she
Had gained before of it, and me,
That neither of us have been well
Before, or since my Caelia fell.
Eclogue.
Damon. C. C. Thyrsis. R. R. Dam. THyrsis, whilst our Flocks did bite
The smiling Salads in our sight,
Thou then were wont to sing thy state
In Love, and Chloe celebrate;
But where are now the Lovesick lays
Whilom so sung in Chloe's praise?

Thyr. Alas! who can sing? since our Pan died
Each Shepherd's pipe is laid aside:
Our flocks they feed on parched ground,
Shelter, nor Water's for them found:
And all our sports are cast away,
Save when thou sing'st thy Caelia.

Dam. Caelia, I do confess alone
My object is of Passion,
My Star, my bright Magnetic Pole,
And only G^idress of my Soul.

Thyr. Let Caelia be thy Cynosure,
Chloe's my Pole too, though the obscure:
For, though her self's all glorious,
My Earth 'twixt us does interpose.

Dam. Obscure indeed, since she is but one
To mine a Constellation:
Her Lights throughout so glorious are,
That every part's a perfect Star.

Thyr. Then Caelia's Perfections
Are scattered: Chloe's, like the Suns
United Light, compacted lie,
Whence all that feel their force, must dye.

Dam. Caelia's Beauties are too bright
To be contracted in one Light;
Nor does my fair, her Rays dispense
With such a stabbing Influence,
Since it is her less imperious Will
To save her Lovers, and not kill.

Thyr. Each beam of her united Light
Is, than the greatest Star more bright;
And, if she stay, it is from hence,
She darts too sweet an Influence,
We Surfeit with it: weak Eyes must shun
The dazzling Glories of the Sun.
Perhaps, if Caelia do not kill,
It Is want of Power, not of Will.

Dam. I now perceive, thy Chloe's Eyes
To be no Stars, but Prodigies:
Comets, such as blazing stand
To threaten ruin to a Land:
Beacons of sulfurous Flame they are,
Symptoms not of Peace, but War,
And thou I guess, by singing thus,
Thence stoll'st thine Ignis fatu^s.

Thyr. As the vulgar are amazed at the Sun,
When tripled by reflection;
C^loe's self, and glorious Eyes
To thee seem Comets in the Skies.
And true, they may portend some Wars
Such as 'twixt Venus, and her Mars,
But chaste: whose captivating Bands
Would People, and not ruin Lands.
With such a Going fire I Will stray,
For who with it can lose his way?

Dam. The Vulgar may perhaps be won
By thee to think her Sun, and Moon,
And so would I, but that my more
Convincing Caelia I adore.
Would we had both, that Chloe thine,
And my dear Caelia might be mine.
But if we should thus mix with Ray,
In Heaven would be no Night, but Day;
For we should People all the Skies
With Plannet-Girls, and Starry-Boyes,
Chloe's a going-fire, we see,
Pray Pan, she do not go from thee.

Thyr. Thanks, Damon, but she does, I fear,
The Shadows now so long appear:
Yet, if she do, we'll both find Day
^'^h' Sunshine of thy Caelia.

Her Sigh.
I.
SHE sighs, and has blown over now
The storms that thrat'ned in her brow:
The Heaven's now serene and clear,
And bashful blushes do appear,
The Error sh'has found
That did me wound,
Thus with her odorous Sigh my hopes are crowned.
II.
Now she relents, for now I hear
Repentance whisper in my Ear,
Happy repentance! that begets
By this sweet Airy motion heats,
And does destroy
Her Heresy,
That my Faith branded with Inconstancy.
III.
When Thisbe's Pyramus was slain,
This sigh had fetched him back again,
And such a sigh from Dido's Chest
Wasted the Trojan to her Breast.
Each of her sighs
My Love does prize
Reward, for thousand, thousand Cruelties.
IV.
Sigh on, my Sweet, and by thy Breath,
Immortal grown, I Will laugh at Death.
Had Fame so sweet a one, we should
In that regard learn to be good:
Sigh on, my Fair,
Henceforth, I swear,
I could Cameleon turn, and live by Air
On the Lamented Death of my Dear Uncle,
Mr. Radcliff Stanhope.
SUch is the unsteddy state of humane things,
And Death so certain, that their period brings,
So frail is Youth, and strength, so sure this sleep,
That much we cannot wonder, though we weep.
Yet, since it is so, it will not misbecom,
Either perhaps our Sorrows, or his Tomb
To breath a Sigh, and drop a mourning Tear
Upon the cold face of his Sepulcher,
Well did his life deserve it, if to be
A great Example of Integrity,
Honor, and Truth, Fidelity, and Love,
In such perfection, as if each had strove
T'out-do Posterity, may deserve our care,
Or to his Funeral command a Tear,
Faithful he was, and just, and sweetly good
To whom allied in Virtue, or in Blood:
His Breast (from other conversation chaste)
Above the reach of giddy Vice was placed:
Then, had not Death (that crops in's Savage speed
The fairest flower with the rankest weed)
Thus made a beastly Conquest of his Prime,
And cut him off before grown ripe for Time,
How bright an Evening must this Morn pursue,
Is to his Life a Contemplation due.
Proud Death, t'arrest his thriving Virtue thus!
Unhappy Fate! not to himself, but us,
That so have lost him; for, no doubt, but he
Was fit for Heaven, as years could make him be:
Age does but muster Sin, and heap up woes
Against the last, and general Rendezvous;
Whereas he died full of obedient Truth,
Wrapped in his spotless Innocence of Youth.
Farewell, Dear Uncle, may thy hoped for Bliss
To thee be real, as my Sorrow is;
May they be named together, since I do
Nothing more perfect than my sorrow know;
And, if thy Soul into men's minds have Eyes,
It knows I truly weep these Obsequies.
On the Lord Derby.
TO what a formidable greatness grown
Is this prodigious Beast Rebellion,
When Sovereignty, and its so sacred Law,
Thus lies subjected to his Tyrant awe!
And to what daring impudence he grows,
When, not content to trample upon those,
He still destroys all that with honest flames
Of loyal Love would propagate their Names!
In this great ruin, Derby, lay thy Fate,
( Derby, unfortunately fortunate)
Unhappy thus to fall a Sacrifice
To such an Irreligious Power as this;
And blessed, as 'twas thy nobler sense to dye
A constant Lover of thy Loyalty.
Nor is it thy Calamity alone,
Since more lie whelmed in this Subversion:
And first, the justest, and the best of Kings,
Roab'd in the glory of his Sufferings,
By his too violent Fate informed us all,
What tragic ends attended his great fall,
Since when his Subjects, some by chance of War,
Some by perverted justice at the Bar
Have perish't: thus, what the other leaves, this takes,
And who so scapes the Sword, falls by the Axe:
Amongst which throng of Martyrs none could boast
Of more fidelity, than the world has lost
In losing thee, when (in contempt of spite)
Thy steady faith at th'exit crowned with Light,
His Head above their malice did advance,
They could not murder thy Allegiance,
Not when before those Judges brought to th'test,
Who, in the symptoms of thy ruin dressed,
Pronounced thy Sentence. Basilisks! whose Breath
Is killing Poison, and whose Looks are Death.
Then how unsafe a Guard Man's virtue is,
I^ this false Age, (when such as do amiss
Control the honest sort, and make a prey
Of all that are not villainous as they)
Does to our Reasons Eyes too plain appear
In the mischance of this Illustrious Peer.
Blood-thirsty Tyrants of usurped State!
In facts of Death prompt, and insatiate!
That in your Flinty Bosoms have no sense
Of Manly Honor, or of Conscience,
But do, since Monarchy lay drowned in Blood,
Proclaim't by Act, high Treason to be good;
Cease yet at last for shame: let Derby's fall,
Great, and good Derby's expiate for all,
But if you will place your Eternity
In mischief, and that all good Men must dye,
When you have finished there, fall on the rest,
Mix your shamed slaughters with the worst, and best;
And, to perpetuate your murdering Fame,
Cut your own Throats, despair, and dye, and damn.
Ain si soit il.
On Marriot.
Tempus edax rerum.
THanks for this rescue Time; for thou have won
In this more glory than the States have done
In all their Conquests; they have conquered Men,
But thou have conquered that would conquer them,
Famine; and in this Parricide hast-shown
A greater courage than their Acts dare own;
Thou'st slain thy eating Brother, it is a Fame
Greater than all past Heroes e're could claim:
Nor do I think thou could have conquered him
By force, it surely was by Stratage^.
There was a Dearth when he gave up the Ghost:
For, (on my life) his Stomach he never lost,
That never failed him, and without all doubt
Had he been victual'd he had still held out:
However, it happened for the Nation well,
All fear of Famine now is impossible,
Since we have escaped his reign; Blessed were my Rhymes,
Could they but prove, that for the peoples Crimes
He an atonement fell; for in him died
More Bulls, and Rams, than in all times beside,
Though we the numbers of them all ingrost,
Offered with antique Piety, and Cost:
And 'tmight have well become the Peoples care
To have embowel'd him, if such there were,
Who, in respect of their Forefathers peace,
Would have attempted such a task as this,
For it is discreetly doubted he will go hard
To eat up all his fellows in the Churchyard:
Then, as from several parts each mangled Limb
Meet at the last, they all will rise in him;
And he (as once a Pleader) may arise
A general Advocate at the last Assize.
I wonder, Death durst venture on this prize,
His jaws more greedy were, and wide than his,
'Twas well he only was composed of Bone,
Had he been Flesh, this Eater had not gone;
Or had they not been empty Skelletons,
As sure as Death he would crush't his Marrow-bones;
And knocked 'em too, his stomach was so rife,
The Rogue loved Marrow, as he loved his life.
Behold! behold, O Brethren! you may see
By this late Object of Mortality,
It Is not the lining of the Inward Man,
(Though never so soundly stuff't, and cramb'd) that can
Keep Life, and Soul together; for if that
Could have preserved him, he had kick't at Fate
With his High shoes, and lived to make a prey
Of Butchers stinking Offal to this day.
But he is gone, and 't had been excellent sport
When first he stalked into Pluto's Court,
Had one but seen with what an angry gust
The greedy Rascal worried Cerberus;
I know he would do it before he would retreat,
And, he and 's stomach are not parted yet;
But, that digested, how he will do for meat
I cannot imagine: for the Devil a bit
He Will purchase there, unless this tedious time
The tree of Tantalus was saved for him;
Should it prove so, no doubt he would rejoice,
Spite of the Devil, and Hell's horrid noise.
But then, could't not be touched, 't would prove a curse
Worse than the others, or h^d bear it worse:
Oh, would his Fortitude in s^ffering rise
So much in glory 'bove his Gluttonies,
That, rather than confess them to his Sire,
He would, like Porcia, swallow coals of Fire,
He might extinguish Hell, and, to prevent
Eternal pains, void ashes, and repent;
For, without that, his torments still would last,
It were damnation for him to fast.
But how had I been like to have forgot
My self, with raving of a thing is not,
Of his Eternity; I should condole
His Death, and Ruin, had he had a Soul:
But he had none: or 'twas mere sensitive;
Nor could the gormundizing Beast outlive;
So that 'tmay properly of him be said,
Marriot the Eater of Gray's Inn is dead,
And is no more: Dear Jove, I thee entreat,
^end us no more such Ea^ers, or more Meat.
To Caelia's Ague.
ODE.
I.
HEnce, fond Disease, I say forbear,
And strive t'afflict my Fair no more,
In vain are thy attempts on her,
She was, alas! so cold before.
II.
Yet thou at once, by Sympathy,
Disturb'st two Persons in one Ill;
For when she freezes, then I fry,
And so complete her Ague still.
III.
Sure thou my choice would fain disgrace,
By making her look Pale, and Green,
Had she no Beauties, but her face,
I never had a Lover been.
IV.
^or sparkling Eyes, and rosy Cheeks
Must, as her Youth does fade, decay:
^ut Virtue, which her Bosom decks,
Will, when they are sunk, and withered, stay.
V.
Thou would eclipse that Virtue too,
For such a Triumph far too dear,
^^king her tremble, as they do,
Whom jealous guilt has taught to fear.
VI.
^ wish thy Malice might so thrive
To my advantage, as to shake
^^r Flinty Breast, that I might live,
And on that part a battery make.
VII.
(...) since Ass^ults without some fire
Are seldom to perfection brought,
^ may like thee baffled retire,
Thou have her burning fit forgot.
VIII.
Since thy attempts then never can
A^chieve the power to destroy
This wonder, and delight of Man,
Hence to some grosser Body fly.
IX.
Yet, as returning stomachs do
Still covet some one Dish they see:
So when thou from my Fair do go,
Kind Ague, make her long for me.
A Valediction.
I Go, I go, Perfidious Maid,
Obeying thee, my froward Fate,
Whether forsaken or betrayed,
By Scorn, or Hate*
I go, th'exact'st Professor of
Desire, in its Diviner sense,
That ever in the School of Love
Did yet commence.
(...), and False, could thou find none
^^ongst those Fools thy Eyes engrost,
(...) me to practice Falsehood on,
That loved thee most.
^lov'd thee 'bove the Day's bright Eye,
^bove mine own; who melting drop,
^s often, as opening they miss thee,
And 'bove my hope;
^ill (by thy promise grown secure)
^^at hope was to assurance brought,
^y Faith was such, so chastely pure,
I doubted not
^hee, or thy Vows, nor should I yet
^S^ch, False one, is my Loves extreme)
^^ould'st thou now swear, the Breath's so sweet
That utters them.
^^, Syren^ why did t'me entice,
^o that unconstant Sea, thy love
that ebbs and flows so in a trice?
Was it to prove
The power of each attractive spell
Upon my fond enamored Youth?
No: I must think of thee so well
Thou then spak'st truth.
Else amongst overweening Boys,
Or Dotards, thou had chosen one
Than me, methinks a fitter choice
To work upon.
Mine was no withered Old man's suit;
Nor, like a Boys just come from School,
Had thou been either deaf, or mute,
I Would been no Fool.
Faith! I was then, when I embraced
A false belief thy Vows were true,
Or, if they were, that they could last
A day, or two.
Since I Would been told a Woman's mind
Varies as often, as April's Face:
But I supposed thine more refined,
And so it was,
Till (swayed by thy unruly Blood)
Thou changed'st thy uncertain will,
And it is far worse to have been good,
Than to be ill.
Methinks you are blemished in each part,
And so, or worse than others are,
Those eyes grown hollow as thy heart,
Which two Suns were.
Thy Cheeks are sunk, and thy smooth Skin
Looks like a Conquest now of Time,
Sure th'had'st an Age to study in
For such a Crime.
Thou Art so transformed, that I in thee,
(As it is a general loss) more grieve
Thy falling from thy self, than me
Fool to believe!
For I by this am taught to prize
The inward beauties of the Breast,
Bove all the gayeties of the Eyes
Where Treasons rest.
Whereas, grown black with this abuse
Offered to Love's commanding Throne,
Thou may despair of an excuse,
And wished undone.
Farewell thou pretty brittle piece
Of fine-cut Crystal, which once was
Of all my Fortune, and my Bliss
The only Glass,
Now something else: But in its state
Of former luster, fr^sh and green
My Faith shall stand, to show thee what
Thou should have been.
Love's Triumph.
I.
GOD Cupid's Power was never so shown,
Since first the Boy could draw a bow,
In all past Ages, as this one,
This Lovesick Age we live in now:
Now He, and She, from high to low,
Or Lovers are, or would seem so.
II.
His arrows now are every where,
In every Lip, and every Eye,
From Young, from Old, from Foul, and Fair,
This little Archer lets them fly:
He is a Traitor to Love's Throne,
That has no love, or seems to have none.
III.
If she be young, and fair, we do
Think her the blessing of this Life,
And, out of that opinion woe
Her for a Mistress, or a Wife,
And if they think us able Men,
The pretty Souls will love again.
IV.
Or, if she be a Wife, and that
A jealous Ass corrupts her Bed,
We build our pleasures on his Fate,
And for her sake do crown his Head,
So what he fears a Truth does prove,
And what is this but a trick of Love?
V.
If she be left a Widow, then
Her first Amors have warmed her Blood,
She Will think us Puppies or no Men
Should not her wants be understood,
Pity then makes us Lovers prove,
And, Pity is the child of Love.
VI.
If she be withered, and yet itch
To do as once in time of old,
We love a little, for she is rich,
Though, but to scare away the cold,
She has (no doubt) the gift t'asswage,
Then never stand upon her age.
VII.
Thus Maid, Wife, Widow do all wound,
Though each one with a different Eye,
And we by Love, to love are bound,
Either in heat, or policy,
That is, we love, or say we do,
Women, we love our selves; or you.
VIII.
Cupid may now slacken his nerve,
Hang Bow, and Quiver in some place
As useless grown, useless they serve,
For Trophies of what once he was,
Love's grown a Fashion of the mind,
And we shall henceforth love by kind.
IX.
Lord! what a Childish Ape was this,
How vain improvident an Elf,
To conquer all at once, when it is
Alas! a triumph ore himself?
He has usurped his own feared Throne,
Since now there is nothing to be done.
X.
And yet there is, there is one prize
Locked in an adamantine Breast;
Storm that then, Love, if thou be'st wise,
A Conquest above all the rest,
Her Heart, who binds all Hearts in chains,
Castanna's Heart untouched remains.
A Rogue.
READER, read this Man, than whom
Is none more vile in Christendom:
Thou may know him, wheresoever
Thou meet'st him, by his Character,
And, to begin first with his Face,
It is the worst that ever was,
So Crab-like, wrinkled, and so foul,
His Mother shit him sure at stool.
To that, his Limbs are such, thou would swear
Nor two of them could make a pair:
His Hands! Man never saw such clutches,
No such Feet walk without crutches;
The bulk to these fair branches is
A Chaos of confounded Vice:
A trunk of Tumors, and Diseases,
Which a thousand Ulcers eases,
With a stink that would infect us,
Did not kinder Heaven protect us.
Now how this hide of his is lined!
To this shape he has a mind
Of so damned a leprous taint
As the Devil himself would Saint.
Bloody, revengeful, treacherous:
A hellish Liar, covetous;
A cursed Sycophanting Slave,
A Fool, a Coward, and a Knave:
Lewdly debaucht (the Devil take him!)
As Drabs, and Dice, and Drink can make him:
Loudly profane 'bove Blasphemy,
The abstract of all Villainy;
Ignorant of all things, but evil:
And now y' 'ave warning of a Devil.
The Contest.
COme, my Corinna, let us try,
Which loves you best, of You, and I,
I know you often have in your Glass
Seen the faint shadow of your Face;
And, consequently, then became
A wondering Lover, as I am;
Though not so great a one, for what
You saw was but a glimpse of that,
So sweet, so charming Majesty,
Which I in its full Luster see.
But if you then had gazed upon
Your self, as your reflection,
And seen those Eyes for which I dye,
Perhaps you would been as sick as I.
Thus Sweetest, then it is con^est,
That of us Lovers I love best;
You Will say it is reason, that my share
^e great as my Affections are,
When you insensibly are grown
^ore mine, by Conquest, than your own.
(...), if this Argument I name
Seem light to such a glorious claim;
Yet, since you love you self, this do,
Love me, at least, for loving you;
So my Despair you may destroy,
And you your loved self enjoy;
Acting those things, can never be done,
Whilst you remain your self alone:
So for my Sighs you make amends,
So you have yours, and I my Ends.
The False One.
In Imitation of that of Horace.
Non ^rat and Coelo, etc.
I.
BEhold, False Maid, yon horned Light,
Which in Heavens arched Vault does range,
And view part of thy self in it;
Yet she but once a Month does change.
II.
The raging Sea, the uncertain Air,
Or, what does yet more change admit,
Of variation Emblems are;
When thou, and only thou art it.
III.
Philosophers their pains may spare
Perpetual motion where to find;
If such a thing be any where,
It Is Woman, in thy Fickle mind.
IV.
^ow, of^, incentred in thine Arms,
Big with betraying Sighs and Tears,
(...), thou secured me, by thy Charms,
From other Lovers natural Fears.
V.
(...) that improved the honest Flame,
Which made my faithful Bosom pant;
(...) Tears so gentle, as might claim
Belief, from Hearts of Adamant.
VI.
(...) were the Arts seduced my Youth,
A Captive to thy wanton will:
(...) with a Falsehood, like to Truth,
In the same instant cure, and kill.
VII.
(...) ^ell the next you will betray,
(I mean that Fool usurps my room)
(...) for his sake I Am turned away;
^ the same Fortune he must come.
VIII.
When I, restored to that Sense
Thou have distempered, sound and free,
Shall, with a very just pretense,
Despise, and laugh at Him, and Thee.
ODE Valedictory.
I.
I Go: but never to return:
With such a killing Flame I burn,
Not all the enraged waves that beat
My ships calk't ribs, can quench that heat:
Nor thy Disdains, which colder are
Than Climats of the Northern Star,
Can freeze the Blood, warmed by thine Eye:
But Sweet, I must thy Martyr dye.
II.
(...)! can thou know, that losing thee,
^he Universe is dead to me,
^^d I to it, yet not become
(...) kind, as to revoke my Doom?
^^^tle Heart, do: if I remove,
^ow can I hope to atchieve thy love?
^^ot, I shall 't a blessing call,
(...) she, who wounds may see my fall.
III.
(...) say thou love, and bid me go
^here never Sun his Face did show:
(...) to, what is worse, want of thy Light,
which dissipates the shades of Night;
^o dangers, Death, Hell dares not own,
^^^cely to Apprehension known,
^m'd with thy Will, (despite of Fear)
^ seek them, as if Thou were there.
IV.
(...) if thou will I dye, and that,
(...), worse than thousand deaths, thy hate;
When I am dead, if thou but pay
My Tomb a Tear; and sighing say,
Thou do my timeless fall deplore,
Wishing the had known my Truth before;
My Dearest Dear, thou make me then,
Or sleep in peace, or live again.
To my friend Mr. Lely, on his Pictur^ of the Excellently Virtuous Lady, t^^
Lady Isabella Thynn.
NAture, and Art are here at strife;
This Shadow comes so near the Life,
Sit still ( Dear Lely) the have done that
Thy self must love, and wonder at;
What other Ages ^'er could boast,
Either remaining yet, or lost,
Are trivial toys, and must give place
To this, that counterfeits her face:
(...) I Will not say, but there have been,
(...) every past Age, Paintings seen
^oth Good, and Like from every Hand,
(...) once had Maistry and command,
(...) none like her; Surely she sat
^^y Pencil thus to celebrate
^bove all others that could claim
(...) Echo from the voice of Fame.
^or he, that most, or with most cause,
^eaks, or may speak his own applause,
^^n't, when he shows his Master-peice,
(...) he e're did a Face like this.
^^his thy chance to be the Man,
^one, but who shares thy honor, can;
(...) such another do arise,
^o steal more glory from her Eyes;
(...) 't would improvident bounty show
^o hazard such a Beauty so;
^^s strange thy Judgment did not err,
(...) want a Hand, beholding her,
^^ose awing Graces well might make
^^ssured'st Pencil to mistake.
To Her, and Truth then, what a crime,
To Us, to all the World, and Time
(Who most will want her copy) 't were,
To have it then unlike appear!
But she is preserved from that Fate,
Thou know so well to imitate,
And in that Imitation, show,
What Oil and Color mixed can do;
So well, that had this Piece the grace
Of motion, she and none else has,
Or, if it could the Odor breathe,
That her departing sighs bequeath,
And had her warmth, it then would be
Her glorious Self, and none but she.
So well it is done; But thou can go
No farther than what Art can do:
And when all is done: this, thou have made,
Is but a nobler kind of Shade;
And thou, though thou have played thy part,
A Painter, no Creator art.
To Chloris.
ODE.
Farewell, My Sweet, until I come,
Improved in Merit, for thy sake,
With Characters of Honor home,
Such, as thou can not then but take.
To Loyalty my love must bow,
My Honor too calls to the Field,
Where, for a Ladies busk, I now
Must keen, and sturdy Iron wield.
Yet, when I rush into those Arms,
Where Death, and Danger do combine,
I shall less subject be to harms,
Than to those killing Eyes of thine.
Since I could live in thy Disdain,
Thou art so far become my Fate,
That I by nothing can be slain,
Until thy Sentence speaks my Date.
But, if I seem to fall in War,
TO excuse the murder you commit,
Be to my Memory just so far,
As in thy Heart to acknowledge it;
That Is all, I ask; which thou must give
To him, that dying, takes a pride
It is for thee; and would not live
Sole Prince of all the world beside.
Taking Leave of Chloris.
I.
SHE sighs; as if she would restore
The Life, she took away before;
As if she did recant my Doom,
And, sweetly would reprieve me home;
Such hope to one condemned appears
From every whisper that he hears;
But what do such vain hopes avail,
If those sweet sighs compose a gale
To drive me hence, and swell my sail?
II.
See, see! she weeps! who would not swear
That Love descended in that Tear,
Boasting him of his wounded prize,
Thus in the bleeding of her Eyes;
Or that those Tears, with just pretense,
Would quench the fire that came from thence?
But, oh! they are (which strikes me dead)
Crystal, her frozen Heart has bred,
Neither in Love, nor Pity shed.
III.
Thus, of my merit jealous grown,
^^y happiness I dare not own;
But wretchedly her favous wear,
Blind to my self, unjust to her,
Whose sighs and tears at least discover,
She pitties, if not loves, her Lover,
And more betrays the Tyrant's skill,
Than any blemish in her will,
That thus laments, whom she does kill.
IV.
Pity still, Sweet, my dying state,
My Flame may sure pretend to that,
Since it was only unto thee,
I gave my Life, and Liberty;
However my Life's misfortune's laid,
By Love I Am Pitties object made.
Pity me then; and if thou hear
I Am dead, drop such another tear,
And I am paid my full arrear.
ODE.
I.
COme, let us drink away the time,
A pox upon this pelting Rhyme!
When Wine's run high, Wit's in the prime.
II.
Drink, and stout drinkers are true joys,
Odes, Sonnets, and such little toys,
Are exercises fit for Boys.
III.
Then to our Liquor let us sit,
Wine makes the Soul for Action ^it,
Who bears most drink, has the most wit.
IV.
The whining Lover, that does place
His wonder in a painted Face,
And wastes his substance in the chase,
V.
Could not in M^lancholy pine,
Had he Affections so divine,
As once to fall in love with Wine.
VI.
The Gods themselves their revels keep,
And in pure Nectar tipple deep,
When slothful Mortals are asleep.
VII.
They fudled once, for recreation,
In Water, which by all relation,
Did cause Deucalions Inundation.
VIII.
The spangled Globe, as it held most,
Their Bowl, was with Salt Water dos't,
The Sunburned Center was the Toast.
IX.
In drink, Apollo always chose
His darkest Oracles to disclose,
'T was Wine gave him his Ruby-Nose.
X.
The Gods then let us imitate,
Secure of Fortune, and of Fate,
Wine Wit, and Courage does create.
XI.
Who dares not drink's a wretched Wight;
Nor can I think that Man dares fight
All day, that dares not drink all night.
XII.
Fill up the Goblet, let it swim
In foam, that overlooks the brim,
He that drinks deepest, here is to him.
XIII.
Sobriety, and Study breeds
Suspicion of our Thoughts, and Deeds;
The downright Drunkard no Man heeds.
XIV.
Let me have Sack, Tobacco store,
A Drunken Friend, a Little Wh -- re,
Protector, I will ask no more.
ODE.
I.
THE Day is set did Earth adorn,
To drink the brewing of the Main,
And, hot with travel, will e're Morn
Carouse it to an ebb again,
Then let us drink, Time to improve,
Secure of Cromwell and his Spies,
Night will conceal our Healths, and Love
For all her thousand thousand Ey^s.
Cho: Then let us drink secure of spies
To Phoebus, and his Second rise.
II.
Without the Evening dew, and showers,
The Earth would be a barren place,
Of Trees, and Plants, of Herbs, and Flowers,
To crown her now enameled Face;
Nor can Wit spring, or Fancies grow,
Unless we dew our heads in Wine,
Plump Autumn's wealthy overflow,
And sprightly Issue of the Vine.
Cho: Then let us drink secure of spies
To Phoebus, and his Second rise.
III.
Wine is the cure of Cares, and Sloth,
That rust the Metal of the Mind,
The Juice, that Man to Man does, both
In Freedom, and in Friendship bind.
This clears the Monarchs cloudy brows,
And chears the Hearts of sullen Swains,
To wearied Souls repose allows,
And makes Slaves caper in their chains.
Cho: Then let us drink secure of spies
To Phoebus, and his Second rise.
IV.
Wine, that distributes to each part
Its heat and Motion, is the Spring,
The Poets Head, the Subjects Heart,
'T was Wine made old Anacr^on sing.
Then let us quaff it, whilst the Night
Serves but to hide such guilty Souls,
As fly the beauty of the Light;
Or dare not pledge our Loyal Bowls.
Cho: Then let us Revel, Quaff, and Sing,
Health, and his Scepter to the King.
ODE.
I.
FAir Isabel, if ought but thee
I could, or would, or like, or love;
If other Beauties but approve
To sweeten my Captivity:
I might those Passions be above,
Those Powerful Passions that combine
To make, and keep me only thine.
II.
Or, if for tempting treasure I
Of, the World's God, prevailing Gold,
Could see thy Love, and my Truth sold,
A greater, nobler Treasury;
My flame to thee might then grow cold,
And I like one whose love is sense,
Exchange thee for convenience.
III.
But when I vow to thee, I do
Love thee above or Health or Peace,
Gold, Joy, and all such toys as these,
'Bove Happiness and Honor too:
Thou then must know, this love can cease,
Nor change for all the glorious show
Wealth and Discretion bribes* us to.
IV.
What such a love deserves, thou, Sweet,
As knowing best, may best reward;
I, for thy bounty well prepared,
With open arms my Blessing meet.
Then do not, Dear, our joys detard;
But unto him propitious be,
That knows no love, nor life, but thee.
An Old Man's Gift to a Fair Lady.
POXo' your doting Coxcomb! was there ever
So old a Lover, and so young a Giver?
A pair of Spectacles! who the Devil, but thee,
Could have found out such a disparity?
There were, t'oblige thy Love, far better ways,
A lump of Sugar, or her Name in Baies,
A row of Pins, a Baby, or a Purse,
Or what as fit had been, a Hobbyhorse,
A Valentine, had thou not wanted blood
To paint it with, would have been full as good.
Thy old Seal-ring, thy Grandam's pleated Gown,
A Boon-grace to preserve her from the Sun.
Or any thing, rather than a dull pair
Of second Eyes, these must deform thy Fair.
I see, thou fain would blast her in her prime
To parallel thy Age before her Time.
What do thou think thy Mistress cannot see,
Without such helps, thy full Deformity;
Thy shaking Noddle, and thy dropping Nose,
Whence the moist Philtre is salt Rheum that flows.
Thy stooping Shoulders, and thy trembling Hands,
Thy bursten Belly, and thy crinkling Hamms,
Thy spider's Legs, and thy club'd corny Feet,
That stink, though grown so dry they cannot sweat?
Or would thou have thy Love a Bugbear be,
To fright the Boys in snavelling like thee?
Or is it to stop her sense she may not smell
The tainted Winds, that in thy Bowels swell,
Until they burst in cracks: nor snuff the sent,
Thy nasty, suppurated Issues vent?
I am content to think this gift was bought
In mirth, and given her for a Merry-thought.
Are they to mend her Sight, or dimm her Eyes,
So to eclipse her Sight from seeing these?
'Twas thy good Nature made thee give such ware,
And so, in troth, the Present was most rare.
For the great kindness of this gift implies,
Thou love thy Mistress better than thine Eyes.
If to find out, thou ever had design
A Present fit to offer at her Shrine;
Thou should have bought the Sun that Day of light,
And all the twinkling Beauties of the Night,
And yet, those glories of that arched Scene
Had been for her an Offering too mean.
Embroidered Waste-coats, Spanish Gloves, or Plate,
Watches, or Jewels might become her State.
But could thou find out no allurement else?
A pair of nasty horn-set Spectacles!
Where were thy Wits, Old Fool? she might have born
With them, if set in Amalthea's horn:
And had those green-glass Orbs been cut from some
Of The crystal Sphere, they might her Eyes become.
The Case might have past too if made it were
Of the Embroidered Girdle of the next Sphere:
But such a wretched Rogue, with such an itch,
Never made love to any wrinkled Witch.
Sure thou have heard, that Love is blind, and thou
By this device would be a Cupid too.
A pleasant Plot in faith! thou would be then
A pretty Boy of Fourscore years, and ten.
Or thou had laid 'em by, and wanting light
Bestow'dst them for some Gemm, as well thou might.
Or else amazed by th'lustre of her Face
Mistaking gav'st them for a Looking glass.
However, whether thou did, or did not see,
I wish in stead of them the had given her me.
In Amorem Medicum.
EPIG.
FOR Cares whilst Love prepares the Remedies,
The main Disease in the Physician lies.
The Legend of the Famous, Furious, Expert, and Valiant Gittar-Masters
Caveliero Comer, and Don Hill.
BALLAD.
YOU, that love to read the Tracts,
Of tall Fellows Fights, and Facts,
In this Song will hear a wonder,
How two Fiddlers fell asunder,
Lampon, etc.
Comer had the first abuse,
Which admitted no excuse;
But, since Hill so ill did treat him,
Dick, in wrath, resolved to beat him,
Lampon, etc.
Straight a Broom-staff was prepared,
Which Don Hill no little scared;
But he resolved if Dick did bast him,
That his patience should out-last him.
Lampon, etc.
Whilst (good Christian) thus he me'nt,
To despise his punishment,
And first to appease his Foe send,
Lo! in sight, was Dick's fierce Nose-end;
Lampon, etc.
Whom, in terror, Hill did ask,
If he durst perform his task,
Dick, in wrath, replied, God dam me!
To that purpose now come am I,
Lampon, etc.
And withal, with main, and might,
Up he trips this proper Knight,
And with such fury he quel'd Hill,
That to the Ground he levelled Hill;
Lampon, etc.
This shows Music discord has,
Which the cause of this War was,
And, that Hil^'s beaten, is a token,
That their string of Friendship's broken;
Lampon, etc.
Now behold! this mortal cause,
Is referred to Harry Laws,
And since he is beaten Hill does tell tho,
Law shall give him salve for's Elbow.
Lampon, etc.
On Annel-seed Robin, the Hermophrodite.
EPITAPH.
HEre, Reader, lies, bereft of life,
The Emblem strange of Man and Wife,
Who, if they pay their Vows aright,
Make up a true Hermophrodite;
And in this Chest Entombed are,
The wonder of a single pair;
So that here thou may bewail,
Either the Female, or the Male.
Though the distracted grief of Friends,
Ever in single Robin ends.
No Rib was taken from his side,
Robin Bridegroom was, and Bride,
And, of his Marriage tie so tender,
He only did, with She engender;
Robin, with Robin so far won,
That the Male half begot a Son,
The Female half, a few years after,
Happily brought forth a Daughter,
So like, you from their looks might gather,
That Robin Mother was, and Father;
From Robin only differing thus,
That neither was Amphibious,
Heaven did so happily combine
This Doubtful Gender Masculine,
That they were Married at their Birth,
And both together laid in Earth,
Where let them lie, and no Man thwart 'em;
If they must part, the Devil part 'em.
ODE.
To Chloe.
I.
FAlse one, farewell, thou have releast
The Fire, imprisoned in my breast,
Your beauties make not half the show
They did a year or two ago;
For now I find,
The Beauties those fair walls enshrined,
Foul, and deformed appear,
Ah! where
In Woman is a spotless mind?
II.
I would not now take up thine Eyes,
But in revenge to tyrannize;
Nor should thou make me blot my skin,
With the black thou wear'st within;
If thou would meet,
As Brides do, in the Nuptial Sheet,
I would not kiss, nor play;
But say,
Thou nothing have that can be sweet.
III.
I was betrayed, by that fair Sign,
To entertainment cold within;
But found that fine built Fabric lined,
With so ill contrived a Mind,
That now I must,
For ever ( Chloe) leave to trust
The face that so beguiles
With smiles;
Falsehood's a charm to love, or lust.
ODE.
To Chloris from France.
I.
Pity me Chloris, and the flame
Disdain, and Distance, cannot tame;
And pity my necessity,
That makes my Court-ship, wanting thee,
Nothing but fond Idolatry.
II.
In dark, and melancholy Groves,
Where pretty Birds discourse their loves,
I daily worship on my knee,
Thy Shadow, all I have of thee,
And sue to that to pity me.
III.
I vow to it the sacred Vow,
To thee, and only thee, I owe
When (as it knew my true intent)
The silent Picture gives consent,
And seems to mourn my Banishment.
IV.
Presaging thence my love's success,
I triumph in my happiness,
And straight consider how each Grace,
Adorns thy Body; or thy Face,
Surrender up to my embrace.
V.
I think this little Tablet now
Because less cruel, fair as Thou;
I do from it mercy implore,
It Is the sole Saint I do adore,
I do not think I love thee more.
VI.
Yet be not jealous, though I do
Thus dote of it, in stead of you;
I love it not, for any line
Where captivating beauties shine:
But only ( Chloris) as it is thine.
VII.
And, though thy Shadow here take place,
By intimating future grace,
It goes before, but to impart
To thee, how beautiful thou art,
And show a reason for my smart.
VIII.
Nor is it improper, Sweet, since thou,
Art in thy Youthful Morning now,
Whilst I, deprived of thine eyes light,
Do drooping live a tedious Night
In Paris, like an Anchorite.
IX.
Recall me then, that I may see,
Once more, how fair, and kind you be;
Into thy Sunshine call again
Him, thus exiled, by thy disdain,
And I Will forget my loss, and pain.
An Invitation to Phillis.
COme live with me, and be my love,
And thou shall all the pleasures prove,
The Mountains towering tops can show
Inhabiting the Vales below.
From a brave height my Star shall shine
T'illuminate the desert Clime.
Thy Summer's bower shall overlook,
The subtle windings of the Brook,
For thy delight which only springs,
And cuts her way with Turtles Wings.
The Pavement of thy Rooms shall shine,
With the bruised Treasures of the Mine,
And not a Tale of Love but shall
In Minoture adorn thy wall.
Thy closet shall Queens Caskets mock
With rustic Jewels of the Rock,
And thine own light shall make a Gemm,
As bright of these, as Queens of them.
From this thy Sphere thou shall behold
Thy snowy Ewes troop over the mold,
Who yearly pay my Love a-piece
A tender Lamb, and silver Fleece.
And when Sols Rays shall all combine
Thine to out-burn, though not outshine,
Then, at the foot of some green Hill,
Where crystal Dove runs murmuring still,
We'll angle for the bright-ey'd Fish,
To make my Love a dainty dish;
Or, in a Cave, by Nature made,
Fly to the covert of the shade,
Where all the pleasures we will prove,
Taught by the little God of love.
And when bright Phoebus scorching beams,
Shall cease to guild the Silver streams,
Then in the cold arms of the Flood
We'll bathing cool the factious Blood,
Thy beauteous Limbs the Brook shall grace,
Like the reflex of Cynthia's Face,
Whilst all the wondering Fry do greet
The welcome Light, adore thy Feet,
Supposing Venus to be come
To send a kiss to Thetis home.
And following Night shall trifled be
Sweet; as thou know I promised thee,
Thus shall the Summers Days, and Nights,
Be dedicate to thy delights.
Then live with me, and be my love,
And all these pleasures shall thou prove.
But when the sapless Season brings
Cold Winter, on her shivering Wings,
^reezing the Rivers liquid face,
^^to a crystal Looking-glass,
And that the Trees their naked bones,
Together knock, like Skeletons,
Then, with the softest, whitest Locks,
Spun from the tribute of thy Flocks,
We will o're-cast thy whiter Skin,
Winter without, a Spring within.
At the first peep of Day I Will rise,
To make the sullen Hare thy prize,
And Thou with open Arms shall come,
To bid thy Hunter welcome home.
The Partridge, Plover, and the Poot,
I Will with the subtle Mallard shoot;
The Fell-fare, and the greedy Thrush
Shall drop from every Ha^^-thorn Bush*
And the slow Heron down shall fall,
To feed my Fairest Fair withal,
The feathered People of the Air,
Shall fall to be my Phillis fare,
No Storm shall touch thee, Tempest move;
Then live with me, and be my love.
But from her Cloister when I bring,
My Phillis to restore the Spring,
The ruffling Boreas shall withdraw,
The Snow shall melt, the Ice shall thaw;
The Aguish Plants fresh Leaves shall show,
The earth put on her verdant hue,
And thou ( Fair Phillis) shall be seen
Mine, and the Summers beauteous Queen.
These; and more pleasures shall thou prove;
Then live with me, and be my love.
The Entertainment to Phillis.
NOW Ph^ebus is gone down to sleep
In cold embraces of the deep,
And Nights Pavillion in the Sky,
(Crowned with a Starry ( Canopy)
Erected stands, whence the pale Moon
Steals out to her Endimion;
Over the Meads, and over the Floods,
Thorough the ridings of the Woods,
The enamored Huntress scours her ways,
And through Night's vail her horns displays,
I have a Bower for my Love,
Hid in the Center of a Grove
Of aged Oaks, close from the sight
Of all the prying Eyes of Night.
The polished Walls of Marble be
Pillaster'd round with porphyry,
Casements of Crystal to transmit,
Night's sweets to thee, and thine to it,
Fine silver Locks to Ebon Doors,
Rich gilded Roofs, and Cedar Floors,
With all the Objects may express
A pleasing Solitariness.
Within my Love shall find each room,
New furnished from the Silkworms Loom,
Vessels of the true antic mold,
Cups cut in Amber, Myrrh, and Gold;
Quilts blown with Roses, Beds with Down,
More white than Atlas aged Crown,
Carpets where Flowers woven grow,
Only thy sweeter steps to strew,
Such as may emulation bring,
To the wrought mantle of the Spring.
There silver Lamps shall silent shine,
Supplied by Oils of Iessamine,
And mists of Odours shall arise
To air thy little Paradise.
I have such Fruits too, for thy taste,
As teeming Autumn never graced,
Apples, as round, as thine own Eyes;
Or, as thy Sister Beauties prize,
Smooth, as thy snowy Skin, and sleek
And ruddy as the Morning's cheek,
Grapes, that the Tyrian purple wear,
The spritely Matrons of the Year,
Such, as Lyoeus never bare,
About his drowsy Brows, so fair,
So plump, so large, so ripe, so good,
So full of flavor, and of blood.
There Is Water in a Grot hard by,
To quench thee, when with dalliance dry,
Sweet, as the Milk of Sand-red Cow,
Brighter than Cynthi'as silver Bow,
Cold, as the Goddess self ever was,
And clearer than thy Looking-glass.
But oh! the sum of all delight
For which the Day submits to Night,
Is that my Phillis thou will find,
When we are in embraces twined.
Pleasures that so have tempted Jove,
To all his Masquerades of Love;
For them the Prince his purple waves,
And strips him naked as his Slaves.
It Is they that teach humanity
The thing we love, the reason why:
Before we liv^; but never 'till then,
Are females Women; or males Men:
This is the way, and this the trade,
That does perfect what nature made,
Then go; but first thy beauties skreen,
Lest they that revell on the Lawns
The Nymphs, the Satyrs, and the Fawns,
Adore thee for Nights horned Queen.
To Coelia.
ODE.
I.
WHen Coelia must my old Days set,
And my young morning rise,
In beams of Joy, so bright, as yet
Never blessed a Lover's eyes.
My state is more advanced than when
I first attempted thee;
I su'd to be a Servant then,
But now to be made free.
II.
I Have served my time faithful, and true
Expecting to be placed,
In happy freedom, as my due
To all the joys thou have:
Ill husbandry in love is such
A scandal to Loves power,
We ought not to mispend so much,
As one poor, short-lived hour.
III.
Yet think not (sweet) I Am weary grown,
That I pretend such haste,
Since none to surfeit e're was known,
Before he had a taste;
My infant love could humbly wait,
When young it scarce knew how
To plead; but grown to Man's estate
He is impatient now.
To Cupid.
O D E.
I.
FOnd Love, deliver up thy Bow,
I am become more Love than thou,
I am as wanton grown, and wild,
Much less a Man, and more a Child,
From Venus born, of chaster kind,
A better Archer, though as blind.
II.
Surrender without more ado,
I am both King and Subject too,
I will command, but must obey,
I am the Hunter, and the Prey,
I vanquish, yet am overcome,
And, sentencing, receive my doom.
III.
No springing Beauty scapes my Dart,
And every ripe one wounds my Heart;
Thus whilst I wound, I wounded am,
And firing others turn to flame,
To show how far love can combine
The Mortal part with the Divine.
IV.
Faith! quit thine Empire, and come down
That thou, and I may share the Crown,
I Have tried the worst thy arms can do,
Come then, and taste my power too,
Which (howsoever it may fall short)
Will doubtless prove the better sport.
V.
Yet do not; for in Field, and Town,
The Females are so loving grown,
So kind; or else so lustful, we
Can neither err, though neither see:
Keep then thine own Dominions, Lad,
Two Loves would make all Women mad.
The Tempest.
I.
STanding upon the Margent of the main,
Whilst the high boiling tide came tumbling in,
I felt my fluctuating thoughts maintain,
As great an Ocean, and as rude within,
As full of waves, of depths, and broken grounds,
As that, which daily laves her chalky bounds.
II.
^oon could my sad imagination find,
A parallel to this half world of Flood,
An Ocean by my walls of Earth confined,
And Rivers in the chanells of my blood,
Discov'ring Man, unhappy Man, to be
Of this great Frame, Heavens Epitome.
III.
There pregnant Argosies with full Sails ride
To shoot the Gulphs of sorrow and despair,
Of which the Love no Pilot has to Guide,
But to her Sea-born Mother steers by prayer,
When oh! the Hope her anchor lost, undone,
Rowls, at the mercy of the Regent Moon.
IV.
It Is my adored Diana, then must be
The Guidress to this beaten Bark of mine,
It Is she must calm, and smooth this troubled Sea,
And wast my hope over the vaulting Brine,
Call home thy venture Dian, then at last,
And be as merciful, as thou art chaste.
The Litany.
I.
FRom a Ruler that is a curse,
And a Government that is worse;
From a Prince that rules by awe,
Whose Tyranick Will's his Law;
From an armed Council board,
And a Scepter that is a Sword,
Libera nos, etc*
II.
From a Kingdom, that from health
Sickens to a Commonwealth;
From such Peers as stain their blood,
And are neither wise; nor good;
From a Gentry steept in Pots,
From unkennellers of Plots,
Libera nos, etc.
III.
From a Church without Divines,
And a Presbyter that whines;
From John Calvin, and his Pupils,
From a Sentence without Scruples,
From a Clergy without Letters,
And a Free State bound in Fetters,
Libera nos, etc.
IV.
From the bustle of the Town,
And the Knavish Tribe of the Gown,
From long Bills where we are Debtors,
From Bum-Bailiffs, and their Setters,
From the tedious City Lectures,
And Thanksgivings for Protectors,
Libera nos, etc.
V.
From ill Victuals when we dine,
And a Tavern with ill Wine;
From vile Smoke in a short Pipe,
And a Landlord that will gripe,
From long Reck'nings, and a Wench
That Claps in English; or in French,
Libera nos, etc.
VI.
From Demeans whose barren soil
Never produced the Barley Oil;
From a Friend for nothing fit,
That nor Courage has; nor Wit:
From all Liars, and from those
Who write nonsense Verse; or Prose,
Libera nos, etc.
VII.
From a Virgin that is no Maid,
From a kicking, stumbling Jade,
From false Servants, and a Scold,
From all Women that are old,
From loud Tongues that never lie,
And from a domestic Spy,
Libera nos, etc.
VIII.
From a domineering Spouse,
From a smoky, durty House,
From foul Linen, and the noise
Of young Children, Girls or Boys,
From ill Beds, and full of Fleas,
From a Wife with Essences,
Libera nos, etc.
IX.
From Trapans of wicked Men,
From the Interest of Ten,
From Rebellion, and the sense
Of a wounded Conscience;
Lastly, from the Poets Evil,
From O. Cromwell*
his Highness, and the Devil,
Libera nos, etc.
To some Great Ones.
EPIGRAM.
POets are great Men's Trumpets, Poets feign,
Create them Virtues, but dare hint no stain:
This makes the Fi^tion constant, and does show
You make the Poets, not the Poets you.
To the Memory of my worthy Friend Colonel Richard Lovelace.
To pay my Love to thee, and pay it so,
As honest Men should what they justly owe,
Were to write better of thy Life than can
Th'assured'st Pen of the most worthy Man:
Such was thy Composition, such thy Mind
Improved to Virtue, and from Vice refined.
Thy Youth, an abstract of the World's best parts,
Enured to Arms, and exercised in Arts;
Which with the vigor of a Man became
Thine, and thy Countries Pyramids of Flame;
Two glorious Lights to guide our hopeful Youth
Into the paths of Honor, and of Truth.
These parts (so rarely met) made up in thee,
What Man should in his full perfection be;
So sweet a temper into every sense,
And each affection breathed an influence,
As smoothed them to a Calm, which still withstood
The ruffling Passions of untamed Blood,
Without a wrinkle in thy Face, to show
Thy stable Breast could a disturbance know.
In Fortune humble, constant in Mischance,
Expert of both, and both served to advance
Thy Name, by various trials of thy Spirit,
And give the testimony of thy Merit;
Valiant to envy of the bravest Men,
And Learned to an undisputed Pen,
Good as the best in both, and great; but yet
No dangerous Courage; nor offensive Wit:
These ever served, the one for to defend,
The other nobly to advance thy Friend:
Under which title I have found my Name
Fixed in the living Chronicle of Fame,
To times succeeding; yet I hence must go
Displeased I cannot celebrate thee so.
But what respect, acknowledgment, and love,
What these together, when improved, improve;
Call it by any Name (so it express
Ought like a Tribute to thy worthiness,
And may my bounden Gratitude become,)
Lovelace I offer at thy honored Tomb.
And though thy Virtues many Friends have bred
To love thee Living, and lament thee Dead,
In Characters far better coucht than these,
Mine will not blot thy Fame; nor theirs increase;
'Twas by thine own great Merits raised so high,
That, maugre Time, and Fate, it shall not die.
To Poet E. W.
Occasioned for his Writing a Panegyric on Oliver Cromwell.
FRom whence, vile Poet, did thou glean the Wit,
And Words for such a vicious Poem fit?
Where could thou Paper find was not too white;
Or Ink, that could be black enough to write?
What servile Devil tempted thee to be
A flatterer of thine own Slavery?
To kiss thy Bondage, and extol the deed,
At once that made thy Prince, and Country bleed?
I wonder much thy false Heart did not dread,
And shame to write, what all Men blush to read;
Thus with a base ingratitude to rear
Trophies unto thy Master's Murderer?
Who called thee Coward ( --) much mistook
Thou have at once abused thy self, and us;
He Is stout that dares slatter a Tyranne thus.
Put up thy Pen, and Ink, muzzle thy Muse
Adulterate Hag fit for a common Stews,
No good Man's Library; writ thou have
Treason in Rhyme has all thy Works defaced:
Such is thy fault, that when I think to find
A punishment of the severest kind,
For thy offense, my malice cannot name
A greater; than, once to commit the same.
Where was thy reason then, when thou began
To write against the sense of God, and Man?
Within thy guilty breast Despair took place,
Thou would despairing Die in spite of Grace.
At once the art Judge, and Malefactor shown,
Each Sentence in thy Poem is thine own.
Then, what thou have pronounced go execute,
Hang up thy self, and say, I bid thee do it;
Fear not thy memory, that cannot dye,
This Panegyric is thy Elegy,
Which shall be when; or wheresoever read,
A living Poem to upbraid thee dead.
DIALOGVE.
Geron and Amarillis. Gr. STay, stay, fair Nymph! oh! whither Flies
The love, and wonder of all Eyes?
Stay, and to see be now besought
The Miracle thy Charms have wrought;
Age turned to youth at Love's command,
And thine which nothing can withstand.

Am. Be gone, old Fool, why do thou stay
My better thoughts, and cross my way?
Fly, fly, and quit my shady walk,
Nature will blush to see us talk,
Who all conjunction must disclaim
Betwixt her glory, and her shame.
Prefer thy suit to some one fit,
If not to grant, to pardon it.
Thou wrong'st my youth, by thy pretense,
And every Prayer is violence.
Love has on thee no wonder wrought,
Thou only art transformed in thought,
Nor art thou quick'ned by my Eyes,
But dream'st of Metamorphosies.
Thou art the same old thing thou wast,
Without, or sight, or touch, or taste,
Hearing, or smell, or any sense,
That beauties grace should recompense.
And only have a tongue to move
Contempt, and laughter, but no Love.

Ge. Sweet, do not scorn me, though I seem
Old, and unfit for thy esteem;
Though hoary grown, and shrunk I am,
I feed within, perhaps, a flame;
As hot as can the youngest he,
That hourly Sighs, and sues to thee.
As I am old, I should be wise,
And better know the thing I prize,
Than twenty Younglings that do light
Their Torches only at the sight.

Am. I shun thee not for any part
Of what thou seem, but what thou art.
And that, thou do a flame believe,
Is but enough to make thee live:
For if thy Heart a flame should turn,
The bulk's so dry thy frame would burn.
I know thee old, and wish thee wise,
A younger Man, and younger Eyes;
On public Faith thou courtest me,
For troth, I think thou can not see.

Ge. Would I were deaf! I might not hear
This confirmation of my fear.
I doubted thou would scornful prove,
But looked for no reproach for love.
I come perhaps with full delight
T'outbid thy wary appetite;
I can distinguish Beauty too,
And taste the Fruit for which I sue.
Know all Love's ends, and all his ways,
Women's reproaches, and delays,
And furnished 'em with able Arms
To force the Fortress of thy charms.
Scorn then, ingrate, my love, and me;
Thy Spring will one day Winter be.
When every youthful Shepherd Swain,
As thou do me, will thee disdain.

Am. Old Man, why should thou think me nice?
Because I cannot hug thy Ice?
Or tell me I shall Winter grow,
Because thy self art turned to Snow?
No heats so wild in my Blood play,
As need the excess of thy allay:
Nor can the judgment of thy dim,
Erroneous sight, raise my esteem;
And that stiff blade of thine may in,
Attempts, but no performance, sin.
Go Dotard, and impartial look
Thy Shadow in the frozen Brook,
In that congealed mirror behold,
How shrunk thou art, withered, and old,
Thy Leaf dropped off from thy bald Crown,
And all an antic Statue grown;
Then say if ought thou there can see
Fit to present my youth, and me.

Ge. I have (fair Nymph!) considered all,
Thy Youth may tax my Age withal,
And on my self some Lectures read:
But cannot find that I am dead:
For furrowed though my Skin appears,
Because old Time these threescore Years,
Has plowed it up, I Am fruitful still,
And want no power to my will.
And though my Leaf be fallen, each Vein
Does a proportioned heat retain.
One yielding Glance from thy fair Eyes
Would make my lusty Sap to rise;
And glow with germinating heat.
My wanton Pulses strongly beat,
Create me then, and call me thine,
We then will in Embraces twine,
As sweet, and fruitful, as the Pair
That in their April coupled were.

Am. Stay Shepherd, stay, you run too fast,
This fury is too hot to last;
And by the crackling Flame, I doubt,
The Fire will be soon burnt out.
Leave me, and stumble to thy Bed,
Where dream thou have me; and you are sped.

Ge. Fair, and inflexible, will Love,
Prayers, Tears, and Sufferings nothing move?
Thus then I leave thee, and am gone,
To die for an ungrateful one.
When I am dead if thou repent,
And sigh over my Monument,
^y that sweet Breath, I shall respire,
(...) Dead enjoy my Life's desire.

Am. Stay, stay, for now I better see
T^^nblemis^'t truth that shines in thee.
Thou conquered have, I am overcome,
Then lead me, Shepherd, Captive home.

CHORUS.
JOlly Shepherds, quit your Flocks
To the greedy Wolf, or Fox;
Though no Shepherd them attend,
Hecate will all defend.
For another Cynthia's led
To a lusty old Man's Bed.
Tune your Oaten Pipes and Play;
This is Hymen's Holy Day.
To one Night a Years mirth bring,
Winter's married to the Spring.
Therefore it becomes each one
To Crown the revoluti^n.
An Epitaph on Robert Port, Esquire designed for a Monument:
And now set up in Elum Church, in the County of Stafford.
Virtue in those good times that bred good Me^
No testimony craved of Tongue; or Pen*
No marble Columns; nor engraven Brass,
To tell the World that such a Person was:
For then each Pious Act, to fair descent,
Stood for the worthy Owner's Monument:
But in this change of Manners, and of States*
Good Names, though writ in Marble, have their fates*
Such is the barbarous, and irrev'rent rage
That arms the Rabble of this impious Age.
Yet may this happy Stone that bares a Name,
(Such as no bold Surviver dares to claim)
To Ages yet unbron unblemish't stand,
Safe from the stroke of an inhumane Hand.
Here, Reader, here a Port's sad Relics lie
To teach the careless World Mortality;
Who while he Mortal was unrivaled stood
The Crown, and Glory of his Ancient blood*
(...) for his Princes, and his Countries trust,
(...) to God, and to his Neighbor just.
A loyal Husband to his latest end,
A gracious Father, and a faithful Friend.
Beloved he lived, and died o'recharg'd with Years,
^^ller of Honor than of Silver Hairs.
And, to sum up his Virtues, this was he
Who was what all we should, but cannot be.
To Cupid, a foolish Poet, occasioned by as foolish a Poem of his to a bona
Roba.
I.
GOod Cupid, I must tell you truly,
Had it not been for Abram Cowley,
You, and your Ode, had come off blewly.
II.
With other Thefts, that shall be nameless,
Because their Authors should be blameless;
Although your Worship's somewhat shameless.
III.
Could such a spacious Beauty want
Matter her native worth to paint,
That thy Dull Muse was grown so scant?
IV.
As thus to steal from other Muses,
When thine own Wit, at need, refuses,
Elogies for such pious Uses?
V.
Out of her Shoulders, or her Haunches,
Thou surely might have Collopt Fancies,
Enough for Millions of Romances.
VI.
(...) any part thou might find matter,
(...) the brightest she to flatter;
(...) that she cannot hold her Water,
VII.
(...) such a Saying of a Bard,
(...) (doubtless) yet was never heard,
(...) Man that Verses made; or marred.
VIII.
^^ou should have told her she was tight,
(...) built, well tackled, new and light;
(...) for Stoage, and for Fight.
IX.
(...) on what Mount was thy Muse Nursed?
Of Block-heads thou art sure the worst,
To say she sprang a Leak at first!
X.
Cupid, I doubt me (not to flatter)
By your ill handling of the Matter,
You're but a simple Navigator.
XI.
She Is such a Vessel that who will swim her,
Steer, and Man out, Carine, and trim her,
Must be no Youth of your small Timber.
XII.
Then leave thy Rhiming, and be Quiet,
I tell the She Is not for thy Diet,
Thou have another Hulk to ply out:
XIII.
And hope (thou Dunce) for no rewarding,
She Is not so lean to need thy larding,
And thou a Poet worth a Farthing.
Philoxipes and Policrite. An Essay to an Heroic Poem* CANTO I.
The ARGUMENT.
THis Canto serves first to relate,
Philoxipes his Birth, and parts,
His Princes Friendship Wealth; and State,
His Youth, his Manners, Arms, and Arts;
His strange contempt of Love 's dread Dart*
Till a mere Shadow takes his Heart.
I.
In Thetis lap, and by her Arms embraced,
Betwixt the Syrian, and Cilician Coasts;
The Poets Cyprus fortunately placed,
Like Nature's Casket, all her Treasure boasts:
An Isle, that once for her renowned Loves;
Stood consecrate to Venus, and her Doves.
II.
From whose fair Womb, once sprung as fair a Seed
To shame the brood of the corrupted World,
The graceful Sexes of her happy Breed,
In one another chaste Embraces curled:
Nor other difference knew, than did arise
From em'lous Virtue, for the Virtues prize.
III.
And these were Strifes, where Envy had no place;
She was not known in such a virtuous War;
Nor had Ambition, with her Giant Race,
In such Contentions a malignant share:
Love was the cause, and Virtue was the claim,
That could their honest, gentle Hearts inflame.
IV.
But none, amongst that never failing Race,
Could match Philoxipes, that noble Youth,
In Strength, and Beauty, Fortitude, and Grace
In gentle Manners, and unblemisht Truth
In all the Virtues, and the Arts that should
Embellish Manhood; or ennoble Blood.
V.
A Prince descended from the Royal Lines
Of Greece, and Troy united in one Bed,
Where merit, and reward did once combine
The Seeds of Aeacus, and Leomed,
And in a brave Succession did agree
Bold Felamon, and fair Hesione.
VI.
From this illustrious Pair famed Teucer sprung,
Who, when returned from Ilium's funeral Fire,
Without due Vengeance for his Brother's Wrong;
Was banished home by his grieved Father's Ire:
And into Cyprus fortunately came
To build a City to his Country's Name.
VII.
Great Salamis, whose polisht Turrets stood
For many Ages in the course of Time,
T'orelook the surface of the swelling Flood,
The strength and glory of that fruitful Clime,
Was His great Work, from whose brave Issue, since,
The World received this worthy, matchless Prince.
VIII.
Worthy his Ancestors, and that great Name,
His own true Merits, with the public Voice,
Had won throughout the Isle, as his just claim,
Above whatever past a general Choice:
A Man so perfect, none could disapprove,
Save that he could not; or he did not love.
IX.
Books were his Business, his Diversion Arms,
His Practice, Honor, his Achievements Fame,
He had no time to love; nor could the Charms,
If any Cyprian Nymph his Blood inflame:
He thought the fairest print of Womankind
Too small a Volume to enrich his Mind.
X.
He loved the tawny Lyon's dangerous Chase,
The spotted Leopard; or the tusked Boar;
Their bloody Steps would the young Hunter trace,
And having lodged them, their tough Entrails gore:
Love was too soft to feed his generous Fire,
And Maids too weak to conquer his Desire.
XI.
In all his intervals of happy Truce,
Knowledge, and Arts which his high Mind endowed,
Where still his Objects, and what they produce
Was the brave Issue of his solitude:
He shunned dissembling Courts, and thought less Praise,
Adhear'd to Diadems, than Wreaths of Baies.
XII.
Although betwixt him, and the youthful King,
Who, at this time, the Paphian Scepter swayed;
A likeness in their Manners, and their Spring
Had such a true, and lasting Friendship made,
That, without him, the King did still esteem
His Court a Cottage, and her Glories dim.
XIII.
One was their Country, one the happy Earth,
That (to its Glory) these young Heroes bred;
One year produced eithers auspicious Birth,
One space matur'd them, and one council led:
All things in fine, wherein their Virtues shone,
Youth, Beauty, Strength, Studies, and Arms
were one.
XIV.
This, so established Friendship, was the cause,
That when this modest Prince would fain retire,
From the fond World's importunate applause
Often crossed the Workings of his own Desire;
And made him, with a Favorites love, and skill,
Devote his Pleasures to his Master's Will.
XV.
But once his Presence, and Assistance stood
In balance with this hopeful Monarch's Bliss,
Love's golden Shaft had fired his youthful Blood;
Nor any Ear must hear his Sighs but his;
Artiphala his Heart had overthrown,
Maugre his Sword, his Scepter, and his Crown.
XVI.
From her bright Eyes the wounding Lightning flew,
Through the resistance of his Manly Breast,
By none, but his Philoxipes that knew
Each motion of his Soul to be expressed:
He must his Secrets keep, and Courtships bear,
Conceal them from the World, but tell them her.
XVII.
This held him most to shine in the Court's Sphere,
And practice Passion in another's Name,
To dally with those Arms that levelled were
His high, and yet victorious Heart t'enflame:
He sight, and wept, expressing all the Woe
Despairing Lovers in their Frenzy show.
XVIII.
And, with so good Success, that in some space
The magic of his Eloquence, and Art,
Had wrought the King into this Princess Grace,
And laid the passage open to her Heart:
Such Royal Suitors could not be denied,
The whole World's Wonder, and one Asia's pride
XIX.
The King thus fixed a Monarch in his Love,
And in his Mistriss's fair surrender crowned,
Could sometimes now permit his Friends remove,
As having other Conversation found.
And now resign him to the Peace he sought
To practice what the wise Athenian taught.
XX.
Solon, that Oracle of famous Greece,
Could in the course of his experience find,
None to bequeath his knowledge to but this,
This glorious Youth blessed with so rich a Mind,
So brave a Soul, and such a shining Spirit*
As Virtue might, by lawful claim, inherit.
XXI.
It was his Precept, that did first distill
Virtue into this hopeful young Man's Breast;
That gave him Reason to conduct his Will,
That first his Soul in sacred Knowledg'd dressed;
And taught him, that a wise Man, when alone,
Is to himself the best Companion.
XXII.
He taught him first into himself retire,
Shunning the greatness, and those gaudy Beams,
That often scorch their Plumes who high aspire,
And wear the splendour of the World's extremes,
To drink that Nector, and to taste that Food,
That to their Greatness, make Men truly Good.
XXIII.
(...) his unerring Eye had aptly chose
^ place so suited to his Mind, and Birth,
(...) the sweet Scene of his beloved Repose:
^s all the various Beauties of the Earth,
Contracted in one plot, could nere outvie
To nourish Fancy; or delight the Eye.
XXIV.
From the far famed Olympus haughty Crown,
Which, with curled Cypress, Periwigs his Brow
The crystal Lycus tumbles headlong down,
And thence unto a fruitful Valley flows;
Twining with amorous Crooks her verdant
Was It that smiles to see her Borders so embraced.
XXV.
Upon whose flowery Banks a stately Pile,
Built from the marble Quarry shining stood:
Like the proud Queen of that Elizean Isle,
Viewing her front in the transparent Flood:
Which, with a murmuring Sorrow, kis'd her base,
As loath to leave so beautiful^ a place.
XXVI.
Lovely indeed; if tall, and shady Groves,
Enameled Meads, and little purling Springs,
Which from the Grots, the Temples of true Loves,
Creep out to trick the Earth in wanton rings:
Can give the name of Lovely to that place,
Where Nature stands clad in her chiefest Grace.
XXVII.
This noble Structure, in her Sight thus blessed,
Was round adorned with many a curious piece;
By every cunning Master's hand expressed,
Of famous Italy; or A^tick Greece:
As Art, and Nature both together strove,
Which should attract, and which should fix his
love.
XXVIII.
There whilst the Statue, and the Picture vie
Their shape, and color, their design, and life;
They Value took from his judicious Eye,
That could determine best the curious strife:
For naught, that should a Prince's Virtues fill,
Escaped his knowledge, or amused his skill.
XXIX.
But in that brave Collection there was one,
That seemed to lend her light unto the rest;
Wherein the mastry of the Pencil shone
Above, whatever Painter's Art expressed;
A Woman of so exquisite a Frame;
As made all Life deformed, and Nature lame.
XXX.
A Piece so wrought, as might to Ages stand
The work and likeness of some Deity;
To mock the labors of a humane hand:
So round, so soft, so airy, and so free,
That it had been no less, than to profane*
To dedicate that Face t'a mortal Name.
XXXI.
For Venus therefore Goddess of that Isle,
The cunning Artist named this brave Design,
The Critic Eyes of Wond'rers to beguile;
As if, inspired, had drawn a Shape divine:
Venus Urania, Parent of their bliss,
Could be expressed in nothing more than this.
XXXII.
And such a power had the lovely Shade,
Over this Prince's yet unconquered Mind;
That his indiff'rent Eye full often it stayed,
And by degrees his noble Heart inclined
To ^ay, that could this Frame a Woman be;
She were his Mistress, and no Fair but she*
Caetera desunt.
^To Mr. Alexander Brom.
EPODE.
NOW let us drink, and with our nimble Feet,
The Floor in graceful measures beat;
^ever so fit a time for harmless Mirth
Upon the Sea-guirt spot of Earth.
The King's returned! Fill Nectar to the brim,
And let Lyaeus proudly swim:
Our Joys are full, and uncontrouled flow,
Then let our Cups (my Hearts) be so:
^^gin the Frolic, send the Liquor round,
And as our King, our Cups be crowned.
^o Boy, and pierce the old Faternian Wine,
And make us Chaplets from the Vine.
Range through the drowsy Vessels of the Cave,
Till we an Inundation have,
Spare none of all the Store, but ply thy Task,
Till Bachus Throne be empty Cask;
But let the Must alone, for that we find
Will leave a Crapula behind.
Our Griefs once made us thirsty, and our Joy,
If not allayed, may now destroy.
Light up the silent Tapers, let them shine,
To give Complexion to our Wine;
Fill each a Pipe of the rich Indian Fume,
To vapor Incense in the Room,
That we may in that artificial Shade
Drink all a Night our selves have made.
No Cup shall be discharged, whilst round we sit,
Without a smart report of Wit,
Whilst our Inventions quickened thus, and warm,
Hit all they fly at, but not harm;
For it Wit's mastry is, and chiefest Art
To tickle all; but make none smart.
Thus shall our Draughts, and Conversation be,
Equally innocent, and free,
Our Loyalty the Center, we the Ring,
Drink round, and Changes to the King;
Let none avoid, dispute, or dread his Cups,
The strength, or quantity he sups:
Our Brains of Raptures full, and so divine,
Have left no room for fumes of Wine;
And though we drink like Freemen of the Deep,
We'll scorn the frail support of Sleep;
For whilst with Charles his presence we are blessed,
Security shall be our rest.
Anacreon come, and touch thy jolly Lyre,
And bring in Horace to the Quire:
Mould all our Healths in your immortal Rythme,
Who cannot sing, shall drink in time.
We'll be one Harmony, one Mirth, one Voice,
One Love, one Loyalty, one Noise,
Of Wit, and Joy, one Mind, and that as free
As if we all one Man could be.
Drowned be past Sorrows, with our future Care,
For (if we know how blessed we are)
A knowing Prince at last is wasted home,
That can prevent, as over come.
Make then our Injuries, and Harms to be
The Chorus to our Jollity,
And from those Iron times, past Woes recall,
Extract one Mirth to balance all.
On Tobacco.
WHat horrid sin condemned the teeming Earth,
And cursed her womb with such a monstrous Birth?
What Crime America, that Heaven would please
To make thee Mother of the World's disease?
In thy fair Womb what accidents could breed,
What Plague give root to this pernicious Weed?
Tobacco! Oh, the very name does kill,
And has already fox't my `reeling Quill:
I now could write Libels against the King,
Treason; or Blasphemy; or any thing
`Gainst Piety, and Reason; I could frame
A Panegyre to the Protector's Name:
(...) ^ly infiction does the World infuse
(...) the Soul of every modest Muse,
What politic Peregrine was it first could boast,
(...) bought a Pest into his native Coast?
^Th' abstract of Poison in a stinking Weed,
^The spurious Issue of corrupted Seed;
(...) belch't in Earthquakes from the dark Abyss,
those Name a blot in Nature's Herbal is.
What drunken Fiend taught Englishmen the Crime,
Thus to puff out, and spawl away their time?
Pernicious Weed (should not my Muse offend,
To say Heaven made ought for a cruel end*)
(...) should proclaim that thou created were,
To ruin Man's high, and immortal part.
Thy Stygyan damp obscures our Reason's Eye,
Debauches Wit, and makes Invention dry;
Destroys the Memory, confounds our Care;
We know not what we do, or what we are:
Re^ders our Faculties, and Members lame
To every office of our Country's claim.
Our Life's a drunken Dream devoy'd of Sense,
And the best Actions of our time offense.
Our Health, Diseases, Lethargies, and Rhume,
Our Friendship's Fire, and all our Vows are Fume
Of late there is no such things as Wit, or Sense,
Council, Instruction, or Intelligence:
Discourse that should distinguish Man from Beast
Is by the vapor of this Weed suppressed;
For what we talk is interrupted stuff,
The one half English, and the other Puff:
Freedom, and Truth are things we do not know
We know not what we say, nor what we do:
We want in all, the Understanding's light,
We talk in Clouds, and walk in endless Night.
We smoke, as if we meant concealed by spell
To spy abroad, yet be invisible:
But no discovery shall the Statesman boast,
We raise a mist wherein our selves are lost,
A stinking shade, and whilst we pipe it thus,
Each one appears an Ignis fat^us.
Courtier, and Pesant, nay the Madam Nice
Is likewise fallen into the common Vice,
We all in dusky Error groping lie,
Robbed of our Reasons, and the days bright Eye.
Whilst Sailers from the Main-top see our Isle
VVrapt up in Smoke, like the Aetnean Pile.
What nameless Ill does its Contagion shrowed
(...) the dark Mantle of this noisome Cloud?
(...) `tis the Devil: Oh, I know that is it,
(...)! How the Sulphur makes me Cough and Spit?
^Tis he; or else some Fav'rit Feind at least,
(...) all the Mischief of his Malice dressed;
(...) deadly Sin that lurks t'intrap the Soul;
Does here concealed in curling Vapors roll*
And for the Body such an unknown ill,
(...) makes Physicians reading, and their skill:
One undistinguisht Pest made up of all
That Men experienced do Diseases call.
Coughs, Astma's, Apoplexies, Fevers, Rhume,
(...) that kill dead; or lingeringly consume;
(...), and Madness, nay the Plague, the Pox,
And every Fool wears a Pandora's Box.
(...) that rich Mine, the stupid Sot does fill,
Smokes up his Liver, and his Lungs, until
(...) reeking Nostrils monstr' ously proclaim,
(...) Brains, and Bowels are consuming Flame.
What noble Soul would be content to dwell
In the dark Lanthorn of a smoky Cell?
To prostitute his Body, and his Mind,
To a Deba^ch of such a Stinking kind?
To sacrifice to Molech, and to fry,
In such a base, dirty Idolatry;
As if frail life, which of its self's too short,
Were to be whift away in drunken sport.
Thus, as if weary of our destined years,
We burn the Thread so to prevent the Shears.
What noble end, can simple Man propose
For a reward to his all-smoking Nose?
His purposes are levelled sure amiss,
Where neither Ornament, nor Pleasure is.
What can he then design his worthy hire?
Sure `tis t'in^ure him for eternal fire:
And thus his aim must admirably thrive,
In hopes of Hell, he damns himself alive.
But my infected Muse begins to choke,
In the vile stink of the increasing Smoke,
And can no more in equal numbers chime,
Unless to sneeze, and cough, and spit in Rythme.
Half sti^led now in this new times Disease,
She must in fumo vanish, and decease.
This is her faults excuse, and her pretense,
This Satyr, perhaps, else had looked like Sense.
Laura Sleeping.
ODE.
I.
WInds whisper gently whilst she sleeps,
And fan her with your cooling wings;
Whilst she her drops of Beauty weeps,
From pure, and yet unrivaled Springs.
II.
Glide over Beauties Field her Face,
To kiss her Lip, and Cheek be bold,
But with a calm, and stealing pace;
Neither too rude; nor yet too cold.
III.
Play in her beams, and crisp her Hair,
With such a gale, as wings soft Love
And with so sweet, so rich an Air,
As breaths from the Arabian Grove.
IV.
A Breath as hush't as Lovers sigh;
Or that unfolds the Morning door:
Sweet, as the Winds, that gently fly,
To sweep the Springs enameled Floor.
V.
Murmur soft Music to her Dreams,
That pure, and unpoluted run,
Like to the newborn Crystal Streams,
Under the bright enamored Sun.
VI.
But when she waking shall display
Her light retire within your bar,
Her Breath is life, her Eyes are day,
And all Mankind her Creatures are.
Laura Weeping.
ODE.
I.
Chaste, lovely Laura, `gan disclose,
Drooping with sorrow from her Bed,
As with ungentle Showers the Rose,
O'recharg'd with wet, declines her head.
II.
With a dejected look, and pace,
Neglectingly she `gan appear,
When meeting with her tell-tale Glass,
She saw the Face of sorrow there.
III.
Sweet sorrow dressed in such a look,
As love would trick to catch desire;
A shaded Leaf in Beauties Book,
Charact'red with clandestine Fire.
IV.
Down dropped a Tear* to deck her Cheeks
With orient Treasure of her own;
Such, as the diving Negro seeks
T'adorn the Monarch's mighty Crown.
V.
Then a full shower of pearly Dew,
Upon her snowy Breast `gan fall:
As in due Homage to bestrew;
Or mourn her Beauties Funeral.
VI.
So have I seen the springing Morn
In dark and humid Vapors clad,
Not to eclipse but to adorn
Her glories by that conquered shade.
VII.
Spare ( Laura) spare those Beauties twins
Do not our World of Beauty drown,
Thy Tears are Balm for other Sins,
Thou know not any of thine own.
VIII.
Then let them shine forth to declare
The sweet Serenity within,
May each day of thy Life be fair,
And to eclipse one hour be Sin.
SONNET.
CHloris, whilst thou and I were free,
Wedded to naught but Liberty,
How sweetly happy did we live?
How free to promise, free to give?
Then Monarch's of our selves, we might
Love here, or there, to change delight,
And tied to none, with all dispense,
Paying each love its recompense.
But in that happy freedom we
Were so improvidently free,
To give away our Liberties;
And now in fruitless Sorrow pine,
At what we are, what might have been,
Had thou, or I, or both been wife.
SONNET.
WHy do thou say thou love me now,
And yet proclam'st it is too late*
When bound by folly, or by fate,
Thou can no further grace allow?
Repeat no more that killing Voice,
Thou beauteous Victrice of my Heart;
Or find a way to ease my smart,
Maugre thy now repented choice.
`Tis not too late to love, and do
What love and nature prompt thee to,
Whilst thus thou triumph'st in thy prime;
Thou may discreetly love, and use,
Those pl^asures thou did once refuse:
But to profess it were a Crime.
SONNET.
WHy do thou say thy Heart is gone;
And no more mine, no more thine own;
But past retrieve for ever wed,
By sacred Vow t'another's Bed?
Why do thou tell me that I lie
Bound in the same perplexed tie;
And that our now divided Souls
Are cold, and distant, as the Poles?
Do thou not know when first our Loves
^ere plighted in the secret Groves,
Our hearts were changed with equal flame:
(...), Chloris then, how can it be?
Could thou give me; or I give thee?
No, no, our selves are still the same.
SONNET.
HOw should thou Love, and not offend!
Why, Chloris, I will tell thee how:
(...) thou did once, so Love me now,
(...) lie with me, and there is an end.
Thou only art enjoined (my Sweet)
To keep thy Reputation high,
And that indeed, is secrecy,
(...) all do err, thou all not see it.
Then fairest Fearless of all blame,
That sacred Treasure of thy Name
Into my faithful Arms commit.
Thou once did trust me, with thy fame,
I then was just, and true to it;
And, Chloris, I am still the same.
To Sir Aston Cockayne, on Captain Hanniball.
EPIG.
YOur Captain Hanniball does snort and puff,
Armed in his Brazen-face, and Greazy Buff
`Mongst Puncks, and Panders, and can rant, and roar
With Cacala the Turd, and his poor Whore.
But I would wish his Valor not mistake us,
All Captains are not like his Brother Dacus;
Advise him then be quiet; or I shall
Bring Captain Hough, to bait your Hannibal.
In imitation of a Song in the Play of Rollo.
TAke, O take, my Fears away,
Which thy cold Disdains have bred;
And grant me one auspicious Ray,
From thy Morn of Beauties shed.
But thy killing Beams restrain,
Lest I be by Beauty slain.
II.
Spread, O spread, those orient Twins
Which thy snowy Bosom grace,
Where Love in Milk, and Roses swims,
Blind with Luster of thy Face.
But let Love thaw them first, left I
Do on those frozen Mountains dye.
To Sir Aston Cockayne, on his Tragedy of Ovid.
LOng live the Poet, and his lovely Muse,
The Stage with Wit, and Learning to infuse,
Embalm him in immortal Elegy,
My gentle Naso, for if he should dye,
Who makes thee live, thou wilt be again pursued,
And banished Heaven for Ingratitude.
Transform again thy Metamorphosis
In one, and turn thy various shapes to his,
A Twin-born Muse in such Embraces curled,
As shall subject the Scriblers of the World,
And spite of time, and Envy, henceforth sit,
The ruling Gemini of Love and Wit.
So two pure Streams in one smooth Channel glide
In even motion, without Ebb, or Tide:
As in your Pens Tybur, and Anchor meet,
And run Meanders with their silver Feet.
Both soft, both gentle, both transcending high,
Both skilled alike in charming Elegy;
So equally admired the Laurels due,
Without distinction both to him and you:
Naso was Rome's famed Ovid, you alone
Must be the Ovid to our Albion;
In all things equal, saving in this case,
Our Modern Ovid has the better Grace.
Philodramatos.

De Die Martis, and Die Veneris.
EPIG.
SAturn and Sol, and Lun^ chaste,
`Twixt Mars and Venus still are placed,
Whilst Mercury and Jove divide,
The Lovers on the other side.
What may the hidden Mystery
Of this unriddled Order be?
The Gods themselves do justly fear,
That should they trust these two too near;
Mars would be drowned in Venus, and so they
Should lose a Planet, and the Week a Day.
ALIVD.
SHould Mars and Venus have their Will,
Venus would keep her Friday ill.
ODE
To Love.
I.
GReat Love I thank thee, now thou have
Paid me for all my Sufferings past;
And wounded me with Nature's Pride,
For whom more Glory `tis to dye,
Scorned, and neglected, than enjoy
All Beauty in the World beside.
II.
A Beauty above all pretense,
Whose very Scorns are recompense,
The Regent of my Heart is crowned,
And now the Sorrows, and the Woe,
My Youth, or Folly, helped me to,
Are buried in this Friendly Wound.
III.
Led by my Folly; or my Fate,
I loved before I knew not what,
And threw my Thoughts I knew not where;
With Judgment now I love, and sue,
And never yet Perfection knew,
Until I cast mine Eyes on her.
IV.
My Soul that was so mean before,
Each little Beauty to adore;
Now raised to Glory, does despise,
Those poor and counterfeited Rays,
That caught me in my childish Days,
And knows no Power but her Eyes.
VI.
Raised to this height, I have no more,
Almighty Love, now to implore
Of my auspicious Stars; on thee:
Than, that thou bow her noble Mind,
To be as mercifully kind:
As I shall ever faithful be.
TRANSLATIONS Out of several POETS.
Horace his second Epod Translated.
HAppy's that Man that is from City-Care
Sequestered, as the Ancients were;
That with his own Ox, ploughs his Father's Lands,
Untainted with usurious Bands:
That from Alarms of War in quiet sleeps;
Nor's frighted with the raging Deeps:
That shuns litigious Law, and the proud State
Of his more potent Neighbor's Gate.
Therefore, he either is employed to join
The Poplar to the sprouting Vine,
Pruning luxurious Branches, grafting some
More hopeful Offspring in their room:
Or else, his sight in humble Valleys feasts,
With scattered troops of lowing Beasts:
Or refined Honey in fine Vessels keeps;
Or shears his snowy, tender Sheep;
Or, when Autumnus shows his fruitful head
In The mellow Fields with Apples covered,
How he delights to pluck the grafted Pear,
And Grapes, whose Cheeks do Purple wear!
Of which to thee, Priapus, Tithes abound,
And Silvan Patron of his Ground.
Now, where the aged Oak his green Arms spreads,
He lies; now in the flowery Meads:
Whilst through their deep-worn Banks the murmuring Floods
Do glide, and Birds chant in the Woods:
And bubling Fountains flowing Streams do weep,
A gentle Summons unto Sleep.
But when cold Winter does the Storms prepare,
And Snow of thundering Jupiter;
Then with his Dogs the furious Boar he foils,
Compelled into objected Toils:
Or, on the Forks extends his mashy Net,
For greedy Thrushes a deceit.
The fearful Hare too, and the Stranger Crane
With gins he takes, a pleasant gain.
Who but with such Diversions would remove
All the malignant Cares of Love?
But, if to these he have a modest Spouse,
To nurs^ his Children, keep his House,
Such, as the Sabin Women, or the tan'd
Wife of the painful Apulian,
To make a good Fire of dry Wood, when come
From his hard Labor weary home.
The wanton Cattle in their Booths to tie,
Stripping their stradling Udders dry,
Drawing the Must from forth the cleanly Fats,
To wash down their unpurchas'd Cates;
Mullet, or Thorn-back cannot please me more,
Nor Oysters from the Lucrine shore,
When by an Eastern Tempest they are tossed,
Into the Sea, that sweeps this Coast.
The Turkey fair of Africa shall not come,
Within the confines of my Womb:
As Olives from the fruitfull'st Branches got,
Ionian Snites so sweet are not.
Or Sorrel growing in the Meadow Ground,
Or Mallows for the Body sound.
The Lamb killed for the Terminalia;
Or Kid redeemed from the Wolf's Prey.
Whilst thus we feed, what Joy `tis to behold
The pastur'd Sheep haste to their Fold!
And the wearied Ox with drooping Neck to come
Haling the inverted Culter home;
And swarms of Servants from their Labor quit
About the shining Fire sit:
Thus when the Usurer Alphius had said,
Now purposing this Life to lead,
(...) Ides called in his Money; but for gain
In The Kalends put it forth again.
Horat. Ode IX. Lib. III.
Ad Lydiam.
Hor. WHilst I was acceptable unto thee,
And that no other youthful Arm might cling
About thy snowy Neck, than mine more free,
More blessed I flourisht than the Persian King.

Lyd. And, for no other Woman's Beauty, when
Thou sigh'dst; and when thy Chloe did not come
Before thy Lydia, thy Lydia then
Flourisht more famed than Ilia of Rome.

Hor. Now Thracian Chloe is my only Dear,
Skilled on the Harp, and skilful in an Air!
For whom to die I not at all should fear,
If gentle Fate my Soul in her would spare.

Lyd. The Son of Ornithus the Thurine, me
With equal violence of heat does move:
for whom, with all my Heart, I twice would die,
So Fate would spare the gentle Boy, my Love.

Hor. What if our Friendship should renew,
And link our Loves in a more lasting Chain?
Yellow-hair'd Chloe, should I slight for you,
Should my access to thee be free again?

Lyd. Though than a glorious Star He is more bright,
And thou than is the Adriatic Sea
More raging, and than spungy Cork more light,
Yet should I love to live and die with thee.

Martial, Epig. Lib. I. Ep. XX.
AS I remember, Aelia cought full sore;
She cought out twice two Teeth, she had but four.
Now she may safely cough for over: Why?
Her Mouth's not charged to let such Bullets fly.
Stances de Monsieur Theophile.
I.
WHen thy naked Arm thou see me kiss
Upon the snowy Sheet displayed,
Which whiter than the Linen is;
And, when my glowing Hand's betrayed,
Wandering about thy Paps: Thy Sense may prove,
Chloris, that with a burning heat I love.
II.
(...) Zealots Eyes to Heaven tend,
So mine Eyes unto thine are turned,
^hen to thy Couch my Knees I bend,
With thousands of warm Passions burned,
My Lips from whispering Murmurs then are free,
And suffer my Delights to sleep with thee.
III.
M^rpheus glad of the surprise,
In his black Empire thee detains;
And hides from seeing me thine Eyes
With so dull, so heavy Chains,
That thy soft slumber'd-charmed Spirits lie
Dumb, without murmur at his Tyranny.
IV.
In breathing her perfume the Rose,
In shooting forth his heat the Day,
The Chariot, where Diana goes,
And Naiad's, when in Floods they play,
The silent Graces in a Picture to
Make more of noise, than thy soft Breathings d^
V.
Then by thee did I breathe a Sigh,
And when thy rest I had descryed;
The sweet Repose, that sealed thine Eye:
With Passion then; Oh Heaven! I cried*
How can thou from such excellent Limbs, as these
Extract so great an ill, as my Disease.
Her Heart and Mine.
Out of Astrea.
MADRIGALL.
I.
WEll may I say that our two Hearts
Composed are of flinty Rock;
Mine as resisting rigorous Darts;
Yours as it can endure the shock
Of Love, and of my Tears, and Smart.
II.
^ut when I weigh the griefs, whereby
My Sufferings I perpetuate,
(...) say, in this extremity,
In Constancy, that I am that
Rock, which you are in Cruelty.
To Charinus, an ugly Woman's Husband.
Epig. out of Johannes S^cundus.
CHarinus, 'twas my hap of late
To have a sight of thy dear Mate,
So white, so flourishing, so fair,
So trim, so modest, debonair;
That if good Jove would grant to me
A leash of Beauties, such as she:
I Would give the Devil at one Word
Two that he would take away the third.
An Ode of Johannes Secundus Translated.
To my dear Tutor Mr. Ralph Rawson.
THE World shall want Phaebean light,
And the Icy Moon obscured lie,
And sparkling Stars their Rooms shall quit
IN the gloomy Sky:
The Crab shall shorter cut the Day,
The Capricorn prolong its Hours,
And to abridge Nights unpleasant stay,
Command the Powers:
Earth shall be plowed by crooked Ships,
And Carrs shall roll upon the Seas,
Fishes in Woods, Bores in the Deep
Shall live and Graze:
Before I Will lay aside that care
Of thee, that is in my Bosom bred,
Whether in the Center, or in the Air,
Alive, or dead.
EPIG.
Translated out of Hieron; Amaltheus.
ACon his right, Leonilla her left Eye
Does want; yet each in Form the Gods outvie.
Sweet Boy, with thine thy Sisters light improve;
So shall she Venus be, and thou blind Love.
Love's World.
Translated out of Astrea.
I.
THat Artist Love another World has made,
To which in'ts Center fixed my Faith's the Earth:
And as on Earth the Worlds Foundation's laid,
My Faith the ground-sell is to this fair Birth.
II.
If any jealous Fears are there disclosed,
This constant Faith within my Breast to shake,
It Is like those Winds within the Earth enclosed,
Which with their riots make her Entrails
quake.
III.
My Tears the Ocean are: to dry those tears
A task no less, than to exhaust the Main:
'Cause of my Sighs, that I Am not loved the fear:
Those sighs the Storm, that stirs the Watery Plain.
IV.
Bitter's this Sea; although its liquid course
Is but of Rivers sweet a concourse great;
More bitter are my Tears, pleasant their sourse
As sprung from you unto my Heart more sweet.
V.
My Wil^'s the Air, which in her power free
About my Faith in constant motion roves
The Winds Desires hot from their infancy,
By which, as Air by Winds, my will still moves.
VI.
And as the unruly Winds diversely stray
Though locked in Mountains, whence they dare not part:
So my Desires unto Respect obey,
And dare not break that Prison of my heart.
VII.
The hidden Fire, which compasses the Air,
Is th'undiscover'd Flame, wherewith I burn;
And, as that great Fire does to none appear,
So to Men's Eyes a borrowed Face I turn.
VIII.
My Hope's the waxing and the waining Moon,
Borrowing from you alone her glorious hue:
But when it darkly in the Clouds does run,
It Is doubtful thought, that vainly follows you.
IX.
Your Eye's the Sun incomparably bright,
Fair Eye Love's Sun, which to us all Light gives:
If the other Sun gives the World living Light,
What Lover can deny by you he lives?
X.
Why with such beauty has Love furnished you,
As that your sight's his Day, your absence Night,
If not to enjoy that blessing of your view?
Then let us rather live, than perish by it.
XI.
The Summer's my hot Bloods redundancy;
And frozen Fear my cold, chill Winter brings.
But what of this, if still my Autumn b^
As void of Fruit, as void of Flowers my Spring?
Martial, Ep. 84. Lib. 10.
Do muse to sleep, why Afer does not go?
Prithee, Caecilian, look at's Bedfellow.
Id. Ep. 93. Lib. 11.
WHo says, you are Vicious, Zoilus, lies;
Thou art not Vicious, but a Vice.
Id. Ep. 58. Lib. 1.
Ad Flaccum.
FLaccus, thou ask'st, what kind of Girl I prize?
I like not one too Easy, nor too Nice.
I best with one betwixt these could dispense,
Not to afflict me, nor to glut my Sense.
Id. Ep. 48. Lib. 1.
De Diaulo Medico Paraph.
DIaulus Sextan from Physician is
Of late become, and it is not much amiss:
For now, t'interr, his care he may apply
In this, those killed in that capacity.
Id. Lib. Ep. 65.
Ad Fabullam ambitiosam.
You Are fair, we know it, a Maid, it is true,
And rich, why, we will grant that too.
But whilst too often by thee it is said,
You Are neither fair, nor rich, nor Maid.
Id. Lib. 1. Ep. 3.
Ad Velocem.
My Epigrams are long thou do report,
For thy part, thou writ'st none: Thine are more short.
Id. Lib. 2. Ep* 88.
In Mamercum.
THou naught repeat'st, yet Poet would be thought;
Be what thou will, so thou repeatest naught.
Id. Lib. 3. Ep. 9.
In Cinnam.
CInna writes Verses against me, it is said,
He does not write whose Verse by none is read.
Id. Lib. 3. Ep. 28.
In Nestorem.
THou wondrest, Marius has a stinking Ear:
Nestor, it is long of thee, thou whisper'st there.
Id. Lib. 3. Ep. 26*
In Candidum.
THou, Candidus, alone enjoy'st the estate;
Alone thy Money, Myrrh, and Golden plate,
^^ssican, ^ecuban Wine alone thou tast'st
^lone thou Wit, and Understanding have.
^lone thou'st all things: I deny this one,
(...) have a Wife too, but not thine alone.
Id. Lib. 3. Ep. 32.
In Matriniam.
THou say, I cannot fit an old Wife's Bed,
I can, Matrinia, you are not old, but dead.
(...) Hecube, or Niobe I could be prone,
B^t when she was no Bitch, and she no Stone.
Id. Lib. 3. Ep. 52.
Ad Chloen.
CHloe, thy Face I do not prize,
Neither thy Neck, thy Hands, nor Thighs,
Nor Breasts, Hips, Hanches, Legs, nor Feet,
Nor what thou think more tempting yet;
And not to insist on every part,
I could want all, with all my heart.
Id. Lib. 4. Ep. 78.
In Varum.
VArus of late to Supper did me call
His Plate was sumptuous his Victuals small:
With Gold, not Victuals, was his Table spread.
Our Eyes his Servants, not our Palats fed.
for Meat, not Sights, I came, then did I say,
(...) bring us Meat, or take thy Plate away.
Id* Lib. 4. Ep. 86.
In Ponticum.
WE drink in Glass, thou Myrrh, Ponticus; why?
Lest Glass of two Wines make discovery.
Id. Lib. 5. Ep. 46.
In Bassam.
BAssa, thou say, you are fair, and a Maid too;
Bassa, thou often say what is not so.
Id. Lib. 5. Ep. 44.
De Thaide, and Lecania.
THais her Teeth are black, as jet, or Crow:
Lecania's Teeth are white, as driven snow.
The reason of it easily is known,
Lecania bought Teeth wears, Thais her own.
Id. Lib. 7. Ep. 32.
In Cinnam.
SInce thy dagg'd Gown's so dirty, when thy Shoe,
Cinna, is whiter than the Virgin-snow:
Why with thy Garment do to thy Feet abuse?
Cinna, tuck up thy Gown, thou spoil'st thy Shoes.
Id. Lib. 10. Ep. 47.
Ad Seipsum.
THese, pleasant Martial, are the things
That to Man's life contentment brings;
Wealth by succession got, not toil,
A glowing Hearth; a fruitful Soil;
No Strife; few Suits; a Mind not drowned
(...) cares; clean Strength; a Body sound;
Prudent Simplicity; equal Friends;
^o Diet, that to lavish tends:
^ Night not steept in Drink, yet freed
from Care; a chaste, and peaceful Bed;
^ntroubled Sleeps, that render Night
^horter, and sweeter till the light;
^o be best pleased with thine own state,
neither to wish, nor fear thy Fate.
Id. Lib. 8. Ep. 3.
Ad Musam.
IT was enough five, six, seven Books to fill,
Yea and too much; why, Muse, do scrible still?
Cease, and be modest. Fame no farther grace
Can add; My Book's worn out in every place.
When razed Messalla's Monumentals must
Lie with Licinus's lo^ty Tomb in dust
I shall be read, and Travellors that come
Transport my Verses to their Father's home.
Thus I had once resolved (Her Clothes, and Head
Besmeared with Ointment) when Thalia said,
Can thou, Ungrateful, thus renounce thy Rhyme*
Tell me; how would thou spend thy Vacant time*
To Tragic buskins would thy Sock transfer,
And in Heroic Verse sing bloody War?
That tyrannous Pedants with awful voice
May terrify Old Men, Virgins, and Boys:
Let rigid Antiquaries such things write,
Who by a blinking Lamp consume the Night,
With Roman air touch up thy Poems Dress,
That the Age may read its manners, and confess:
T^ou'lt find thou may with trifling Subjects play,
^^til their Trumpets to thy Reed give way.
Id. Lib. 8. Ep. 19.
De Cinna.
CInna would fain be thought to need,
And so he does, he is poor indeed.
Id. Lib. 8. Ep. 23.
Ad Rusticum.
TO thee I gluttonous and cruel seem
About my Cook, because I basted him
For supper; Rusticus, the cause was great:
What should a Cook be beaten for, but's meat?
Id. Lib. Ep. 47.
In vari^ se tondentem.
PArt of thy Beard is clipped, part shaved, anoth^^ place
Is pulled: who'd think this could be all one Face*
Id. Lib. 8. Ep. 21.
Ad Luciferum.
^Hospher, appear; why do our joys delay
When Caesar's coming only waits for Day?
(...) begs thy haste; on slow Boots's Carr
(...) thou not ride, thou mov'st so slowly, Star?
^^ift-footed Cyllarus, thou might have took,
(...) his saddle now would have forsook.
^hy do thou longer stop the longing Sun?
^^^thus, and Aethon beat, and snort to run:
(...) Memnon's Mother watches till you come.
^or will the Stars give place to greater Light,
(...) stay with the Moon expecting Caesar's sight.
^ow, Caesar, come by Night, we shall have Ray:
(...) People cannot, where thou art, want Day.
Id. Lib. 8. Ep. 35.
In pessimos Conjuges.
SInce you are a-like in Manners, and in Life,
A wicked Husband, and a wicked Wife,
I wonder much you are so full of strife!
Id. Lib. 8. Ep. 53.
In Catullam.
THE Fairest of Women, that have been, or ar^
Thou art, yet Cheaper than them all by far;
To me Catulla, what a triumph 't were
That thou were, or more Honest, or less Fair.
Id. Lib. 8. Ep. 59.
In Vacerram.
BUT Antic Poets thou admirest none,
And only prayest them are dead, and gone.
I beg your pardon, good Vacerra, I
Cannot on such terms find in my Heart to die.
Id. Lib. 7. Ep. 100.
De Vetula.
You Are soft to touch; charming to hear; unseen
You Are both: but neither, take away the Screen.
Id. Lib. 8. Ep. 41.
Ad Faustinum.
SAd Athenagoras naught presents me now,
As in December he was wont to do.
If Athenagoras be sad, or no,
I Will see: I Am sure, that he has made me so.
Id. Lib. 11. Ep. 103.
In Lydiam.
HE did not lie, that said, thy Skin was fair,
But not thy Face; so one, and the other are.
Thy Face, if thou sit'st mute, and hold'st thy peace
Even as in one ^mbost, or Painted is.
But, as thou talk, thou loosest off thy Skin
And no ones Tongue more hurts themselves than thine:
Take heed the Aedile thee, nor hear, nor see,
As often as Statues speak it is a Prodigy.
Id. Lib. 12. Ep. 7.
De Ligia.
IF by her Hairs Ligia's Age be told,
It Is soon cast up, than she is three years old.
Id. Lib. 12. Ep. 20.
Ad Fabullam.
THat Themison has no Wife, how't comes to pass,
^hou ask'st: why Themison, a Sister has.
Horat. Lib 1. Carmin. Ode 8*
Ad Lydia.
TEll me, for God's sake, Lydia, why
Thy Sa^aris thou do with love destroy.
The Glorious Field why should he shun,
Grown now impatient of the Dust, and Sun
Why not in Warlike bravery ride,
Curbing with bits the Gallick Horses pride
Why fears he Tybers yellow Flood,
And flies the Olive more than Vipers Blood
Why not still crushed with Arms, whose art
Was famed for clean delivery of his Dart?
Why does he, Lydia, now lie hid,
As once, they say, the Son of Theti^ did
Before Troy's wept for Funeral,
Lest in his own Apparel he might fall
Subject to Slaughter, and the Harms
Of bloody Lycians unrelenting Arms*
De Fortuna* an sit caeca.
Epig. ex Johann. Secundo.
WHY do they speak the Goodess Fortune blind?
Because She Is only to the unjust inclined;
This Reason naught Her blindness does declare,
They only Fortune need who Wicked are.
Tria Mala ex eodem.
THE three great Evils of Man's life,
Are Fire, Water, and a Wife,
Id. Lib. Ep. 15.
In Neaeram.
'TWas Night, and Phaebe in a Heaven bright
Shone amongst the lesser sparks of Light,
When, thou (to wound the Gods) vowd'st to fulfill
The strictest tenures of my will,
With straighter Arms, than ever the Ivy tall
Embraced the aged Oak withal;
Whilst Wolves devour, and whilst Orion stirs
The Winter Main to Mariners;
And that this ^ ove should mutual last, whilst air
Wantoned with Phaebus's uncut Hair.
Neaera false on my good Nature wan
Too much; were Flaccus ought of Man,
He Would not to another yield thee Night by Night;
But seek another Love in spite:
Nor would his Anger so provoked give place,
To the Charms of thy offensive Face.
But, Thou, who ere more happy, and now grown
Proud usher'st my Affliction,
Thou may be rich in Cattle, and in Land,
Pactolus may flow to thy Hand;
Thou may be too a Pythagorean
Overcome with Beauty Nerean.
Yet thou, alas! wilt mourn her change to see,
When I by turn shall laugh at thee.
ODE De Theophile.
Par.
I.
THy Beauties, Dearest Isis, have
Disturbed Nature at their sight,
Thine Eyes to Love his blindness gave,
Such is the vigor of their light:
The Gods too only minding thee,
Let the World err at liberty.
II.
And having in the Suns bright Eye
Thy glances counterfeited seen,
Even their Hearts, my Sweet, thereby
So sensibly have wounded been:
That, but they are fixed, they would come to see,
And gaze upon their Creature thee.
III.
Believe me, in this humor They
Of things below have little Care,
Of good, or ill, we do; or say,
Then since, Heaven lets thee love me, Dear,
Without revenging on thine Eye,
Or striking me in Iealousy.
IV.
^hou may securely in mine Arms
And warm Womb of my wanton bed,
^each me to unravel all thy Charms*
Thou nothing, Isis, need dread:
Since Gods themselves had happy been,
Could all their power have made thee Sin.
Elegy de Theophile.
SInce that sad Day, a sadder Farewell did
My Eyes the object of my ^lame forbid,
My Soul, and Sense so disunited are,
That being thus deprived of thee, My Fair,
I find me so distractedly alone,
That from my self, methinks my self am gone.
To me invisible's the Sun's fair Light,
Nor do I feel the so^t repose of Night:
I Poison taste in my repast most sweet;
And sink wherever I dispose my feet;
My Life all company, but Death, has lost,
Chloris, so dear the love I bear thee cost.
Oh Gods! who all the joys we have bestow,
Do you with them always give torments too?
Can that, we call Good Fortune never hit
Humane designs, but ill must follow it?
If equally you interweave the Fate
With good, and ill of those you love, and hate.
In vain I sue to her, I so adore,
In vain her help that has no Power implore.
For, as black Night pursues the glorious Sun,
The greatest Good does but some Ill fore-run.
When handsome Paris lived with Helen fair,
He saw his Fortune raised above his Care;
But Fate severely did revenge that bliss,
For (as with time his Fortune changed is.)
From his Delights sprang a debate, that Fire
Brought to old Troy, and massacred his Sire.
And though in that subversion there appear^
Such sad mishaps of Blood, of Fire, and Tears*
Yet by that Heavenly Face I so adore,
I swear, for love of thee, I suffer more.
For so long absent from thy gracious Eyes,
Methinks I banished am the Deities.
And that from Heaven with Thunder wrapped in Flame*
To the Center I precipitated am.
Since I left thee, my Pleasures in their Tomb
^ye dead, and I their Mourner am become.
With all Delights my Thoughts distasted are,
And only to dislike the World take care;
Which as complying with my peevish Will,
Does nothing, I protest, but vex me still.
In Paris, like an Hermit, I retire,
And in one Object limit my Desire.
Where ever my Eyes seek to divert my Mind,
I bear the Prison, where I am confined.
My Blood is sir'd, and my Soul wounded lies,
By the golden Shaft shot from thy killing Eyes*
All the Temptations, that I daily see,
Serve only to confirm my Faith to thee.
The usual helps, that humane Reason bless,
To render a Man's Passion some^hing less,
Stir mine up more to suffer cheerfully
The obliging Torments, that do make me dye.
My Prudence, by my Courage, is withstood,
As by a rock the fury of the Flood.
I love my Frenzy, and I could not love
Him of my Friends, that should it disapprove;
Nor do I think, my reasonable part
Will ever approach me, whilst thou absent art.
I find my Thoughts uncessantly approve
The torturing effects of faithful Love.
I find, that Day it self shares in my pain;
The Air's o'respread with Clouds, the Earth with Rain;
That horrid Visions in my starting Sleep,
My Souls in their illusions tangled keep:
That all the apprehensions in my Head
Are Madness, by my feverish Passion bred,
That at hushed midnight I imagine Storms,
And see a Shipwreck, in its dreadfull'st Forms,
Fall from the top of an high precipice
Into the Jaws of an obscure Abyss:
And there a thousand ugly Serpents see,
Hissing to advance their scaly Crests at me.
I cannot once dream of a false Delight,
But cruel Death straight seizes me in spite.
But when Heaven (weary to have gone thus far)
Gives, that I live under a better Star;
And when the unconstant Stars, by their changed power,
Present me for my Pains one happy hour;
My Soul will find it self changed at thy sight,
And of all past mishaps revenged quite.
Though in Nights Sleep my Spirits buried lay,
Thy sight, my Dear, would lend them beams of Day.
Thy Voice has over me the self same power,
With Zephyr's Breath over the Earth's withered
Flower:
The vigorous Springs makes all things fresh and new;
The blowing Rose puts on her blushing hue;
The Heavens more gay, the Days more fair appear*
Aurora dressing to the Birds gives ear,
The wild Beasts of the Forest free from Care,
Do feel their Blood, and Youth renewed are,
And naturally obedient to their Sense,
Without remorse, their Pleasures recommence.
I only in the season all are blessed,
With cruel, and continual Griefs oppressed,
Alone in Winter, sad, and comfortless,
See not the glorious Spring, that we should bl^ss.
I only see the Forest fair forsook,
'Th' Earths surface Desert, and the frozen Brook,
And, as if charmed, cannot once taste the Fruit,
That in this season to all Palats suit.
But when those Suns my adoration claim,
Shall with their Rays once reinforce my Flame,
My Spring will then return more sweet, and fair
By thousand times than those,' Heavens Lamp gives, are,
If ever Fate allow mine Eyes that grace,
My Joys will transcend those of humane Race,
Nothing, but that, Oh Gods! nothing but that
Do I desire to ba^^le Death, and Fate.
Out of Astrea.
MADRIGALL.
I Think I could my Passions sway,
Though great, as Beauties power can move
To such obedience, as to say,
I cannot; or I do not love.
But to pretend another Flame,
Since I adore thy conquering Eye,
To thee, and Truth, were such a shame,
I cannot do it, though I dye.
If I must one, or the other do,
Then let me die, I beg of you.
Stanzes upon the Death of Cleon.
Out of Astrea.
I.
THE Beauty which so soon to Cinders turned,
By Death of her Humanity deprived,
Like Lightning vanished, like the Bolt it burned:
So great this Beauty was, and so short lived.
II.
Those Eyes so practiced once in all the Arts,
That loyal Love attempted; or ever knew:
Those fair Eyes now are shut, that once the hearts
Of all that saw their luster, did subdue.
III.
If this be true, Beauty is ravished* hence,
Love vanquished droops, that ever conquered,
And she who gave Life by her influence,
Is, if she live not in my Bosom, dead.
IV.
Henceforth what happiness can Fortune send,
Since Death, this abstract of all Joy has won;
Since Shadows do the Substance still attend,
And that our good does but our ill fore-run?
V.
It seems (my Cleon) in thy rising morn,
That Destiny thy whole Days course had
bound,
And that, thy Beauty, dead, as soon as born,
Its fatal Hear^e, has in its Cradle ^ound.
VI.
No, no, thou shall not die, I Death will prove,
Who Life by thy sweet Inspiration drew;
If Lovers live in that which does them love;
Thou liv'st in me, who ever loved most true*
VII.
If I do live, Love then will have it known,
That even Death it self he can control,
Or, as a God, to have his Power shown,
Will that I live without of Heart, or Soul.
VIII.
But, Cleon, if Heavens unresis^ed will
'Point thee, of Death the inhumane Fate to try,
Love to that Fate equals my Fortune still,
Thou by my mourning, by the Death I dye.
IX.
Thus did I my immortal Sorrows Breath,
Mine Eyes to Fountains turned of springing Woe;
But could not stay the wounding Hand of Death,
Lament; but not lessen misfortune so.
X.
When Love with me having bewailed the loss
Of this sweet Beauty, thus much did express,
Cease, cease to weep, this mourning is too gross,
Our Tears are still than our misfortune less.
Song of the inconstant Hylas*
Out of Astrea.
I.
IF one disdain me, then I fly
Her Cruelty, and her Disdain;
And ever the Morning guild the Sky,
Another Mistress do obtain.
They err who hope by force to move
A Woman's Heart to like; or love.
II.
I^ often falls out that they, who in
Discretion seem us to despise,
Nourish a greater Fire within,
Although perhaps concealed it lies.
Which we, when once we quit our rooms,
Do kindle for the next that comes.
III.
The faithful Fool that obstinat^
Pursues a cruel Beauty's Love,
To him, and to his Truth ingrate
Idolater does he not prove?
That from his pow'rless, Idol, never
Receives a Medicine for his Fever.
IV.
They say the unwearied Lovers pains
By instance meet with good success;
For he by force his end obtains:
It Is an odd method of Address,
To what Design so e're't relate,
Still, still to be importunate.
V.
Do but observe the hourly Fears
Of your pretended faithful Lover,
Nothing but Sorrow, Sighs, and Tears,
You in his chearfull'st Looks discover;
As though the Lovers Sophistry
Were nothing but to whine, and cry.
VI.
^^^ght he by a Man's Name be styled,
that (losing the Honor of a Man)
^hines for his Pepin, like a Child
^hipt and sent back to School again,
Or rather Fool that thinks amiss,
He loves, but knows not what Love is?
VII.
(...) my part, I Will decline this Folly,
(...) others harms (thank Fate) grown wise,
^^ch Dotage begets Melancholy,
^ must profess Loves Liberties;
And never angry am at all
At them who me inconstamt call.
SONNET.
Out of Astrea.
SInce I must now eradicate the Flame,
Which, seeing you, Love in my Bosom placed,
And the Desires which thus long could last,
Kindled so well, and nourisht in the same.
Since Time, that first saw their Original,
Must triumph in their end, and Victor be,
Let Us have a brave Design, and to be free,
Cut off at once the Briar-rose, and all.
^et us put out the Fire Love has begot,
^^eak the tough Cord tied with so fast a knot*
And voluntary take a brave adieu.
^o shall we nobly conquer Love and Fate,
and at the Liberty of choice do that,
Which time its self, at last, would make us do.
A PARAPHRASE.
THE Beauty that must me delight,
Must have Skin, and Teeth Snow white:
Black arched Brows, black sprightly Eyes,
And a black Beauty 'twixt her Th -- ghs;
So^t blushing Cheeks, a Person tall,
Long Hair, long Hands, and Fingers small;
Short Teeth; and Feet that little are,
Dilated Brows, and Haunches fair:
Fine silken Hair, Lips full, and red,
Small Nose, with little Breast and Head:
All these in one, and that one kind,
Would make a Mistress to my Mind.
An Essay upon Buchanan's First Book de Sphaera. Never perfected.
HOW various are the World's great parts I sing*
And by what League the jarring Seeds of things
Agree in one, the Causes Motion breed
Why Darkness Light, and Coldness Heat succeed,
And why the Suns, and the Moons horned Light
Suffer Eclipses of o're-shading Night.
Thou who the Temples, walled with sacred Light.
(Impenetrable to our weaker sight)
Inhabit'st, holy Father of the Skies,
Propitious be to this bold Enterprise,
Whilst to the World we do Thy Acts reveal,
And the immense Work of the Pole unseal;
That people ignorant of Truth, a Mind
From Sloth, and long-lived Error so refined)
May lift to Heaven, and whilst amazed, the Ball
They so embraced with a Flaming Wall,
And wheeling times return in certain course,
May own the Mover, and admire his Force,
that props so great a Pile, that with the bit
Of his Eternal Law does govern it;
And in His secret Council has decreed
(...) fit for Man's innumerable Need.
And thou, young Mercury Tymolion,
Thy Father's, and thy Country's hopeful Son,
Go, my Companion, in thy tender Years,
C^^^alion Woods, and sacred Founts draw near,
^requent that unknown Peace, and Nymphs soft Choires
Subject to loss; nor avaritious Fires.
The time will come (when time has given Thee Force)
That thou shall bravely, with thy foaming Horse,
Rush into War, and gloriously advance
In dusty Fields thy Country's threatening Lance:
Till then, thy Sire, either shall Lombards deign
T'orecome, wild Germans, and the Warlike Spain
By Force; or Conduct: Or with Gallick spoil,
Dazzling the Sun, deck Calidonia's Soil.
Caetera desunt.
Cn. Cornelii Galli; vel potius Maximiani Elegia 1. Trans.
WHY, envious Age, do thou my End delay
Why in this wearied Trunk delight to stay
My captive Life from such a Prison free,
Death now is Rest, when Life is Misery.
I Am no more what I was, but sunk, and old,
And what remains is languishing and cold.
The day that young Men chears, offends mine Eye
And (which is worse than Death) I wish to die
I was my Youth, whilst Wit, and Beaut^ crowned,
An Orator throughout the World renowned.
The Poets charming lies full often I feigned,
And by fictitious Tales, true Titles gained.
In all Disputes of Wit the Wreath bore I;
And have my Eloquence reputed high,
High, and immortal. Oh! what then remains
Worthy an old Man's Living; or his Pains?
Nor less than these the Beauty of my Face,
Which (though the rest are wanting) wins much Grace.
Manhood to that, which richer far than Gold,
Makes Wit a greater price, and Luster hold.
If I, with Dogs, the Thickets would surround,
The conquered Prey fell at my Lances Wound;
Or would I loose Shafts from the bending Yew,
With great applause untamed Beasts I slew;
Or with the sinewy Wrestlers if I tried,
With my strong Nerves their oily Limbs I tied:
^ow at the Race I all that came outrun;
And now in Tragic Song the Buskin won.
This mixture of good things my worth increast,
^^ill various Works of Art advance us best:
For whatsoever things simply delight,
Joined to another Grace, shine out more bright;
With such a Mine of Fortitude adorned,
All threatening Dangers I contemned, and scorned*
Bare-head I made the Winds and Storms retreat,
Feeling no Winters Cold; nor Summer's Heat;
I swam the yellow Tyber's gelid Stream,
And fearless would the doubtful Current s^em.
With the least Sleep I could forsake my Bed,
And with the slend'rest fare be amply fed.
Or if a drunken Guest surpised my Walls,
To waste the forlorn day in Bacchanals;
Lyaeus self struck Sail, amazed, and dumb,
And he that always conquered, fell overcome.
Nor is it an easy thing the Mind to bend
At once with two Opposers to contend.
And in this kind of strife they say of Yore,
Great Socrates the Victor's Trophy bore.
And thus they say the rigid Cato won;
Things are not ill themselves, unless ill done.
To all things dreadless I opposed my Face,
And to my constant Mind Mischance gave place.
With little pleased I still loved to be poor,
And being Lord of all, could wish no more.
Thou only, wretched Age, do me subdue,
To whom who conquers all things else must bow.
It Is into thee we fall, and what at last
Decays, and withers, thou alone do wast.
Hetruria ravished with these parts of mine,
Wished that I would with her fair Daughters twine:
But Liberty to me was far more sweet,
Than all the Pleasures of the Nuptial Sheet.
In my gay Youth I walked about proud Rome,
To view what Virgins there might overcome,
Which might be won; or which was fit to seek;
When at their sight, soft blushes stained my Cheek.
Now runs a smiling Girl her self to hide,
And yet not so, as not to be descried;
But by some single part to be revealed,
Gladder by much to be so ill concealed.
Thus did I fare, and acceptable pass
To all, and thus a lusty Suitor was,
And only so: For Nature my strong Breast,
In Modesty and Chastity had dressed.
For whilst I strove the choices Fair to wed,
I wore out Cold even to a Widdow'd Bed.
They all to me ill bred, or ugly seemed,
And I none worthy my Embraces deemed.
I hated lean ones, fat were a Disease;
Neither the low; nor yet the tall would please.
With middle Forms I ever loved to play,
And in the midst most Graces ever lay.
Here of our softest parts lies all the bliss,
And in this part Loves Mother seated is.
A slender Lass not lean, I loved to choose,
For Flesh is fittest for a ^leshy use:
One whose most strait Embraces would delight,
Not one whose Bones should goar my Ribs in Fight.
I loved no Fair, unless her Cheeks were spread
With native Roses of the purest red.
This Tincture Venus owns above the rest,
And loves the Beauty in her Flower dressed.
A long white Neck, and golden flowing Hair,
Have long been known to make a Woman fair.
But black Brows, and black Eyes catch my Desire,
And still, when seen* have set my Heart of fire*
I ever loved a red, and swelling Lip,
Where a full Bowl of Kisses I might sip,
A long round Neck than Gold appeared more rare,
And the most wealthy Gem outshone by far.
Ill fits it Age, to speak his wanton prime,
And what was decent then, is now a Crime:
For various things do different Men delight,
Nor yet are all things for all Ages right;
Things apt for one Age, at the last may grow
Uncomely for the self-same Man to do.
The Child by play, the old Man's by stead'ness seen,
But the young Man's Behavior lies between.
This silent sadness best becomes, and that,
Is better liked of for his Mirth, and Chat:
For rolling times does all things turn, and sway,
And suffers none to run one certain way.
Now that a long unprofitable Age,
Lies heavy on me, I would quit the Stage.
Life's hard Condition gripes the Wretched still*
Nor is Death swayed by any humane Will.
The Wretch wishes to die, but Death retires,
Yet when Men dread him, then the Slave aspires.
But I alas, that ma^gre all my Arts,
Have been so long dead in so many parts,
On Earth I think shall never end my Days,
But enter quick the dark Tartarean ways.
My Taste, and Hearing's ill, mine Eyes are such,
Nay I can scarce distinguish by my Touch:
No Smell is sweet; nor Pleasure; who'd believe
A Man could sensibly his Sense out live?
Lethe's Oblivion does my Mind embrace,
And yet I can remember what I was.
The Limbs diseased, the Mind no Work contrives,
The thought of ills all other aim deprives.
I sing no Lyricks now, that dear Delight,
With all my Voices Grace, is perished quite;
Frequent no Exercise, no Odes rehearse,
And only with my Pains, and Griefs converse;
The Beauty of my Shape and Face are fled,
And my revolted Form 'fore-speaks me dead.
For fair, and shining Age has now put on
A bloodless, Funeral Complexion.
My Skin's dried up, my Nerves unpliant are,
And my poor Limbs my Nails plow up, and tear,
My cheerful Eyes, now with a constant Spring,
Of Tears bewail their own sad Suffering;
And those soft Lids that once secured mine Eye,
Now rude, and bristled grown, does drooping lie,
Bolting mine Eyes, as in a gloomy cav^.
Which there on Furies, and grim Objects rave.
'Twould fright the full-blown Gallant to behold
The dying Object of a Man so old;
Nor can you think that once a Man he was,
Of humane reason, who no portion has.
The Letters split, when I consult my Book,
And every Leaf I turned does broader look.
In Darkness do I dream I see the Light,
When Light is Darkness to my perished Sight.
Without a Night t'oreshade him, the bright Day
Is from my Sense deprived, and snatched away.
Who can deny, that wrapped in Nights Embrace,
I groping lie in the Tartarean place?
What mad Adviser would a Man persuade
By his own Wish to be more wretched made?
Diseases now invade, and Dangers swarm,
Sweet Banquets now, and Entertainments harm.
We Are forced to wean our selves from grateful things,
And though we live, avoid the sweets Life brings*
And me, whom late, no accident could bend,
Now the mere Aliments of Life offend.
I would be full, am sick when I am so,
Should fast, but abstinence is hurtful too.
It Is changed to surfeit now what once was Meat,
And that is now nauseous, which before was sweet.
Venus, and Bacchus's Rites, now fruitless are,
That use to lull this Life's contingent Care.
Nature alone panting, and pros^rate lies,
Caught in the ruin of her proper Vice.
Julip; nor Cordial now no Comfort give;
Nor ought that should a Patient sick relieve:
But with their Matter their Corruption have,
And only serve to importune my Grave.
When I attempt to prop my falling Frame,
The Letts opposed, make my Endeavors lame*
Until my Dissolutions tardy day
All helps of Arts do with the thing decay*
And by th'appearance since the afflicted Mind
Can no diversion, nor advantage find;
(...) it not hard we may not from Men's Eyes
Cloak, and conceal Ages Indecencies.
Unseeming Spruceness the old Man discommends;
And in old Men only to live offends.
With Mirth, Feasts, Songs, the old must not dispense,
^O wretched they whose Joys are an offense!
What should I do with Wealth, whose use being taken,
Although I swim in store, I poor remain:
Nay it is a Sin to what we have got to trust,
And what is our own to violate unjust.
So thirsty Tantalus the neighbor Stream,
And Fruit would taste, but is forbidden them.
I but the Treas'rer am of my own Pelf,
Keeping for others what is denied my self:
And like the Fell Hesperian Dragon grown,
Defend that golden Fruit's no more my own.
This above all is that augments my Woes,
And robs my troubled Mind of all Repose.
I strive to keep things I could never gain,
And ignorantly hold some things in vain.
Continued Fears do credulous age invade;
And the old Man dreads the ills himself has made,
Applauds the past, condemns the present Years;
And only what he thinks Truth, Truth appears;
He only learned is, has all the skill,
And thinking himself wise, is wider still.
Who though with Trouble he much Talk affords,
Faulters, forgets, and dribbles out his Words;
The Hearer's tired, but he continues long;
O wretched Age, only in prating strong!
Idly he talks, and strains his feeble Voice,
Whilst those he pleased before, laugh at his noise.
Their Mirth exalts him, he still louder grows,
And dotingly his own Reproach allows:
These are Death's Firstlings, Age does this way flow,
And with slow pace creeps to the Shades below.
Whilst the same Color Mien, nor pace appear
In the poor Traveller that lately were.
My Garment from my vvither'd Limbs hangs down,
And what before too short, too long is grown.
We strangely are contracted, and decrease,
A Man would think our very Bones were less.
Our burdened Age cannot the Heavens behold,
But prone still looks upon the parent Mold.
On three Feet first we halt, on four next fall,
And on the Earth like helpless Infants crawl.
To their first Birth and Mother all things tend,
And what was nothing shall in nothing end.
Hence it is that leaning Age the senseless Ground,
Does with his bending Crutch so often wound.
And with thick steps making a tardy way,
In a hoarse Voice may thus be thought to say;
Receive me, Mother, to remorse incline,
And in thy Lap cherish these Limbs of mine.
The Children vvhoot me vvheresoe're I go;
Why will thou let thy Birth so monstrous grow?
I with the Gods have now no more to do,
Each Office of my Life I have run through.
My waste Carcass then at last restore,
To the cold Clay from whence I came before.
To spin a miserable Life in smart,
Of a Maternal Care can be no part.
Then propping his vveak Joints, he feebly cravvls,
And on his weary Bed neglected falls.
Lying like livid Corpse of Life bereft,
Only the rafters of the Building left.
Should I still lie, and lying win more space,
Yet who would think me in a living place?
It Is pain to live, with heat we burn, not warm,
The Clouds offend, the Air, and Coldness harm.
The Dew, and soft Showers that in April flow,
With Autumns jocund Days offensive grow.
Coughs, Phlegm, and Leprosies afflict the old,
And ages minutes by his Groans are told.
How can I him a living Man believe,
Whom Light, and Air, by which he pants, grieve?
Those gentle Sleeps which other Mortals ease,
Scarce in a Winters Night mine Eyelids seize;
Or if it come to shade my setting Beams,
It Is clad in all the shapes of frightful Dreams.
The softest Feather-beds seem hard as Stones,
And lightest Quilts oppress my naked Bones.
I quit my Bed at midnight to the Floor,
And suffer much, I may not suffer more.
Our own Infirmities our selves invade,
And by the way we hate, we are Captives made*
Our Entrails suffer Dissolution,
By which the noble Structure is overthrown.
Unlookt for Age, o'reburthen'd with these things,
Has learnt to bow under the weight he brings.
Who therefore would desire in Griefs so sour,
When the Minds vanished, to prolong his hour?
Better die once, than dying live by far,
Making the Trunk the Senses Sepulcher;
But I repine not, my time wasted is,
And Nature's shame to open is amiss.
Sinewy Bulls in time invalid grow,
The Horse that once was fair's misshapen now.
Time tames the fury of the Lions wild,
And Age will make the Caspian Tigers mild.
Antiquity the Stones themselves will race,
And to old Time all Natures Works give place:
But I were best prevent mischance to come,
And by one blow anticipate my doom.
To haste a certain Ruin is less pain,
Than is the fear of Mischie^s that remain.
But in the other World what Torments are,
Suspends, and well becomes and old Man's Care.
Contempt, and Mischiefs ev'rywhere attend,
And in distress I find no helping Friend.
The Boys, and Girls deride me now forlorn,
And but to call me Sir, now think it scor^.
They jeer my Countenance, and my feeble Pace,
And scoff that nodding Head that awful was:
And though I nothing see, I can perceive,
My Pains by this contempt redoubled grieve.
He Is happy Merits a smooth Life to spend,
And shut his Days up with a constant end.
That Is hard at last we Reputation call,
From which height tumbling, still augments the fall.
Ad Furium, Ep. 23.
Ex Catullo.
THough Furious Servant have, nor Chest,
Spider, nor Fire, nor creeping Beast,
He has a Sire, and a Stepdame yet,
Whose greedy Teeth a Flint would eat.
And doubtless leads a happy Life
With His Father, and his wooden Wife.
No Wonder; for their Healths are clear*
They eat together, nothing fear.
No Conflagrations, Ruins great,
No impious Facts, nor foul Deceit.
(...) accidental dangers scorn,
and having Bodies dry as horn;
(...) what we still do dryer hold
^he Sun, or hunger; or the cold,
amongst the happy are enrolled.
(...) sweat; nor salivation flows
from thee; no drop hangs at thy Nose;
and to this cleanness, cleaner far.
^hy A -- se is than a Salt-Seller,
(...) Ten times in a Year does Sh -- te,
and that parcht Pease; or Stones does quite
(...) hardness pass, which if thou list
(...) rub, and crumble in thy Fist:
^hou may securely do it, and
^e're stain the Whiteness of thy Hand.
These Benefits do not despise,
^or rashly, Furius, lightly prize;
^et begging then for shame alone,
^or thou art rich enough for one.
De Catella Publ. Mart. Ep. 110. Lib. 1.
PAR.
AS Lesbias Sparrow, Tricksy wanton is,
And purer than the Turtle's Kiss;
Fairer than Maids, decked in their Morning beams,
And of more price than Indian Gems.
Tricksy, that little Bitch, is my delight,
My Sport by Day, my Love by Night.
She apprehends her Master's joy, and woe,
And wanton's, or's dejected so.
And if in play, or love she quest, or whine,
Men think she speaks in Language fine.
She rouses with me at the dawning peep,
And by my side al Night does sleep;
So calm, so still, no sigh does interpose
Betwixt me, and my sweet repose:
Or if an accident unlooked for come,
To ease the gripings of her Womb,
(...) slips no drop of any kind to stain;
Or to ill sent the counterpain:
(...) nimbly rises up, and whining tells
What her necessity compells.
(...) innate Chastity adorns the Beast
She knows not lust; nor have we guest,
^^roughout mankind, one worthy to invade,
The treasures of so fair a Maid.
(...) lest the Fate of her extremest Day
Should snatch her Memory away,
(...) wisely have in cunning color set,
The Beauty of her counterfeit;
^^hich fair Tricksy you so like may see,
That She is not more like to She.
(...) fine expose her, and her Shade to view
You Will think both painted; or both true.
(...) ad Pictorem Ausonii Epig.
^^'Express me in a Face! vain Painter why?
Or court an unknown Goddess with thine Eye?
From Hyre, and Tongue, I Am sprung mother of vai^
Report, who Voice without a Mind retain.
Catching last Syllab'es from their dying tone,
And mocking others Language with my own.
Shrill Echo only in the Ear is found;
But if thou wilt paint her like, go paint a Sound.
De Myrone and Laid Ausonii. Epig.
OF Lais hoary Myron begged a Night,
But she repulst him with a slight.
He soon perceived the cause, and his white Head
With shining black soon overspread.
Myron the same in Face, but not in Hue,
Returns his Love-suit to renew.
But Face and Hair compared by the Dame,
Thinking him like, but not the same.
Perhaps the same Top, yet disposed to play;
She to the subtle Youth could say;
^o^dling, forbear to importune me so,
Thy Father I denied, but now.
De Vita beata.
Paraphrased from the Latin.
COme you are deceived, and what you do
Esteem a happy Life's not so;
He is not happy that excels
(...) L^pidary's Bagatells;
Nor he, that when he sleeps, does lie
Under a stately Canopy;
Nor he, that still supinely hides,
(...) easy Down his lazy Sides;
Nor he, that Purple wears and sups!
Luxurious Draughts in Golden Cups;
Nor he, that loads with Princely fare,
His bowing Tables whilst they will bear;
Nor he, that has each spacious Vault
With Deluges of Plenty fraught;
Cul'd from the fruitful Libyan Fields,
When Autumn his best Harvest yields:
But he whom no mischance affrights;
No Popular applause delights,
That can unmoved, and undismayed
Confront a Ruffins threatening Blade.
Who can do this; that Man alone
Has Power, Fortune to Disthrone.
Q. Cicero de Mulierum levitate. Translat.
COmmit a Ship unto the Wind;
But not thy Faith to Women kind;
For The Oceans waving Billows are
Safer than Woman's Faith by far.
No Woman's Good, and if there be,
Hereafter, such a Thing as she:
^Tis by I know not what of Fate,
That can from Bad, a Good Create.
Epig. de Monsieur Maynard.
SOme Men of Sense, and who pretend to be
Ancient Well-willers to your Family,
Photi^, give out, that Baud Men may thee call
And do thy modesty no wrong at all.
Thou swear'st they Infamously lie
And that no Word of Verity
They ever spoke, then; or before:
And yet it cannot be denied
But by thy Cuckold Husbands side,
Thou every Night do lay a Whore.
In Coccam.
Epig. de Monsieur Maynard.
THy Cheeks having their Roses shed,
And thy whole frame through Age become
So loathsome for all use in Bed,
That it is much fitter for a Tomb:
Cocca thou should not be so vain,
(Although thy Eloquence be great)
As to expect it should obtain,
That I should do the filthy Feat.
And that same Engine in your Hood
You Cherish, Court, and Flatter so,
Now you have made him barely stood;
Is not so charitable though,
As in his vigorous Youth to be
A Crutch to your Antiquity.
Epig. de Monsieur Maynard.
OLd Fop, why should you take such pains
To Paint, and Perriwig it so?
My nobler Love alas! disdains
To stoop so infamously low.
Time that does mow the fairest Flowers,
Has made so very bold with yours,
You should expect to be denied:
The Footmen can no more endure you,
And, if no sport in Hell, assure you
You Will never more be Occupy'd.
Epig. writ in Calistas Prayer Book. By Monsieur Malherbe.
WHilst you are Deaf to Love, you my,
Fairest Calista, Weep, and Pray,
And yet alas! no Mercy find:
Not but God's Merciful it is true:
But can you think he will grant to you,
What you deny to all Mankind.
ODE Bacchique de Monsieur Racau.
I.
NOw that the Day's short, and forlorn
Of Melancholic Capricorn
To Chimny-corners Men translate:
Drown we our Sorrows in the Glass,
And let the thoughts of Warfare pass,
The Clergy and the Third Estate.
II.
Maynard, I know what thou have writ,
That sprightly issue of thy Wit,
Will live whilst there are Men to read:
But what if they recorded be
In Memories Temple, boots it thee,
When thou art gnawnby Worms, and dead?
III.
Henceforth those fruitless Studies spare,
Let Us rather Drink until we stare*
Of this delicious Juice of ours:
Which does in excellence precede
The beverage which Ganimede
Into the Immortals Geb^et pours.
IV.
The Juic^ that sparkles in this Glass,
Make tedi^us Years, like Days, to pass;
Yet makes us younger still become;
By this from laboring Thoughts are chas't,
The Sorrows of those ills are past,
And terror of the ills to come.
V.
Let us Drink brimmers then, Time's fleet,
And steals away with winged Feet
Halling us with him to our Urn:
In vain we sue to it to stay;
For Years like Rivers slide away,
And never, never do return.
VI.
When the Spring comes attired in Green
Then Winter flies, and is not seen,
New Tides do still supply the Main:
But when our frolic Youth's once gone,
And Age has taken Possession;
Time never restores us that again.
VII.
Death's Laws are universal, and
In Princes Palaces command,
As well as in the Poorest Hut:
We Are to the Parcae subject all
The Threads of Clowns, and Monarchs shall
Be both by the same Cizo^s cut.
VIII.
Their rigours, which all things de^ace,
Will ravish in a little space
Whatever we most lasting make;
And soon will lead us out to drink
Beyond the Pitchy Rivers brink
The Waters of oblivious Lake.
Lyrick.
Ex Cornelio Gallo.
LYdia, thou lovely Maid, whose White
The Milk, and Lilly does outvi^,
The Pale and Blushing Roses light,
Or polisht Indian Ivory.
Dishevel, sweet, thy yellow Hair,
Whose ray does burnisht Gold disprize,
Dissolve thy Neck so brightly fair,
That does from Snowy Shoulders rise.
Virgin, unvail those starry Eyes,
Whose Sable Brows like Arches spread;
Unvail those Cheeks, where the Rose lies
Streaked with the Tyrian Purples Red.
Lead me those Lips with Coral lined,
And kisses mild of Doves impart,
Thou ravishest away my Mind,
Those gentle kisses steal my Heart.
Why suck'st thou from my panting Breast
The Youth^ul vigor of my Blood?
Hide those ^wine-Apples, ripe, if pressed
To spring in to a Milky-flood.
From thy expanded Bosom, breathe
Perfumes Arabia does not know;
Thy every part does Love bequeath,
From thee all excellencies ^low.
Thy Bosoms killing White then shade,
Hide that temptation from mine Eye:
Thou ^eest I languish, cruel Maid;
Will thou then go, and let me dye?
De luxu, and libidine.
Epig. Tho. Mori.
LEt who would die to end his Woes,
Both, Wench, and Tipple, and he goes.
Id. in Avarum.
EPIG.
WIth narrow Soul thou swim'st in glorious Wealth,
Rich to thy Heir: but wretched to thy self.
Id. in Digamos.
EPIG.
WHo having one Wife buried, Marries then,
After one Shipwreck tempts the Sea again.
Stances de Monsieur de Scudery.
I.
FAir Nymph, by whose perfections moved,
My wounded Heart is turned to Flame*
^y all admired, by all approved,
^^dure at least to be beloved,
Although you will not Love again.
II.
Aminta as Unkind, as Fair
What is there that you ought to fear*
^or cruel if I you declare,
And that indeed you cruel are,
Why the reproach may you not hear?
III.
Even reproaches should delight,
If Friendship for me you have none;
And if no anger, I have yet,
Enough perhaps that may invite
Your hatred; or compassion.
IV.
When your Disdain is most severe,
When you most rigorous do prove,
When frowns of anger most you wear;
You still more charming do appear,
And I am more, and more in Love.
V.
Ah! let me, Sweet, your sight enjoy,
Though with the for^eit of my Life;
For fall what will, I Would rather dye,
Beholding you, of present Joy,
Than absent, of a lingering Grief.
VI.
(...) your Eyes lighten till expiring
In flame my Heart a Cinder lie;
^^lling is nobler, than retiring,
(...) in the glory of Aspiring;
It Is brave to tumble from the Sky.
VII.
(...) I would any thing embrace,
Might serve your anger to appease;
(...), if I may obtain my Grace,
^our Steps shall leave no print; nor trace
I will not with Devotion kiss.
VIII.
(Cruel) you will have it so,
No word my passion shall betray;
(...) wounded Heart shall hide its Woe:
(...) if it Sigh, those Sighs will blow,
And tell you what my Tongue would say.
IX.
Should yet your rigor higher rise,
Even those offending Sighs shall cease;
I will my Pain, and Grief disguise:
But (Sweet) if you consult mine Eyes,
Those Eyes will tell you my Distress.
X.
If the utmost my respect can do,
Still more your cruelty displease;
Consult your Face, and that will show
What Love is to such Beauty due,
And to the state of my Disease.
Epitaph Monsieur Maynard*
JOhn, who below here reposes at leisure,
By pilf'ring on all hands, did rake up a Treasu^^^
Above what he e're could have hoped for himself;
(...) was Master of much; but imparted to no Man,
(...) that had he not had a Wife, that was common
Never any Man living had shared of his Wealth.
On Cation a Dwarf.
Epig* de Monsieur Maynard*
THe extended wont of Nature,
As all Men's Judgments will allow,
Never pissed so small a Creature;
Nor such a Mannikin as thou.
One might conceal thee well enough
In the least plet of thy small Ruff;
Alas! thou half a Man art scant:
Go, and show thy Stature ( Cation)
In the gross of some Batallion,
Most bravely mounted on an Ant.
Epig. de Monsieur Maynard.
ANthony feigns him Sick of late,
Only to show how he at home,
Lies in a Princely Bed of State,
And in a nobly furnished Room,
Adorned with Pictures of Vandike's,
A pair of Crystal Candlesticks,
Rich Carpets, Quilts, the Devil, and all*
Then you his careful Friends, if ever,
You wish to cure him of his Fever,
Go lodge him in the Hospital.
In Coccam.
Epig. de Monsieur Maynard.
COcca thou would still be loved; nor wilt abate
Our Primitive ardour, but with Discontent
Although thou know thy Youth bears the same date
With that alas! of the Old Testament.
Thine Eyes no more are Homicides,
And thy warpt front its furrows hides
Under the Paint-house of a Hood.
Now ply thy Beads; thy Name's renouned,
Thou the first Baudy-house have founded,
Has been erected since the Flood.
In Coccam.
Epig. de Monsieur Maynard.
LOrd! how wrinckled is thy Forehead!
And how Gray thy Hair is grown!
Lord! how chink't thy Lips, and aride!
And thy whole Frame turned Skeleton!
Truly, Cocca, I regret thee,
Sure Old Age did undiscreetly,
To be with thy Face so bold:
Henceforth none will pleasure make thee;
But thou purchase of the Laquey,
What thou once the Master sold.
Epig. de Monsieur Maynard.
COme, let us Drink, and drown all Sorrow,
It Is what the Time invites us to,
And who knows whether to morrow
Was ordained for us or no!
Death watches us, and when that Slave
Has once enclosed us in the Grave,
And heaps of Mold upon us hurled;
Farewell good Victuals and good Wine;
I read in no Author of mine
Of Taverns in the other World.
To Agrippa.
The Sixth Ode of Horace. His First Book of Lyricks.
VArius, in living Annals may
To the admiring Universe
Voice out in high Maeonian Verse
Thy Courage, and thy Conquests won,
And what thy Troops by Land, and Sea
Have through thy noble conduct done.
Our Muse, Agrippa, that does fly
An humbler pitch, attempts not these,
T'express Pelides rage; nor ^ly
Vlysse's tedious Voyages:
Nor dips her Plume in those Red Tides,
Flow from the Bloody Parricides
Of^ Pelop's cruel Family:
We nothing to such heights pretend
Since Modesty,
And our weak Muse, who does aspire
No further than the jolly Lyre,
Forbids that we
Should in our vain attempts offend,
And darken with our humble lays,
Thine and great Caesar's Godlike Praise.
Who to his worth can Mars display,
When clad in Arms, whose dreadful Ray,
Puts out the Day?
Or brave Meriones set forth,
When solyl'd in Trojan Dust; or raise^
Fit Trophies to Tydides worth,
Who to the Immortal Gods was made^
A Rival by Minerva's aid?
We Sing of Feasting, and Delights,
Stout Drinking, and the harmless Fights
Of hot young Men, and blushing Maid^
Who when the Foe invades,
Make a faint show,
To Guard what they are conten^
should go.
These are the Subjects of our Song,
In Nights, that else would seem too long,
Did we not wisely prove
The sweets of Jollity, and Love.
Epig. de Monsieur Corneille.
MArtin, Pox on him, that impudent Devil,
That now only lives by his Shifts,
By borrowing of Dribblets, and Gifts,
For a forlorn Guinny I lent him last Day,
Which I was assured he never would pay;
On my own Paper would needs be so civil,
To give me a Note of his Hand,
But I did the Man so well understand,
I had no great mind to be doubly trapan'd,
And therefore told him 'twas needless. to do it:
For said I, I shall not be hasty to Dun ye,
And it is enough surely to part with my Money,
Without losing my Paper to boot.
Epig. de Monsieur Cotin.
AFter so many Works of various kinds
Dawen with so great pains has writ,
And all the recompense the Poet finds,
Is but the poor contempt of Wit;
If Dawen now forbear to write on still,
It Is that he weary is of doing ill.
Epig. de Mons. de Bensaurade.
HEre lies a great load of extr'ordinary merit,
Who taught us to know ere he did hence depart,
That a Man may well live without any Heart,
And die (which is strange!) without rend'ring his Spirit.
Madrigal on Queen Dido.
Translated from Cavalier Guarini, and he from Ausonius.
O Fortunata Dido, etc.
HOw hapless, Dido, was thy Fate
In both conditions of Life,
To be alike Unfortunate,
Whether a Mistress, or a Wife!
Both alike unhappy made thee,
Or thou thy self unhappy made;
But thy Lover false betrayed -- thee,
And thy Husband was betrayed.
He one miserably dying,
Poor Queen thou wast enforced to fly;
And the other fasly flying,
Thou did miserably dye.
Sede d'Amore.
Madrigal. From Cavalier Guarini.
TEll me Cupid, where is thy Nest,
In Clora's Eyes, or in my Breast?
When I do behold her Rays,
I conclude it in her Face:
But when I consider how
They both wound, and burn me too,
I conclude then by my smart,
Thou inhabits in my Heart.
Mighty Love, to show thy Power,
Though it be but for an Hour,
Let me beg without Offense,
Thou will shift thy Residence,
And erect thy self a Nest,
In my Eyes, and in her Breast.
Foco di sdegno.
From Cavalier Guarini. Madrigal.
FAir, and Ealse, I burn it is true,
But by Love am no ways moved;
Since your Falsehood renders you
So unfit to be beloved.
Tigress then, that you no more,
May triumph it in my smart;
It is fit you know before,
That I now have cured my Heart.
Henceforth then if I do Mourn,
And that still I live in pain.
With another flame I burn;
Not with Love; but with Disdain.
Risposta del Tasto.
BUrn, or Freeze at thine own pleasure,
Thou art free to Love, or no;
It Is as little loss, as treasure,
Whether thou be'st Friend, or Foe.
Lover False, and Unadvised,
Who to threaten art so vain,
Light thy Love I ever prized,
And less value thy Disdain.
If to Love 'twas ever bootless,
And neglected was thy smart:
The Disdains will be as Fruitless,
Of thy fickle, hollow Heart.
WINTER.
I.
HArk, hark, I hear the North Wind roar,
See how he riots on the Shore;
And with expanded Wings out-stretch,
Ruffels the Billows on the Beach.
II.
Hark, how the routed Waves complain,
And call for Succor to the Main,
Flying the Storm as if they meant
To creep into the Continent.
III.
Surely all Aeoll's huffing Brood
Are met to War against the Flood,
Which seem surpised, and have not yet
Had time his Levies to complete.
IV.
^he beaten Bark her Rudder lost,
^on the rolling Billows tossed;
(...) Keel now Plows the Ouse, and soon
(...) Topmast tillts against the Moon.
V.
^is strange! the Pilot keeps his seat;
^is bounding Ship does so curvet,
^hilst the poor Passengers are found,
(...) their own ^ears already drowned.
VI.
^ow Fins do serve for Wings, and bear
their Scaly Squadrons through the Air;
^hilst the Airs Inhabitants do stain
their gaudy Plumage in the Main.
VII.
^ow Stars concealed in Clouds do peep
(...) the secrets of the deep;
And Lobsters spued from the brine,
With Cancer constellations shine.
VIII.
Sure Neptune's Watery Kingdoms yet
Since first their Corral Graves were wet,
Were never disturbed with such alarms,
Nor had such trial of their Arms.
IX.
See where a Liquid Mountain rides,
Made up of innumerable Tides,
And tumbles headlong to the Strand,
As if the Sea would come to Land.
X.
A Sail, a Sail, I plainly spy,
Betwixt the Ocean and the Sky,
An Argosy, a tall built Ship,
With all her Pregnant Sailers a-trip.
XI.
^^arer, and nearer, she makes way,
^ith Canvis Wings into the Bay;
and now upon the Deck appears
^ crowd of busy Mariners.
XII.
(...) thinks I hear the Cordage crack,
^ith furrowing Neptune's foaming Back,
^ho wounded, and revengeful roars
^^s Fury to the neighboring Shoars.
XIII.
^ith massy trident high, he heaves
(...) sliding Keel above the Waves,
^pening his Liquid Arms to take
^he bold invader in his wrack.
XIV.
(...) how she dives into his Chest,
^hilst raising up his floating Breast
To clasp her in, he makes her rise
Out of the reach of his surprise.
XV.
Nearer she comes, and still does sweep
The Azure Surface of the deep,
And now at last the Waves have thrown
Their Rider on our ALBION.
XVI.
Under the Black cliff, spumy base,
The Sea-sick Hulk her freight displays,
And as she walloweth on the Sand,
Vomits her burden to the Land.
XVII.
With Heads erect, and plying Oar,
The Ship-wrack'd Mates make to the Shore;
And dreadless of their danger, climb
The floating Mountains of the brine.
XVIII.
^ark, hark, the noise, their Echo make
^he Islands Silver Waves to shake;
^ure with these throws, the laboring Main
(...) delivered of a Hurricane.
XIX.
And see the Seas becalmed behind,
Not crispt with any breeze of Wind;
The Tempest has forsook the Waves,
And on Land begins his braves.
XX.
Hark, hark, their Voices higher rise,
They tear the Welkin with their Cries;
The very Rocks their fury feel,
And like Sick Drunkards nod, and reel.
XXI.
Louder, and louder, still they come,
Niles Cataracts to these are dumb;
The Cyclope to these Blades are still,
Whose Anvils shake the burning Hill.
XXII.
Were all the Stars enlightened Skies,
As full of Ears as sparkling Eyes;
This rattle in the Crystal Hall,
Would be enough to deaf them all.
XXIII.
What monstrous Race is hither tossed,
Thus to Alarm our British Coast;
With Outcries, such as never yet
War, or Confusion could beget.
XXIV.
Oh! now I know them let us home,
Our Mortal Enemy is come,
Winter and all his blustering train,
Have made a voyage over the Main.
XXV.
Vanished the Countries of the Sun,
The Fugitive is hither run,
To ravish from our fruitful Fields
All that the teeming Season yields.
XXVI.
Like an Invader, not a Guest,
He comes to Riot, not to Feast;
And in wild fury overthrows,
Whatever does his march oppose,
XXVII.
With bleak and with congealing Winds,
The Earth in shining Chains he binds;
And still as he does farther pass,
Quarries his way with Liquid Glass.
XXVIII.
Hark, how the blusterors of the Bear,
Their Gibbouse Cheeks in triumph tear,
And with continued Shouts do ring
The entry of their Palsy'd King.
XXIX.
The Squadron nearest to your Eye,
Is his Forlorn of Infantry,
Bow-men of unrelenting Minds,
Whose Shafts are Feathered with the Winds.
XXX.
Now you may see his Vanguard rise
Above the Earthy Precipice,
Bold Horse on bleakest Mountains bred,
With Hail instead of Provend fed.
XXXI.
Their Lances are the pointed Locks,
Torn from the Brows of Frozen Rocks,
Their Shields are Chrystals as their Swords,
The Steel the rusted Rock affords.
XXXII.
See the main Body now appears,
And hark the Aeolian Trupetters,
By their Hoarse Levets do declare,
That the bold General Rides there.
XXXIII.
And look where Mantled up in White,
He sleads it like the Muscovite;
I know him by the Port he bears,
And his Lifeguard of Mountaineers.
XXXIV.
Their Caps are Fur'd with Hoary Frost,
The Bravery their cold Kingdom boasts;
Their spungy Plads are Milk White Frieze,
Spun from the Snowy Mountains Fleece.
XXXV.
Their Partisans are fine carved Glass,
^ringed with the Mornings spangled Grass;
And Pendant by their brawny Thighs,
Hang Cimetars of burnisht Ice.
XXXVI.
See, see, the Reer-ward now has won
The Promontories trembling Crown,
Whilst at there numerous Spurs, the Ground
Groans out a hollow murmering sound.
XXXVII.
The Forlorn now halts for the Van;
The Reer-guard draws up to the Main;
And now they altogether crowd
Their Troops into a threatening Cloud.
XXXVIII.
Fly, fly; the Foe advances fast
Into our Fortress, let us have
Where all the Roarers of the North
Can neither Storm, nor Starve us forth.
XXXIX.
There under Ground a Magazine
Of Sovereign juice is collard in,
Liquor that will the Seige maintain,
Should Phoebus never return again.
XL.
Till that, that gives the Poet rage,
And thaws the gelly'd Blood of Age;
Matures the Young, restores the Old,
And makes the fainting Coward bold.
XLI.
^t lays the careful Head to rest,
Calms Palpitations in the Breast,
Renders our Lives misfortune Sweet,
And Venus frolic in the Sheet.
XLII.
Then let the chill Sciorocco blow,
And grid us round with Hills of Snow;
Or, else go whistle to the Shore,
And make the hollow Mountains roar.
XLIII.
Whilst we together jovial sit
Careless, and Crowned with Mirth and Wit;
Where though bleak Winds confine us home,
Our Fancies round the World shall roam.
XLIV.
We'll think of all the Friends we know,
And Drink to all worth Drinking to:
When having Drunk all thine and mine,
We rather shall want Health than Wine.
LXV.
But where Friends fail us, we'll supply
Our friendships with our Charity;
Men that remote in Sorrows live,
Shall by our lusty Brimmers thrive.
XLVI.
We'll Drink the Wanting into Wealth,
And those that Languish into Health,
The Afflicted into Joy, the Oppressed
Into Security and Rest.
XLVII.
The Worthy in Disgrace shall find
Favor return again more kind,
And in restraint who stifled lie,
Shall taste the Air of Liberty.
XLVIII.
The Brave shall triumph in Success,
The Lovers shall have Mistresses,
Poor unreguarded Virtue Praise,
And the Neglected Poet Baies.
XLIX.
Thus shall our Healths do others good,
Whilst we our selves do all we would;
For freed from Envy and from Care,
What would we be, but what we are?
L.
It Is the plump Grapes Immortal Juice
That does this happiness produce,
And will preserve us free together,
Maugre mischance, or Wind and Weather.
LI.
Then let Old Winter take his course,
And roar abroad till he be hoarse,
And his Lungs crack with Ruthless Ire,
It shall but serve to blow our Fire.
LII.
Let him our little Castle ply,
With all his loud Artillery,
Whilst Sack and Claret Man the Fort,
His Fury shall become our Sport.
LIII.
Or, let him Scotland take, and there
Confine the plotting Presbyter;
His Zeal may Freeze, whilst we kept warm
With Love and Wine, can know no harm.
An ELEGY upon the Lord Hastings.
AMongst the Mourners that attend his Hearse
With flowing Eyes, and wish each Tear a Verse,
T'embalm his Fame, and his dear Merit save
Uninjur'd from th'oblivion of the Grave;
A Sacrificer I am come to be,
Of this poor Offering to his Memory.
O could our pious Meditations thrive
So well, to keep his better part alive!
So that, in stead of Him, we could but find
Those fair Examples of his Lettered Mind:
Virtuous Emulation then might be
Our hopes of Good Men, though not such as He.
But in his hopeful progress since he is crossed,
Pale Virtue droops; now her best Pattern's lost.
'Twas hard, neither Divine, nor Humane Parts,
The strength of Goodness, Learning, and of Arts,
Full crowds of Friends, nor all the Prayers of them,
Nor that he was the Pillar of his Stem,
Affection's Mark, secure of all Men's Hate,
Could rescue him from the sad stroke of Fate.
Why was not The Air dressed in Prodigious forms,
To groan in Thunder, and to weep in Storms?
And, as at some Men's Fall, why did not His
In Nature work a Metamorphosis?
No; he was gentle, and his Soul was sent
A silent Victim to the Firmament.
Weep, Ladies, weep, lament great Hastings Fall;
His House is buried in his Funeral:
Bathe him in Tears, till there appear no trace
Of those sad Blushes in his lovely Face:
Let there be in it of Guilt no seeming sense,
Nor other Color than of Innocence.
For he was Wise and Good, though he was Young;
Well suited to the Stock from whence he sprung:
And what in Youth is Ignorance and Vice,
In him proved Piety of an excellent price.
Farewell, dear Lord; and sinc^ thy Body must
In time return to its first Matter, Dust;
Rest in thy melancholy Tomb in Peace: For who
Would longer live, that could but now die so?
THE BATTLE OF YVRY.

To my worthy Friend Mr. White, From the unworthy Author Charles Cotton.

^^generes animos timor arguit heu, quibus ille
^^ctatus Fatis! quae bella exhausta canebat!
Virg. Aeneid. Lib. 4. To his Honored Friend, the Author of this Excellent POEM.
I Took, Sir, of your Book a short survay,
And swiftly ran it over without stay;
Yet stumbled not, I found the Work to be
So smoothly wrought, and coucht so evenly.
Some Muses seem to gambol and curvet;
But yours, though frolic Feet on Ground she set,
Goes (as she swam in Blood) an easy pace,
Or rather runs a wreath-deserving Race.
Some rave in Verse, as they would seem to be
Full (like the Sibylls) of some Deity,
When Wine inflates them; but you, in your height
Of Fury, give your winged Phansies weight,
With Reason temper Rage, and like a strong
Well-fraighted Bark, pass steadily along.
You (as a true bred Stanhop) write in State,
Brave lines compose, yet never Luxuriate;
But keep within your sober bounds, most fit
To give restraint to a high-working Wit.
As a Wise King's a Subject of your lines,
So you considerately bring on designs,
Not rush (like Curtius) into the vastitys
Of danger, but approach by fair degrees,
Relating from what troubled Sourse arose
The discord, and what troops of Gallant Foes
Gave Luster to the Field, as here with fine
Phaebean Phansies your Narrations shine.
Now when brave Metal to the stroke you bring,
Your Verse then sparkles, fervently you sing,
Spur up your Pegasus, and make him fly
A gallant pitch of rare sublimity,
And when his Head into a Cloud does dash,
Cause it to Thunder, as your Wit does flash.
Great Mars, when Diomed his Wast did wound,
From his deep Throat sent froth a hideous sound:
But (sure) he bellows not in Homer more
To terror, than your Poem makes him roar.
As your high enterprise did merit Praise,
So for the achievement claim your Crown of Bays.
Your Worth was in the bud, but now it is blown
By Fame, and to more Eminency grown,
By this strong work, a work that may defy
The Tooth of Time, and Tongue of Calumny.
Thomas Bancroft.

THE BATTLE OF YVRY.
I.
HIgh are his thoughts, whose Buskined Mistress sings
In verse Heroic, the Heroic deeds
Of Warlike Princes, and Victorious Kings,
Whose worth all Commentary still exceeds;
Nor can a Muse, imp't with the noblest Wings,
Write worth the least drop a brave General Bleeds:
" So high is Virtue, in her native Glory,
" Advanced above the Trophies of all Story.
II.
Yet, to repeat what they have bravely writ,
With pointed Steel, in Characters of Blood,
How great Relations into Faction split,
When blind Ambition does corrupt the Good;
Should, from the worst no censure ill admit,
Nor of the best Me^ ill be understood;
Since we do others, not our selves commend;
To celebrate the bold's a noble End.
III.
Assist me, then, thou God of Song, whose Lyre
I dare to touch with my unskilful Hands,
Whilst Truths I sing to make the World admire,
Of glorious Burbon, and his Conquering Bands,
Not to Eclipse; nor raise that Virtue higher,
Which in the Mount of Honor burning stands,
Bright, as the brightest Star, that there does flame
A shining Monument to Caesar's Name.
IV.
And thou great Goddess of all Arts, and Arms,
Teach me a Verse High as this Princes thought,
That I may number the out-brav'd harms,
He, by his Conduct, to Subjection brought,
The dangerous Conquest, that through Death's Alarms,
By hardy Valor he so bravely bought,
A day in Fame's great Catalogue more bright;
Than all the Suns of Honor e're could light.
V.
Great were the Virtues, that, Example since,
To Kings succeding, he has left behind,
Great in a Man; but greater in a Prince,
A Monarch, from the Lees of place, refined;
A living precept Tyrans to Convince,
And plant true Honor in a Worthy's Mind,
A Noble Stem, whence to this clim did Spring
A worthy, though an overshadow'd King.
VI.
Long had the Family of Lorain (grown
To dangerous greatness by their Princes Grace)
By subtle Arts, strove to supplant the Crown
To grasp the Scepter, and usurp his place,
Could they once get Henry of Valois down,
Then King, and last of that Illustrious Race,
A Prince in Prudence, and in Arms as great,
As Europe boasted in a Regal State.
VII.
Three were the ruffling Brothers, that durst rise
In opposition to the Royal Line;
The First, and Chiefest, H^nry Duke of Guise,
To whom the others Charles, and Lewis join;
Lewis a Cardinal, more Bold, than Wise,
Charles Duke of Main, Third in this great Design,
In League Compacted (so they called their Cause)
Against Obedience, and her sacred Laws.
VIII.
Nor was their Power so trivial, as to be
Crushed by the Kings Authority; or force,
So well 'twas strengthened by the Papal Sea,
Whence ('it is conceived) this Faction had its Source;
But must be undermined by Policy,
For this engaged Crown the only Course,
So great, and many the Confed'rates were,
Who stood in favor of this haughty Peer.
IX.
Wherefore the King, did, in his Prudence, choose
The help of Policy, where Arms were vain,
And knew so well his wary Councels use,
That Duke, and Prelate at his Foot lay slain,
When from his Juster Fate, the Third broke lose,
Did then sole Head of the whole League remain,
Employing all his Courage, and his Art
To seal his Vengeance on his Prince's Heart.
X.
And, in his Enterprise, was gone so far,
The King was forced to call into his Cause,
Henry of Burbon, then King of Navar
His true Successor by the Salique Laws;
Who then against him made defensive War;
Him to his Service by command he draws,
"So soon can Virtuous Princes learn to obey,
" And humbly bow, when they have Power to sway.
XI.
The Royal Arms, thus reinforc't, begin,
In conduct of these Princely Generals
To take the Field, some Towns, and Prisoners win,
No Force resists them, no Design forestals;
Till, at the last they shut the Leaguers in,
And lay close seige to Paris spacious Walls;
In whose Defense, and Strength the Duke, at last,
His latest refuge, and his safety placed.
XII.
Nor were those Walls; or the Parisians aid
(True to the League; but treacherous to the State)
Enough to stop the Power did invade;
Or to divert a Rebels juster Fate,
Had not the League by Combination made
On Henry's Life a foul Assassinate,
Who, in the Center of his own command,
Fell by the stroke of an ignoble Hand.
XIII.
Then, at the Helm alone great Burbon stood,
Undoubted Heir unto the Crowns of France,
Great in his Name, in Arms, and great in Blood,
Though something shaken by the King's mischance,
For why the Peers serve; nor obey him would,
Unless he would the Roman Faith advance,
Too hard a Contract for a King to make,
Though Life, and Honor lie engaged at Stake.
XIV.
His just repulse, to their unjust demands,
Soon changed the Scene, beyond all humane aim,
For though he won some honest Hearts, and Hands
T'acknowledge, and assist his lawful claim;
Yet in few days so lessened were his Bands,
To his Abandoners Eternal Shame,
That, he was forced his Conquest to decline,
And build his Fortunes on some new Design.
XV.
It Were tedious to relate the Battails Fought,
The Towns beleaguered, and the Cities won,
The hauhgty Rebels to subjection brought,
By this brave Leader, Honors Eldest Son,
Acts, that indeed, exceed belief; or thought,
By mature Councels, and great Courage done;
The dangerous paths to Honor, and Renown
He trod, before he could atchieve the Crown.
XVI.
Nor falls it in the Sphere of my design,
To mention each of Bo^rbon's noble Acts,
So high attempts I humbly shall decline,
And leave those Annals to their better Tracts;
Who me, and my poor Muse as far outshine;
As Henry, in his Celebrated Facts,
The lesser sparks of Honor does out-flame,
And swallows all their Titles in his Name.
XVII.
One day there was, wherein his Valor shone
A Pyramid of inextinguish'd Fire,
Wherein Immortal Glory; or there is none,
By dint of Sword, he bravely did acquire,
To that one days great History alone,
This Poem impotently shall aspire:
A day, above the Trophies of the Pen;
A Prince, above the Characters of Men.
XVIII.
Many the Conflicts were, various the Chance,
Betwixt the Seige of Paris, and the Fight
In Yvry-Plain, that goar'd the Womb of France
With Fire, and Blood, betwixt the Wrong, and Right;
E're both the Armies to that Field advance,
One to Pursue, the other Pretending flight,
Their numerous odds had raised the League so
high,
As to pursue him, that could never fly.
XIX.
Two Nights before these angry Armies met
The uncertain chance of Bloody War to try,
All-seeing Heaven his dire portents had set,
Oraculous Symptoms in the troubled Sky,
The naked Surface of the Earth was wet
With Storm, and Tempest, and a Prodigy,
Succeeded in the Air, to show the King,
How to his aid Heaven did assistance bring.
XX.
Two Puissant Armies in the Sky appeared,
To shoot in Thunder, and with Lightning kill,
In color like the Comets streaming Beard,
Which great events in Battle ushers still,
By most Men doubted, and by many feared,
All were suspended at the Almighty's will;
Yet such their Leader was, their Cause so Just,
They unto Providence, and Valor trust.
XXI.
The Slothful Sun, rose to his daily round,
All Night disturbed with riots in the Air,
When both the Hosts his drowsy Eye had found,
Imploring Conquest in different Prayer,
And now they both march to the destined Ground,
Where Fate their different Fortunes does prepare,
Both Armed for the Disasters, and the Harms,
That still attend the uncertain chance of Arms.
XXII.
The Field where this great Game was to be tried,
In a round Form, does a large Plot contain,
A Stage of Honor spacious and wide,
Where Soldiers may Eternal Glory gain,
Two little Towns did bound the Royal side,
And on the Dukes a Grove shut up the Plain;
Toward the West (the lodging of the Sun)
The River Eure, in a deep vale does run.
XXIII.
A place so formed by Nature, as not Art
Could smooth it plainer to so brave an end,
In which no craggy; or deformed part,
Could either side advantage; or offend,
Save that a little dimple in the Heart
Did with a gentle fall it self extend;
A worthy Theater whereon to play
The Tragic entrys of a Bloody day.
XXIV.
^^ustrious Bourbon was the first, that took
^ brave Possession of the Fatal place,
^et down in Destiny's eternal Book,
^o his Renown, and to the Duke's Disgrace,
^ho in the King's victorious Arms mistook,
^s of a flying Foe pursued the Chase,
So far did Fate, and Odds seem to combine
In help, and favor of his black Design.
XXV.
^or the Royal Muster did appear
^ght thousand Foot, and but three thousand Horse,
^he League above double the Number were,
^^ch inequality was in their Force,
^he Rebel Crew were more, that crowded there
^ number better, but in Courage worse:
For they with Henry who so often had fought,
So far from Fear were, they disdained to doubt.
XXVI.
Now, on the Plain the Royal Standard stands,
Waving the Golden Fleur-de-Lis of France,
The Trumpets usher in the Loyal Bands,
The barded Steeds under their Riders prance,
The Leaders take their several Commands,
And in good Order in the Field advance;
And there abide -- the coming of the Foe,
To crown their Sovereign in his overthrow.
XXVII.
Montpensiers, worthy Duke, the Van up led,
A Prudent Wariour, and a Loyal Peer,
The Battle next, of which the King was head,
The Marshal Byron brought up the Rear;
A Captain Practiced, and a Soldier bred,
A Man that knew not such a Thought as Fear,
Wise as the wisest, as the Boldest bold,
In Dangers only, and Success grown old.
XXVIII.
Their hardy Cavalry they did divide,
In Bodies five, for Service of that Day,
Unto the first Marshal d' Aumont was Guide,
By him two Regiments of Firelocks lay,
To flanck that first Divisions left aside,
And, at a distance, keep the Duke in play,
That naked Side to succor, and to shield,
Placed on the outside of the spacious Field.
XXIX.
Next that, the second was commanded by,
Montpensiers Duke, who on his left, and right,
Two valiant Squadrons had appointed nigh,
To second, and assist him in the Fight,
Of German one, the other Swisse Infantry,
Both prompt to Battle; and both famed for Might,
As by the event of that victorious Day,
To all the World their Valors did display.
XXX.
The third to this, and biggest of them all,
Contained the Sacred Person of the King,
The Prince of Conty, and the Count St. Paul,
And of the Flower of France a noble Ring,
To rise in Conquest, or in Glory fall,
With him who was their Lives, and Honors spring,
These on the right, and left hand flanked were
By the Swisse-Guard, and Colonel Balthazar.
XXXI.
The fourth Division, on the right hand this,
To Marshal Byron's wise Conduct fell,
Who in true Discipline could never miss,
He knew the angry Art of War so well,
Tho^^ approved Councils, and that Heart of his
Were known most Leaders of his time t'excel,
By him two Regiments of Firelocks stand,
To flank his Body upon either hand.
XXXII.
The fifth, and last, by Scomberg's valiant Count
Theodorick was led, this did consist
Of German Horse, Soldiers of good account,
That, under Henry's Pay, entered the List;
None could their Courage, nor their Truth surmount
Hardy t'attempt, and resolute t'resist;
These, with their Belgic Cornets, reached quite
down,
Even to the Houses of St. Andre's Town.
XXXIII.
Two other Squadrons in the Front did stand,
Then the main Battle marched some paces higher,
The one four hundred Horse, in the Command
Of Baron Giury was, and the grand Prior,
The next, which stood upon the other hand,
Three hundred Cuiriasses made up entire;
These had to Chief, the Baron of Byron,
Of a brave Father, a victorious Son.
XXXIV.
Betwixt these two, th'Artillery planted were,
(The black Invention of ingenious Ire)
To which old Philibert was Canoneer,
Expert in all the effects of levelled Fire,
Well knew he how, and when to gall, and tear,
And force the forward Foe halting retire,
Him fifty Harquebuses do attend,
With Pioneers the Ord'nance to defend.
XXXV.
The Forlorn-hope by three Commanders led,
St. Denis, Brignolet, and Parabiere,
Some Paces before all lay covered,
Scarce seen by them, who knew not they were there,
In the Fields lay so safe, they naught could dread,
No execution of the Canon fear;
So happily they found a friendly room,
In that green Navel of the Plains smooth Womb
XXXVI.
Scarce were they ordered, when the Sieurs la Mouy
Du Plessis* and Tremouille, from Poictou came,
Tri'de Knights, with them two hundred Cavalry,
The weaker to assist, the Rebel ^ame,
The Sieur de Humiers out of Picardy,
With fourscore Gentlemen, stirred by the Fame
Of a great Day of Honor to be tried,
Came Volontiers to fight on Henry's side.
XXXVII.
These slender Aids, in such an hour sent*
To the whole Army promised fair Success,
And of the day presaged a good event,
Since they must conquer, that Heavens care does bless,
No less the Soldier thinks these Succors meant,
Which Joy, and Hope, he loudly does express,
And to the Sky his Acclamations sends,
In Thanks, and welcome of these valiant Friends.
XXXVIII.
Thus stand th'embattail'd Royalists to dare,
The Twins opposed, of Danger, and Mischance,
And as their Captains, so the Squadrons are,
Prompt as the Killing speed of Fire, to advance;
Such Manly Confidence, they all declare,
Upon whose Valors lay the Crown of France,
A Stake for the brave Game then to be tried,
Which Fortune must, and the Swords Edge decide.
XXXIX.
The adverse Camp to such assurance grew,
Of easy Conquest by their seeming Flight,
They nimbly seem to fly, as they pursue,
As to a Prey, rather than to a Fight,
But their Forlorn found that Belief untrue,
When first they saw the King to Battle dight,
Ordered with all the Courage and the Art,
That could express a Soldiers Head; or Heart.
XL.
This rude Alarm, that soon from Van, to Rear,
Flew, with the wonted speed, of ill Report,
Soon changed the Soldiers overweeming cheer,
Who now perceived they were to bandy forced,
Their vain assurance it converts to fear,
So much the unexpected News import,
They now amazed to doubtful conflict have,
And order new their Troops in march misplac't.
XLI.
Their numerous Army with all speed, and care,
(Now of their blind security bereft)
Th'abus'd Commanders for the Fight prepare,
And into two mighty Battalions cleft,
The right Duke Nemours, fit to do, and dare,
Had in Command, and stout Aumale the left,
The first a noble Youth, seduced to fight
Against his Honor, and his Prince's Right.
XLII.
In point of the right Wing Count Egmont fought,
Who Arms in favor of the League did bear,
With him the Launciers, he from Flanders brought
Next him the Swisse, Fifer, and Berling were
Flanck't by three Reg'ments in their trade well taugh
By Dissemieux, Pons'enac, and Chasteliere,
Three Colonels, who by the Worlds applaus^
Deserved their Honors in a better Cause.
XLIII.
'Twixt these, and Nemours Regiment, that made
The number of four hundred gallant Horse,
The yawning Canon ready to be played,
Were planted to devour the Royal Force,
And, ram'd for Death only the Signal stayed,
Their murdering sulphrous Treasure to disburse,
A threatening train of great Artillery,
Enough to fright Men not resolved to dye.
XLIV.
In the left Wing four hundred Spaniards led,
By Captains bold, their Cornets fair display,
Which to the margent of the Plain out-spread,
Had in their Flanck St. Paul, and Tenissay,
With Lorain Regiments, who had to head
Bold Tremble court, and fierce Chastaignera^e;
Next these, Aumale, the Sieurs de Perdriell,
De Loncampe came, and de Fountaine-Martell.
XLV.
The Dukes own Cornet, which Cygogne bore,
Marched up the Body to these spacious Wings,
With them, of Gentlemen, four hundred more,
In all seven hundred to oppose the Kings;
These flanck't by Flemings were, and these before,
The Reiters, which hapless Duke Brunswick brings,
To charge and wheel, as they were disciplined
Betwixt the Wings for a Reserve behind.
XLVI.
The Leaguers Force, thus ordered, gently moves,
Scorning in such a Glorious hour to breathe;
The Mother Earth spurn d by the armed Hooves,
In dire ostent mournfully Groans beneath,
Whilst each, like Fire by agitation proves,
Prompter to snatch from others head the Wreath,
Then Face to Face, both Armies in Array,
Stand to attempt the Fortune of the Day.
XLVII.
And now Heavens Lamp, unwilling to behold,
The bloody Conflict pressed to be begun,
Shading with Clouds his Locks of burning Gold,
Stepped into Night before his course was run,
The dusky Hemisphere in darkness rolled,
Withheld the trial until the Morning Sun;
When each in equal favor of the light,
Might have the day bright Umpire of their
Fight.
XLVIII.
^^aightway succeeding night 'gan to arise,
^b mists of darkness, to possess the Sky,
^^ntling the Warriors in her dark surprise,
(...) Valiant could not fight, the Coward fly,
(...) in her Sables clad, ermin'd with Eyes,
(...) in a mourning Vail of Tragedy,
Black, as the Face of Sorrows blackest hue,
To solemnize the Funerals to ensue.
XLIX.
(...) Camps, withdrawn into their Quarters make,
^at Fires, that each may see the others Care
(...) to their Safety they are both awake,
(...) each of others bold Attempts aware,
(...) wary Guards them to their Posts betake,
(...) and Sentinels well planted are,
Upon occasion, to report th'Alarm,
And prompt their Leaders when, and where
to arm.
L.
The Lorain Duke retired into his Tent,
During this respite, does a Counsel keep,
To which the heads of every Regiment
Summoned, appear in Consultation deep,
Kept waking all by Bourbon's brave intent,
" When Death stands Sentinel, it is no time to sleep;
There every one, and all, maturely weigh
The State, wherein their Lives, and Honors lay.
LI.
Himself (a Friend to secure Counsels) first
Delivered what he thought best to be done,
Not like a Prince in forward action nurs't,
(Which fires brave Minds where Honor's to be won)
But like a subtle Fox, that hardly durst,
With all his odds, a Battail's hazard run:
He thus in Counsel to his daring Friends,
The common State of their Affairs commends*
LII.
^Most noble Friends, in the Results of War,
" Wherein the glorious Soul of Conquest lies)
" The safest Counsels, most successful are;
" Nor is that Man less valiant, who is wise,
" Whereas precipitous resolves, impair
" The worthy number of such brave supplies,
" As these of yours, who nobly thus advance
" Your dreaded Ensigns, for dismembered France.
LIII.
Whose wounding Adversaries, pounded lie,
Into this Angle frighted, by your Fame,
Compelled to fight, because they cannot fly,
Their desperate ruin, and their certain shame,
Yet with this poor, half vanquished Enemy,
^Tis best we wisely play a certain Game,
" That is, to husband what our Swords have won,
" And end in safety, what in blood begun.
LIVE.
" For though the Foe be by your Valors brought
" To his last Cast, that is, to fight, and dye;
" And, that he is, as soon overcome as fought,
" To conquer without loss, is Victory,
" When from the desperate Conquest's dearly bought,
" The Victors surest Friend is Policy,
" By whose advice, we may on cheaper terms
" Purchase the Triumphs, that attends our Arms.
LV.
" The lost Nobility, that assist Navarre,
" In his vain Quarrel, at their own Expense,
" Will fall away by a protracted War,
" Leaving his Power as weak, as his Pretense;
" And when their Furnitures all wasted are,
" Want will reduce them to a better Sense:
" So that by spinning out the War in length,
" We, without Battle, shall overcome his Strength.
LVI.
This said Count Egmont instantly arose,
His sparkling Eyes with Resolution shone,
Wherein Disdain, and Valor did disclose,
^ow much he scorned, such abject thoughts to own,
^^fore he spoke, he threatened to oppose
The mean Resolves, their General put on;
At last he with a Soldiers Grace expressed,
The nobler sense of his more noble breast.
LVII.
^My Lord (said he) I was not hither sent,
^Nor into France these approved succors bring,
^To vanquish without Arms; nor with intent
^To wast the Treasure of the Catholic King;
Nor must his Money, and his Men be spent
In doing naught; or some ignoble thing,
" Advantage gives the Signal now to go,
" And end the Quarrel with one Manly blow.
LVIII.
" Nor suits it with our Honors; or your Cause,
" To wave a Fight whereto they are compelled
" And suffer such an Enemy to pause,
" Because he is, with Bloodshed to be quelled;
" So shall their Story, with the Worlds applause
" Be writ in Triumph, and we Cowards h^ld,
" And in the splendour of their Leaders Fam^
" Will be eclips't the Glory of your Name.
LIX.
" Therefore (my Lord) let not the rising Sun,
" Behold a slothful Camp, that dares not rise,
" To end what they so daringly begun,
" A wretched Army, that the Conquered flies,
" And dreads the glorious Wreath their Swords ha^ won;
" But add unto our famous Victories,
" This one, which only for the Morning stay
" T'impale our brows with Oak, the Souldie^ bays.
LX.
^impatient Captains all at one approved
^h'unhappy Count's Advice, and all aloud
^ith equal ardour the stayed General moved
^o reap the crop, for which their Swords had plowed,
^ho paused, then told them, that he dearly loved
^he Zeal, and Valor their brave Minds endowed,
And was resolved the day's event to try,
To conquer with such Friends; or fighting dye*
LXI.
^hus then resolved, each Officer repairs,
(...) his brave charge against the Morn to come,
^rming their Limbs in Steel, their Souls with Prayers,
(...), to prevent; or to preserve their doom;
(...) less the Heroi^k King his Men prepares,
^ho, but through danger, had no high way home;
Spending those hours in diligence, and care,
That interposed 'twixt him, and conquest were.
LXII.
At last the unwilling Morn 'gan weeping rise,
T'illuminate the Theater of Death,
And like a tender Virgin, hid her Eyes,
From the sad Objects to succeed beneath;
So that she shone; but did not guild the Skies,
Even ashamed to grace the Victor's Wreath;
Who at the price of native blood at best,
Must win that Honor to his daring Crest.
LXIII.
No sooner peept she from her Eastern Seat,
Through the Clouds of sorrow veiled her Face,
Than the loud Instruments of War did greet
The Light so longed for; such a tedious space,
They sound their Trumpets, and their Drums the beat,
Whilst each side takes possession of their place,
In the same order, that before, when nigh^
By interposing, had deferred the Fight.
LXIV.
The valiant French (whose Flames that day enrolled
To proved posterity) spurred about the Plain,
To cheer the Coward, and confirm the bold,
No thought of Fear could their true Metals stain,
^ach in his constant Looks to his foretold,
^hey should the Honor of the Field obtain:
Thus by their Leaders brave Exemple taught,
On Conquest, only, every Soldier thought.
LXV.
^^eat Henry mounted on a large, bay Steed,
Who as he knew the Royal Weight he bore,
^ampled the Earth where Thousands were to bleed,
their tribute to that Parent, whence before
^hey had derived the matter of their seed,
(...) to that Element must now restore)
Rode up, and down to view his Loyal Bands,
How each in order, and in courage stands.
LXVI.
His Head u^arm'd, to those his faithful Friends,
Who now impatient of the Battle, stay,
With an undaunted Look, he recommends
The common State wherein their Fortunes lay,
He tells them all, that no more strength attends
To try: th'ev^nt of such another day;
But tha^ each private Man's peculiar share
Of Life, and Safety in their Valors were.
LXVII.
His noble Presence more persuasion finds,
Than his brave Words, not to be heard by all,
And gave a better stamp to all their Minds,
Than from the Tongue of Eloquence could fall,
" Nothing a Soldiers Resolution binds
" More, than Example in a General;
They all ambitious are, of their blind Fate,
And each Man thinks the time defe^'d too lat^
LXVIII.
Thus riding the Divisions his Host,
To help an Error were it to be found,
He spurred his fiery Steed from post, to post,
Through the Files of every Squadron round,
So to supply, where the defect was most
A disadvantage in his Men; or Ground,
Till at the main Battalions head he stayed,
And lifting up his Eyes to Heaven thus prayed,
LXIX.
" Thou dreaded Architect of this great Ball,
" Who with thine Eye of Providence look down,
" Searching the secret Purposes of all,
" Out of thy Gracious Bounty please to own
" The Justice of my Arms; nor let me fall
" In my just claim to this usurped Crown:
" But fav'rably extend this doubtful hour
" The conquering hand of thy Almighty Power.
LXX.
" Or, if for this thy zealous peoples Peace,
" Thou in thy sacred Wisdom, know it unfit
" That I should rule, and that 'twere their Disease,
" In the French Throne, should I a Monarch sit,
" Then, let my Title fall, if thou so please,
" To Advance their Fortune; and, let me with it,
" In the first File of Honor,, fighting dye
" Worthy my Name, and their Fidelity.
LXXI.
This said, a cheerful shout in the Front began
The loud excursion of a sudden Joy,
And with the Rear which echoed to the Van,
Filled the whole Camp with an auspicious Cry,
From Troop to Troop the Loyal Motto ran,
Which made the Plain resound, Vive le Roy,
All armed with Valor, and their Prince's Love,
Unwilling stay their faithful Arms to prove.
LXXII.
Then with his Cask he armed his noble Head,
In which, a waving Plume of curled white,
Like a white Dove, the silver Wings outspread
Above his Crest, there stuck to be a Light*
In clouds of Horror unto those he led
Through the rough paths of an uncertain Fight,
And now the Armies both attend the sign,
Which given both in dreadful conflict join.
LXXIII.
Have you not seen, on Neptune's liquid Plain.
A short-lived Truce still that transparent Face,
No whisper of the Air to crisp the Maine;
But all, as even, and as smooth, as Glass,
Where not the Footsteps of a Storm remain,
Whereby the Eye may any ruins trace,
The Sea so calm, and the Winds Doors so barred,
As if the Elements had never jar'd.
LXXIV.
When on a sudden all the Winds broke loose,
From the dark Entrails of their bolted Cave,
Break the late Concord, and dissolve the Truce,
And on the surface of the Waters brave,
Nothing but noise and tumult then ^nsues,
Winds fight with Winds, and Wave encountreth Wave,
Together shuffled in a foaming rage,
That pale-faced Ruin only can assuage.
LXXV.
So still these Armies do maintain their Ground,
As in their cutting Swords no danger were,
As each withdrew his hand from the first Wound,
Panting for Glory some, and some for Fear,
Till by the Signal of the Trumpets Sound,
In a far different posture they appear,
Thundering confusion to the vaulted Sky,
A Prologue to the ensuing Tragedy.
LXXVI.
The wide-mouthed Canon through their Iron Jaws,
In killing Accents, first began to speak,
Disputing with a dreadful noise the cause,
In which all Argument had proved too weak,
Nor was it now a time for other Laws,
Than what the effects of Fire and Sword could wreak,
No other Language must be understood,
Th^n that, which spoke in Thunder, Fire, and
Blood.
LXXVII.
The troubled Morning who before had lent
Only a faint, and an unwilling Light,
In sulfurous Clouds was hid, as if they meant
To shade that Beauty with eternal Night,
The rowls of Smoke, These roaring Ord'nance vent
Heavens burning Eye had overshaded quite;
A vaperous Darkness so enclosed them all,
None other knew but by the Canons call.
LXXVIII.
So have I seen a black tempestous shade
Rudely succeeding Phoebus's Golden Beams,
With thundering Terror the hush't Air invade,
Clad in the rage of Natures loud extremes,
No ray of Comfort, but what Lightenings made,
Darting through dreadful Chasms their flaming
Streams,
Whilst the confounded World do trembling fear,
The last and greatest Dissolution near.
LXXIX.
Twice had these Engines, upon either part,
Disgorg'd their murdering Entrails on the Foe,
But with so different Fortune, Care and Art,
That the Duke's erring Shot played all too low,
Whilst the King's levelled Right, tore through the Heart,
Of the Duke's Front, almost to overthrow,
And galled Count Egmont, who ashamed to stay,
Began the brave Encounter of the Day.
LXXX.
The Grand-priors Squadron the bold Count assails,
With so much Brav'ry, such impetuous Force,
That through that Body's Center he prevails
Unable to withstand his stronger Horse,
So that the Flemings, turned their Coursers Tails
On the King's Canon, and complete their Course*
Painting their Lances with the Rabble Blood,
Of Pioneers, who by the Ord'nance stood.
LXXXI.
By which contempt, they so disordered were,
Thus killing on, at this successful rate,
That bold Aumont, and fierce Byron must bear
Upon their damask't Swords, their sudden Fate,
So that by these charged home in Flanck, and Rear,
They find the Error of their have too late,
Whilst the Grand-prior rallied, straight began
A furious Charge in their dismembered Van.
LXXXII.
Anger, and Shame, Spite, and Revenge contend
In execution which should which outrun,
With unresisted Fury all offend,
And to redeem what the rash Du^ch had won,
Who round begirt with slaughter, bow, and bend,
And e're times restless wheel an hour had spun,
On the cold bosom of the purpled Plain,
They every Man lay with their Leader slain.
LXXXII.
So a Victorious Grove of stately Oaks,
Which their aspiring Heads to Heaven raise,
Before a throng of Lab'rers wounding strokes,
Stoop their ambitious Brows to kiss their base,
The strong limbed Clown in his Endeavor smoaks.
Till the large Trunks lie tumbled on the place,
As fell this Squadron on The Earths bruised Womb,
Worthy a better Cause, and worth their Tomb.
LXXXIV.
In this great Ruin, Noble Egmont fell,
To War, and Death a Bloody Sacrifice,
His Countries Honor, his Times Miracle,
Spurring his Fa^e by his too bold Advise;
Nor can the Tongue of Fame speak ought but well,
Of his Renoun, and living Victories,
He Conquering fell, despising Fate, and Death,
Bequeathing to his Name Immortal Breath.
LXXXV.
Now through the Field Giddy destruction flew,
To riot in full draughts of Christian Blood,
Each other Cut and Mangled Hurt, and Slew,
Till the whole Plain, appeared a Crimson Flood,
Members, and Men the groaning Earth bestr^w,
No Walls of Steel their furious Arms withstood,
Force, Hatred, Wrath, and E^vy mustred show,
What altogether can in Conflict do.
LXXXVI.
Valiant Duke Nemours in the Vanguard m^t,
With Duke Montpensier to dispute the Day,
Each stroke the others daring Coronet,
At a less pitch would neither Warrior play,
Their burnish't Armor, with their Blood was wet,
Their owners heat; and manhood to display;
Whilst eithers Squadrons spur their Valors home,
Eager to Fight, impatient to Overcome.
LXXXVII.
And in the R^er, German Count Scomberg come
With a well guid^d ^^ry to assail,
The hardy Troops ^ir^d by their Fellows (...),
Who had to Chief the Chevalier D'(...),
With equal Conduct, and with equal flame,
They fiercely Join, Ambitious to prevail,
Whilst Fortune, hovering on ambiguous Wings,
To neither part her blind assistance brings.
LXXXVIII.
Montpensiers Duke having his Courser slain,
In the first brunt of that unequal flight,
Remounted by the Valor of his train*
Fought like a Loyal, and a hardy Knight,
His constant Prowess did that Day obtain,
A burning Crown of inextinguish'd Light,
For greater Acts than his, more bold, and high,
Never adorned the Face of History.
LXXXIX.
Nor less Duke Nemours did attempt t'excel,
Who though a Youth, was full of noble Fire,
Into the Battle with the Sword he fell,
Ambitious, as the proudest, to aspire
To Honors sacred Hill, a parallel
To those great Names which never must expire;
Like Young Ascanius shone his downy Face,
The worthy Heir of an Illustrious race*
XC.
During their Conflict, on the other side,
Count Scomberg powered his shot upon the Foe,
By which Aumale's vast Squadrons fell, and died,
The warlike Knight quits not the quarrel so,
Since naught that Controversy could decide,
But one; or the others total overthrow,
Like a brave Captain he maintained the Field,
Who knew to dye, but had not learned to yield.
XCI.
Mean while the Reiters, planted in the Van,
Of the Duke's Battle, though so shrewdly torn,
Their Body closed, a wheeling Charge began,
After their Custom; when the King's Forlorn,
Standing upright, where they had ambush'd lain,
Since first appearance of the early Morn,
Gave them so rude a welcome, that the ground,
Was in the streams of ruthless slaughter drowned.
XCII.
Death's Messengers, impuls'd by Fire, and Fate,
About the Field on mortal Errands flew^
At such a cruel, so well-guided rate*
That almost every Ball a Soldier slew,
The wounded Foe tumbles precipitate,
The Bed of Death their trembling Limbs bestrew,
While each that fell in that impetuous strife
Opened a passage to his Fellow's life.
XCIII.
The fury of this Storm Duke Brunswick bore,
Whom nor in Arms, nor Courage could defend:
But on his Heart the stamp of Death he wore,
No longer could Life's battered Fort contend,
He dying fell, embalmed in his own gor^,
To crown his actions with a glorious end,
On whom no barbarous Enemy could confer,
Less than a high, immortal Character.
XCIV.
Their Captain slain, straight from their killing Foes,
The frighted Reiters faced to get behind,
But found their own Divisions placed so close,
No path to Safety could their terror find,
The Duke's own Lances were compelled to oppose
These desperate Flyers with amazement blind
So to preserve the Order of his own,
From being by their mad career o're-thrown.
XCV.
The King, who thus long had Spectator stood,
At this advantage, spurred his foaming Steed,
Down from whose wounded Sides, the hot chaff'd
Blood
Beguilt the Warriour's Spurs; who fiercely rid,
To whip the pride of that Gigantick brood
That durst, with rebel Arms, his claim forbid,
And after him the noblest Peers of France,
With faithful Fury to the Field advance.
XCVI.
The Lorain Duke, embarras'd by his own,
And charged, at once, by the victorious King;
Yet like a Leader true to his renown,
Maintained his ground, maugre the Force they bring,
And now the latest cast of War was thrown,
With peals of Shot, the rolling Orbs do ring,
Bravely resolved they close th'events to try,
Of Fate, and Fortune, Chance and Destiny.
XCVII.
There head, to head, each Gen^ral other faced,
With equal heat of deadly fury fired,
The Battails Sphere, that erst the Plain embraced,
Seemed to its Center now to be retired,
In his own strength, and courage each Man placed
The glorious end, to which they all aspired,
Some fighting stand, whilst others fighting fall,
And each Man fights, as each Man fought for all.
XCVIII.
The sanguine Die, that Burnished every Blade,
Which reeking from some bloody Slaughter came,
Their angry Owners cruel Acts betrayed,
Whilst the opposed, killing with equal Flame,
The Conquest doubtful first, then bloody made
To him that lost, and him that overcame,
So well on both Sides was the Battle fought,
One dearly sold, what the other dearly bought.
XCIX.
The Sieur de Rhodes who the King''s Cornet bore,
A loyal, daring, and unblemished Youth,
Writ in the Crimson of his streaming Gore,
Must seal his Manhood, and confirm his Truth,
Th'unpitying Steel his panting Vitals tore,
Who dying stoopt a Spectacle of ruth,
In some few Minutes he exspiring fell,
To live in Fames eternal Chronocle
C.
Yet ever he yielded to the mortal Blow,
Courage awhile upheld his dying weight,
Like a young Cedar, did he bend and bow,
Loath to obey the Summons of his Fate,
Now would he have revenged his Wound, when now,
Death must alas! his ^rave acts terminate,
He threatening fell, as if his single fall,
Had been enough to overwhelm them all.
CI.
From his Disaster flew the tell-tale Fame,
Thorough the Field to all the Royal Host,
And does aloud from Troop to Troop proclaim,
That Henry was in the main Battle lost,
The sudden News their Manly hearts o'ercame,
So that in terror, and confusion tossed,
The daunted Soldiers in amazement fly,
Opening a way to the Duke's Victory.
CII.
But e're this dangerous error too far flew,
Through all the Files of every hardy Band,
Their Warlike King, the Loyal Nobles knew,
In the first Ranks contending hand, to hand,
His cutting Sword his bold Opposers slew,
No less his words their courages command,
They rush into the conflict, live; or dye,
With the French Barons wonted bravery.
CIII.
Naught now their res'lute fury could oppose,
So fast, and wounding fell their Weapons bright,
With desperate rage; they dealt their killing blows
To give a period to that cruel Fight,
Which in a bloody color was to close
Orewhelming Thousands in Eternal Night,
Such, and so dire, the consequences are,
That still attend that Hell-bred Monster War.
CIV.
Now Conquest, who on her triumphant wings,
So long had hovered umpire of their fight,
Makes a brave stoop, and down her body flings,
On Henry's meritorious crest to light,
On high her Golden Plumes do clapping ring,
To tell the distant World great Bourbon's might,
She now comes down the Quarrel to decide,
In which before such hapless numbers died.
CV.
As I have seen a Field of standing Corn
In doubtful conflict wave their pendant Heads,
By the uncertain Air confusedly born,
Which only whispring the large Field orespreads,
But by a sudden storm depres't and torn,
Drooping their bearded tops to their first beds,
Whilst the rude Wind, exalted with his prize,
To the next crop with riotous fury flies.
CVI.
So fared it with the League, who for a space,
With equal fortune, well maintained their post,
Fighting with equal brav'ry face, to face,
No side of other could advantage boast,
Equal their Honor, equal their Disgrace;
Till, at the last all hopes of safety lost,
The valiant on the Bed of Honor lie,
Whilst the less daring in confusion fly.
CVII.
Half killed with fear the coward Rebels run,
Thorough the Field an Ignominious race,
Like fearful Deer they crow'd away to shun,
The danger of the Loyal hunters Chase,
Who generously think, too soon to have won,
An easy Conquest, with too little grace,
And wish they had better resistance ^ound,
To have their Acts with greater Glory Crowned.
CVIII.
Although ind^ed no Annalls can out speak;
Or speak enough of this great Victory,
Where such a handful, could such Squadrons break;
Repel their force, and make their Captain fly,
In courage strong, alas! in numbers weak,
Armed only with their Faith and Loyalty;
But Heaven was pleased to favor Henry's claim
Against whose will all Earthly strength is vain.
CIX.
On every side the Monarch's Arms prevail,
And put the Leaguers to a shameful flight,
They now pursue that Foe, who to assail,
Their thiner Troops brought such a seeming might,
Some flying 'scape, whilst others falling quail,
To bid their Honors with the World good Night,
But none so daring in that desperate State,
As once to turn, and look upon his Fate.
CX.
Yet in this Torrent of admired success,
Even some Victors Hearts were full of woe.
Because their longing Eyes they could not bless
With their Loves Object; nor did all their know,
There Prince's safety, and their happiness,
But feared him fallen in the late overthrow.
In such a doubtful, and afflicted sort,
Many had drunk the poison of report.
CXI.
But when they saw him from the Chase retire
Their drooping Spirits then began to wake,
The Soldiers crow'd t'approach their Sov'rain nigher
And, as their Eyes a full assurance take
Their Loyal Hearts over charged with zealous fire,
Straight into Thundering Acclimations break,
Vive le Roy, thorough the Welkin ran,
Which so auspitiously the Day began,
CXII.
Still like the Sparks of a late mastered fire,
Some Foes appeared on the forsaken Plain,
The Leaguers Infantry remained entire,
Of which the sturdy Swisse seemed to disdain,
A shameful flight; nor could they safe retire
But to their ruin, and Eternal shame,
Wherefore the brawny Clowns as undismayed,
Some show of resolute resistance made.
CXIII.
But when they saw the Canon drawing near,
To force their Arms, and tame their fruitless pride,
Their stubborn Hearts, then thawed away in fear,
Their threatening words, and looks were laid aside,
They think to trust his mercy safest were,
Whose Conquering Sword, they had so lately tried,
And straight way down their useless weapons
threw,
To beg that grace chance had reduced them to.
CXIV.
Nor were they ill advised; for the brave king,
So scorned the ruin of a prostrate Foe,
That, sooner could they not their Arms down fling,
Than he preserve them from the Angry blow
That Death, and Vengeance both, were levelling,
With Fire and Sword to work their overthrow,
His Princely Quarter they do all obtain,
Without one Wound, that might his Mercy
stain.
CXV.
But with the German Foot, far worse it fared,
Whose base revolt from the King's Standard made,
Their Crime so black and Mercies doors so barred,
The Soldiers hands could be no longer stayed,
But for their Treason, as a just reward,
The faithless Squadrons furiously invade,
Strewing the Plain, with their dismembered
Limbs,
Which in the Ocean of their false Blood swims.
CXVI.
And now the Fields the Conquerors entire,
No opposition left, no Foe appears,
The Royalists triumphantly retire,
Whilst Victory the waving Banners bears,
Nor dare my Muse to other Acts aspire,
So much the Fate of this attempt she fears;
Owning her weakness in Heroic Song,
That may have done these noble Heroes wrong.
CXVII.
Thus did this Day, so doubtfully begun,
Set red in Henry's Honor and Renown,
He that in all his Battails ever won
A Victor's Wreath, and in this last his Crown,
Which having humbly kiss't the bafl'd Sun
Into the Western Ocean bowed him down;
Leaving fair France unto his brighter Ray,
May every injured Prince have such a Day.
W. WHITE.

Amen.
FINIS.
Advertisement.
THe Great French Dictionary* In Two Parts* The First, French and English: The
Second English and French* according to the Ancient and Modern Orthography.
Wherein E^ch Language (...) Set forth in its greatest Latitude* The various
Senses of Words, both Proper and Figurative, are orderly Digested; and
^llustrated with Apposite (...), and Proverbs: The Hard Words Explained; and
the Proprieties Adjusted. To which are Prefixed the Grounds of Both Languages,
in Two Grammatical Discourses; the One English, and the Other French. By Guy
Mi^ge* Gent* London* Printed for Thomas Basset, at the George near St.
Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street.


