A CENSURE OF That Reverend and Learned man of God Mr. JOHN COTTON, Lately of
New England, upon the way of Mr. Henden of Bennenden in Kent, expressed in some
Animadversions of his upon a Letter of Mr. Henden's, sometimes sent to Mr.
Elmeston.

2. A brief and solid Exercitation concerning the Coercive power of the
Magistrate in matters of Religion, by a reverend and learned Minister, Mr.
Geoge Petter, lately of Bread in SUSSEX.

3. Mr. Henden's Animadversions on Mr. Elmestons's Epistle Revised and
Chastized.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for JOHN STAFFORD, at the sign of the George near
Fleet Bridge. 1656.

Mr. Hendons ANIMADVERSIONS On Mr. Elmestons EPISTLE, Revised and Chastised.
I Will say little to your Preface, but leave it to the discreet, judicious,
and godly Reader, to examine and censure as he finds cause. Only I desir^
that the Reader may know, that it is but your vain Surmise, that my other
Answer to your Letter (as you intimate in the beginning of your Preface, and
hint elsewhere in your Book) was the joynt-labour of sund^y Neighbor-Ministers
concurring with me. Touching which I Page 94.
can truly say, that not any of them, no not the neer^st to me knew much of it,
I am sure saw not a line of it, until I had sent a Copy of it to your self.
So far were they from contributing their Midwifry to the Birth of it. There
was but unum ad unum, according to the Erasm. Chil. 2. Cent 2.
Proverb. But this is the overweening confidence that you have of your self,
that l^k^ Miles gloriosus, the braggadosia Soldier in Plautus, you think me
too weak a man to grapple with you: and indeed I boast not of my abilities.
What I am, I am by the grace of God alone, whom also I thank for that small
mite of Learning, humane or divine, that I have. But as St. Augustine says, so
say I, Ego parvas vires habeo, sed Dei verbum magnas habet; I have but small
strength: Cited by Mr. Burg. vindic. leg. in the Preface Orat. post Mich. 1573.
but the Word of God and the Truth have great power. And as the learned Doctor
Reynolds, Bonam causam vel infans sustineat, mala vix Cicero patronus
sufficiat. A very Babe may uphold a good cause, but Cicero himself is fearce a
sufficient Patron for a bad. It savours of the like arrogant spirit, that you
would have my Answer to you come forth in the name, and with the united forces
of all our Ministers. What is this but some spice of Goliah's termagant spirit,
who did defy the whole Host Chiliads 1. ^ent. 5.
of Israel? and more than an Herculean courage, of whom the Proverb is, Ne
Hercules quidem contra duos, Hercules himself would not take on him to deal^
with two. Methinks I hear from you the brags of that flattering Parasit^ to
his Braggadosi^ Master, that he, Hostium legiones difflavit spiritu quasi
ventus folia, Plaut. Mil. glor. Act. 10. Scen. 1.
that he had blown away legions of enemies with a blast, as the wind does
leaves. It may be for all this your boasting you may have your hands full of
one ere we have done, as the Braggadosia Dares in the Poet, had of aged
Eutellus, who upon encounter Virg. Aen. 5.
with that aged Worthy, notwithstanding his insolent boast and challenge, was
feign to yield him up the Bucklers upon Aeneas timely advice, who saw it like
else to go ill with him saying,

Nonne alias vires, conversaque numina sentis? Cede Deo. --
Do thou not feale a strength above thine own,
And God against thee? Unto God sit down.
But leaving further to meddle with your Preface, I pass to your
Animadversions, where you tell me, that my Epistle comes galloping in, etc.
Whereto I say, That I was never noted among my neigbours for a Galloper, but
one that usually rode a sober pace: The more unlikely is it that I should turn
Galloper in my age, or that my Epistle should come galloping in, and that upon
a wooden Horse, who could not sure be very free of motion, but as he was drawn
by others strength. But howsoever thus you j^^re at this not wooden story, as
you scoff, but a pleasant Poetical fiction, yet the application of it to your
opinion and practice, about an Universal toleration in Religion, does so fully
meet with you therein, that it makes you kick and lash like a Jade nettled in
the breech. It is a vile and lewd perverting of my words and meaning, to say
(as you do) that liberty granted to tender consciences in Religion, is by me
compared to this Trojan Horse: For I speak plainly of an Universal toleration
of all ways and consciences in Religion, and that not as established and owned
by the State (as some did calumniate me) (For I knew, and know that there was
an Act made against Ranterisme, that they had declared themselves against
Arrians in condemning Mr. Fry his book; and against Socinians in ordering the
Cracovian Catechism to be burnt, for which their zeal for Christ and his
Truth, I bless the Lord, and wish, that from all Gods people they may have
their deserved honor) but I mentioned it only as a thing pleaded for, taken
up by the headstrong practice of too many, which is sadly evident to the
World. And is there no difference between such a vast toleration, and a just
liberty granted unto tender consciences? If men will be blasphemou^ Mahumetans,
execrable Arrians, and Socinians, idolatrous Papists, gross Arminians,
wretched Soule-Mortalists, fantastic Seekers, etc. Are these to be tolerated
as men of tender consciences in Religion? Such only have been counted men of
tender consciences in Religion, whose mistakes have been in matters
indifferent, or at least in points not fundamental, of an inferior allay,
carrying themselves in an humble and peaceable way, and not struggling to make
parties and rents in the Church; with whom much patience is to had, and to whom
due liberty is to be granted. But surely such as err in matters fundamental,
or next to the foundation, and pertinaciously persist therein, after due pains
taken with them, to inform them in the truth, and convince them of their
error, yea, and also openly profess, and spread them abroad to seduce others,
are far from men of tender consciences, unless Drunkards, Adulterers, Railers,
etc. be so also, with whom Heretics are coupled, Gal. 5. 20. Tender
Consciences and true Grace may meet in one subject, and none indeed are truly
of tender Conscience, but such as are truly Gracious.

But what spark of saving Grace can be in such, whose minds and consciences
are possessed and corrupted with damnable errors and heresies, as Peter calls
them? It is but censorious ignorance which you manifest in taxing me for the
use of this Poetical fiction of the Trojan Horse; nor is it utterly unsuitable
to the majesty of Divinity (though in this my Epistle I treat of no special
point of Divinity) especial^y in controversall writings to make use of
Poetical fictions, or Poetry, when as the Apostle in his preaching and
writing, did think the speeches of Heathen Poets suitable enough to his most
serious D^vinity, as appears Acts 17. 28. 1 Cor. 15. 33. Tit. 1. 11. where he
does allege them: And say that this is but a Fiction, yet is is a rule among
Logicians, that feigned ex^mples and similitudes serve to illustrat^ as well as
tru^, Ficta similitudo parem vim habet veris, A feigned sim^litude is of like
force with the true; Exemplorum, says another, non est Ramus dialect. lib. 1.
cap. 21.
exquirenda veritas, sed solum rei propositae declaratio aut convenientia. The
truth of examples is not to be looked to, but only the declaration Zabarel. de
mente bumana. cap. 8.
of the matter propunded and their fitness for it. It is also but a poor
soarling to carp at a wor^, that upon mention of this Poetical Fiction, I
call, by way of allusion, our Church our Troy: Sure I am that it is an
expression which a thrice noble Author, for B^rth, Honor, Learning and Piety,
thought it not unfit to use, namely, Philip Mornee, Lord of Plessis; At whom to
carp would sooner bewray much audacious folly in you, than any In his Preface
to his my^^ery of Iniquity, not fa^ from the end.
whit asperse his wisdom and gravity. And touching your farther descant upon
this name, it is a wild and rovi^g conceit, that Rome was built by any roving
Trojans, when there were more than four hundred years between Aeneas coming
into Italy with his Trojans, and the building of Rome by Romulus and Remus;
when the wandering of the Trojans was ceased, yea their name lost, and Buchol.
in Cbron.
extinguished, though some of the race might remain though swallowed up by
other nations, and under other n^mes. 2. Where and by whom Rome is called a
second Troy, if you had showed, I should have been beholding to you for that
piece of Philology: For I confess ingenuously, it is not within the compass
of my memory. 3. It is a wrong to ou^ Church in England (now as it is) to call
it Hierarch^call, when it was of that frame, the good Party groaned under such
Lords as an heavy burden, and it has now clean cast them off, and changed its
face and form into a Church Ministerial; your petty Separation comes nearer to
an Anarchy, than our Church State to an Hierarchy. Last, It is a wonder you
tell us of, viz. of a Christian Church ar^sing out of the ashes of a Pagan
City. The Proverb is, E. squilla non nascitur Chiliad 2. Cent. 3.
Rosa, The sweet Rose grows not out of the strong sented Sea-onion, much more
unlikely it is that a City of God should arise out of a Palace of Satan: You
love, if not all devou^ing words, as the Prophet speaks, Psalm. 52. 3. yet all
biting words. But if you mean (as some speak) of a noble Trojan, Brutus
arriving in England, that Englishmen are descended of old of the Troj^n B^ood,
that has been counted the honor of the Nation, or if any blemish be in it, it
reflecteth on you, yours, and your company, as much as upon us or any other.

Concerning Troy's dis^olution, I speak not of the Metitorious Cause that did
procure it, which was (as you say) their retaining of that Strumpet Helena, but
of the Active Cause, which by fire and sword did lay it wast, which were the
Grecian Captains hidden in that Horse, and the other G^aecian Army joining
with them. And for a^y such accu^s^d thing to be found amongst us, we are as
free by Gods grace, and so shall be, and far from any such spiritual H^rlotry,
as you are in this your censure of u^ from Christian Charity. But whatsoever be
amongst us, I see not but that you allow, and would bring in amongst us as
provoking, and evil, and a more filthy Harlot, than was Helena, viz, an
universal toleration for all Religions. For Helena, though she lewdly forsook
her Husband Menelaus, and ran away with Paris, yet as long as she lived she was
fair and honest toward him. But this Harlot-Toleration does allow men liberty
to commit spiritual Fornication, with any false Religion, and at pleasure to
give a bill of Divorce to the old, and take up a new. That liberty (which I
yoke, you say, most unfitly to the Trojan wooden Horse) what is it but an
universal Toleration for all Ways and Consciences in Religion? Which Liberty
(say you) is a precious Jewel, bought for men by the invaluable ransom of
Jesus Christ. In which words I doubt you are little aware what you say. What
has Christ shed his blood, that men might have liberty to deny his D^ity, to
reproach the Scriptures, to be Arrian^, Socinians, Papist^, and to be what they
please in point and profession of Religion? I trust you abhor to affirm such
things. And yet such horrid consequences must needs ensue thereupon, if the
liberty, which I so comp^re, be the Jewel so purchased, since I manifestly
speak it, and that only of such an universal and general toleration. And
such as will so say, may as well say, that Christ has shed his precious blood
to procure men a liberty to whore, swear, and be drunk, as to be of what way in
Religion they please. Gross ways in false Religion, and foul Errors and
Heresies, do tend as much to the dishonor of Christ, and damnation of men's
souls, as such foul and gross sins. It is true what you add, that by Christ
we are redeemed from vain traditions and humane thraldom, to be a free and
willing people in Christ's service. But such a liberty comes far short of that
vast liberty, to be of what Religion we please, and to be tolerated therein
without any control from the Magistrate. You spightfully and falsely charge
me, as defaming our noble Patriots about their honorable endeavors, and
prosperous success^ in preventing the overflowing of Popery, promoting the
Gospel, repressing Tyranny, or procuring us any just Liberty in the State or
Religion: For the which I bless the Lord, and honor them according to their
most worthy deserts. But such a vast and wide liberty (as I speak of, and you
also must mean, if you answer to the point) viz. a toleration for all ways and
consciences in Religion, as Christ never purchased for us, so cannot I
acknowledge, that the State does allow it, however sundry plead for it, and
usurp it. And therefore you do more reproachfully defame them, to make them
Patrons of such a wicked Liberty, than I, who deny them to be so. But whether
it be usurped only, or whether it should be established (which God forbid I
should) I would never write upon such a Liberty, or the procuring of it, as you
say I ought. This is the finger of God. That can never be the work of God^
finger, which is contrary to the word of his mouth. I do^ not complain of such
a toleration, as in particular destructive unto us, but as to the welfare of
the Gospel and Church in the whole Land; which sad effect it would as
manifestly tend unto, as a general Pestilence, in which infected persons were
permitted to walk abroad among the sound, to the destroying the health of a
Nation, and making the disease the more general and mortal among them.

In which estate of Religion, though we have, and might have, more liberty than
heretofore under the Prelates, and were to be thankful to God and Man for our
liberty to serve God in his own way. Yet no good Christian but must needs take
it to heart, to the great abatement of his comfort, to see as much liberty
granted to Error, Heresy, Idolatry, etc. as to Christ's own saving Truth,
and that such abominations to Christ's open dishonor, and the damnation of
souls should have free course and passage. I know not well what you mean by a
Worldly power, whose Prop our Church should need. The civil power of the
Magistrate, especially in a Christian, is unfitly so nicknamed: For it is an
Ordinance of God, and no^ merely of the World, and ought to be employed for
God: It may degenerate into a mere worldly power, in the hands of pagan and
profane persons, when it is exercised only about worldly matters, with a
neglect of Religion, yea perhaps against Christ and true Religion. But if by it
you mean the civil Power, I doubt not but that our Church, as a true Church of
Christ, can stand without that prop. But this withal I give you to know, that
even Christ's true Church and Religion, though it can stand without such worldly
support, does yet the more flourish, spread and lift up its head^ when the
civil Magistrate does undertake the protection, and does countenance it not
only against Persecution, but also against contrary Schisms, Heresi^s, and
Idolatry. It was some benefit which the Lord did mean the Church should enjoy
by the civil Power, when he did promise that Kings should be nursing Fathers,
and Queen^ nursing Isa. 49. 23.
Mothers thereunto. Where let it be noted, that the promise is made unto the
Church, and not to all ways in Religion, though Heretical and Idolatrous, as
if they should have equell protection and countenance from Kings, Queens, and
supreme Magistrates with the Church.

And what benefit the Church has by the protection and support of the
Magistrate, as our England may sufficiently witness, where Religion did more
flourish in the free and open worship of God, and the number of professions of
Religion under the reign of Edward the sixth, blessed Queen Elizabeth etc. the
one whereof was even in his younger days a nursing Father, the other all her
days a nursing Mother to the Church; then in the days of Queen Mary, a cruel
S^e p^dame and persecutor thereof. So if we take a survey of States abroad,
certainly we shall perceive that the Church and Religion does prosper better in
Geneva and its territory and among the Helevetian Protestants, where one way of
true Religion is maintained, than in Polonia, such States wherein this
mingle-mangle is tolerated.

Next, you would have me remember, that the Primitive was built not by Power,
but by the Spirit, That by the Spirit Christ Zech. 4. 6.
went forth conquering; That the Stone dashing, all opposers was Revel 6 2.
cut out of the mountain without hands; That Gods people are a Dan. 2. 34.
willing people, and never act nobly but out of a principle of love. All Psalm.
110. 3. and 47. 9.
this I do desire to remember. But what is all this to prove an 2 Cor. 5. 14.
Universal toleration of all ways and consciences in Religion, which was the
thing I insisted on as the main root of much mischief amongst us? What? cannot
the Church be built, nor Christ conquer by the Spirit, nor Daniels Stone be cut
out of the Mountain without hands, nor Gods people be a willing people, nor
act out of love, unless such an universal toleration be allowed, and it be
left as free for men to be Atheists, Mahumetans. Arrians, Pap^sts, Heretics,
and Sectaries of any kind, as well as to be true, sound, and orthodox
Christians? This is a mystery you had need to open to us, how such a toleration
does conduce any whit to make the Gospel the more powerful in converting, or
Gods people the more free and willing in believing and pro^essing.

But it seems you muster up these forces against all coercive power of the
Magistrate in matters of Religion.

But first, There was no need to fall upon this controve^sie, if your intent
were only to plead for some due liberty for tender consciences, that dissent
in lesser matters, and that in a modest, meek, and peaceable way, which I did
not gainsay, who only bent my speech against this miscreant and universal
toleration.

2. If you intend to argue against all such coercive power here is committed by
you ignorated Elenchi, you argue not against the question as it ought to be
stated, which perhaps you conceal, that your arguing may be the more plausible
among your D^sciples, and other simple and well-meaning Readers, but such as
do not well understand the state of this controversy. For you know which you
should have let your Reader know (which one thing understood, would have cut
the sinews of most of your Reasons hudled together about this in your Preface)
that we do not say, that the M^gistrate has power to comp^ll any man to
believe the Gospel, or to comp^ll such as are strangers from the Faith, to
take up the profession of it. But we affirm,

1. That the Magistrate may and ought to prohibit his Subjects now in the
days of the Gospel, the open exercise of Impious and Idolatrous worship, the
open profession of ungodly Errors and Heresies, yes, also of rash and
uncharitable rent^ from the true Church in his Dominion, and the open neglect
and profaning of the Lords day.

2. It is in his power, and it becomes him to command them, yea, even such as
be strangers from the Faith, to attend that worship of God which is naturally
moral, as to hear the Word read and preached, that they may be convinced of
their false Religion, instructed in the true Faith, and converted to it by the
Lords blessing coming in upon their hearing, and others outwardly professing
the Faith, might be confirmed in it, and converted in the Inner man to a real
and powerful profession of it; and also to join in prayer and praising God. It
does not impeach this assertion, that David did not cause the Edomites,
Moabites, and other Idolatrou^ Nations, conquered by him, to renounce their
Idolatrous Worship, but did suffer them in it; nor did send any to teach them
God^ Law, or constable aine them to attend it. The Lord in those days had confined
his worship and covenant of Salvation only to the people of the Jews, and
would not have it made common generally to other Nations, except to some few
Proselytes that came in, but had shut them out from this Covenant; wherefore
David was not obliged to any such c^re of them, nor had any warrant to send any
to teach them Gods Laws and Ways: but now under the Gospel there it no such
r^^^raint; but as God would have all men to repent, and his Grace is free for
all Nations: So supreme Magistrates, had they any Heathen under their power,
they were so as above to exercise their power, to put down their Idolatry, and
bring them to Gods worship. But this is to be taken in by the way, That mere
force is not to be used, but instruction and teaching to inform in the truth,
and to persuade the will ought to go along with power, that they be not driven
as Beasts, but led fairly along, as men of reason and understanding.

3. For such Subjects as have been baptized into the faith of Christ, and so
have given themselves to the profession of it, the Magistrate may and ought to
provide against their renouncing of the Faith, and falling to Heresy and
Idolatry, and for their submitting to means of being further taught and built
up in it, and holding forth the profession of it, as otherwise, so especially
in frequenting the worship of God.

Last, The Magistrate may and ought, by his Authority, not only give way to
the profession of the true Religion, and some way to countenance it, but is
bound to provide that Gods Word be preached by faithful and able Ministers,
that they be encouraged and well maintained, and to command the practice of
Gods worship in all points by Gods people:

Now your Scriptures make not against this Assertion thus explained: For they
chiefly intend the inward conversion, and work of Grace in the heart, which is
only the work of the Spirit, and to which the civil power cannot reach; nor
do we allow him to meddle with it, as if by his Laws he could work it. They
concern not these outward actions mentioned, which may be reached and regulated
by the civil Power. And though inward Conversion be the sole work of the
Spirit, yet does it not exclude the use of outward means, which do either more
directly conduce or occasionally make some way for that work.

1. It does not exclude the preaching, hearing, or other use of Gods Word, by
which the Spirit works Faith and other saving Graces in men: Nor,

2. Does it exclude the exercise of Church Censures, which avail to keep men
in the Faith, and an holy Conversation: Nor,

3. The command of the M^gistrate (so far as has been said) to restrain men
from Idolatry and Heresy, which cannot but hinder the work of true Conversion,
and to command the attendance on the Word preached, and other means of
instruction, whereby men may be brought under the shadow of the holy Ghost,
that he may work on them.

But to touch upon your Scriptures more particularly; for that of Zeeharie, I
shall desire the Reader to wait for the clearing of it, until I come to a
passage in your Book following, where it is again alleged, and will be more
fitly examined: To that of Rev. 6. 2. it is but your single conceit (as you
affect to be an odd man by your self) that by the white Horse whereon Christ
is said there to ride forth conquering, or the Bow in his hand is meant of the
Spirit: It is an expression not to be paralleled, and sense not well sounding,
to say, That Christ does ride on the Spirit, or carry the Spirit in his hand:
It is the more general and genuine sense to understand it of the preaching of
the Gospel, according to that of Psalm 45. where Christ it bid to ride forth,
verse 4. as on an horse, which is there expounded his truth, and furnished with
sharp arrows, verse 5. to pierce the heart of his enemies. Now the preaching of
the Word does carry forth Christ, as it were, on Horseback, in the view of men,
and out of it, as a Bow in his hand, does he shoot his divine Doctrine,
Promises, and Threats which pierce to the heart of men; and by it he did, and
does conquer the world. The preaching of the Gospel has its ^fficacy indeed
from the Spirit going forth with it; which conquering power of the preaching of
the Gospel, and of the Spirit the command of the Magistrate, as above declared,
does no way hinder, but promote rather, as tending to bring men within the rode
of that white Horse, that they may be conquered by his Rider, and brought to
his Obedience, and within the reach of his Bow, that his Arrows may pierch
their hearts with godly sorrow for sin, and make them fall down unto Christ.
Subordinata non pugnant, says the Logician, Things subordinate fight not one
with another, but K^kerman. System. log. l. 10. sect. 2. cap. 5.
are subservient one to the other. For the Stone cut out of the Mountain
without hands, Dan. 2. 34. it does indeed typifie Christ and the Church his
Kingdom. And as he, concerning his humane nature, was framed in the Womb of
the Virgin Mary, without any procreation from man, and set up as King of the
Church by God alone, without man's concurrence, so his Church and Kingdom was
first set up by Gods only power and authority, and not by that of Man; but so
that outward means were and are also used by him, and all is not done by the
immediate power of God, without any use of means, as at first the world was
created by him. For there are Ministers employed to preach the Gospel,
Magistrates set on work to countenance and defend it, and by their authority to
set it up in their Countries, Professors raised up to hold it forth in their
lives, to suffer for it; bu^ these means are so used by the Lord, that the
whole work and success of it appears to be from Gods power and blessing alone,
not at all from man, as hereafter I shall more largely show, and so is cut out,
as it were without hands. It is manifest, that in the overthrow of those mighty
Monarchies figured and set out, Dan. 2. the Lord did use the power of the Sword
and Armies; and I believe that you think that Christ this Stone does so now,
and will do the like in dashing to pieces all the mighty Opposers of his
Kingdom. And therefore all things that are done toward the advancement of this
Kingdom, are not wholly done without hands or external means: And why then
may not Christ also use some hands or external means, in some things that
more directly tend to the setting up and maintaining his Church and Kingdom?
whose success and efficacy yet is not from themselves, but wholly from Christ's
power and spirit, and so effected, as it were, without hands. For Psalm. 110. 3.
and 47. 9. which say, That Gods people must be a willing people; and 2 Cor. 5.
14. That they act not nobly, unless out of love. How does the command of the
Magistrate, as it is above laid down, hinder them in Gods service to be a
willing people, or to act out of love? For if they command good and lawful
things, the command does not hinder their willingness in the doing of them,
but encourage them in it, as knowing that they shall do them with praise and
approbation. If they restrain them by their command from evil things, men
ought not at any time to be willing to do evil, but rather should willingly
be restrained from it. And it is better that against their will they be
restrained from evil, than that they be permitted willingly to rush into it.
It is also an Antinomian misconceit to think that nothing is done willingly,
and out of love to God, which is done out of obedience and respect to a
commandment enjoining or prohibiting it. 2. Gods people were to be a willing
people in his service, and to act out of love under the Law also as well as the
Gospel. For there must be a willing mind^ and working out of love before any
thing will be accepted: And yet 1. Chro. 29. 9. Deuteronomy. 6. 5. 2. Cor. 8. 12.
Abraham is commended, that he would not only exhort and persuade, but out of
his authourity command his household to Genesis 18. 19. 2 Chronicles. 14. 4.
fear God; and Asa likewise, that he commanded Judah to seek the Lord God, and
to do the Law, etc. Which course of theirs, had it hindered the willingness of
those that were commanded in Gods service, or their acting out of love, it may
seem strange that those so godly persons should pract^ce it, stranger that it
is recorded to the praise of both. 3. It is as much required that men should be
willing to abstain from foul sins against the second Table, and to do the
good duties of it, and that herein they should act out of love; about which yet
you allow the Magistrate to make laws to r^straine men from Murder,
Fornication, Theft etc. and to cause them to be sober, honest, and just. And
how then does this willingness, and acting out of love, hinder Mag^strates
from making meet Laws in matters of Religion? Last, Nothing can be spoken more
punctually than that of the Apostle, concerning Servants, that what they do in
the Masters service, they should do it heartily and willingly.
Notwi^hstanding, Ephesians. 6. 6, 7. Col. 3. 23.
surely you will grant Masters that authority over Servants, as to lay their
command upon them, to do them just service, and to punish the neglect of it.
Willingness to do good, and acting out of love, is nothing hindered, but may
be promoted by the command of Authority. It is true, that if a thing be done
only out of obedience and respect to man's command, it wants its acceptance
with God, but it is good in it self; and though an humane command may give
some occasion to the doing of it; yet a godly person will do it also, yea, and
more out of the love of God, and to show his ready obedience to him. But here
we have a Criticisme cast in by the way, viz. that the Hebrew Text carries it
to signify voluntaries, as well as willing people, as if, forsooth, there were
some great and observable difference between these two words; when the one is
but our common English word, the other coined out of the Latin, and are both
the same in sense and signification. Next, we have a silly cavil about the
Errors named, as coming out of the womb of an univers^ll toleration. Nay, say
you, they were long extant before such a toleration was granted, and so that
could not be a womb to breed and bring them forth.

Answ. 1. It is more than we know that such a Toleration is yet granted: If it
be, show us the act for it. It is and has been indeed long pleaded for, and
practiced.

2. For those Errors and Heresies, I speak not of their first rising, which
was heretofore in foreign parts, and those perhaps where too much way was
given for such a Toleration; but of their int^uding, spreading and multiplying
in ou^ Land. Concerning which, if we look back unto the writings and practices
of some later years, it will appear, that if the one were not extant before
the other, that yet like two bad weeds, they grew up together, and that this
Toleration, did if not give them their first birth, yet confer much to their
growth and enlargement. What then becomes of that clamor that I have here
non-pluss'd all Logicians, as denying the cause to precede the effect, and am
one unworthy to be disputed with, is denying the maine principles of Reason?

Good words, I pray you, be not so eager, but let me in cold blood argue the
matter with you. If I were palpably mistaken in Ne saevi magne Sacerdos.
the rise and beginning of these things (which you have not proved, but barely
^ffi^med) the mistake were only in my calculating the time of their Nativity,
not in my denying that Logical Axiom, Causa est prior effectu: If this Axiom
were alleged to confut^ me, I should as readily receive the Axiom as you;
only the question would be which of these were the cause, which the effect,
and which was before the other, whether that Toleration, or these Errors and
Heresies in nature and time: I may here then return you some of your own
language, that my intellectualls (as you jeere) were not so much disturbed with
any heat of passion against S^ctaries, as your brains were taken with the
whirligig out of your eager humor to carp and snarle: What follows is more
serious. If Errors arise (say you) not carnal but spiritual weapons must
beat them down.

Answ. I grant that spiritual weapons, as preaching, conference,
Church Censures and prayer, are the most proper and effectual for this work,
as more directly tending to inform in the Truth, convince of Error, and
persuade men's hearts and minds, and such are first and most to be used in this
case. But by your leave no these only: Spiritual weapons must be used against
sins against the second Table, as preaching, admonition, Church Censures to
convines men thereof, to restrain them and bring them to repentance. But if
these aloue should be used, such sins and sinners would not so fully and
effectually be repressed, as when withal civil Laws are made against them,
and such punishments prepared for them: So here Spiritual weapons alone may be
too weak to beat down Errors and Heresies, and keep them from breaking out,
and spreading abroad. But if with these Spiritual weapons the carnal (as you
in some scorn call them) viz. the prohibition of the Magistrate, and some
moderate punishment be added, they will do good, as otherwise, so to make
erroneous persons the more seriously to consider of their ways, whether they
be right or wrong, and the more ready to receive the truth manifested to them,
which otherwise out of pride and self-conceit they will reject: It is too well
known that most erroneous persons are of the nature of the Servant Solomon
speaks of, who will not be corrected with words, though he understand well
enough his Masters mind; yet upon b^re words he will not answer, nor be
brought unto his duty; So is it with these persons for the most, let them be
never so fully convinced, let the truth be never so clearly manifested to them,
so that they cannot put it off but with gross shifts; yet for all words and
spiritual weapons, they will not yield to it, but of haughtiness of spirit
persisi in their errors, and be often more pertinatious and turbulent in their
way.

Errors and Offenses you say must come according to the Scripture, to manifest
the approved, and to make Truth's victory the more glorious.

Answ. If they must be, and that by Gods permission, etc. must they therefore
be suffered to go on without control or contradiction? If so, it is not
lawful to oppose them with spiritual weapons, viz. Freaching, Writing,
Conference, Church censure, etc. For in so doing we shall go against Gods
providence and permission, who will have them to be, and that for good ends;
and it is in vain to think thereby to repress them, since they must needs be.

This permission then, and necessity of them, does no more exclude the use of
the civil Power to restrain them, than of spiritual means: And if,
notwithstanding the same, there be place l^ft for the Spiritual weapons to
repress them, there may be also place for the Civil power in right order and
manner against them. But what are these Offenses that Christ says must Matt.
1^. 7.
needs be? They are not only Errors, Heresies, and false Religions, but also
other foul sins against the second Table, as Murders, Whoredoms, Theft, etc.
which as is the corruption of Man's Nature, and the streng^h of Satan's and the
Worlds Temptations cannot be avoided, but do break forth, and must needs do
so, and that not without Gods permission. What then? must there be a free
Toleration of these Iniquities? or must Spiritual weapons only be used
against them to repress them? we should then surely have a woeful world to live
in, which is now too too bad notwithstanding all good Laws against them: And if
notwithstanding this necessity and Gods permission, Magistrates may, yea ought
(as herein I presume you will concur with us) to make Laws against such
enormities, and infl^ct civil punishments on them, the like necessity and
permission of Heresies and Errou^s in Religion, is no sufficient reason against
the use of the civil Power by Laws and Punishments to oppose them. There is
no more force in such a reason than because it is appointed for all men to die
once, and so men must needs die, Some should argue, that H^b. 9. 27.
therefore it were not lawful, or at least it were in vain to prescribe rules
to preserve health and life, yea to make laws against murdering men. For might
some say, To what purpose serves such ado? Men must needs die, and all these
rules and laws will not prevent their death. Nor will the ends for which
Errors and Heresies must come, viz. to manifest the approved, and make truths
victory the more notable, conclude for a free toleration of them. For if in
that respect they must be l^^ go free without control of the Mag^strate,
neither should they be opposed or suppressed by sp^rituall means, as which in
the restraint of them would hinder the manifestation of the Approved, and
obscure the victory of Truth. Besides, as other foul offenses against the
second Table fall out by divine permission, so are they permitted amongst
other, even for such ends as errors and offenses in Religion are, viz. to
manifest such the more as are just, sober, chaste and innocent, upon grounds of
good conscience, and to make their righteousness^ and innocence the more
conspicuous. And if all such wickedness were left free without fear of humans
punishment, doubtless in the midst of such a wicked liberty, the
Righteousness, Innocence, and honest Conversation of those who did live justly
and honestly, would be the more eminent and notable. If there were no
punishment for Whoredom, Theft, D^unkennesse, etc. it would make the Chastity,
Sobriety, and Justice, of such as kept themselves from those and such like
Vices, the more famous and praiseworthy. What you say of the Mystery of
Godliness, that it rays out with the most perfect beauty by the clear
discovery of the deepest mystery of In^quity, may be as truly said, that in
such a bad state of things, if it should be, the splendor of true Virtue and
Innocence would ^ay forth with most perfect Beauty, by the discovery of the
foulest practice of reigning iniquity. The more freedom there was in Sodom for
all filthiness and wickedness, the more did Lot's righteousness and
innocence appear. But yet, woe to those M^gistates, that in their dominions
should suffer all wickedness of that sort to go unpunished, and not restrain
it by just and severe laws, that forsooth the honesty and righteousness of
men truly good* might be the better tried, and the more manifest. And truly
Magistrates will never have comfort in granting a free course to Errors,
Heresies, and all ways in Religion, in their respective Countries, upon such
pretenses, that the found in the Faith may be the more manifest, and Truths
conqu^st the more glorious.

And here I think it not amiss to insert this Observation, (...) upon search
it will be found, that Errors and Heresies did a^^se more easily, spread more
swiftly, continue longer in the first three Centuries after Christ, where the
Church wanted the authority of the civil Magistrate to put them down, then
afterward when the Emperors had entertained the Christian Faith, in whose
times they arose not so often, and were much sooner stayed and repressed by the
Edicts and Laws of Emperors, that were found in the Faith, and did oppose
them.

This may ^ppeare by Dauaeus his second Table upon Augustine, De haeresibus,
where he shows what Heresies did arise in every c^ntury, of which the three
first centuries were most fertile, where are reckoned up more than sixty
several Heresies; the other next three centuries afford not many above forty,
and the most of them did arise and flourish under profane and heretical
Emperors.

Obj. Truth in a free passage may come in, as well as Heresy.

Answ. 1. But Truth surely will come in more freely, where the passage is
stopped against Error and Heresy.

2, In such a free passage Error and Heresy in all likelihood would most
prevail, as being more suitable to our corrupt nature: Mala herba cito
crescit, A bad weed grows apace. And naughty weeds will overrun a garden
sooner, if they be not plucked up, than good herbs and flowers replenish and
adorn it.

3. This makes no more against the use of the civil power, to repress them,
than of spiritual means, and Church power. For if Truth in such Liberty may
come in, as well as Heresy, why should there any opposition be made against
Heresy by spiritual weapons? and why should not every way as free a liberty be
left for one, as for the other?

4. It may as well be alleged against all civil Laws to repress any other
wickedness: For why should anysuch Laws be made, when in a free Liberty for
men to live as they list, Righteousness and Virtue may come in, as well as
Unrighteousness, or any other kind of Vice?

Obj. Christ is as potent to 'prevaile in Light, as the Prince of darkness in
Delusions.

Answ. Must we therefore depend upon Christ's immediate and almighty power, and
working without use of means for the spreading Truth, and restraining Heresies?
May we nht as well say* Why should there be any preaching, any writing, any
praying or disputing against Heresies? Christ is potent without such means to
prevail in light. Nay, may we not also say, Why should any Laws be made
against Murder, Whoredom, Theft, Slandering, etc. for God is as potent to
maintain Righteousness, Peace, Chastity and Truth, etc. in such a liberty, as
Satan is to work Unrighteousness, Uncleanness, Envy, Lying, etc. But if it
cannot be expected that Christ should put forth his power to maintain such
Virtues, where there is such a neglect of means, as that no good Laws are
made against the foulest Vices, so surely it may be feared that Satan will
there more prevail with his delusions in Religion, than Christ show himself
powerful in maintaining truth, where no good laws are in force to repress
Heresies or to uphold Divine truth.

Obj. Truth may thus be shut out, and Compulsion has proved a direct enemy to
the Gospel.

Answ. It is true: and so has Preaching, Writing, and Church. censures, helped
to shut out Truth, and been made direct enemies to the Gospel. But that has
been not in the right use of them, by preaching and writing for truth, and just
censuring scandalous and erroneous persons, but by the abuse of them in turning
them against the truth and professors of it. And if this co^rciv^ power (which
in harsh language you delight to call Compulsion) exercised in matters of
Religion, have obstructed Truth, and been an adversary to the Gospel, that
mischief has not sprung from the nature of the power which is good and
lawful, but from the abuse of it by seduced and ill affected Magistrates, who
have misimployed it. And it is a gross Paralogisme, from the abuse of any
thing, to blemish or extinguish the right use of it. And if you would clear
your eyes, and look abroad, you may see that it has often helped to maintain
Truth, and prop^gate the Gospel, witness the godly Kings of Judah, who did
thereby put down Idolatry in their land, and bring their people back to the
true worship of God. Witness the first Christian Emperors, who by it banished
Pagan Idolatry, and promoted Christian Religion. Witness Protestant Princes of
late in England, and other Countries, who by it suppressed Popish Idolatry, and
set up the preaching of the Gospel, and countenanced the profession of it.
Last, Compulsion of the Civil Power has often been an instrument of Tyranny, and
exercised to hinder justice and righteousness, as Solomon shows* And yet
indeed Eccles. 3. 16.
it is not so easily and often used against Justice, and other ^uties of the
second Table, as it is against the Gospel; For that there be more principles of
civil righteousness, and care of preserving peace and man's outward welfare,
left in man's nature to direct thereto, and check unrighteousness, than of
Divine truth in Religion, of which there are left but some general notions,
that there is a God, and that he is to be worshipped; but nothing by any such
principles do they know of the particular manner of his worship, much less
any thing of the Gospel. And if notwithstanding this abuse of civil power, or
compulsion against righteousness and tra^ quility, commanded in the second
Table, it have its right use, and that to b^ a low^d about civil matters of
that table, there may be a right and lawful use of it in matters of Religion,
though by the abuse thereof, it shut out Truth, and be often an enemy to the
Gospel.

Obj. To what way do you so eagerly labor to engage the Sword of the
Magistrate? to your own or to some other?

Answ. This is nothing but the sp^tting of your rancour: For where do I
mention the Sword of the Magistrate in my Epistle? What are the words that I
use to engage the Sword of the Migistrate against any Religion? All that I do,
is but briefly to decipher and complain of that mischief that has come of an
universal toleration of all Religions, and that not as avowed and allowed by
the State, but by you and others cried up and usurped.

2. We take not upon u^ to prescr^be to the Magistrate any way in Religion,
which he should establ^sh, but advise him specially to have recourse to the
Word of God, which is a sure and clear rule; out of which he may learn^ by
diligent search and prayer, taking also the advice of godly and learned
Ministers, what is the good and right way, which he himself should embrace and
also commend, yea, and command unto his Subjects.

3. A^ under the Bishops there was a power practiced which was tyrannical,
whereof you also, a^ well as other, did complain; so now also in this
multiplicity of religious ways, set on foot, some courses must needs be
erroneous and schismatic, in which company you and your party march with the
foremost.

Obj. Neither you nor any other sit in the Chair of Infallibility, and so have
no power over the conscience, which none can have but an unerring Law.

Answ. 1. Whence are these loud words concerning our Infallibility? Our speech
is not of our power, but of the power of the Magistrate.

2. If the Magistrate may not make laws in matters of Religion, because he is
not infallible in his determinations, upon that account you may as we^l abolish
his power about Laws in civil matters; For in those he may mistake, though not
so often and foulely as in matters of Religion, and enact things not only heavy
and burth^nsome unto his people, but also unjust and unrighteou^.

3. There is an infallible and unerring rule, viz: the Word of God, by which
the Magistrate i^ to be direct^d in making Laws: And so far as he keepe^
close to that, his determinations are infallible, and to be observed.

4. The matters that he commands in Religion ought to be the manifest precepts
of God, or evidently consonant to his Word; and then though as being the
command of the Magistrate, they do not absolutely bind the conscience; yet as
God^ L^wes, they have power so to do. It is then a vain surmise, to imagine
that the Magistrate in making such Laws, does encroach upon men's consciences,
as binding men by his mere authority unto the observance of them, and that
under p^ine of damnation, when as he does only command external duties of
Religion, to which men by Gods Law are bound in conscience: A^ for example, the
sanctifying of the Lords day, public attendance upon the Word, and other
natural worship of God, and forbidding what is manifestly forbidden by the
Word, the open professing and publishing of Error and Heresies, and making
unwarrantable Schism^ in the Church, and that only under some temporal
penalties and rewards.

Obj. Suppose you and others were infallible, yet neither you nor any can
create belief in the hearts of any that are contrary-mind^d

Answ. This Argument proceeds upon a false supposition, ^^ if it were affi^med,
that Magistrates should compel men to believe and repent, and in case they do
not, were to punish them, which before has been declared to be otherwise. The
Magistrates power does not enable him to meddle with those inward and
spiritual actions of the soul, but only to regulate the outward in life and
conversation.

It is some mervaile to me, that you that are so acute to ^spy mysteries by
others unseene, see not the weakness of this and of many your reasons; For it
is not in the Magistrates, or any man^ power to create in men's hearts the
principle of true love to their neighbors, nor any of those gracious habits of
inward cha^tity, temperance, meekness and contentation, etc. who yet by Laws
order some outward actions of those virtues, and forbid the actual sins
contrary to them, as railing, quarrelling, fornication, riotous drinking,
theft, etc. And why then in like sort may he not make Laws about External
acts of Religion, to enjoyne the exercise of them, and forbid the actual
contrary sins, though he have no power to create and infuse faith it self? It
is not in vain for Ministers to preach, though they cannot create Faith in the
hearts of dissenters; nor for Magistrates to command hearing of the Word,
though they can infuse no faith into the heart, the outward means are rightly
used, where the inward effect can be only wrought by God. As there is no need
of the creating any new principle in the heart of man for doing these things
wherein the Magistrate does command, which is only the abstaining from outward
evil acts, as the not venting or openly professing Errors, Heresies, and
Blasphemies, or the doing of some external duties, as to join in Gods
public worship, hear the Word, and such like. To perform which, that power
and freedom, which by nature they have, is sufficient.

Obj. The Apostles in Church Affairs were of infallible spirit, but yet claimed
no such power, but endeavored to draw men to faith by the cords of love*

A 1. Here is the same mistake which was noted before, as if it were affirmed,
that Magistrates might compel Infidells, or any, to the Faith of the Gospel:
As for Church Affairs, and any other matters, I trust you know that there is a
wide difference between the Apostles and Church Officers and Magistrates, and
the power committed to them both. The power of the first is only spiritual
and ecclesiastical, and does allow them no other means to reclaim men from
Idolatry, Heresy, or any sin, and to win them to the obedience of the Gospel,
but spiritual, viz. the preaching of the Gospel, and Church censures.

2. But the power of the Magistrate is such, as does furnish them with
authority, to lay commands on men to urge them to what is good, and punishments
to reclaim from evil. It is no wonder then that the Apostles would not intrude
into a power, which was not given them* which yet Magistrates may use as their
proper right.

3. The Apostles did not put forth any coactive power against the foulest sins
of Whoredom, Drunkenness, Theft, etc. to pun^sh them with bodily punishments,
or to urge men to Justice, Temperance, Chastity, but only by words and
exhortatione dissuaded from such sins and persuaded to the contrary vertue^. If
therefore Magistrates may not in Religious affairs go^ beyond this practice of
the Apostles in the use of their power, neither may they use their power for
the punishment of sins against the second Table, or by laws encourage to the
moral virtues thereof.

Obj. All humane Weapons can only force the outward man with a violent and
preternaturall motion, etc. which soon turns again, when the constraint is over.

A. 1. It is not the proper effect of humane and Magistratical commands to
force menby a violent motion, but rather tends to move them to a ready and
willing obedience: such violent and constrained obedience comes not from the
command, but from the indisposition of the commanded parties, who are ill
affected to right and truth.

2. That motion which is unto good, and from evil, though somewhat forced, is
more natural unto man in his right estate, and more agreeable to his right end
and duty, than a most free and willing motion unto sin and from good.

3. Forced motions are used for the common good in other things, and that
without blame, and so may be here in some things, and in the order above
prescribed. The State does force its Subjects by pressing, and such like ways,
to serve them in their Wars; Servan^s are often compelled, will they, nill they,
to do their Masters work; Children to do their duty to their Parents. So by
Law-courses untoward Debtors are constrained to p^y their debt^. Now these
motions are such violent motions, as here you except against, and such as would
soon cease, if the constraint ceased. But who complains of any wrong herin done
them, since the things they be constrained to be just and equal, and for the
common good? And what lets, but that some constraint with wisdom and moderation
may be used in religious matters, since it is a thing most just and righteous,
and for the common good, both civil and spiritual, that Idolatry and Heresy
be suppressed, and that the people do attend the preaching of the Word, and
God^ service in praying to, and prayising him?

4. The motion may at first be violent, but afterward become very voluntary;
what a do is there at first to bring a Bullock to the yoke, or a Colt to the
saddle? when at length the o^e willingly comes to the yoke, and draws in it,
and the other as willingly hears the saddle and his rider. It is often so that a
young Scholar for a time is forced to school; but being a while entered, and
taking some l^king of learning, goes to school very freely and willingly. So
may it be, and o^t is, in these matters we treat of.

But last, This makes as much against all correction of children, and all
law-making about matters of the second Table, as against coercive laws in
Religion. For there they force children and men with a violent motion, as much
as here: and it utterly impeaches the courses of the godly Kings, Asa and
Josiah, in their reforming of Religion, as taking such courses as could only
force the outward man with a violent and preternaturall motion, who yet are for
such their practice praised in the Scripture.

Obj But the Gospel naturally begins with illightening the understanding, then
persuading the Will etc. and the sum of the Covenant is to write the Law in
the heart.

Ans. This Argument, as some other before, proceeds upon a false supposition.

1. It surmiseth, That such Magistraticall commands and penalties, by our
opinion, serve to work inward grace in men's hearts, and for their conversion,
when we teach that they are only to order the outward actions of man.

2. It surmiseth, that they oppose and go contrary to the work of the Gospel
in men's conversion, which is utterly untrue. And the course, which by those
that plead for the Magistrates power in this thing, is commended to the
Mag^strate, is by you wittingly dissembled and concealed, to make their
doctrine the more harsh, and to set the fairer gloss upon your large
discourse, concerning the order of the Gospels working; therefore to deal
fairly, you should have let them know, that we do not say that the
Magistrate's command should go out alone to force subjection to it, but that
there should go with it all along the preaching of the Word, and all good
means of instruction, to reclaim from ^^rour, and instruct in the truth, and
persuade to the obedience of it. It is their mind that men should be dealt
with as reasonable creatures, and led by reason and persuasion, and not as
bruit creatures, only forced with goads and whips.

2. This course is far from opposing the Gospel's way, as that it directly
tends to further the working of it, that the Lord thereby, according to his
Covenant, may write his laws in his peoples hearts. The end of it (as was said
above) is to bring men to the hearing of the Gospel, and attend upon it;
without which it can never work either to the illightening of their
understanding, or the persuading of their wills. Moreover, for the Covenant,
which is, That God will write his laws in the heart; this writing, no doubt,
is meant of the whole Law, that of the second table as well as that of the
first. What then, may not Magistrates make Laws to regulate men's actions in
duties of the second Table, as against the foul sins against it, because Gods
Covenant is to write these in the hearts of his people? And if this writing
such laws in men's hearts, evacuate not the Magistrates legislative power about
such duties, why should it take away the Magistrates power to make laws about
Religion, and the duties thereof? The like may be said concerning the Gospels
illightening the mind, and persuading the will, which concerns not only the
mysteries of the Gospel, and matters of Religion, but the works and duties of
the second Table; to the right peformance whereof there is need of the
illightening of the mind, and persuading of the will; about ordering which,
yet power is granted to the Magistrate. Farther, Why go you not on to urge
this farther with Familists, and Seekers, and the like, against preaching the
Word, and such other means of edification, as vain and useless, since God
does promise to write his laws in his chosens hearts and minds, without
mentioning any such external helps, yea adds, that they shall no more teach
one another, saying, Know the Lord, for they shall know every one the Lord from
the greatest unto the least of them. Jer. 31. 33. 34.

Obj. This was the method he Apostle followed, 2 Corinthians. 3. 22.

Answ. Here is a plain change of the Question; For the question is not, what
method the Apostles and Ministers may and ought to use for inward conversion;
but what course Magistrates may follow in outward matters of Religion, Aliud
est Chil. 7. cent. 1.
sceptrum, as he said, aliud est plectrum; It is one thing to sway a Scepter,
and to carry the temporal Sword, which cutteth the flesh, and another thing to
manage only the sword of the Spirit, viz. the Word, and Church Discipline,
which only medleth with men's spirits. Another manner of power for making Laws
and assigning Punishments, i^ annexed to the temporal sword, than to the
spiritual.

2. What answer has been given to the former Arguments, may serve here,
namely, that this course does not thwart the Apostles method, but does promote
it.

3. That that writing mentioned by the Apostle, which was by the Spirit, and in
the fl^shly tables of the heart, does concern the duties of the second table,
about which the Apostle makes many exhortations in this and his other Ep^stles,
as well as duties in Religion; wherefore the Apostles method excludes the
Magistrates power no more from meddling with matters of the first Table than of
the second, and permits him equal power in them both.

Obj. You endeavor by a contrary course to constrain the body to what the
heart opposes: And then, if whatsoever be not of Faith, is Sin, your course is
contrary to the Gospel Order, and destructive to men's souls.

Answ. This Argument seems not to be your Helena (as you call an Argument of
mine) but your Achilles, as a strong Argument is sometimes called Achilleum
argumentum, as which in this Question seems to be of the most force and
strength. But I answer, that it is not contrary to the order of the Gospel, nor
destructive to men's souls, by civil laws instruction going along, and being
also used to restrain men from Idolatry, and publishing Heresies, or to
command them to the necessary and natural duties of Gods worship, though it be
against their mind and persuasions.

For first, The Gospel does not allow that men's erroneous consciences and
persuasions should be their rule or guide in Religion, or any other way, but
only the Word of God.

2. The Gospel does no where allow unto men the practice of Idolatry, or the
open profession of Errors and Heresies:

3. As Christ has appointed that his Gospel should be preached to every
creature; so all men are bound when and where it is preached, to be ready to
hear it. It is therefore more contrary to the Gospel, and more destructive to
men's Sou'es, to suffer them without restraint to continue in Idolatrous
worship, and Heretical ways, than to restrain and compel them according to
the abovesaid order.

Obj. But whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin, and men may not be compelled to
sin.

Answ. It is true, that whatsoever is not done with a due persuasion, that it
is right and lawful, but against such a persuasion, and with a doub^ing
conscience, is sin to him that shall so do it, but is not always so in it
self, nor to him that shall command the doing of it; but may be a most just
and necessary duty, and very justly commanded to be done.

1. There are things merely indifferent in which to enforce men to practice
against their consciences, is against Charity, is a breach of Christian
liberty, and an abuse of Magistracy. For there is no breach of any command of
God, in doing or not doing such things, and God may be honored and
acknowledged both in his doing or not doing thereof. Romans 146.

2. There be matters of less moment in Religion, and circumstantiall points of
Discipline, or so, in which, who so dissent, and carry their dissent in a
peaceable and humble way, are much to be born with, and no hard measure is to
be put upon them.

3. There are maine and necessary, but external duties of Religion, negative
and affi^mative, and some such as oblige all men even by the law of Nature;
which to command men to observe and restrain from the contrary evils, though
it go against their minds, is no sin in the Magistrate.

For first, The doing of the one, and the neglect of the other, are manifest
and palpable sins, are sins per se, and in their own nature. To suffer which
would reflect upon the Magistrate, to make him guilty of the sin, who has
power to restrain it and does not. 1 Samuel 3. 12.

Secondly, The sin that arises upon the doing necessary and main duties, or not
doing, according to the Magistrates command, comes, ex accidenti, by accident,
not by the nature of the thing commanded, which is not only good in it self,
but also a necessary duty; nor by virtue of the command, which commands nothing
but a thing manifestly good, and a necessary duty; but by the ill disposition
and erroneous persuasion of the person doing or not doing. And if the enforcing
of necessary duties must be forborne upon this account, that some sin by
accident will ensue thereupon, how can Ministers lawfully call upon men to pray
or hear Gods Word, since wicked men in such services will rather by their ill
doing of them, offend than please God? Moreover, Magistrates in making laws
about such weighty matters, are not bound to look to particular men's
consciences and opinions, but to have an eye to Gods Word, commanding or
forbidding this or that. Men's opinions and consciences are secret, and not
always openly known, Gods Word is open and manifest: Men's Consciences are
diverse, quot homines tot sententiae, so many men so many minds; Gods Word is
uniforme and the same, Men's Consciences would be a weak and uncertain rule for
him to go by, Gods Word is sure and certain: And if Men's Consciences accord
not with Laws in such main and manifest matters, made according to the Word,
it is their sin and error, and in such case the Magistrate ought indeed to
take order that they may be instructed and brought to the knowledge of the
truth, and so willingly submit unto it. But if notwithstanding they will
persist in Idolatrous, Heretical, and openly Schismatic ways, such
wholesome Laws must not give place to stubbornly erroneous consciences, but
they must submit thereunto, or do justly suffer the appointed penalties.

Further, It is plain, that in sundry cases men may be compell^d to that, in
doing which they sin through their own default. It is the duty of Subjects to
serve the State in their wars, willlingly, and out of ^^ve to the publ^que
good; of Servants to serve their Masters willingly and out of love to them; of
Debtors to pay their Debts willingly, and out of love to justice. Which things
if they do not, or will not do, they are justly compelled ther^ unto, though
in doing it there is sin committed by them, in doing that upon force and
grudgingly, which should be done by them out of love, and with a ready mind. I
may yet add, that this dart, such as it is, may be as well cast against Church
censures, as against this coactive exercise of civil Power. For it may easily
fall out, that men in the Church, for fear of the censure of the Church, and
especially in case of deposition from their Pastoral Office, and so the loss
of the maintenance they have thereby, may dissemble their Errors, and
subscribe to Truth, even against their conscience: A notable example of it is
in some Arrian Bishops, Eusebius of Nicomedia, and Theognis of Nice, who for
fear of losing their Bishoprics, upon the decree of the Nicene Council,
against Arrius and his Accomplices in dessembling manner against their conscience
subscribed to the decree of that Council, against that damnable Heresy.

If then no courses may be used upon which men may be driven to act against
their consciences, and so sin, neither can Church Censures, nor deposition of
H^reticall teachers be put in practice, upon which such an inconvenience may
ensue.

The conclusion then is, that it is not lawful to compel any man to do that
which is directly, and in it self sinful; but that a man may be compelled by
lawful authority, without any fault of theirs, to the doing of manifest and
necessary duties, though in the doing thereof he sin, and that only by his own
default and evil disposition.

Let me yet tell you, that a man does sin much less in doing a necessary good
work, upon command against his misinformed conscience, than in a willing and
witting omitting of it. And that whenever the conscience is awakened, it will
more sting for this last than the former, ab^ut which we have seldom known
any to have been troubled in mind upon doing it: And that the Magistrate must
needs sin in suffering such a witting and willing negl^ct of a manifest
necessary duty, but can never be proved to have sinned in commanding and urging
men to duti^s manifestly good and necessary.

Obj. We read of none in the New Testament who commanded all to worship save
the Beast. Rev. 13.

Answ. 1. We read of none in the New Testament that were punish^d for
Whoredom, Incest, Perjury, False witness bearing, Drunkenness, etc. What
then? may not these with your consent be punished by the civil Magistrate? all
the sons of Belial would much applaud you for such a toleration of wickedness,
which this your pleading does as much countenance, as an Universal toleration
for Religion.

2. It had been fair play to have written out the whole text, that the command
was to worship the Image of the Beast, and receive his mark in their right
hand, or in their forehead. Rev. 13. 15, 16. Such compulsion doubtless is
detestable. But what is this against compulsion to renounce the Idolatry of the
Beast and all other Idolatry, and to worship God in his true worship? To which
things we read, that the godly Kings of Judah, Asa, Jchosaphat and Josiah
compelled their Subjects, to their praise and commendation. The fault is not
noted to be simply in the course of compulsion, but in the object of False
worship, and open profession of Popery, to which he compelled.

And thus have I cleared our Barque from those dangerous shelves, upon which
you made account to wreck us, and have brought it safe to land. Now it follows:

Obj. It is conceived that you (Presbyterians you mean) are in this a part of
the greatest and most deceivable Schism, that ever came into the world.

Answ. A foul and lewd reproach, but fit enough for your wide mouth.

Thus indeed the Papists did judge of us, and so do still, who condemn the
reformed Churches of a wicked Schism, in departing from them, and them most,
which went farthest off from them in that, as well in D^scipline as in
Doctrine, with whom you and yours symbolize in this accusation of us. But as
one says, Non eadem est sententia tribunalis Christi and anguli susurronum,
The Sentence of Christ's righteous judgment, and of whisperers in their corners
is not all one.

Next, after some pretty many lines follows a volley of sl^nderous reproaches,
in matching Classical government with Episcopacy: Whereas that was a Lordly
government of one over a whole D^ocess; this is only a brotherly combination
of many Ministers and ru^ing Elders; to manage Church affairs by common
consent, and that as much as may be, according to the Word of God.

2. As if we did take authority to adjudge all beside our selves to be
Heretics, Schismatics, etc. and did seek by humane force to captivate others
to our wills and canons, and were beneath a legal Spirit in dealing worse with
others than we would be deal withal. All which are but the lashings of a
netled Jade, that kicks and ^^ings his heels at random, at those that are
about him.

For first, Who is there of those that I name expr^sly, that you will have the
face to excuse from the blame of an eroneous Sect? Which are Arminians,
Antinomians, Soule-mortalists, Antisabbatarians, Seekers and Anabaptists, with
rigid irreconcilable Seperatists? Or where do I speak of captivating all
others to our wills? Our Independent Brethren here you gloze withal, and
stroke them; for which yet they have little cause to con you any thank: For in
your book you soundly box them. N^xt follows a blazing of the conscientious
Piety and State-Fidelity of your party, and some others, with a plen for an
Universal Liberty. To which this is all that I will say, that where those
things are found (of which you boast for your selves and others, which is no
great Proprio laxesordet in ore.
modesty) as they deserve their due respect and encouragement, so they may not,
nor can serve for a just plea to countenance any error or erroneous course;
nor can challenge any other liberty than will stand with the leave of Gods Word
for the Magistrate to grant. And if any laid out their dear lives to purchase
this vast Universal Liberty for themselves and others, they spent their lives
to no good purpose, and with small comfort to themselves. When we and many
other peaceable Christians were under the Prelaticall yoke, what Liberty would
have been grateful to us, appeared by the writings and Petitions of
Non-conformists in those days, which was an ease from the burden of
Subscription, and sundry Ceremonies superstitious, and plainly superflaous,
without any endeavor to break off communion in the public worship of Prayer,
Hearing, and Sacraments, wherein they were willing to join, much more without
pleading for a Toleration for all ways in Religion, an abomination by them
abhorred; or derogating from the Magistrates power to command in matters of
Religion, which they did then (as now) unanimously maintain, and your Sect did
eagerly oppose. When we are guilty of that calumny which you falsely charge on
us, we shall need your jeering advice: But in the mean while I say with the
Poet.

Loripedem rectus derideat, Ethiopem albus.

Let the straight foot jeere the polt-footed man,
And the fair face the Ethiopian.
To go along with you, after you have smeared your paper with some foul over
flowings of your gaul, in charging upon me Fopperies, opprobrious dealings,
etc. without instancing any particulars (which is but deceitful dealing) you
school me for taxing your way for a Sect and Sch^sme, and assay to inform me
better Dolo^e agit qui versatur in generalibus.
in the nature of these. A Sect (say you) is a Rent; a Schism is a cutting
off, or dividing from the truth. Answ. It is not worth the labor to make much
ado about words; but it will not be amiss to let men see your ignorance in
some things, wherein you would seem to be acute. A Sect therefore cannot
rightly be Englished a Renting; It comes not from any word that signifies to
rent, but is derived (as some) either a secando, which is to cut, whence is
sectum, secta, and so sectu, is as it were, a part cut off from others, or from
the truth, to which they should stick and adhere, by which course there is a
dividing into sundry sides, according to that of the Poet; Soinditur incertum
studia in contraria vulgus.

The inconstant people do themselves divide
Into contrary parts from side to side.
Or (as others) a sectando, which signifies earnestly to follow, noting a
company which does stiffly follow some opinion or party, with a resolution to
cleave thereto. A Schism is a Greek word orginally, and comes (...), which
signifies to cut, or cleave in two, and as it were divide one from another, and
is translated Mat 9. 16. Mark 2. 21. Luke 5. 36. rather a rent than a cutting
off, because in an old cloth patched up with a new piece, it is not meant that
thereby one piece is cut off from another; but that therein when it is worn
out, the breach is made the wider.

2. Not is it rightly said, that a Schism is a cutting off, or dividing from
the truth, but rather a dividing of minds and affections between men, and a
breaking off from Church communion between those that agree in the truth of the
Gospel. This by Divines is usually laid down to be the difference between
Heresy and Schism. Heresy stands in the intertaining and stiff maintaining
false and perverse Doctrine; Schism is the practice of an unlawful and undue
separation from a true Church: One may be an Heretic, and not a Schismatic,
as if a man denying some prime Article of Faith, do yet adhere to a Church
confessing the true Faith: And one may be a Schismatic which it not an
Heretic, as if a man soundly holding all the articles of the Faith, will not
yet communicate with a true Church is Gods public worship. Schismaticum facit
(says another) communion^^ dir upta societas, The breaking off from
Church-society and communion does make one a Schismatic: Of which who is more
guilty, you in your way, or we, can be no question; when as you display this
course of Separation, as the chief banner of your company, in defiance of all
Church-society. It is true as you say, that truth newly springing is often
branded with the black cole of a Sect and Heresy. And it is also as true, that
Error, when it comes abroad, is wont to disguise it self under a counterfeit
habit of Truth, the better to in grati^te her self with unwary persons. And
from whomsoever you should hear such language touching your way, that it is a
Sect or Schism, it may be plain, but no soul language, to call a Fig a Fig,
or a Spade a Spade. Next, for some touches given your company you are shrewdly
passionate, and kick and lash very wildly. In Ovids Verses taken up by me only
in way of allusion, there is nothing can be found by you but scurrility,
ribaldry, and the language of Hell. Alack good man, that a verse or two of
witty Poetry should be taken in so ill part by you: But this is nothing but the
cynicall arrogance and churlishness of your spirit.

The truth is, it was such a pretty picture of your gadding and r^mbling
company, that you could not see it so lively set forth with patience. And if a
verse or two out of Ovid be the language of H^ll, what language use you, who
allege a verse of his? but I wo^ to little purpose; in the margent of your
Book, page 78. Morte cadunt subit a per mutua vulnera fratres: For the scandal
of Ribaldry cast in my teeth, it is true that that wanton Poet was feign to
excuse his looser Verses elsewhere used; for which he was justly blamed, with
these words;

Lasciva est nobis pagina, vita proba.

Our writing loose and wanton is,
My life is honest for all this.
But for my part I have not in all my days (which are not a few) been
upbraided with Ribaldry in speech or writing until now by you. And what is the
ground of this foul crime? a Dist^ck which I borrowed out of Ovid, in which,
as he elegantly, and as far from Scurrility and Ribaldry, as you are from
Modesty in so charging them, describes the flocking of the Thehans after the
Orgia, as they were called, the worship of Bacchus newly brought amongst them;
so I by the same set out the rambling of sundry amongst us, after your
new-set-up way and course of Religion. Both which courses, as in this flocking
of people after them, they do agree pretty well; so you may know, it is far
from my intent for matter to compare the worship you use, wherein is some
exercise of the Word, and prayer to God well intended, though the manner and
end in the way of Separation, and other ways, cannot be justified, with the
profane and impious Orgia of Bacchus: But for the Verses, Latin or English,
let the chastest Susanna read them, and I dare say, neither her chafte ear
shall hear, nor eye espy any tittle that has the le^st show of R^baldry: And
unless you can show plainly in what words this R^baldry lies with which you
defame me, you do but proclaim your self a foul-mouthed rayler to all
understanding men. As for the free doal you make among your hear^rs, of what
you have freely received, if they understood themselves, they have little cause
to thank you for it, who for bread cast stones amongst them, that is, intricate
matters which they cannot bite or understand; or for wheat give them chaff,
that, is light and unprofitable stuff to feed upon. And if you mention this
your doale to blame the Ministers, which receive and requ^re due maintenance
for their labor. I trust you know, and will yield to it, that Christ has
ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel: And if
your free receiving your gifts bind you to a free 1 Cor. 9. 14.
giving, why do^ you not as freely spend and bestow your tempocall means upon
your hearers and followers, which I hope you will acknowledge to be as freely
given you, as your spiritual gifts? I desire not to derogate from the
pretiousnesse of your Saints, if so they be: Nor can you with all your painted
language excusethem or your self from that instability I charge on them. If
Paul justly charge the Galatians with this inconstancy, that Gal. 4. 14, 15, 16.
once they did reverence him as an Angel of God, yea as Christ Jesus himself;
but afterward, upon their giving ear to false Apostles, who turned them to
another Gospel, did slight him, yea counted him as an enemy, how can you and
many of your company, free your selves from the like blame? who not, many
years since, acknowledged our Ministers the true Ministers of Christ; heard
them gladly, followed them earnestly, confessed the spiritual good you
received by them; but now, not only for sake them, and I doubt, against your
consciences, disclaim the comfort and conversion wrought in you by their
Ministry, but load them with the foulest reproaches you can, as calling them
Priests of Baal, and Antichristian, etc. What in me is invective language,
gaul, vinegar, and cruel gaul of Aspes, as all these you fi^de in Ovids
harmless Verses, had been in you (as you speak in your paper to me) but an
abstersive to clear up my dim eye sight. But whatsoever fault be in my
language (of which let the Reader judge) truly it must lie upon my self alone,
and not be charged upon any other, who had no hand in it.

But it is as far from any of these bitter things, as from Scurrility or
Ribaldry: some salt perhaps there is in them, with which your galled back
cannot endure the rubbing. We in our way challenge no Throne or Kingdom to our
selves (as you scoff) Our desire and endeavor is only to set up the Kingdom
of Jesus Christ, which while you seek to darken by your foul Errors and
Schismatic courses, we cannot but make it matter of sadness and grief unto
our hearts: And for your matching us (which is your constant course) with
Antichristians, and charging us with blaspheming God with them; let all
Christians take notice of your Spirit, and the Lord rebuke you for it. There is
no gault, no vinegar, nor venom of Aspes in such language, because your.

Concerning your passage of outward Jerusalem, figured by Hagar, with its
application, it does no more concern ut, than all others, who maintain stated
Churches, and oppose you as well as we do in this your new way of mere
separasion.

2. To answer more particularly, there are Externalities of diverse sorts.

1. Such as are merely legal, and are by Christ abolished. It was the Jews
of that outward Jerusalem, st^ff standing on these in Paul's days, and that as
still to be continued; and as necessary to Salvation, that made them such
enemies to those that walked in a free Gospel-walk, free, not I ween (as you
seem to intimate) from all externalities, but from those legal ones, and as
urged by the false Apostl^s.

2. Such as are grossly Idolatrous and Superstitious, as most among the Papists.

3. Such as are merely humane, and of man's invention. And it is so commonly,
that such as stand rigidly on those exte^nalities, prove enemies to such as
desire to walk in a Gospel liberty.

4 There are externalities that are of Divine Institution, as constitution of
visible Churches, official Ministry, Sacraments to be duly administered,
Church Censures, upon which to stand rigidly is no fault, no^ any counterfeit
holiness. It is only to stand upon Christ his order and ordinances. And the
Primitive Christians walked not in any freedom from these, but in a willing
subjection to them.

And if you now, or any other, in your course of separation, shake off these
Externalities, as you term them, of Christ's Institution, they are not children
of a Christian, but of a carnal and licentious liberty: and their ^ime at
Spirituality is merely counterfei^ and deceitful. For the outward Court
rejected, Revel. 11. 2. it is not (as you would have it understood) the ou^ward
state of visible Churches among Protestants, but the visible and outward state
of the Romish Church, as hereafter shall be more fully cleared; which is indeed
a Mother that does enslave her Children.

Now toward the end, somewhat you have a mind to say about your first Letter;
where first, for the report given out about your Letter, and my not coming to
conference with you, I have given some answer in the beginning of my Reply. The
other matters about some mistakes in some words and quotations; there is no
such wrong done as needs any exp^stulation on either side. For there is no
advantage taken upon any such matter to the prejudice of either cause. And if
it should be done on either side, it would prove but a cavil; and redound to
his discredit who should make it. If some places of Scripture by you alleged,
were omitted by me, for have or by oversight, you know thatyou had an answer
to them from another reverend man by my procurement, which I sent to you,
though you pleased to take no notice of it; and I shall, I trust, God
assisting, give answer to them all in due time.

But now for a Conclusion, There is a capital crime, or some deep plot charged
on me: Your Book, say you, is not dated at the beginning according to the
usual manner. At the end of your Epistle it bears date August the 18. now it
came not out until December, near four months after: whether this be double
dealing, to make the Reader believe that we were ^ardy in our Reply, is best
knowns to your own conscience: Answ. It is wonder that here you did not make a
O yes, and as he call our, Hearken O people every one of you. Here is, no
doubt, a weighty matter to cavil at, and to charge upon a man's conscience, as
if I 1 Kings 22. 28*
were by when the book was in printing, and gave any order about its dating: It
is dated as all other books be in the beginning and as your own noting, the
party for whom it was printed, and the year when it was printed, though not
the month, nor day of the month, which is is not usually noted. 2. The long
distance between the date of the Epistle and the Books coming forth may show
indeed (and that is the plain truth) that it was long ere I could prevail
with the Stationer to undertake the printing of it, and the slow going on of
the Press.

But it seems that you are very jealous of your credit, and would have the
world take notice of you^ ability and readiness to write and answer: In which
point I shall not contend with you. I did in my book, toward the end,
acknowledge, and still do, that I am but of a dull apprehension, and slow
motion, and now somewhat the slower by reason of my age, having fulfilled the
77. year of this mortal race. You, for me, shall go away with the praise of
this swiftness. It shall suffice me, if after some p^odding and longer
deliberation, I can at length find out the truth. In which case yet I wish you
to take notice of the Proverb, that Tardus aliquando celerem assequitur, He
that is but slow, may at length overtake the more swift of foot.

I will conclude with a story of Melancth^n, who in a disputation with Errius,
a Popish Sophister, being urged with a subtil^ argument from him, after some
demur about it, said, I will answer it to morrow. Oh (says Errius) this is not
for your credit, if you cannot answer extempore, out of hand, and presently. To
whom Melancthon did reply, O good Doctor, I do not seek mine own credit in
this business, but the truth: To morrow you shall hear me. Thus I had rather
suffer in my credit for dullness, than prejudice the truth by my too hasty
swiftness:

Qui dicit quae vult, audiet quae non vult,

Whose humor is to speak what he does please,
Shall hear what will afford him little ease.
A brief and solid Exercitation concerning the Coercive Power of the
Magistrate in matters of Religion, by a reverend and learned Minister, Mr.
George Petter, deceased, lately of Bread in Sussex.
Qu. WHether the Civil Magistrate by his authority may compel men to do^ any
thing against their conscience in matters of Religion, or in the worship of
God, as, to come to Church, and there to hear the Word preached.

Answ. The Magistrate being ordained of God to be custo^ utriusque tabulae,
both may and ought to use his authority, in compelling those under his
jurisdiction to the due performance of all external religious duties commanded
of God, and required in the first table of the moral Law.

1. But Romans 134. He is the Minister of God for the good of his Subjects, that
is, to procure and provide for their good and welfare. Now the chief good of
his Subjects is their spiritual good, the good of their souls: and how does
he provide for this, if he suffer them to neglect and omit the duties of Gods
worship, and the ordinary means of their salvation, and do not compel them
to perform and to use the same?

2. But 1 Timothy 2. 2. One end for which we are commanded to pray for those that
are in authority, is this, that we may under them, and by their means, lead
our lives in all godliness. Whence it follows, that it is the Magistrates
duty by his authority, to provide that Subjects may live under him in all
godliness. And how can he be said to do this, if he do not by his power take
order that they may duly perform the maine duties of piety commanded by God?

3. That from the example and practice of some of the religious King^ of Juda,
2 Chronicles. 34. 31. Josiah made a Covenant to walk after the Lord, and to keep his
commandments, etc. and he caused all in Jerusalem and Benjamin to stand to it.
So 2 Chro. 15. the like Covenant, by the authority of Asa, was made by his
people, ver. 12. They entered into a covenant to seek the Lord God of their
fathers, etc. and that whosoever would not seek the Lord, etc. should be put to
death, etc. This was a compulsion in an high degree.

4. That, If a Master of a Family may and ought to compel his Family, yea and
Strangers too, coming or being in his house, to the outward sanctifying of the
Sabbath, at least to keep them from profaning it, as appears by the Fourth
Commandment: then may a Magistrate do the like, according as is read of, and
commanded in Nehemiah, cap. 13 15* 16, etc.

1. Obj. If the Magistrate compel his Subjects to do things against their
conscience, or which they in their consciences are persuaded to be unlawful
for them to doc, then he compells them to sin.

Answ. Here it is to be considered, from whence this persuasion in the Subject
does proceed; If from an ignorant and weak conscience, as in such as have not
had the means, or no sufficient means to teach them, and inform their
consciences right touching the lawfulness of the things enjoined, then I think
such persons are not to be compelled to such things, till they have been first
conferred withal, and better instructed and informed of the lawfulness of those
things enjoined by such as may be presumed better able to inform them, than
they can inform themselves: Yet here this caution is to be added, that when
such duties of Religion are enjoined by authority of the Magistrate, such
ignorant or weak persons are not rashly, or of their own heads, to withdraw
their obedience by refusing to conform to the duties enjoined, but they are
first in all modest and humble manner (and that speedily) to propound their
doubts and reasons of their refusal, and to desire satisfaction therein, from
such as are in authority.

2. If on the other side the foresaid persuasion do proceed from an obstinate
conscience, as those that have had the means of teaching, and have been
sufficiently convinced of the lawfulness of the things enjoined by authority
of the Magistrate, and yet do obstinately persist in refusing to do them,
then the Magistrate compelling them to outward conformity in doing the duties
enjoined, does not compel them to sin, but uses the means to reform sin in
them, by punishing them for their obstinacy, thereby to reclaim them from it,
and from their contempt and neglect of Gods ordinances.

Now this the Magistrate may and ought to do: For Romans 13. it is said, He
bears not the sword in vain, and is therewith to punish evil doers; but
surely they are evil doers, who do wilfully even against the light of their
Conscience^, refuse to be conformable in such duties of Religion and Gods
worship as are enjoined by the Magistrate. These are (...), selfecondemned
persons, Titus 3. 11. The Magistrate in this case does not cause such to sin,
Nisi per accidens; vide Pet. Mart. loc. com. clas. 2. c. 2.

Obj. Faith and Religion are not to be forced, but to be freely and voluntarily
taken up and embraced, according to that of Tertullian, ad Scap. cap. 2. Nec
religionis est cogere religionem, quae sponte suscipi debet, non vi. It is not
according to Religion to compel men to Religion, which ought freely to be
taken up, and not per force: And that of Lactant. Institut. lib. 5. cap. 20.
Religio cogi non potest, verbis potius quam verberibus res agenda est. Religion
cannot be forced; the matter is to be effected by words rather than by stripes.
To such purpose Amb. lib. 5. Ep. 30.

Answ. To compel men to conformity in outward ex^rcises of Religion and of
Gods worship, is not to force them to believe or embrace Religion, but only to
compel them to the external use of Gods Ordinances, which are the means to
work Faith and Religion in them, and to move them in time (if it be possible)
voluntarily to believe and embrace true Religion.

2. As for those places of Tertullian, Ambrose, and Lactantius* That Compulsion
that they speak of, is of Christians toward Heathen, or of Heathen toward
Christians (as may plainly appear by perusing the places) and not of the
Christian Magistrates compelling of Christians under his Dominion to the
outward exercise of Religion and Gods worship established. It is one thing for
the Heathen Emperors, or their Deputies, to compel Christians to embrace
Paganism; or for Christian Magistrates to compel the ^eathen (who have been
brought up in Paganism, and never had yet the means to instruct them in
Christian Religion) to believe and embrace Christianity before they have had
sufficient instruction therein: And another thing for Christian Magistrates to
urge, and compel such subjects ^t have been brought up and instruc^ed in the
Christian Religion, to outward conformity in the public worship of God,
established by lawful Authority.

Obj. This is the way to make men Hypocrites, when they are compelled to the
outward worship of God, wanting in the mean time inward Piety.

Answ. The scope of the Christian Magistrate, in using such compulsion, is not
to make men Hypocrites* but by this means to move them to do that afterward
willingly, which for the present they do by compu^sion, as Austin says of the
Christian^ in Hipp^ (where he was Bishop) That they at first taking part with
Donatus and his F^ction, were after moved by the severe Laws of Christian
Emperors, reigning in those times against the Don^tists, to forsake Donatus
and his followers, and to embrace the Catholic Doctrine of the Church, and so
in other cities also. Se^ Aug. Tom. 2. Epist. 48. where he does at large ^andle
this question touching the M^gistrates power in punishing Heretics: Of which
Epistle of Austin, Zanchy says that it is Insigni^ epistola, sed prolixa, a
notable Ep^stle, but very long. See also the same Austin, Tom. 7. Operum contra
epistolas Petili^^i Donatista, lib. 2. c^p. 28. etc. 84. and also in his 50
Epistle, in which places he treats of this question touching the Magistrates
power in punishing Heretics. In the former of those places, whereas P^tilian
complain^ of the Emperors forcing the Donatists to the Catholic Faith by
persecution, Austin makes this answer to him, Non persequimu^ vos, nisi
quemadmodum veritas persequitur falsitatem, etc. We persecute you no otherwise,
but as Truth does persecut^ Falsehood. And again, whereas Petilian boasted
that the Donatists did not compel any to the Faith; Austin answers thus, Ad
fidem quidem nullus est cog^ndus invitus sed perseveritate^, imo^er
miseric^rdiam Dei, tribulationum flagellis solet per^idia castigari. Number quid
quia mor^s optimi liberate voluntatis ^liguntu^, id^o mores pessi^i non legis
integritate puniuntur? S^d tamen ma^e vivendi ultrix, disciplina pr^postera
est, nisi quum pr^cedens belle vivend^ doctrina contemnitur, that is, No man
truly is to be compelled to the Faith against his will, but through, the
severity, yea through the mercy of God, perfidiou^nesse is wont to be chastized
with the scourge of tribulation. What I pray, because good manners are chosen
by a free good will, shall not therefore bad manners be punished by sound and
wholesome laws? Notwithstanding, that Discipline, which is the revenger of
evil living, is preposterous, unless when the precedent instruction of
well-living is despised. To which may be added that of Austin contra epist.
Gaudentii Donatistae, lib. 2. cap. 17. Quod vobis (Donatistis) videtur invites
ad veritatem non esse cogend^s, erratis nes^ientes scriptur^^ and virtutem D^i,
qui eos volentes facit dum coguntur inviti, Whereas it seems to you Donatists,
that none are to be compelled to the truth against their will, you err not
knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God, who makes men willing while they
be enforced against their will Zanchy in 2 praeceptum. cap. 15. de imaginibus,
These. 4. handles this question, where thus he expresses the sum of what he
holds concerning it; Augustini sententiam sequor, Piu^ magistratum posse pro
authoritate sibi a Deo tradit^, and ver^ etiam si viderit se posse* sua
authoritate ad ecclesi^ adificationem uti, ex officio debere subditos suos a
malo ad bonum and a superstitionibus ad verum cultum cogere, tempore tamen
commodo and ^edo ad ^inem consequendum utili prudenter observato that i^, I
follow the sentence of Austin. That the godly Magistrate may according to that
authority given him of God; and truly also, if he shall see that he can use his
authority to the edification of the Church, that he ought, out of duty, to
compel his Subjects from Evil to Good, and from Superstitions to Gods true
Worship; notwithstanding wisely observing a convenient time, and such a manner
as shall be profitable to obtain his end. This Assertion he farther explaines,
and proves more at large: In one case he holds that the Magistrate is to
forbea^e this coaction, at least for a time, viz. Si aperte viderit res tal^
esse loco ut si sua si^^^ pli^iter velit uti authoritate ^mnin^ casura sint
omnia in pejus and in totius ecclesi^ eversion^m supersedendum fuerit atque in
aliud tempu^ d^fferendum negotium, etc. Tu^c certe re^inere debet gladium in
vagina, and curandum est ut gladio duntaxat Spiritus, quod est verbum Dei --
^ollantu^ ex animis errores, etc. -- Pertinet huc Augustini co^silium de
supersedenda excommunications in Africa adversus ^b^ios^s, qui cum omnes fere
tales essent, excommunica^i ^^^ potexant nisi tota ^cclesia dissiparetur. Then
Zanchy adds, Sunt tamen quaedam mala tam gravia, ut graviora contingere non
possint, ut publicae blasphemiae in Filium D^i, publicae Idololatriae, etc. Ad
haec certe connivere nullo modo potest aut debit pius magistratus, ^tiamsi ruat
mundus: That is, If he plainly see things to be in such a condition, as if he
should absolutely use his authority, that all things certainly would become
worse, and turn to the overthrow of the whole Church; there must be a
forbearing, and the business is to be deferred unto another time. -- Then
furely he ought to keep his sword in the sc^bbard, and to t^ke care that errors
should be removed out of men's minds only by the sword of the Spirit, which is
the Word of God. -- H^therto appertains Austin's counsel about the forbearing
-- of excommunication in Africa, against Drunkards, who, when almost all were
so, could not ^e excommunicated, unless the whole Church were dissipated.
Notwithstanding some evils are so heinous, that worse cannot happen, as
public blasphemies against the Son of God, public Idolat^y, etc. Certainly
the godly Magistrate by no means can or ought to con^ive at these evils,
although the whole world should fall on his head.

Bucan lee. com. 49. quest. 33. An Magistratus debet coger^ quenquam ad
credendum?

Resp. Non potest indore fidem aut cogere mentem, sed cogere locomotivam ut
audiat veram doctrinam, and media quibus exitatur fides promovere debet, etc.

Quest. Whether the Magistrate ought to compel any man to believe?

Answ. He cannot put faith into any, nor constrain the mind, but he can force
the loco-motive faculty, that a man may he^r true Doctrine; and he ought to
promote all means by which Faith is excited and stirred up.

Alsted. cas. conscient. cap. 17. cas. 8. Princeps tuta conscientia potest in
ditione sua permittere liberam religionem, non quidem it a ut ampune quisque
colat Deum arbitratis suo; sed ut bonum autonomiae, sive libertas conscientiae
concedatur iis, qui in fundamento salutis convenient, and non nisi circa ritus
and leviores quasdam questiones in negotio religionis dissident. Sane si potest
h^c efficere citra pacis publicae perturbationem ut omnes. and singuli subditi
eandem religionis formulam amplexentur, utique nihildebet facere reliquum ad
summam diligentiam hoc ut obtineat, verum quia saepenum eroque unitatem
religionis in rempub introducere conantur funditus evertune rempublicam, and
unitatem civilem scindunt, non temere princeps hic quicquam audebit; A Prince
may with a safe conscience permit Religion to be free in his Dominion, not so
indeed that every man without punishment, may worship God according to his
pleasure; but that the benefit of Autonomy, or liberty of Conscience, or a
Self-law, may be granted unto them, which agree in the foundation of Salvation,
and differ not in the business of Religion, but about some rites and certain
lighter questions: certainly if he could effect it conveniently, without the
disturbance of the public Peace, that all and every one of his Subjects should
embrace the same form of Religion; truly he ought to leave nothing unaslayed
unto his utmost diligence, that he might obtain it. But because oftentimes
they that endeavor to bring into the Commonwealth the unity of Religion, do
utterly overthrow the civil Unity: A Prince will not rashly dare to atttempt
any thing in this matter. But B^za is more strict in this matter, whose words
in his Book de puniendis haereticis; are these, page 143. Magistratus officium
est, vel externae pacis jactu^a, si aliter non potest, verum Dei cultum in sua
ditione, redimere; It is the duty of the Magistrate (if it cannot otherwise be
done) to purchase in his D^m^nion the true worship of God, even with the loss
of outward peace. Wolfangus Capito, in a Book written by him, de jure
magistratus in religione, has these words, as they are cited by Beza in his
Treatise de Haereticis a Magistratu puniendis, p. 149. Pius princeps populum
pro virili ad verbum Dei audiendum and ad hoc ut vita and moribus illud
exprimat, adiget severa authoritate, hoc est anim adversione legitima; A godly
Prince will, according to his power, enforce his people to hear the Word of
God; and to this also, that they express the same in life and manners, with
severe authority, that is, by lawful punishment. Mr. Perkins in his Treatise
of Callings, Tom. 1. operum, page 741. writes thus, That the duty of
Magistrates wherein they do commonly fail, is this, that they use not the
Sword for this end, to urge men to the keeping of the Commandments of the
first Table, to a practice of pure Religion, and to the keeping of the Sabbath
day. This is the duty of the Magistrate, who b^ares the sword, especially for
the good of men^ souls. See also Dr. Cudworth's Commentary upon Gal. cap. 6.
printed with Mr. Perkins Comment on the five first chapters of that Epistle, as
a Supplement to it, where (upon the 12 vers^ of that 6 chapter) this question
is propounded and answered.

Magistratus legum severitate retine^it populum in ordine -- qu^ad auditum
verbi, orationis communicationem, sacrificium laudi^, and Sacram^ntorum
celebration^m incunctanter ac religi^^^ frequentet -- vigore legum and virga
disciplin^ animadvertet in mores subdit^rum ^mnium -- co^^c^bitq^e non solum
adulteria, scortationes, ^brietat^m, furta -- quod and Ethnici Magistratus
faciunt, sed and impi^tat^m, blasphemiam h^reses, sacrilegiae, Ecclesia
contemptum ac desertionem. Mu^culus loc. com. de Migistratu, page 431, and 432.
The Magistrate by the severity of his laws, ought to keep his people in order,
so far as that they do frequent diligently and religiously the hearing of the
Word, joining in P^ayer, the offering of Praise, and the celebration of the
Sacraments -- he ought to correct the manner^ of all his Subjects, by the
vigor of his Laws, and ro^ of Disciplin^, and he shall restrain not only
Adulteries, Whoredoms, D^unkenesse, Thefts -- which Heathen Magistrates also
do; but also Impiety, B^asphemy, Heresies, Sacrilege, the contempt and
forsaking of the Church.

Mr. John Cotton's Animadversions upon Mr: Henden's Letter to Mr. Elmeston,
heretofore printed and published in his Book to Mr. Henden.
Mr. John Cotton 's Letter to Mr. Elmeston, sent with the following
Animadversions.
Reverend and dear Sir,
IT is indeed a busy season with me to return due answer to sundry Friends,
who expect the same by this v^ssell. But because your Letter is not only
yours, but a voice from the Lord Jesus, in which h^ calls me to bear
witness to the truth (for which end he came himself into the world, John 18.
37. and sent his servants) I durst not ^mit this first opportunity of returning
answer to the scruples which your Letter enclosed. If when you have perused the
same, your judgment con^ur therein, you may please to communicate them to your
Christianfriend: If otherwise, reserve them by your self. Be intrea^^^ to
accept the labor of my love from your fellow servants, and cease not to pray
for me whose businesses are more than my days. The Lord Jesus be still the
staff of your age, and perfect his work in your heart and head till he
trans^^te you to his heavenly Kingdom in Christ Jesus: In whom with ^^arty
salutes to you and Mrs. De^ly, I take leave, and rest,

Boston the 18. of the eighth month. 1651. Yours in Brotherly love unfeigned,
JOHN COTTON.


My Letter to Mr. Henden, when as I sent him a Copy of Mr. Cotton's
Animadversions.
Good Mr. Henden,
SVch was my desire to be satisfied about your n^w Way and Principles, and to
inform your self and followers about them, that I sent your Letter wrote to me
to Mr. Cotton to New England, and by Letter requested his judgment thereupon.
In which thing, according to his courteous disposition, and desire to give
witness to the truth, he has condescended to me, and sent me in writing his
censure upon your Letter; which I received but the last Saturday, and having
transcribed a Copy of it, have here sent it to you for you and your Disciples
to peruse, and thence to receive better information about your course. It may
be, that truth commended to you from a place so remote, and from so learned and
godly a man, will sooner be embraced than coming from a neighbor and ordinary
friend, as commodities brought from far Countries, as China, or so, are of more
esteem with curious Gentlewomen, than what are homebred, according to our
English Proverb, Far fetched and dearly bought is good for Ladies. There was,
you see, a mistake in your quotation of Isa. 65. for 56. which I observed not
but upon the receipt of your last; upon which occasion I could say nothing to
it; and Mr. Cotton here does somewhat miss of your meaning. What now I send
you, in writing, I shall shortly make more public by printing. And if
notwithstanding all this, you will wander still, and mislead others, I can say
nothing but what he did; Si vult hic populu: decipi, decipiatur; If this people
will be deceived, let them be deceived; for who can hinder them that will not
be undeceived? So, I rest,

December. 20. 1651. Your loving Friend, JO. ELMESTON.


Certain Errors noted in the Letter sent to you from a Christian Friend,
whereof you desired my judgment.
THat the foundation of the Beast consisted in an usurped power of Error ^.
Church Discipline, footed upon man and his will without the call of God.

If the Beast be Antichrist, then he is contrary to Christ in all his
anoynments, by which he is Christ. Now Christ is the Anointed, not only King
of his Church, but anointed Priest, and anointed Prophet also.

The Beast i^ Antichrist, therefore not only usurping a Kingly Answ*
power over the Church, in Church Discipline, but also in usurping the anointed
Priesthood, in suborning to us other propitiztory and meritorious Sacrifices
for Sin, and other Mediators of Redemption, as likewise in usurping the office
of the anointed Prophet; in giving us Apochrypha-rules of Faith, and advancing
himself to be Judge of Controversies.

The call of God in our time is only for Separation and Rewarding, Error 2.
to wit, rewarding evil upon Antichristians.

The Scripture acknowledges no calling only for Separation and rewarding Evil
(both which are but detestations of sin) but Answ.
requires also the practice of the contrary virtues. Beloved (says John)
follow not that which is evil, but that which is good, 3 John ver. 11. Depart
from evil (says David) and do good, Psalm. 34. 14. Cease to do evil (says
Isaiah) and learn to do well, Isa. 1. 16, 17. There is no commandment of God
fulfilled submitting to the Negative part only (in forbearing what is
forbidden) without performing the Affirmative also, doing what is commanded.
The second Commandment is not fulfilled in abandoning or punishing Humane or
Antichristian inventions, without establishi^g and observing Christ's own
Institutions.

The places of Scripture alleged to prove that all the Calls of God in our
times, are for Separation and Rewarding, are misinterpreted, and mis app^ied:
In Rev. 18. 46. the very phrase of coming out of ^abel, implies not only a
terminus a quo, the place from whence they should come, but Terminus ad quem,
as Rev. 12. 12. (a time contemporary to the other) come up hither, to wit, into
an heavenly and pure estate. That place Rev. 15. 8. does no^ argue that there
were no visible Churches, nor Members in them, till all the seven Vials were
powered forth on the Antichristian state, but the contrary rather. For all the
seven Angels, that is, all the Instruments and Ministers of Gods wrath, against
the Beast, came out of the Temple, and such a Temple it was, as was opened,
that is, was visible, cap. 15. 5. and therefore there was a visible
Church State, before the pouring out of any of the Vials. As for that which is
said, No man was able to enter into the Temple till the seven Plagues of the
seven Angels were fulfilled, It is not understood of Christians (who were in
the Temple before) but of Pagan Nations, whose conversion it retarded by the
smoke of Gods wrath against Antichristians; which yet, nevertheless, hinders
not the conversion of a Sprinkling of some Jews and Pagans, but only any
large or numerous conversion of them. The places in Rev. 19. 7, 8, 9. and Isa.
62. 5. do expressly speak of the conversion of the Jew^ unto Christ in a Church
Estate: And their Espousage or Marriage to Christ does not argue his divorce
from the Gentiles, for the coming of the Jews will not infer a rejection of the
Gentiles, but rather their resurrection and provocation to farther zeal, Romans
11. 12. 15. Much less will these places argue, that there is no visible
Church-marriage from the Apostasy, till this time of the conversion of the
Jews. For beside what has been said of the open and visible estate of these
Churches, out of which the seven Angels came, it is evident, that during all
the time of Antichrist's reign, the woman and her seed were nourished in the
wilderness, and there persecuted of the Dragon, and his Vicegerent the Beast.
Rev. 12. 14. to 17. Now the Woman is the Church, and the Seed her Members; and
their Wildernesse-estate does not argue them invisible; For the Church of
Israel in the Wilderness was visible and goodly, even in the eyes of Pagans,
(Numb. 23. 9. and 24. 5.) yea so visible were they, that the Dragon and Beast
could see them, and persecute them, yea and make war against them. Rev. 13. 7.
The two witnesses are said to be two Candlesticks, Rev. 11. 4. and Allegorical
Candlesticks are ever in St. John's Divinity taken for visible Churches. In the
Canticles before the return of the Shulamite (that i^ before the coversion of
the Jews) Cant. 6. 13. there were sixty Queens and eighty Concubines, besides
one precious Spouse above them all, Cant. 6. 8, 9. Now Queens are Churches in
Marriagecovenant.

The Scriptures alleged for the restraint of the Spirit from breathing on
Churches and Ordinances after the Primitve times, do not argue an Abolition or
Cessation of all Churches and Ordinances, but at most a corruption and
pollution only of the most of them, when yet in some Churches the Ordinances
were preserved in due purity, that the Saints walked in them as Virgins, in
whom was found no guile nor fault, Rev. 14. 4, 5. The only Text that seems
to look a contrary way, Rev. 7. 1. does rather bear witness to this truth:
For the four Angels that restrained the four Winds from breathing on the Earth,
Sea, and Trees, they did not execute that charge until a stronger Angel than
they had sealed all the Servants of God in their foreheads, even twelve times
twelve thousand, ver. 2. to 8. which argues, that all the times of the
Antichristian Apostasy (though it lasted twelve centuries of years and somewhat
upwards, Rev. 11. 3.) yet there never wanted in any century, at least, twelve
thousand that worshipped the Lamb in spirit and truth, by the virtue of the
spirit breathing on them in their Church Fellowship, as there wanted not 7000.
breathed on by a still, small, soft voice in the sorest Tyranny of Jezabel, and
deepest Apostasy of Israel, Nor do the places quoted for the returning of the
breathing of the spirit at the brightness of Christ's coming, speak of Christ's
future coming, but of the coming past and present, save only that of Ezekiel. 37.
9. which apparently speaks of the Jews, and the Spirit breathing on them in
their future conversion, and not of Christians. That of Isaiah 32. 15. is most
fitly accomplished in Christ first coming; as likewise that of Ps. 97. 4. That
other place of Mat. 24. 27, 28. shows only that the Gospel shall shine forth
from the East to the West, as from Christ's time ^o this it has ever done: the
Gospel still spreading it self westwa^d unto this day. In all which time, if
any enquire where Christ is, he tells you, wherever the Eagles (that is, the
clear-sighted, and high-soaring spirited Christians) are gathered together,
ver. 28.

The third Error discovers in his distinction of Gospel Ordinances, and his
exp^ication and application thereof: We conceive, Error 3*
says he, that Gospel Ordinances are of two sorts; 1. Such as are founded more
immediately upon our spiritual Union in the Covenant of Grace, as Ministry,
Baptism, the Lords Supper, Prayer, Profession. 2. Such as are footed upon
Church-stating, and appert^ine to the officials, as Ordination, Confirmation,
Excommunication, Admission, Absolution, etc. The first of these we say the
Gates of Hell never prevail against them, as Teaching, Baptism, Bread, Wine,
Prayer, Profession* etc. But the second sort, to wit, the keys (deemed
essential to officials) were not always truly used, etc.

This Distinction and the Explicat^on and Application thereof, is not sound nor
convenient. 1. Ministry, Baptism, and the Answ*
Lords Supper, are essential to Officials, and more essential too, than
Admission, Excommunication, Confirmation, Absolution: For these may all of them
be dispensed by an Homogeneal Church without Officers. But Ministry, Baptism,
and the Lords Supper, cannot be dispensed without Officers. Christ sent forth
none to administer Baptism and the Lords Supper, but such Officers as he sent
forth for the Ministry of the Gospel. 2. The Gates of Hell prevailed as much
against Teaching, Baptism, Bread, and Wine, Prayer, and Profession, as against
the power of the Keys: For as the Keys were not always truly used, so
neither were any of the rest. Teaching was corrupted with many fundamental
Heresies and Errors; Baptism with many superstitious Ceremonies and undue
Power; The Bread transubstantiated into the Body of Christ, and the Wine into
the Blood, and both transformed into a propitiatory Sacr^fice for the Quick and
the Dead; the Wine also taken from the People; Prayer was perverted into the
Idolatrous worship of Angels, Saints, Images, and publicly offered in a
strange tongue: And profession of Christianity degenerated into the profession
and pract^se of Antichristian Idolatry and Superstition. Greater abuses than
these have not prevailed upon the Keys. True it is that the former sort of
these were soone^ purged from sundry gross Pollutions, than the exercise of
the Keys. But two things would be considered:

1. That a^ all the former Pollutions were no^ brought into the Church and
Ordinances at once, so neither were they purged ou^ at once, but by degrees.
And why may we not perceive the Keys to be at length purged and scoured, as
well as all the former?

2. It can never be proved that in the da^kest times of the Antichristian
Apostasy, the Ordinances of Christ were any of them wholly polluted in all the
Churches, no not the power of the Keys. For the promise of building the Church
upon a Rock, against which the gates of hell should not prevail, was given to
such a Church, as to whom the power of the Keys was given expressly, Mat. 16.
18, 19. I know not what place (there was a mistake in the Letter, quoting Isa.
65. for 56. which is the cause that Mr. Cotton's answer is not punctual to
that allegation) the Author alludeth to, when he says the name (of the Keys)
was foreprophecied to be everlasting, yet the hand or keys, held forth by the
hand in the interpreted place, is not so specified, Isa. 66. 5. but was wholly
resolved in the Pope, etc. which is as unsafe as the former. For in that place,
Mat. 16. 19. where the Keys are pr^mised, the power and efficacy of them is
given also. To thee will I give the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven (there is
the name) and whatsoever thou shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven;
and whatsoever thou shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven; there is
the power and efficacy of the Keys; which though the Pope and his Ministers
perverted and abused, yea, and exercised another Key, which he received from
the bottomless pit; yet it is very unsafely said, That the power of the keys
was wholly resolved in the Pope, and that there was no other face of Officials,
but amongst the Papists in Luthers time, and that the visible Church, the
foundation of these failed, and only an elect s^aled number remain^d. F^^ it
is evident, and in Story, yea, and in the Revelation also, 1. That the s^aled
number was a visible Church represented to John under the resemblance of two
Candlesticks, Rev. 11. 4. discerned and seen not only by John (representing
the faithful, Rev. 14. ^.) but also by the Dragon, and by his Vicegerent the
Beast, who persecuted the Woman and her seed (that is the Church and her
Members) R^v. 12. 13. to 17. and cap. 13. 6, 7. The Church visible to malignant
persecutors, was doubtless v^sible in it self, and in its Members one to
another. 2. It is evident that in Luthers time, and many ages before the
Waldenses lived, and when Luther came, wrote to Luther and to Calvin also, who
not only kept Church Assemblies amongst themselves, but exercised the power of
the keys among themselves; How then can the Author of the Epistle say, That
there was not any face of Officials, but among the Papists in Luthers time?
What could be spoken more eff^ctually to gratify the Papists, and to confirms
their boasting, that either the Church of Rome was the only visible Church
upon the face of the earth, or else Christ had no visible Church upon eath for
above a thousand years together? It is a very slender and lean evasion, to
excuse the rooting out of Ordinances for having any being upon earth, to hold
they have a being in the Scriptures of truth, and in the minds and desires of
the faithful. For we might as well say, Babylon has no being upon earth, but
is burnt down with fire, and the New Jerusalem is come down from Heaven,
because so it is in the Scriptures of truth, and in the minds and desires of
the faithful. If we do (as he says) in this our return from Babylon, carry
(as the Israelites did of old) the vessels of the Lord along with us, why
should we be afraid to officiate in them? We dare not, says he, officiate in
them, because we are as yet within the territories of Babylon, and so shall be,
till we have passed by the sixth Vial, over the River Euphrates. Rev. 16. 12.

Answ. There might be some color for this, if the Churches of Europe, and of
the Western America, were in Scripture Phrase the Kings of the East. For they
that are said to pass over the Riv^r Euphrates in that sixth Vial, are
expr^sly styled the Kings of the East. But sooner shall a man draw East and
West together, than prove Christian Churches to be the Kings of the East, or
that we are still in the territories of Babylon, till we have passed by the
sixth Vial over the River Euphrates: yea suppose we were still in the
territories of Babylon, yet nevertheless, though the Jews of old did not
perform Temple-worship within the territories of Babylon, (because that worship
was confined to the Temple) yet we in the days of the New Testament (where the
worship of God is not limited to any place) the true worshippers may worship
the Father, even in the midst of Rome. And so did the Waldenses, and other of
our godly forefathers within the Roman territories. The mention of the sixth
Vial puts me in mind of an wholesome warning delivered in it by Christ, and
that to the Saints of this age in a special manner, Behold I come a^ a thief
(not to the last Judgment which is no yet* but) to rob men of their garments
of their former profession. Blessed is he that watch^th, and keeps his
garments, lest he walk naked, and men see his sh^m^. Rev. 16. 15. AMEN.

Mr. Cottons Letter to Mr. Elmeston, upon his writing back to thank him for
this labor of love in imparting unto me his judgment upon Mr. Hendens Letter,
and my signifying the slight account that Mr. Henden made thereof.
Dear SIR,
I Thank you for your last Letter, of March 5. 1651. whereunto I would have
returned you a large Answer, but that God having lately afflicted me with an
Asthma, I find, stooping to write somewhat painful to me; which distemper,
though (I thank the Lord) it does not yet silence me from public Ministry, yet
it keeps me within the town, that I cannot go to neighbor towns to hear,
else I had gone abroad to have joined this day with the Indians at Natick
(about 20 miles from us) in a day of Humiliation, wherein they intend to give
themselves to the Lord, and to the worship of Christ in a Churchway. It is a
wise dispensation of the Lord that when many Christians with you, and with us
too, fall off from Christ's Institution and Ordinances, that now God should stir
up poor Pagans to seek after the same. But so it was in the days of old, Acts
13. 46, 47, 48. and 28. 28. As for your Neighbor, I do not expect the Word
should convince him, till the Spirit convert him more from himself, and
persuade him: I do not easily believe his saying, that he had met before with
all the things presented to him, but self is self-full. I should spend time in
vain to run over the particulars of his notions, unless all his grounds were
laid open in them. To cut off some sprigs when other lie hid: The best help for
such is the prayer of faith, to him that touches hearts as well as judgments.
If God return him not, I fear he will fall (...) (...) and greater
ex^^bitances, till he be filled with (...) way, and have enough of himself. But
the Lord Jesus rede^^^ him. I comm^nd my affectionate love to you, and you to
the (...) of (...) grace, in who^ I rest, desirous of your pra^^rs, and yours
in (...) ^^rly love,

John Cotton.
Re^^^^ this 12. of the 8. 1652.

FINIS.

