A DEFENSE Of Mr. JOHN COTTON From the imputation of SELF CONTRADICTION,
charged on him by Mr. DAN: CAVVDREY Written by himself not long before his
death. Whereunto is prefixed, an Answer to a late Treatise of the said Mr.
CAVVDREY about the nature of SCHISM. BY JOHN OWEN: D: D:

(...), Tit. 1. 7. OXFORD, Printed by H: HALL; for T. ROBINSON. 1658.

CHRISTIAN READER,
I have not much to say unto thee, concerning the ensuing Treatise; it will
speak for it self with all impartial men; much less shall I insist on the
commendation of it is Author, who also being dead (...); and will be so I am
persuaded, whilst Christ has a Church upon the Earth; The Treatise it self
was written sundry years ago, immediately upon the publishing of Mr Cawdryes
Accusation against him; I shall not need to give an account whence it has
been, that it saw the light no sooner; it may suffice, that in mine own behalf
and of others, I do acknowledge that in the doing of sundry things seeming of
more importance, this ought not to have been omitted; The judgment of the
Author approving of this vindication of himself as necessary, considering the
place he held in the Church of God, should have been a rule unto us, for the
performance of that duty, which is owing to his worth and piety, in doing and
suffering for the Truth of God. It is now about 7 months ago, since it came
into my hands; and since I engaged my self into the publication of it, my not
immediate proceeding therein, being sharply rebuked by a fresh charge upon my
self from that hand, under which this worthy Person so far suffered, as to
be necessitated to the ensuing defensative, I have here discharged that
engagement. The Author of the charge against him, in his Epistle to that
against me, tel's his Reader, that it is thought that it was intended by
another (and now promised by my self) to be published to cast a Slurre upon
him; so are our intentions judged, so our ways, by thoughts and reports; Why a
Vindication of Mr Cotton should cast a slurre upon Mr Cawdry I know not; Is he
concerned in Spirit or Reputation in the Acquitment of an holy, reverend Person
now at rest with Christ, from imputations of inconstancy and self
contradiction? Is there not room enough in the world, to bear the good names
of Mr Cotton and Mr Cawdry? but that if one be vindicated the other must be
slurred? He shall find now by experience, what assistance he found from him who
loved him, to bear his charge, and to repel it, without any such reflection
on his Accuser, as might savor of an intention to slurre him; mala men's, malus
animus; the measure that men fear from others, they have commonly meted out
unto them before hand; He wishes those that intend to rake in the ashes of the
dead, to consider whether they shall deserve any thanks for their labor. How
the covering of the dead with their own comely garments, comes to be a raking
into their ashes, I know not; His name is alive, though he be dead; It was
that, not his person, that was attempted to be wounded, by the charge against
him; to power forth that balm for it is healing, now he is dead, which himself
provided whilst he was alive, without adding or diminishing one syllable, is
no rakeing into his ashes; and I hope the (...) of the Reverend Author, will
not allow him to be offended, that this friendly office is performed to a dead
Brother; to publish this his defense of his own innocence, written in obedience
to a prime dictate of the law of Nature, against the wrong which was not done
him in secret.

But the intendment of this prefatory discourse, being my own concernment, in
reference to a late tract of Mr Cawdries, bearing in it is Title and
Superscription, a vindication from my unjust clamours and false aspersions; I
shall not detain the Reader with any farther discourse of that, which he will
find fully debated in the ensuing Treatise it self; but immediately address
my self to that, which is my present peculiar design; By what ways and
means the difference betwixt us is come to that issue wherein now it stands
stated, in the expressions before mentioned, I shall not need to repeat. Who
first let out those waters of strife, who has filled their streams with
bitterness, clamor and false aspersions, is left to the judgment of all, that
fear the Lord, who shall have occasion at any time to reflect upon those
discourses; How ever it is come to pass, I must acknowledge that the state of
the Controversy between us is now degenerated into such an useless strife of
words, as that I dare publicly own engageme^ts into studies of so much more
importance unto the interest of truth, Piety, and literature, as that I cannot
with peace in my own retirements, be much farther conversant therein. Only
whereas I am not in the least convinced, that Mr Cawdry has given satisfaction
to my former Expostulations, about the injuries done me in his other Treatise,
and has evidently added to the number and weight of them in this, I could not
but lay hold of this opportunity given, by my discharging a former promise,
once more to remind him of some miscarriages, exceedingly unbecomeing his
profession and calling; which I shall do in a brief review of his Epistle and
Treatise. Upon the consideration whereof, without charging him or his way with
schism, in great letters on the Title Page of this book, I doubt not but it
will appear, that the guilt of the crime he falsely, unjustly, and uncharitably
charge upon others, may be laid more equitably at his own door; and that the
shortness of the covering to hide themselves, used by him and others from the
inquisition made after them for schism, upon their own principles, will not be
supplied by such outcryes as those he is pleased to use after them, who are
least of all men concerned in the matter under contest, there being no solid
medium, whereby they may be impleaded. And in this discourse, I shall, as I
suppose, put an end to my engagement in this controversy; I know no man whose
patience will enable him to abide always in the consideration of things to so
little purpose; were it not that men bear themselves on high by resting on the
partial adherence of many to their dictates, it were impossible they should
reap any contentment in their retirements from such a management of
Controversies as this; Independency is a great schism, it has made all the
divisions amongst us, Brownists, Anabaptists, and all sectaries are
Independents; they deny our Ministers and Churches, they separate from us, all
errors come from among them, this I have been told, and that I have heard, is
the sum of this Treatise; who they are of whom he speaks, how they came into
such a possession of all Church state in England, that all that are not with
them are Schismatickes; how de jure, or de facto, they came to be so instated;
what claim they can make to their present stations, without schism, on their
own principles; whether granting the Church of England as constituted when they
and we begun that, which we call Reformation, to have been a True instituted
Church they have any Power of rule in it, but what has been got by violence;
what, that is purely theirs, has any pretense of establishment, from the
scripture, antiquity, and the laws of this land? I say with these and the like
things, which are incumbent on him to clear up, before his Charges with us
will be of any value, our Author troubles not himself. But to proceed to the
particulars by him insisted on.

1. He tells the Reader in his Epistle, that his unwillingnesse to this
rejoinder was heightened by the Necessity he found, of discovering some
personal weaknesses and forgetfulnesses in me, upon my deny all of some things
which were known to be true, if he should proceed therein; for what he intimates
of the unpleasantnesse that it is to him, to discover things of that importance
in me, when he professes his design to be to impair my Authority, so far
that the cause I own may receive no countenance thereby; I leave it to him, who
will one day reveal the secrets of all hearts, which at present are open and
naked unto him; but how I pray are the things by me denied known to be true?
seeing it was unpleasant and distasteful to him to insist upon them, men might
expect that his Evidence of them, was not only open, clear, undeniable, and
manifest as to it is truth, but cogent as to their publication; The whole
insisted on is, if there be any truth in reports; hic nigrae succus loliginis,
haec est aerugo mera; Is this a bottom for a Minister of the Gospel to proceed
upon, to such charges as those insinuated; is not the course of Nature set on
fire at this day, by reports? is any thing more contrary to the royal law of
charity, than to take up reports as the ground of charges and accusations? Is
there any thing more unbecoming a man, laying aside all considerations of
christianity, than to suffer his judgment to be tainted, much more his words,
and public expressions in charging, and accusing others to be regulated by
reports? and whereas we are commanded to speak evil of no man, may we not on
this ground, speak evil of all men, and justify our selves by saying it is so,
if reports be true? the Prophet tel's us, that a combination for his defaming
and reproach was managed among his Adversaries, Jer. 20. 10. I have heard the
defaming of many, fear on every side, report say they, and we will report it;
if they can have any to go before them in the Transgression of that Law, which
he who knows how the tongues of men are set on fire of Hell, gave out to lay a
restraint upon them, thou shall not raise a false report, Exodus 23. 1. They
will second it, and spread it abroad to the utmost, for his disadvantage and
trouble; Whether this procedure of our Reverend Author, come not up to the
practice of their design, I leave to his own conscience to judge. Should men
suffer their Spirits to be heightened by provocations of this nature, unto a
recharge from the same offensive dunghill of reports, what monsters should we
speedily be transformed unto? but this being far from being the only place
wherein appeal is made to reports and hearesayes by our Author, I shall have
occasion in the consideration of the severals of them, to reassume this
discourse. For what he adds about the space of time wherein my former reply
was drawn up, because I know not whether he had heard any report insinuated to
the contrary to what I affirmed, I shall not trouble him with giving evidence
thereunto: but only add that here he has the product of half that time,
which I now interpose upon the review of my transcribed papers: Only whereas it
is said that Mc Cawdry is an ancient man; I cannot but wonder he should be so
easy of belief; Arist. Rhetor. lib. 2. c. 18. tel's us, (...), and not apt to
believe; whence on all occasions of discourse (...); but he believes all that
comes to hand with an easy Faith, which he has totally in his own power, to
dispose of at pleasure. That I was in passion when I wrote my review is his
judgment; but this is but man's day; we are in expectation of that, wherein the
world shall be judged in righteousness; it is to possible that my spirit was
not in that frame in all things, wherein it ought to have been; but that the
Reverend Author knows not; I have nothing to say to this, but that of the
Philosopher -- (...), Epic. Cap. 48. Much I confess, was not spoken by me
(which he afterward insisteth on) to the Argumentative part of his book,
which as in an answer I was not to look for, so to find, had been a difficult
task. As he has nothing to say, unto the differences among themselves both in
judgment and practice, so how little there is, in his recrimination of the
differences among us, as that one and the same man differs from himself,
which charge he casts upon Mr Cotton and my self, will speedily be manifested
to all impartial men. For the Treatise it self whose consideration I now
proceed unto, that I may reduce what I have to say unto it, unto the bounds
intended in confining my defensative unto this Preface to the treatise of
another, I shall refer it unto certain Heads, that will be comprehensive of
the whole, and give the Reader a clear and distinct view thereof.

I shall begin with that which is least handled in the two books of this
Reverend Author, though the sum of what was pleaded by me in my Treatise of
Schism. For the discovery of the true nature of Schism, and the vindication
of them who were falsely charged with the crime thereof, I laid down two
Principles as the foundation of all that I Asserted in the whole cause insisted
on; which may briefly be reduced to these two Syllogismes.

1. If in all and every place of the new Testament where there is mention made
of Schism, name, or thing, in an Ecclesiastical sense; there is nothing
intended by it, but a divisio^ in a particular Church; then that is the proper
Scripture notion of Schism in the Ecclesiastical sense; but in all and every
place etc: ergo, The Proposition being clear and evident in it is own light,
the Assumption was confirmed in my Treatise, by an induction of the several
instances that might any way seem to belong unto it.

My second principle was raised upon a concession of the general nature of
Schism restrained with one necessary limitation and amounts unto this Argument.

If Schism in an Ecclesiastical sense, be the breach of an Union of Christ's
institution, then they who are not guilty of the breach of any union of
Christ's Institution, are not guilty of Schism; but so is Schism, Ergo,

The Proposition also of this Syllogism with it is inference being
unquestionable, for the confirmation of the Assumption I considered the nature
of all Church Union as instituted by Christ, and pleaded the innocence of those
whose defense in several degrees I had undertaken, by their freedom from the
breach of any Church Union. Not finding the Reverend Author in his first
answer to speak clearly and distinctly to either of those principles, but to
proceed in a course of perpetual diversion, from the thing in question, with
reflections, charges etc: All rather I hope out of an unacquaintednesse with
the true nature of argumentation, than any perverseness of spirit, in
cavilling at what he found he could not answer; I earnestly desired him in my
review that we might have a fair and friendly meeting, personally to debate
these principles which he had undertaken to oppose, and so to prevent trouble
to our selves and others, in writing and reading things remote from the merit
of the cause under agitation; what returns I have had hereto, the Reader is
now acquainted withal, from his rejoinder, the particulars where of shall be
farther enquired into afterward.

The other parts of his two books consist in his charges upon me, about my
Judgment in sundry particulars, not relating, in the least that I can as yet
understand, unto the Controversy in hand; As to his excursions, about
Brownists, Anabaptists Seekers; rending the peace of their Churches, seperating
from them, the errors of the Seperatists, and the like, I cannot apprehend my
self concerned to take notice of them; to the other things an Answer shall be
returned, and a defense made, so far as I can judge it necessary. It may be
our Author seeks a Releife from the Charge of Schism that lies upon him and
his party (as they are called) from others, by mannaging the same charge
against them, who he thinks will not return it upon them: but for my part, I
shall assure him that were he not in my judgment more acacquitted upon my
principles than upon his own, I should be necessitated to stand upon even
terms with him herein; but to have advantages from want of charity, as the
Donatists had against the Catholics, is no Argument of a Good cause.

In the first Chapter there occurs not any thing of real difference as to the
cause under agitation, that should require a review, being spent wholly in
things (...). And therefore I shall briefly animadvert on what seems of most
concernment therein, in the manner of his procedure. His former discourse, and
this also consisting much of my words perverted by adding in the close
something that might wrest them to his own purpose, he tells me in the
beginning of his third Chapter, that this is to turn my testimony against my
self, which is, as he says, and allowed way of the clearest victory, which it
seems he aims at; but nothing can be more remote from being defended with
that pretense than this his way of proceeding. It Is not of urging a Testimony
from me, against me, that I complained, but the perverting of my words, by
either heading, or closeing of them with his own, quite to other purposes than
those of their own intendment: a way whereby any man may make other men's words
to speak what he pleases; as Mr Biddle hy his leading questions, and knitting
of Scriptures to his expressions in them, makes an appearance of constraining
the word of God to speak out all his Socinian blasphemies.

In this course he still continues; and his very entrance gives us a pledge of
what we are to expect in the process of his management of the present
business; whereas I had said, that considering the various interests of
parties at difference, there is no great success to be promised by the
management of Controversies, though with never so much evidence and conviction
of truth; to the repetition of my words he subjoines the instance of Sectaries,
not restrained by the clearest demonstration of truth; not weighing how facile
a task it is, to supply Presbyterians in their room; which in his account is,
it seems, to turn his testimony against himself, and as he somewhere
phraseth it, to turn the point of his sword into his own bowels; but, nobis
non licet esse tam disertis; neither do we here, either learn or teach any
such way of disputation.

His following leaves are spent for the most part in slighting the Notion of
Schism by me insisted on, and in reporting my arguments for it (p. 8, 9, 12.)
in such a way and manner, as argues that he either never understood them, or is
willing to pervert them. The true nature and importance of them I have before
laid down, and shall not now again repeat: Though I shall add that his
frequent repetition of his disproving that principle, which it appears, that
he never yet contended with all, in its Full strength, brings but little
advantage to his cause, with persons whose interest does not compel them to
take up things on trust. How well he cleares himself from the charge of
reviling and useing opprobrious reproachful terms, although he profess
himself to have been astonished at the charge, may be seen in his
justification of himself therein. page 16, 17, 18, 19. with his reinforceing
every particular expression instanced in; and yet he tells me, for inferring
that he discovered sanguinary thoughts in reference unto them whose removal
from their native soil into the wilderness, he affirms, England's happiness
would have consisted in, that he has much ado to forbear once more to say
the Lord rebuke thee: for my part, I have received such a satisfactory taste of
his spirit and way, that as I shall not from henceforth desire him to keep in
any thing, that he can hardly forbear to let out, but rather to use his utmost
liberty; so I must assure him that I am very little concerned, or not at all,
in what he shall be pleased to say, or to forbear for the time to come;
himself has freed me of that concernment.

The first particular of value insisted on, is his charge upon me for the
denial of all the Churches of England to be true Churches of Christ, except
the Churches gathered, in a Congregationall way: Having frequently and without
hesitation charged this opinion upon me in his first answer, knowing it to be
very false, I expostulated with him about it in my Reveiw. Instead of accepting
the satisfaction tendered in my express denial of any such thought or
persuasion, or tendering any satisfaction as to the wrong done me, he seeks to
justify himself in his charge, and so persisteth therein. The Reasons he gives
of his so doing are not unworthy a little to be remarked.

The first is this; He supposed me to be an Independent, and therefore made
that charge; the consequent of which supposition is much to weak, to justify
this Reverend Author in his Accusation; does he suppose that he may without
offense, lay what he please to the charge of an Independent? but he says
secondly, that he took the word Independent, generally, as comprehending
Brownists, and Anabaptists, and other Sectaries: But herein also he does but
delude his own conscience, seeing he personally speaks to me and to my
design in that book of Schism, which he undertook to confute; which also
removes his third intimation, that he formerly intended any kind of
Independency, etc: the rest that follow are of the same nature, and however
compounded will not make a salve to heal the wound made in his reputation by
his own weapon; for the learned Author, called vox populi, which he is pleased
here to urge? I first question whither he be willing to be produced to
maintain this Charge; and if he shall appear; I must needs tell him, (what he
here questions whether it be so, or no) that he is a very liar. For any
principles in my Treatise, whence a denial of their Ministers and Churches may
be regularly deduced, let him produce them if he can; and if not, acknowledge
that there had been a more Christian and ingenious way of coming off an
engagement into that charge, then that by him chosen to be insisted on; animos
and ir am ex crimine sumunt. And again we have vox populi cited on the like
occasion, page 34; about my refusal to answer whither I were a Minister or
not; which as the thing it self of such a refusal of mine on any occasion in
the world, (because it must be spoken) is purum putum mendacium, so it is no
truer, that, that was vox populi at Oxford which is pretended; that which is
vox populi, must be public: publicum was once populicum; now setting aside
the whispers, of it may be two or three Ardelio's, notorious triflers, whose
lavish impertinency, will deliver any man from the danger of being slandered by
their tongues, and there will be little gound left for the report, that is
fathered on vox populi: And I tell him here once again (which is a sufficient
answer indeed to his whole first Chapter) that I do not deny Presbyterian
Churches to be true Churches of Jesus Christ, nor the ministers of them to be
true ministers, nor do maintain a nullity in their Ordination as to what is
the proper use and end of Ordination, (taking it in the sense, wherein by Vid.
Gerard. loc. Com. de Minist. Ecclesiast. Sect. 11. 12.
them it is taken,) though I think it neither administered by them in due order,
nor to have in it self that force and efficacy, singly considered, which by
many of them is ascribed unto it. Thus much of my judgment I have publicly
declared long ago, and I thought I might have expected from persons Professing
Christianity, that they would not voluntarily engage themselves into an
opposition against me, and waveing my judgment which I had constantly published
and preached, have gathered up reports from private and table discourses, most
of them false and untrue, all of them uncertain, the occasions and coherences
of those discourses from whence they have been raised and taken, being utterly
lost, or at present by him wholly omitted. His following excursions about a
successive ordination from Rome, wherein he runs cross to the most eminent
lights of all the Reformed Churches, and their declared Judgments, with
practice in reordaining those who come unto them with that Roman stamp upon
them, I shall not further interest my self in, nor think my self concerned so
to do, until I see a satisfactory answer given unto Beza and others in this
very point; and yet I must here again profess, that I cannot understand that
distinction of deriveing ordination from the Church of Rome, but not from the
Roman Church. Let him but seriously peruse these ensuing words of Beza, and
tell me whither he have any ground of a particular quarrel against me upon
this account.

Sed praeterea quaenam ista est quaeso ordinaria vocatio, quam eos habuisse
dicis, quos Deus paucis quibusdam except is, excitavit? Certe papistica. Nam
haec tua verba sunt; Hodie si episcopi Gallicanarum ecclesiarum se and suas
ecclesias a tyrannide Episcopi Romani vindicare velint, and eas ab omni
idololatria and superstitione repurgare, non habent opus alia vocatione ab ea
quam habent. Quid ergo? Papisticas ordinationes, in quibus neque morum examen
praecessit, neque leges ullae servatae sunt inviolabiliter ex divino jure in
electionibus and ordinationibus praescriptae, in quibus puri etiam omnes
canones impudentissime violati sunt: quae nihil aliud sunt, quam foedissima
Romani prostibulin undinatio, quavis meretricum mercede, quam Deus templo suo
inferri prohibuit, inquinatior: quibus denique alii non ad praedicandum sed
pervertendum evangelium: alii non ad docendum, sed adrursus sacrificandum, and
ad abominandum (...) sunt ordinati, usque adeo firmas tecum esse censebimus, ut
quoties tali cuipiam pseudoepiscopo, Deus concesserit ad verum Christianismum
transire omnis illa istiusmodi ordinationis impuritas simul expurgata
censeatur? Imo quia sic animum per Dei gratiam mutavit, quo ore, quo pudore,
qua conscientia papismum quidem detestabitur, suam autem inordinatissimam
ordinationem non ejurabit? aut si, ejuret, quomodo ex illius jure auctoritatem
dicendi habebit. Nec tamen nego quin tales, si probe doctrinam veram tenere, si
honest is moribus praediti, si ad gregem pascendum apti comperiantur, ex
pseudoepiscopis novi pastores, legitime designentur; Thus he; who was thought
then to speak the sense of the Churches of Geneva and France; in his book
against Saravia about the diverse orders of Ministers in the Church:

His plea for the Church Authority of the Pope, notwithstanding his being an
Idolater, a murderer, theman of sin an adversary of Christ; because a Civil
magistrate does not by any moral Crime or those whereof the Pope is guilty,
loose his jurisdiction and Authority, considering the different principles,
grounds, ends, laws, Rules, privileges of the Authority of the one, and the
other, and the several tenures, whereby the one does hold, and the other
pretends to hold his power, is brought in to serve the turn in hand, and may
be easily laid aside?

And when he shall manifest, that there is appointed by Christ, one single
High-Preist or Prelate in the house of God the whole Church; and that office to
be confined to one nation, one blood, one family, propagated by natural
generation, without any provision of relief by any other way, person or family
in case of miscarriage; and when he shall have proved that such an officer as
the Pope of Rome, in any one particular that constituteth him such an officer,
was once instituted by Christ, I shall farther attend unto his Reason for his
Authority from that of the Highpriests among the Jews, which was not lost as
to it is continuance in the family of Aaron notwithstanding the miscarriage of
some individual Person vested therewithal; In the close of the Chapter he
reassumes his charge of my renouncing my own Ordination which with great
confidence, and without the least scruple, he had asserted in his Answer; of
that assersion he now pretends to give the Reasons, whereof the first is this.

1. The world looks on him as an Independent of the highest note; therefore he
has renounced his ordination; and therefore I dare to say so. So much for that
reason. I understand neither the Logic nor morality of this first Reason.

2. He knows from good hands that some of the Brethren have renounced their
Ordination; therefore he durst say positively that I have renounced mine. Prove.
12. 18.

3. He has heard that I dissuaded others from their ordination, and therefore
he durst say I renownced my own; and yet I suppose he may possibly dissuade
some from Episcopal Ordination: but I know it not, no more than he knows what
he affirms of me which is false.

4. He concludes from the principles in my book of Schism; because I said that
to insist upon a succession of ordination from Antichrist and the Beast of
Rome would if I mistake not keep up in this particular what God would have
pulled down, therefore I renounced my ordination; when he knows that I avowed
the validity of ordination on another account.

5. If all this will not do,, he tells me of something that was said at a
public meeting (at dinner it seems) with the Canons of Chhist-Church, viz:
that I vallued not my ordination by the Bishop of Oxford any more than a crum
upon my trencher; which words whether ever they were spoken or no, or to what
purpose, or in reference to what Ordination, (I mean of the two orders) or in
what sense, or with what limitation, or as part of what discourse, or in
comparison of what else, or whither solely in refference to the Roman
succession, in which sense I will have nothing to do with it, I know not at
all; nor will concern my self to enquire; being greatly ashamed to find men
professing the Religion of Jesus Christ, so far forgetful of all common
Rules of civility and principles of humane society, as to insist upon such
vain groundless reports as the Foundations of accusations against their
Brethren! nor do I believe that any one of the Reverend Persons quoted will
own this information; although I shall not concern my self to make enquiry
into their memories concerning any such passage or discourse.

Much relief for the future against these and the like mistakes may be
afforded from an easy observation of the different senses wherein the term of
Ordination is often used; it is one thing when it is taken largely for the
whole appointment of a man to the ministry; in which sense I desire our Author
to consider what is written by Beza among Reformed, and Gerhard among the
Lutheran Divines; to omit innumerable others; another thing when taken for the
imposition of hand, whither by Bishops or Presbyters; concerning which single
Act, both as to its order, and efficacy, I have sufficiently delivered my
judgment, if he be pleased to take notice of it. I fear indeed that when men
speak of an ordained ministry; which in its true and proper sense I shall with
them contend for, they often relate only to that solemnity, restraining the
authoritative making of ministers singly thereunto; contrary to the intention
and meaning of that expression, in Scripture, antiquity, and the best reformed
Divines, both Calvinists, and Lutherans; and yet it is not imaginable how some
men prevail by the noise and sound of that Word, upon the prejudiced minds of
partial unstudied men. A little time may farther manifest, if it be not
sufficiently done already; that another account is given of this matter, by
Clemens, Tertullian, Cyprian, Origin, Justin Martyr, and generally all the
first writers of Christians; besides the Counsels of old and late, with
innumerable Protestant Authors of the best note to the same purpose.

This I say is the ground of this mistake; whereas sundry things concur to
the calling of Ministers, as it belongs to the Church of God, the ground and
pillar of truth, the spouse of Christ, Psalm. 45. and mother of the family, or
she that tarryeth at home, Psalm. 68. unto whom all ministers are stewards, 1
Cor. 4. 1. even in that house of God, 1 Timothy 3. 15. and sundry qualifications
are indispensably previously required in the persons to be called; overlooking
the necessity of the qualifications required, and omitting the duty and
authority of the Church, Acts 1. 15. Acts 6. 2. 13. 2. 14. 22. the Act of them
who are not the whole Church, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. but only a part of it, 1 Cor.
3. 21. 2 Cor. 1. 24. 1 Pet. 5. 3. as to ministry, consisting in the approbation
and solemn confirmation, of what is supposed to go before, has in some men's
language, gotten the name of ordination, and an interpretation of that name to
such an extent, as to enwrap in it, all that is indispensably necessary to the
constitution or making of ministers; so that where that is obtained, in what
order soever, or by whom soever administered, who have first obtained it
themselves, there is a lawful and sufficient calling to the ministry. Indeed,
I know no error, about the institutions of Christ, attended with more
pernicious consequences to the Church of God, then this; should it be
practiced, according to the force of the principle its self. Suppose six,
eight, or ten men, who have themselves been formerly ordained; but now perhaps,
not by any ecclesiastical censure, but by an act of the civil magistrate, are
put out of their places, for notorious ignorance and scandal; should concur
and ordain an hundred ignorant and wicked persons like themselves, to be
ministers: must they not on this Principle be all accounted ministers of
Christ, and to be invested with all ministerial power; and so be enabled to
propagate their kind to the end of the world; and indeed why should not this be
granted, seeing the whole bulk of the papal ordination is contended for as
valid; whereas it is notoriously known, that sundry Bishops among them (who
perhaps received their own ordination as the reward of a whore) being persons
of vicious lives, and utterly ignorant of the Gospel, did sustain their pomp
and sloth, by selling holy orders as they called them, to the scum and refuse
of men; but of these things, more in their proper place.

Take then Reader, the substance of this chapter; in this brief recapitulation.

1. He denies our Churches to be true Churches, and our Ministers true
Ministers.

2. He has renounced his own ordination.

3. When some young men came to advise about their ordination he diswaded them
from it.

4. He says he would maintain against all the Ministers of England, there was
in Scripture no such thing as Ordination.

5. That when he was chosen a Parliament man he would not answer whether he was
a Minister or not; all which are notoriously untrue, and some of them, namely
the two last, so remote from any thing to give a pretense or color unto them,
that I question whether Satan have impudence enough to own himself their
Author; and yet from hearesayes, reports, rumors, from table talk, Vox populi,
and such other grounds of Reasoning this Reverend Author has made them his
own, and by such a charge, has I presume, in the judgment of all unprejudiced
men, discharged me from further attending to what he shall be prompted from the
like principles to divulge, for the same end and purposes, which hitherto he
has managed, for the future. For my judgment about their ministry, and
Ordination, about the nature and efficacy of Ordination, the state and power of
particular Churches, my own station in the ministry, which I shall at all
times through the grace and assistance of our Lord Jesus Christ, freely justify
against men and devils, it is so well known, that I shall not need here
further to declare it: for the true nature and notion of Schism, alone by me
enquired after, in this chapter, as I said, I find nothing offered thereunto:
only whereas I restrained the Ecclesiastical use of the word Schism to the
sense wherein it is used, in the places of Scripture, that mention it with
relation to Church affairs, which that it ought not to be so, nothing but
asseverations to the contrary are produced to evince; this is interpreted, to
extend to all that I would allow as to the nature of Schism it self, which is
most false; though I said if I would proceed no farther, I might not be
compelled so to do, seeing in things of this nature we may crave allowance to
think and speak with the Holy Ghost: However, I expressly comprised in my
proposition all the places wherein the nature of Schism is delivered under
what terms or words soever. When then I shall be convinced, that such
discourses as those of this Treatise, made up of diversions into things wholly
foreign to the inquiry by me insisted on, in the investigation of the true
notion and nature of Schism, with long talks about Anabaptists, Brownists,
Sectaries, Independents, Presbyterians, Ordination, with charges and
reflections grounded on this presumption, that this Author and his party, (for
we will no more contend about that expression) are in solidum possessed of all
true and orderly Church state in England, so that whosoever are not of them,
are Schismatics, and I know not what besides, he being -- Gallinae filius
albae nos viles pulli nati infelicibus ovis; I shall farther attend unto them.
I must farther add that I was not so happy as to foresee that because I
granted the Roman Party before the Reformation to have made outwardly a
profession of the Religion of Christ, although I expressed them to be really a
party combined together, for all ends of wickedness, and in particular for the
extirpation of the true Church of Christ in the world, having no state of union
but what the Holy Ghost calls Babylon in opposition to Syon, our Reverend
Author would conclude as he does page 34. that I allowed them to be a true
Church of Christ; but it is impossible for wiser men then I, to see far into
the issue of such discourses; and therefore we must take in good part what does
fall out; and if the Reverend Author, instead of having his zeal warmed
against me, would a little bestirre his abilities, to make out to the
understandings and consciences of uninterested men, that All ecclesiastical
power being vested in the Pope and Councills, by the consent of that whole
combination of men called the Church of Rome, and flowing from the Pope in its
execution to all others; who in the derivation of it from him, owned him as the
immediate fountain of it, which they swear to maintain in him, and this in
opposition to all Church power in any other persons whatsoever; it was possible
that any power should be derived from that combination, but what came
expressly from the fountain mentioned. I desire our Author would consider the
frame of spirit that was in this matter, in them, who first labored in the
work of Reformation, and to that end peruse the stories of Lasitius, and
Regenuolscius about the Churches of Bohemia, Poland, and those parts of the
world, especially the latter from page 29. 30. and forward. And as to the
distinction used by some, between the Papacy, and the Church of Rome, which our
Author makes use of to another purpose, then those did, who first invented it,
(extending it only to the consideration of the possibility of salvation for
individual persons living in that communion before the Reformation) I hope he
will not be angry if I profess my disability to understand it. All men cannot
be wise alike; if the Papacy comprise the Pope, and all Papal Jurisdiction and
power, with the subjection of men thereunto, if it denote all the Idolatries,
false worship, and heresies of that society of men; I do know that all those
are confirmed by Church Acts of that Church: and that in the Church Public
sense of that Church, no man was a member of it but by virtue of the union that
consisted in that Papacy, it being placed always by them in all their
definitions of their Church; as also hat there was neither Church Order, nor
Church Power, nor Church Act, nor Church confession, nor Church Worship amongst
them, but what consisted in that Papacy.

Now because nothing does more frequently, occur then the objection of the
difficulty in placing the dispensation of baptism on a sure foot account, in
case of the rejection of all authoritative influence from Rome into the
ministry of the Reformed Churches, with the insinuation of a supposition of the
nonbaptization of all such, as derive not a title unto it, by that means,
they who do so being supposed to stand upon an unquestionable foundation, I
shall a little examine the grounds of their security, and then compare them
with what they have to plead, who refuse to acknowledge the deriving any sap or
noushriment from that rotten corrupt stock.

It is I suppose, taken for granted, that an unbaptized person can never
effectually baptize, let him receive what other qualifications soever that are
to be superadded, or necessary thereunto. If this be not supposed the whole
weight of the objection improved by the worst supposition that can be made,
falls to the ground. I shall also desire in the next place, that as we cannot
make the Popish baptism, better then it is, so that we would not plead it to
be better, or any other, then they profess it to be; nor pretend, that though
it be rotten or null in the foundation, yet by continuance and time it might
obtain validity and strength. When the claim is by succession from such a
stock or root, if you suppose once a total intercision in the succession from
that stock or root, there is an utter end put to that claim; let us now
consider how the case is with them from whom this claim is derived.

1. It is notoriously known, that amongst them the validity of the sacraments
depends upon the intention of the Administrator: It is so with them, as to
every thing they call a sacrament: now to take one step backwards: that
baptism will by some of ours, be scarce accounted valid, which is not
administered by a lawful minister; suppose now that some Pope ordaining a
Bishop in his stable to satisfy a Whore, had not an intention to make him a
Bishop, which is no remote surmise; he being no Bishop rightly ordained, all
the Priests by him afterward consecrated, were indeed no priests, and so
indeed had no power to administer any Sacraments, and so consequently the
baptism that may lie, for ought we know, at the root of that which some of us
pretend unto, was originally absolutely null and void, and could never by tract
of time, be made valid, or effectual, for like a muddy fountain, the farther
it goes, the more filthy it is: or suppose that any Priest, baptizing one who
afterward came to be Pope from whom all Authority in that Church does flow and
is derived, had no intention to baptize him? what will become of all that
ensues thereon.

It is endless to pursue the uncertainties, and intanglements, that ensue on
this head of account; and sufficiently easy it is to manifest, that whosoever
resolves his interest in Gospel privileges, into this foundation, can have no
assurance of faith nay nor tolerably probable conjecture that he is baptized,
or was ever made partaker of any ordinance of the Gospel. Let them that
delight in such troubled waters, sport themselves in them: for my own part,
considering the state of that Church for some years if not Ages, wherein the
fountains of all Authority amongst them, were full of filth and blood, there
Popes upon their own confession being made, set up and pulled down at the
pleasure of vile, impudent domineering strumpets, and supplying themselves with
officers all the world over of the same spirit, and stamp with themselves, and
that for the most part for hire, being in the mean time all Idolaters to a
man; I am not willing to grant, that their Good and upright intention is
necessary to be supposed as a thing requisite unto my interest in any
privilege of the Gospel of Christ.

2. It is an ecclesiastical determination of irrefragable Authority amongst
them, that whosoever he be that administers baptism, so he use the matter and
form, that baptism is Good and valid and not to be reiterated: yea Pope
Nicholas in his Resolutions and determinations upon the enquiry of the
Bulgarians, (whose decrees are authentic and recorded in their Counsels, Tom:
2. Crabb: p. 144.) declares the judgment of that Church to the full: They tell
him, that many in their Nation were baptized by an unknown person, a Jew or a
Pagan they knew not whether; and enquire of him, whether they were to be
rebaptized or no; whereunto he answers; si in nomine S. S. Trinitatis, vel
tantum in Christi nomine, sicut in Act is Apostolorum legimus, baptizati sunt,
unum quippe idemque est, ut S. Ambrosius expressit, constat eos denuo non esse
baptizandos: if they were baptized in the name of the Trinity or of Christ,
they are not to be baptized again. Let a blasphemous Jew or Pagan do it, so it
be done the work is wrought, grace conveyed, and baptism valid. The constant
practice of women baptizing amongst them, is of the same import: and what does
Mr Cawdry think of this kind of Baptism? Is it not worth the contending about,
to place it in the derived succession of ours? who knows but that some of
these persons, baptized by a counterfeit impostor, on purpose to abuse and
defile the institutions of our blessed Savior, might come to be baptizers
themselves, yea Bishops, or Popes; from whom all ecclesiastical Authority was
to be derived; and what evidence or certainty can any man have, that his
baptism does not flow from this fountain.

3. Nay upon the General account, if this be required as necessary to the
administration of that ordinance, that he that does baptize, be rightly and
effectually baptized himself; who can in faith bring an infant to any, to be
baptized, unless he himself saw that person rightly baptized.

As to the matter of Baptism then, we are no more concerned, then as to that
of Ordination; by what ways or means soever any man comes to be a minister,
according to the mind of Jesus Christ; by that way and means he comes to have
power for a due administration of that ordinance: concerning which state of
things, our Author may do well to consult Beza in the place mentioned. Many
other passages there are in this Chapter, that might be remarked, and a return
easily made according to their desert of untruth and impertinency; but the
insisting on such things, looks more like childrens playing at pushpin, then
the management of a serious disputation: Take an instance, page 23. he seems
to be much offended with my commending him; and tells me, as Jerome said of
Ruffinus, I wrong him with praises; when yet the utmost I say of him is, that I
had received a better character of him, then he had given of himself in his
book, page 10. and that his proceeding was unbecoming his worth, gravity and
profession, page 46. or so Grave and Reverend a person as he is reported to be,
page 121. wherein it seems I have transgressed the rule, (...).

The business of his second Chapter is to make good his former charge of my
inconstancy and inconsistency with my self as to my former and present
Opinions, which he had placed in the Frontispiece of his other Treatise. The
Impertinency of this Chapter had been intolerable, but that the loose
discourses of it are relieved by a scheme of my self-Contradictions in the
close. His design, he professes, in his former discourse was not to blast my
Reputation, or to cause my person to suffer, but to prevent the prevalency of
my way by the Authority of my person, That is, it was not his intention, it was
only his intention for such a purpose. I bless my God I have good security
through Grace, that whether he, or others like minded with himself, intend any
such thing or no, in those proceedings of his and theirs, which seemed to have
in their own nature, a tendency thereunto, my reputation shall yet be
preserved in that state and Condition, as is necessary to accompany me in the
duties and works of my Generation, that I shall through the hand of God be
called out unto; And therefore being prepared in some measure, to go through
good report and bad report, I shall give him assurance, that I am very little
concerned in such attempts, from what ever intention they do proceed; Only I
must needs tell him, that he consulted not his own reputation with peaceable
godly men, what ever else he omitted, in the ensuing Comparing of me to the
seducers in Jude, called wandering Planets, for their inconstancy and
inconsistency with themselves, according to the exposition that was needful
for the present turn.

But seeing the Scheme at the close must bear the weight of this charge, let
us briefly see what it amounts unto; and whether it be a sufficient basis of
the sustruction, that is raised upon it; Hence it is, that my inconsistency
with my self, must be remarked in the title page of his first Treatise; from
hence must my Authority (which what it is I know not) be impaired, and my self
be Compared to cursed Apostates and Seducers, and great triumph be made and
upon my self inconsistency.

The Contradictions pretended are taken out of two books, the one written in
the year 1643. The other in 1656. and are as follows.

He spoke of Rome as a Collapsed, Corrupted Church State. p. 40. He says Rome
we account no Church at all. page 156.

Crimen in auditum C. Caesar; is it meet that any one should be tolerated, that
is thus woefully inconsistent with himself? what! speak of Rome as a Collapsed
Church in Italy, and within thirteen, or fourteen years after to say, it is
no Church at all; well! though I may say there is indeed no Contradiction
between these Assertions, seeing in the latter place I speak of Rome as that
Church is stated by themselves, when yet I acknowledge there may be corrupted
Churches both in Rome and Italy in the same Treatise; Yea I do not find that in
the place directed unto, I have in terms, or in just consequence at all
granted the Church of Rome to be a Collapsed Church: nay the Church of Rome is
not once mentioned in the whole page, nor as such is spoken of: and what shall
we think of this proceeding? But yet I will not so far offend against my
sense of my own weakness, ignorance and frailty, as to use any defensative
against this Charge; let it pass at any rate that any sober man freed from
pride, passion, selfefulnesse, and prejudice shall be pleased to put upon it;

-- (...)
(...).
But the second instance will make amends, and take more of the weight of this
Charge upon its shoulders: Take it then as it lies in its triple Column.

Gifts in the Person, and consent of people, is warrant enough to make a man a
preacher in an extraordinary Case? only page 15. and page 40. Denying our
ordination to be sufficient, he says he may have that which indeed Constitutes
him a minister, viz: Gifts and submission by the People p. 198. I am
punctually of the same mind still p. 40. Yet had said in his first book p. 46.
as to formal teaching is required 1 Gifts, 2 Authority from the Church, if he
do not equivocate.

I must Confess I am here at a stand, to find out the pretended Contradiction;
especially laying aside the word only in the first Column which is his and not
mine. By a Preacher in the first Place I intend a minister: Gifts and Consent
or submission of the People, I affirm in both places to be sufficient, to
constitute a man a minister in extraordinary Cases; That is, when imposition of
hands by a Presbytery may not be obtained in due order according to the
appointment of Jesus Christ. That the Consent and submission of the people,
which include Election, have nothing of Authority in them I never said: the
superadded Act of the imposition of hands by a Presbytery, when it may be
regularly obtained, is also necessary. But that there is any Contradiction in
my words, (although in truth they are not my words but an undue collection from
them) or in this Authors inference from them, or any color of Equivocation, I
profess I cannot discern: in this place Mr Cawdrey (...). Pass we to the
third.

He made the Union of Christ and believers to be mystical page 21. He makes
the Union to be Personal. page 94. 95.

I wish our Reverend Author for his own sake, had omitted this Instance;
because I am enforced in mine own necessary defense to let him know, that what
he assigns to me in his second Column, is notoriously false, denied, and
disproved, by me in the very place, and Treatise wherein I have handled the
Doctrine of the Indwelling of the Spirit; and whether he will hear or
forbear, I cannot but tell him, that this kind of dealing, is unworthy his
calling and profession. His following Deductions and Inferences whereby he
endeavors to give countenance to this false and calumnious charge, arise from
ignorance of the Doctrine that he seeks to blemish and oppose. Though the same
spirit dwell in Christ and us, yet He may have him in fulness, we in measure;
Fullness and measure relating to his Communication of Graces and Gifts, which
are arbitrary to him; indwelling to his person: that the Spirit animates the
Catholic Church, and is the Author of its spiritual life by a voluntary act
of his power, as the soul gives life to the body, by a necessary act, by
virtue of its union, for life is actus vivificant is in vivificatum per unionem
utriusque, is the Common Doctrine of Divines. But yet the soul being united to
the body, as pars Essentialis suppositi, and the spirit dwelling in the Person
as a free inhabitant, The union between Christ and the Person, is not of the
same kind with the union of soul and Body; let our Author Consult Zanchy on
the second of the Ephesians, and it will not repent him of his labor; or if he
please an Author whom I find him often citing, namely, Bishop Hall about union
with Christ. And for my Concernment in this charge I shall subjoyne the words
from whence it must be taken; Page 133. of my book of Perseverance.

1. The first signal Issue and effect which is ascribed to this Indwelling of
the Spirit, is Union; not a Personal Union with himself, which is impossible:
He does not assume our natures, and so prevent our Personality, which would
make us one person with him, but dwells in our persons, keeping his own, and
leaving us our Personality infinitely distinct; But it is a spiritual Union;
the great union mentioned so often in the Gospel, that is the sole Fountain
of our Blessedness; our Union with the Lord Christ, which we have thereby.
Many thoughts of heart there have been about this Union; what it is, wherein it
does consist, the causes, manner, and Effects of it; The Scripture expresses it
to be very Eminent, necre, durable, setting it out, for the most part, by
similitudes, and Metaphorical Illustrations, to lead poor weak Creatures into
some useful needful acquaintance with that Mystery, whose depths in this
life, they shall never fathom. That many in the days wherein we live, have
miscarried in their conceptions of it, is evident; some to make out their
Imaginary Union have destroyed the person of Christ, and fancying a way of
uniting man to God by him, have left him to be neither God nor Man. Others have
destroyed the Person of Believers, affirming that in their Union with Christ,
they loose their own personality, that is, cease to be Men: or at least,
those, are these Individual men.

I intend not now to handle it at large, but only (and that I hope without
offense) to give in my thoughts concerning it, as far as it receives light
from, and relates unto, what has been before delivered, concerning the
Indwelling of the Spirit, and that without the least contending about other
ways of Expression. So far there; with much more to the purpose; and in the
very place of my book of Schism, referred to by this Author, I affirm as the
head of what I assert, that by the indwelling of the spirit, Christ personal
and his Church do become one Christ mystical; 1 Cor. 12. 12. The very
expression insisted on by him, in my former Treatise; and so you have an issue
of this selfe-Contradiction, concerning which, though reports be urged for some
other things, Mr Cawdry might have said what Lucian does of his true History;
(...).

Let us then consider the 4th which is thus Placed.

1. In extraordinary cases every one that undertakes to preach the Gospel must
have an immediate Call from God page 28. 2. Yet required no more of before but
Gif^s and Consent of the People which are ordinary, and mediate Calls p. 15.
neither is here any need or use of an immediate Call, page 53 3. To assure a
man that he is extraordily called, he gives 3 ways, 1 Immediate revelation, 2
Concurrence of Scripture rule. 3 Some outward acts of Providence. The two last
whereof are mediate Calls, page 30.

All that is here remarked and Cast into 3 Columns, I know not well why, is
taken out of that one Treatise of the duty of Pastors and People. And could I
give my self the least Assurance that any one would so far concern himself
in this Charge, as to Consult the Places from whence the words are Pretended to
be taken, to see whether there be any thing in them to answer the cry that is
made, I should spare my self the labor of adding any one syllable toward
their vindication; and might most safely so do, there being not the least
color of opposition between the things spoken of. In brief Extraordinary
Cases are not all of one sort and nature; in some an extraordinary call may be
required, in some not. Extraordinary calls are not all of one kind and nature
neither; some may be immediate from God in the ways there by me described;
some calls may be said to be extraordinary, because they do in some things
come short of, or go beyond the ordinnary rule that ought to be observed in
well Constituted Churches. Again, concurrence of Scripture rules and acts of
outward Providence, may be such sometimes, as are suited to an ordinary,
sometimes to an extraordinary Call; All which are at large unfolded in the
Places directed unto by our Author, and all laid in their own order without
the least shadow of Contradiction. But it may sometimes be said of good men as
the Satyristsaid of evil Women; fortem animum praestant rebus quas turpiter
audent. Go we to the next.

1. The Church Government from which I desire not to wander is the
Presbyteriall. 2. He now is engaged in the independent way. 3. Is settled in
that way which he is ready to maintain and knows it will be found his rejoicing
in the day of the Lord Jesus.

Hinc mihi sola malilabes: This is that inexpiable crime that I labor under;
an account of this whole business I have given in my Review; So that I shall
not here trouble the Reader with a repetition of what he is so little concerned
in. I shall only add that whereas I suppose Mr Cawdrey did subscribe unto the
39 Articles at his Ordination; were it of any concernement to the Church of
God, or the interest of truth, or were it a Comely and a Christian part to
engage in such a work, I could manifest Contradictions, between what he then
solemnly subscribed to, and what he has since written and Preached, manyfold
above what he is able to draw out of this alteration of my Judgment. Be it here
then declared, that whereas I sometimes apprehended the Presbyterial Synodicall
Government of Churches, to have been fit to be received and walked in, (then,
when I knew not but that it answered those principles which, I had taken up,
upon my best enquiry into the word of God) I now profess my self to be
satisfied, that I was then under a mistake; and that I do now own, and have
for many years lived in the way and practice of that called Congregationall.
And for this Alteration of Judgment, of all men, I fear least a Charge from
them, or any of them, whom within a few years, we saw reading the service book
in their surplices, etc: against which things, they do now inveigh and
declame. What influence the perusal of Mr Cotton's Book of the Keys, had on
my thoughts in this business I have formerly declared. The answer to it (I
suppose that written by himself) is now recommended to me by this Author, as
that which would have perhaps prevented my, Change; But I must needs tell him,
that as I have perused that book, many years ago, without the Effect
intimated, so they must be things written with an other frame of spirit,
evidence of truth, and manner of reasoning, then any I can find in that book,
that are likely for the future, to lay hold upon my Reason and understanding.
Of my settlement in my present Persuasion I have not only given him an account
formerly, but with all Christian Courtesy, tendered my self in a readiness
Personally to meet him, to give him the proofs and reasons of my my
persuasions; which he is pleased to decline and return in way of answer, That
I Complemented him, after the mode of the times; when no such thing was
intended. And therefore my words of desiring liberty to wait upon him, are
expressed, but the end and purpose for which it was desired, are concealed, in
an etc. But he adds another instance.

Men ought not to cut themselves from the communion of the Church, to rent the
body of Christ and break the sacred bond of Charity, Duty. 1. 48. 2 He says
separation is no Schism, nor Schism any breach of Charity, page 48. 49. There
is not one word in either of those cautions, that I do not still own and allow,
p. 44. sure not without Equivocation.

I have before owned this Caution, as consistent with my present Judgment, as
expressed in my Book of schism and as it is indeed; wherein lies the
appearance of Contradiction I am not able to discern: Do not I in my Book of
Schism Declare and prove, that men ought not to cut themselves from the
Communion of the Church; That they ought not to rent the body of Christ, that
they ought not to break the sacred bonds of Charity? Is there any word or
tittle in the whole Discourse deviating from these Principles? How and in what
sense, Separation is not Schism, that the nature of Schism does not consist
in a breach of Charity, the Treatise instanced will so far declare, as
withal to Convince those that shall Consider what is spoken, that our Author
scarce keeps close either to Truth or Charity in his framing of this
Contradiction: The Close of the Scheme lies thus.

I conceive they ought not at all to be allowed the benefit of private meeting,
who wilfully abstaike from the public Congregations. As for liberty to be
allowed to those that meet in private, I confess my-selfe to be otherwise
minded.

I remember that about 15 years ago, meeting occasionally with a learned
Friend, we fell into some debate, about the liberty that began then to be
claimed by men, differing from what had been, and what was then likely to be
established; having at that time made no farther enquiry into the grounds and
reasons of such liberty, then what had occurred to me in the writings of the
Remonstrants, all whose plea was still pointed toward the advantage of their
own interest, I delivered my Judgment in opposition to the liberty pleaded
for, which was then defended by my learned Friend; Not many years after,
discoursing the same difference with the same Person, we found immediately that
we had changed Stations, I pleading for an Indulgence of liberty, he for
restraint; whether that learned and worthy Person be of the same mind still
that then he was, or no, directly I know not: But this I know, that if he be
not, Considering the Compass of Circumstances that must be taken in, to settle
a right Judgment in this Case of Liberty, and what alterations influencing the
Determination of this Case we have had of late in this nation, he will not be
ashamed to own his Change; Being a Person who despises any reputation, but
what arises from the Embracing and pursuit of truth; my Change I here own; my
Judgment is not the same in this Particular, as it was 14 years ago j and in
my Change I have good Company whom I need not to name. I shall only say my
Change was at least 12 years before the Petition and Advice; wherein the
Parliament of the three Nations, is come up to my judgment: And if Mr Cawdrey,
has any thing to object to my Present Judgment, let him at his next leisure
Consider the Treatise that I wrote in the year 1648, about Toleration, where
he will find the whole of it expressed: I suppose he will be doing, and that I
may almost say of him, as Polycteutus did of Speusipus; (...). And now
Christian Reader I leave it to thy Judgment whether our Author had any just
cause, of all his outcryes, of my inconstancy and selfe-Contradiction; and
whether it had not been advisable for him to have passed by this seeming
advantage of the design he professed to manage, rather than to have injured
his own Conscience and Reputation to so little purpose.

Being sufficiently tired with the consideration of things of no relation to
the Cause at first proposed (but, this says he, this the independents, this
the Brownists and Anabaptists etc.) I shall now only enquire after that which
is set up in opposition to any of the principles of my Treatise of Schism
before mentioned, or any of the propositions of the syllogismes wherein they
are comprised, at the beginning of this Discourse; remarking in our way some
such particular passages, as it will not be to the disadvantage of our Reverend
Author to be reminded of. Of the nature of the thing enquired after, in the
third Chapter I find no mention at all; only he tells me by the way, that the
Doctor's assertion that my Book about Schism, was one great schism, was not
non sense; but usual Rhetoric, wherein profligate sinners may be called by
the name of sin; and therefore a Book about Schism, may be called a schism;
I wish our Author had found some other way of excusing his Doctor, then by
making it worse himself.

In the fourth Chapter he comes to the business it self; and if in passing
thorough that, with the rest that follow, I can fix on any thing rising up with
any pretense of opposition to what I have laid down, it shall not be omitted;
for things by my self asserted, or acknowledged on all hands, or formerly
ventilated to the utmost, I shall not again trouble the Reader with them: such
are the positions about the general nature of Schism, in things natural and
political, antecedently considered to the limitation and restriction of it to
it is Ecclesiastical use; the departure from Churches voluntary or compelled
etc: all which were stated in my first Treatise, and are not directly opposed
by our Author; such also is that doughty Controversy he is pleased to raise,
and pursue about the seat and subject of Schism with it is restriction to the
instituted worship of God, page 18. 19: so placed by me, to distinguish the
Schism whereof we speak, from that which is natural, as also from such
differences and breaches as may fall out amongst men, few or more, upon civil
and rational accounts; all which I exclude from the enjoyment of any room or
place in our consideration of the true nature of schism in it is limited
Ecclesiastical sense. The like also may be affirmed concerning the ensuing
strife of words about separation and schism; as though they were in my
apprehension of them, inconsistent; which is a fancy no better grounded than
sundry other, which our Reverend Author is pleased to make use of. His whole
passage also receives no other security, than what is afforded to it by turning
my universal proposition into a particular: what I say of all places in the
Scripture where the name or thing of schism is used in an ecclesiastical
sense, as relating to a Gospel Church, he would restraint to that one place of
the Corinths where alone the word is used, in that sense: However if that one
place be all; my proposition is universal: take then my proposition in it is
extent and latitude, and let him try once more if he please, what he has to
object to it, for as yet I find no instance produced to alleviate it is truth.
He much also insists, that there may be a separation in a Church where there is
no separation from a Church, and says this was at first by me denied: that it
was denied by me he cannot prove; but that the contrary was proved by me is
evident to all impartial men, that have Considered my Treatise; although I
cannot allow that the separation in the Church of Corinth was carried to that
height as is by him pretended; namely as to separate from the ordinances of the
Lord's supper; their disorder and division about and in it is Administration are
reproved, not their separation from it: only on that supposition made, I
confess I was somewhat surprised with the delivery of his judgment in
reference to many of his own party, whom he condemns of schism for not
administering the Lord's supper to all the Congregation, with whom they pray and
preach. I suppose the greatest part of the most godly and able ministers of the
Persbyterian way in England, and Scotland, are here cast into the same
condition of Schismatics with the Independents. And the truth is, I am not yet
without hopes of seeing a fair coalescency in love, and Church Communion,
between the reforming Presbyterians and Independents; though for it they shall
with some, suffer under the unjust imputatation of schism.

But it is incredible to think whithermen will suffer themselves to be carried
studio partium; and (...); Hence have we the strange notions of this Author
about Schism; decaies in Grace are Schism, and errors in the Faith are
Schism; and Schism and Apostasy are things of the same kind, differing only
in degree; because the one leads to the other; as one sin of one kind does
often to another; drunkenness to whoredom, and envy and malice to lying; that
differences about civil matters, like that of Paul and Barnabas are schism;
and this by one blaming me for a departure from the sense of antiquity, unto
which these insinuations are so many monsters. Let us then proceed.

That Acts 14. 4. Acts 19. 9, 18: are pertinently used to discover and prove
the nature of Schism in an evangelically ecclesiastical sense or were ever
cited by any of the Ancients to that purpose, I suppose our Author on second
consideration will not affirm, I understand not the sense of this Argument,
the multitude of the city was divided, and part held with the Jews, and part
with the Apostle, therefore Schism in a Gospel Church state, is not only a
division in a Church; or that it is a separation into new Churches, or that it
is something more than the breach of the Union appointed by Christ in an
instituted Church; much less does any thing of this nature appear from Paul's
seperating the Disciples whom he had converted to the Faith from the
unbelieving hardened Jews, an account whereof is given us, Act. 19. 9. So then
that in this Chapter there is any thing produced de novo to prove that the
precise Scripture notion of Schism in it is ecclesiastical sense, extends it
self any further than differences, divisions, separations in a Church and that
a particular Church I find not; and do once more desire our Author that if he
be otherwise minded, to spare such another trouble to our selves, and others,
as that wherein we are now engaged, he would assign me some time and place to
attend him for the clearing of the truth between us.

Of Schism Act. 20. 30. Heb. 10. 28. Jud. 19. there is no mention; nor are
those places interpreted of any such thing by any Expositors new or old, that
ever I yet saw; nor can any sense be imposed on them enwrapping the nature of
Schism with the least color or pretense of Reason.

But now by our Author, Schism and Apostasy, are made things of on kind,
differing only in degrees, page 107. so confounding Schism and heresy,
contrary to the Constant sense of all antiquity. Act. 20. 30. The Apostle
speaks, of men speaking perverse things, to draw away Disciples; that is
teaching them false doctrines, contrary to the truths wherein they had been by
him instructed; in his Revealing unto them the whole counsel of God: verse. 27.
This by the Ancients is called heresy, and is contradistinguished unto Schism
by them constantly: So Austin an 100 times. To draw men from the Church, by
drawing them into pernicious errors, false doctrine, being the cause of their
falling off, is not schism, nor so called in Scripture, nor by any of the
Ancients, that ever yet I observed. That the design of the Apostle in the
Epistle to the Hebrews, is to preserve and keep them from Apostasy unto
Judaisme, besides that it is attested by a cloud of witnesses, is to evident
from the thing it self to be denied. chapt. 10. 25: he warnes them of a common
entrance into that fearful condition, which he describes, verse. 26: their
neglect of the Christian Assemblies, was the door of their Apostasy to
Judaisme. what is this to schism? would we charge a man with that crime whom
we saw neglecting our assemblies, and likely to fall into Judaisme; are there
not more forceable considerations to deal with him upon; and does not the
Apostle make use of them? Jude. 19: has been so far spoken unto already,
that it may not fairly be insisted on again. Parvas habet spes Troja,
sitables habet.

In the entrance of the fifth Chapter he takes advantage from my question, p.
147. who told him that raising causeless differences in a Church, and then
separating from it, is not in my judgment schism; when the first part of the
assertion, included in that interrogation, expresses the formal nature of
Schism, which is not destroyed, nor can any man be exonerated of it is guilt,
by the subsequent crime of separation, whereby it is aggravated. 1 John 2. 19:
is again mentioned to this purpose of schism, to as little purpose, so also is
Heb. 10. 25: both places treat of Apostates, who are charged and blamed under
other terms than that of Schism. There is in such departures, as in every
division whatever, of that which was in Union, somewhat of the general nature
of schism: but that particular crime and guilt of schism in it is restrained
Ecclesiastical sense, is not included in them.

In his following discourse he renewes his former Charges of denying their
ordinances and ministry, of separating from them and the like; as to the former
part of this Charge I have spoken in the entrance of this discourse; for the
latter, of separating from them, I say we have no more separated from them,
then they have from us; our right to the celebration of the ordinances of God's
worship, according to the light we have received from him, is in this nation as
good as theirs; and our plea from the Gospel we are ready to maintain against
them, according as we shall at any time be called thereunto. If any of our
judgment deny them to be Churches, I doubt not but he knows who comes not
behind in returnall of Charges on our Churches. Does the Reverend Author
think or imagine, that we have not in our own judgment more reason to deny
their Churches and to charge them with Schism though we do neither, then they
have to charge us therewith, and to deny our Churches? can any thing be more
fondly Pretended than that he has proved that we have separated from them;
upon which, page 105, he requires the performance of my promise to retreat from
the state wherein I stand, upon the establishment of such proof. Has he
proved the due administration of Ordinances amongst them whom he pleads for?
Has he proved any Church Union between them as such, and us? has has he
proved as to have broken that Union? what will not selfe-fulnesse and prejudice
put men upon?

How came they into the sole possession of all Church state in England; so that
who ever is not of them, and with them must be charged to have separated from
them; Mr Cawdrey says indeed, that the Episcopal men and they agree in
substantialls, and differ only in circumstantials; but that they and we differ
in substantials; but let him know they admit not of his compliances; they say
he is a Schismatic, and that all his party are so also; let him answer their
Charge solidly upon his own principles; and not think to own that which he
has the weakest claim imaginable unto, and was never yet in possession of. We
deny that since the Gospel came into England, the Presbyterian Government as
by them stated, was ever set up in England, but in the wills of a party of men;
so that here as yet, unless as it lies in particular Congregations, where our
right is as good as theirs, none have separated from it, that I know of; though
many cannot consent unto it. The first Ages we plead ours, the following were
unquestionably Episcopal.

In the beginning of Chapter the 6: he attempts to disprove my assertion that
the Union of the Church Catholic visible which consists in the professing of
the saving doctrine of the Gospel, etc: is broken only by Apostasy. to this
end he confounds Apostasy and Schism, affirming them only to differ in
degrees; which is a new notion unknowen to Antiquity and contrary to all sound
Reason; by the instances he produces to this purpose he endeavors to prove
that there are things which break this union, whereby this union is not broken;
whilst a man continues a member of that church which he is by virtue of the
union thereof, and his interest therein, by no act does he, or can he break
that union.

The partial breach of that union which consists in the profession of the
truth, is error and heresy and not Schism. Our Author abounds here in new
notions which might easily be discovered to be as fond, as new, were it worth
while to consider them; of which in brief, before. Only I wonder why giving
way to such thoughts as these, he should speak of men with contempt under the
name of Notionists, as he does of Dr Du Moulin; but the truth is, the Doctor
has provoked him, and were it not for some considerations that are obvious to
me, I should almost wounder, why this Author should sharpen his leisure and
zeal against me, who scarce ever publicly touched the grounds and foundations
of that Cause which he has so passionately espoused, and pase by him, who both
in Latin and English, has laid his Axe to the very Root of it, upon
principles sufficiently destructive to it, and so apprehended, by the best
learned in our Authors way, that ever these nations brought forth; but as I
said, Reasons lie at hand, why it was more necessary to give me this
opposition; which yet has not altered my Resolution, of handling this
controversy in another manner, when I meet with another manner of Adversary.

Page 110. He fixes on the examination of a particular passage about the
disciples of John mentioned Acts 19. 2. of whom I affirmed that it is probable
they were rather ignorant of the miraculous dispensations of the Holy Ghost,
then of the person of the Holy Ghost; alleging to the contrary that the words
are more plain and full then to be so cluded, and that for ought appears,
John did not baptize into the name of the Holy Ghost: I hope the Author does
not so much dwell at home, as to suppose this to be a new notion of mine; who
almost of late in their critical notes have not either (at least) considered
it, or confirmed it? neither is the question into whose name they were
expressly baptized, but in what doctrine they were instructed: He knows who
denies that they were at all actually baptized, before they were baptized by
Paul. Nor ought it to be granted without better proof then any as yet has
been produced, that any of the Saints under the old Testament, were ignorant of
the being of the Holy Ghost. neither do the words require the sense by him
insisted on; (...), do no more evince the person of the Holy Ghost to be
included in them, then in those other Joh. 7. 39. (...); the latter in the
proper sense He will not contend for; nor can therefore, the expression being
uniforme, reasonably for the latter. Speaking of men openly and notoriously
wicked, and denying them to be members of any Church whatever: he bids me,
answer his arguments to the contrary from the 1 Cor. 5. 7. 2 These. 13. 17. and
I cannot but desire him that he would impose that task on them that have
nothing else to do: for my own part, I shall not entangle my self with things
to so little purpose: Having promised my Reader to attend only to that which
looks toward the merit of the cause, I must crave his pardon, that I have not
been able to make good my resolution: meeting with so little or nothing at all
which is to that purpose, I find my self entangled in the old diversions that
we are now plentifully accustomed unto: but yet I shall endeavor to recompense
this loss, by putting a speedy period to this whole trouble, despairing of
being able to tender him any other satisfaction, whilst I dwell on this
discourse. In the mean time to obviate all strife of words if it be possible
for the future, I shall grant this Reverend Author that in the general large
notion of Schism which his opposition to that insisted on by me has put him
upon, I will not deny but that He, and I are both Schismatics, and any thing
else shall be so, that he would have to be so, rather then to be engaged in
this contest any farther. In this sense he affirms that there was a Schism
between Paul and Barnabas, and so one of them at least, was a Schismatic; as
also he affirms the same of 2 lesser men, though great in their generation
Chrysostom and Epiphanius; so error and heresy, if he please shall be Schism
from the Catholic Church, and scandal of life shall be Schism: And his
argument shall be true, that schism is a breach of union in a Church of
Christ's institution, therefore in that which is so only by call, not to any end
of joint worship as such; of any union; that which consists in the profession
of the saving truths of the Gospel, and so there may be a schism in the
Catholic Church; and so those Presbyterians that reform their Congregations,
and do not administer the sacraments to all promiscuously, shall be guilty of
Schime; and indeed, as to me, what else he pleases, for my inquiry concerns
only the precise limited nature of Schism, in its evangelically
ecclesiastical sense.

Neither shall I at present, (alloting very few hours to the dispatch of this
business, which yet I judge more then it deserves) consider the scattered
ensuing passages about Ordination, Church Government, number of Elders, and the
like, which all men know, not at all to belong unto the maine controversy which
was by me undertaken; and that they were against all laws of disputation,
plucked violently into this contest, by our Reverend Author. One thing I cannot
pass by, and it will upon the matter put a close to what I shall at present
offer to this Treatise; having said that Christ has given no direction for the
performance of any duty of worship of sovereign institution, but only in them
and by them (meaning particular Churches) he answers that, if I would imply
that a Minister in or of a Particular Church, may perform those ordinances
without those congregations, he contradicts himself for saying a particular
Church is the seat of all ordinances, but why so, I pray? may not a particular
Church be the seat of all ordinances subjectively, and yet others be the object
of them, or of some of them? but says he, if he mean those ordinances of
worship are to be performed only by a minister of a particular congregation,
what shall become of the people? I suppose they shall be instructed and built
up according to the mind of Christ, and what would people desire more. But
whereas he had before said, that I denied a Minister to be a Minister to more
then his own Church: and I had asked him who told him so; adding that
explication of my judgment, that for so much as men are appointed the objects
of the dispensation of the word, I grant a Minister in the dispensation of it
to act ministerially, toward not only the members of the Catholic Church, but
the visible members of the world also in contradistinction thereunto; he now
tells me a story of passages between the learned Dr Wallis and my self about
his question in the Vespers 1654. namely that as to that question An potestas
ministri Evangelici ad unius tantum ecclesiae particularis membra extendatur? I
said that, Dr Wallis had brought me a challenge, and that If I did dispute on
that question, I must dispute ex animo; although I grant that a Minister as a
Minister may preach the word, to more then those of his own congregation, yet
knowing the sense wherein the learned Dr Wallis maintained that question, it
is not impossible, but I might say, if I did dispute I must do it ex animo; for
his bringing me a challenge, I do not know that either he did so, or that I put
that interpretation on what he did; but I shall crave leave to say, that if the
learned Dr Wallis do find any ground, or occasion to bring a challenge unto
me, to debate any point of difference between us, I shall not wave answering
his desire, although he should bring Mr Cawdry for his second; for the present
I shall only say, that as it is no commendation to the moderation or ingenuity
of any one whatever, thus to publish to the world private hearesaies, and what
he has been told of private conferences; so if I would insist on the same
course, to make publication of what I have been told has been the private
discourse of some men, it is not unlikely that I should occasion their shame
and trouble: yet in this course of proceeding a progres is made in the ensuing
words; and Mr Stubbes (who is now called my Amanuensis, who some five years
ago, transcribed about a sheet of paper for me, and not one line, before or
since;) is said to be employed or at least encouraged by me to write against
the learned Dr Wallis his Thesis being published; this is as true as much of
that that went before, and as somewhat of that, that follows after; and
whereas it is added that I said what he had written on that subject, was a
scurrilous rididulous piece, it is of the same nature with the rest of the like
reports. I knew that Mr Stubbes was writing on that subject; but not until he
had proceeded far in it; I neither employed him, nor encouraged him in it,
any otherwise then the consideration of his papers, after he had written them,
may be so interpreted; and the reason why I was not willing he should proceed,
next to my desire of continuance of peace in this place, was his using such
expressions of me, and somethings of mine, in sundry places of his discourse,
as I could not modestly allow to be divulged; the following words to the same
purpose with them before mentioned, I remember not; nor did ever think to be
engaged in the consideration of such transgressions of the common rules of
humane society as those now passed through; Reports, heresayes, talks, private
discourse between friends, allegations countenanced by none of these, nor any
thing else, are the weapons wherewith I am assaulted. I have heard, I am told,
if reports be true, it was vox populi at Oxford, is it not so, I presume he will
not deny it, are the ornaments of this discourse: strange! that men of
experience and gravity should be carried by the power of these temptations not
only to the forgetfulness of the royal law of Christ, and all Gospel rule of
deportment toward his professed Disciples: but also be engaged into ways and
practices, contrary to the dictates of the law of nature, and such as sundry
heathens would have abhorred. For my own part, had not God by his providence
placed me in that station, wherein others also that fear him are concerned in
me, I should not once turn aside to look upon such heaps as that which I
have now passed over: my judgment in most heads and articles of Christian
Religion is long since published to the world, and I continue through the grace
and patience of God preaching in public answerably to the principles I do
profess; and if any man shall oppose what I have delivered, or shall so
deliver, in print or in the pulpit, or in divinity lectures, as my judgment, I
shall consider his opposition, and do therein, as God shall guide: with evil
surmises, charges upon hearesayes, and reports, attended with perpetual
excursions from the Argument in hand, I shall no more contend.

Some few observations on scattered passages, will now speedily issue this
discourse. Page 112. To that Assertion of mine, that if Rome be no particular
Church, it is no Church at all, for the Catholic Church it is not, he replies
that though it be not such a particular Congregation as I intend, yet it may be
a particular Patriarchall Church: but, 1: then it seems it is a particular
Church, which grants my inference.

2. It was a particular Church of Christ's institution, that I inquired after;
does our Author think that Christ has appointed any Patriarchall Church? a
Patriarchall Church, as such, is such from it is Relation to a Patriarch: and he
can scarce be thought to judge Patriarchs to be of Divine institution, who
has cast off and abjured Episcopacy.

The Donatists are mentioned again, p. 113. And I am again Charged with an
attempt to vindicate them from schism; my thoughts of them I have before
declared to the full; and have no reason to retract any thing from what was
then spoken, or to add any thing thereunto; if it may satisfy our Author, I
here grant they were Schismatickes, with what aggravations he pleases; and
wherein their schism consisted, I have also declared: but he says, I
undertake to exempt some others from schism (I know whom) that suffer with
them in former and after ages, under the same imputation; I do so indeed, and
I suppose our Author may guess at whom I intend: himself amongst others; I
hope he is not so taken up in his thoughts, with charging schism on others, as
to forget, that many, the greatest part and number of the true Churchs of
Christ do condemn him for a Schismatic; a Donatisticall Schismatic: I
suppose he acknowledges the Church of Rome to be a true Church; the Lutheran I
am persuaded he will not deny, nor perhaps the Grecian, to be so: The
Episcopal Church of England, he contends for; and yet all these with one voice
cry out upon him for a Schismaticke: and as to the plea of the last, how he can
satisfy his conscience, as to the rejection of his lawful superiors, upon his
own principles, without pretending any such crime against them, as the
Donatists did against Caecilianus, I profess I do not understand: new mention
is made of Episcopal ordination, p. 120, And they are said to have had their
successive ordination from Rome who ordained therein; so indeed some say, and
some otherwise; whether they had or no, is nothing to me, I lay no weight upon
it; they held I am sure, that place in England, that without their approbation
no man could publicly, preach the Gospel; to say they were Presbyters, and
ordained as Presbyters, I know not what satisfaction can arise unto Conscience
thereby. Party and argument, may be countenanced by it; they profess they
ordained as Bishops, that for their lives and souls they durst not ordain but
as such; so they told those whom they ordained, and affirm they have open
injury done them, by any ones denial of it: As it was, the best is to be made
of it; this shift is not handsome; nor is it ingenious, for any one, that has
looked into Antiquity, to charge me with departing from their sense in the
notion of schism, declared about the 3d and 4th Ages, and at the same time to
maintain an equality between Bishops and Presbyters; or to say that Bishops
ordained as Presbyters, not as Bishops: nor do I understand the excellency of
that order which we see in some Churches, where they have two sorts of Elders;
the one made so, by ordination without Election, and the other by Election
without ordination; those who are ordained, casting off all power and Authority
of them that ordained them; and those who are elected, immediately rejecting
the greatest part of those that chose them.

Nor did I, as is pretend, plead for their Presbyterian way in the year 46;
all the ministers (almost) in the county of Essex, know the contrary; one
especially, who being a man of great ability, and moderation of spirit, and for
his knowledge in those things, not behind any man, I know, in England of his
way, with whom in that year, and the next following, I had sundry conferences
at public meetings of ministers, as to the several ways of Reformation,
then under proposal. But the frivolousnesse of these imputations, has been
spoken of before, as also the falsnesse of the Calumny, which our Author is
pleased to repeat again, about my turning from ways in Religion.

My description of a particular Church he once more blames as applicable to the
Catholic Church invisible, and to the visible Catholic Church (I suppose he
means as such) when a participation in the same ordinances numerically, is
assigned as its difference; He asks, whether it becomes my ingenuity, to
interpret the capability of a Churches reduction to it is primitive
constitution, by its own fitness and capacity to be so reduced, rather then
by its external hindrances or furtherances; But with what ingenuity or
modesty, that question is asked, I profess I understand not; and page 134, he
has this passage: (only I take notice of his introduction, to his answer, with
thanks for the civility of the inquiry in the manner of its expresion; my
words were these: whether our Reverend Author do not in his conscience think
there was no true Church in England 'till, etc, which puts me into suspicion,
that the Reverend Doctor was offended, that I did not always (for often I do)
give him that title, of the Reverend Author, or the Doctor, which made him cry
out he was never so dealt withal by any party as by me; though upon review, I
do not find, that I gave him any uncivil language, unbeseeming me to give or
him to receive; and I hear that somebody has dealt more uncivilly with him in
that respect, which he took very ill.

Let this Reverend Author, make what use of it he please, I cannot but again
tell him, that these things become neither him, nor any man professing the
Religion of Jesus Christ, or that has any respect to truth or sobriety; can
any man think, that in his conscience, he gives any credit to the insinuation
which here he makes, that I should thank him for calling me Reverend Author,
or Reverend Doctor, or be troubled for his not useing those expressions? Can
the mind of an honest man be thought to be conversant with such mean and low
thoughts? for the Title of Reverend, I do give him notice that I have very
little valued it, ever since I have considered the saying of Luther; Nunquam
periclitatur Religio nisi inter Reverendissimos. So that he may as to me
forbear it for the future, and call me, as the Quakers do, and it shall
suffice. And for that of Doctor; it was conferred on me by the University in my
absence, and against my consent, as they have expressed it under their public
seal: nor does any thing but gratitude, and respect unto them, make me once
own it; and freed from that obligation, I should never use it more, nor did I
use it, until some were offended with me, and blamed me for my neglect of
them. And for that other, whom he mentions, who before this, gave so far
place to indignation, as to infinuate some such thing, I doubt not but by this
time he has been convinced of his mistake therein, being a Person of another
manner of ability and worth, then some others, with whom I have to do; and the
truth is, my manner of dealing with him in my last reply, which I have since my
self not so well approved of, requires the passing by such returns. But you
will say then why do I preface this discourse, with that Expression; with
thanks for the civility of the enquiry in the manner of it is expression? I
say! this will discover the iniquity of this Author's procedure, in this
particular: His enquiry was, whether I did not in my Conscience think that
there were no true Churches in England, until the Brownists our Fathers, the
Anabaptists our elder brothers, and our selves arose, and gathered new
Churches; without once taking notice, or mentioning his titles that he says he
gave me, I used the words, in a sense obvious to every man's first
consideration, as a reproof of the expressions mentioned; that which was the
true cause of my words our Author hides in an etc: that which was not by me
once taken notice of, is by him expressed; to serve an end of drawing forth an
evil surmize and suspicion, that has not the least color to give it
countenance; Passing by all indifferent Readers, I refer the honesty of this
dealing with me, to the judgment of his own conscience; setting down, what I
neither expressed, nor took notice of, nor had any singular occasion in that
place so to do, the words being often used by him, hiding, and concealing what
I did take notice of, and express, and which to every man's view was the
occasion of that passage, that conclusion or unworthy insinuation is made,
which a Good man ought to have abhorred.

Sundry other particulars there are, partly false, and calumniating, partly
impertinent, partly consisting in mistakes, that I thought at the first view,
to have made mention of; but on several accounts, I am rather willing here to
put an end to the Readers trouble, and my own.

The Preface.
THE Servants of the Lord (says Paul) must not strive, but be Gentile toward
all men, 2 Timothy 2. 24. how much more toward their Brethren? But what if a
Brother, should become an Adversary (whether Adversarius lit is, or Personae,)
and speak hard words, yea and write a Book against his fellow Servants? Job
tells us, though he could, yet he would not speak as they do, Job. 16. 4, 5.
And for the book against him, He would take it and bind it upon his shoulder,
And yet I do not think he meant to cast it behind his Back, but that he would
bear it as a light load, and in case of his Innocence, He would we are it as
his Crown: And for that end, would declare unto Him the Number of his steps,
Job. 31. 35, 36, 37? Yea though such a Book might seem to Impartial and
Judicious minds written with a Spirit of Bitterness, and contempt, and in a
Style suitable, yet the Servants of the Lord have not so learned Christ, nor
the Truth (as it is in Jesus) as to Return Evil for Evil, or Reviling for
Reviling. Hard words are not Given, but as the Lord commands, if not in his
Ordinances, yet in his Providence: And either they are Deserved, and then they
are an excellent Balm which will not break the head: or undeserved, and then
the Lord will Requite Good to him that suffers evil. It is no new Thing for
God's own Servants to be taken with Paroxismes (as Paul and Barnabas were,
Act. 15.) that is, with Pangs of Passion, And that is the worst I conceive of
the tartest Passages of Mr Cawdryes Reply. For I see by his dealing with Mr
Hooker, that he can write with more meekness, and moderation, when the Lord
helps him: Let me therefore briefly give Account of such Passages of mine, as
have seemed most offensive to Him: and that in such terms, as may not
unbeseeme either my self, or the cause.

CHAP. 1.
THE first offense he takes, is against my Inconstancy, and (that which is the
fruit of it) my manifest and manifold Contradictions to my self to the number
of about 21: Inconstancy in the general He Intimates in the Text of James in
his Frontispiece, James 1. 8.

A Double minded man is unstable in all his ways. To which I will Rejoyne no
other Answer than a Text of like Authority, and alleged (I hope) with more
Pertinency, Math. 11. 7. What went you out into the wilderness to see? A Reed
shaken with the wind?

The Contradictions are set forth in great letters in the Title Page and
afterward particularly in an ample Scheme in 3 Columns in the end of his
reply, let us consider of them in order.

The 1rst Contradiction.
1. The Keys were given to Peter at an Apostle as an Elder, as a Believer. So
the Sense is most full. The keys, Page 4. 1. The power of the keys is given
to Peter, not at an Apostle nor as Elder, but as a Professed Believer The way, P.
27. 1 Peter Received not the keys, merely as a Believer, but as a Believer
publicly professing his Faith, etc. The way cleared Part. 2 p. 39. To like
Purpose M. Hooker Surv. Part. 1. p. 203

The Reconciliation of this Seeming Contradiction were obvious and easy; take
the words as they stand in the Scheme; for so it might be said, Brethren, are
sometimes put for private members of the Church, and Contradistinguished from
such as bear office in the Church. As when it is said in the Synodicall Letter
(Act. 15. 23.) The Apostles, Elders, and Brethren. Sometimes Brethren are put
more generally, as Comprehending all the members of the Church, both officers
and private members as Gal. 6. 1: and frequently else where: In the former
Sense, the Passage in the Keys speaks, when it says, the sense of the words
will be most full, if Peter be conceived as Receiving the Keys in the Name
both of the officers, and private members, to wit, in the Name of the Apostles,
Elders, and Brethren. In the latter sense, the words of the Scheme might be
taken to Run, That the Power of the keys was given to Peter, not as an
Apostle (for then it had been Given only to the Apostles:) nor as an Elder (for
then it had been only to Elders) but as a Professed Believer. And under the
General Name of Professed Believers, not only private Brethren, but Apostles,
and Elders may be comprehended. For all the Apostles and all the Elders are
professed Believers: And so all of them may claim their Interest in the Power of
the keys, according to the several measure and latitude of Power assigned to
them in the Scriptures. But I will not so answer; because in the Way the
context speaks of such Brethren, as have not power to exercise the Pastoral
Ministry of the word and Sacraments. But notwithstanding that the Assoylment of
the contradiction is no less fair and clear. For Mr Cawdrey well knows
(and so does any Logician:) That to a contradiction, It is a necessary
Requisite (amongst others:) That both speak ad Idem. But here it is otherwise.
In the keys I spoke of such a power of the keys, as Peter Received Formally,
standing in the room both of an Apostle and of an Elder, and of a Professed
Believer: that is, such a Power as Peter having Received might exercise in his
own person, and each one of them respectively. In the Way, I spoke of such a
power, as the Brethren of the Church have Received not formally (farther than
concerns their own liberty) but virtually only.

For though the Brethren have not a formal Power to exercise the Pastoral
ministry of the word and Sacraments, yet they have a virtuall Power to exercise
them by choosing and calling forth such Officers as have a formal Power to
exercise the same. And there is nothing in the keys, or in the way, or in the
Defense, that contradicts this. So that both these two Passages (in the
keys, and in the way) are so far from making a Contradiction (and that so
flat as never any more) as that they do not indeed amount to an Opposition. In
an Opposition both parts cannot be true: here both are true. Peter considered
as standing in the Room of an Apostle, Elder, and Professed Believer, did
receive Formally all the Power of the keys: The Body of the Brethren have
received, though the power of their liberty Formally; yet all other Parts of
Church Power which belongs to Officers, they have Received only virtually and
this very distinction is expressed in terminis, in the very same Page (27. of
the way) whence this (...) is fetched. As for his Exageration of the
Contradiction, That is was as flat, as never any more, though he to make this
Comparative Speech seem less hyperbolicall, do tell us in a Parenthesis, That
Contradictions do not Recipere magis and minus (and therefore if they make any
Contradiction at all It must needs be as slat, as ever any was:) He may be
pleased to Consider, That such a Parenthesis, though it make his Speech, less
hyperbolicall, yet it makes it the more irrational; If I should say Nero was
as wicked a man as ever any was, and yet presuppose all men were equally wicked
(wickedness in men did not Recipere magis and minus) there were very little
Reason in Such Exaggeration. In my former Answer to this Contradiction
(entitled, The way of the Congregationall Churches cleared) I said the words
whereon the Assertour grounded this Contradiction, were his own not mine. For
He reports me to say (in the keys page 4.) That the keys were delivered to
Peter as an Apostle, as an Elder, as a Believer. But in his Preface (Sect. 5.
Number. 1.) He confesses;

That the words are not mine in terminis: but in sense, (he says) they be. For
I said take Peter not as an Apostle Only, but as an Elder also, and a Believer
too, all may well stand together.

Whereupon he Infers; Does not this discourse clearly hold forth this
Proposition, as the sense of that Text, The keys were delivered to Peter as an
Apostle, as an Elder, as a Believer too? all may well stand together.

Ans. That discourse of mine is so far from clearly holding forth that
Proposition, that it clearly holds forth the contrary in express terms: my
express terms be, Take Peter considered not only as an Apostle etc. now if
not only as an Apostle, than not as an Apostle, For if they were delivered to
him as an Apostle, then to all the Apostles, and only to the Apostles: which my
words in Terminis do expressly Deny.

But says he, This Apology makes it worse, For if it be so that whatsoever is
Attributed to any as such, is given to all such universally, reciprocally, and
only to such: Now Assume.

But the keys were given to Peter as an Apostle, Therefore they were given
only to the Apostles, and not to the Believers as such.

But here the Assumption is Palpably false, not at all delivered by me, but
dragged out of my words against the letter and against the sense of them. I say
the keys were not given to Peter as an Apostle only: why then not to him as an
Apostle, but as He is jointly considered with other Officers and Brethren. When
therefore he Appealeth to the Judgment of any Logician, whether to say Peter
Received the keys not as an Apostle only, but an Elder also, and a Believer,
be not as much as to say, Peter had the Power of the keys given Him, as an
Apostle, as an Elder, and as a Believer: Verily if that were the Judgment of
all Logicians I should conclude, either that Logic had forsaken the world, or
at least that my self were forsaken of Logic.

When Christ Promised the keys to Peter, though he spoke Indefinitely, keys,
yet he means universally all the keys of the kingdom of Heaven. And to put
all the keys into Peter's hand as an Apostle, though it would communicate them
indeed to all the Apostles, yet since the Death of all the Apostles, all the
Churches and all the Elders, have been left destitute of the Power of the keys.

And if so, then why do we blame the Seekers who have cast off all Churches,
and all Ordinances, 'till new Apostles come?

Again the Replyer Argues thus on the contrary (from that Passage in the way
page 27:) If the keys were given to Peter, not as an Apostle, nor as an Elder,
but as a Believer, then to all Believers, and only to Believers. But (says the
Way) the keys were given to Peter not as an Apostle, nor as an Elder, but as a
Believer, therefore they were given to all Believers (Women and all) and only
to Believers.

Ans. It has been showed above, That in that Place in the Way, I speak
expressly of Professed Believers, to have received all the power of the keys not
Formally, but virtually. So that if there be some Power of the keys which they
cannot exercise Formally as Brethren, yet they may exercise the same virtually,
by choosing and calling forth such, as may formally exercise the same for them:
which presupposed I answer to the Major, If the Power of the keys (which was
to continue in the Church) were given to Peter, not as an Apostle, nor as an
Elder, but as a Believer, then it was Given to all Believers, and only to
believers, and to such whom Believers shall orderly choose, and call forth to
execute the same. As to instance in a like example, If heat be Given to Fire,
as such, then to all Fire, and only to Fire, and to such other things, as Fire
communicates his virtue to. When therefore the Publishers of the keys say,
The Power of the keys may be Disposed in a due Allotment into diverse hands.
The Replyer had no cause to say, Herein they neither Agree with me, nor with
them. They say it is put into diverse hands, And he says it is Given only to
Believers: And is not this a Contradiction?

Ans: No verily; For when I say It is given to Believers as such, and express
virtually, as well as Formally, The meaning is clear, It is given to all
Believers, and only to Believers, and by them Communicated to such, as they do
orderly choose and call forth, to the exercise of the same. And the publishers
of the keys I doubt not, will say as much. When I said (in the way) That the
brethren might not administer Sacraments in Defect of all Officers, And
therefore made it appear that one sort of men (the brethren) had not Received
all the Power of the keys Formally. The Replyer returns, Truly this is to
Discover the Contradiction the more. For if the Power of the keys be Delivered
to Believers as such, then the Power of Administering the Sacraments is Given to
them: for that is a Part of the Power of the keys.

Ans. It is wearysome to repeat so often the same Answer; yet let me say it
once more, and leave it; He that says, Believers Receive all the Power of the
keys as Professed Believers, He says all of them have Received the Power, and
they only, and such as Receive their Power from them. And this is the force of
quateuus Tale; That whosoever Receive any thing as such, all such do Receive
it, and none but such as Derive it from them.

But says the Replyer, In the Way, he gives the greater part of Church power
to the Body of the Church (page 45.) to wit, to Ordain, and in some cases) to
excommunicate all their Church Officers: which are the highest Acts of Rule (as
else where he speaks:) Therefore he may not Deny them the lesser, which is to
Administer the Sacraments.

Ans. The answer is ready at hand, and was ready at his hand (in Part 2: of the
Congregationall way cleared page 29.) where I Distinguish Potestas into
officiariam and honorariam. Excommunication by the Brethren is the highest Act
of Honoraria Potestas: but not of Officiaria Potestas. To Preach the word with
Authority, and to Administer the Seals of it, are acts of the highest
office-Power in the Church. Popish Divines would take it very ill, if any Act
of Church Power were said to be higher than Conficere corpus Domini. But
excommunication largly taken is an Act of a Power proper to a Community. Any
community has power ex Natura rei, to Receive into their Communion, and to
cast not of their Communion. Every sound Body has a power to cast out his own
superfluous humors, and to cut off his own Putrid members: As for ordination,
though we look at it (with Dr Ames) as Adjunctum consummans of the Peoples
Election, and vocation of their Officers (and therefore not utterly Excentrical
from the Peoples power;) yet our Churches do not Practice it ordinarily, where
they have Elders of their own, or can Procure other Elders to Join with them.

As for that last words in the Scheme of the first Contradiction, I know not
whether the Replyer put any weight, or stresse, in that, in the first Column,
the keys are said to be given (to wit, partly) to Believers, and in the same
Column again to the Fraternity, with the Presbytery, in the second Column to
Professed Believers, In the third to Believers Publicly Professing their Faith:
And (in Mr Hookers Judgment) Not to Believers as Believers, but as Believers
Covenanting.

But if it be requisite to say any thing to this, I would say. 1. That the
Fraternity, and Professed Believers, and Believers Publicly Professing their
Faith, are all one. And the common Name of Believers is often put for all the
rest, They that were Added to the Church (Acts 2. 47: and 41:) are called by
the common name of Believers Acts 2. 44. and 4. 32. when Mr Hooker says the
Power is not Given to Believers as Believers, but as Believers Covenanting, He
means the same that I do, by Professed Believers.

As for women (whom the Replyer cast in our way before) though they be
Believers and so partake in the same common Salvation, as also in the word and
seals: yet because of the frailty of their sex, they are expressly exempted by
the Apostle from any Act of Power in the Church. 1 Cor. 14. 34, 35. and 1 Timothy:
2. 11, 12. Yet that Impeacheth not the Generality of the Proposition; That all
the Fraternity of Believers have Part in the Power of the Keys: That all men
once Dye is the general Proposition of the Apostle Heb: 9. 27. which is not
Impeached by the Translation of Enoch and Elias.

Having thus cleared the first Answer to this contradiction, Let us weigh next
what he says to the second Answer, which says he is given to help out the
former, for I had said.

2. If there had been some Difference between the Keys and the Way, in some
expressions: yet it lay rather in Logical Terms, then in the Doctrine of
Divinity, or Church Practice, and such is this, about the first subject of the
Power of the Keys.

What says the Replyer to this? He Returns a double exception.

1. Says He, Had it been only a lesser Difference about a Logical Notion (as
he minceth it) the Assertor had not Observed it. But a difference (of the
highest magnitude) to Contradiction, in Delivering a New way is very
Remarkable. How shall we be brought to Agree with them that contradict not only
one another, but one man himself.

Answer 1. It was not any weakness of the first Answer, that needed a second
to Help it out, but variety of fit matter for a just Defense produced it: It
needed no help, but to clear it self from groundless exceptions.

Answer 2. The seeming Difference between the way and the Keys (if any be in
this point) it lies rather in Logical expressions, then in the Doctrine of
Divinity, or Church Practice. For what ever the Different Judgments of men of
our way may be, touching the first subject of the Power of the Keys (some
Placing it in the Body of the Church, others Dividing it between officers and
Brethren:) yet in the Doctrine of Divinity we all Agree with one Accord, that
the Church (even the Body of Churchmembers) have power to choose their
officers, to Admit members, and to censure offenders: And that the officers
only have Power to Preach the word with office and Authority, and to Administer
the Sacraments. And according to this unity of judgment is the uniforme
Practice of our Churches. And therefore let mincing be left to curious Cooks
to prepare their shread meat for queazy stomachs: or let it be left to such as
would make the best of a bad cause: we neither Distrust our Cause to be of God,
nor do fear any thing more then that it should be hid, and clouded with
prejudices and calumnies from such as know it not, and yet seek the Truth in
sincerity. And therefore let the Replyer be pleased to consider, whether the
Difference be indeed any more then in a Logical Notion: and whether they be
the words not only of an Assertour, but of an Avenger, to style it a Difference
of the highest magnitude? Surely if there were not some more then common zeal
and Indignation in the cause, A Contradiction in Logical Terms, would not be
counted a Difference of the highest magnitude in Divinity: nor would such
Difference in words so easy to be reconciled, be blovven up to so high an
opposition, as a Contradiction.

2. His second exception is, That Howsoever the first Subject is indeed a
Logical Term, yet the matter Discoursed is Doctrinall Divinity: And
whatsoever the Practice be, It is a Contradiction in Divinity as well as in
Logic.

Answer: But I hope it has appeared, there has been found no Contradiction at
all, neither in Logic nor in Divinity, though there have wanted no Industry to
search it, nor animosity to charge it. And therefore your Question is easily
Answered, How shall we be brought to Agree with them, that Contradict not only
one another, but one man himself? For here is yet no Contradiction found of
one man to himself, nor any Appearance of Contradiction neither in one man nor
other, unless it be only in Logical Terms, and scarce therein. But If the
Replyer defer his Agreeing with Divines or Churches, in any way of Religion,
till he meet with such as neither Contradict themselves, nor one another, He
must neither be Protestant nor Puritan (as they have been called) nor of the
Presbyterian, nor Congregationall way.

What if it be said (in the way, page: 45.) The brethren of the Church might
Proceed (to wit, upon just, and weighty grounds) against all their officers as
well as one? yet in such cases our Churches are never wont to proceed, but in
the Presence, and with the Consent and approbation of other Churches?

Why then says he their Doctrine and Practice agree not, which is the greater
Blemish.

How hard is it for a heart leavened with Prejudice to take good things in good
part? A free man, sui juris (having his fathers consent) might marry a wife (if
he would) without his Brethrens consent: And for Adultery, he might put her
away also without their Consent, And yet he will not do either, without their
consent, and Approbaion. Is this man's Judgment contrary to his Practice, and is
it the greater Blemish? what say we to Paul? He Received his Gospel, neither
of man, nor by man. And he might have Preached it every where boldly and
confidently, and have called an Anathema upon all such as had gainesayed Him,
whether Angels or Apostles Gal. 1. 8, 9. yet he chose rather to go up to
Jerusalem to confer with the Apostles about his whole Gospel Gal. 2. 1, 2.
and that lest he had Run in vain, or should Run in vain. What then? shall
we say Then Paul's Doctrine and Practice Agree not, which is the greater
Blemish? God forbid. Christian Prudence and Religious care to Prevent offense,
will condescend to clear Righteous Proceedings to all judicious and equal
minds. And yet neither cross his own judgment of his own Right, nor blemish
(but rather Honor) himself by Approving it to others.

3. I gave a third Answer to the former Charge of Contradictions, which he
says, I Added to succor both the former.

But the Truth is, they need no succor to Defend themselves against such
exceptions: but it is an Honor to truth, to have many witnesses to attend upon
it.

I said it for a third Answer, That it were no just matter of calumny, If in
some latter Tractate, I should Retract or express more commodiously, what I
wrote in a former less safely: as Augustine etc.

Whereto he Replyeth, Truly Sr, It had been no just Calumny so to do, but
matter of Honor and Reputation rather. But to write Contradictions, and to
take no Notice of them, till observed by others: and then to be so far from
Retracting, as to stand upon Justification of them, is nothing like Augustines
Practice, and so falls short of his Reputation.

Answer: Though Augustine Retracted, what he was convinced of, to be erroneous,
or unsafe, yet he did not Retract what every one objected against him, (not
only what Faustus, or Petilius or Julian objected, but not so much as what
Jerome himself objected,) but justly stood upon his own Defense. Had Vindex
his objections been Convictions, Reason, and (I hope) conscience, would not
have suffered me to Justify known Errors. He does himself bear me witness,
That he has sometimes heard, I have often changed my opinions. And (I thank
God) I take it for no shame to change for the better.

But to confess I am convinced, when I am not, and to Retract what a Stranger
(though a Brother) conceives erroneous, to wit, in his Judgment, but not in
mine own, It were as much as to live by another man's Faith, and not mine own:
and with all to cast my self under that Reproach, which the Title of his Book
implicitly casts upon me.

A wavering minded man is unstable in all his ways.

In the conclusion of his Preface he says, there are in that Prefatory Epistle
to the Way, and in that other to the keys, other Differences observed,
between the Author and the Prefacers, but the Author is not pleased to take
Notice of them.

It is too hard perhaps to Reconcile others to himself.

It is well if he can Reconcile himself to himself.

Ans. This is the word not of an Assertour but of an avenger, (whose heart is
hot, Deuteronomy. 19. 6.) But Though Mr Cawdry know not so much, yet I have taken
Notice of those Differences, and have Advertised the Prefacers of the same,
whom it concerned. My letters to them are not present at hand with me: If they
were I should not think it meet to publish them. In the Preface to the keys,
the Prefacers note a Difference between me and them about the Prophesying of
Private Brethren, concerning which I sent them word, I Discerned no Dissent at
all between them and me in that Point, though they had Added a case or two of
liberty, more than there they did express.

Whether it be too hard for me or no to Reconcile others with my self it is
enough, that I keep the unity of the Spirit with them in the bond of Peace: and
that I have learned Placide far contra Sentientes.

But howsoever I hope (by the help of Christ) I shall soon Reconcile my self
to my self, unless the Replyer can prevail with me so far, as to make me
not only to fall out with my self, but to fall off from the Truth too, or else
convince me that I have so fallen, and yet even so I hope the Lord will help me
rather to Reconcile my self to the Truth, than my self to my self.

CHAP. 2.
Touching the second Pretended contradiction, with the 3, 4, 5.
The second Contradiction which the Replyer charge is delineated in the
Scheme thus.

2. The keys are Given to the Church of Believers, The way page 1. that is a
combination, of Faithful. men, as Mr. Hooker. 2. The key of knowledge belongs
to all the faithful, whether Joined to any particular Church or no. The Keys
page 11. 2 The key of knowledge is given not only to the Church, but to some
before they enter into the Church, Keys page 2.

Ans. This term the key of knowledge is taken from our Savior's words, in
Luke 11. 52. Where he Reproves the Lawyers, who had taken away the key of
knowledge, and neither entered in themselves, nor suffered others to enter. The
words argue, that the entering in was not into the visible Church: for into that
the Lawyers had entered, and were willing to admit others. He speaks therefore
of entering into the state of Grace, and so into the kingdom of Grace and
Glory. The solution then is plain and easy, The key of knowledge (or Faith)
belongs to all the faithful, whether Joined to any particular Church or no.
For by it they enter into the Kingdom of Grace and Glory. But if we speak of
the keys of a Particular visible Church, they are all given to the Church or
Congregation of Believers.

Touching the third Contradiction.
The third Contradiction is decyphered thus.

3. The key of Order is Common to all the members of the Church: keys page 8.
Then say we, to Women and Children. 3 It is not every place, or Order in the
Church, that gives Power to Receive Ordinances, much less to Dispense them,
as Children and Women, Way cleared part. 2. page 19.

Ans. 1. It has been Answered above, that such General Propositions hold
true, notwithstanding some known particular exceptions. It is appointed to all
men once to Dye: which is an undoubted Truth, though Enoch and Elias never Dyed.

Ans. 2. The Children of Church Members are in Order to Baptism, but excluded
from the Lord's Table. 1 Cor. 11. 28.

Women have some parts of the key of Order, whereby they have power to walk
Orderly themselves, and in a private way to help others to walk Orderly also,
Act. 18. 26. Tit. 2. 3, 4, 5.

Only they have not Power to Admit members, choose Officers, censure Offenders.
But if they have any part of the power of the keys, the Proposition is true,
yea and it were true also, though they had been kept from all Interest in the
Exercise of the keys.

Touching the fourth Contradiction.
The fourth Contradiction is thus laid out.

4. Ordination is a work of Rule. The way, page 49. Ordination and Jurisdiction
(both Acts of Rule) pertain indifferently to all the Presbyters. ibid. page
49. 4. As for Election, and Ordination of Officers these things the brethren
may do (if need be) without Officers The way, page 45. 101. 4. Ordination is
not an Act of Supreme Jurisdiction, but of Order rather, Hooker's Survey part.
2. 75.

Ans. Ordination, They that make the least of it make it an Act of Prayer, and
such Prayer, by which the less is blessed of the greater; as it is in all
Prayer which is Joined with Imposition of hands; which Argues, it is an Act of
majority of Power: and majority of Power may without a Soloecisme be called,
Rule: though not office-Rule, yet Honorable pre-eminence. I no where call it
an Act of Supreme Jurisdiction which is that Mr Hooker Denies; and seems to
Deny it, not Positively neither, but comparatively rather. Ordination (says
he) is not an Act of Supreme Jurisdiction, but of Order rather, then there is
no contradiction here. Nor will it be found in the other clause, for though
Ordination and Jurisdiction be said (in the Way page, 49.) to pertain
indifferently to all the Presbyters: yet that is expressly spoken in opposition
to the Lord Bishops, who usurped both into their own hands, as their peculiar
prerogative: and though I say, (else where in the Way) that in Election and
Ordination of Officers, the Brethren may act (if need be) without Officers: yet
the very word of limitation (if need be) Argues, that in ordinary cases,
ordination pertains to the Presbyters, as other Acts there mentioned do
pertain to the Presbyters, and Brethren met together: but as for Election, I
take it to pertain principally to the Brethren.

Touching the 5th Contradiction.
The 5th Contradiction follows in this sort.

5. The keye of Authority, or Rule is committed to the Elders of the Church,
and so the Act of Rule is the proper Act of their office, Keys page 20.

The People discerning, and approving the Justice of the censure give consent
and Obedience to the will and Rule of Christ, keys page 15. 37. 41.

The People stand in an Order, even an orderly Subjection, according to the
Order of the Gospel, page 11.

5. In case the Officers do Err and give effence they shall be governed by
the whole Body of the Brethren, The Way, Page 100.

The Church exercises several Acts of Authority over the Elders, The Way,
page 101.

The People have some storke of Power and Authority in the Government of the
Church, page 36.

They Rule the Church by Appointing their own officers, ibid. page 16.



Ans. 1. The former Column in all the three Places speaks of Elders walking
in the right Administration of their office then in Propriety of speech the Key
of Authority and Rule is committed to them 1 Timothy 5. 17. and is there made the
proper Act of their office, Then it is that the People Discerning the will and
Judgment of Christ in their Judgment, they do give Consent and Obedience to the
will of Christ in Censures Advised by them, Then it is also that they walk in
orderly subjection to their Elders, Heb. 13. 17.

But the latter Column speaks of the Power of the Church over the Elders
chiefly in case of the Elders mal-Administration of their office, or
misgovernment of themselves. But then the Power which the Church puts forth,
It is not office Power (which is properly Authority:) but Potestas honoraria.

Answer 2. In Column the second when it is said; The People have some stock of
Power and Authority in the Government of the Church, Keys page 36. They are
the words of an objection, not of mine own Assertion, And though some where I
speak of Acts of Authority over the Elders, I do clearly explain my self in
the Keys (page 36.) That Authority is taken in a large sense, and after a
sort, when it is Acknowledged, in the People over the Elders, As

1. When a man acts according to his own will freely, he is then said to be
(...), Dominus sui Actus, so the People in all the Acts of liberty, which they
put forth, they are Domini sui Actus, Lords of their own Actions.

2. The people by sundry Acts of liberty, (as in Election of officers, in
sending forth their messengers, in concurrence with their Elders, in the
Admission of members, and censure of Offenders, in the Determination and
Promulgation of Synodall Acts) They have a great stroke and Power in the
Ordering of Church Affairs: which may be called (...), or Potestas, a Power
which many times (in Common speech) goes under the Name of Rule or Authority.
But in proper speech, It is indeed a Privilege, or liberty, an (...), or Power
rather then Authority. It is a common speech usual amongst our best Divines,
That the Government of the Church is mixed of a Monarchy, an Aristocracy, and a
Democracy. In regard of Christ the Head, the Government of the Church is
Sovereign and Monarchical. In regard of the Rule by the Presbytery it is
Stewardly and Aristocraticall: In Regard of the Peoples Power in Elections, and
censures, It is Democraticall.

Chap. 3.
Touching the sixth Contradiction.
The sixth Contradiction is thus Presented.

6. Examination is one of the highest Acts of Rule: and therefore cannot be
performed, but by some Rulers. Keys page 16.

The Church cannot Excommunicate the whole Presbytery, because they have not
received from Christ an office of Rule without their officers, ibid.

No Act of the Peoples power does properly bind unless the Authority of the
Presbytery Join with it. Ibid. page 36.

6. If all their officers were found Culpable either in Heretical Doctrine, Or
in scandalous Crimes, the Church has lawful Authority to proceed against them
all. The Way, page 45.

In case of offense given by an Elder, or the whole Eldership together, the
Church has Authority to require satisfaction, and if they give it not, to
Proceed to Censure Ibid. page 101.

6. Excommunication is not an Act of the Power of office, but of judgment, Nor
an Act of highest Rule but of supreme Judgment seated in the Fraternity. Surv.
part. 3. page 45.

As a Church of Brethren can not proceed to any public Censure without the
Elders so nor the Elders without concurrence of the People, Preface to the
Keys page 4.



Answer 1. Here is indeed a Discrepance in Expressions between the Way, and
the Keys. But it was not my Act, that any such Discrepance should have been
extant. The truth is, That many years ago, (and some years before the
suppressing of the Bishops in England) I was seriously moved by some of our
Brethren, and fellow Elders here, to Draw up an Historical Narration of our
Church Way together with some familiar grounds of the same briefly. In short
time as God Helped, I dispatched it, which when our brethren had perused, I saw
they did not close with it. Yet a Brother going for England, got some where a
Copy of it, and Presented it to some of the Congregationall way there: and I
afterward heard, that neither did they close with it: and in particular not
with that Passage, which is here recited, as a part of the Contradiction. Which
since appears more openly, by the Asterisk put upon that Passage, and upon
sundry other in the Book: But before I saw that, and had only heard, That they
did not fully Accord, I hoped it had met with a timely suppression, rather then
an impression: for I heard no more of it, for two, or three years after: Mean
while perceiving That one maine Point of Dissatisfaction, was the Authority
given to the Fraternity, I considered more seriously and Distinctly, of the
whole Power of the Keys, and expressed my Apprehensions in that Treatise of
the Keys, which our brethren here did well Accept, and so did the brethren (of
like Judgment) in England, and some of them were pleased to Attest it with the
Preface which is now extant before it: yea I have heard (as well as some other
of our Brethren here) by some letters from England, that Reverend Mr Rutherford
(who was a great Part of the Assembly at Westminster) offered to the Dissenting
brethren, That if they would come up to the Treatise of the Keys, themselves
would meet them there. But this was sundry years, after the Treatise of the
way had been finished, and carried to England, and (as I hoped) suppressed. But
it seems some Brother there, having got a Copy of it, being zealous of the
Authority of the Fraternity, and Perceiving that their Authority was not so
fully Acknowledged in the Keys as in the Way; He caused his Copy of the Way
(which was indeed abrupt in the entrance, and imperfect otherwise) to be
Published in Print: which when I saw, It troubled me not a little, as knowing,
That the Discrepant Expressions in the one, and in the other, might trouble
friends, and give Advantage to Adversaries. Afterward Mr Hooker coming down
from Connectiquol, to consult with the Elders here about his Book; He pleaded
seriously for the Placing of all Church power, primitively, in the Body of the
Church, and also for their Judiciary Power of Censure over the Presbytery,
suitable to what I had delivered in the Way; Now, though I cannot say, that his
Reasons did prevail with me, to lter the Placing of the First Subject of the
Power of the Keys, from what I had delivered in the Treatise of the Keys: yet
Perceiving that some men's Judgments did more Adhere as to his Judgment, so to
the former course of the Way: others to that of the Keys, I suffered both to
stand as they did, especially seeing I could not help it, the Book of the Way
being published without my Consent; and both the Way, and the Keys being
dispersed into many hands (past my Revoking) and Refuted by some; So that if the
Replyer find some Discrepancy in one of these books from the other, Let him
know that the Doctrine of the Way (in such few Points wherein it differs from
the Keys) was not then mine when the Keys were published, much less when the
Way was published, which was many years after, though it had been penned many
years before. And yet take all the Discrepancyes, and weigh them (I will not
say with Candor but with Rigor) and I do not yet remember, nor can I yet find
any of them, but they lie rather in Difference of Logical Notion, then in
Doctrine of Divinity, or Church Practice, as I said before.

Answer 2. This further; let me Acquaint both the Replyer, and the Reader
withal, that sometimes there has grown a Question, amongst us whether all
Excommunication be an Act of Officiaria Potestas, or not some Honoraria only?
If of Officiaria, It cannot be Dispensed by the Brethren only, as the first
Column has it. If of Honoraria, It may, and so the second Column has it:
and then the Contradiction is not ejusdem.

Neither is this Censure dispensed by the brethren (as I conceive) one of the
highest Acts of Rule (which is to deliver unto Satan 1 Cor. 5. 5.) but Reaches
only to cast their Elders, out of Administration of office to them, and out of
Church Communion with them. The Truth is, Ego libenter in eorum me numero esse
Profiteor, qui proficiendo Scribunt, and Scribendo proficiunt; which gave me
occasion to Add the third Answer given above to the first Contradiction, Some
things in the way which I delivered more laxly, I express more distinctly in
the Treatise of the Keys which followed after: and some things more fully and
clearly, in the way cleared, then in either of the former.

Answer 3. When I say No Act of the Peoples part, does properly bind, unless
the Authority of the Elder join with it (Keys page 36.) I would be understood
to speak it as I meant it, of the Elders walking without offense; in the Right
Administration of their office, and Conversation of their lives.

Answer 4. When Mr Hooker says. Excommunication is not an Act of Office,
Power, nor of Rule, but of supreme Judgment seated in the Fraternity, I easily
grant that the Excommunication dispensed by the Fraternity is not an Act of
Office-Power; But it may Justly be Inquired, whether Excommunication, being
Dispensed by the Elders with the consent of the Church, be not an Act, as of
the Churches honorable Judicial Power, so of the Elders Office-Power, and
Rule in the Church? For as the Pastoral Preaching of the Elders is Official,
and so Authoritative, though the Preaching of other Brethren (as of the Sons
of the Prophets) be not so: so why may there not be the like Difference,
observed here? To deliver unto Satan seems to be an Act of Judicial
Office-Power, as when in another case it is said, The Judge delivers a man to
the Officer, and the officer casts him into Prison Matthew. 5. 25. He that
casts into Prison is an Inferior officer. The Judge must therefore be a
Superior officer, that delivers an offendour to the officer, to be cast into
Prison. In the Excommunication of the Incestuous Corinthian (where both the
Elders and Brethren concurred) the sentence might well be delivered in Terms
that express an Act of highest Authority, To deliver unto Satan. But where the
Church is called to Act against their Elders (who corrupt them with false
Doctrine) there the Apostle Requires the Church, to mark them, and Avoid them,
Romans 16. 17, 18. which may express an Act of liberty, and Judicial Power, but
not of Authority.

CHAP. 4.
Touching the seventh, Contradiction and eighth.
The seventh Contradiction is thus gathered.

7. It was a Sacrilegious Breach of Order, That Commissaries and Chancellours
wanting the Key of Order (no Ministers) have been invested with Jurisdiction.
Yea and more then Ministerial Authority, above those Elders, who labor in
word and Doctrine. The Keys page 16. 7. There is a Key of Power given to the
Church (with the Elders) as to open a door of entrance to the Ministers
calling, so to shut the door of entrance against them in some cases etc. The
Keys p. 9. Yea to Censure all their Elders (without Elders) The Way p. 45. as
before.

Ans. The power given to the Commissaries Chancellors and: I justly called a
Sacrlegious Breach of Order in more Respects than one.

1. In that being no Ministers, they exercised more than Ministerial Authority
over the Elders. For Ministers do not exercise Authority over Elders, no nor
over any Brother, but with consent of the Church. But these do it without, and
against the Consent of the Church.

2. In that they exercise this Authority even in Churches wherein they have not
Received the key of Order, and so stand not so much as in the Order of Members
amngst them.

3. In that they proceed against them, not for crimes committed against the
word of God, but for Neglect of Popish-Canons or Humane Traditions.

But now no Authority allowed to Brethren either in the Keys or in the Way,
comes near to this Breach of Order.

For 1. In Joining with the Elders to open a door of entrance to Minister's
calling, They put forth no Act of Authority (properly so called) at all: but
only exercise a liberty and Power orderly which they have Received from the
Lord Jesus, to elect their own officers, As the Peoples election of Deacons
(Act. 6. 2. to 5th.) And their lifting up of hands in the choice of Elders
(Act. 14. 23.) does declare. And when they do shut them forth it is not
without their Elders, where their Elders are not wanting, or not wanting to
their Duty. And even then, they put forth no Act of Office Rule, or Authority
(properly so called) as the Commissaries do, but only an Act of Judicial
Power common to the whole Church, 1 Cor. 5. 12.

2. The People do exercise this Power only in their own Church where themselves
are members, and have Received a key of Order.

3. They proceed not against any, much less against their Elders, but for
notorious offenses, committed against the word of God, in Doctrine or life, so
that this Contradiction speaks as little ad idem as any of the former.

Touching the 8th Contradiction.
The 8th Contradiction is represented thus.

8. We are so far from Allowing that Sacrilegious usurpation of the Ministers
office, That private Christians ordinarily take upon them to Preach the Gospel
Publicly, The Keys, page 6. 8. This is ordinarily Practiced in England, and
Allowed by the Independent Brethren. Yea they being but in the Notion of Gifted
Brethren, no Ministers to other Congregations, do it ordinarily themselves.

Ans. 1. This Contradiction is not of me to my self, but of some others, who
whether they be Independants truly so called, I do not know: sure I am, that
Presbyterians and Independants are not membra Dividentia, though I see, that
all that are not for Popery, or Episcopacy, or Presbytery, do commonly lurk
under the style of Independancy. I hope the Replyer would be loath to Renounce
the Protestant Religion, because there are found some contradictions, and
greater than these, in one of them to another.

Ans. 2. When I call it a Sacrilegious usurpation for Private Christians
Ordinarily to take upon them to Preach the Gospel Publicly, and to Administer
the Sacraments; yet this latter of Administering the Sacraments the Replyer
leaves out, and so the Contradictiction is not ad idem: which is a Common
failing in this, and the rest. For I would not say that it is a Sacrilegious
usurpation, for well gifted Brethren (where ordained Ministers cannot be had)
there to Preach ordinarily and Publicly, especially if they be Approved by
those that have Power, and requested thereto by the People, wherein I go
further in giving way to the Prophesying of Private Brethren, than my Reverend
Brethren (the Prefacers to the Keys) do, who only Allow them to Preach
occasionally, and not ordinarily, which I speak only to this end, That the
Replyer and others may know, there is more consent and Agreement in our
Judgments, then they take notice of, or sometimes our selves either. But if
Private Brethren do Administer the Sacraments at all whether ordinarily, or
Occasionally, It seems to me like the Fact of Uzziah in offering Incense.

CHAP. 5.
Touching the 9th Contradiction.
The 9th Contradiction is laid out thus.

9. A Particular Church of Saints Professing the Faith (that is members without
offices) is the first subject of all the Church. Offices, with all their
Spiritual Gifts and Power, Keys page 31. 9. As the keys of the kingdom of
Heaven are diverse, so are the Subjects to whom they are committed diverse,
keys page 11. The Apostles were the first subject of Apostolical power. ibid.
page 32. A Synod is the first Subject of that Power whereby Error is
convinced, and condemned. ibid. page 47. 9. The Power of the keys belongs
firstly to a Congregation of Covenanting Believers, Surv. part. ^. p. 219. The
Power of the keys is in the Church of Believers, as in the first subject. ib.
p. 195 That conceit is wide to make one first subject of this power, and yet
others to share in this power, not by means of that, for this is to speak
daggers, and Contradictions. ibid.

Ans: 1. This is one of those Differences, of which I spoke before, that lies
rather in Logical Notion, than either in Doctrine of Divinity, or in Church
Practice. Against which the exception made above, has been Answered above, in
clearing the first Contradiction.

Ans. 2. There is no color of Contradiction between the two former Columns.
For when I say A Particular Church is the first Subject of all the Church
Officers and their Gifts, I speak not of this or that particular Church, (which
is but an Individual) but of a Particular Church taken Indefinitely, which (by
mere error of the Printer) is without sense said, taken Independently, which
is the Disadvantage of us, who live so far remote from the Press, that we can
neither prevent their mistakes nor correct them afterward. But take a
Particular Church Indefinitely and it comprehends all Particular Churches:
And that God has given to Particular Churches all spiritual officers together
with their Gifts, for the Discharge of their offices, is Proved by evident
Texts of Scripture, in that very Page of the Keys 31. I do not say (as some
do) that the Church meaning the Fraternity is the first subject of all
spiritual Gifts (for then they had received them immediately without
officers:) but I say the offices and Officers, not devoid of Gifts, but
furnished with their gifts, are given by Christ to the Church freely, and not
to any other Person or Society, from whom the Church Receives them.

But this no whit crosses, what is said in the second Column, That Elders are
the first Subjects of ordinary Ministerial Power, and Apostles of Apostolical
Power, and Synods, of Synodicall Power. A wife may be the first subject of her
own Dowry, but yet her Husband is the first Subject Recipient of his wife with
her Dowry.

Ans. 3. As for what is said differently by my Brother Hooker in the third
Column, as his Person and Gifts and Friendship were precious and dear to me
whilst he lived: so now that he rests in Glory, his Name and memory, and
labor (saving some very few private Notions) are honorable, and blessed, with
me, and I suppose with all that knew him. But in this Logical Notion, I crave
leave, not so much to dissent from him (for he herein Dissented from me, who
wrote first, rather than I from him) but leave I crave not to Retract what I
formerly wrote in the Keys touching this Point, though I should as much
suspect mine own judgment, where he Dissenteth from me, as where any man. It is
true he takes the Church of Covenanted Believers to be the first Subject of
the power of the keys, which if he mean no more, than that they have all
Church Power either formaliter, or Radicaliter, and Virtualiter, then there is
no Difference in our expressions; but if he mean that that they are the first
Subject of all Church-Povver properly, two or three things Detain me from
consenting with him herein. 1. That which is the first Subject of any Power
Receives it immediately without any other Intervening Subject. As fire being
the first Subject of Heat, Receives not his Heat from any former Subject.
But it is evident, That many a Church of Believers, has not Received Pastoral
Gifts, nor it may be any Gifts fit for office, 'till they fetch them from other
Churches, and sometimes from some who are not members of any Particular Church
at all.

2. The first Subject of any Power, as it has immediately Received it: so it
may immediately exercise it: as Fire (the first subject of Heat) can Heat
without Intervention of any other subject.

But the Church has not Power immediately to exercise Pastoral Preaching, or
Administration of the Sacraments, 'till it have procured and chosen, and called
forth some or other Gifted Persons to exercise the same.

3. I might Add a third Reason to both the former. Whatsoever is properly the
first Subject of any Power, It has that same Power, or some other equivalent,
and analogicall to it, not only radicaliter and virtualiter, but Formaliter
also. And because formaliter, therefore radicaliter and virtualiter. For
whatsoever is in any Subject Firstly, (whether it be proper Adjunct, or proper
effect, or any other proper Argument) it either flows from the form, or from
the matter so formed; As for instance, capacity of Learning, or Risibility is
in Man, as in the first subject. The former flows from the Reasonable soul:
the latter from the matter of a man so formed. But neither of these are in man
radicaliter or virtualiter, but only because they are in a man formally, and so
either flow from the form, or from the matter so formed. Take another
Instance, and of another sort. The People that have power to elect a King,
though they have not formally kingly power, yet have they a formal Power, to
submit themselves to Kingly Power. And so having a formal Power to put one of
the Relatives, they have an aequivalent and Analogicall Power to put the other
Correlative. For, Posito uno Relatorum, Ponitur etiam and alterum.

As for that which is quoted by the Replyer from Mr Hooker, in the last clause
of the third Column of this contradiction, I see not how it concerns me, or
contradicts any thing in the former Columns. For I do not make any first
Subject of Church Power, and yet others to share in that Power, but not by
means of that. But as the keys of the kingdom of heaven are diverse: So I
see no Inconvenience, that the first Subjects to whom the several keys are
committed, may be diverse also. Neither does the letter of the Text seem to me
to gainesay that, Mat. 16. 18. For though it speak, not to Them but to Thee; a
Representing one state or Condition of men: yet say that one condition to be
believers and take Believers in a large sense, It comprehends all sorts of
Professing Believers, whether Private members, or Elders, or Apostles, indeed
all. But neither do I see any convincing reason seeing Peter stood in a
threefold Ecclesiastical Relation (being both an Apostle, and an Elder, and a
Professed Believer) why Christ committing the keys to him (saying to Thee will I
give them) might not Intend to give all the keys; and the several sorts of
them, according to the several Relations he stood in.

If it be said All that share in the subject to whom the keys are Given (in
these words, To Thee) they all share alike in the same equal Power of the
keys, because they have all the same Commission: I Answer it would indeed so
follow, If there were no other several Commissions, granted in Scripture else
where, but only here; But clear it is from other Scriptures, That Power of
Authoritative Preaching, and Administering the Sacraments, is Given only to
Apostles, Elders, and such like officers: but Power of Privilege and Judgment,
is given all the Fraternity.

CHAP. 6.
Touching the 10th Contradiction with the 11th 12th 13th.
The 10th Contradiction is thus held forth.

10. Pastor and Flock are Relates: and so he is a Pastor to none but his
own Congregation. This is the Common Tenent. 10. The members of any Church we
Adm^t t^ the Lords Table (if they bring letters testimonial.) and their
Children to Baptism. The Way p. 68. The Keys, p. 17. 10. Administration of
Sacraments is a Ministerial Act: and what Authority has a Pastor to do it,
or they to Receive it from him to whom he is no Pastor? Mr. Hocker Surv. Part.
2. 64, 65. Pastors and Teachers might Pray and Preach in other Churches
besides their own: but not Administer seals and Censures. Bartlets Model
page 63.

Answer 1. That Appearance of Contradiction is easily Removed, if our Doctrine
and Practice be known, as it is, what a Pastor does in his own
Congregation, and to his own Flock, he does it by Pastoral Power, and
Authority, what he does to the members of other Churches, abroad, or out of his
own Congregation, He does it not Authoritative, but Precario, and not in a
constant, but in a transient way: which the communion of Churches does not only
Admit, but readily (as occasion serves) Desire. What Mr Hooker doubted of in
this Point, he Answers himself in the end of the same Page 65.

If Paul, Apollos, and Cephas, things present and things to come, be all Given
to the Particular Church of Corinth (1 Cor. 3. 22.) who yet had no peculiar
Interest in them more then other Churches. By the same Right all the officers,
and all their Gifts are theirs also, in the same way. Theirs they are not
(...), (for each Church has his peculiar offices, as their own propriety):
Then they are theirs (...), for their use, not Authoritatively, nor Ordinarily,
but occasionally, as God gives opportunity; Ordinarily as the Officers must
attend to their own Flock, so must the Flock Depend upon their own Officers.
The officers have no Authority over any Flock, but that which the Holy Ghost
has committed to them: Neither can any other Flock command the employment of
any of their Gifts, or any act of their office amongst them. But upon occasion,
in a transient way, as they may have need of their Gifts, so they may have need
of some Act of their Office, and accordingly may Desire it, and Receive it.

The 11th Contradiction which is thus set forth.

11. We Receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper (say the same of 'Baptisme)
as a se^le of Communion, not only with the Lord Jesus in our own Churches but
in all the Churches of the Saints, Keys page 17. Del. of 9. Posit page 133,
134.

11. Baptism (and so the other Sacrament) seals up the External Communion
with a Particular Church etc. Mr H. Surv. Part. 3. page 27.

And he disputes against it, as to the Catholic Church.



Answer: When we say, that the Sacraments are Seals of Communion with the Lord
Jesus not only in our own Church, but in all the Churches of the Saints, we do
not mean that they seal up the same measure of External Communion with other
Churches, as with our own. They do not seal up this Communion, That their
officers are our officers, and we their Flock: Or that we have the same Power
over them, which we have over our own members. This were to seal up not a
Communion but a Confusion of Churches; And this is that which Mr Hooker in the
place alleged does deny as our selves also do.

The 12th Contradiction is thus declared.

12. It is an Act of the Elders Power and Authority to Examine whether
Officers, or members, before they be Received of the Church, Keys page 21. 12.
As for Admission, Election, Ordination of Officers, Admission or shutting out
of Members, these things the Brethren may do without officers, The Way p. 45.
101

Answer: The Answer is Obvious, what the Elders do in this kind, Ex Officio,
The Church may do the like in the want of Elders.

The 13th Contradiction is set before us thus.

13. Ordination is then Complete when the People has Chosen an Officer, and
the Presbytery has laid their Hands on him, Keys p. 37. 13. But if the
Church want a Presbytery, for want of Elders they want a warrant to Repair to
the Presbytery of another Church to Impose hands upon their Elect Elders, Way,
p. 50.

Answer: In that Place of the Keys, I only Assert and Prove, That a man of
Sufficient Gifts chosen by the People of the Church, and Ordained by the
Presbytery of his own Church, wants nothing to the complete Integrity of his
calling. The Right hand of Fellowship given by the Elders of other Churches
expresses their Approbation of his calling, but adds nothing to the essence,
or Integrity of his calling.

But when I say that in want of a Presbytery of their own, they want a warrant
to Repair to the Presbytery of another Church for his Ordination, I no where
say, That the Officer Elected, wants the complete Integrity of his calling,
for want of the Imposition of hand, of the Presbytery of another Church. And
yet that had been requisite to make up a pretense of a Contradiction. The
Replyer knows that a Church wanting a Presbytery of their own to lay hands
upon an Elect Officer in our Judgment, they may appoint some of the Elders and
graver Members of their own Body, to supply the Defect of their own
Presbytery; which we Account sufficient to the completing of his calling in
such a case.

But when I said (in the Way) That the Church wanting a Presbytery, they wanted
a warrant to Repair to the Presbytery of another Church to Impose hands upon
their Elect Elders, I meant in way of Subordination to an Extrinsecall Power.
For it is against that which both the Reasons Plead, which I there Alleged
for that Purpose. But I no where dislike, That a Church wanting a Presbytery of
their own may send for Elders of other Churches, to Assist them, and to Join
with them in the Ordination of their Elect Officers.

CHAP. 7.
Touching the 14th Contradiction with 15. and 16.
The 14th Contradiction is thus laid out.

14. Paul and Barnabas were Ordained to that Office (of Apostleship) by the
Imposition of hands of some officers or Members of the Church, Way, p. 45. 14.
In Act. 13. 2, 3. There is no Ordination to Office at all: for the Apostles had
their office before Mr. Hooker, Surv. Part. 2. p. 83. This was not to put a new
office upon them, but to confirm their sending to the Gentiles ib. p. 60. 14.
This was done in a Particular Church Keys, p. 29. The officers of one Church
did what was done in an ordinary Way, Surv. Parr. 2. p. 83. Then it follows
(by Mr. C.) his Doctrine that the Apostles who were officers in all Churches
were ordained in a Particular Church: or that officers of a Church may be
ordained in another Church: which he said was unwarrantable.

Ans. 1. When I say (in the Way) That Paul and Barnabas, were ordained to the
Apostolic office by Imposition of hands of some officers of the Church at
Antioch (Act. 13. 1, 2, 3.) It is not Disproved (by Mr Hooker) saying that they
had had their office before. For I nowhere say, That ordination Gives the
office, but only Approves it and Solemnly, (as it were) Installeth the elect
officer into it, and sends him forth with a Blessing into the Administration
of it. Neither when he says, That there is there no Ordination unto office at
all, does he contradict what I affirm, For his meaning is, to Deny it in Mr
Rutherford's sense, who speaks there of Ordination, as Giving the calling
unto the office: which Mr Hooker Disproveth, and therein I concur with him.
For it puts no New office upon them, but Bare witness to that calling, which
the Holy Ghost had given them.

When Mr Hooker says, The Officers of one Church did what was done in an
ordinary way, He himself infers the consequence, Therefore it is no
Precedent for the Pastors of many Churches, what either they may or should do.

But the Inferences which Mr Cawdry gathers, as from my Doctrine out of that
Text, either will not hold, or not hurt our cause. For this Inference will not
hold, That then the Officers of one Chuch may be ordained in another.

For they were as much Officers of the Church of Antioch, as of any other
Churches, It will only infer, That they who are officers in many Churches,
may be Ordained in any one of them.

The other inference will in part follow That some of the Apostles (who were
Officers in all Churches) may be Ordained in a Particular Church, when the Holy
Ghost calls for it. For they Act now not in their own Name, or Power, but in
the great Name, and Sovereign Power of the Lord Jesus, who is the Head of all
Churhes.

But what Prejudice is that to our cause? or wherein does it contradict any of
our Tenants?

The 15th Contradiction is thus Declared.

15. What if the whole Presbytery offend? The readiest course is to bring the
matter to a Synod, the keys page 43. 15. There is a readier and nearer way;
The Brethren may censure them all, Way page 45. If the Congregation be found
faithful and willing to Remove an offense by due censure, why should the
offense be called up to a more public Judicature. Keys page 42.

Ans. This Contradiction is made partly out of the concealment of Part of my
words in the first Column, and Partly out of the Addition of some words of his
own in the second Column. In the former Column I say, If the whole Presbytery
offend, or such a Part as will draw a Party, and a Faction in the Church with
them, the readiest course then is, to bring the matter to a Synod where those
words, such a Part as will draw a Party, or Faction in the Church with them,
are given for the just Reason, why in such a case, the case of the offending
Presbytery, or other such Leading members in the Church should be brought to a
Synod, before it be censured in the Church. But in the words recited in the
latter Column, I speak of the Congregation as Agreeing together, and both
faithful and willing to Proceed against Heretical Doctrine and Scandalous
crimes in whomsoever. And then they need not Trouble the Synod to clear the
case, which is already clear unto themselves, so that this Contradiction
speaks not ad Idem. The one Column speaks of a Church, Divided into parts
and Factions, and their readiest course is to bring the matter to a Synod. The
second Column speaks of a Church both faithful and willing to Proceed
against offenses with one accord. And then they have sufficient Power within
themselves, to judge that which is right, and to execute their Judgment. That
which is Added of the Replyers own words, in the latter Column, does help not
a little to make up an Appearance of the Contradiction. In the Keys I had said
(In the case above mentioned) It is the readiest course to bring the matter to
the Synod. In the Way he quoteth my words, as if I had said, There is a readier
and nearer way. The Brethren may censure them all. If these words had been
mine, there had been an Appearance of Contradiction.

To say this is the readyest course, and yet to say, a Discrepant course is a
readier and nearer way, is (at least, verbo tenus) an apparent Contradiction.
But the Truth is, Those words are none of mine, but the Replyers own. And so it
will be an easy matter to make up Contradictions (tot quot) if we may take
leave, in one sentence to conceal Part of the words necessary to make up the
sense, and in another sentence to Add words of our own.

The 16th Contradiction is delivered thus.

16. It belongs to the civil Magistrate, to establish pure Religion, in
Doctrine, worship and Government: partly by civil Punishment upon the wilful
oppressors, and Disturbers of the same. Keys p. 50. 16. Yet the Brethren here
call for, or Tolerate Toleration of all Opinions, and Deny the magistrate Power
to Punish any Pretending conscience Bartlets Model, page 128. 16. See Mr.
Bartlets Model p. 25. Contra

Ans. 1. This Contradiction labors of the same Disease (as the rest
generally Do) It speaks not ad Idem. Such as require the Magistrate to
establish Pure Religion, in Doctrine, worship and Government, and to Restrain
the wilful opposers and Disturbers thereof by civil Punishments, They speak
of Fundamentals in Religion, and such opinions as apparently tend to
libertinisme, and licentious ungodlynesse, as Mr Bartlet expresses it, Model
page 126.

But the Toleration which they Allow and call for, is of such opinions, as
neither subvert the Foundation of Religion, nor Practice of Piety. Both these
may be maintained without the least show of the face of Contradiction. Further
I find this in Mr Bartlet, That himself and some others are not free, That
Heretics should be put to Death, in case they keep their errors to themselves,
and do not seek to seduce, and corrupt others. And though I grant, that such
an Heretic after once or twice Admonition may be Rejected out of the Church
(according to Titus 3. 10, 11.) yet I do not find, that Moses condemned them
unto Death, unless they became blasphemers, or Idolators, or Seducers to
Idolatry. What Christ, and Moses do both of them Tolerate, the Servants of
Christ need not to be ashamed of such Toleration.

Ans. 2. This Contradiction (for ought I can Discern) labors also Crimine
falsi. For it seems a manifest untruth, what he speaks in Column 2. That
the Brethren call for, or Tolerate Toleration of all opinions, and Deny the
magistrate Power to punish any Pretending conscience, Mr Bartlet Alleged for
the proof hereof, p. 128. says no such thing, And the contrary he proves,
from the express Testimony of Mr Buroughs, Mr Thomas Goodwin, and others of
that way.

The 8th Chapt.
Touching the 17th Contradiction with 18. 19.
The 17th Contradiction is thus set forth.

17. Visible Saints though they be Hypocrites inwardly, are the matter of a
visible church. Mr. Hook. part. 1. p. 14. 15. 17. You say Saints in outward
Profession are the matter of a Congregationall Church: we judge that real
Saints uttering in Discourse the Breathings of the Holy Spirit, and experiences
of conversion, interested in a stricter conversation to be the matter. Dr.
Holmes Epistle to Way cleared. page 4. Mr. Bartlet speaks something (this
language) Can there be Ability for spiritual and holy services, where the
spirit is not yet given? Can there be communion between light and Darkness?
Can they edify one another in the Faith, that have not the work of Faith
wrought in them? Model. p. 57. See more page 103.

Ans. What Mr Hooker's Judgment was, is expressed in that first Column: what
mine own, is declared, and I hope, cleared in the Holiness of Church Members.
What Dr Holmes and Mr Bartlet do further require in it, they Declare what
Church Members ought to be de jure, especially in their first constitution,
rather then what they are, or are wont to be de facto, especially in their
Declension. Again I see Mr Bartlet speaks in opposition to the members of
the Parish Churches, who are in many places Ignorant, loose, profane and
scandalous livers, who are not indeed visible Saints, page 56.

It is true there is some work of the Spirit, where ever there is a visible
Saint. But the Spirit gives many Gifts to the edification of others (as to
Judas and Demas) which often do not reach to the Regeneration of him that
Receives them.

The 18th Contradiction is thus stated.

18. The form of the visible Church is the Covenant, either explicit, or
implicit: and the latter is sometimes fully sufficient Mr. H. Surv. part. 1.
page 47. 48 and others. 18. You say an implicit uniting, viz. A walking and
communicating with you is a sufficient evidencing of the Form: we say, Their
folemne confession of their faith and express open covenanting with the Lord
to wake with such a body of Saints, in all the ways of Christ to be the
manifest Form. D. Holmes ibid. 18. It is not general Profession will serve
the turn, but there must be a peculiar engagement and appropriation to this or
that particular body, Mr. H. Surv. page 63. Yet he said An Implicit Covenant
was sufficient.

Ans. The expressions of Mr H. quoted in Column 1: and Column 3: will not
amount to an opposition of himself, much less to a Contradiction. For though
he make an Implicit Covenant sufficient, yet a general Profession will not
serve the turn; to make an Implicit Covenant. For an Implicit Covenant must
be with Reference to this or that particular Body: or else it is neither
Covenant at all, nor Implicit. A General Profession enters not any man into
any Relation with any Church, unless he offer himself to Join with them as
Mr Hooker in that Place more largely, and truly opens himself. Neither does
Dr Holms his expression contradict him. For he that makes the explicit
Covenant the manifest form of the Church, He does not gainesay the implicit
covenant to be a real Form of the Church, though not so manifest but more
obscure.

The 19th Contradiction is thus delineated.

19. We crave leave of the Author of the keys, To Declare that we Assent not
to all expressions, or all and every Assertion in it: As in these Particulars.
About the Prothesying of Private Brethren.

2. That the Assembly (Act. 15.) was a Formal Syned.

3. That the Apostles Acted in it, as Ordinary Elders, Preface to Keys. page 6.

19. We do in this Epistle certify our Assent to the way of the Churches of
New England. saving that we do not fully close with some expressions passim in
the Bock: before some of which (10 at least, belike there are more) we minded
to Note a star in the Margin. This we could not but say and do (pace Authoris)
or we could not Assent, Epistle to the Way page 2.

19. Yet they are angry that we call for a fuller Declaration of themselves,
Epistle to the Way. p. 1. and Epistle to the Way cleared page 2.



Answer: 1. Though my reverend Brethren crave leave to dissent from me in some
expressions (which they may safely and freely do without my leave, for I
profess my spirit subject to the Prophets:) yet about the Prophesying of
private Brethren, I must again Profess as I did before, That I do not know,
wherein I Dissent from them: unless it be that I Allow somewhat more liberty
to the Prophesying of private Brethren, then they do. The Allowance, which they
give is with four limitations.

1. That is be done occasionally, and not in ordinary course.

2. By men of such Abilities, as are fit for office.

3. Not assuming this to themselves, but as they are allowed, and designed to
it by such, as have Power.

4. That their Doctrine be subjected to the Teaching Elders of the Church.
Grant these limitations, and I never scrupled (to my remembrance) the liberty
of Prophesying by private Brethren, yea this liberty I should further grant,
that though the private Brethren be not furnished, with abilities fit for
public office, yet there may be occasion, to call them forth to exercise their
gifts; as in the sudden sickness or absence of the Minister, and other
officers, why may not a private brother be called forth by the Church, or
stirred up by the Spirit of God in himself to stand up, and with leave,
instruct and exhort the Church, to make a Sanctified use of such a sudden
stroke of Providence? Or what if a private Brother of good credit in the church
shall observe the Doctrine of the Ministers not so much valued as were meet?
why may he not take occasion, to speak some words of encouragement, and
confirmation, both to the Minister and to the Congregation? Jehosaphat's
Nobles, though Princes, yet were but as Private Brethren in the Church, as
bearing no Public Church-office: yet they taught in the Cities of Juda, what
Respect was due to the Ministry of the Levites, whom they brought with them,
when my beloved Brethren do not acknowledge the Assembly of Apostles, Elders,
and Brethren Acts 15. To have been a formal Synod of Messengers sent out of a
set and combined Association from neighbor churches, They do not herein
Dissent from me. For the two Churches of Antioch and Jerusalem were too far
remote to stand in a set, or combined Association, and therefore they may well
deny it to be a Formal Synod, according to the Form of Synods now in use in
Presbyteriall Churches. But that that assembly had the true matter and form of
a just Synod, As I do believe it, so I do not see that my Brethren deny it. For
the efficient cause of the Synod, the Church of Antioch sent messengers: and
the Church of Jerusalem (whose officers were sent unto) they freely gave them a
meeting, and the Church with them. For the matter of the Synod, they had the
Messengers, officers, and Brethren of both Churches met together in the Name of
Christ. It is not necessary to the being of a Synod the convention of the
Messengers and members of many Churches, The convention of two Churches (by
themselves or messengers) may make a Synod. If the convention of one Church may
make a Synagogue, why may not the convention of two churches make a Synod? The
form of a Synod they had, in Arguing, and disputing the case in hand, and
freely giving in their Judgments from scripture grounds, and at length
determining the whole cause with the Joint consent of the Apostles, Elders, and
Brethren, and Publishing the same by letters, and messengers to all the
churches whom it concerned. The establishment of Peace and Truth in the
churches, was the end of this Synod, as it ought to be the end of all. It is
true, here was a consultation, in that the church of Antioch sent for counsel:
and the Apostles and Elders met to consult, and consider of the matter. But
consultation was but one Act of the Assembly, many other Formal Acts of a
Synod they put forth besides, which have been specified. The Apostles though
they did put forth some Acts of their Apostolical Power, in helping to clear
the Truth by explayning obscure Scriptures, and in Ratifying the conclusion
with some greater Plerophory of the mind of the Holy Ghost: yet in Putting such
things to Argumentation, and Disputation, and allowing Elders and Brethren
liberty of Putting in their votes, and determining, and publishing the
sentence, in the Name and with the common consent of all, herein they Acted as
Ordinary Elders and messengers of churches, might and ought to do.

The Notes of about Ten Passages in the Way, wherein our Reverend Brethren in
England (or some of them) say they could not fully close with them, without
Affixing an Asterisk to them, If I knew where, the Pinch of the Difficulty lay,
I would Address my self, to give them fuller satisfaction either by
condescending to them, or giving them just Reason why I could not. Mean while
I have learned (through Grace) not to fall out with my Brethren, for greater
differences in judgment, then those be.

That which is added in the third Column, that they are offended (and, as you
call it, Angry with you) for that you call for a fuller Declaration of
themselves, for that, themselves can best give you an Account: for

1. It may be, they think it needless to Publish further declaratio^s, because
over and above the former Declarations, there have been since published three,
or four Pithy Pregnant Declarations of the same Argument; as Mr Hookers surv:
Mr Nortons Answer to Apollonius, the Synod at Cambridge, the Defense of the
Answer to the nine Questions.

2. It may be they fear, If they should publish more declarations in this
case, It would Add rather more Fuel to contention, then Prevail with the
Spirits of men, contrary minded to Receive satisfaction.

CHAP. 9.
Touching the 20th Contradiction and 21.
The 20th Contradiction is thus Expressed.

20. It is generally asserted by them, that one Church has not Power to
Censure another. 20. A Synod has Power to Determine, to withdraw Communion
from them, if they cannot heal them, Keys, page 24. 20. The sentence of non
Communion denounced against whole Churches Apolog. Narrat. p. 18, 19. If a
Sentence denounced it is a Censure.

Answer: To withdraw Communion from a church, is no more an Act of Power over a
church, then it was to Join in Communion with them. Communion and
non-Communion are Acts of the same power: both of them Acts of privilege or
liberty. And if withdrawing Communion be not an Act of censure, then to
determine so to withdraw, is no Act of an higher Nature.

Though a Censure is a sentence denounced, yet every sentence denounced is not
a Censure, unless it be Denounced by an higher power, then that of equals.
When the Ten Tribes denounced their Rejection of service to David's House (1
Kings 12. 16.) It was not a censure more then theirs, who solemnly Rejected
the Rule of Christ: we will not have this man to Rule over us, Luke 19. 14.

The last Contradiction is declared thus.

21. We Say Instituted worship and Ordinances do not flow immediately from
spiritual union, and Relation to Christ, and his members etc. Def. of 9. Pos.
page 76.

He must come at them in a right Order, to w^t in Fellowship of the Church
Surv. page 2.

21. Then it follows, that Hearing the word Preached Singing of Psalms and
Baptism, belong not to any, but such as are members of a Particular
Congregation.

And yet they say Ordinarily hearing it no sign of a Church member, Surv.
part. 1. page 18.

21. A Person has his first Right to the Sacrament (and so to other
Ordinances, because He has an Interest in the Covenant of the Gospel, Surv.
part. 1. page 65.



Answer: Here is no semblance of Contradiction; Mr Hooker Surv. says, a Person
has his first Right to a Sacrament, because he has an interest in the
covenant of the Gospel. The defense says he has not immediate Right till he
be a member of a Particular Congregation. And so says the Survey too, in the
Place Alleged. If Immediate Right, and first Right were all one, there were
some color for the Exception: but it is far otherwise; in having Christ, we
have a first Right to all things, but not an Immediate Right but in Gods way.

But neither hence will it follow, that Instituted Ordinances; as hearing the
word, Singing of Psalms, belong to none but to members of a Particular
Congregation. For though they be given to such firstly, and Immediately: yet
for their sakes to all that come in amongst them. The Childrens Table and the
Provisions thereof is first Allowed to the Children of the Family; yet in a
Bountiful Housekeepers Family, such part of the Pro^^sions may be Allowed to
strangers, as they may be fit to partake in.

FINIS.

