The Merry Bell-man's OUTCRIES, OR, The City's O YES. Being a mad merry Ditty,
both Pleasant and witty, to be cried in Prick-song Prose through Country and
City;

After a Conscience lately lost
Between the Stocks and Whipping-post.
Which for a Penny to the Bell-man,
If you the marks can to him tell-man,
His Art shall not be used in vain,
To help you to your goods again.
And make you a whole fort-night after,
Bepiss your selves with very laughter.
Not by L. P. but J. C.

Printed in the Year of Bartledum Fair, 1655. When few honest men can Thrive,

The Merry BELL-MANS O Yes, O Yes.
IF any Man, or Woman in City, Town or Country, can tell any Tale or Tidings of
a honest Broakers Conscience, lost (he cannot tell when) between the stocks in
Wite-chappell, and the Whipping-post at Charing-Crosse, it being supposed to be
strayed out of Houndsditch through Long-lane or Charter House Lane, the marks
to know it by in all likelihood are these, It is a Monsterous huge Beast, of a
devouring nature, sparing neither, man, Woman nor Child, of a Roaguish black
color, his panch being like the Devils Storehouse, a recepticle for
Thievery, and a vent for Villainy; he is marked in the right hand with T, that
stands for Thievery or ulgarly Tyburn, in the forehead with E, for
Extortioner, on his shoulder with C for Catterpiller, or Covetous Catiff, on
his right side O for Oppressor, on the left side with D for devouring Devil,
and in the tail with three XXXes, which stands for 30. pound in the Hundred,
which unlawful Usury and Extortion (without the least scruple of dishonesty)
he lives upon, to the devouring of many hundred of poor People in a year, if
you hear of any such Beast, bring word to Squire Dun the Hangman, at his
Manor House in Bell-Alley, and they shall see him turned off for their p^ines.

Vnea^th these Foxes, for it is great pity,
Such Vermin rest unhang'd to spoil a City.
O yes, O yes, O yes.
IF any Man, Wom^n, or Child, in City, Town and Country, can ^ell any Tale or
Tidings of a Charitable Usurer, a Priest that is not Covetous, a Tailor that is
no Thief, a Whore that would not be accounted a very honest Woman, (...)
cunning Bawd, that is not Diseased; a sullen Wife, that has a mind to live
honest, a Woman with a long Bottle-Nose that is not a Sco^d; A sottish Drunken
Woman that is not a nasty slutt, a little Woman that is patient, a great man
that is Valiant, a Carret-bearded Man that is Loyal, an Astronomer that is not
Impudent, an old Thief that turns honest, a sly Hypocrie that would not be
taken for the best Christian, a young Tub-man that c^nnot preach Nonse^se, a
Sister that will not take a touch in zeal, a Puritan that will not lie, a
Smith that hates good Lickquor, a Baker that makes his bread over-waight, a
hairy man that is not lecherous, a Woman that cannot dissemble, and a Pimpe
that is not adacious, and a Tapster that will not mis-reckon, and a Poet that
is an Usurer, let them leave word at the three Smoking Chimneys on
Fleet-Conduit, or at the Royal Ezchange in Turn-again Lane, or bring speedy
word to the Crier, and they shall have an unknown reward for their pains.

These are rare People, and hardly found
Within the Circuit of Old Englands ground.
O yes, O yes, O yes,
If any man, Woman or Mortal between Fleet Bridge and Temple Bar, have taken
up a Skye-colourd s^lke Petticoat, with four silver Laces about the Skirt, a
La^ne Apron laced round with a Flanders Lace, and the same Lace down the
middle; Also a new Holland Smock marked with E. W. in the bosom; wrists and
gussetts wrought with pure Naples Silk. it being about four yeards compass in
the Skirt, let them leave word at the sign of the Turn-up Cart and four Horses
in twatling Street, or at the Whip and Eggshel in Jack-an-apes Lane; they shall
be accounted Puppi^s for their pains.

Because the Ladies Head that ownes them scorns
To hide's Wives losses in his velvet Horns.
O yes, O yes, O yes.
IF any man, Woman or Mortal can tell any Tale or Tidings of a golden Calf
lost long since in Egypt, it being now by the Egyptian Soothsayers imagined
to be grown a BVLL, and worshipped by some Idolaters in the Land of Nodnol, let
them bring word to the Queen of Egypts Corncutter, living at the Kings Arms in
horn-Alley, and they shall have the Bull-head, his Hide, Intrailes, and
Pettitoes for their pains.

For now are veryer fools then were by half,
That cannot discern a Bull, from a Bull calf.
O yes, O yes, O yes.
IF any man or Dog can tell any Tale or Tidings of an Honest Chambermaid of
about Twenty four years of Age, being Fourten hand high, that goes a
Canterbury pace back-ward and foreward, mouths her game gently, and is painted
in the right cheek with A, that stands for Adultrate, and in the left cheek
with B, betokening Beauty, she has a black mark between her legs, of a
lacivious behavior, and it is thought young with Foale; being strayed from a
Lady in Covent Garden about a fort night since, If you meet with any such
Creature, leave word at the Piaza in the place aforesaid, or give notice to the
Crier, and you shall have a Danderly busse for their pains.

For that her loss does prove a great dissaster,
To ease the Lady, and to help her Master.
O yes, O yes, O yes,
If any man or Woman in Town, Country or City, can tell any Tale or Tidings of
about 300 two-legg'd Hackney Mares broake out of their pastures in Cole-yeard,
Soddom and Gommorrah, Dogg-yeard, Long-ace, Drury Lane, Roaguelane, May Pole
Alley, and some other placee adjacent, about two days before Bartholmew day,
and supposed to be taken up in Whore and Bacon lane, ^ulgarly called
Hosier-street, or in Cuckolds l^ne, so called Cow street, or in Diving Alley,
commonly called Duck-lane, or in any other chamber, shop, garret or celler
within the liberty of Cuckolds Pound, let them presently upon hearing this
Outcry, turn them out of doors, or send them home by the next Officer to
them, else they shall loose their Rent, for letting their rooms to such an
unlawful occupation, and ever after be accounted no better then Pimps for
their pains; You may know them by these marks; they are painted on both
cheeks, having rolling goggle Eyes, something bluish underneath, and most of
them burnt about their Docks, they have many other marks, as well as Jades
tricks to be known by, but these are sufficient, therefore it is expected that
you turn them presently out, or conduct them home by a Martialls man or Beadle,
as you will answer the contrary.

Those Cattel^ lately were so cheap and plenty,
Where you have one Whore now, you then had twenty.
O yes, O yes, O yes.
IF any Man or Woman in Town, Country or City can tell any tale or Tidings of a
Maidenhead of Two and Twenty years of age, lately lost, at Placeto between the
Hamm^ in Bedfordshire, let them bring word to the sign of the Dildoe in
Fucklers bury, or to the Devil over against Ro^gues Lane, not far from Pntle
Bar, and they shall be accounted Puppies for their pains.

For now that Maiden is a Maiden Queen,
Can keep her Maidenhead till Fourteen.
O yes, O yes, O yes.
IF any man or beast can tell any Tale or Tidings of one Mrs. Anne Quiet, lost
a long time since, she being thought to be departed the land with one Mrs.
Faith Hope, and Mrs. Prudence Charity, she is of a lowly, meek, humble Nature,
of a constant Mind, a brown hair, sparkling eye, rose-coloured cheek, cherry
lip, violet veins on her neck, breathes sweeter then Arabianspices, her
breasts like two little Mountains of Snow, her Heart an Altar to the gods, her
pray'^s the Incence, her belly, Virtues Mint, from whence all Arts and Sciences
have their Birth, her thighs like two Colossus, or Herculian Pillars, her
Legs like Alabaster T^ins, her Feet,

That do support this glorious Frame
Does want a Figure to describe the same.
O yes, O yes, O yes.
IF any Man or Woman in Town, Country or City can tell any tale or Tidings of a
Woman's Tongue lately lost in a Brawle at Billing-gate, it is of a very nimble
and perpetual motion, of a sharp, shrill thundering voice, of a blackish
yellow bloody color, something speckled and forked at the butt-end, also much
swelled near the throat; if ye find any such Beast, bring word to the
tongue-wright near Execution wharf, or to Squire Dun at the place aforesaid,
and ye shall hear a Juniper Lecter, in Billings-gate Nonsense, and have a mess
of maundring Broth, with a dish of Carpe and Powts, served in with Vinegar and
Mustard sauce for your pains.

For nothing like this black unruly tongue,
For which fair Virtue often suffers wrong.
O yes, O yes, O yes.
If her can tell her any Tale or Tidings of her cood Cofin Shinkin ap Shone,
Shentleman of Wales, by her Mystery, a Vermin-chaser, with creat Pigg Peard,
more like her Gooses tail then her Goats whiskers, her is armed with two
Spanish Pike on her sleeve, and Podkin in her hand, was very Valliant against
her Enemy, which her kill with Crack of her nail, or at least give her ploody
nose, as all her Countrymen can tell, her dwell near St. Clements in the
Strand, having creat pigg shop, and is strayed away above two whole Week ago,
none but St. Taffie knows whether.

But before her would loose her cood Cousin Shonn;
Her vows, for Tosted Cheese, to eat the Mo^ne.
FINIS.

