Title page enclosed within a decorative border of printer's flowers. A Brief
EXPOSITION WITH Practical Observations UPON The Whole Book OF ECCLESIASTES. By
that late pious and worthy Divine, Mr. JOHN COTTON, Pastor of Boston in
New England.

PUBLISHED, By ANTHONY TUCKNEY, D.D. Master of St. John's College in Cambridge.

LONDON, Printed by T. C. for Ralph Smith at the Bible in Cornhill. 1654.



To the Right Worshipful, Mr. George Caborn, Mayor; With the Aldermen,
Common Counsel, Ministers, and the rest of my Christian friends of Boston in
Lincolnshire.
Dearly Beloved,
THe large interest which I have long enjoyed in your favor, and which you
must ever have in my heart, has imboldened me to prefix your names to this
Piece; and with the more confidence of your acceptance, because in it an
address is made to you at once by two, who sometimes were together your
Ministers in the Gospel of Christ: by the ever to be honored Mr. Cotton in the
Book, and by my unworthy self, in the review and Dedication of it: Both now
removed from you. The one, first to a remote part of the world, there to plant
Churches; and thence (after that happy work done) to heaven: The other, to some
more public service nearer hand: in which I humbly crave the best help of
your prayers, as you are constantly remembered in mine; and that with more
strength of affection, whilst I often call to mind those most comfortable days,
in which I enjoyed the happiness of joint Ministry with so able and faithful a
Guide; and both of us so much satisfaction and encouragement from a people so
united in the love both of the truth, and of one another. The first Chapters of
both his Epistles to them.
I cannot read what Paul writes of his Thessalonians, but I think I read over
what we then found in Boston. They were then very happy days with you, when
your faith did grow exceedingly, and your love to Christ's Ordinances,
Ministers, servants, and to one another abounded. Although your Town be situate
in a low Country, yet God then raised your esteem very high, and your eminency
in Piety over-topped the height of your steeple; your name was as an ointment
poured out, Cant. 1.3.
and your renown went forth for that beauty and comeliness which God had put
upon you. Ezekiel. 16.14.
How it is now with you, at this distance, I cannot so well judge; only I desire
you would please seriously to consider whether the new wine or the old he
better, and ever think that best which does not intoxicate us into staggering
from the Truth, and falling off from one another: but so cheareth the heart, as
yet makes us humble and meek, and keeps us close to God, his truth,
ordinances, the power of his grace, and all those duties, in which the
faithful among you formerly walked with God, met with peace, and at last
reached heaven. Such a frame of spirit, and way, I can remember, was sometime
among you; and as often as I remember it, I desire not to forget to praise God
for it. What was then your blessedness? Gal. 4.15.
And what then was, I humbly beseech God may so revive and continue, that you
may prove a little model, and fore-taste of that blessed Church, which God will
make an eternal excellency, Isai. 60.15.
and a joy of many generations. This you and I have the more cause to desire
and endeavor, because

1. Miserum est fuisse, it is a great misery to have it said of us, that we
have been happy. Fuimus Troec, fuit Ilium, was but a sad word, and it is a
sadder thing for the Sun of righteousness which had sometime shone gloriously
upon any particular Church or people, at last to set in a cloud; if such a
light come to be darkened, how great is that darkness? after the light is put
out, the room proves darker then if it had never been set up; and the
remembrance of those former pleasant things once enjoyed, but afterward lost,
Lam. 1.7.
added to, and aggravated the Churches lamentation.

2. And yet such a lamentable condition has been and may be the lot of such
places and people which God sometimes has highly honored, when they have
grown fat and wanton together. Bethel has proved Bethaven; Hos. 10.5. 2 Kings
2. Judge. 8.8. Jer. 7.12.
in after times we find young profane mockers in Bethel, and scornful
neuters in Penuel. Go to Shiloh; think of the sometimes glorious Churches of
Asia. As Empires and Kingdoms, so particular Churches have had their periods. I
have sometimes on purpose visited some places where God had before planted his
Church and a faithful Ministry, to see if I could discern any footsteps and
remembrances of such a mercy; Prove. 24.31.
and lo they were all grown over with thorns, and nettles had covered the face
thereof, and the stone-wall thereof was broken down.

3. And which is more sad, in some of them never, in others very hardly built
up again: God proving severe, when we grow wanton, and so as he removes the
Candlestick when we play or fight by the light of the candle set up in it; Rev.
2.5.
so he is very hardly induced to light it again in that place where it has
once been wantonly or frowardly put out: there are more hopes of recovering a
particular person fallen, by virtue of an everlasting covenant made with him
(although he may go halting to his grave, and never here again rise up to his
former comforts and enlargements) but a particular Church or people (unless it
be that of the Jews, who in the great Jubilee after their rejection shall again
return to their former possessions) cannot claim the like privilege of such a
Covenant. Jer. 3.1, 12, 13, 14, 8, 4.
The Arc never returned to the same place from whence it was in a way of
judgment removed; and the glory of the Lord, when after its gradual removes,
was at last quite gone from the first Temple, was not fully restored in the
second till Christ's first coming; nor will it be in this their rejection, til
his second. I think there will be found very few instances of Gods presence and
ordinances long enjoyed by a people, and after abused and rejected, if
thereupon lost, easily (if at all) restored: Jud. v. 3.
the faith once delivered to the Saints, is not wont to be received or lost the
second time. The reason is, because a jealous God can least endure upon trial
made of him, to be slighted in that wherein he would most commend to us his
special love, and ever account's the rejecting of such special tokens of it as
a renouncing of himself. 2 Samuel 8.7
They have not rejected thee but me. And as the husband in the law pleaded some
uncleanness in his wife, Deuteronomy. 24.1.
when he put her away: so God makes account that we tell the world, that we
have found iniquity in him, Jer. 2.5.
when we go far from him, and walk after vanity, and that he has been a
wildernese and land of darkness, when we prove Lords, and will come no more at
him. Dear Friends, he has not been so to you, v. 31.
even your enemies being judges, and your own experience will bear witness for
him, that his Gospel, even in point of ontward advantage, has paid for its
entertainment. These thick cords of love therefore (I hope) will bind you close
to him, and strongly draw you off from whatever may be a means of drawing you
away from him, and so by your continuing to be planted in the house of the
Lord, and by you still flourishing in the Courts of our God, you will proclaim
to all, that he is upright, Psalm. 92.13, 14, 15.
and that there is no unrighteousness in him. These (Dearly beloved) are my
affectionate desires, and hopes of you; and yet in regard of the unsetledness
of these times, and the wildness of many men's spirits in them, you will pardon
me if I be be jealous over you with a godly jealousy, and that having this fit
opportunity, I take the boldness, by putting you in remembrance of what
sometimes you were, 2 Pet. 1.13. Rev. 2.4, 5 Rev. 3.2. 2 Timothy 1.13 Romans 6.17
to stir you up to keep warm your first love, and to do your first works: to be
watchful, and to strengthen the things that remain, especially if any be ready
to die. To hold fast the form of sound words, whereto you have been formerly
delivered, and to hold up the power of godliness;

In your selves, by the constant exercise of Faith, Repentance,
self-examination and humiliation, self-denial and mortification, etc.

In your public government, by reviving your ancient care and zeal for the
sanctifying of Gods Sabbaths, countenancing his Ministers and Ordinances, and
discountenancing whatever Doctrines or practices are contrary to the truth as
it is in Jesus, and the power of godliness.

In your Families, by private prayer, singing of Psalms, catechizing your
children and servants, training them up in Gods fear, and restraining them
from that pride, wantonness, and stubbornness, which your faithful Pastor (now
with God) was wont much to complain of, and which in these looser times, I
wish, you had not cause much more now to bewail.

Now the good Lord help you to stand up for God in your several places, and so
to serve your generations, Act. 13.36 2 Kings 20.19.
that peace and truth may be in your days: that in them your Sun may not go
down, but when ye are gathered to your fathers, in your hopeful and happy
posterity it may rise with greater strength and glory, as drawing nearer to a
more glorious day now approaching; that then another generation may not arise
after you, which shall not know the God of their fathers, Judge. 2.10.
and so the ages to come may be to seek for Samnium in Samnio, old Boston in
New. But on the contrary*

That your seed may be so known among the Gentiles, Isai. 63.9.
and your offspring among the people, that all that see them, may acknowledge
them to be the seed which the Lord has blessed.

That this may be the everlasting covenant which God shall make with you and
them, Isai, 59.21.
that his Spirit and word shall not depart out of your mouth, nor out of the
mouth of your seed, nor out of the mouth of your seeds seed, from hence forth
and for ever:

But that your Congregation may be a Zion, which God has chosen, and desired
for his habitation, of which he may say, Psalm. 132.13, 14.
This is my rest for ever, here will I dwell, for I have desired it: Is, and
(God enabling me) shall be the most hearty desire and prayer of him

Who desires to have no dominion over your faith, but to be an helper of your
joy, ANTHONY TVCKNEY
From St. John's College in Cambridge, July 7. 1654.
A BRIEF EXPOSITION UPON ECCLESIASTES.
THis whole Book is a Discourse not unseasonable for this Country, wherein men
that have left all to enjoy the Gospel, now (as if they had forgotten the end
for which they came hither) are ready to leave the Gospel for outward things;
which are here lively and clearly demonstrated to be vanity, yea, vanity of
vanities.

Obj. But were not something of Christ more proper for a Minister of the Gospel
to handle?

Ans. The way to stir us to seek after Christ, is to behold (and be convinced
of) the vanity of all things here below.

When Eve brought forth Cain, she hoped she had got the Promised seed, Genesis
4.1. with 3.15.

But when she saw by his spirit and carriage, that she was deceived in him, she
called her next son Abel, Genesis 4.2. which signifies vanity.

And so she must see all things to be, before she bring forth Seth, the Father
of the promised seed: Now Abel, or vanity, expresses the state of all the
creatures by the fall. And Solomon takes up Eves word, and amplifieth it,
vanity, yea, vanity of vanities. So this whole book is a Commentary upon the
state of corruption, Romans 8.20. A fit Introduction to Christ in the Canticles.

CHAP. 1. Ver. 1, 2. Ver. 1. The words of the Preacher the son of David, King
in Jerusalem. 2. Vanity of vanities, says the Preacher, vanity of vanities,
all is vanity.

THe chief good of the sons of men, which the moral Philosophers amongst
the Heathen sought after, but found not, Solomon in this book truly and fully
opens to us. The Philosophers being vain and wicked themselves, how could
they find or teach the true chief good? but this wise and good King, upon his
own experience, both found it himself, and taught us to find it after him.

The sum of his discourse stands upon these two points: 1. That the chief
good of the sons of men is not to be found in all the creatures under the
Sun, nor in men's labors and ways about them. For they are all vanity and
vexation of Spirit. 2. That it is to be found in the fear of God and keeping
his Commandments, Chap. 12. v. 13.

These two verses contain, First, the Title of the book; wherein the book is
set forth, 1. By the Author: 2. And he by, 1. His condition, Coheleth. 2. His
Lineage, the son of David. 3. By his Office, a King. 4. The place of his
government, in Jerusalem, v. 1.

Secondly, the Argument, or sum of his discourse, or at least of the former
part of it, v. 2. Wherein is set forth, 1. The condition of all things, by the
Adjunct of vanity, all is vanity. And this vanity is amplified by many
ornaments of Rhetorique:

1. An Hyperbole, vanity it self, for vain.

2. Polyptoton, vanity of vanities.

3. Epizeuxis, the like sound continued in the same sentence, vanity of
vanities.

4. Anadiplosis, (the same sound repeated in the end of one sentence, and the
beginning of the other) vanity of vanities, vanity etc.

5. Epanalepsis, (the same sound repeated in the beginning of the sentence, and
in the end, vanity etc. all is vanity.

6. Anaphora (the same sound repeated in the beginning of the sentences) vanity
etc. vanity etc.

7. Epistrophe (the same sound repeated in the end of the sentences) of
vanities etc. of vanities.

8. Epanodos (the same sound repeated in the beginning and midst, in the midst
and end) vanity, vanity, vanity.

9. Numerus Oratorius, t(he same number of syllables repeated in both
sentences) vanity of vanities, vanity of vanities.

10. Climax, (the same sound continued and increased by degrees) vanity of
vanities, vanity of vanities etc.

11. Paranomasia, (the repeating of like sounds, yet somewhat differing.)

2. This confirmed by the Testimony of Coheleth, says the Preacher, verse. 2.

Chap. 1. Verse. 1, 2.
THe words of Coheleth] Solomon had four names. Solomon, Jedidiah, Lemuel,
Coheleth, 2 Samuel 12.24, 25. Prove. 31.1, 4. and the Text. This name Coheleth is
only given him in this Book, when after long experience of all earthly
vanities, he in his old age speaks to wean his people from them, and teaches
them the fear of the Lord for their chief good.

It is a participle of a verb out of use in the Active voice, yet in the
Passive used to signify, to be gathered, or assembled; whence (...) a
Congregation; (...) then being a Noune or Participle of the Feminine gender,
may imply to us these three things:

First, Solomon's gathering him self to the Church and Assembling therewith,
when yet his wives, and many other Idolaters with them assembled to the
Conventicles, and Synagogues of false gods.

Secondly, That in this true Church assembled, he was Anima concionans; in haec
verba, he spoke these words, or delivered them in the Congregation, by word or
writing, as a testimony of his repentance: which may also further appear if we
consider,

1. What he says by his experience of the dangerousnesse of enticing women,
even his own; and of his deliverance out of their hands, as being beloved of
God, Eccles. 7.26, 27, 28.

2. The frame of the whole book which speaks sadly of the bitterness of all
earthly vanities, after his long experience of all of them in his old age.

Thirdly, that he delivered these things from his heart and soul, not out of
any policy of State, to satisfy the people. Psalm. 68.11. Esaias 40.9.

So the Feminine gender is expounded, Psalm. 16.2.

Use 1. To persuade us of Solomon's repentance after his fall. Such as think he
fell finally and totally, are not only hereby refuted, but by all those
arguments which prove the perseverance of the Saints, which are many and
impregnable; And besides by such other arguments as more peculiarly concern
Solomon himself, as

1. Our Saviors testimony, that all the Prophets are in heaven, Luke 13.28.

Now Solomon was a Prophet, seeing the whole Scripture was penned by no other
but Prophets and Apostles, 2 Pet. 1.19, 20, 21. Ephesians. 2.20.

Balaam, though he prophesied, as did also Saul, yet neither of them were
Prophets, a spirit of prophecy rested not upon them. Ios. 13.22.

2. He is said to be loved of God, and therefore by Gods own appointment to be
named Jedidiah, 2 Samuel 12.25.

Now Gods love is the pledge, as of Jacobs election, Romans 9.13. so of Solomon's;
God is not wont to give names to things but according as he finds them, or
purposes to make them; Whom he loves, he loves to the end, John 13.1. To say
that was only meant in regard of not taking the Kingdom from him, and his
Posterity, as he did from Saul, is to wrest the Text, which promises 1. That
he will be a father to him. 2. For his person, that he will not take his mercy
from him. 3. For his kingdom, that it shall not be taken away.


Use 2. To teach us to accept this book with greater respect. The Sun never
shines more gloriously then when it breaks forth out of some dark cloud: nor
the graces of Gods Spirit, then when they have over-wrested some cloud of
Temptations and sins, and break forth into Repentance. So was it with David
also in Psalm 51.

The son of David] which he mentions in sundry respects.

First, it is honorable to be the son of a Prince, Eccles. 10.17.

Secondly, it procures the more reverence, a Prophet to be the son of a
Prophet.

Thirdly, It is comfortable to be the son of a man after Gods own heart, for
the Covenants sake, Genesis 17.7. and especially of David, for the promise sake
made to him, and to his seed after him, 2 Chro. 7.11, to 15.

Use 1. To procure reverent acceptance of the Doctrine of this book for the
Penmans sake. For though it little skilleth what the pen be, of a Goose or
Swans quil, or Ravens, yet when God delights to use such an instrument, so
richly adorned with many privileges, it challenges from us the more due
respect. It is a book written by the eldest son of Wisdom.

Use 2. To teach parents that send their children to the University, to seek to
excel in eminency of grace, and love amongst men. It will add some luster and
credit to their childrens ministry, as Zachary and Elizabeth's godliness (
Luke 1.6.) did to John Baptist, and David's to Solomon's.

King in Jerusalem] King as having sovereign power of life and death; to whom
it belonged to be as a head to counsel, and direct, and rule the people; to be
also as a shepherd to feed the people with wholesome laws and institutions, and
examples of good life, and to drive them from feeding in unwholesome Pastures
upon unsavory vanities.

In Jerusalem] the City of God, the mother Church of Israel, then a faithful
City, full of faithful and good people, though afterward an harlot.

He does not say, King of Israel, as Prove. 1.1. but in Jerusalem: intimating
that his conversing in this faithful City, amongst so many good people, was
some means the sooner to bring him to a sight of his sin, and to enditing and
penning these words, which show his repentance.

It could not be but that Solomon must needs read in the countenances of his
people, when he came abroad to Church and Judgment Seat, and hear likewise by
intelligence of his wise Counselors, how much the Citizens of Jerusalem were
grieved with his building Idolatrous Temples, and tolerating false worship in
them: The which might well provoke him to a more serious sight of his sin, and
to make mention of the City in the words that show his repentance. Besides, in
a Penitential discourse, the full latitude of titles is unseasonable.

Use 1 To show us that God uses instruments of all sorts in penning the
Scriptures, as well some Kings, (as David and Solomon) as some Fishermen, (as
amongst the Apostles) and Herdsmen, (as Amos,) and Priests (as Jeremy:) that
all sorts might meet with style and phrase of speech meet for them.

Use 2. That it is no disgrace to any man, or to any man's children, to be
Preachers; Solomon and David, both Kings and both Prophets; yea Solomon
studying to teach the people knowledge, Eccles. 12.9.10. The Angels, higher
then the highest men, are all ministering spirits, etc. Heb. 1.14.

Use 3. It is no unbeseeming Office for Kings to write good books, or to
publish their repentance after their public sins, Psalm. 51.

Use 4. To let us see what a benefit it is for a Minister or Magistrate to live
amongst good people; They mutually help one another to avoid sin, and to come
out of it.

Use 5. To add still the more due respect to this book, penned by a King, and
a King of the Church of God.

Use 6. To teach Penitents, not to affect the expression of Titles or styles of
honor at large.

Chap. 1. Verse. 2. Vanity of vanities, says the Preacher, vanity of vanities,
all is vanity.


VAnity of vanities, etc.] The Logical and Rhetorical resolution of these
words, is delivered above in opening the first Use.

Doct. 1. All things under the Sun (whether creatures of God, or labors of
men) are altogether vain, to the attaining of true happiness: Or thus, Are
excessively, diversely, wonderfully vain. The chief things which men seek for
in this life, are vain in a threefold respect:

1. To find the chief good in them.

2. To satisfy the soul, Esaias 55.22.

3. To make that good they are made for of themselves, Psalm. 33.17.

For the gathering of this point from the true meaning of the Text, compare
this place with Verse 3.14. and Chap. 2. verse. 3. In this sense Paul calls all
things loss (dross, dung) Phil. 3, 7, 8. to wit, not only without Christ, or
in comparison of him, but for the attainment of Christ or true happiness.

The ground of this point may be most sitly showed in opening the several
acceptions of vanity in the Scripture, and observing how they all agree in all
things in the world in this respect. Vanity is put for

1. Unprofitablenesse, as here verse. 2, 3. Mal. 3.14. which agrees to worldly
things, Mat. 16.26. A man may have the whole world, and lose his soul; and
then what profit did they yield him? Prove. 11.4.

2. Emptiness, Psalm. 2.1. 1 Cor. 3.20. Vain, that is, void of substance and
worth and sufficiency. So Esaias 36.5. to which also agrees [ Esaias 29.8.) Esaias
55.2

3. Lightness, Psalm 62.9. which is also true, Deuteronomy. 32.47. The like may be
said of all earthly things in this case.

4. Falsehood and lying, Psalm. 12.2. and 4.2. which also holds here, Psalm.
31.6. Jonah 2.8.

5. Frustration or disappointment of the end, Psalm. 127.1, 2. Unless the Lord
build and keep the house and City, the builders and watchmans care will fall
short of the end they aim at, and so the work is in vain, James 1.26. 1 Cor.
15.14.

6. Frailty or inconstancy, vanishing away as smoke, Romans 8.20, 21. Psalm.
144.4. Esaias 40.6, 7, 8.

7. Iniquity, 2 Chronicles. 13.7. Prove. 12, 11.

8. Folly, Job 11.12. Prove. 12.11.

Reasons of the vanity of those former ends.

1. From the end for which God made them (to wit) for us, not us for them, 1
Cor. 3.22.

2. From their condition, they are corporal, temporal and therefore cannot
feed, much less satisfy an eternal spirit, Luke 12.19, 20.

3. From the curse lying upon them since the fall, Genesis 3.17.

Reasons of the Repetition of this vanity; and the Holy Ghosts manner of speech
in expressing this vanity.

1. To show the excessivenesse of the vanity of these earthly things.

Vanity implies they are not only vain, but exceedingly vain; as vain as
vanity it self.

Vanity of vanities, is in the Hebrew a Superlative form of speech, to set
forth the highest vanity; as the Song of Songs, the most excellent Song; the
King of Kings, the Servant of Servants, the chiefest King, the most servile
servant.

2. To show, the multitude and variety of vanities heaped up in earthly things.
There is a rest (as it were) of vanity in them; or as Sampson speaks in another
case, Judge. 15.16. heaps upon heaps.

3. For admiration. To show the wonderful and strange vanity of these things,
he breaks forth into this Exclamation, Oh vanity of vanities, etc.

Use 1. To show us what a great change sin makes in the world; it does as it
were blast the virtue and beauty of the creature.

Time was before sin entered, when God saw all the creatures to be very good,
Genesis 1 31. Now after sin had blown upon them, he looked upon them again, and
all is vanity; Such a change will sin make in us, and in our counsels and
courses.

Use 2. To show us what a woeful change they make that fell their souls to
commit sin for any earthly benefits, which are but vanity, Jonah 2.8. Esaias
5.18. Temptations from earthly things may draw on sin like cart-ropes, but they
are the cart-ropes of vanity. And so do they that change the Ordinances of God
for accommodations which are under the Sun.

Use 3. To show us the vanity of men beyond all creatures, Psalm. 119.89. He for
whose sake all the rest became vain, is much more vain himself, Psalm 62.5. He
is lighter then vanity, Esaias 40.17.

Use 4. To teach us not to set our hearts on earthly things: Psalm 62.10.
neither by 1. Coveting them before we have them, Prove. 23.4, 5. 2. Confidently
trusting in them, or proudly rejoicing in them when we have them, Job 31.24,
25. 3. Grief when we part from them, Job 1.21.


Use 5. To exhort us to lay up better treasure then these earthly vanities,
Matthew. 6.19, 20.

Use 6. For a sign of trial of our repentance; such as see nothing but glory,
and goodlinesse in these outward things, Satan has bewitched them, Mat. 4, 8.
But such as see the extreme vanity of them, have repented with Solomon here.

Use 7. To teach us, It is no vanity to teach the vanity of the creatures in
Rhetorical elegancies; here are many Tropes of Rhetoric used; so Romans 12.5.
With these Cautions: 1. That the Rhetoric be suitable to the matter, grave and
holy; else its bastard Rhetoric. 2. That it set forward the end of the
discourse, to wit, to affect the heart with the sense of the matter in hand.


Eccles. 1.2, 3, to 11. Verse. 2. Vanity of vanities, says the Preacher, vanity
of vanities, all is vanity.


IN that Solomon sets the seal of his testimony to the vanity of all these
earthly things, after the long trial of them, observe this:

Doctr. They that have had most trial of all earthly comforts, are most ready
and best able to avouch the vanity of them.

Who could haste more to outward things, then Solomon; and yet more confident
in avouching the vanity of them?

Reason 1. Experience is a divine testimony, as being taken from the work of
God in the events of things coming to pass by providence.

Reason 2. Experience is of great authority with men, as being an argument more
sensible, and less subject to ignorance or error.

Use. To show us a broad difference of earthly things from spiritual and
heavenly; earthly things seem goodly and glorious, till we have them and good
trial of them, and afterward we find them altogether vanity: But heavenly
things seem vanity till we have them, and good trial of them, then seem they
excellent and divine; no gain, no glory, no comfort like to that which they
yield.

Before we leave this verse, let us remove a false Collection which one makes
from this word: That Reading is Preaching, because Solomon calls his book
(though read) the Preacher.

But for Answer, consider, 1. Solomon does not call his book, but himself the
Preacher.

2. He might from hence collect, that the Preacher may deliver his Sermon by
writing, and so that writing may be preaching; but that reading therefore is
preaching, follows not. For in writing a Minister may and does make use of
spiritual gifts requisite in a Prophet or Preacher, to the exercise of his
ministry, 1 Cor. 14.1. but not so in reading; which even a Schoolboy may
perform, that never attained any spiritual gift at all.

Verse. 3. What profit has a man of all the labor which he has under the Sun?
Labor under the Sun] is labor taken about the creatures, or things under the
Sun; For the labor a man takes for the favor of God, the fellowship of the
Blood and Spirit of Christ, etc. is labor for things above the Sun. Whence
such are said to converse in heaven, Phil. 3.20. and to walk with God, Genesis
5.24.

What profit] To wit, toward the attaining of true happiness; otherwise, in
all labor there is some profit toward the helping of our earthly estates,
Prove. 14.23.

This verse is an (...) or dwelling upon the former conclusion, of the vantity
of all things delivered in the former verse, and here repeated in other words
more plainly.

Doctr. All the labor a man takes (whether of mind or body) about the
creatures under the Sun, is altogether unprofitable toward the attainment of
true happiness, Chap. 2.22. and 3.9.

Reasons from the disproportion of these creatures to our happiness.

Reas. 1. All these creatures are under the Sun; but our happiness is above
it. Now as water can never ascend higher, nor carry any other thing higher then
the fountain from whence it came; so neither can things below the Sun carry us
up to a condition above the Sun.

2. These creatures are temporal, our happiness eternal, 2 Cor. 4.17, 18.

3. These things are changeable and unsettled, but our happiness unchangeable.

Use 1. To wean us from immoderate labor after these things which cannot
profit; It many times falls out that those things which we labor most to
avoid, are the most behovefull to attainment of happiness: as Afflictions,
Psalm. 119.67, 71.

Use 2. To stir up to labor principally for heavenly blessings, things above
the Sun, Esaias 55.1, 2, 3. 1 Cor. 15.58.

Eccles. 1.4, 5. to 11. Verse. 4. One generation passes away, and another
generation comes: but the earth abides for ever. 5. The Sun also arises,
and the Sun goes down, and hastneth to the place where he arose.

THat which Solomon taught us in the former verse, the unprofitablenesse of all
labor about worldly things toward the attainment of happiness, he confirms
in the rest of this Chapter, and the rest which follow, by induction of sundry
sorts of labors, wherein men usually weary themselves, but in vain. And first
he begins with the vanity of the labor of the mind, about the study of
natural things, which in this whole Chapter he shows to be unprofitable to
the attainment of happiness, by two Reasons.

1. The first taken from the want of such things as accompany true happiness,
to wit, stability, satiety, newness in natural things. The Reason stands
thus:

The knowledge and study of such things as want stability, satiety, newness,
is unprofitable to the attainment of true happiness. But the knowledge and
study of such things, is of such things as want stability, satiety, novelty.

This want of stability he proved by the state

1. Of bodies mixed of the four Elements, which are generable and corruptible,
come and go, verse. 4.

2. Of the four Elements. 1 Of the Sun, the Chariot of fire, verse. 5. 2 Of the
wind or air, verse. 6. 3 Of the water, verse. 7. 4 Only the earth stands
still in the midst of all these restless motions. 1 Partly as a center about
which these move. 2 Partly as a Theater upon which every generation comes and
goes, verse. 4.



Whence, though it be stable, yet we want stability in it, which is all one to
us, as if it were not stable.

Their want of Satiety he shows, verse. 8.

Their want of Novelty, verse. 9, 10, 11.

2. The second Reason is taken from his own experience, verse. 12. to the end of
the chapter.

Doct. 1. Such things as come by generation stand not at a stay, but pass away
[passe away by corruption.] Job 14.1, Psalm. 49.7, 8, 9. Josh. 23.14. 1 Kings
2.2.

Reason 1. From the causes in nature whereof they are generated, which are the
four Elements, and they contrary one to another. Now contrary things being
divided one against another, make the whole body of short continuance, one
wasting another, till all fail, Mat. 12.25. Heat against cold, and moisture
against dryness, work continually one against another, till all be consumed.

Besides, in living creatures the disproportion between Calor naturalis and
Humidum radicale, causes dissolution; the food received breeds not such
kindly heat and moisture as is daily spent, but a more mild heat, and more raw
moisture.

Obj. How then could Adams life be maintained for ever, if he had stood in
innocence?

Answ. By the Almighty power of God subduing and keeping these contrary
qualities in a sweet temper and harmony, even by the same hand whereby he kept
the wild beasts from preying upon the tame, allowing them to eat nothing but
grass, Genesis 1.30.

Reas. 2. From the curse which sin brought with it, even the bondage of
corruption upon the Creature, Romans 6.23. and 8.20, 21. It is commonly said of
the Oak that it lives three hundred years; growing one hundred, standing at a
stay another hundred, and decaying the next hundred. The holy Ghost records
of the Patriarchs that they lived many hundreds, Genesis 5.

Priny out of Hesiod describes nine ages to the Crow; sometimes as much more
to the Heart, and yet three times as much more to the Raven, Not. Hist. lib. 7.
c. 48.

But yet all these being compounded and generated of the four Elements, do in
the end return into them again by dissolution and corruption.

Use 1. To teach us (that which is Solomon's scope) that the study of these
natural things, is not available to the attainment of true happiness; For how
should that which is restless (and as Solomon's word is; full of labor)
procure us settled rest and tranquillity, which accompanies true happiness?
The mind of man, as Philosophers have observed, is somewhat assimilated into
the nature of the Object which it studieth, and is conversant about: as
Mariners who are conversant about winds, and seas, and storms are more
boisterous. Shepherds and Herds-men more brutish, Forresters more wild,
Butchers more bloody, etc. So the study of these restless creatures leaves
the mind more restless.

In particular, the Study and Knowledge of the passing away of one Generation
after another, shows us our mortality and misery, and thereby yeildeth us
grief and vexation, but no relief if we rest there.

Use 2. To exhort us to lift up our hearts to true wisdom, by the consideration
of this unsetlednesse of our Estates, Psalm. 90.10. 12. Deuteronomy. 32.29. Prepare for
a change, it is a coming, Heb. 13.14. Micah 2.10.

Use 3. To exhort to weanednesse in our present condition, and contentment in
all Estates, 1 Cor. 7.29, 30, 31.

Use 4. To exhort to fruitfulness in good things whilst we here abide, 2 Pet.
1.13, 14, 15.

Doct. 2. As one Generation passes away, so another comes.

The Sun sets and arises the same again; Trees may be cut down, and yet
spring again; not so we, but others come in our place Job. 14.7. to 10.

Reas. 1. God will always have his Church to call upon him in this world,
whilst the world stands.

Reas. 2. God will have the elder generations to instruct and govern the
younger, and the younger to yield reverence and obedience to the elder, which
cannot be, unless one generation be coming on as another passes away.

Use 1. To refute the Pythagorean dotage of returning of the same persons again
many years after their death.

Use 2. To stir up the Generations passing away to be helpful to the generation
coming on, in good counsels, instructions, examples, etc. Psalm. 71, 18. and
78.3, 4. Isay. 38.18, 19.

Use 3. To teach the younger sort as they come after, so to make some benefit
of their Ancestors going before, observing whatsoever was commendable in them,
and imitating it; and eschewing whatsoever was evil and dangerous, Zach. 1.5, 6.

Doct. 3. Though one generation passes away, and another comes on; yet the
Earth abides for ever.

As one harvest is gathered another comes, yet the earth or soil still
remains, stands:

Rea. 1. Gods word establishing it, and that even upon nothing Psalm 33.9. Job
26.7.

Use 1. Against Copernicus his opinion of the Revolution of the earth, and the
standing still of the Sun, Psalm 19.5: and 119.90: If the earth moved swiftly,
when a man throws a stone, the same way the earth moves, he might easily
overtake the stone before it fell: or (it may be) standing still, the earth
speedily moving would carry him so far, as to be under the stone when it should
fall.

Use 2. To moderate our desires after the earth, and earthly things, which we
must leave behind us, and cannot carry away with us, 1 Timothy 6, 7, 8. Psalm
49.17.

Use 3. To reprove our unstayednesse to stand in good ways, though the word of
God have been as well spoken to us as to the earth, which yet stands
according to his word, Jeremiah 5.22, 23.

Use 4. To exhort to the building of our hopes of salvation upon Gods word,
which will establish them for ever, when other grounds will fail us.

Eccles. 1.5. to 11.
DOct. 1. The knowledge of such things as are full of labor, and empty of
yiedling satisfaction to the mind, and of variety or newness, is unprofitable
to the attainment of true happiness.

This is the ground upon which Solomon builds the unprofitablenesse of the
labor of the mind about the knowledge of natural things.

1. They are full of labor or restless motion, verse. 8.

2. They yield no satisfying to the eye and ear, which are the senses of
discipline. 1. The one by observation. 2. The other by instruction.


3. There is no newness or variety in them, which arguing would not hold,
unless this Doctrine be presupposed as a ground.

Reason of it from the nature of such things wherein true blessedness stands.

They are such, as

1. Are at rest; he makes it our safety to rest in peace and tranquillity,
Esaias. 30.7.15.

The favor of God, the blood of Christ, the fellowship of Gods spirit, the
word of promise, the Covenant of grace and peace. But natural things which are
themselves in perpetual motion, they leave our minds restless.

2. Do satisfy the mind and heart of a Christian; his eye would ever see the
favor of God, and the light of his countenance shining upon him; his ear would
ever hear the things belonging to his peace.

The eye or ear not to be satisfied, with such or such things, implies either

1. That a man cares not to see or hear any more of them, as having enough of
them, and yet would have something besides them, as being not contented with
them; so it is meant here, Esaias 55.1, 3.

But on the contrary, in heavenly things a man having true and full contentment
in them, yet desires to partake more and more of them, John 4.14. Matthew. 5.6.
Psalm. 42.1, 2. For such things do yield true satisfaction to the eye, and
ear, and taste, when as a man is desirous always to see and hear, and taste
the same. And so is it in heavenly things: the more we taste of them, the more
we desire them, and yet are fully satisfied and contented with them.

Secondly, that a man not having enough of that he sees and hears, would
have more of it, and yet cannot attain it, and thereupon is vexed: as
Aristotle, not fully comprehending the course of Euripus, is said to have cast
himself into it; and so is it also meant here in sundry difficulties of
natural things.

Thirdly, Are new; full of fresh and sweet variety of newness: To a new
creature, behold all things become new, 2 Cor, 5, 17, Not only within him, new
mind new judgment, new conscience, new heart, new affections, (new joys,
fears, griefs, cares, desires, etc.) new speeches, new life; But also without
him, new company, etc.

Yea those things he busieth himself about, they yield him continually new
matter to be refreshed withal: The favor of God, the blood of Christ, the
fellowship of the Spirit, the more they are heard or seen, the more novelty
they are to us; the Word the oftener read, still yields us more knowledge, new
comfort, etc. Paul speaks not of the estate of glory, but of grace, when he
says, Eye has not seen, nor ear heard such things, 1 Cor. 2.9. The natural
man never perceived them (and therefore as Paul reasons, the Princes of this
world could not devise such things to keep people in awe) they are new when
they are first perceived of the godly; and they feel a new, fresh, sweet
savor in them, as often as the seeing or hearing of them is renewed, Lam. 3.23.

Use 1. To wean us from placing our happiness in the study of the creatures:
There is no rest in them, no satisfaction to the mind, no such newness, as in
those things wherein true happiness stands. Some of the Philosophers placed
happiness in contemplation (meaning of the creatures) but shows they were
deceived. Many a man thinks, that if he could attain to the knowledge and
mysterse of this or that trade he should need no more good. But it is even with
trades, as with the creatures, they are full of labor, and yet empty of
satisfying the mind, empty of newness.

Use 2. To exhort to the study and searching out of the favor of God, the
blood of Christ, the grace of his Spirit, the Word of God, etc. These will
answer our hearts with rest, and fullness, and newhesse of comfort and
contentment.

Use 3. For trial of our happiness, whether we have made right choice of it;
if we bend our studies and labors upon things that are full of labor, and yet
empty of satisfying the mind with contentment and newness, we have misplaced
our happiness.

But if we find rest, and satisfaction, and newness in the things we are
conversant about; it is a sign we have chosen heavenly things to place our
happiness in. A right choice.

From the Suns motion, verse. 5. observe

First, (against Coperni us) that the Sun stands not still, but the earth,
Psalm. 19.5.

Secondly, against the opinion of such that do think the Heavens and Planets
are moved by Intelligences. The same is here said to arise and go down, to
hasten, not to be carried or moved passively, Psalm. 19.5. the Sun is said
freely to run his course, or which is all one, to rejoice to run it.

Thirdly, the Sun is endued with life; for whatsoever stirs and moves it
self in his own place, is quick and lives.

There is a double life in things, yet coming short of sense: 1. Vegetative,
as the Plants and Herbs. 2. Locomotive, as in the Stars.

This also is employed in the order of the works of the Creation; where
proceeding from things less perfect to things more perfect, he mentions
Stars made the fourth day, and Herbs and Trees the third. The Stars therefore
mentioned to be created after some living things, have in themselves a more
perfect life.

From the Winds motion, verse. 6. observe

The freedom of the motion of Gods Spirit, blowing where it lists, John 3.8.

From the motion of the Rivers, verse. 7. observe.

First, the original of Fountains to spring from the Sea.

Aristotle's reason to the contrary, that water coveteth to run to the lowest
place: And if the water should have this vicissitude, of course from the
Fountains to the Sea, from the Sea to the Fountains; then the same place
should be higher and lower then it self; will not hold. For some parts of the
Sea are lower then the Fountains, and into them the Fountains send forth
their streams to run; other parts of the Sea are as high, or higher then the
Fountains, especially in great storms, when the waves seem to ascend up to
heaven, Psalm 107.26. And they by secret channels another way send forth
Springs of water to feed the Fountains.

Plato's Barathrum in the hollow Caverns of the earth, which he makes to be
the original of Fountains, is hence also refuted, unless he derive the
supplying of that Barathrum from the Sea.

Secondly, that the earth, through which the Sea waters pass to the
Fountains, does percolate and strain the Salt out of them; else, as the sea
waters are salt, so would also the Fountain waters be.

That some fountains of water are salt as the sea, arises from the openness
of the pores of the earth between the sea and them; which is also the cause of
the ebbing and flowing of some of them.

Thirdly, A pattern of thankful returning what we receive to the Fountain that
supplieth us; as we receive all blessings from God, so let us return all to him.

From the motion of all these together, observe

First, That all the Elements abhor idleness; the Sun (the chariot of fire)
the wind, the waters, are all in continual motion. And though the earth abide
and stand, yet it is continually fruitful, in breeding and nourcing such
things as abide upon it, and in it; an idle person, though made and fed of all
these, is like none of these; he lazily sitting or lying still, whilst they
continually move; diligence in our calling hinders not the happiness of the
resting of our hearts in God.

ECCLES. 1.9, 10, 11. 9. The thing that has been, it is that which shall be:
and that which is done, is that which shall be done: and there is nothing new
under the Sun. 10. Is there any thing whereof it may be said, See, this is new?
it has been already of old time, which was before us. 11. There is no
remembrance of former things, neither shall there be any remembrance of things
that are to come, with those that shall come after.

IN these words Solomon shows us the want of newness in these things under
the Sun, and from thence argues the unprofitableness of the study or
knowledge of them to the attaining of true happiness.

This want of newness, First, Is expressed in the end of the 9 verse, There is
no new thing under the Sun. Secondly, is amplified, 1. By particular Induction
of that which has been, and that which is done, they both shall be hereafter,
verse. 9.

Secondly, by an (...) dwelling upon the same point, affirming every thing that
now seems new, to have been in old time, verse. 10.

Thirdly, by removing an objection which is secretly implied, If these things
that seem new to us, have been in old time, How comes it we never heard of
them before? verse. 11. which is amplified by the like forgetfulness of things
now in after-ages, verse. 11.

The Doctrine of the ninth and tenth verses may be opened in handling this
point,

There is no new thing under the Sun.

It may seem a Paradox at first sight: for it may be said, what is that which
all men (like the Athenians) enquire after? News; if there be no new thing,
Acts 17.21. why are men taxed for hunting after new fashions in Apparel
(especially English men, as unfit to be suited as the changeable Moon) if there
be no new thing? will God again destroy the world with water? Genesis 9.11. was it
not a new thing for God to deliver the Law with lively voice from heaven? Deuteronomy.
4.32, 33. was it not a new thing, or shall it be again repeated, the Sun to
stand still, or to go back ten degrees? Jos. 10.13, 14. 2 Kings 20.11. A
Virgin to bear a Son? Jer. 31.22. Christ to be born, to die, to rise again, to
ascend? The holy Ghost to descend? The Apostles to preach and write the new
Testament? Are there not sundry Inventions of Art new, as Guns, Printing, and
the use of the Loadstone? was not the Gunpowder-treason new, without precedent
or former example?

To answer these, and such like doubts, many interpretations and limitations of
these words have been given, which were not worth rehearsing, as that of
Cajetan concerning Solomon, to reason from the Eternity of time to argue the
circular motion of natural bodies; and that alleged of Origin, touching
Plato's great year, of 49000 years, wherein he would have all the Stars to
come to the same Position, and so all things to return again in the same
course. But to touch only those which come nearer to the truth; Some have
thought (amongst whom Hierome) that all things now done, were first in Gods
Predestination; but though that be a truth, yet not pertinent here: For Gods
Predestination is above the Sun; and things done here according to it, are
new still under the Sun, as having never been done under the Sun before.
Besides, Gods Predestination was not in old time before us, but before all time.

Others understand the words, as denying new Arts; but what will they say of
the Art of Printing?

Others (as Pineda) understand it of no new happiness, nor any new way to
attain it.

But Solomon seems to speak of the want of new objects to eye and ear,
whence it comes to pass that they are not satisfied, verse. 8.

Others (and that rightly) conceive him to speak of natural things, and their
natural actions. Avicen. sup. Q. 91. A, 1.

For of these Solomon here discourses, to prove that happiness cannot be
found in the knowledge of these, because they are wanting in newness and
variety. As if he should say, Natura nihil molitur novi. Though upon this
particular occasion he seems to reach further, in denying newness to the
common affairs of men in the world.

For verse. 11. he denies remembrance of former things, which is not wont to be
taken up about natural bodies, or the actions of them, but especially about
men and their affairs.

And indeed in Civil matters there be the like manners of men now as of old;
the like causes and successes of war and peace etc. whence the knowledge of
History of former times is so much behovefull: so in Church matters, like
disposition of hypocrites, Matthew. 15.8, 9.

Like opposition to the truth by false teachers, 2 Timothy 3.8. 2 Pet. 3.1. Like
security, forerunning general judgments, Luke 17.26, to 30.

Ans 1. For answer therefore to the former doubts, Solomon speaks not of Gods
miraculous and extraordinary actions, whether of judgment or grace: such as
the drowning of the world, the standing of the Sun, the Birth and death of
Christ, the writing of the Scriptures, etc. 2 Pet. 3.4, 5, 6.

Ans. 2. He speaks of natural bodies, and the whole course of nature; nature
works now as from the beginning, Natura nihil molitur novi, but upon some
accidental defect, or superfluity in the matter.

Ans 3. The Artificial inventions of men, though they be new sometimes at
first, yet for the kind many of them have been before; and generally none of
them continue new long, but wax stale and old like other things, Psalm. 102.26.
Heb. 8.13.

Only God our happiness is always the same, Psalm. 102.27. Heb. 13.8. and ever
is new. Abraham's Covenant is still the New Covenant.

Use 1. To show us the emptiness of the knowledge of the creature to bring us
to happiness.

Where newness is wanting, sweetness and full contentment is wanting.

Use 2. To exhort to seek after the favor of God, the blood of Christ, the
fellowship of his Spirit, the knowledge of the word, etc. These things yield a
daily new freshness, 2 Cor. 5.17. Lam. 3.23.

Doct. 2. Matters of former times are buried in forgetfulness.

Reas. 1. Men's negligence to recount them, or to search after them.

Reas. 2. Men's unthankfulness, not rehearsing them to posterity.

Reas. 3. Emulation, envying the propagation of others good name.

Reas. 4. Gods just judgment, cutting off the memory of some persons and
things from off the earth.

Use 1. Not to wonder, though so many things seem new to us, which yet have
been before, seeing former things are forgotten.

Use 2. Not to seek our own glory, in this or that good work, to be talked of
when we are gone. For we and our works shall be forgotten.

Use 3. To exhort to godliness, which brings an everlasting good name, Prove.
10.7. Psalm. 112.6.

Eccles. 1.12, 13, 14, 15. 12. I the Preacher was King over Israel in
Jerusalem. 13. And I gave my heart to seek and search out by wisdom, concerning
all things which are done under Heaven: this sore travel has God given to the
sons of man, to be exercised therewith. 14. I have seen all the works that are
done under the sun, and behold, all is vanity and vexation of spirit. 15. That
which is crooked cannot be made straight: and that which is wanting cannot be
numbered.

NOw follows in these verses the second Argument, whereby Solomon proves the
vanity and unprofitablenesse of the study and knowledge of Gods works in nature
to the attainment of happiness thereby; taken from his own experience. Where
observe.

First, his study of the creatures; and that set forth.

1. By the opportunity he had thereto; he was then King over Israel in
Jerusalem, verse. 12.

It was not when he was a child, but when a King, and endued with extraordinary
wisdom; yea, a King of a wise people, Deuteronomy. 4.6. and in Jerusalem the Oracle
of wisdom.

2. By the diligence he used therein; seen

1. In the subject he employed in the study, his heart; I gave my heart to it.
2. In the act, seeking, searching. 3. In the instrument or guide he used, By
wisdom. 4. In the object he was conversant about in those studies, I gave my
heart to seek and search out by wisdom concerning all things that are done
under heaven, (to wit) all the works of God in nature.
3. By the Calling he had thereto, verse. 13.

Secondly, his verdict or sentence of all upon his study and search, All is
vanity, verse. 14.

Thirdly, the reason of such his sentence; the insufficiency of such knowledge
to streighten things crooked, or to supply defects.

Doctr. 1. To study the nature and course, and use of all Gods works, is a duty
imposed by God upon all sorts of men; from the King that sits upon the
Throne to the Artificer.

This sore travel has God given to the sons of men, even to Kings also,
verse. 12, 13. Prove. 25.2.

Reas. 1. Gods glory which is seen in the creatures, Psalm 19.1. and 145, 10.
Romans 1.20. It is a disgrace to a good workman not to look at his work, but to
slight it.

Reas. 2. Our own benefit; both of body for health, as in the knowledge of many
medicinal things; and of soul for Instruction, which may be learned from the
creatures; and of the estate for gain, when we know the worth and use of each
thing.

Use 1. To reprove the streight-heartednesse of most, who study no further the
creatures, then for necessity or pastime. The Gentleman only observes so much
of the nature of Dogs, and Hawks, and Phesants, and Partridges, etc. as
serves for his game. The Tradesman looks only at the nature and use of such
things as whereby he gets his living, whether Sheep, Beasts, Skins, Wool,
Spices, Fishes, Foul, etc.

But studying the nature of all things, which by observation and conference men
might learn one of another, would enlarge our hearts to God, and our skill to
usefulness to our selves and others.

Rich men have more means, and poor men more vacancy to seek and get this
knowledge; how justly then are both reproved for wanting heart to it? Prove.
17.16. Yea Scholars here are not to be excused, who study only some general
causes and properties of the creatures, as the principles of natural bodies,
their motion, time, place, measure, etc. but neglect to apply their studies to
the nature and use of all things under heaven.

Doctr. 2. Those businesses which God sets us about, we are to set our
hearts and best endeavors upon them. God laid this sore travel upon men, and
Solomon gave his heart to seek and search, etc.

Reas. 1. Gods wholly we are, and therefore to employ our whole selves at his
appointment.

Reas. 2. His blessing is upon the Industrious; his curse upon the negligent,
Prove. 10.4. Ier. 48.10.

Reas. 3. All the opportunity we have of taking pains to any profitable use,
is in this life, Eccles. 9, 10. Time spends fast, and should be redeemed,
Ephesians. 5.15, 16.

Use. To reprove slacknesse and idleness in any Calling; whether the study of
nature or other. It is not for men to say they have nothing to do, or to stand
idle, because no man has hired them, Matthew, 20:6, 7. Behold a world of
creatures for thee to study upon. If God lay a sore travail upon the sons of
men, it is not for Kings to neglect it, but even they to give their hearts this
way.

Doctr. 3. Such as speak by experience, speak with authority. As Solomon here,
verse. 14. Acts 4.20.

Three things give authority to speech:

1. Experience.

2. A good calling from God, Amos 7.10, to 17.

3. The Spirit of God, and we speaking in the evidence of it, 1 Cor. 2.4. Acts
8, 13. Matthew. 7.29.

Use 1. To teach young men who want experience, to be the more modest in
speech, Job 32.6, 7.

Use 2. To Teach Ministers especially to know by experience the power of the
Gospel, and grace of God in themselves, and then teach it to others.

Doctr. 4. They that have best experience of the knowledge of the creature,
find both the creatures and the knowledge of them vain and unprofitable to the
attainment of happiness, yea tending rather to the vexation of the spirit,
verse. 14.

For the Philosophers by the wisdom gathered from the creatures, knew not God
in the wisdom of God, that is in Christ, in whom alone our happiness is, 1
Cor. 20.21.

Unprofitable to happiness, but rather yielding vexation.

1 Because they lead us not to happiness.

2 There lies a curse upon the creature ever since the fall, Genesis 3.17. Romans
8.20.

3 Because of the difficulty of the searching out of many secrets in nature, as
the cause of the Seas flowing, the motion of the Moon, the Loadstones drawing
of Iron, and looking toward the North Pole, sundry Sympathies, and Antipathies
of the creatures: It is said by some to be the death of Aristotle that he could
not comprehend the cause of Euripus seven times ebbing and flowing in a day:
Because I cannot comprehend thee (says he) thou shall comprehend me; and so is
said to have thrown himself into it.

4 Because the study of nature heals not the sinful defects of nature in our
own spirits, which is the reason Solomon renders, verse 15.

Use 1. To teach Scholars and other Students of nature, so to study it, as not
to place felicity in the creatures, or in the knowledge of them; They are vain
and vexing if used to that end. Solomon does not bring a causlesse evil report
upon the world, as the spies did upon Canaan.

Object. But do not many Scholars acknowledge they find great contentment,
yea sweetness in the study and knowledge of the creatures?

Answ. 1. True, they may, if they use the creatures and the knowledge of them
not to find happiness in them, but to those other ends for which God made
them, mentioned in Doct. 1. page 23.

2. Though many think themselves happy by such speculations, it is because they
cast not up their accounts, as Solomon here does, to see what true Reformation
of their own perverseness, or supply of their defects they have found thereby.

Use 2. To teach all men, neither to satisfy themselves in such things as
reach not to the healing the crookedness of their natures; nor to the
supplying of the defects thereof. How vain then are they that see not the
vanity of wealth, honor, pleasure, all earthly things, which are all of them
short herein?

Doct. 5. The crooked perverseness, and sinful defects of our nature, are not
healed by the knowledge of Gods works in nature:

A threefold crookedness is in our nature.

1. We act not from a right principle, from God in Christ, but from our selves.

2. We act not by a right Rule, Gods will and word.

3. For a right end, Gods honor; but our own ends.

Defects also Innumerable, First, in gifts, Secondly, in Acts; as in Thoughts,
Words, and Works.

Hence the Philosophers themselves, as vicious as others in pride and
vainglory, in wantonness, in covetousness, in flattery, etc.

Yea they are more averse and backward to embrace the Gospel then the common
sort, Acts 17.18, 32.

1 Natural bodies cannot reach to the healing of our souls.

2 The virtue of the creatures is finite, as themselves be; but it requires an
infinite power, even a new creation, to heal our crookedness, and to supply
our defects, Psalm 51.10.

Use 1. To show us the depth of our corruption; no creature is able to make our
crooked spirits straight, or to supply our defects, which are innumerable.

Use 2. To stir us up to the knowledge of Christ, whom to know, is eternal
life, John 17.3. He rectifies our crookedness, and supplies all our defects.
John 1.16.

Eccles. 1. v. 16, 17, 18. 16. I communed with mine own heart, saying, Lo, I
am come to great estate, and have gotten more wisdom then all they that have
been before me in Jerusalem: yea, my heart had great experience of wisdom and
knowledge. 17. And I gave my heart to know wisdom, and to know madness and
folly: I perceived that this also is vexation of spirit. 18. For in much
wisdom is much grief: and he that increases knowledge, increases sorrow.

SOlomon having taught us, partly by the nature of the creatures themselves,
and partly by his own experience, that happiness is not to be found in the
creatures;

He now proceeds to enquire after happiness, in making trial and use of
those blessings which God had given him; 1 Great Estate. 2 Great Wisdom.


Which point he delivers by declaring,

First, His communing with himself, what gifts he had received, which were
two, 1 Great Wisdom. 2 Great Estate;

Amplyfied, 1 A Minore, Greater then any before him in Jerusalem.

2. By the confirmation of it by his experience, verse. 16.

Secondly, his making use of the benefit of both these gifts, and that by a
phrase frequent in Scripture, I gave my heart to know wisdom; to wit, to know
the worth of it, by experience and search.

And to know madness and folly, to wit, by experience; thus making use of this
great estate, to know the worth and benefit of sensual blessings, mentioned
Chap. 2. v. 1, to 10. which to do in way of seeking happiness therein, he
calls madness and folly, verse. 17. etc. 2. v. 3.

Thirdly, His observation of the worth of wisdom, v. 17. I perceive that this
also is vexation of spirit.

Fourthly, His reason of such his judgment upon observation taken from the
sorrow accompanying and following wisdom, v. 18.

Doct. 1. Solomon in his time attained to great excellency both of outward
Estate, and inward wisdom!

His Estate was great,

1. In wise Princes and Counselors, 1 Kings 4.1, to 6. and 2.6.

2 In provision for his household, 1 Kings 4.7. to 19.

3 In multitude and peace of his subjects, and in largeness of Dominion, 1
Kings 4.20, 21, 24, 25.

4 In beautiful keeping, 1 Kings 4.22, 23. Compare this with that of Nehem.
5.18.

5 In Horses and Chariots, 1 Kings 4.26. and c. 10.26.

6 In Magnificent buildings, 1 Kings 6. and c. 7.1, 2, etc. etc. 9.17, 18, 19.

7. In abundance of wealth, 1 Kings 10.14, 21. Which he got

1 By Sea-voyages, 1 Kings 9.26, 27, 28.

2 By Merchandise in Egypt, 1 Kings 10.28, 29.

3 By presents, 1 Kings 10.25.

4 By Husbandry: For those Officers that served his household every month, were
overseers of his Herds and Flocks, and Vineyards; this care he advises his
son, Prove. 27, 23, to 27.

His Wisdom was great,

First, By the means of it.

1 From his youth up, by Gods blessing in nature, 1 Kings 2.9. 2 Prayer,
choosing it above all blessings, 1 King. 3.9. to 12. 3 Experience, Eccles.
1.16.
Secondly, in the effects of it, 1 King. 4.32, 33.

Thirdly, in comparison of all others, 1 Kings 4.29, 30, 31.

Fourthly, In the same of it, and the use made of it, 1 Kings 4.34. etc. 10. to
17.

Reasons of these so great blessings given him of God.

1. The upright-heartednesse of his Father, 1 Samuel 13.14.

2. Because he was to be a type of Christ, who abounds in all riches, and
treasures of wisdom and blessedness, that of his fullness we might all
receive supply of all our wants, John 1.16.

Use 1. To teach us the right and ready way to attain wealth and wisdom, and
to procure it to our children; which are 1. Upright-heartedness, giving up our
wills to be guided by Gods will: For that is an heart after Gods heart. 2.
Prayer for wisdom above wealth or any other outward blessing, 1 Kings 3.11,
12, 13. 3. Just and honest dealing, without bribery or partiality: Solomon's
Throne was established by justice; He never wronged any. 4. A wise care
reaching to the outmost corner of all our affairs. 5. Bountiful dispensing
the talents we receive to public good of others.


Use 2. To teach us not to rest in inward gifts, or outward blessings, to
preserve us from falling, but in humbleness of heart to depend upon Christ.
Solemon with all these blessings fell fearfully.

Doct. 2. It is the part of a wise Christian to consider within himself what
inward and outward blessings he has received.

Solomon communed with his own heart, Lo I am come to great Estate, and have
gotten more Wisdom, etc. Psalm 126.3.

Reason 1. How shall we else be thankful to the Lord for the blessings we
enjoy?

Reason 2. How shall we else employ the talents we have received to Gods best
advantage?

Use. To teach all men, especially great men, to follow Solomon's example
herein. A Steward that never sets down his Accounts, what he has received
of his Lords moneys, will never make a good Account of the expense of it.

We must not be so brutish as the swine or other beasts, that eat what is given
them; but never commune with their hearts, what they have received.

Eccles. 1.17, 18.
Doct. 1. To give a man's heart to knowledge is the way to obtain.

I gave my heart to know, etc. and I perceived, etc.

Reason 1. From the hearts dominion or commanding power over the whole man; It
sets the senses awork, to look about and listen; the mind to understand;
the judgment to consider and observe: the memory to keep up whatsoever might
make for the gaining of knowledge.

Reason 2. The heart set upon a thing will also deal with God about it, and
neglect no other means.

Use 1. To teach Students to give their hearts to knowledge; which is done 1.
By esteeming it a Singular thing. 2. By cleaving to it with earnest Affection.

Use 2. To stir us up to seek the knowledge of that wisdom much more, the
beginning whereof is the fear of the Lord. For if Solomon gave his heart here
to the knowledge of that wisdom which is gotten by the knowledge of the
creatures, and humane affairs; how much more should we give our hearts to the
knowledge of the Creator, and our Redeemer, whom to know is eternal life? John
17.3. Giving our hearts to this, we shall obtain even this also, Pro. 23.26.
and 2.2 to 5.

Doct. 2. It is a wise man's part seriously to observe and consider what good he
gets by his own wisdom, verse 17. To know wisedome] He means to know it
experimentally, to know the worth and benefit of it.

Reason 1. It is the part of wisdom to observe the goodness of every thing
(as knowledge observes truth) and therefore it should not be wanting to
observe the goodness of it self. The eye can see each thing but it self; but
it is the glory of wisdom (the eye of the soul) to see it self with
reflecting upon it self.

Reason 2. Else we shall take this talent in vain, if we do not consider
what it is good for: otherwise we shall either undervalue it, or overvalue it.

Use. To reprove a common fault in Scholars, who seek to gather more and more
knowledge, but never consider what to do with it, or what use to put it to, or
what themselves are the better for it. All things but the last end, are no
further good then as they lead to him; He only good in himself and for
himself: We need not consider what further good we get by him; To get him is
abundantly good enough: To look at any thing as good in it self, without
looking further what it is good for, is to put it in the place of God; which is
that Atheism.

Doct. 3. To give our selves to make use of our great estate according to the
nature of it, will give us to know by experience madness and folly.

Solomon had observed (in verse 16) that God had given him a great Estate, and
great Wisdom. In this 17 verse he gives his heart to know the use, and
benefit, and worth of both: of Wisdom first, and then of his great Estate.
Now, instead of knowing the use and benefit of his great Estate, he puts it
to know madness and folly: As if the giving of his heart to make use of it,
were to lay hold on madness and folly. Thus he interprets himself, chapter 2.
verse 1, 2, 3, 4, to 11.

Reas. To make use of our great Estate, according to the nature of it, is to
use it to erect great Buildings; to plant Vineyards, Orchards, Gardens; to
provide a man's self of store of Servants, costly Apparel, rich Furnicute, Gold
and Silver, musical Instruments, as is shown verse 3. to 10. of chap. 2.

Now the benefit he had by the use of his great Estate, was Madness and Folly.

Madness is a privation of natural Reason, and natural Affection.

Madness (in the Original) implies two things: 1. A fond delight in rejoicing
and exalting a man's self: Selfe-applauding. 2. A vainglorious boasting to
others, even sometime with loud clamours and cracking, celebrating a man's
self, and affecting to be celebrated of others.


Both these are found to arise in a man's spirit, upon his fair buildings,
sumptuous provision, and furniture, and attendance, goodly and pleasant
gardens, Orchards, etc. Dan. 4.30.

Folly is a dullness, and fondness or weakness (Stupor sensus in judicando,
Aquin. 2.2. Q. 46. Art. 2.) the dullness of the understanding to judge and
discern of things. So is it with every man employing his great Estate, in these
rich and glorious matters; he shall find discerning and savouring of heavenly
things much dulled.

Use 1. To call upon men of great Estates to consider what good they get by
their great Estates, and their employment of them. If they employ them about
great buildings, rich furniture, etc. as Solomon did, chap. 2. verse 3, to 8.
then consider if madness and folly be not their portion.

Use 2. If men's callings require the employment of their Estates in sundry of
these things, then it behooveth them especially to watch over themselves, lest
madness and folly grow upon them.

Use 3. To exhort men of great Estates to employ them not so much according to
nature, which breeds in the owners madness and folly; as in liberality to the
poor, hospitality to strangers, maintenance of Church and Commonwealth, etc. So
may we wisely lay up a good foundation for time to come, Luke 16.9. 1 Timothy
6.18, 19.

Doctr. 4. Much wisdom brings with it much grief, sorrow, and vexation of
spirit: and the more wisdom, the more grief.

The wisdom he here speaks of is an acquisite wisdom, to wit, natural or
civil wisdom, gotten from the observation of the creatures, or of humane
affairs.

Reason 1. From the means used for the getting of this wisdom, Reading and
Meditation, which are weariness to the flesh, Eccles. 12.12. Study heateth the
brain, intends and stretches the mind, as if the body were stretched on the
Rack, yea sometimes to the breaking of a man's wits. As in wrestling there is
striving, then weariness, then despair of overcomming, then giving over, then
taking it up again: So in Study again and again.

Reason 2. The curse of God upon the body of the creatures causes that no use
can be made of them, but with some sweat to the body, some grief and vexation
to the spirit.

Reason 3. Envy and Emulation in others, which breeds a learned man
disturbance, indignation, and vexation, and coffeehouse in our selves that
we are so much neglected, nor better respected then others of less eminency, as
we conceive.

Reason 4. The more knowledge we attain, the more we see our own ignorance,
which adds much grief.

Reason 5. Much study dries up the sweetest moisture in the body, whether
blood or marrow; consumes the cheerful sprits, and so breeds morosity and
harshness, which is a vexation to a man's self and others.

[ Calvin desired the Senate of Geneva to pardon his morositie.]

Reason 6. The vanity of this wisdom falling short of Christ and his grace;
which is true wisdom, 1 Cor. 1.21.

Use 1. To reprove a foolish conceit of ignorant people, that think Ministers
and Scholars eat the bread of idleness, come easily by their living. No
calling more wastes and grieveth him that is occupied therein, then theirs
does. The Ploughmans employment is a pastime to theirs; his labor strengthens
his body, but theirs wastes body and spirit; whence it is the one so long a
time outliveth the other.

Use 2. To teach men to bear the more with Scholars and Wisemens weakness and
morositie: they are incident to their callings.

Use 3. To teach wise men to see if this be not the fruit of their wisdom. If
yea, then to seek after that wisdom, which makes blessed, and adds no
sorrow with it, Prove. 3.17.

Eccles. 2.1, to 11. Verse 1. I said in mine heart, Go to now, I will prove
thee with mirth; therefore enjoy thy pleasure: and behold, this also is vanity.
Verse 2. I said of laughter: It is mad, and of mirth, What does it?

FRom Verse 16. of the former Chapter, Solomon has tried what happiness might
be found in his great wisdom: now he proceeds to try what happiness might
be found in his great Estate, in the pleasures and profits which it yields.

Parts 5.

1. Solomon encourages himself, in this Soliloquy, to enjoy pleasure, verse
1. since he cannot find happiness in wisdom, Go to now, I will prove thee,
etc.

2. He delivers his judgment of it, verse 1, 2. It is Vanity, Madness, good
for nothing, what does it?

3. He has declared by particular induction the special delights he gave
himself to take pleasure in 1. In his diet, Wine, verse 3. 2. In his
Buildings, verse 4. 3. In, Husbandry. 1. Planting of Vineyards, and making
Gardens, Orchards, Pools of water, verse 6. 2. Storing of Cattle, verse 7.
4. Housekeeping. 1. Retinue, verse 7. 2. Wealth, verse 8.
5. Music, verse 8:


4. He amplifieth his enjoying of these 1. By his joint laying hold of
(diverse) wisdom, verse 3. 2. By the end he aimed at in all his pleasure,
verse 3. 3. a minori, he increased in these above all others, verse 9. 4. By
adding all other things like these, verse 10. 5. By his solacing himself in
them all, as being his portion, verse 10.


5. He relates the issue hereof or event, which was that upon survey he found
all to be Vanity, Vexation, Unprofits bleness, verse 11.

Doct. 1. Conference with our selves in way of encouragement adds strength
and freedom to our resolutions and purposes, Luke 12.19. Psalm 43.5.

Reason 1. Words are as bellows to blow up fervency and strength of spirit, as
well in our selves as in others.

Reason 2. They presuppose a judgment satisfied in the lawfulness and
expediency of that we go about: out of the abundance whereof the mouth
speaks words of encouragement.

Use 1. To teach us to use this help to stir up our dull hearts, and to
strengthen our feeble knees to any good duty, Psalm 27.6, 7, etc.

Use 2. To teach us to use the like conference with our selves in way of
discouragement from sins. The same breath that blows up fire, cools hot
water, Jer. 8.6. [ Genesis 39.9.] Neh. 6.11. Psalm. 4.4.

Doct. 2. To give up our selves to pleasure and laughter to find happiness
therein, is vanity, madness, unprofitableness.

Reason 1. There is emptiness in such mirth: In the midst of it the heart is
sad; the end of it is heaviness, Prove. 14.13. Isay 50.11. Eccles. 7.6.

Reason 2. To frolic it in the midst of so many sins and dangers, is not the
part of a wise man, but of a mad man rather, Dan. 5.7. James 4.9.

Use 1. To reprove the vanity and madness of Epicurean gallants, voluptuous
livers.

Use 2. To exhort us to believe Solomon's experience, who has proved it to our
hand; and not to place and seek happiness in mirth and jollity, Psalm 4.6, 7.

Eccles. 2.3, to 11. Verse 3. I sought in mine heart to give my self unto
wine, (yet acquainting mine heart with wisdom) and to lay hold on folly, till
I might see what was that good for the sons of men, which they should do under
the Heaven all the days of their life. 4. I made me great works, I builded me
houses, I planted me vineyards. 5. I made me Gardens and Orchards, and I
planted trees in them of all kind of fruits. 6. I made me pooles of water, to
water therewith the wood that brings forth trees. 7. I got me servants and
maidens, and had servants born in my house: also I had great possessions of
great and small cattle, above all that were in Jerusalem before me. 8. I
gathered me also silver and gold, and the peculiar treasure of Kings, and of
the Provinces: I gat me men-singers, and women-singers, and the delights of the
sons of men, as musical instruments, and that of all sorts. 9. So was I great,
and enereased more then all that were before me in Jerusalem: also my wisdom
remained with me. 10. And whatsoever mine eyes desired, I kept not from them, I
withheld not mine heart from any joy: for my heart rejoiced in all my labor;
and this was my portion of all my labor. 11. Then I looked on all the works
that my hands had wrought, and on the labor that I had labored to do: and
behold, all was vanity and vexation of spirit, and there was no profit under
the sun.

DOct. 1. To give up a man's self to seek his chief joys and happiness in
outward comforts and delights, is to take hold of folly.

Solomon here seeking to give himself to wine and great buildings and
planting, and gatherings of wealth and cattle, as also to great retinue and
music, to see what was the chief good thing of the sons of men, says here of
himself he laid hold on folly, verse. 3.

Reason These outward delights deeply tasted of do dull and stupifie our minds
to the discerning and relishing heavenly and spiritual comforts. And what is
folly else but Stupor sensus in judicando? Prove. 20.1. and 27.7. Hos. 4.11.
Genesis 27.4. Isaac his affecting Venison perverted his mind and will, to divert
the blessings of God, and his own love from his better son to profane Esau.

Feeding of sweet meats does take away the taste of our drink: so do these
outward delights fed upon, infatuate the soul, to the disrelishing of the
water of life.

Use 1. To show us how much more folly it is to give a man's self to seek
pleasure in unlawful delights, as in drunkenness, whoredom, Cards, Dice,
Interludes, etc.

If all lawful fruits tasted on do not satisfy; how much less will it
satisfy us, or bless us, to taste of the forbidden fruit?

Use 2. To wean us from placing our chiefest contentmen^ even in these lawful
profits and pleasures. It is but folly to set ^our hearts upon transitory
sensual blessings, which are but trifles in comparison of Spiritual and
Eternal blessings.

Use 3. To stir us up to lay hold of eternal life, the favor of God, the
pardon of sin, the grace of Gods spirit, the ways of obedience to Gods
Commandments. This is as true wisdom, as the contrary is folly.

Use 4. To watch over our spirits, least they grow unsavory, the more we enjoy
outward sensual contentments and delights.

Doct. 2. Wisdom may be held with the large seeking after delight, in these
outward things, but with much hazard.

Solomon in the end almost lost himself in these sensual delights.

Reas. 1. [Qui vadit per praecipitium, vergit in ruinam] He that walks in the
uttermost extent of the borders of his Christian liberty, will soon degenerate,
and fall into some licentiousness.

Reas 2. The body pampered with all contentments, kicketh against the spirit,
Deuteronomy. 32, 15. 1 Cor. 9.37.

Use 1. To discourage us from making like trial as Solomon here did, whether
man's chief good might be found in outward pleasures and profits. His wisdom
was much hazzarded in so doing, yea blemished and Eclipsed; how much less
shall our less wisdom hold out in such trials?

Better is it for us to trust and believe Solomon's experience, then to try to
our cost and danger as he did.

Solomon himself led himself into temptation by this course: If we will not be
warned by his fall, our danger will be the more desperate.

Doct. 3. God allows us to rejoice in these outward things (pleasures or
profits) though not to seek or place our happiness in them.

Reas. 1. It is the portion which God gives a man of all his labor, Text, v.
1.10. and v. 24.26.

Reas. 2. It is a just ground, and good help and means to stir up our selves
to the cheerful and thankful service of God, Deuteronomy, 28.47.

Reas. 3. It does good like a medicine, healing some bodily infirmities, and
strengthening to each good duty, and to freedom in it. Prove. 17, 22. Neh. 8.10.

Reas. 4. Hilaritas in Domino est indicium animi hene sibi conscij, godly
cheerfulness is a token of a good conscience, Prove. 15.15.

Use 1. To teach us not to defraud our selves of such lawful delights, as the
Lord allows us, in the good things we enjoy: we shall do him and our selves
also injury in so doing.

Doct. 4. He that shall take a just account and survey of all the happiness he
gets by his worldly profits and pleasurts, shall find for his felicity,
vanity; for tranquillity of mind, vexation of spirit: for advantage, no profit.

Reas. 1. Of Vanity.

1. God never sowed man's happiness in those outward things; how then shall we
there reap it?

2. Gods curse has brought vanity upon the whole creature, and all the fruits
of it, by reason of our sin, Romans 8, 20.

Reas. 2. Of vexation of spirit.

1. The delusion of our hopes which we promised to our selves by these outward
things, must needs vex us.

2. The distempering of our bodies, but especially of our spirits by these
sensual delights, must needs grieve a good spirit.

Reas. 3. Of no profit.

1. For in them we save not our souls but rather lose them, Matthew, 6.26.

Use 1. To teach men destitute of these things, not to think themselves
miserable for want of them; for they that have them, are not thereby happy.

Use 2. To teach men that enjoy these things, not to presume of more good to be
found in them then there is in them; no happiness can be in them: seek that in
better things; he that looks not for much from the creature, shall never be
much deceived.

If happiness could be found in outward worldly things, how could God be happy
without the world, and before the world was made?

Eccles. 2.12. to 17. 12. And I turned my self to behold wisdom, and madness
and folly: for what can the man do that comes after the king? even that which
has been already done. 13. Then I saw that wisdom excels folly as far as
light excels darkness. 14. The wise man's eyes are in his head, but the
fool walks in darkness; and I my self perceived also that one event
happens to them all. 15. Then said I in my heart, as it happens to the fool,
so it happens even to me: and why was I then more wise? then I said in my
heart, that this also is vanity. 16. For there is no remembrance of the wise
more then of the fool for ever, seeing that which now is, in the days to come
shall be forgotten: and how dies the wise man? as the fool. 17. Therefore I
hated life, because the work that is wrought under the sun is grievous unto me:
for all is vanity and vexation of spirit.

SOlomon having considered the vanity of wisdom and folly severally and in
part, now comes to consider of them jointly, in comparison one with another,
whereof he renders the reason, verse. 12. because no man had better experience
of both of them, then himself. His singular experience, though but of one man,
may stand for a general observation, as if it had been proved by the
experience of all men. He that should try these things after him, should find
no more in them, then he had done.

Now upon comparing of them together, he first prefers wisdom above folly,
by a comparison, 1. Of light-excelling darkness, verse. 13. 2. Of sight
excelling blindness: Or of him whose eyes are in his head, above him who
walks in darkness. verse. 14.


Secondly, He equalleth wisdom and folly by the events happening to the fool
and wise alike. Whence he falls 1. Into an expostulation with himself why he
should then be more wise. 2. Into a resolution or acknowledgment of this
vanity, besalling wisdom and wise men, which is to find the like event
befalling themselves as fools, v. 15. 3. He expresses in particular what these
events be which fall equally upon both; to wit,


1. Both to be forgotten alike.

2. Both to dye alike, v. 16.

The effect of which in himself, he shows to be, hatred of his life, arising
from the sense of the grievousnesse of this passage of Gods work, together
with the vanity and vexation of spirit, which each thing yeildeth to him, v. 17.

Doct. 1. He that will judge wisely and fully of things, must consider of them,
not only in themselves apart, but jointly also in comparison one with another.

Thus wise Solomon to give the more right sentence of wisdom and folly, does
not only consider them in their own worth and use apart, (which in case of
placing happiness in either of them, he finds to be vanity) but also he
turns his heart to consider them jointly, in comparison one with another.

Reas. 1. It is the nature of a comparison to yield much illustration and light
to the things compared, which much helps the judgment to discern of both of
them aright.

Reas. 2. In comparing our good things with our betters, it helps to abate
our pride.

Reas. 3. In comparing the evils lying upon us, with the greater evils lying
upon others, it helps our contentment.

Use 1. To teach us to do the like in all such things whereof we would take a
just estimate: as in conceiving aright of our wisdom, wealth, poverty,
liberty, restraint, credit, discredit, husbands, wives, children, friends,
neighbors, etc. comparing them with the estates of others worse then our own,
it will make us the better contented with our own portion: Comparing them with
the estates of others better then our own, will abate our pride.

Doct. 2. It is for men of Solomon's worth to make Solomon's comparisons.

He knew by Gods own voice to him, that none should succeed him in wisdom and
wealth, 1 Kings 3.12, 13. and therefore he might safely compare his own
singular experience of the worth of wisdom and wealth, honor and pleasure,
with the experience of all that should come after him.

Reas. 1. Unless a man do know his own eminency above all others in the things
whereof he makes comparisons, he will appear no better then vainglorious,
if not ridiculous. Campian challenging both the Universities, though his cause
had been as good as he presumed it to be, yet coming short of sundry learned
men in the knowledge of the Greek Tongue, exposed himself to just disgrace.

Goliath defying the whole Host of Israel, and yet not knowing the eminency of
the strength of faith, above that of Sphere and Shield, made himself a scorn
and a prey.

Use 1. To reprove the insolency of boasting spirits, comparing and challenging
many times their equals, if not betters, to their own shame in the end. Peter
preferring himself before all men, fell worse then any of his fellows;
Solomon excelling all, yet makes comparisons but of equals here, Use 12, and
25.

Doct. 3. It is not for any to hope to find more benefit by the use of
wisdom, wealth, honor, pleasure, then Solomon did, v. 12.

By folly Solomon means the enjoying of all sensual comforts, (whereof he
spoke, v. 1, to 11.) such as wealth, honor, pleasure.

Reas. a majore. If he excelled all others in all these things, so far as any
of them might be employed to any comfortable, or profitable, or honorable use:
It is not for his inferiors in all or any of these, to find more good by them
then he had done.

Use 1. To teach all men to content themselves with Solomon's experience, and
not look for more benefit in these things then he found. If he seeking the
chief good in them, found them all vanity and bitterness, we in following his
example, shall find no better success.

But the world will not herein believe Solomon, though he should arise from the
dead, and report no less to them.

Doct. 4. There is as much difference in wisdom above wealth, and such other
sensual delights, as is in light above darkness, or in sight above blindness,
v. 13.14.

Light excels darkness in sundry points.

Light is comfortable, stirring up to cheerfulness and boldness, Eccles. 11,
7. But darkness breeds sadness and timerousnesse.

So wisdom makes the face of a man to shine, Eccles, 8.1. But sensual
delights leave a man sad and timorous.

1. Light manifests things as they be, Ephesians. 13. Darkness hides them.

2. Light distinguishes one thing from another: Darkness confounds all
alike.

So wisdom discovers clearly to us the ^e discernment of things: But
voluptuousness overwhelmeth men with stupidity.

3. Light directs a man in his way, but darkness misleadeth. So is it with
wisdom, it shows a man his way, voluptuousness leads aside.

4, Light awakeneth us: but darkness lulleth asleep.

So does wisdom stir up a man to his business, but voluptuousness lulleth a
man asleep in laziness and security.

Light excels blindness, as in all the things wherein light excels
darkness (for the light of the body is the eye.) So in these things besides.

1. Sight is an Ornament to the body: blindness a deformity; By it the body is
(as it were) a living dungeon to the soul without windows.

So is wisdom an Ornament to the soul; but the voluptuous person burieth
himself quick in obscurity and deformity, 1 Timothy 25.6.

2. Sight can discern light, if it be showed to a man: but blindness makes a
man incapable of seeing light offered.

So wisdom apprehends counsel and instruction, but the voluptuous person is
incapable of either, Hosea 4.11.

By the voluptuous person, I mean a man seeking happiness in sensual
pleasure, whether arising from profit, honor, ease, or pastime, etc.

So Solomon himself understands himself, for he says to himself; I will
try thee with pleasure, c. 2. v. 1. he thereupon shows what trial he took of
pleasure in great and honorable works, profitable treasures, musical
pastimes, etc.

Use 1. To teach us that men do not streightway condemn all such things,
wherein yet they do not place happiness. Solomon will not admit happiness to
be found in wisdom (he means natural or civil wisdom) and yet he
acknowledges much excellency, and worth, and use of it.

Use 2. To stir up men to be studious of getting wisdom above wealth, profit
pleasure.

Use 3. To teach wise men and learned, more contentment in knowledge, then
other men take in wealth.

Doct. 5. The same events, to dye, and to be forgotten after death, befall both
to the wise man, and to the voluptuous Epicure alike, Eccles. 9.15.

Reas. 1 The curse of God upon mankind is more powerful to kill and blast men,
then wisdom, much less sensuality can be to preserve their lives and memories,

V e. 1. To stir up both wise men and voluptuous to prepare for death, and
another life after this: Neither wealth nor wisdom can secure for death.

Doct. 6. Such as employ themselves in getting wisdom and wealth, and other
sensual comforts, to the intent to find happiness therein, shall in the end
be weary of their wisdom and wealth, yea even of their lives. Solomon here
having so employed his life, in the end comes to this, why am I more wise? v.
15. And therefore I hated life, v. 17.

Reas. 1. These things not yiedling happiness, shows us their vanity and our
vanity in seeking it in them.

Again hope disappointed vexes the spirit, Prove. 13.12. (a minori.)

Reas. 2. God inflicteth a more special curse upon earthly blessings, when they
are set up (as Summum Bonum) in his stead. God never more powerfully and
disdainfully overthrows Dagon, then when he is exalted with the spoils of
his Arc, 1 Samuel 5.2, 3, 4. So does God then especially blast worldly comforts,
when our heart is carried captive unto them.

Quest. But whether did Solomon well to be weary of his life for this cause?

Answ. No: He should rather have been weary of his sin in seeking happiness in
these things.

Life we are not to hate, but for Christ, Luke 14.26.

Use 1, To weane men from placing their happiness (as the world generally
does) in these outward blessings. Certainly as it was with Solomon, so it shall
be with all such; They shall in the end be weary of all these things and of
themselves also.

Eccles. 2.18. to 23. 18. Yea, I hated all my labor which I had taken under
the Sun: because I should leave it unto the man that shall be after me. 19. And
who knows whether he shall be a wise man, or a fool? yet shall he have rule
over all my labor wherein I have labored, and wherein I have showed my self
wise under the Sun. This is also vanity. 20. Theresore I went about to cause my
heart to despair of all the labor which I took under the Sun. 21. For there
is a man whose labor is in wisdom, and in knowledge, and in equity: yet to a
man that has not labored therein, shall he leave it for a portion. This is
also vanity, and a great evil. 22. For what has man of all his labor, and of
the vexation of his heart, wherein he has labored under the Sun? 23. For all
his days are sorrows, and his travel grief; yea, his heart takes not rest
in the night. This is also vanity.

SOlomon in Verse. 17. told us one effect, which the consideration of the like
event in death to the wise and fool wrought in him, which was his hatred of
life.

In this verse he adds another effect, of the same consideration; which was,
he hatred also of all his labor, verse 18. which he further amplifieth first
by two causes thereof which show the like event befalling to the wise man in
death, as to the fool. Where

The first is, that he shall leave behind him all his labor, to wit, the great
works he has labored in, to another that shall come after him, verse 18.

The Second is his uncertainty of his sons disposition, whether he will prove a
wise man or a fool, verse 19.

Secondly, by the effect of the hatred of his labor, verse 20, therefore
(says he) I went about to cause my heart to despair of all the labor etc.
which effect he further amplifieth by a double cause.

1. For that he having labored in wisdom and knowledge, and equity, must
leave the estate he has so gotten, to a man that has taken no pains for
wisdom, or knowledge or equity, verse 21.

2. For that his labor has yielded to himself nothing but sorrows, grief,
restlesnesse, even in the night, verse 22.23.

Doctr. 1. When we labor for worldly comforts and blessings (such as wisdom,
wealth, honor, and pleasure be) to the intent to seek happiness in them, we
shall in the end come to see our labor lost, yea become odious and weary some
to us.

For no man may expect to find more good by his labor after these things then
Solomon did: yet this was the issue of all his labor so bestowed.

Reas. As of the former hatred of life, verse 17.

Quest. But whether did Solomon well, thus to hate his labor, for not yiedling
him that fruit he expected?

Answ. No. For, 1. His labor was commanded of God, and was therefore good,
Eccles. 1.13. Genesis 3, 19.

2. His labor had not been in vain, if he had used it as God commanded;
sundry blessings follow dillgent labor, Prove. 10.4, and 14, 23, and 22, 29.

3. God never gave labor about earthly things that blessing as to yield
felicity. It was Solomon's fault to look to reap that fruit from his labor,
which God never gave it. He should rather have hated the vanity of his own
mind which abused his labor to a wrong end. But Solomon does well to tell us
plainly, how it fell out with him upon his labor so bestowed, that we may also
see what we may expect in the like case.

Use 1. To teach Scholars that labor for natural or civil wisdom, and other
men that labor for wealth, or honor, or pleasure, not to expect or seek
greater happiness in them then they are able to yield. If we do, we shall
find our labor lost, yea wearysome to us in the end.

These things we may labor for, but not as our chiefest good, but to some
further higher end. If these things be the top of our hopes and desires, and
the last end of our labor, we shall lose our labor and happiness both.

Obj. But do not many Scholars that seek for no further happiness then
learning and wisdom, find good contentment therein, free from such hatred of
their labors? And so do not many worldlings find the like in their wealth
etc. and never think their labor lost?

Answ. True: But such men never cast up their accounts, as Solomon here did, to
see whether they have indeed found true cause of contentment, true happiness
indeed in these things. If they had or did, doubtless they would find no
better issue, then Solomon had done, Verse 12.

Doctr. 2. It is a wearysome and odious thing to seek happiness in those
things, which we must leave behind us. As Solomon was to leave all those great
works behind him, which he had wrought by his great wisdom and wealth,
together with all the comforts which they afforded him [1 Timothy 6.7, 8.]

Reason 1. From the great need we stand in of happiness when we depart hence:
yea then have we most need of it; if otherwise we then fall of it, we become
eternally miserable.

Use 1. To show the excellency of godly men above others; they carry the
happiness with them, which others leave behind them, Prove. 12.26. When a
wordly wealthy man has made his will and left all his estate to such and such,
what has he left himself to carry away with him, but the anguish and misery of
a guilty conscience, and the expectation of worse?

Use 2. To exhort therefore to labor more for godliness then all earthly
blessings. It is indeed great gain which will go current in this world and
that which is to come, 1 Timothy 6.6, and 4, 8. It is a great gain that brings
Gods blessing and no sorrow with it, Prove. 10, 22.

Doct. 3. A wise man may have a son grown up to man's estate, and yet be
uncertain what he will prove, when he comes to enjoy his fathers living.

Solomon was old before he fell to Idolatry; 1 Kings 11.4. and some years he
must needs spend in building those Temples to his wives Idols, after which time
he wrote this Book, so that now he was become very old. And therefore Rehoboam
could not be young when he wrote it; for he wrote it not long before his death,
and at his death Rehoboam was 41 years old, 1 Kings 14.21. And yet Solomon
notwithstanding all his wisdom and deep insight into the nature of all the
creatures, and into the manners of men, he was not able to say, whether his son
would become a wise man or a fool.

Reas. 1. From the government of wise Parents over their children, which
keeps them in from showing forth their own spirits; [Donec liberius vivendi
sit copia Adoles centulis, qui vitam scires aut Ingenium nosceres dum aetas,
metus, magister prohibebant?]

Reason 2. From the change of outward estate, which often changes inward
conditions Honores mutant mores, Sixtus, an humble crouching Cardinal, but none
so resolute and stour a Pope; A Cardinal of the Spanish Faction, a Pope against
Spain.

Reas. 3. From the various dispositions of some young men especially. Rehoboam
himself sometime does foolishly after his coming to the Kingdom, 1 Kings
12.14. sometimes wisely, 2 Chronicles. 11.5, to 12, 23. If he were thus various
after he came to the Crown, how much more before?

Use 1. To teach youth to take notice of their own uncertainty of spirit, that
they may more seek to be established with grace.

Use 2. To teach Parents as much as may be to season their children with grace,
and to teach them in the Trade of the best ways especially: and then are they
most likely to foresee their constancy, Prove. 22.6.

Use 3. To exhort Parents, to train up their children above all graces to
humility: For pride is the only sin for which God is wont to strike with
madness, Dan. 4.30, 31, 32. That other cause of destraction, to wit, spiritual
anguish through brokennesse of spirit, ( Psalm. 88.15.) which Heman fell into,
will not blemish reputation of wiseome, 1 Kings 4.31. God is wont to heal it.

Doctr. 4. It is a wearysome vanity tending to make a man to despair of all
his labors; a wise man and an honest man, to leave his estate either to an
heir of whose wisdom he is uncertain, or to any who has not labored after
wisdom and honesty, verse 19.20, 21. This double vexation befell Solomon;
first he was uncertain what his son would prove, wise or foolish.

2. He saw for the present, he took pains neither for wisdom nor equity (or
honesty) as himself had done: yea, it may be he also foresaw what loss of his
estate might befall his son, ten parts of it to fall to Jeroboam, a man that
made Israel to sin. And yet in Libanus and other parts of Israel, Solomon had
built much, 1 Kings 9.19.

Reason 1. For so a wise man is likely to be a drudge to a fool: an honest man
to a wretch, a painful man to an idle.

Use 1. To weane wise men and so all men from voluptuousness, that is, from
placing their happiness in earthly comforts. Otherwise it would never have
thus vexed Solomon to have been uncertain of his heir.

For it would have contented him, and ought so to have done.

1. To have enjoyed the comfort of his own labors himself whilst he believed,
Psalm. 128.2.

2. To have employed them in his life time to the good of others.

3. To have trained up his heir, with as much good education as he could.

4. To have disposed his estate at his death as wisely as he could.

5. To clear doubtful events to God, who disposes of all things wisely and
justly.

Use 2. To moderate men's eager pursuits after wealth: little know we what
manner of men we labor for.

3. To reprove our carnal confidence who think to make sure to leave our
estates in a good hand, and there to abide from one time to another. A thing
more then Solomon could foresee or provide for.

4. To moderate our judgments, when we see men's estates fall into the hands of
foolish and prodigal heirs, not straight to think they were ill gotten.
Solomon had labored in equity as well as in widome, and got all his estate
honestly, yet it was scattered (ten parts of it) in his sons days in the hands
of a stranger.

Doctr. 5. To seek felicity in wealth and pleasure, etc. will put a man to
continual grief and restlesnesse day and night, verse 22, 23.1 Tim. 6.10.

Riches and pleasures are as thorns, not only to choke good seed in us, Luke
8.14. but also to prick and pierce our selves with many sorrows.

Reason 1. Their multitudes are a burden, Eccles. 5.12. as many clothes on a
man's bed, will put him into a swear, and not suffer him to sleep; so
multitudes, and abundance of wealth. For they carry with them many Cares,
Fears, and Uncertainties.

Use 1. To weane us from seeking such troublesome comforts. Labor we for
riches so as we may have them with Gods blessing, which adds no sorrow: Prove.
10.22.

Use 2. To exhort to labor for spiritual treasure which makes our sleeps
sweet, and our days comfortable, Job 35.10. Psalm. 77, 6. Prove. 15.15.

Eccles. 2.12. to 23.
WHen Solomon saw that the exercise of his wisdom about the creatures, and his
employment of all the creatures unto delight, which he calls madness and
folly, did neither of them satisfy his heart, but both of them alike yield him
vanity and vexation of spirit; it gave him occasion to consider, whether they
were not both of them in comparison equal, or what excellency there was in the
one above the other. And this he could as well as any undertake, because he
excelled all men in wisdom, 1 Kings 4.30, and Chap. 3.12.

Doctr. 1. A wise man that shall compare together wisdom and folly (that is
the exercise of wisdom about the knowledge of the creatures, and the
employment of a great estate to try what chief good there may be found in
creature comforts) shall find as much excellency in wisdom above folly, as in
light above darkness, in sight above blindness, verse 13.14.

See this opened and applied in the notes on page 42, 43.

Doctr. 2. Though the excellency of wisdom above folly he as great as the
excellency of light above darkness, and of sight above blindness, yet one
event happens both to the wise and foolish; which Solomon proves by
instances, both, 1. Dye alike, 2. Are forgotten alike; verse. 14, 15, 16.

Reason. From the condition of the creatures, they are temporal, and serve to
support a temporal and mortal life: but when this life is ended, we leave them
and they leave us.

Use 1. To teach wise men and fools too, to prepare and provide for another
life, and honorable remembrance after it, by another course; then either
wisdom or wealth.

Faith is the only way, 1. To eternal life, Joh 11.25, 26. 2. To honor, Hebr.
11.2.

Doctr. 3. To consider the like event, befalling to the wise and to the
foolish, it may breed in a wise man that exercises all his wisdom and labor
about creatures and creature-comsorts, deep coffeehouse, sadly to be weary
both of his wisdom, and of his life, and of all his labor, wherein he has
exercised his wisdom under the Sun. Verse 15. Why was I then more wise? Verse
17. Therefore I hated life. Verse 18. Yea I hated all my labor. Verse 20. And
I went about to cause my heart to despair of all my labor.

Reas 1. From discerning the equality of the like event to himself, as to the
foolish, to wit, 1. To dye, 2. To be forgotten. 2 From the necessity of leaving
all, verse. 18. 3 From the uncertainty of the wisdom, or folly of such to whom
he shall leave it, verse 19. in likelihood to leave all to such as have not
labored in wisdom, knowledge, and equity, as Solomon left all to Rehoboam who
was foolish and weak, 1 Kings 12, 8. 2 Chronicles. 13.7. Jereboam, who though
industrious, 1 Kings 11.28. yet labored not in equily. 4 From the portion
which a wise man reapeth of all his labors, to wit, sorrow, grief,
restlessenesse by night, verse 22.

Quest. But was it well done of Solomon, thus to be discontented, and weary of
these good gifts of God? 1. His wisdom, 2. His life, as well as of his labor.

Ans. No: But Solomon did well thus to confess his own distemper, before the
Church, to let them and us all see what we shall get by employment of our
wisdom, and great estates to seek happiness in creature comforts.

To exercise our wisdom in the knowledge and study of the creatures, to employ
them or to teach others to employ them in Physic and Chyrurgery, it would
never have made a man weary of it in that course. And in like sort to employ
our great estate in due supportance and refreshment of our selves, education of
our families, maintenance of Church and Commonwealth, succor of poor widows,
and fatherless (as Job did) would never have made a man weary of his Labor.
But to try to seek what happiness might be found in all creature comforts,
that is it which is vanity and vexation, and makes a man weary of wisdom,
life, labor. As if a man should employ his wisdom (Art and skill) in the
Secrets of nature, and lay out a great estate to find the Philosophers stone,
what shall he find at length but cause to be weary of his wisdom, life, and
labor so bestowed in vain?

Reas. 1. From the curse of God upon wisdom, wealth, and labor bestowed upon
an end which God never ordained them unto.

Use 1. For a warning to Scholars, not to bless themselves in all the wisdom
they get by the study of the creatures, nor in all the labor they take about
that knowledge so as to make it their end to excel herein: but so to
subordinate all to some of Gods ends, that he may accept them and their
labors, least otherwise he make them weary of all thorough coffeehouse.

Use 2. To teach men of estates not to bless themselves in their great
estates, nor in all the creature comforts they can get by them; It will at
length leave them in deep discontentments.

Use 3. To teach us so to use our wisdom and estates, as the employment
thereof, the fruit thereof may not dye with us, but may be carried along with
us, Rev. 14.13. Then it will not grieve us (as it did Solomon verse 18.) to
leave our labors behind us.

Use 4, To endeavor faithfully the good education of our children, that
whether they prove wise or foolish, we may have comfort in our conscionable
care of their good. And we faithfully endeavoring their good, shall find God
ordinarily blessing our endeavors so far to them, as we shall leave all behind
us to them with comfort.

Eccles. 2.24.25, 26. 24. There is nothing better for a man then that he should
eat and drink, and that he should make his soul enjoy good in his labor. This
also I saw, that it was from the hand of God. 25. For who can eat? or who else
can hasten hereunto more then I? 26. For God gives to a man that is good in
his sight, wisdom and knowledge, and joy: but to the sinner he gives travel,
to gather, and to heap up: that he may give to him that is good before God.
This also is vanity and vexation of spirit.

THere is no good in man that he should eat and drink, etc. even this I saw,
that was from the hand of God, etc. Solomon having said that man has no
portion out of his labors, but grief for his travel, verse 22, 23. he here
renders a reason of it taken from the continent or efficient cause of
goodness, which he says is,

1. Not man; it is not in his power to reach it, or give it.

2. But God, whatever good we receive, verse 24. whereof he renders a double
reason. 1 From his own experience, verse 25. himself was as able and ready to
seek good in the creatures as any: and yet he could get no other good out of
them, then as it is said, verse. 22, 23. 2 From Gods manner of dispensing these
good things of this life, to wit, the wise and joyful use, and benefit of them
to the good man: the travel about them, to heap them up to the sinner, and
that also for the good man's use verse 26. which argues that the finding of
good by all our labors and travel, is not in man's hand, but Gods. Whereupon he
adds this usual Epiphonema that this also is vanity, and vexation of spirit,
verse 26. There is no good in man, or in the power of man: So I translate the
words in the same sense, as the same words are translated, Chap. 3.12.

Doctr. 1. To enjoy any good by our labor, yea so much as to eat or drink
with comfort, is not in man's hand, but it is the gift of God, Jam. 4.13, 14,
15. Eccles. 3.12, 13.

There is a threefold good, which our souls might enjoy by our labors, 1 The
having of the creature, 2 The use of it; 3 The benefit of that use.

None of these is in the power of our labors to attain unto. 1 Not the having
of the creature it self, Eccles. 9.11. Levit. 26.19, 20. Deuteronomy. 8.17, 18. 2 Nor
the use of it, either to our selves, which may be intercepted (as the use of
meat and drink) 1 By sickness Psalm 107.18. Job. 33.20. 2 By sadness, Psalm.
42, 3, and 102, 9. and 80.5. 3 By sudden fears, and dangers, 1 Samuel 30, 16,
27. 1 Kings 7, 19, 20. Psalm. 78, 30, 31: 4 By Covetousness, Eccles, 4.8, and
6.2, 5 By scruple of Conscience, Acts 10, 13, 14. or to others. 3 Nor the
benefit of the Use, which is cheerfulness and joy in it, the refreshing and
nourishing, which the creature might yield, Haggai 1, 6, Acts 14, 17. The
benefit of doing good to others is acceptance: but that is of God too, Romans
15.31.

Reas. 1. Since the fall, the good which God put into the creature, ( Genesis 1,
31,) is accursed to us for our sin, so that now labor and sorrow, is all our
portion from the Creature, Genesis 17.19. 2 Goodness residing chiefly in God, is
to be found in the creature only by participation, and that at his pleasure,
Matthew. 19, 17. By Adams fall goodness is devoted to the second Adam; to wit,
the goodness of the creature, Heb. 2 6, 7, 8. Hence from him it is derived to
us.

Use 1, To reprove, First confidence in our selves, for the getting of this or
that good by any means we can use, Jam. 4.13, 14, 15. Secondly, acknowledging
the good we have to have come from our own means, Hab. 1.16. Amos 6.13.
Thirdly, The abusing of meares and drinks, and other creatures to vanity,
riot, and mischief, etc. the gifts of God are to be used to his service and
praise, Hos. 2.8, 9.

Use 2. To exhort to look up unto God for the finding of good in all the means
we use: and to acknowledge him in the attaining of it. The Heathens did so to
their false god; how much more we to the true? Dan, 5.4. We thank our Host for
our good cheer; how much more should we thank God for it? 3. To teach us to
look up to God, that we may find good in his Ordinances especially. For
spiritual and eternal good things are least of all in the power of the
creature, to give or to receive.

Doct. 2. It is not for any man to look to find more benesit by his labors or
by the creatures gotten and used by him, then Solomon did.

Reas. No man knew the creatures better then he, nor how to use them to better
purpose: neither can any man go about to get benefit by them more wisely, or
more seriously.

Use. To teach us to content our selves with his experience; if he found no
happiness by all his labors about the creature, if he found nothing by the
creature, but his labor for his travel: no more shall we, if we depend upon
our labor, or upon the creature, or seek happiness in either.

Doct. 3. God gives to the godly, wisdom, knowledge, and a cheerful use of
the fruits of his labor, but to the wicked labor and drudgery, for the
benefit of the godly; [verse 26.] A man good in Gods sight, is here meant the
godly, as opposed here to the sinner, Job. 27.13, 16, 17. Prove. 28.8.

Reas. 1. It is the end of Gods predestination, that all things befalling the
wicked, should redound to the glory of Gods mercy toward the elect, Romans 9.22.
2. The godly having Christ, have the world as theirs, and all the comforts of
it, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22, 23. 3. The godly using the creatures and their own labors
about them, in their right place and kind, reap that benefit from them which
any way they can yield, Matthew. 6.33. They in that way find the blessing of God
which exempts from sorrow, Prove. 10.22. But the wicked taking the creatures for
their chief good, fall short of God, and of that good also from the creatures
and their labors about them, which otherwise they might attain.

Obj. But does it not often fall out contrary, that the wicked have the world at
will, and not so the godly, Job 21.7, to 13. Psalm 73.3, 4, 5. and 17, 14.

Answ. First, It is so as Solomon speaks here with many godly, they enjoying
a wise and cheerful use of their labors and of the creatures; and contrariwise
many wicked labor and toil, and that uncomfottably, for the good of the godly.
2. A little the righteous has, is better then great treasures of many wicked,
Psalm. 37.16. For, 1. The joy of Hypocrites and worldlings is but for a moment,
Job. 20.5. Isai. 50.11. 2. Their prosperity is pernicious to them, Prove. 1.32.
3. The great estates of wicked men never rests till it be devolved into the
hands of the godly: but is mean while tossed as a Tennis ball from one hand to
another, from one family to another.

Use. To exhort to godliness. The godly are good in Gods sight, they have
comfort of their labors; The wicked men's labors is also for their benefit and
comfort.

Doct. 4. The disappointment of a man's labor is a vanity and vexation of
spirit, especially to such as seek for happiness in their labors about the
creatures, verse 26.

Reas. It is a curse of God, Levit. 26.16.

Use. To stir us up the more to godliness thereby we shall find good in our
labors, or if we be disappointed; that also will work our further drawing
near to God, Hos. 2.6, 7.

Eccles. 3.1. to 9. Verse 1. To every thing there is a season, and a time to
every purpose under the heaven. 2. A time to be borne, and a time to dye: a
time to plant, and a time to pluck up that which is planted. 3. A time to kill,
and a time to heal: a time to break down, and a time to build up. 4. A time to
weep, and a time to laugh: a time to mourn, and a time to dance. 5. A time to
cast away stones, and a time to gather stones together: a time to embrace, and
a time to refrain from embracing. 6. A time to get, and a time to lose: a time
to keep, and a time to cast away. 7. A time to rent, and a time to sew: a time
to keep silence, and a time to speak. 8. A time to love, and a time to hate: a
time of war, and a time of peace. 9. What profit has he that works, in that
wherein he labors?

TO every thing there is a limited term (or Period) and a time to every will
(or purpose) under the heaven, etc. Solomon having showed the vanity of all the
creatures toward the attainment ol felicity: and that First, partly by their
own nature, Cap. 1.1, to 11. Secondly, partly by the great experience and
trial which himself had taken of them, both in, First, The knowledge and
study of them, Chap. 1.12, to 18. 2. The employment and improvement of them to
sensual delights, Chap. 2. he in this Chapter (the former part of it) and in
these words shows the vanity that lies upon the estate and actions of men,
by the vici^itude and variety of them, and that by the determined Appointment
and limitation of Gods purpose and providence. Parts of the words, First an
Assertion that all things under heaven are subject to variety and vicissitude
of changes, and that by the determinate appointment and limitation of God,
verse 1, to 8. 2. A Collection or inference of the unprofitablenesse of men's
labors in regard thereof. The Assertion he first delivers in a general
Proposition, verse 1. Secondly, He declares and proves it, by an induction of
28 particulars, verse 2, to 8. In the Assertion the word translated Season, is
a set or limited time or a determinate period, as the word is used for an
appointed set time, Ezra 10.14. Neh. 10.34. And the meaning is not to show
there is a fit season allowed us of God for all things done under heaven. For
First, That is not true: If it were, what is that to demonstrate the vanity or
unprofitablenesse of men's labor about the creature, which is here the scope of
Solomon? And when he says to every purpose, or as it is in Hebrew, to every
will, he means by a Metonymy, to every thing which a man wills, or
purposes, or performs. In the Induction, the 28 particulars consist of 14
pair of contraries: wherein a man changes from one contrary estate or course
unto another, whereof the first pair is natural; to be borne, to dye.
Secondly, the rest voluntary; and they are either, First, private and
domestical, as a time. 1 Of planting and pulling up: 2 Of breaking down and
building: 3 Of weeping and laughing: 4 Of mourning and dancing: 5 Of casting
away and gathering stones: 6 Of ^mbracing and refraining: 7 Of getting and
loosing: 8 Of keeping and casting away: 9 Of renting and sewing: 10 Of silence
and speech: 11 Of love and hatred: Secondly, Politic, as First, Of killing
and healing; Secondly, Of War and Peace.

Eccles. 3.1, to 9.
DOct. 1. The times that pass over us, bring upon us many changes, yea often
from one contrary to another.

Doct. 2. To every change that befalls us, even to every state and business
of men under heaven, there is a time limited and determined by God.

Doct. 3. This change of men's estates, and the limitation of the times thereof,
leaves a man no profit by all his labor toward the attainment of Happiness:
But for brevity sake; all these may be handled together,

Doct. 1. As the maine proposition of the Text.

Doct. 2. As the principal reason of it.

Doct. 3. As the chief use of both.

For proof of the first Doctrine, Psalm. 30.5, 6, 7. Lament. 1.1, 2, and 4, 1,
2, 7, 8. Isa. 1.21, 22. John 21, 18. The people sometimes cry Hosanna,
sometimes Crucify; Peter fometimes makes a glorious confession of Christ,
sometimes a gross denial; Paul sometimes as an Angel of God, Gal. 4.14.
sometimes an enemy, Gal. 4.16. Nebuchadnezzar sometimes flourishing in his
Palace, sometimes grazing among the beasts restored again.

Reason 1. From the determinate purpose of God to limit men's times and changes,
Job. 14.5, and 7, 1. John 7.30, and 8, 20. Luke 13.32, 33, and 22, 53. Acts 13,
25, 26. Psalm. 31, 15. Acts 17, 26. Dan. 5, 26. Grounds whereof, First, Gods
sovereignty over us, and so his dominion over our times, Acts 1.7. The heir
while under age has his time limited, Gal. 4.1. Secondly, Gods faithfulness
to us, Psalm. 119.75. If our times were in our hands, we would never see ill
times; If in Satan's hands, he would never suffer us to see good days. Thirdly,
Our aptness to settle upon the lees, and to corrupt if not changed, Zeph.
1.12. Ier. 48, 11. Psalm. 55, 19. Secondly, From the contrary principles
dwelling in us, whence variety, yea contrariety of changes of carriage, Gal. 5,
17. Thirdly, from the Instability of all the creatures, and their outward
estates, by reason of the curse, Genesis 3.17. which though to the godly it be
changed to a cross, yet the cross abides to them, the curse to the wicked, 1
Kings 14.15.

Use 1. To weane us from fastening our hopes and desires after happiness in
any estate here below, Matthew. 6.19.20. Prove. 23.5. 1 John 2.15, 17. The
unsetlednesse of all things here below, demonstrateth their unprofitablenesse
unto happiness. Secondly, to keep us from presuming of our own undertaking,
and from profession of absolute purposes and promises, without subjection to
the will of God, Jam. 4.13, 14, 15. Luke 12.19, 23. Prove. 27.1. 3 To moderate
our mourning in hard times, and our rejoycings and confidences in good hours,
Psalm 39.9. and 115, 3. Mich. 7.7, 8. Psalm 30.6, 7. 4. To stir us up to seek
and wait for a settled mansion in heaven, Heb. 13.14, 5. To take off the plea
for dancing hence. For it is not said there is a lawful time to dance, but a
limited time. Herodias daughter (Salome) had a time to dance, as to earne half
a Kingdom for a dance, and to get John Baptists head; So another time of a
contrary dance, when falling through the Ice (if we may believe Nicephorus,
lib. 1. cap. 20.) her feet capered under water, and her head being cut off by
the Ice, it danced above the Ice.

We read First, of a Religious dance, Lxod. 15.20. Secondly, of a civil dance
to entertain Conquerours Judge. 11.44. 1 Samuel 18.6. Luke 15.25. when the eyes
are set upon joy. But, not in marriages, where is more temptation to lust. Tully
pro Muraena* Nemo saltat sobrius nisi forte insaniat, neque solitudine neque in
convivio honesto and moderato; especially its unmeet in N. E. and that now when
the Churches of England are in such distress, Ezekiel. 21.10.

Eccles. 3.10.11. 10. I have seen the travel which God has given to the sons
of men, to be exercised in it. 11. He has made every thing beautiful in his
time: also he has set the world in their hearts, so that no man can find out
the work that God makes from the beginning to the end.

SOlomon in the former verses of this Chapter argues the vanity that lies
upon the estate and actions of men by reason of the vicissitude and variety of
them, and that limited and determined, by the Appointment of God. And from
thence he infers the vanity and unprofitablenesse of men's labors to seek
for happiness in creature comforts, verse 1. to 9. Now therefore least men
should slightly pass over these varieties of changes that pass over them,
and make no profitable use of them (as if they came by fortune or chance, or
Gods neglect of the government of the world) Solomon here preaches to us a
fourfold profitable use and observation of them.

1. That God has given this travail to the sons of men, to exercise
themselves in observing and finding out Gods work in them all, verse 10. as 1.
Having made every thing beautiful in his season. 2. Having put the world in
the hearts of men, verse 11.

2. That whatsoever our estate be, we should not look to find the chief good
in them, but be doing good with them, verse 12.13. and take such good from them
as they afford, verse 12, 13.

3. That these changes are wholly and unchangeably in Gods hand, and aim at a
gracious end, that men should fear before him, verse 14.

4. That there is to be observed a settled order in this variety of changes, as
in the motions of the Heavens, v. 15.

Doct. To consider and find out the work of God in all the variety of changes
that by his appointment do pass over us, it is a travail given of God to
exercise the sons of men: As in searching out the creatures, it was a travail
given of God, Eccles. 1.13. So here to search out the work of God in all
changes that befall us, Psa. 111.2, 3, 4.

Reason 1. From the beauty to be observed in every work of God (that is in
every change befalling us) in its season. To the beauty of the body there
concur three things, 1. (...); when no member is defective or superfluous: good
constitution; every maime is a blemish: every superfluity is a deformity. 2.
(...) Partium, when one part is proportionable to another, and all suitable to
their end, and to their head, good proportion. 3. (...), well-colouredness, or
well favourednesse, good complexion. So in Gods work about us there is 1. A
perfection, as in the creatures, Isay 40.26. So in his government of us, Deuteronomy.
2.4. Isay 5.4. 2. A Symmetry or proportion, First between the Lord and his
work, 2 Timothy 2.13. Ezekiel. 20.9, 14, 22. Secondly between his former and latter
works, Judges 6.13, 14. Thirdly between the instrument and the work God does by
it [multuin refert Davusne loquatur an herus] Arrogant cruelty becomes
Pharaoh; Profane blaspbemy, Rabshekah; Cursing, Shimei; Treason, Judas, Isay
32.6, 8. Fourthly between Gods dealings with us, and ours with him, Psalm
18.24, 25, 26. The wildfire of lust in Sodom was punished with wildfire and
brimstone. So in destroying the Egyptians Firstborn, Exodus 4.22, 23. So in
Nadab and Abihu. So in Adonibezek, Judges 1.6, 7. 3. (...), well-favourednesse:
It is a beauty in the countenance. First Cheerfulness. Secondly Lightsomnesse.
First, there is a cheerfulness in Gods works at last, Genesis 45.7, 8. James
5.11. Heb. 12.11. They have a pleasant countenance, Psalm 92.4. and 58.10.
Secondly, there is a lightsomnesse in them, giving light and instruction, Psalm
107.43.

Reason 2 From Gods putting the world into our hearts, verse 11. where by the
world is meant, First, not only the creatures, the world of them; Secondly,
but chiefly the world of changes of the creatures, of which Solomon here
speaks; has put the world into their hearts, implies that God has put into
our hearts, First, some desire and delight to search and find out the work of
God in all the changes that pass over us. So putting into the heart implies
desire and delight in a thing, Psalm 40.8. Secondly, ability to do it, Jer.
31.33. Both together are expressed by that phrase, Revel. 17.17. The ground of
which is our impotency and impossibility, without this putting the world into
our hearts, that ever we should find out the work of God from beginning to the
end, Text verse 11.

Use 1. To stir us up to observe add find out the work of God in every change
of estate that passes over us: It is else a brutishness in our selves, Psalm
92.5, 6: It is a dishonor to God and to his work, Isay 5.12. It is an
enlargement of knowledge and favor from God to consider his works, Psalm
107.43. As when a good workman sees a man taken with his work, he is willing
to show him all his Art in it. 2. To teach us not to disparage, or slight, or
dislike any of Gods works, but to magnify them. They are every one beautiful
in his season, Job 36.24. Isay 45.9. Psalm 64.9. This magnifying of every work
of God (as beautiful in his season) will keep us from coffeehouse and
murmuring at Gods providence, whatsoever it be that befallerh us or ours, Joh
1.20. Psalm 39.9. 2 Kings 20.19. It may seem an uncomely thing to take fair
and full clusters of sweet Grapes, and to tread them and press them in a
wine press to leave nothing in them but husks, till in the end you see what
sweet wine is pressed out of them, which keeps lively and sweet, when else
the Grapes left alone would be rotten.

Use 3. To teach us to improve and employ that knowledge of the world (that is
of all the changes that befall us in the world) which God has put into our
hearts, to find out the council and work of God therein. It was happiness to
Hester in her advancement, Hester 4.14. To David in crosses, Psalm 119.67, 71,
75.

Obj. Yea says one, if I could but spell out Gods meaning in his works and
dealings with my self and mine, it would give me great contentment

Answ. 1. In evils observe, First what thou wast doing when a cross befell
thee, Dan. 4.30, 31. Secondly, what conscience suggesteth to thee, Genesis 42.22.
Thirdly, the proportion of the affliction to thy sin, Judge. 1.7. Fourthly,
cast all Idols out of thy heart, and enquire of the Lord his meaning, that thou
might know it and do it, Psalm 25:9, 12. God was long in answering Johanan
and his company, even long after a Sabbath, because they sought in hypocrisy,
Jer. 42.20.

2. In good things observe, First the opportunities and advantages God puts
into our hands, according to his word, Hester 4.14. Secondly, the great works
God has in hand; and derive your Brooks to run into that stream, Jer. 45.4,
5. Now God is advancing Reformation, pursue we that.

Eccles. 3.12, 13. Verse 12. I know that there is no good in them, but for a
man to rejoice, and to do good in his life. 13. And also that every man should
eat and drink, and enjoy the good of all his labor, it is the gift of God.

I Know Good (that is, the Good of man) is not in them. These words contain in
them the second profitable observation which Solomon has made of the variety
of the changes of our creature comforts and discomforts, and employments about
them; to wit, that the good of man is not to be found in changes of
creature-conditions, and employments or labors about them, but to enjoy the
good of them, and to do good with them; which he amplifieth by a twofold
Argument or Reason.

Reas. 1. From his own certain judgment or experience of them, I know that
good is not in them, v. 12.

Reas. 2. From the proper cause of any good or comfort that a man can either
take himself or give to others by the creatures, or by his labor about them,
it is the gift of God, verse 13.

Doct. The good of man is not to be found in the creatures, but it is from the
gift of God, to do good with them, or to enjoy the good of them. His meaning
is not that there is no good in the creature; for that were contrary to Genesis
1.31. But that 1. The chief good of man is not in them. 2. That it is not in
themselves to minister their own good to us without the gift of God, Job 28.2,
to 12, etc. to the end of the Chap. Eccles. 2.24.

Reas. 1. From the end of all the creatures, and of all their changes about
man, and of our labors about them, they are all for us as their end, Psalm
115.16. Genesis 1.26. Deuteronomy. 4.19. And therefore our good cannot lie in them, but
their good rather lies in us.

Reason 2. From our forfeiture of the good that is in them by the Fall, that
now the good in which they were created 1. Is much impaired. 2. Is not yielded
to us without a renewed gift from God, Genesis 3.17, 18, 19. Which curse is
increased by actual sin, Genesis 4.12. Isay 7.23, 24. Levit. 26.18, 19, 20.
Haggai 1.6. and 2.16, 17. 3. From the emptiness of our hearts to do any good,
or to make any good use of what changes befall us, Hos. 14.8. John 15.5. 2 Cor.
3.5, 4. From the Prerogative of Christ, as to teach us to profit Isay 48.17.
God in Covenant, the Holy One of Israel, our Redeemer.

Use 1. To set before us the frame of the spirit of a christian penitent soul;
It knows his good is not in the creature, nor in any creature-comfort, nor in
any creature-changes, nor in any creature-labours.

Use 2. To look for no more from the creatures then is in them, and that way
wherein we may get it out of them. Chief good is not in them; nor can they
yield that good which is in them but by the gift of God: With the gift of God,
and by it, you may eat, and drink, and rejoice in the enjoyment of the good of
your labors, and do good to others in your life time by the creatures.

Use 3. To move men to repentance that have restrained the good of the
creatures form themselves, Exodus 22.22, 23, 24. Jer. 5.24, 25.

Use 4. To seek and expect the good of any creature, or of our labor about it,
by Prayer and Faith in the blood of Christ, Matthew. 6.11. 1 Timothy 4.3, 4, 5.

Use 5. To stir up such to thankfulness as both take good and do good by all
the changes that pass over them: It is God that works the power of the will
to will, and the power of the whole man to do; and therefore we are to fear
before him, Phil. 2.12, 13. Else a wise man may act foolishly, and a strong man
weakly, in many fair opportunities.

Eccles. 3.14. Verse 14. I know that whatsoever God does, it shall be for ever:
nothing can be put to it, nor any thing taken from it: and God does it that men
should fear before him.


COherence see in verse 10, 11.

Doct. What God himself does, that takes place in every Age, without any
addition to it, or taking ought from it by any creature.

The meaning of the words cannot be, that every work of God is everlasting: For
no work of God is so, but the Angels and souls of men, the highest Heavens,
and the bodies also of men after the Resurrection. But whatsoever God does,
that shall be for ever; to wit, It shall take place in every Age. It is not (to
wit for the creature) to add to it. It is not to take away from it, Psalm
33.9, 10, 11. Ephesians. 1.11. Job 23.13, 14. Matthew. 5.36. and 6.27. Prove. 19:21. and
29.26. John 19.10, 11. Some grant a general concourse of Gods providence to
every thing done by the creature, seeing he sustaineth all things in their
Life, Motion, Being; but do not acknowledge a special concourse to the
producing of each particular act, as inclining to it, and determining of it,
unless the act be supernatural. But surely, as God inclines and determines
the will by gifts of grace, by motions of the spirit (exciting and enlarging
the heart) and good objects unto spiritual acts; so does he incline natural
agents of natural acts by natural dispositions; and voluntary Agents to moral
and civil acts by moral and civil Dispositions, Motions, Objects, Exodus 12.36.
And casual Agents to casual events by casual occurrences.

Reason 1. From the nature of God; he is the first and universal cause, Ephesians.
1.11: Rev. 1.8. Romans 11.36. and therefore concurreth to every effect. Adam
under God is the first cause of all the sons and daughters of men, Acts
17.26. But he is not the cause of all their actions; for he produces them
voluntary Agents: And therefore what they do by choice of their own will, he
is no cause of that, seeing he inclines not, nor determines their will to it,
save only as he propagateth to them natural pravity; else he was not the cause
of Cain's murder of Abel, which is more plain in other parents; Causa causae
is causa causati, holds in natural Agents, not voluntary. But God is the
first cause, not only of all causes, but of all effects, First, of good things
per se, Jam. 1.17. Hos. 14.8. Secondly, of evil things, by accident or
occasion, Acts 4.27, 28. 2 Samuel 12.11, 12.

Reason 2. From the nature and condition of the creatures. They are all Gods
instruments, Heb. 1.14. Isay 10.5, 15. and 44.28. Joel 2.25. Matthew. 8.8, 9.

Obj. 1. There ^eatures may be said to be Gods instruments, because he may and
does use them when he will; not that he does always use them.

Answ: Yes always when they work at all: The Devil himself, and all his
instruments, are indeed but Gods instruments: So Faith beholds them, Job
1.21. Hence always Gods ends are more fulfilled then the ends which the
instruments aimed at, Genesis 45.7, 8. with Chapter 37.20.

Obj. 2. Hos. 8.4.

Answ. Its meant, Not of his Providence; See 1 Kings 12.24, But of his
Ordinance.

Obj. 3. Zach. 1.15.

Ans. They helped forward destruction beyond Gods approbation, but not beyond
his providence.

Obj. 4. What need then of Counsels, Commandments, Rewards and Punishments?

Answ. As if the wind need not blow, because a windmill cannot move but in, and
by the wind. These Commandments and Counsels, etc. are the blasts by which God
moves us.

Obj. 5. Thus you take away free will from the creature, not only in acts of
spiritual grace, but even in moral and civil actions?

Answ. No such matter: For God determines all actions, not by imposing
necessity upon the will, but by inclining it according to the nature and
liberty of it; to wit,

1. In good actions, by, First, infusing good gifts, Exodus 12.36. Secondly,
exciting by good motions. Thirdly, Propounding good objects.

2. In evil actions, by, First, eliciting the evil within into outward act;
First, by leaving to Satan, and evil objects, John 13.2. Secondly, by
propounding good objects, Psalm 105.24, 25. Secondly, occasioning the choice of
evil (as Adams fall.) First, making the Subject mutable and declinable.
Secondly, giving leave to instruments to tempt, as Satan in the Serpent.
Thirdly, by propounding objects: Fair Fruit, Good Name.

Use 1. To teach us to fear before the Lord, Text, Phil. 2.12, 13. Jer 10.5,
6, 7. Our Savior calls us to fear him that can cast both body and soul
into Hell, Luke 12.4, 5. How much more to fear him that can cast both body and
soul into sin, which is worse then Hell, and or himself most pure and holy
in so doing, Isay 6.3, 9, 10.

Use 2. In Gods fear to acknowledge him in all our ways, as those who can do
nothing without him, and who works all our works for us, Prove. 3.5, 6, Psalm
57.2. Isay 26.12.

Use 3. To look higher then the creature in all things befalling us, which will
train us up to 1. Patience in evils. 2. Contentment in evils, Job 1.21. 2 Samuel 16.10. Psalm 39.9. 3. Thankfulness for that which is good, Genesis 33.10.
Neh. 2.8. Ezra 7.27. 4. Fruitfulness, or making a good use of all occurrences,
whether good or evil, befalling us. If Gods hand be in every thing, surely
good may be gathered out of it, Psalm 116.16. Amos 4.6, 8, 9, 10, 11. 5.
Courage in all approaching danger; All our hairs are numbered: A sparrow falls
not to the ground without God, Mat. 10.29, 30.

Use 4. To teach us the vanity of all humane endeavors and purposes without
God, James 4.13, to 16.

Eccles. 3.15. 15. That which has been, is now: and that which is to be, has
already been, and God requires that which is past.


COherence, see above verse 10, 11.

These words express the fourth observable thing in the changeable course of
Gods providence about the sons of men; to wit, That there is a settled order
and constancy in that instability, as there is in the motions of the Heavens
and heavenly bodies. There is great variety of changes in the Moon, yet great
constancy in that variety; as it was in one month, so in another.

Solomon had such a like speech before, Eccles. 1.9, 10. but there he spoke of
the works of Creation, or of Nature, as Spring, Summer, Autumn, Winter, etc.
but here he speaks of the work of providence.

That which has been, is now, etc.] Not that the same individual things shall
return again; for dead men shall return no more into this world, Job. 7.8,
9, 10. neither does he speak of Gods extraordinary and miraculous actions,
whether of Judgment or Mercy, Exodus 10, 14. Deuteronomy. 4.32, 33. I^sh. 10.12, 13,
14. 2 Kings 20.11. nor of the rare and singular inventions of men, as of
Printing, or Guns. But he speaks of the works of Gods ordinary providence in
disposing of the variable changes of the estates and affairs of the sons of
men: which though they be carried with great variety, yet are they carried also
with great stability and correspondency, and sutablenesse one to another.

Doct. 1. The former ways and works of God in disposing of the estates of the
sons of men, God brings them about again from one generation to another, 2
Pet. 2.4, to 9. Romans 11.21, Jer. 7.12, 14. Psalm. 48.8. 1 Cor. 10.11. Gods
former dealings with the sons of men in former times, are precedents of what he
will do in after Ages.

Reas. 1. From Gods nature which is ever like it self, Heb. 13.8, 10, 12, 28,
29. Mal. 3.6. 2. From the correspondency of Gods works to his word; every work
of God fulfilleth either some promise in the word, or some threatening. Now the
word is ever suitable to it self, so is Gods work, The examples of Gods
dealings in Scripture would be of no use to us, if they were not precedents and
patterns of the like to be performed, in like cases in after times, 1 Cor.
10.11. Romans 11, 21. Josh. 1.5. with Heb. 13.5. Jam. 5.11, and verse 17.18.

Use 1. Against Manichees who think one God to have governed in the old
Testament, another in the new. But the suitable carriage of all things now as
then, argues the same hand to rule both then and now, Heb. 12.29. It is also a
refutation of fortune; for fortune is not stable, nor keeps any certain or
proportionable course. 2. To lend both comfort and stay, and warning also to
Gods people, from the course of Gods providence to his people of old, Psalm.
22.4, 5, and 77, 10, 11. yea from Gods former dealings with our selves, Psalm.
77.6. 1 Samuel 17, 34, to 37. warning also, Heb. 12.28, 29. Psalm. 99.6, 8. Beware
of breaches in general Courts. It will presage and produce like effects, as
breach of Parliaments has done in England. 3. To threaten to wicked men like
judgments, which have befallen others for like sins in former Ages, Dan. 5,
18, to 28, 2 Pet. 2.4, to 9. Jude 11. Job. 4.8. 4. To teach the children of God
to persevere in like constancy, and to keep an holy correspondency in all their
actions and courses, that we may be like to our heavenly Father.

Eccles. 3.16, 17. 16. And moreover, I saw under the Sun the place of
judgment, that wickedness was there; and the place of righteousness, that
iniquity was there. 17. I said in mine heart, God shall judge the righteous and
the wicked: for there is a time there for every purpose, and for every work.

IN the former part of the Chapter Solomon showed the vanity of the estates of
men, by an argument taken from the changes and vicissitude which the
determinate hand and Providence of God did put upon them. In these verses he
observes and declares another vanity that befalls our estates by the hand
and government of Magistrates: yea a vanity that befalls upon judgement-seats
themselves. The vanity is wickedness, which is both, First, ungodliness, 2 Samuel 22.22. Secondly, unrighteousness, Isai. 58, 4, 9. And lest this vanity
should cast some blemish upon the wise and just providence of God (whereof
penitent souls are more tender) he declares his resolution of that doubt,
what it was in his own heart, that God will judge righteously, and so reform
all the iniquity of Judgement-seats: And this he proves by a principle
delivered in v. 1. of this chap. taken from the time appointed for every
purpose and every work there, verse 17.

Doct. 1. He that shall live in the best times of the best Commonwealths, may
see seats of Judgments and Justice corrupted with wickedness and iniquity.
The word wickedness signifies both, First, Ungodliness, 2 Samuel 22.22
Secondly, Unrighteousness or iniquity, Isai. 58, 4, 6. Solomon speaks not of
Markers, or Tavernes, or Stews, or Mountains of prey (Stand-gate Hole,
Shooters Hill, Black Heath, Salisbury Plain, etc.) but of Seats of law and
justice, and that not in the reign of wicked Tyrants, Saul, Ahab, Iezabel, or
the like, but in the times wherein himself lived, which were the best which
the best Commonwealth, the Commonwealth of Israel, ever saw, even the times of
David and Solomon. In David's time, 2 Samuel 19, 24, to 30, with 16.4. In his time
and Solomon's, Eccles. 10, 5, 6, 7. 1 Kings 11.6, 7, 8, and 12, 4. In Asas time,
2 Chronicles. 16.10. In Iehosophats, 2 Chronicles. 18, 1, and 20, 33, to 37. In Vzziahs
and Iothans, Isai. 1.21, 22, 23, and 5, 7, and 3, 12, 15. In Hezekiahs, Micah
7, 3, 4, and 3, 9, to 12. with Ier. 26, 18. In Iosiahs, Zeph. 1.1, 9, and 3,
1.3.

Reason 1. Acceptance of persons in the Princes promoting their kinsmen or
friends (though unworthy) to Judgment seats, as Samuel promoted his sons, 1 Samuel 8, 1, 3.

Reason 2. Misinformation and receiving it without hearing both parties speak,
2 Samuel 16.1, 2, 3, 4. with Chap. 19.26.29.

Reason 3. Wicked fervants of Counselors about a Prince, Prove. 25.4, 5. 1
Kings 12.8, to 11.

Reas 4. Self sufficiency, leaning to a man's own wisdom, Josh 14.15. Prove. 3,
5.6.7.

Reas. 4. Bribes or gifts, 1 Samuel 8.3. Exodus 23.8. Prove 281.21.

V^e 1. To teach us not to wonder, if we find sometime the like errors here
in our Courts. We are to humble ourselves for the sins of our Courts, Isai.
59.14, 15, 16. 2 Chronicles 19.10. It may be every one will not Judge it an iniquity
to sine the injury of twenty pound at two hundred; we read of restoration
twofold, fourfold, sevenfold, but never one hundredfold. But is it not a
wickedness to suffer blasphemy to pass unpunished, and Sodomitical Rapes?
what will become of rigor without mercy, is yet unknown.

Use 2. To teach men of place, First, not to affect seats of Justice, they will
not secure them. Secondly to prevent these errors, which is done by, 1. Gods
fear, 2 Chronicles. 19.6, 7.2. Not judging by the hearing of the ear, Isai. 11, 3,
4. unless both ears be open. 3, Rejection of gifts, Isai. 33.15.

Use 3. To refute the Popes infallibility of Judgment; for he has not such a
promise of infallibility, as the King has, Prove. 16.10.

Use 4. To moderate men's eagerness to suits at Law.

Object, Why may I not sue for my Right?

Answ. But can you tell that you shall attain your right by suit?

Use 5. To teach us Private censurers may err much more, who have not received
like promises.

Doct. 2. God will find a time to Judge both the righteous and wicked, with
every purpose (or will) and every work, verse 17. Not only at the last
Judgment, Matthew. 12.36. 1 Cor. 4, 5. Eccles. 12. last. but even in this life,
Prove. 11.31. Psalm. 9.4, 12, 16, and 7, 11, to 16, and 76, 9, 10. Exodus 22, 22,
23, 24.

Reason 1. The glory of God, Psalm. 9, 16, and 50, 26,

Reas. The restraint and check of the rage and pride of men, Psalm. 9.20.

Reas. 3. The groans and sighs, and expectation of the poor afflicted, Psalm.
12, 5. Psalm. 9.18.

Use 1. To exhort to watchsulnesse in Judgement-seats, and against all secret
unrighteousness, Eccles. 12. last.

Use 2. To exhort to quietness of spirit, when wrong Judgment proceeds,
Eccles. 5.8.

Eccles. 3.18. to 23. 18. I said in mine heart, concerning the estate of the
sons of men, that God might manifest them, and that they might see that they
themselves are beasts. 19. For that which befalls the sons of men, befalls
beasts, even one thing befalls them: as the one dies, so dies the other;
yea, they have all one breath, so that a man has no preeminence above a beast:
for all is vanity. 20. All go unto one place, all are of the dust, and all
turn to dust again. 21. Who knows the spirit of man that goes upward, and
the spirit of the beast that goes downward to the earth? 22. Wherefore I
perceive that there is nothing better then that a man should rejoice in his own
works: for that is his portion: for who shall bring him to see what shall be
after him?

SOlomon having oberved a vanity that befalls the estates of men, First, by
the overuling providence of God, limiting all their changes, verse 1. to 14.
Secondly, By the hand and government of Courts of Justice over other men, verfe
16.17. Least this should reflect any dishonor upon the providence of God,
whereby he governs all things in the world wisely, righteously, holily: He
takes up and gives himself and others a twofold satisfaction in this point,
from a twofold meditation. 1. From the order of which God will take to
redress all the iniquities of Courts of Justice, both in this and in another
world, verse 17. 2. From the end which God aymeth at in leaving Courts of
Justice to such iniquity, which is double, First, God does it to try them;
Secondly, He does it to let them see, They are as beasts one to another, verse
18. And to convince them the more of this latter, that men be but beasts, he
argues it not only from their usage of one another as beasts, but from sundry
events common to them with beasts; that which befalls the sons of men,
befalls the beasts, to both alike. Which he argues, First, for their bodies
in three particulars: 1. In the likeness of their deaths, as one dies, so
dies the other. 2. In the likeness of their breath, they have all one breath,
verse 19. 3. In their burial and resolution of their bodies; all turn to the
dust as they came from it. Secondly, For the soul or spirit of man which goes
upward, and the spirit of the beast that goes downward, this difference is not
known or acknowledged, discerned, or considered by men generally, to wit, not
by natural men at all, verse 21. From whence he takes this Corollary, That
seeing a man can take so little comfort or contentment in the estate or course
of other men, therefore so to live as a man may rejoice in his own works,
verse 22. which he proves First, from the propriety he has in that course, it
is his portion. Secondly, From the impossibility to know what shall be after
him, verse 22. or from his uncertainty of future events. To gather up all the
points here delivered into a narrow room, all may be comprised in one note of
doctrine; the reasons thereof and the uses thereof also, let us handle them.

Doct. 1. He that shall ponder in his heart, and consider the estate of the
sons of men, shall find that God would have men to say they are as beasts,
verse 18.19. That which Solomon upon serious pondering in his heart the estates
of the sons of men, did resolve and say it, that God does this or that about
them, that they might see themselves to be as beasts: the same another
Christian pondering the matter in his heart may discern, resolve it, and say
it, Psalm. 49, 12, 20, and 73, 22. Prove. 30.2. more brutish then any man; which
implies that First, all men are brutish, Secondly, he more then others. When
God will clear it to Peter that he might converse with all sorts of men, he
shows him in a vision that God would have him eat of all beasts, Acto
10.12.13, 28.

Reason. 1. From the violent, and fraudulent and beastly oppression of men in
authority over the poor people, Prove. 28.15. Zeph. 3, 3. Luke 13.32. Psalm,
10.9. Dan. 7.4, to 7. Ezekiel. 21.31. Genesis 10.9. 1 Samuel 26.20.

Reason 2. From the like occurrences, or events befalling their outward man or
body in their, First, lives; both a like subject to hunger, cold, hears,
labor, weariness, sickness, pains, yea man's body more subject to these then
the beasts. Secondly, Deaths, both mortal alike. Whether, 1. By a natural
death, 2. By a violent death, as hanging, drowning, stoning, burning, stabbin,
etc. 3, Burials. First, both alike resolved to dust as they come from it,
excepting some special privilege, as Christ, Henoch, Eliah. Secondly, both
subject to base contempt, Jer. 22.19.

Reason 3, From men's prostituting of their souls to like or worse conditions
then that of the souls of beasts; who of all the sons of men, in an estate of
vanity (or nature) considers or knows (that is acknowledges) the
difference of his soul which goes upwards, from the soul of the beast, which
goes downwards? For, men cleave to earthly things to maintain this life as
do the beasts: both alike follow their sensual Appetites; immortal food and
raiment of the soul is generally neglected. The immortal soul cannot feed upon
bodily meats and drinks, nor be satisfied with silver or gold, but with the
favor of God, the blood of Christ, the gifts of the spirit, the Ordinances of
God, communion of Saints, etc. All which are neglected.

Use 1. To teach us to look at Magistrates and Courts of Justice as set up of
God for trial of men, (as well as for other ends.) To try, First, Magistrates
themselves [Magistratus indicat virum] Place of government tries the spirit of
a man, whether it be just or corrupt, liberal or covetous, valiant or fearful,
for God or for man. Secondly, Subjects. Prove, 28.12. for hidden read tried or
searched; as Prove. 20.27. Genesis 44.12. Subjects tried in their, 1. Faith, Heb.
11.36. 1 Pet. 4 12. 2. Patience, Luke 21.19. 3. Obedience, Acts 4.19. Let
Magistrates look at their places as Furnaces to try them. Let people look at
Magistrates, especially unjust ones, as sent of God to try them.

Use 2. To teach all self debasement; Magistrates when they prove unjust, rule
over the people as beasts, and all the people naturally live as beasts that
perish, laboring for the meat that perishes; and so for perishing Raiment,
Honor, Pleasure, and Profit, ever since we affected to become as Gods, Genesis
3.5. we fell to be like the beasts; whence God clothed our Parents fallen with
the skins of beasts, Genesis 3.21. Yea, our bravest clothing is with webs of
Silk-works, as 1. Expresiing whom we are like, Job. 25.6. 2. presaging what we
shall one day be covered with, Job 17.14, and 21, 26.

Use 3. To stir us up to consider better of our souls, and to make better
provision for them, least we live and dye like beasts, Joh. 6, 27.

Use 4. To refute the Popish opinion of Limbus patrum, which they place in the
earth beneath, Bellar. de purgat. l. 2. c. 6. But here we see the souls of men
before Christ's Resurrection went upward.

Use 5. To teach us so to live as we may rejoice in our works; there is little
comfort in living like beasts that perish; but there is rejoicing in a
Christian course, Isai. 64, 5. 2 Cor. 1.12.

Motives, First, It is our portion, Eccles, 3.22. as that which, 1. Maintains
us with necessaries, conveniences, and delights for the present, Prove. 16, 8.
2. Makes up all other losses and crosses, Acts 20.23, 24. Psalm. 73, 26.3,
Makes provision for another world, 1 Timothy 6, 17, 18, 19. Luke 16.9, and 12, 33.

Secondly, uncertainty of future events, if we leave our good works to be done
by our last Wills and Testaments, it is uncertain how they may be fulfilled.

Eccles. 4.1, 2, 3. Verse. 1. So I returned and considered all the oppressions
that are done under the Sun, and behold the tears of such as were oppressed,
and they had no comforter: and on the side of their oppressors there was
power, but they had no comforter. 2. Wherefore I praised the dead which are
already dead, more then the living which are yet alive. 3. Yea, better is he
then both they, which has not yet been, who has not seen the evil work that
is done under the Sun.

IN this Chapter Solomon proceeds to declare other vanities that befall the
estates of the sons of men in this world, over and besides the vanity which
befell them either by the just and wise government of Gods providence, or by the
unjust administration of men's government or judgment seats. In the estates of
men do arise the vanities here observed: first from the neglect of compassion
to men oppressed, verse. 1, 2, 3. Secondly, from envy, verse 4. Thirdly, from
idleness, verse 5.6. Fourthly, from covetousness, verse 7, 8. Fifthly, from
solitariness, verse, 9, to 12. Sixthly, from wilfulness, verse 13, to 16.
Solomon turning his mind from considering former vanities, and now considering
oppressions, he fastneth his thoughts chiefly upon the sad and pitiful estate
of men oppressed.

This estate is set forth, First, by their adjunct, want of comfort or succor:
and they had no comforter, twice repeated. Secondly, by the contrary strength
and store of power in their oppressors; So great that some translate that the
oppressed had no power of escaping from it: and the words may bear both; verse
1. Thirdly, By the effect which then it wrought in himself, to wit, to praise,
1. The dead above the living, verse 2.2. The unborne above the other, verse 3.

Doctr. 1: It is a vanity that befalls the estates of men under the Sun, that
men of power abuse it to oppression. And a further vanity that men oppressed
(though lamentably oppressed, yet) have no comforter: And yet a further vanity,
that a wise man (even a godly wise man) considering this, is subject to wax
weary of his life, Micah 2. verse 1, 2. 1 Kings 21.7. Psalm. 58.2. Yea, Moses
the meekest on Earth, Number. 12.3.

Reason of abusing the power, First the power of corrupt nature, which will
have a time to put forth it selse to the utmost, Ier. 3, 5. Secondly, Folly and
Arrogance joined with power, 1 Kings 12.10, 11.

Reason of no comforter, First, Neglect of Gods fear, Job 6.14. Secondly,
Fear of men, 1 Samuel 23, 11, 12. Thirdly, The strength of Gods wrath, who when
he chasteneth, he will suffer none to help, Job 9.13, and 34, 29. Psalm. 88.18.
with 38.11. Fourthly, Contempt of men cast down, Job 12.5. Fifthly,
Sensuality, Amos 6.4, 5, 6. Sixthly, Inhumanity, Luke 10.30, 31, 32. Seventhly,
Scruple of conscience, through difference of Religion, John 4.7, 9. Luke 9.52,
53.

Reasons of wise men's weariness of life to behold or feel this, First,
distemper of their minds, Eccles. 7, 7. through, 1. Judging of things according
to sense, not according to faith, 2. Doubt of Gods providence in temptation. 3.
Impatience, Luke 21.19. Secondly, Depth and Tenderness of compassion and zeal
which makes them utterly unwilling to behold the violence of oppressors,
through zeal, Hab 1.2, and v. 12, 13. and Tears of the oppressed, through
compassion, Habac. 1.3. Ier. 9.1, 2.

Use of the abuse of power to oppression. First, To behold the vanity of all
estates by the fall; power which was given to help the afflicted, is abused to
crush them. Thus greater men (as Fishes) devour the less, Habac. 1, 14.
Secondly, To warn men of power to beware of the abuse.

Use of no comforter, 1. To teach all men oppressed, to seek first to make
their peace with God; for if he be angry, the strong helpers fail, Job 9, 13,
and 34, 29. Secondly, to teach such as behold the tears of the afflicted, to
cast out such corruptions and temptations as might hinder our compassion, as
these before spoken of; Neglect of Gods fear, Fear of men, Contempt,
Sensuality, Inhumanity, Scruple of Conscience, Heb. 13.3. Gal. 6.10. Luke
10.33, to 37.

Quest. How may I know, when God calls me to succor and comfort a man
afflicted or oppressed?

Answ. When three things concur, 1. His necessity, Job 31.19, and 29, 12, 17.
2. My ability, Prove. 3.27, 28. 3. God offering opportunity, Luke 10.33. Gal.
6.10.

Use of the wise man's weariness of life to behold this, First, to teach godly
wise men to beware of a snare in the best virtues. It is a gracious and
precious virtue, Tenderness of compassion to men of misery. And yet the
beholding of men in misery, may breed in the wisest a coffeehouse and
weariness of life. Secondly, to teach us in such a case rather to live by
faith, in suffering oppression our selves, Heb. 10.34. or beholding the
afflictions of others, Eccles. 5, 8.

Use of all the three parts of the doctrine; If men of power be apt to abuse
their power to oppression, and men oppressed do often find no comforter, and
that a wise good man considering this, be subject to wax weary of his life:
Then it may teach us to be compassionate and succourful to the oppressed. This
may heal and prevent the two latter vanities, and remove the first, Job 6.14,
and 19, 21, and 29, 25. Luke 10.33. 1 Pet. 3.8. Romans 12.15, Psalm. 72.4.

Motives, First, Gods example, 2 Cor. 7.6. Psalm. 146.7. and 145, 8, 9. And his
example is of necessary imitation in such cases, Matthew. 18.33. Prove. 12.10.
Exodus 23.5. Secondly, Danger upon neglect of it, 1. From God, Exodus 22, 22, 23,
24. Iam. 2.13. Amos 6.6, 7. Psalm. 109.12, 2. From conscience, Genesis 42, 21, 22.
or else searednesse or hardness contracted after softness by Gods just
judgment. 3. From man, 1 Samuel 12, 57, 6. Psalm. 72, 4. Thirdly, Community of
condition, Heb. 13.3. Job 3.13, 14, 15.

Application: 1. To the prisoner, to help his conscience to sight and sense of
his sins, and so to repentance. His servant was diseased with the scurvey which
makes the body weak, and listlesse; and when nature is grown weak, the
retentive faculty is weakened that he has no hold of his excrements. In this
case, compassion would have looked out heating Medicines, wholesome Diet, warm
keeping! what compassion was there in immoderate whipping? Its Egyptian
cruelty, Exodus 5.7, 8, 14. 2. Striking on the head with a Cudgel, leaving
wounds and bruises. 3. Diet with the Lights of a dead beast. 4. Washing his
naked body in cold water, when Ice and Snow lay upon the ground, and putting on
a cold and wet shirt, and kept out from fire. 5. Hanging him over the fire in
the smoke, 6. Binding him on horseback, and he not being able to sit fell on
one side till blood issued at mouth, nose, and ears, denying him a draught of
water; upon this he dies.

Object. But his intention was not to hurt him, at least mortally, but to
reform him.

Answ. Sundry of these acts are not intended of God for reformation, as such
diet, washing in cold water, wet Apparel, and then kept from fire, hanging
over the fire with ^moake, bruises on the head. 2. Intention to destroy is no
necessary ingredient to murder. As in case First, Of knocking a servant when
death follows, Exodus 21.20, 21. If one or two violent strokes of correction
on which death follows be Capital, is it not alike Capital to shorten life by
many acts of rigor hastening death by degrees? Secondly, Of killing a child
in the womb, Exodus 21, 22, 23. Thirdly, Of not keeping up a goring Ox, Exodus
21, 29. Two things be requisite to make casual killing murder. viz. 1. To be
conversant in Re illicita, whence death follows as the Benjamites in defiling
the Levites Concubine, Judge. 19.25, 26. 2. in re licita non adhibere debitam
diligentiam ad evitandum mortale periculum: as in these three cases: hence such
as give Poculum amatorium, whence death follows, summo supplicio afficiuntur.
Co. Tom. 1. Part. 2. Col. 2. page 592. Its done, licet non malo animo, yet malo
exemplo.

Object. 2. Most of his hard usage, was before his first coming to prison,
after which he began to recover.

Answ. First, It argues the prison was better to him, then his Masters house:
In prison he mended and began to recover; in his Masters house he relapsed, and
decayed. Secondly, his disease was never thoroughly cured, and therefore all his
hard usage before and after imprisonment, tended to increase his disease, and
hasten his death.

Eccles. 4.4. Verse. 4. Again, I considered all travel, and every right work,
that for this a man is envied of his neighbor: this is also vanity and
vexation of spirit.


SOlomon having showed the vanity that befalls the estates of the sons of men
by oppression, in v. 1, 2, 3. He now in this verse speaks of the vanity that
befalls them by reason of envy, verse 4. and then proceeds to speak of the
vanity that befalls a man from himself, through First, Idleness, verse. 5,
6, Secondly, Covetousness, verse. 7, 8. Thirdly, Solitariness, verse. 9, to 12.
Fourthly, Wilfulness, verse. 13, to 16.

Doctr. It is a vanity afflicting the spirits of men, that when a man's work is
right, and he has taken pains to do that which is good and right, yet for all
this he shall be envied of his Neighbors.

Reason of envy at good: First, pride of heart, and excessive self-love; For
envy is the sadness of the heart for the good that we see in another; in
regard so much glory (or praise) seems to be taken from us, as is given to
him; Eliab taxed that in David, which was his own sin, 1 Samuel 17.28. Hence
hatred of brother, as wishing him deprived of the good he has. Secondly,
Profane and rebellious infidelity; For either we do not believe that our
brother has these gifts given him of God, (for if we did, it would mortify
envy. John 3.26, 27.) and this is profane infidelity: Or else, if we believe
they were forgiven him of God, it is rebellious infidelity to grudge against
Gods goodness, Matthew. 20.15. Thirdly, want of union with Christ, and communion
with our brethren; For if we were united to Christ by faith, and one to another
by brotherly love, the glory of Christ would be a comfort to us, by whomsoever
advanced, Phil. 1.16, to 19, And if we were united in brotherly love one to
another, the honor of one member would be the joy of another, 1 Cor. 12.26.
One finger envieth not another that wears a Gold ring, as taking it for an
ornament of the whole hand, yea of the whole body.

Reason why it is afflictive; First, To the envious person, it rotteth and
wastes the vigor of body and spirit, Prove. 14.30. Secondly, to the person
envied, 1. It is a dangerous threatening loss of life, as in Abel, Joseph,
David, Daniel, Christ; It is murder, Prove. 27.4. 2 It is uncomfortable and
grievous to see a man's self so il-beloved, that his good should be another man's
harm.

Use. To reprove the envious person; see how many foul sins are wrapped up in
his heart; sins against God, his neighbor, and himself. See the Reason.

It argues weakness and baseness of spirit. Quorum similitudinem desperant,
eorum affectant simultatem. Apul. Flo. l. 1: It is weakness of eyes to water
and run at the sight of light. Yea, it is next step to the sin against the holy
Ghost. Both malign others for their goodness; only the one maligneth it as
it is the grace of God, or glory of Christ; the other as it is a glory to a
neighbor. Such as grieve at others good, would rejoice in their evil; Love
grieveth at the evil of another, but envy grieveth at the good of another.

Means against this sin: First, faith to discern whence gifts spring, John
3.27. Secondly, Love to look at them as given to our use. What if all the Town
were good Physicians, and I only had no skill that way? The more ready help it
would be to me. What though Deborah did not kill Sisera, but Jael? yet Deborah
rejoices in it heartily, Judges 25.24.

Use 2. To teach men in well-doing what to expect; Not applause, nor
encouragement, but envy. And yet not thereby to be discouraged from well-doing:
Nor to think it strange to find such unchristian entertainment, even amongst
Christians.

Eccles. 4.5, 6. 5. The fool foldeth his hands together, and eats his own
flesh. 6. Better is an handful with quietness, then both the hands full with
travel and vexation of spirit.

SOlomon having showed the vanity that befalls men through Oppression, and
Envy, he proceeds to show the vanity that befalls the estate of men though
idleness; where he describes the idle person, First, by his Adjunct of folly,
the fool. Secondly, By his cessation from action, and his composing himself to
that cessation, a fool foldeth his hands together: Thirdly, By the cause of
that his cessation or restinesse, a deceitful imagination of the betterment of
an handful with ease and quietness, then of both the hands full with travel
and vexation of spirit, verse 6.

Doct. 1. An idle person by his forbearance of labor makes himself both a
fool and a beggar; or a man that withholdeth himself from labor, does both
befool and undo himself. Folding of the hands together, is an act of an idle
or slothful person, First, withholding himself from labor, Secondly,
Composing himself to rest, or sleep, Prove. 24.30, 33, and 6, 10. It is all
one, whether he fold his fingers together, or fold his arms together, put his
hands into his pocket or bosom, Prove. 19, 24. All alike express cessation
from labor with a mind to forbear it.

Reasons of befooling himself, First, it is folly to mistake Names and Natures
of things, especially to delude our selves with false names. To account and
call that to be quietness which is idleness, sloathfulnesse, sluggishnesse,
to account diligent labor, Travel, vexation of spirit. Secondly, It is folly
to think an handful will be gotten with idleness; whereas nothing will be so
gotten, Prove. 13.4, and 20, 4, and 23, 21, and 24, 34. Thirdly, It is folly to
think an handful gotten with ease and idleness, is better then both the
handfuls with diligent labor; whereas a little gotten with labor is more
precious and comfortable, Eccles, 5.12. Prove. 12.27. Fourthly, It is folly, yea
a foolish tempting of God, to separate the end from the means; to expect
maintenance without labor, Genesis 3.17. Prove. 10.4. Fifthly, It is a like folly
to separate the means from the end, God having given hands to labor, mind
and wit to employ in some honest calling, for private and public good ends,
which to neglect is a sloathful folly, Matthew. 25.26. 6. It is a folly for a man
to prefer his wisdom and practice above others who excel him, verse 6. This
folly is very incident to idle persons, Prove. 26.16.

Reasons of undoing himself, First, By wasting and neglecting the means of
his subsistence, Prove. 18.9. Eccles. 10.18. Prove. 20.4. No man's estate is
infinite or bottomless. Prove. 27.24, to 27. Secondly, By breeding diseases,
wasting body; Rest to the body is as Rust to Metal: 3 By corrupting the mind
with Wantonness, Pride, Folly. Ezekiel. 16.49. Standing Pools gather mud and
venomous vermin. 4 By wasting a man's Kindred also who are his own flesh.

Use 1: To wean us from Idleness, as that which makes us both Fools and
Beggars. See all the Particulars in the Reasons.

It is a sin against the third Commandment, as spending our Time and Talents
in vain. Against the fourth Commandment, as not laboring fix days, and so
unfitting us for Rest on the seventh. Against the fifth Commandment, Pro.
10.5. Against the sixth Commandment, in the Text. Against the seventh
Commandment. Ezekiel. 16.49. Against the eighth Commandment, Pro. 10.4. and
19.15. and 20.4. Idleness is counted a Gentleman's life, but it is a base and
foolish Condition.

Use 2. To observe the deceitfullness of Sin: to cover and color Idleness with
the name of Quietness, but Labor with the name of Travel and Vexation of
spirit: Selflove makes us apt to make a good construction of our own ways: The
vicinity or neerness of Virtue and Vice, makes us apt to mistake and miscall
one for another.

Use 3. To teach Parents to train up their Children in a way of Diligence. If
either Parent be idle, Children will follow the worse part. God gave Christ a
Calling to be King, Priest and Prophet to his Church: the Angels have all a
Calling, Heb. 1.14. Adam in Paradise a Gardener, Genesis 2.15. Cain a Husbandman,
Abel a Shepherd, Noah a Vinedresser. Kings must be diligent and provident, Pro.
27.23. to 27. Queens Huswifes, Pro. 31.

Use 4. To teach us to labor most in our chiefest work. 2 Pet. 1.10. Phil.
2.12.

Eccles. 4.7, 8. 7 Then I returned, and I saw vanity under the Sun. 8. There is
one alone, and there is not a second, yea he has neither child nor brother:
yet is there no end of all his labor, neither is his eye satisfied with
riches, neither says he, For whom do I labor and bereave my soul of good?
This is also vanity, yea it is a sore travel.

IN the former Verses next going before, Solomon observed the vanity that
befalls the estates of the sons of men through Idleness. In these two verses
he observes as great a Vanity that befalls the sons of men through needless
Painfulness; to wit, the Painfulness that Covetous men put themselves to,
without 1 Cause. 2 End 3 Satisfaction. 4 Recreation or Refreshing. 5
Consideration.

First, Without Cause; he is a Lone man, has no second; no Wife, Child, nor
Brother* Secondly, without End; no end of all his Labor, no term of it.
Thirdly, without Satisfaction; his eye is not satisfied with Riches. Fourthly,
without Refreshing; he bereaveth his soul of good. Fifthly, without
Consideration; he considers not, For whom do I labor, and bereave my soul of
good? but not without Vanity and sore Travel and Affliction.

Doctr. It is a Vanity and sore Travel or Affliction that a Lone man should
put himself to endless and restless labor for Riches, and yet neither his eye
satisfied with it, nor himself refreshed by it, nor he so much as to consider
with himself for whose sake he takes so much Pains, and so little ease and
comfort.

A Lone man] One that has no Second, that is, 1 no Wife, 2 no Child. 3 no
Brother.

Yet there is no end of his labour] No end, no term or cessation; for (...)
signifies not an End of Intention, but an End of Cessation.

Neither is his eye satisfied with riches] that is, his desire, covetous
desire, which looks out of the windows of his eyes: hence covetousness is
called the lust of the eyes, 1 Ioh. 2.16. the eyes being that which, 1.
Breeds Goverousness, Josh. 7.21. 2. Is only fed by it. Eccles. 5.11. He
defraudeth, First, his body of wholesome Diet, Physic, Recreation, Sleep.
Eccles. 15.12. Secondly, his name of honor. Thirdly, his soul of grace. Luke
8.14.

1 Reason why without Cause. First from the just hand of God upon a man that
seeks not nor makes the Lord for his God and sovereign good, that he shall
make the creature, Mammon his God, and so seek it for himself. As a godly man
labors hard to enjoy more of God, whether he have any children or brethren to
leave him to, or no. Matthew. 6.21. Secondly, from the ambitious end of some,
that leaving a great estate behind them, it may be said they lived not like
Drones, or Idlesbies, or Prodigals, or shallow shuttlecocks, but knew how to
live and thrive in the world, Habac. 2.5. He is a proud man, etc.

2 Reason, why without end. First, from want of satisfaction in Riches, Eccl.
5.10. Secondly, from want of attaining a man's proper place, when he has
attained never so great wealth. A stone rests, and cease to move, when it
is fallen to the earth, which is its proper place. But a covetous man cease
not his labor, because his wealth is not his proper place.

3 Reason, why without satisfaction. First, from the insufficiency, 1 Of bodily
things, to satisfy a spirit. 2 Of temporal and transitory things, to satisfy
an eternal and immortal soul. Secondly, From the unnaturalness of this lust;
It is a disease like the dropsy, which is increased by drinking. Yea it is a
lust set on fire from Hell; Habac. 2.5.

4 Reason, why without refreshing. First, from the curse upon
creature comforts, Genesis 3.17. Thorns and Thistles is their fruit. They pierce
the heart through, 1. Tim. 6.10.

5 Reason, why without satisfaction. First, from the nature of sensual and
earthly things, they stupifie the heart. Hence they are said to choke, Matthew.
13.22. Secondly, from the curse of God upon Idolatry; Idols, and they that
worship them, are alike senseless, Psalm 115.8. Esaias 44.18, 19, 20.

Use 1. To observe, That sometimes men of great estates, and great dexterity
and industry to get great estates, may yet want children and kindred to leave
it to, as Nabal. 1 Samuel 25.11. And Abraham long, Genesis 15.2. with 17.17. As on
the contrary some men have wives and store of children, and poor kindred to
leave it to, and yet want estate to leave them. Thus, First, there lies a
vanity upon all men's estates: The poor eats his bread with sorrow, because he
has so little, for so great an household. The rich, because he has not whom to
leave it to. Secondly, God bestows his gifts severally; to some children and
kindred, but no Riches; to others Riches, but no children or kindred. Which
first shows the emptiness of Riches, that can get neither children on earth,
nor father in heaven. Secondly, calls upon others for more thankfulness, who
have both wealth and children.

Use 2. To teach such as have children, to be more diligent in their calling,
and to be more provident in their expenses; For Solomon counts it a vanity
and sore travel, for men that want children to take such pains; not for them
that have many, 2 Cor. 12.14. 1 Timothy 5.8. It is engrafted in nature, the old to
provide for the young. The want whereof God accounts want of understanding in
the Ostrich, and cruelty, Job 39.14, to 17.

Use 3. To teach the wife her due place: she is a second, not a first; she it
not above her husband (for he is her head, Ephesians. 5.23.) nor beneath children,
or brethren.

Use 4. To dissuade from covetousness. It tireth out body and mind with
restless labor and care. It yields neither satisfaction nor refreshing. It
stupifieth and besotteh the heart.

Use 5. For a sign of covetousness; It sets a man upon more labor then
cause: we rather covet wealth, then consider what to do with it. We bereave our
selves of many useful comforts.

Use 6. To labor for such wealth as will satisfy, and which will not bereave
the soul of good, but feed and refresh it with the chief good, Esaias 55.2, 3.

Eccles. 4.9, to 12. 9. Two are better then one, because they have a good
reward of their labor. 10. For if they fall, the one will lift up his fellow:
but woe to him that is alone when he falls; for he has not another to help
him up 11. Again, if two lie together, then they have heat: but how can one be
warm alone? 12. And if one prevail against him, two shall withstand him: and a
threefold cord is not quickly broken.

UPon occasion of speech of the vanity that befalls the lonesome estate of
men by covetousness, he declares another vanity that befalls the lonesome
estate of men (though covetousness be wanting) through unprofitableness and
helplesness; and therefore prefers the society of two, and much more of
three before lonesomnesse. And that in all the affairs which are incident to
humane life; which are all of them either, first, Voluntary: of which kind he
puts in (as in the rest) one example for many; as labor; Two have a better
reward for their labor, v. 9. Secondly, Casual; if the one fall, the other
shall help up his fellow, Which he amplifieth by the woe or misery that may
befall a lonesome man in such case for want of help, v. 10. Thirdly, natural:
if two lie together, then they have heat: amplified by denial of warmth to one
alone, v. 11. Fourthly, violent; If one prevail against him, two shall
withstand: which he amplifieth by a Proverbiall Epiphonema, A threefold cord is
not easily broken, v. 12.

Doct. Society in all sorts of humane affairs is better then Solitariness.

Some conceive, this place spoken in praise of marriage, and preferment of it
above single life; but though that have the place here, marriage being one kind
of society, yet is not marriage only here meant. Yea, the Proverb of a
threefold cord does not so fitly agree to that. Polygamy is not preferred
before Digamy; I mean before the marriage of two, one man with one woman.

First, in voluntary affairs; God would have two workmen chief about the Ark,
1 Bezaliel. 2 Aholiab. Exodus 31.2, 6. The Egyptians in Pierius Hieroglyphics
expressed the unprofitableness of a solitary man by one millstone which alone
grindeth no meal, but with his fellow is most serviceable to prepare meal,
and so bread for man. In the body all instruments of action are made by paires,
as hands, feet, eyes, ears, legs, things, etc. though but one head; it is
because a man has liberty to consult with many heads in any business of
importance. Yea, if the business be urgent, and require have, yet he has
another, his wife in his own family. In spiritual things, Christ sent forth his
Disciples two by two, Luke 10.1. Paul and Barnabas sent out together, by the
Holy Ghost, Acts 13.2. And when they fell out, Paul took Silas, and Barnabas
took Mark, Acts 15.39, 40. Hence a Pastor and a Teacher appointed to assist one
another for one Congregation, Romans 12.7, 8. In all duties two or three have a
special assistance, Matthew. 18.20.

Secondly, in Casual events; Though a man may travel often, and find no harm,
meet with no fall; or having fallen, may help himself. yer sometimes a
dangerous fall happens, in which society helps and saves, Luke 10.30.
which is most apparent in spiritual falls, 2 Samuel 12.1, to 13. 2 Chronicles. 19.2. In
these falls which are bodily, men sooner feel their falls, and the danger of
them; but in spiritual falls sin is of a venomous nature, and like some
poisons blinds the eyes, and stupifieth the feeling; so that here a faithful
Christian helper is a special mercy.

Thirdly, In natural dispositions and works; if one lie alone, in old and cold
age, or in cold weather, he is without heat, 1 Kings 1.1, 2. Brands of fire
laid together keep heat; one alone, though never so well kindled, goes out. In
spiritual matters much more. Compare 2 Cor. 1.12, 13. with Acts 18.5. See also
2 Chronicles. 24.2, 17, 18. and 26.5, 16.

Fourthly, In violent assaults, one much helps his fellow, 2 Samuel 10.9, to
12. In spiritual assaults it is the like case: Eve alone yielded to the
tempter, who if she had kept with her husband, and consulted with him, might
have resisted the temptation, and kept her innocence.

Reason 1. From the Lords appointment of mankind to live in Societies, first,
of Family, Genesis 2.18. Psalm. 68.6. Secondly, Church, Ephesians. 2.19, 22. Thirdly,
Commonwealth, Ephesians. 2.12.

Reason 2. From the variety of gifts given to the sons of men; and to none
all, that one might stand in need of another, and make use of one another, 1
Cor. 12.8, to 11. Yea, it is so in Civil gifts; No man is skilled in all
Occupations.

Reason 3. From the subordination of some Gifts to others, as the Bricklayer to
the Mason, the maker of mortar to both; whence these together, much further one
another business, and so make better riddance of work, and get a better reward.

Use 1. To refute the Popish Anchorites and Hermites, who think solitary life a
state of perfection; but Solomon judges it a woeful estate.

Use 2. To refute such as love to be alone in all their counsels and
proceedings, and are not willing to communicate with others. Thus pride of
heart makes a man of a savage nature; wild beasts love to go alone, but tame
by flocks and herds. And to teach men to affect society in all their affairs.
Solomon, though full of wisdom, yet had a College of wise Counselors, 1 Kings
12.6.

Use 3. To persuade also seasonably to marriage, yea as preferring it before
single life, Genesis 2.18. Adam had no need of a wife as a remedy against
incontinency, yet married.

Use 4. To teach men in societies to do one another the more good; Else
Solomon's discourse falls: Now a days company does one another much hurt.

Eccles. 4.13. to 16. 13. Better is a poor and a wise child, then an old and a
foolish King, who will no more be admonished. 14. For out of prison he comes
to reign, whereas also he that is born in his kingdom becomes poor. 15. I
considered all the living which walk under the Sun, with the second child that
shall stand up in his stead. 16. There is no end of all the people, even of all
that have been before them: they also that come after shall not rejoice in him:
surely this also is vanity and vexation of spirit.

IN these words Solomon declares the vanity and vexation of spirit that
befalls upon Kings and Princes, and so upon Royal estates; and that from a
double ground, or cause: First, from the Folly and Wilfulness of Kings, v. 13,
14. Secondly, Through the levity and inconstancy of the people, v. 15, 16. The
folly and wilfulness of Kings he argues from the meannesse and baseness of
that estate; and that he aggravateth by an argument a majori, of a far better
estate of a wise child though poor, above a foolish king though old, and so
for age venerable; Preferring the low estate of the one, above the highest
estate of the other, v. 13. And this he proves by the effects of both their
estates; for the poor wise child out of prison comes to reign: the other
born and waxen old in his Kingdom becomes poor, v. 14. In declaring the
levity and inconstancy of the people, he notes it as a vanity found in the
people of all the Nations under the Sun: First, That there is no end (or stay,
or rest) of the peoples affections to their Princes and Governors. Secondly,
That the people will wax weary of the young Prince that shall come after the old
King, after they have tried his government, v. 16. And both these he proves by
his own observation of all the people living in all Nations under the Sun, and
comparing the peoples dealing, with the second child that shall stand up in the
old kings stead, v. 15.

Doctr. There is a vanity and vexation of spirit that befalls the estate of
Kings and Princes, partly through their own folly and wilfulness, partly
through the levity and inconstancy of the people.

Reasons of their Vanity through their own folly and willfullness. First, from
the preferment of a wise Child in his worst estate above such a Prince in his
best estate. Childhood is despicable in any, Eccel. 11.10. 1 Timothy 4.12. much
more in Poverty, Eccel. 9.16. Old Age is honorable in any, Levit. 19.32 much
more in Princes. Yet when a King though old, is foolish and wilful, a poor
wise Child is better then he; yea though the Child were a Captive, a Prisoner.
For such a poor Child or Youth may out of Prison come to reign, as Joseph,
Genes. 41.14.40. David, 1 Samuel 18.23. Daniel 6.3. whereas an Old King may by
folly and willfullness become poor, as Pharaoh, Exodus 10.7. Saul, 1 Samuel 28.15.
Ioram., 2 Kings, 6.25. and 7, 13. Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4.33. Manasseh,
Jehoahaz, Jehoiakim, Jeconiah, Zedekiah, all of them Prisoners. 2 Chronicles. 33.11.
and 36.4. and 2 Kings 23.33. and 24.15. and 25.7. The occcasion whereof is, 1
Gods delight to honor the humble, and crush the proud, 1 Pet. 5.5. Job 40.11,
12. 2 Pride is the root of Willfullness.

Reason of their Vanity through the Levity of the People, From their aptness to
wax weary of any Prince or Governor. 1 Samuel 8.7. 2 Samuel 15.12, 13. 1 Kings.
1.11. And this springs from want of attainment of their Ends in their
Magistrates. There is no end of all the People, v. 16. Every thing rests in
the attainment of his End. The End of Magistracy is set down 1 Timothy 2.2. This
the People not Attending, nor attaining, they cannot rest. Hence they are
compared to waves of the Sea, never still; sometimes full Sea; sometimes
Low Water, Psalm. 65.7. Rev. 17.15. Isa. 57.20,

Use 1 To teach us that Royal state is no Sanctuary nor Preservative from folly
and willfullness. Not only wicked kings, but all, have had their Pangs and
streins of folly; David's Numbering the People, 2 Samuel 24.10. Adultery and
Murder. Solomon's love of strange Wives, and Toleration yea Countenance of
Idolatry. Asa, his League with Benhadad, Imprisonment of the Prophets, and
Trust in Physicians. Jehoshaphat, his affinity with Ahab, and League with
Idolaters. Hezekiah showing his Treasures to the Ambassadors of Babell. Josiah
his War against Pharaoh-Necho. Yea Willfullness found not only in Pharaoh,
Exodus 5.1, 2. in Saul, 1 Samuel 20.30 to 33. in Jeroboam, 1 Kings 13.33. in Jehu,
2 Kings 10.29, 31. but sometimes in good kings; in David, 2 Samuel 24. 1 to 4. in
Asa, 2 Chronicles. 16.9, 10.

Causes hereof, First, Gods hand, Psalm. 107.40. Secondly, Satan. 1 Chronicles. 21.1.
Thirdly, Great Places breed great Spirits, whence Pride springs that
Leaveneth and hardens the whole lump. Jer. 22.21. Fourthly, Old Age is
froward and stiff. Fifthly, Flatterers about Princes lead them into ill Ways
for their own Ends, and stiffen them in them. Hos. 7.3, 5. Amos 7.10 to 13. 1
Kings. 12.10, 11.

A Warning, First, To Princes, to pray for a wise and learning heart. 1 Kings
3.9. Secondly, To People to strive with God for their Princes. Psalm. 72.1.2.

Use 2. To refuse Admonition, is a great folly even in a Prince, even in an Old
Prince. 1 Kings. 12.6, 7, 13. 2 Chro. 16, 9, 10. More hope of a fool then of
such, Prove. 26.12. and 12.1. It brings the Commonwealth into a snare, Pro.
29.8. How much more foolish is this willfullness either in Meaner or Younger
People?

Use 3. To teach us the Excellency of Wisdom, which Youth, yea Childhood and
Poverty cannot Debase, but it will arise to preferment. And the Baseness of
Folly and Stubbornness, which Nobility and Age cannot honor.

Use 4. To teach Parents to train up their Children to wisdom, and therefore
to Learning and Godliness; and withal to break them of their willfullness that
so they may be fit for preferment in the eyes of God and Men.

Use 5. To reprove the Inconstancy of People and the cause thereof, their
neglect of the right End of Magistracy. 1 Timothy 2.2.

Use 6. To wean great men from Popularity, the Peoples favor is unstable. Joh.
5.35. Mattth. 21.8, 9. with 27.22, 23

Eccles. 5.1, 2, 3. Verse. 1. Keep thy foot when thou go to the House of God,
and be more ready to hear then to give the sacrifice of fools: for they
consider not that they do evil. 2. Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not
thine heart be hasty to utter any thing before God: for God is in Heaven, and
thou upon earth: therefore let thy words be few. 3. For a dream comes through
the multitude of business, and a fools voice is known by multitude of words.

IN this Chapter Solomon declares the vanity found, First, in the performance
of Gods worship, v. 1, to 7. Secondly, in marvelling and murmuring at
oppressions in men of place, v. 8. Thirdly, in Riches, v. 9, to 19. In
declaring the vanity found, not in Gods worship, but in men's manner of
performance of it, lest he might seem with the profane, ( Mal. 3.14.) to
esteem it a vain thing to serve God, he rather directs men how to prevent
such vanities, then declares the vanities which they fall into in Gods
worship. His direction in these three verses is, First, in general; to take
heed or look well to our ways, when we enter into holy public assemblies, v.
1. Secondly, in particular: To draw nigh to hear. Whereof he gives a reason,
from the folly of all sacrifices without drawing near to hear, v. 1. Which is
amplified by the Reason thereof, taken from the evil of such a worship, and
their ignorance of that evil, who do so perform it, v. 1. 2 To avoid hastiness
and multitude of words before God. Whereof he gives a twofold reason, First,
from Gods heavenly Majesty, in comparison of earthly baseness, v. 2. Secondly,
from the folly springing from multitude of words, amplified by the comparison
of a dream coming from multitude of business, v. 3. The words may fitly be
opered in opening the Doctrine which arises from them.

Doctr. When we come into the presence of God in holy Assemblies, it is for us
to take heed to our ways, that we may draw nigh to hear, and be serious and
short in speech before the Lord.

To take heed to our feet] is a Metonymie; To take heed to our ways, as Psalm
119.115. and 39.1. Which implies, First, cleansing of our feet (that is our
steps) before holy duties, 1 Pet. 2.1, 2. Psalm. 26.6, 12. John 13.10. Jam. 4.8.
Secondly, attention to the performance of holy duties in an holy manner, Exodus
3.5. Josh. 5.15. Levit. 10.3.

Be more ready to heare] is better translated, Draw nigh to hear, rather then
offer, etc. Which drawing nigh to hear, implies, First, putting away all such
things, as set God far off from us, Jam. 4.8. Psalm. 138.6. Esaias 59.2. Secondly,
sincere desire and purpose of heart, to attend and obey the whole counsel of
God, Acts 10.33. Else we are far off, Mat. 15, 7, 8. Ezekiel. 33.31. Thirdly,
Mingling it with faith, that is, with faithful Application to our selves, Romans
10, 8. Heb. 4.2.

Reason 1. From the folly of all sacrifices (of all other parts of Gods
worship) If attention to the word be neglected: Text. Prove. 28.9. It is an evil
before God, and evacuateth the acceptance of all our oblations, 1 Samuel 15.22,
23. And it is also mixed with vacuity and ignorance, to think we are well
occupied, and spend our time well, when indeed we lose our labor, yea return
worse then we came.

Reason of serious and short speech. 1 From Gods heavenly Majesty in comparison
of our earthly baseness, v. 2. Prove. 10.19. Matthew. 6.7. His heavenly Majesty,
first, knows all our wants when we pray, Matthew. 6.32. Secondly, is a spirit
that is not moved with words, but spirit and life, John 4.23, 24. Thirdly, his
own words, when he speaks to us are spirit and life, John 6.63. And therefore
we must not beat the air in hasty and much speech.

Reason 2. From the vanity and folly of long discourses, whether in prayer or
preaching: Text, v. 3, 7. Prove. 10.19. As a Dream comes by much business, so
a fools voice by multitude of words, v. 3. where blot out in the Translation,
is known.

Use 1. To teach us how we are to esteem holy Assemblies; They are the House of
God. In old time so was the Tabernacle and Temple, 1 Kings 9.1. Psalm 132.5.
and 74.8. and 83.12. Which were Types, First, of Christ body, John 2.21.
Secondly, Of the Church Assembly, 1 Cor. 3.16. Now therefore Church Assemblies
are the Lords house, 1 Timothy 3.15. Not our meeting House, but Gods people in
them, Acts 7.48, 49. John 4.21. 1 Timothy 2.8.

Use 2. To reprove falling down to private prayer, either first, In
meeting houses behind a pillar, in the absence of the people. Secondly, in the
presence of the people, but not joining with them. All public duties should
be performed, first, with one accord, Acts 1.14. and 2.46. and 4.24. Secondly,
to public edification, 1 Cor. 14.26. Also to reprove Latin-service, and
Instruction by Images, which are to be seen, not heard. Likewise to reprove
standing far off, when we may come within hearing. Also careless and
listlesse carriage in the Congregation, standing like pillars, driving away the
time with sleeping, talking gazing about. Likewise running out of doors before
all be ended, Moreover lowness of voice in Ministers, which hinders hearing.

Use 3. To teach us such preparation before hearing, and attention in hearing,
as may be acceptable to God; and profitable to our selves.

Use 4. To teach Ministers in Prayer and Preaching, both Weight of matter, and
shortness of words, Prove. 10.19, 20. and 29, 20,

Object. But was not Christ long in prayer? a whole night, Luke 6.12, and Paul
in preaching, Acts 20.7, 9.

Answ. First, upon extraordinary occasions. Secondly, with as much variety of
matter, and fervency of spirit, as multitude of words.

Eccles. 5.4, to 7. 4. When thou vowest a vow to God, defer not to pay it: for
he has no pleasure in fools: pay that which thou have vowed. 5. Better it is
that thou should not vow, then that thou should vow and not pay. 6. Suffer
not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin, neither say thou before the Angel,
that it was an error: wherefore should God be angry at thy voice, and destroy
the work of thine hands? 7. For in the multitude of dreams, and many words,
there are also diverse vanities: but fear thou God.

IN the three former verses Solomon instructed us to avoid in Gods worship
Unreverent neglect of attention in hearing, and Rashness in speaking before
God. In these verses he instructs against the vanity in the delay or neglect
of payment of vows: When thou have vowed a vow, deser not to pay it. Whereof he
gives six reasons.

Reason 1. From the Folly, yea hateful folly; folly hateful to God, to delay
payment of vows, v. 4.

Reason 2. A majori, from the betterment of not vowing above not paying, v. 5.

Reason 3. From the defilement of the whole man, by the rashness of the mouth
in vowing, which a man should not suffer; Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy
flesh to sin, v. 6.

Reason 4. From the inexcusableness of such a sin, from its not falling under
that kind of sins for which sacrifices are wont to be offered, Neither say thou
before the Angel that it was an error.

Reason 5. From Gods anger and vengeance against such vows, and such excuses,
even to the destroying of the works of a man's hands, v. 6.

Reason 6. From the vanity of such rash vows and speeches, yea the variety of
vanity in them, answerable to what is found in many dreams, v. 7.

Against all which he prescribes an Antidote or preservation, to wit, the
fear of God; but fear thou God, v. 7.

Doct. 1. When a man has vowed a vow to God, he is to pay it, and that without
delay, Deuteronomy. 23.21, 22, 23. Psalm 76.11. and 56.12. Thy vows are upon me, as an
engagement or debt, which a faithful man would be careful to discharge to men,
much more to God, Psalm 50.14. Nahum. 1.15. For opening the point, it is to be
shown, 1. What a vow is* 2. What is a seasonable time of vowing: and whether
now at all in the days of the New Testament? 3. The Reasons against delay of
payment of vows.

1. What a vow is. A lawful vow; it is a promise made to God, wherein a man
binds his soul to perform some acceptable work to God. First, A promise made
to God] wherein it differs from a Prayer. In a Prayer we require something
which God has promised to us. In a vow we promise something to God; Hence in
the Text, the vow is said to be vowed to God, v. 4. and v. 2. Secondly, A man
binds his soul to God in them, Number. 30.4. Thirdly, To perform some
acceptable thing to God; unlawful things we may not vow, as the Jews did,
Acts 23.12, 13. nor impossible, nor unsuitable to our calling. But two sorts of
things are acceptable matter of vows: First, Religious obedience to God in his
Commandments, Psalm 119.106. Genesis 28.20, 21. Secondly, Helps to obedience, and
removal of impediments. Payment of tithes was an help to worship, and to the
maintenance of it in those days when God accepted such a maintenance for his
Priests, Neh 9.38. with 10.29, 32. Genesis 28.22. So contributions, Acts 4.37. So
the vow of a Nazarite, 1 Samuel 1.11. Job 31.1. was a removal of an Impediment.
2 Cor. 11.10. a prevention of dishonor to Paul's Ministry.

2. A seasonable time of vowing, is, 1. When we stand in need of some special
savor from God; then as we desire God might draw more nigh to us in special
mercy, so it is meet we should draw more nigh to God in special duty, Genesis
28.20, 21, 22. Number. 21.1, 2, 3. Secondly, When we have received some special
mercy, Psalm 116.8, 9. and 76.11. Jonah 1.16. Thirdly, When we find our hearts
ready to betray us to this or that evil by occasion, we may vow against such
occasions, and vow also the contrary duties, Job 31.1. 2 Cor. 11.10. which
argues vows are not unseasonable in the days of the Gospel. Fourthly, when we
are to enter into some new Relation whereof God is the Author: and the Duties
of the Relation depend upon our Vows or Covenants with God, and with one
another. Thus in marriage, Prove. 2.17. Malach. 2.14. And in Church Covenant 2
Cor. 8.5. and 11.2.

Reason 1. From the folly, yea, hateful folly, folly hateful to God, to delay
payment, of vows, v. 4.

Reason 2. From the preferment of not vowing before not paying vows, v. 5.

Reas. 3. From the Charg lying upon us to keep our mouths, and the evil of
sin redounding to our whole man by rash Vowing, v. 6. as who should say, We
have sins enough and frailties whereto we are subject otherwise: we had not
need rashly to rush into by such inconsideration.

Reas. 4. From the vanity of the Excuse of such a sin before the Angel, as an
error or ignorance, where by Angel is meant the Priest or Messenger of the
Lord, as Mal. 2.7. before whom the excuser of his rash Vow would come and offer
sacrifice for his ignorance or error, Levit. 4.27, 28. the same word here and
there, and often in that Chapter, as v. 2, 13, 22, 27.

Reas. 5 From the wrath and vengeance of God against such Vows and such
Excuses. God will be angry at thy voice and destroy the works of thy hands.
Thus God was angry with Jacob for Delay, Genes. 34.30. with 35.1. thus he
destroyed Ananias and Sapphira, Acts 5.2. to 5.

Reas. 6 From the variety of vanities in such Vows and Delays, as in Dreams.
to wit in both, first Idleness, and unprofitableness, secondly Confusion,
thirdly Troublesomness, fourthly Contradictions, fifthly Absurdities, sixthly
Fals-hoods.

Use 1. To refute Popish Vows, as to Saints without a Pattern in Scripture.
See Bell. lib. de cultu Sanctorum. c. 9. The like evil is in Vows of Poverty,
Perpetual Single life, and Regular Obedience: they like the Idolatrous praying
Priests, 2 Kings, 23.5. for Incense was a type of Prayer, Psalm. 141.2. Vows to
the Devil, as in Witchcraft: Vows of all unlawful things: for all such Vows,
men that make them, are to be humbled for them, and to break them, lest we draw
in God to bind us to sin.

Use 2. To exhort to Careful Payment of our Vows in Baptism, in
Church Covenant, in Marriage, in our Prayers, wherein we usually promise to
God, Duly, Psalm. 119.32, 33, 34.

Use 3. To exhort to the fear of God, as that which preventeth all these
vanities verse 7. which befall men in Gods worship. This fear of God will help
us, First, To vow in sense of our own insufficiency, either 1. To make vows;
2. To pay vows. Secondly; To depend on Christ for both.

Eccles. 5. v. 8. If thou see the oppression of the poor, and violent
perverting of judgment and justice in a province; marvel not at the matter: for
he that is higher then the highest, regards, and there be higher then they.


AS in the former Verses Solomon sought to prevent the vanities that are wont
to be sound in men's performance of Gods Service: so in this Verse he seeks to
prevent the Vanity of coffeehouse or discouragement that is wont to arise in
men's hearts from the Oppressions of the Poor and the violent wrestings of
justice and judgment.

The Evil here noted, is, Oppression of the Poor, and the wresting of judgment
and justice.

The Remedy he prescribes against the vanity that might arise in men upon
beholding of it, is, not to wonder.

The Reason of not wondering, is from the regard which the most high God, and
others higher then Magistrates have of this matter: for he that is higher then
the highest regards, and there be higher then these.

Doct. The beholding of the Oppression of the poor in a Country, and of the
wresting of justice and judgment, should not put a man to wonder. Rev. 17.6.7.
1 Pet. 4.12.

Object. The Prophets of God inspired by the Holy Ghost have wondered at it.
Isa. 1.21. yea the Lord himself. Isa. 59.14, 15, 16.

Ans. Wondering may arise from a fourfold cause. First, Ignorance of the cause,
Ioh. 7.15. Secondly, Crosness to causes, or expectation from them: Isa. 5.4, 7.
and 59.16. Thirdly, Strangness or Newness. Luke 5.26. Mar. 1.27: Fourthly,
Astonishment or uncertainty what to do. Jer. 4.9. Zach. 12.4. Deuteronomy. 28.28. The
Second sort of Wondering is only incident to God, and that only. The other three
are commonly found amongst men, and are wont to breed in them both discontent
and discouragement.

Reason 1. From the Lords ordering it, so implied in the word (...) keeps;
when he keeps, no hurt done, but as he directs, Isa. 27.3. Prove. 29.26.
Lev. 26.14, 15, 17. Isa. 9.5. Psalm. 109.6.

Reason 2. From Gods sovereignty over such as do oppress the poor and wrest
judgment; and he will require and requite it, Psalm. 12.5. Lam. 3.36. Job 34,
18, 19, 20. and verse 26, 27, 28. Eccles. 3.16, 17.

Reason 3. From the Pre-eminence; and Presidency of Angels over high Princes,
Dan. 4.17. 2 Kings 19.35. Matthew. 18.10.

Use 1. For instruction to people not to wonder at oppressions, or wrestings of
justice or judgment; so as to break forth either into discontent or
discouragement, Psalm. 37.1, 2, 7, 8. But instead of wondering, first enquire the
truth of it, whether it be so or no. Genesis 18.20, 21. Josh. 22.16, etc. with 30,
etc. Secondly, if true, 1 See Gods hand in all, Lam. 3.38. Prove. 29.26. 2 Seek
to Reprove, Ier. 22.17. and Reform, 1 Samuel 14.45. according to our places, 3
Either remove timely, Psalm. 55.6, to 11. or patiently wait upon God, Psalm.
37.3, to 7. and suffer from man.

Use 2. To warn Magistrates and great men to take heed to their ways; The Lord
observes, regards, requiteth, 2 Chronicles. 19.6.

Use 3. For comfort to the poor oppressed: Though no man regard the poor, and
their just cause, yet God and his Angels do.

Eccles. 5.9. to 17. 9. Moreover the profit of the earth is for all: the King
himself is served by the field. 10. He that loves silver, shall not be
satisfied with silver; nor be that loves abundance with increase: this is also
vanity. 11. When goods increase, they are increased that eat them: and what
good is there to the owners thereof, saving the beholding of them with their
eyes? 12. The sleep of a laboring man is sweet, whether he eat little or much:
but the abundance of the rich will not suffer him to sleep. 13. There is a sore
evil which I have seen under the sun, namely, riches kept for the owners
thereof to their hurt. 14. But those riches perish by evil travels, and he
begets a son, and there is nothing in his hand. 15. As he came forth of his
mothers womb, naked shall he return to go as he came, and shall take nothing of
his labor which he may carry away in his hand. 16. And this also is a sore
evil, that in all points as he came, so shall he go: and what profit has he
that has labored for the wind. 17. All his days also he eats in darkness,
and he has much sorrow and wrath with his sickness.

IN these words the Holy Ghost sets forth the vanity of covetousness, or
the love of money, by sundry arguments: First, from the unsatiableness of it,
v. 10. amplified by the contrary sufficing and satisfying profit which the
earth or field yields to all sorts, even to Kings, v. 9. Secondly, From the
Diversion (or turning aside) of the profit of wealth to others; and reserving
no more benefit to the owners then the bare sight thereof, v. 11. Thirdly, From
the disrest, and unquietness which abundance, 1. of meats and drinks, 2. of
cares, yields to the owner, by the excess: amplified by the contrary sweet
and quiet sleep and rest of the laboring servant, v. 12. Fourthly, From the
hurt redounding to the owners by wealth, v. 13. Fifthly, from the perishing of
riches by evil travel, v. 14. Sixthly, from the penury his seed may fall into,
v. 14. Seventhly, from the necessity of leaving all behind him in death, v. 15,
16. Eighthly, from the many crosses and; exations which befall a man in his
life time, from his wealth, v. 17.

Doctr. The earth yields sufficient profit unto all sorts of men, from the
king to the meanest servant; but not to covetousness, 1 Chronicles. 27.26, to 31.
Prove. 27.23, to 27. and 31.16. 2 Chronicles. 26.10. Amos 2.1. It is bread that
strengthens man's heart above all other meats, Isa. 3.1. It is the staff, Psalm
104.15. Genesis 43.8. It is scarcity of bread that makes a famine, not other
commodities. And even the beasts and flocks are maintained by the earth.

Reason of the earths yielding profit sufficient, First, God provideth it as
meet that that which bred us should feed us. Secondly, That labor might be
encouraged, and not lost, Genesis 3.19. Thirdly, to beat into us a sense of our
mortality; as the earth bred us, so it feeds us, till we return to it.

Not so covetousness, or the love of money, or of wealth.

Reas. 1. From the unsatiableness of Covetousness v. 10. It is agreat vanity
when we covet a Creature which cannot satisfy us when we have it. Hunger is
satisfied with meat, Thirst with drink: but Hunger and Thirst after Wealth is
not satisfied with Wealth. The love of meat and drink will make a man willing to
use and spend them: but the love of Money and Silver will not suffer a man to
spend them. A poor man's poor estate may be relieved by one wealthy man's
Beneficence: but the hunger of the Covetous cannot be satisfied with an hundred
men's estates: A sign his heart and mind is unmeasurably poor and miserable. A
man that is still hungry when he has eaten enough (as in the (...)) or is
still thirsty when he has drunk enough (as in the Dropsy) Physicians say opus
habet purgatione, non impletione so is it with the Covetous man: though the
Covetous man may say and think he lays up for his Heirs, yet he would not
have his Heirs to spend it, but like Conduite-pipes to convey it from one to
another.

Reas. 2. From the unprofitableness of abundance: it increases not our
Comforts but Expenses, 1 Kings 4.22, 23. Servants must be multiplied sutably 1
to our business: to our Rank. The eye is only fed with it, but neither that to
satisfaction.

Reason 3. From the Disrest and Disquietness which Abundance yeildeth by
excess, 1 of Meats and Drinks. 2. Cares, and want of Sleep, v. 12. which
comes to pass First by filling the Stomach, and so straitning the Lungs, that
they cannot breathe freely. Secondly, by sending up store of Fumes and vapors
into the Brain, which sill it with excrements, and emptyeth itself in Rhewms
and Flegmes, which by Spitting, Coughing, and Dreams, interrupt Sleep. Thirdly,
by stupifying the Animal spirits which should recreate and refresh the Brain.
Fourthly, by heating the Brain in the Night with study and cares. But Labor
breeds sweet Sleep, I when he eats little, his senses close for want of
spirits to quicken and open them. 2 when a man eats much. First, by exciting
natural heat by Labor. Secondly, by washing superfluous humors, and so
keeping the Stomach and Brain clean.

Reas. 4 From the hurt Redounding to the Owners, by Wealth, v. 13. Hurt, 1 To
the body, 1 Kings, 21.6, 7, 8.2 To the Soul, First leading it into many
Temptations, 1 Timothy 6.9. Psalm. 69.22. Secondly, Choking good seed, Matthew.
13.22. Thirdly, hardening men's hearts in evil of impenitency, Romans 2.4, 5.

Reason 5. From the perishing of riches by evil Travel, verse 14. either,
First, of a man's self, as by an ill haunt to Hawks, Hounds, Whores, or
Suretiship, Buildings, Gaming, costly Apparel. Secondly, of his Household,
children, servants, wasting and consuming the estate. Thirdly, of his enemies,
Job 1.14, 17.

Reason 6. From the penury incident to rich men's children, nothing in his hand;
1. No wealth, 2, No labor. First, neither wit, Secondly, nor skill, Thirdly,
nor strength to it.

Reason 7. From the necessity of leaving all behind a man at death, verse
15.16. Job 1.21. 1 Timothy 6.7, Only laden they are with more sin, else stripped of
all outward things, First, Honors, Psalm. 49, 17. Secondly, Profits, Luke
12.20. Thirdly, Pleasures, Heb. 11, 25. we come into the world crying, we go
out mourning and groaning. Hence all labor for wealth is for wind. First, We
cannot hold and keep it, Secondly, It swells us like empty bladders.

Reason 8. From the much anguish and sorrow and vexation which wealth causes,
through, First, losses and crosses. Secondly, Fears of after evils. Thirdly,
Darkness through want of spiritual light.

Use 1. To encourage to husbandry and feeding of Cattle and all labor about
the earth. It breeds sufficing profit, The earth is a cisterne to the sea
also.

Use 2. To reach Kings not to destroy the fruits of the earth: They undo
themselves.

Use 3. To acknowledge the bounty of God in providing so fruitful a nurse for
us, Acts 14.16, 17.

Use 4. To dissuade from covetuosnesse which is when we love riches, First, For
themselves, nor for their use. Secondly, Are not satisfied with them. Thirdly,
are not content with what the earth may produce for Diet, Clothing, and Lodging.

Use 5. To teach a painful poor man thankfulness.

Use 6. To teach all men, even rich men, moderation of Diet, and diligence of
labor, Prove. 31.13, 19, 27.

Use 7. To teach wealthy men to beware of ill haunts, Prove. 6.26, and 21, 17,
and 23, 21, but rather to employ their estates in some profitable matter, they
will else come to an ill end.

Use 8. To teach Parents to leave their children, First, A good covenant;
Secondly, custom to labor. Any other wealth may come short to them.

Eccles. 5.18, 19, 20. 18. Behold that which I have seen: it is good and
comely for one to eat and to drink, and to enjoy the good of all his labor
that he takes under the Sun, all the days of his life which God gives him:
for it is his portion. 19. Every man also to whom God has given riches and
wealth, and has given him power to eat thereof, and to take his portion, and to
rejoice in his labors; this is the gift of God. 20. For he shall not much
remember the days of his life: because God answers him in the joy of his
heart.

SOlomon having showed in the former verses, the abuse of wealth by
coverousnesse, in these words he shows a contrary good use of wealth. First,
in good men, verse 18. Secondly, In all men, verse 19. In good men he says it
is comely and beautiful to eat, drink, and enjoy the good of all his labor all
the days of his life, which God gives him, verse 18.

Reason hereof he gives, First, from the condition of his estate, and of this
use of it; it is his portion, verse 18. Secondly, From the quiet passing away
of his time without sad remembrances of it, for he shall not much remember the
days of his life; the reason whereof he gives from Gods answering his heart
in comfort, verse 20. In all men to whom God has given wealth, it is a gift of
God, 1. To have power to eat of it; 2. To take his portion. 3. To rejoice in
his labor, verse 19.

Doct. To eat and drink, and to enjoy the good of a man's labor, it is comely
in a good man, and it is the gift of God in any man, Eccles. 2.26, and 3, 12,
13, and 2, 24.

Reasons to confirm it, 1. From Solomon's experience; behold I have seen it (or
found it) verse 18.

Reason 2. From the evil disease and vanity that lies upon a man, when he is
denied the power to make use of it, Eccles. 6.2.

Reas. 3. From the Condition of men's Estates in this world. It is their
portion, v. 18. both to good men, v. 18. and to evil men. Psalm. 17.14. As a
Portion, 1. It furnishes us with necessaries, expediences, delights, 2. It
makes up crosses and losses. 3. It makes Provision for after times, yea for
another world, 1 Timothy 6.17, 18, 19.

Use 4. It is the Fruit or end, or good of his labor, v. 18.

Use 5. From the shortness of the days of a man's life, v. 18. He that
reserveth the use of all till old age, may die before he come to use it at all;
Or else be then unable to use it, 2 Samuel 19.35.

Reason 6. From the joy and comfort, wherein God answers a good man's heart,
in enjoying the good of his labor, verse 20. Now to enjoy the good of it,
implies, First, the reaping of the fat and sweet of it our selves: Secondly,
to impart the good of it unto others also, Eccles. 3.12, 13. Isai. 64.5.

Reason 7. From the little thought or remembrance which such a good man takes
how his time spends, verse 20. For he does not much remember the days of his
life, which is an effect of the former joy; which is as oil to the wheels and
so make our time to pass easily, all the days of the afflicted are evil,
Prove. 15.15. and he takes sad thoughts and remembrance of the revolution of
times, Job 7.3, 4. If an evil man take as little thought and remembrance of his
time it is not comely for him; It becomes him not, Job 21.13.

Use 1. To teach good men, yea to encourage them, to enjoy the good of their
estates; It is comely for them, Psalm. 33.1. Not so for a wicked man, Prove. 26,
1, and 19, 10. All the former reasons of the doctrine are as motives to the use.

Use 2. To teach all men, that any good which they enjoy from the creature, is
the gift of God, and therefore they to look to God to enjoy the giver as well
as his gift.

Use 3. To teach men to give themselves to labor, else how shall they enjoy
the good of their labor?

Use 4. To teach us to number our life by days, verse 18. Genesis 47.9.

Use 5. To reckon our life and all the days of them as Gods gift, verse 18.
Lament. 3.22.

Use 6. To teach us the way to pass away our days comfortably, is to be good,
and to enjoy the good of our labors, receiving the good of our labors, doing
good to others. In this way God answers in joy our hearts, and we pass away
our times without sad remembrances, v. 20.

Eccles. 6.1, 2. Verse. 1. There is an evil which I have seen under the Sun, and
it is common among men. 2. A man to whom God has given riches, wealth and
honor, so that he wants nothing for his soul of all that he desires, yet
God gives him not power to eat thereof, but a stranger eats it: This is
vanity, and it is an evil disease.

IN this Chapter Solomon declares the vanity. First, Of humane Satiety or
Prosperity in outward things, vere 1, 2. Secondly, Of long life and store of
children, verse 3. to 6. Thirdly, Of labor, verse 7, 8. etc. In these two
verses Solomon sets forth the vanity of such outward good things, wherewith
men are most taken, to wit, Riches, Wealth, Honor; and these amplified, 1. By
their abundance even unto Satiety, so that a man wants nothing of all that he
desires. 2. By the evil God inflicteth upon it; God gives him not power to
eat thereof, but a stranger eats it. 3. By the Adjuncts of this estate
fourfold; First, It is an evil. Secondly, It is common amongst men under the
Sun, verse 1. Thirdly, It is a vanity: Fourthly, It is an evil disease, verse
2. Riches, Wealth, and Honor, are expressed by God himself in the same
terms, 2 Chronicles. 1.11. Riches differ from wealth: riches expressing Revenues of
the field, or Cattle which are Titheable; for it is a word in the Hebrew which
differs in a prick only from Tenths or Tithes. Wealth,] in the Original is
such Treasure of Silver, Gold, Jewels, and Housholdstuffe which are not
Tytheable. God gives him not power to eat thereof] a Metaphor and a Synecdoche
in eating, put for enjoying the sweetness of them: one kind of enjoying put
for all. For honor cannot properly be eaten, but the sweet of them may be
enjoyed.

Doct. 1. It is a vanity and an evil, even an evil disease, an evil disease
common amongst men every where, that a man receives from God Riches and Honor
of all sorts, even to the satisfaction of his soul, and yet God gives him not
power to enjoy the good of it, but leaves it to a stranger.

Reason 1. From the unlawful getting of Riches or Honor, by Oppression,
Deceit, Ambition, or the like, Prove. 28.8, and 13, 22. Job 27.13, 16, 17.

Reason 2. From the satisfaction of their hearts in it: which Acquiescency in
the creature is an Idolatry which the Lord will curse. Luke 12, 19, 20.

Reason 3. From want of prayer to God, for a comfortable use of the blessings
we do enjoy, Jam, 4.3.

Reason 4. From the abuse of the creatures upon our lusts, Jam. 4.3. Job 20.22.

God takes away from a man the power to enjoy the sweet and good of it, many
ways; As First, by Sickness of body, Job 21.25. Secondly, By scruple of
conscience (as Acts 10.13, 14.) Thirdly, By inordinate affection to some
trifle, for want of which all is less comfortable, Hest. 5.11, 12, 13.
Fourthly, By Covetousness, Eccles. 4, 8. Fifthly, By some stain of folly in a
great person, which blasteth all his honor, Eccles. 10.1.

Use 1. To teach us that all Riches, Wealth, and Honor, and all the enjoyment
of that good and sweet thereof, are from the Lord, 1 Chronicles. 29.12.

Use 2. To ask of him therefore what we want, either of these things, or of
the good of them.

Use 3. To remove these evils out of Gods sight, for which he is wont to deny
men the good of the gifts we do enjoy.

Use 4. To bless the Lord who gives us any good things, and power to enjoy
the good and sweet of them.

Eccles. 6.3, 4, 5, 6. 3. If a man beget an hundred children, and live many
years, so that the days of his years be many and his soul be not filled with
good, and also that he have no burial, I say, that an untimely birth is better
then he. 4. For he comes in with vanity, and departs in darkness, and his
name shall be covered with darkness. 5. Moreover he has not seen the Sun, nor
known any thing: this has more rest then the other. 6. Yea, though he live a
thousand years twice told, yet has he seen no good: Do not all go to one
place?

IN these verses Solomon declares the vanity of two other earthly comforts 1.
Store of children. 2. Long life, which may be accompanied and clogged with
great vanity, in case two other benefits be wanting, First, the soul to enjoy
good. Secondly, The body to enjoy Burial; which misery and vanity he sets
forth by a comparison with an abortive, a Pari and a minore; equal in five
respects, 1. Of coming into the world with vanity, verse 4. 2. Of seeing no
good, verse 6. 3. Of departing in darkness and obscurity, verse 4. 4. Of
Oblivion of both, verse 4.5. Of going both to one place, verse 6. The vanity of
the Abortive, less in respect, First. He has not seen the Sun; Secondly, He
has not known any thing to grieve him: Thirdly, He has more rest then the
other, verse 5.

Doct. 1. An old Father of many children and many years, if his soul want
goodness, and his body Burial, an Abortive (or untimely birth) is as good, yea
better then he. As good in respect, 1. Of their entrance into the world, they
both came in with vanity, that is to no end, not simply and altogether; For God
has wise and good ends of sending them both into the world; but in regard of
themselves and other men. 2. Of their seeing no good in life time, verse 6. 3.
Of their departure out of the world; they both depart in darkness, First, of
obscurity, Secondly, of misery. 4. They both are covered with darkness of
oblivion; yea sometime the name of the wicked shall rot, when the other is not
blemished, Prove. 10.7. 5. Of the same place whereto they both go, to the earth
from whence they came: and the wicked man to a worse place, Acts 1.25. The
Abortive better, in respect, First, He never saw the Sun, so he never saw
outward good things, which might trouble him to lose. Secondly. He never knew
any thing good or evil: so that his reckoning is more easy, and his present
griefs less. Thirdly, He enjoys more test from evils, both in this, and in
the other world, verse 5.

Reason 1. From the overpoysing vanity of those two wants. First, of burial;
Secondly, of souls want of goodness. To extinguish the comforts of, 1. Store
of children; 2. Long life. Want of burial, First, leaves the body as dung to
rot and stink upon the face of the earth, a thing, y^ Dishonorable to the
dead; 2. Loathsome to the living, Psalm. 83.10. 2 Kings 9.38, 37. Jer. 21, 18,
19. Secondly, leaves the body without pledge of resurrection, the body buried
is Corn sown, 1 Cor, 15.36. The souls want of goodness, 1. Is as a dead
carcass stinking above ground, Psalm. 14.3. 2. Leaves it to more putrefaction
by longer lying above ground, yea the more inexcusable in impenitency, Rev.
2.21. 3. Procures a greater damnation for living so long with so many
children, and for want of goodness does neither good to himself nor them.

Use 1. To take off men from blessing themselves in store of children, and long
life: Rehoboam had store of children, Sons 28, Daughters 60. yet his soul empty
of goodness, 2 Chronicles. 11.21, with 12.14. Ahab had 70 sons, 2 Kings 10.1. yet
they all dyed a violent death, verse 6, 7. and their fathers blood dogs did
eat, 1 Kings 22, 38. And though his carcass sound burial, yet not so Jezabel,
2 Kings 9.34. to 37.

Use 2. To moderate the grief of such as want children, or have Abortives, so
their souls want not goodness, nor their bodies burial, they are better then
these in the Text.

Use 3. To look at Abortion as a vanity and misery to the creature, and so at
want of burial. It is a Stoical Apathy, to despise want of burial; Facilis
jactura Sepulchri: Caelo tegitur qui non habet urnam. Solomon's Porch and Venus
Porch are not of equal dimensions. And if Abortion be a vanity and misery, then
avoid such sins as make us like them: As First, Malignancy against Gods people,
joined with incorrigiblenesse, Psalm. 58.8. Secondly, Harsh and unreverent
insurrection against well deserving Magistrates, Number. 12.1, 2, 12.

Use 4. To exhort to furnish the soul with goodness, which will make a
blessing of life long or short, children many or few; burial or no burial,
Isai, 65.20. Psalm. 79.2. A woman fearing God, is better then a woman bearing
the best child, Luke 11.27, 28.

Eccles. 6.7, 8. 7. All the labor of man is for his mouth, and yet the
appetite is not filled: 8. For what has the wise more then the fool? what has
the poor that knows to walk before the living? 9. Better is the sight of the
eyes then the wandering of the desire: this is also vanity and vexation of
spirit.

IN these verses Solomon discovers to us the vanity of labor, which he
sets forth by four arguments, First, From the wearysomenesse of it employed
in the word, (...) which is labor cum defatigatione and molestia. Secondly,
From the end of it, for the mouth: Thirdly, From the emptiness or defect of
it, in that the soul is not satisfied by it, verse 7. which is amplified by a
distribution of the subject person so laboring, whether he be wise or foolish,
the one has no more by his labor then the other. Yea, the poor who is more
laborious and industrious then other men, yea the discreet and prudent poor,
who knows how to converse and carry himself amongst men, he has no more by
his labor but to fill his mouth, yet not to fill his desire or soul, verse 8.
Fourthly, from the wandering of the desire, (which springs from the souls not
being filled.) This is amplified by an argument a majori, that it is better to
enjoy the sight of the eyes, that is, to enjoy and to be content with the
present estate, then to be carried on with such a walking soul or wandering
desire. In regard of all which evils, he counts Labor it self with these
Concomitants to be vanity and vexation of spirit, v. 9.

Doctr. All the labor that the sons of men take in the estate of corrupt
Nature, is a grievous or vexatious vanity. Genesis 3.17, 19. And though by Christ
and his grace the bitterness and sting of that vanity is removed (the Cure
being taken away. Gal. 3.13.) yet the Cross still remains. Hence Jacobs
description of his life in all the years of it, and in all the days of those
years, Genesis 47.9, 10. Paul, 2 Cor. 11.27.

Reas. 1. From the wearisomness, of the labor amplifyed in the word (...)
which is translated wearisomness, Job 7.3. to wit, 1 Fainting the Body. 2.
Afflicting the mind with care and grief.

Reas. 2. From the End of it: it is for the mouth. The Husbandman labors in
the Earth, the Mariner in the Sea, the Shepherd in the Field, the Carpenter in
the Wood, the Tradesman in his shop, the Scholar in his book; as they are
natural men, they all labor for the mouth. Prove. 16.26.

Object. How can this stand, seeing much labor is for the back, for apparel,
or for lodging? Matthew. 6.25.

Ans. First, the mouth may be put for the whole body, as sometimes bread is put
for all maintenance, as well of back as belly, Genesis 3.19. Matthew. 6.11.

Secondly, It is true in proper Speech, taking the mouth for the chief and
supreme End of Labor, to which all the rest must give place in case of
necessity. A man will sell his lodging and clothing, and all he has, for his
mouth, Genesis 47.15. to 19. And it is a great vanity that the divine spirit of a
man should labor only for sensual things and transitory.

Reas. 3. From the empriness of the Soul or Appetite after all this labor. The
mouth is a narrow Portal, not above two or three Inches square, and the Stomach
not above a hand breadth square, the whole man not above five Foot long: and yet
when a man has labored to fill all these, and provided him of store for many
years, yet his mind is not satisfied, but his inordinate desire after the
means of his maintenance (like a Dropsy thirst) is never filled. And thus
fares it with the Learned Scholar, the rich Churl, the Industrious and
prudent poor man: These Vanities fall alike to them all, how much less is the
immortal soul silled?

Reas. 4. From the wandringness of the unsatisfyed desire, which like the Be
runs from flower to flower, and sucketh honey and wax till it be laden, and
yet still labors for more till sometimes it be stockned in its Hive through
abundance of honey.

Better is the sight of the eyes] that is, better is what you see before you,
be it less or more, then the wandering of the desire: as the good Householder
says to his Guests, Much good may it do you what you see before you.

Use. 1. To Remind us of the greatness of our Fall in Adam, whence so much
bitterness in labor and sin for a little sweetness of the fruit of a Tree, and
that upon us and on all our Posterity.

Use 2. To beware of such sinful labors as increase these wearisome vanities.
If honest labor be so grievous and vain, how much more sinful labors? Take
heed of labor to undermine and supplant wel-deserving men. Pro. 4.16. Psalm.
7.14. Darius was better employed, Dan. 6.14. 1 Thessalonians. 4.11.

Use 3. To Teach us to labor for that bread which perishes not, but feeds
and satisfyeth the soul to Aeterniy, Joh. 6.26, 27. Rev. 2.3. Romans 16.12. Phil.
4.3: 1 Cor. 15.10, and 58.

Use. To Teach the poor, that discretion in him is observed by God and wisest
Princes, when he knows how to walk before the living.

Use 5. To wean us from wandering desires, and to learn us satisfaction and
contentment in our present estate, that is, with what we see before us. Phil.
4.11. 1 Timothy 6.6.

Use 6. To Raise up the Country unto thankfullness to God, that supplyeth us
comfortably with that which men most labor for: we need not sell our Clothes
for Bread.

Eccles. 6.10, 11, 12. 10. That which has been is named already, and it is
known that it is man: neither may he contend with him that is mightier then he.
11. Seeing there be many things that increase vanity, what is man the better?
12. For who knows what is good for man in this life all the days of his vain
life, which he spends as a shadow? for who can tell a man what shall be after
him under the Sun?

That which] It is Quicquid fuerit, as Junius; or as Broughton, quisquis
fuerit; or as the words and sense fitly run, whatsoever he, that is, any one
is, quicquid quis fuerit, it was named already (or formerly of old) and it is
known to be Adam etc.

Solomon summeth up the vanity of man, whosoever or whatsoever he be. He
shows what his estate is; First, by Creation. 1 He is Adam, a piece of red
Earth, base and of the Earth, argued by his Notation. 2 Impotent to his Maker;
He cannot contend with him that is mightier then he. v. 10. Secondly by his
present Condition after the Fall. 1 All the Accessions that come upon him,
Learning or Knowledge, Honor, Wealth, Pleasure, Long life, Store of Children,
Labor, they all increase his Vanity. What is he the better? to wit for them
all. v. 11. 2 He is ignorant First, of what is good for him in this life, which
is amplifyed by the Simile of a shadow. Secondly, of future things. Who shall
tell him what shall be after him? v. 12.

Doct. Whatsoever the man be, it is well known, as his name is, so is he Adam,
a lump of clay; and whatsoever be falls him in this life in his natural
estate, he is never the better for it. Genesis 1.26, 27. and 2.7. Eccles. 12.7.
Clay, and so 1 Subject to the hand of the Potter, of necessity, Jer. 18.6. 2
Base, Psalm. 49.2. and 62.9. 3 Brittle; First, in soul mutable, Job 4.18, 19.
Secondly in body easily subject to mortality of it self, Job 4.19. That that
which befalls him in this life, maketth him not the better, is argued from
the vanity of all. Eccles. 1.2.

Reason 1. From his utter insufficiency and inability to contend with his
Maker, v. 10. An Earthen pot cannot contend with a Rock, Matthew. 21.44. Isa.
45.9. Romans 9.20, 21. Job. 9.3, 4. where be two Reasons of it. The First from
Gods Wisdom; the Second from his Power.

Reason 2. From the Increase of Vanity upon man by all the Accessions of this
life, by Gifts 1 of the mind, Isa. 47.10. Jude v. 4. 2 of the body, Ezekiel.
16.15. employed. 3 of outward estate, Jer. 22.21. Rev, 3.17. Pro. 1.32. Ezekiel.
28.4. 2 Chronicles. 26.16. which springs first from our corrupt nature, which as a
fusty Vessel corrupts all that is put into it. Secondly from the Curse of
God upon the Creatures by the Fall. Genesis 3.17.

Reason 3. From the Ignorance and unskilfulness of men 1 To discern what is
good for them in this momentary life, Job 11.12. We look at those things which
are best for us which are temporary, bodily and present, whereas our souls
find no good in such: as a Dropsy-man chooses drink which is most hurtful for
him. We know not how to make a good use of them so far as they might lead us,
Deuteronomy. 29.4. 2 To foresee or discern future things, Eccles. 8.7.

Use 1. To humble the Pride of man: Earthly man whatsoever he be, he is known
of old to be Adam. And that which more humbles him, is that he is not the
better for all that befalls him in this life, nor does he know what is good
for him in this life, nor how to make use of it.

Use 2. To teach men not to contend with their Maker. It is hard to dash
Earthen Pitchers against stone walls. Therefore to forbear pleadings and
murmurings, 1 against Gods purpose, Romans 9.20, 21. 2 against his Providence,
Jer. 12.1. we must submit patiently under Gods hand, Psai. 39.9. we must
obediently follow his calling. Rev. 14.4.

Use 3. To show us our life as in a glass; it is as a shadow; to wit, 1 without
substance; rather a Death then a life, 1 Timothy 5.6. 2 seeming greater when light
is most remote. 3 easily or speedily passing away, and that when it is at
greatest.

Use 4. For Thankfulness to God, that Christ would take such a base estate upon
him as the estate of earthly man. That so many sons of Adam met together, yet
some good agreement; else (were it not for Gods special guidance and blessing)
vanity put to vanity would but increase vanity, Psalm. 39.5. with 62.9. The
Netherlanders Motto a wholesome Advertisment, Resembling themselves to a company
of earthen Pitchers floating in the Sea, with this word, Si collidimur
frangimur.

Eccles. 7. v. 1. A Good name is better then precious ointment: and the day of
death then the day of ones birth.


SOlomon having spoken of the vanity of sundry Conditions of the Creature
considered in themselves: In this he speaks of their vanity compared one with
another, wherein also he intimates the vanity of men's judgments and
imaginations touching these things, as esteeming the better to be worse, and
the worse to be better; in this Verse he declares two things to be better then
other two, which are commonly reputed to be worse; as first A good name to be
better then a good Ointment. Secondly, The day of death to be better then the
birthday.

The words themselves are a Proverbial Doctrine, A good name is better then a
good ointment; yet an Ointment is reckoned amongst precious Riches and
Treasures, Isa. 39.2. but a good name is preferred before it, Pro. 22.1.

A good Ointment First is fragrant, John 12.3. Secondly, shining and making the
face to shine, Psalm. 104.15. Thirdly, sinketh into the bones, and suppleth and
softneth the dried Sinews and Muscles, that it makes a man more fit for Race,
for Wrestling or any other bodily Exercise, Psalm. 109.18. Fourthly, is healing,
Luke 10.34. Fifthly, preserves even after death by embalming, Luke 23.56.

In all these Properties (qualities and effects) a good name excels a good
ointment, which may be as so many Reasons of the Point. A good name First is
more fragrant, the one filling the house, John 12.3. the other, Town and
Country. John 3.12. Romans 1.8. Secondly, puts a shining Iustre upon the
countenance. Eccles 8.1. Wisdom (which is a matter of Reputation, Eccles.
10.1.) makes the face to shine, etc. Thirdly, It sinketh into the bones, Prove.
15.30, yea it fitteth to any public employment, in Ministry, 1 Timothy 3.7. or
Magistracy, Deuteronomy. 1.13. Fourthly, Heals the venom of slanders and
backbitings. Fifthly, keeps us alive after death, Prove. 10.7.

Object. How can the ninth Commandment be preferred before the eighth?

Answ. Good name is the honor of a man's person, and so belongs to the fifth
Commandment.

Use 1. To reprove the vanity and folly of such, who to get wealth and
treasure, care not how they prostitute their good name [It was a sordid speech
of Vespasian, Dulcis Odos Lucri ex re qualibet.]

Use 2. To reprove the blemishing and blasting of any man's good name, which
duly belongs to him. It is a greater sin then to steal the best goods he
has, Prove. 22.1. a Tradesmans credit is often more worth then his estate.

Use 3. To exhort to a conscionable care of getting and keeping a good name. It
is not ambition nor vainglory, when a man seeks it by good means for good
ends, and affects it no further, nor accepts it, but as is due to him.
Means of a good name: 1. Faith, Heb. 11.2. 2 Fruits of faith. First,
Sanctifying of Gods name, 1 Samuel 2.30. Secondly, Sparing the names of our
brethren, Matthew. 7.1, 2. Thirdly, Humility, Prove. 22.4. Luke 14.11. Fourthly,
Worthy acts for publik service, 1 Samuel 18.7. Matthew. 26.13. 2 Chronicles. 24.16. 1
Pet. 3.16. Hence sweet odours at Funerals as a monument of a sweet smelling
Report, 2 Chronicles. 16.14. On the contrary sin staineth a good name, Prove. 10.7. 1
Kings 15.30. Matthew. 10.4. Genesis 11.4, 9. Absoloms pillar (2 Samuel 18.18.) was
Columna Calumniae, or as Lots wifes pillar of salt, seasoning others, but
shaming our selves. It is not fair Faces, Buildings, Clothes, or Estates, that
can procure or preserve a good name.

Object. 1. Christ excelled in all virtues and duties, yet he lay under an ill
name, as a glutton and wine bibber, a deceiver, an enemy to Caesar.

Answ. 1. He bore our sins, and so our reproaches, as a punishment due to our
sins, 2. It was amongst evil men, as his profession was also evil spoken of
amongst them, Acts 28.22. 3. At length he overwrastled it, and got a great
name, Phil. 2.9.

Obj. 2. But it is a curse to a Minister, to be generally well, spoken of Luke
6.22, 26. John Baptist is said to have a devil Matthew. 11.18.

Answ. First, Ministers that are faithful, have special cause to provoke wicked
men, where their name chiefly suffers, 1 Kings 22.8. and 18, 17. else wisdom
is justified of her children, Matthew. 11.19. Secondly, Ministers at length
overwrastle it. Matthew. 23.29, 30.

Obj. 3. But even private Christians as truly godly are traduced.

Answ. First, Sometime they neglect their life of faith, 2 Samuel 12.13, 14.
Secondly, God prevents sin in them by false reports. Thirdly, It is but at the
hands of wicked men, Acts 28.22, and 24.25. Fourthly, If it be at the hands of
brethren, it is through their Ignorance, Emulation, and Rashness, which God at
length will overwrastle, Job 42.7. Otherwise God hides the names of his
children in the secret of his Tabernacle from the strife of Tongues, Psalm.
31.20. The words are a proverbial Doctrine.

Doct. 2. The day of death is better then the birth day. This is not the
speech, First, Of Job in misery, Job 3.3. Secondly. Of Jeremy in passion, Jer.
20.14. but of Solemon in his repentance. This Solomon speaks, not only of
some extraordinary kinds of death, which have been of more public service, as
the death of Christ, Ioh. 12.32. Of Sampson, Judge. 16.30. Of the Martyrs, whose
blood is, First, The glory of God, John 21.19. Secondly, the seed of the
Church. But indefinitely and generally of the death of all or any. Better to
the godly in regard, First, Of sin, which shall then be wholly subdued, Romans
6.7. 1 Cor. 15.26. If sin continued after death, death were not the last enemy.
But in birth we are borne in sin, Psalm. 61.5. children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. Yea
Newbirth leaves much corruption still in us; we are borne in sin, but we dye
in the Lord, Rev. 14.13. 1 These. 4.14. Secondly, Of misery, which attends
Birth, Job. 14.1. and 5, 7. But death is an haven of rest after a sea of
troublesome agitation and misery; Job 3.13, 14, and verse 21, 22. Rev. 14.13.
Thirdly, Of grace which will then be perfected, Heb. 12.23. 1 Cor. 13.12. Jude
24. Ephesians 5.27. Death is accounted an enemy to Nature, but is a friend to
grace; we are borne unclean, Job 25.4. John 3.6. but we dye perfect. Fourthly,
Of glory. Birth is the seed time of corruption, Gal. 6.8. Death is the seed
time of incorruption and glory, 1 Cor. 15.36, 42, 43, 44. Birth puts us into
the hands of Midwives, and other weak women: Death into the hands of the
glorious and mighty Angels, Luke 16.22. Birth brings us forth into a valley
of tears, Death into our Masters joy, Matthew. 25.21. Birth into an estate of
absence from the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.6. Death brings us into his presence, 1 These.
4.17. 1 John 3.2. Birth brings us to labor, Job 5.7. Death to rest, Rev.
14.13. even Sabbaths rest. Birth brings us into a larger and fairer world
then our mothers womb: but death into a larger and fairer then this. The
starry roose of this world is but the pavement of that. Better to the wicked in
regard, First of others Prove. 11.10. Secondly, Of themselves, though it had
been good for them not to be borne, Matthew. 26.24. yet being borne, the sooner
dead, 1. The less sin, 2. The less Punishment.

Quest. May the wicked then do well to hasten their own deaths?

Answ. By no means; for self murder is worse then murder of another. And
besides, so the wicked cutteth himself off from means and hopes of conversion.

Use 1. Against purgatory to the godly after Death. For then Death setleth them
into a worse condition then ever their birth did. For the pains of Purgatory
(as Papists describe them) differ not from the pams of hell in measure of
torment, but duration only. And what use can there be of Purgatory, when no sin
is left in death to be purged after?

Use 2. To exhort to such a life as may make our death comfortable: Means.
First, Regeneration, New birth, John 11.26. Phil. 1.21. Secondly, Faithful and
fruitful course of life, 2 Timothy 4.6, 7, 8.

Use 3. To comfort the godly against death, by consideration of all the former
benefits of Death. Samsons riddle, is now Solomon's Paradoxe; Out of the eater
(Death which devoureth all) comes meat and sweetness.

Object. 1. But in death I lose all my dear friends.

Answ. First, If thou have lived any long time, most of thy dearest friends are
gone before thee; Secondly, Thou shall change these here for better friends
there; our best friends love us not so dearly as every one there; Thirdly, Thy
good friends will not be long after thee.

Object. 2. But what shall I do with my poor children and young?

Answ. Leave them with God [ Jer. 49.11.]

Object. 3. But there is bitterness and pangs in death.

Answ. First, So there is in Birth. Secondly, After-comsorts swallow up all
griefs, John 16.21.

Use 4. To moderate the mourning of the living for their dying friends; you
rejoiced in their worse day (their birth day) why not much more in their better
day? 2 Samuel 12.19, 20. Pharaoh and Herod solemnized their birth days, Genesis
40.20. Mark. 6.21. why should not Christians rejoice in the departure of their
Christian friends? The days of the Martyrs execution were called Natalitia. It
is true we may mourn for loss of public good, Instruments to Family, Church,
and Commonwealth, and judge our selves for such sins as provoke the Lord to
remove them: but yet it is best for them that they are gone: and best for the
Church, what God does; the death of Joseph and Josiah turned to the best good
of Israel. The bondage of Egypt wrought for Israel a more glorious deliverance.
And the captivity of Babylon (which brake in upon the death of Josiah) instead
of a dungeon proved a wine-cellar, Cant. 2.4.

Eccles. 7. v. 2. 2. It is better to go to the house of mourning then to go to
the house of feasting: for that is the end of all men, and the living will lay
it to his heart.


AS in the former verse Solomon preferred two things, that seem less desirable
above other two that seem more desirable, (a good name above a good ointment:
and the day of death above the birth day) So here he preserreth a third thing
that may seem less desirable before another, which to men does, commonly seem
to be much more desirable. The house of feasting is commonly preferred amongst
men, as more desirable to be gone unto, above the house of mourning; but here
the day of mourning, even the greatest mourning, (mourning for the dead) is
preferred before the house of feasting. Better it is (says he) to go to the
house of mourning then to the house of feasting; whereof he gives two reasons.
First, from the property of the house of mourning (to wit for the dead). It is
the end of all men, Secondly, from the good use which the living will seriously
make of his house of mourning, and of the cause of mourning which he there
beholds (the death of some friend or neighbor) The living will lay it to his
heart.

Doctr. 1. It is better (or a more desirable good thing) to go to an house of
mourning for the dead, then to an house of feasting for the solace of the
living. Of feasts there be three sorts. 1. Civil feasts where a fourfold
solace: First, Eating the fat and drinking the sweet; Secondly, Loving and
neighbourly company: Thirdly, Pleasant discourse and sometimes Music:
Fourthly, Increase of mutual neighbourly love. 2. Profane or riotous, where
the former comforts are abused, and perverted. First, by Excess in eating and
drinking to gluttony and drunkenness: Secondly, The Company, swaggering and
debaucht Ruffians, Swearing and roaring Boys: Thirdly, Instead of pleasant
discourses Ribaldry, wanton songs and dances, abusing of the name of God or
man. Fourthly, fallings out and quarrellings: or else linking in conspiracy to
do some mischief. 3. Holy feasts; where, First, Gods institution or special
mercies invite to thankfulness: and meat and drink as before God, Exodus 18.12.
Secondly, Christian company: Thirdly, Holy conference, Luke 14.1, to 8. and so
to the end: Fourthly, Increase of childlike love to God, and brotherly love one
to another. Of this last sort of feasts, the comparison is not put: for Gods
ordinances are more edifying then his providence. Nor it it to civil,
especially to godly men put of the second sort of feasts, Riotous. For to
honest and good men. It is an house of mourning to be in such an house of
feasting, Psalm. 120.5. But here he speaks of such an house of feasting as is
contrary to the house of mourning.

Reason 1. From the nature of the occasion of that mourning, it being the death
of some or other desirable person in the family, that death is the end of all
men. If the person dead were not desirable, there is little or no mourning for
him, 2 Chronicles. 21.19, 20. But if there be mourning, all useful men will see
their own end in his, which is very wholesome to our spirits, Deuteronomy. 32, 29.
Lamen. 1.9. In feasting men are apt to put the evil day far from them, Isai.
56.12. Amos 6.3, to 6.

Secondly, In the house of mourning, we shall be occasioned to take to heart
what we see: yea to lay it as a plaster to our heart. Text, Not so readily in
an house of Feasting.

Object. But does not the house of feasting offer to our hearts many serious
and savoury meditations? Does it not set before us, First, A spectacle of Gods
bounty, leading to Thankfulness, Psalm. 145.16, and Repentance, Romans 2.4.
Secondly, The variety of Gods goodness dispersed in the several creatures,
Acts 14.17. Thirdly, The wisdom of Gods providence, preparing and gathering
the meat and company from sundry quarters of the world, Psalm. 145.15. Fourthly,
The large extent of Christian liberty purchased by the blood of Christ, 1 Cor.
10.27. Fifthly, The fatness and sweetness of spiritual and heavenly food, [a
minori] Luke 14.15. Sixthly, A spur to enlargement of fruitfulness after a
Feast; we expect our horses after well meating should travel better.

Answ. It is true, a Feast sets before us many spiritual advantages. But
yet, First, A man's spirit disposed to cheerfulness is more exposed to
lightness. Secondly, Sad objects make deeper impression upon our affections.
Thirdly, The company at a Funeral are not so apt to draw our minds away by
cheerful discourse as at a Feast.

Use 1. To reprove Funeral Feasts: for it makes the house of mourning and
feasting all one.

Use 2. To teach us the estate of our nature; God sees it better for us to
meet with sad and mourneful Occurrences then cheerful.

Use 3. To teach us so to lay to heart the death of others, that it may be
better to us then the best meals meat, better then a feast. If thou art a
living man, lay sad objects to heart, especially this of death; more distinctly
lay to heart, First, Death it self. Secondly, the causes of it. Thirdly, The
effects of it. Fourthly, The manner of it. Fifthly, The subject of it.

In death it self see a spectacle of thine own mortality, Josh. 23.14. 1 Kings
2.2. Wait therefore for a change, Job 14.14.

In the causes of it, First, Moral or deserving, look at sin, Genesis 2.17, Romans
5.12. especially original sin. Learn to mortify that, kill that, which else
will kill us soul and body. Secondly, Natural diseases; see the evil of corrupt
nature and life, Romans 6.23. Thirdly, Violent. 1. From Magistrates; First,
Justly; learn to fear such wickedness, Deuteronomy. 17.13. Secondly, unjustly;
learn constancy to the death, Rev. 2.10. Secondly, from thieves and robbers;
and then learn, 1. to walk regularly with God, who else may and will deliver
into such hands, Ezekiel. 21.31. 2 If the man slain were godly, learn to avoid the
misconstructions which are wont to be made of it, Prove. 25.26. Thirdly, from
self: either through, 1. Distress, as Saul. 2 Disgrace, as Achitophel. 3
Despair, as Judas. Hence learn patience in affliction, with faith to prevent
all such evil.

In the manner of it: First, some die, 1. suddenly, Job 21.13, 23, 24. Hence
learn, first, preparation for sudden changes; secondly, submission to reproofs,
Prove. 29.1. 2. Lingringly, Job 21.25. Hence learn not patience only, but
longsuffering. Secondly, some die distracted; Learn hence, 1. To commit our
senses and understanding to God. 2. Settle peace of conscience, which will keep
our minds in Christ, when not in our senses, Phil. 4.7.

In the subject, 1. some die in sin, carnal persons; and they die, first,
Either as stones, 1 Samuel 25.37, 38. Hence learn weanednesse from worldliness
which stupifieth the heart. Secondly, or presuming, Matthew. 7.22. Hence learn to
build on a rock, Matthew 7.24, to 27. Thirdly, Or despairing, as Judas. Hence
learn to beware of sins against conscience. 2. Others die in Christ, and that
first, either troubled in mind, conslicting with desertions, Matthew. 27.46.
Hence learn, To live by faith against sense, Job 13.15. Luke 23 46. Secondly,
Or comfortably, 1. Expressing their joy and confidence, 2 Timothy 4.6, 7, 8. 2
Instructing and exhorting others, Genesis 49. Hence learn, first, to live
uprightly and justly, Psalm 37.37. Secondly, Boldness in Christ against death,
Romans 8.38, 39.

Eccles. 7.3, 4, 5, 6. 3. Sorrow is better then laughter: for by the sadness of
the countenance the heart is made better. 4. The heart of the wise is in the
house of mourning: but the heart of fools is in the house of mirth. 5. It is
better to hear the rebuke of the wise, then for a man to hear the song of
fools. 6. For as the crackling of thorns under a pot, so is the laughter of the
fool: this also is vanity.

IN Verse 2. Solomon had preferred going to the house of mourning above going
to the house of mirth, whereof he gave two Reasons before. The first, taken
from the condition of the house of mourning it is the end of all men. The
second, from the spiritual improvement which living men will make of it. The
living will lay it to heart, v. 2. Now in this verse he gives another reason
of it. 3. From the pre-eminence of sorrow above laughter, Sorrow is better then
laughter. And this he proves, first, from the benefit of a sad countenance, by
the sadness of the countenance the heart is made better, v. 3. Secondly, from
the pre-eminence of such men, whose hearts are in the house of mourning above
those whose hearts are in the house of mirth. The heart of the wise is in the
house of mourning, the heart of fools in the house of mirth, v. 4. Thirdly,
from the pre-eminence of hearing the rebuke of the wise (which causes sorrow)
above hearing the song of fools, v. 5. the vanity whereof is amplified by a
comparison, v. 6. (...) here translated sorrow, comes of a root which
signifies properly to provoke, as Deuteronomy. 32, 19. Now because a man may be
provoked either to anger, or to grief; therefore this word is sometimes
translated anger, Eccles. 7.9. Sometimes grief or sorrow, as Eccles. 11.10.
Psalm 112.10. and here.

Doctr. Sorrow is better then light mirth. v. 3. Laughter expresses light or
frollick mirth.

For right understanding this point, consider these points: First, sorrow, when
God calls for mirth; and joy, and mirth, and laughter, when God calls for
sorrow and mourning, are both a like odious to God, Deuteronomy. 28, 47, 48. Genesis 4.6.
Isa. 22.12, 13, 14. Jer. 48.27. Secondly, Godly sorrow and mourning, and
spiritual joy and rejoicing are both alike acceptable to God, and profitable to
man, 2 Cor. 7.10.11. Neh. 8.10. Thirdly, Sorrow for sin, and upon rebukes for
sin, is better then frolic joy and mirth in vain company, Eccles. 7.5.
Fourthly, sorrow for outward affliction, is better then light mirth for slight
occasions. These two latter hold forth Solomon's meaning, and are the sense of
the doctrine, Heb. 11.25. Job 36.21.

Reason 1. From the benefit of a sad countenance; as it springs from an heart
seriously affected, so it stirs up serious affection, meditations, and
conferences in the hearts of others. A merry countenance is apt to stir up to
loose and dissolute, vain and frothy meditations, affections, conferences.

Reason 2. From the condition of the house of mourning; it is a suitable object
to the heart of a wise man: His heart is there: sad objects to the heart, are
as ballast to the ship, making it go steady; whereas the house of mirth is a
suitable object to the heart of fools, v. 4.

Reason 3. From the pre-eminence or betterment of hearing the rebuke of the
wise (which causes sorrow) then the songs of fools, which causes light mirth,
v. 5. Which may appear, 1. From the great benefit of wise reproofs: They are
as first, Pricks to let out corruption, Acts 2.37. Secondly, Goads to stir up
to duty, Eccles. 12.11. Thirdly, Nails to drive in and fasten good counsel,
Eccles. 12.11. Fourthly, Balm to heal sores, Psalm. 141.5. 2 From the vanity of
fools laughter, and light mirth. It is as the cracking of Thorns under a pot,
v. 6. Not like the fire of thorns under a pot, which is soon kindled, and fair
blazed; But like the noise which first, is no good melody. Secondly, spends
much fuel, as fools mirth much time. Thirdly, soon decays and dampeth, and
leaves both meat in the Pot raw, and bystanders not thoroughly warmed, Psalm.
118.12. and 58.9. So does the mirth of fools, Prove. 14.13.

Use 1. Against the chief good of Epieures, which is pleasure. Sadness is
better then it.

Use 2. To teach us contentment, yea, and thankfulness to, when God sends
occasions of sorrow and sadness for affliction, Job 1.21.

Object. Psalm 35.27.

Answ. Prosperity that will best hold, and least corrupt, is that which is sown
in tears, Psalm 126.5, 6. This sad winter, Christmas (as they call it) is
better then all the carnal jollity wont heretofore to be exercised at that time
of the year.

Use 3. For a sign of trial of our hearts; where they delight to be, such they
are. If they delight to be in the house of mirth, they are vain and foolish; if
in the house of mourning, they are wise, Mat. 6.21.

Use 4. To teach us who are fittest instruments to dispense reproofs, wise men,
v. 5, Prove. 15.12. The wise and the reprover, are Synonima, Prove. 25.12. Great
wisdom requisite to discern, first of faults, whether beams or motes. Secondly,
of the offenders, how more or less easy to be wrought upon, as the body in
Physic, Prove. 17.10.

Use 5. To exhort to patient and willing hearing of just reproofs. A sound
chiding is better music then the song of fools. It is an ornament if well
heard, Prove. 25.12. as arguing humility, wisdom, sincetity, or soundness, Prove.
9.8, 9. Sound flesh will abide rubbing; not so galled. They are the way of life,
Prove. 10.17. and wisdom, Prove. 15.31, 32.

Eccles. 7. v. 7. 7. Surely oppression makes a wise man mad, and a gift
destroys the heart.


(...) Translated surely, I do not find that ever the conjunction so
signifies in Scripture, but as it is translated in v. 6. for so it is firly to
be translated here. Surely neither stands with the Grammar or Logic of the
Text: no coherence will so be made of the sentence. But translate it for, and
the context runs thus: Solomon had said ( verse. 5.) It is better to hear the
rebuke of the wise, then the song of fools.

This he proves, first, from the vanity of the song of fools, illustrated by a
simile taken from the crackling of thorns under a pot, v. 6. Of this was spoken
in the former verse.

Secondly, from the madness of the oppression of such a reprover. To oppress
a wise reprover, 1. makes a wise man mad: A wise man, whether it be, 1. The
reproved, he will grow outrageous by oppressing his reprover, as did Asa, 2 Chronicles. 16.10. 2 The reprover. Oppression may distemper him, Jer. 20.7, 8, 9.
and v. 14 to 18. Secondly, destroys the heart (or life) of the Gift; Gift
cannot properly or Grammatically be in the Nominative case before the Verb, but
by Anomaly. For it is of the Foeminine Gender, the Verb destroy of the
masculine; neither is the sense so suitable here.

Thirdly, from the excellency of the end of a word, (...) to wit the word of
reproof, above the beginning of it; the beginning of it may be harsh and
unpleasant, but the end of it is wholesome, and medicinable, v. 8.

Fourthly, from the excellency of the patient in spirit (as otherwise, so
especially in hearing and bearing the reproofs of the wise) above the proud in
spirit, v. 8. Whereupon he infers a grave and wise admonition, not to be of
an hasty spirit to anger, neither in hearing reproofs, nor generally in any
other case, taken from the proper subject of the residence of anger: for Anger
rests in the bosom of fools, verse. 9.

Doctr. It is better to hear and bear the rebuke of the wise, with submission
and patience, then with oppression and passion, with pride and anger. This
seems to be the very proper scope of Solomon's words in this place, 2 Samuel
12.7. to 13. 2 Chronicles. 19.2, 3, 4. 1 Kings 22.8. Let not the King say so, Mat.
16.23* Gal. 2.11. to 14.

Reason 1. From the madness that a wise man shall fall into by oppressing a
wise Reprover; in that, first, he will distemper and enrage himself, 2 Chronicles.
16.10. Secondly, he will destroy the heart and life of the gift of reproof. It
will no more profit then Physic vomited up, or a plaster cast aside. Thirdly,
he may also distemper and enrage the reprover, Jer. 20.7, 8, 9. and v. 14, to
20. At least it will force him to keep silence, Amos 5.10, 13. This may be
referred to the second.

Reason 2. From the excellency of the word of reproof in the end, above what
it appears in the beginning, Psalm 141. 5. Prove. 28.23. Physic may be bitter
and loathsome at first: yet health by it, recompenceth that.

Reason 3. From the excellency of the patient in spirit, above the proud in
spirit, verse. 8. Patience first possesses the soul, Luke 21.19. Secondly,
inheriteth promises, Heb. 6.12. Thirdly, it makes us perfect, Jam. 1.4.

Reason 4. Implied in the Text, verse. 8. from the root of all rejection of
reproof, which is pride of spirit, Prove. 13.1. and 15: 12. Pride, first God
abhors and scorneth, and resists, 1 Pet. 5.5. Psalm. 138.6. Prove. 3.34.
Secondly, is the presage of sudden destruction, Prove. 29.1.

Use 1. To teach us to eschew all oppression, especially of our reprovers. It
argues us, and makes us mad, Prove. 28.16. It discourageth a reprover from
putting forth the faithfulness of his brotherly love, Jer. 20.9, Amos 5.13.
Yea, he is now excused in his silence, Matthew. 7.6. It eats out the heart and
life of a gift, of the reproof given, 1 Kings 22.8. and v. 27, 28. 2 Kings
5.12, 13.

Use 2. To teach us to be patient in hearing and bearing reproofs. The end of
them is better then the beginning; the beginning may seem harsh and bitter, but
the end is wholesome and comfortable, as of all affliction, Heb. 12.11. 2 Cor.
1.6, 7. and chap: 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. It is not meant of all things universally,
that their end is better then their beginning; for it is otherwise in some
things, 2 Pet. 2.20. Matthew. 12.45. Prove. 20.21. But it holds in this duty of
Admonition, and all Afflictions, inward, and outward to the godly. All
impatience here argues pride of spirit, as appears by the opposition, Text
v. 8.

Use 3. To teach us to express patience rather then pride, and to prefer it
both in our judgments, and in our practice. (...) is a man of a long breath,
which argues a patient spirit; men of a short breath are soon hot; men of hot
hearts breath quick and short, as in choleric and aguish men. Patient in
spirit exceeds the sproud, first, in understanding and wisdom, Prove. 17.27.
(...) frigidus spiritu, a man of a cool spirit is of great understanding.
Secondly, in strength and courage, Prove. 25.28. and 16.32. Thirdly, in honor,
Prove. 22.4. Fourthly, in profiting by all means of grace. In word, Luke 8.15.
In affections, Romans 5.3, 4, 5. Some think it their excellency and magnanimity
to bear no coals at any man's hand, but to give every man as good as he brings.
Patience they condemn for cowardice; but the Spirit of God judges otherwise.

Eccles. 7. v. 9. 9. Be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry: for anger rests
in the bosom of fools.


DOctrine 1. To be of an hasty spirit to anger, God forbids it to his people,
Prove: 14.17. Jam. 1.19. Prove. 16.32. The spirit is hasty to anger when anger
arises: First, without cause, Genesis 4.5, 6. Jonah 4.9. This is hasting before
the cause. Secondly, without measure passing the bounds, 1. Of our calling,
Acts 7.26, 27. Genesis 34.25, with 49.7. 2. Of love; First, As when instead of
brotherly admonition we fall to clamor, railing, scolding, not reproving sin
by Scripture names and arguments, but vexatious terms, Ephesians. 4.31. Secondly,
When we are not fit to pray for those we are angry with, Exodus 32.19, 30, 31,
32. 1 Samuel 8.6, with 1 Samuel 12.23, and 15.35. Thirdly, Of reason, Luke 6.11.
Acts 22.23. 2 Chronicles. 28.9. Fourthly, Of Justice, Zach. 1.15. Fifthly, Of due
season, 1. After sunsetting, Ephesians. 4.26, 27. 2. After the offenders
acknowledgement of his offense, Luke 17.3, 4. And these are hasting before the
measure or proportion of the cause.

Reason 1. From the proper subject of the residence and rest of anger; It
rests in the bosom of fools. Text, Wherein Solomon takes of an excuse which
men are wont to make of their holiness. Though I be somewhat hasty, yet I
thank God, anger does not rest with me. Yes, (says Solomon) If thou be
hasty, anger rests with thee, and argues thee a fool. For a man could not
have anger so ready at hand hastily, if it did not rest with him; the habit of
sinful anger rests there, though the act be quickly transient.

Object. Choleric men are soon stirred, and yet they are not all fools; the
fools are commonly sanguine, as the simple light fond fool; or phlegmatic, as
the dull Ass fool: or melancholic, as the lunatic fool.

Answ. A choleric fool is a frantic fool. Every complexion in excess is
subject to folly, yea to madness; but if choler be subdued to reason,
choleric men though they could be soon hasty, if they see cause, yet will not
be where there is none! A man of quick speed for race, yet will not run till he
see cause.

Quest. But what folly is in Anger?

Answ. First, Rashness, Isai. 32.4. Secondly, Stiffenesse, Jonah. 4.9. blind
wilfulness. Thirdly, Outragiousnesse, Prove. 27.4. Fourthly, Unprofitablenesse.
Anger unfitteth a man, First, To do good, Jam. 1.20. Secondly, To take good, 2
Kings 5.12. As a man when his house is all on a light fire, himself in the
midst of it, can hear no direction given him from without, nor himself able
to do ought within: So is a man in a burning anger, neither able to direct
himself, nor to take counsel from others.

Reason 2. From the Image of God which should shine forth in us. He is slow to
anger, Psalm. 103.8.

Use. To cast discouragement as it were cool water upon this angry passion.
The Sea when it foameth and rages, purges it self, and a pot boiling casts
out foame and scumme: but a man boiling with anger and wrath, both utters his
own shame, and yet keeps the filth within. Physicians count it a sign of
deadly danger, when a sickness or distemper so alters the countenance, that
you cannot know the same man, so Job 14.20. Anger will do as much, Dan. 3.19.
Physicians will also say, It is a sign of the healing and abatement of an
Ague, when in an hot fit the tongue is clean; but if the tongue be foul, it
is a sign the disease is still strong. When a man in his anger gives never a
foul word, it is a sign of an healthful spirit: but the soul is distemped, if
the speech in anger be foul. If a glass bottle be full of clean water, though
it be stirred, there arises no mud: but if mud arise when it is stirred, the
water was foul in the bottom; so is the spirit of a man foul within; that
being stirred shows distemper. Let therefore all hastiness to anger against
all sorts of persons, at all times be eschewed. For Solomon here limiteth it to
none: be it against husband, or wife, child, or servant, friends, or enemies.
2. Yet this hinders not just anger, Ephesians. 4.26. 2. But it much more condenmeth
all malice, hatred, study of revenge; for all these are from anger resting in
the bosom.

Eccles. 7. v. 10. 10. Say not thou, What is the cause that the former days
were better then these? for thou do not enquire wisely concerning this.


SOlomon in this Chapter has hitherto showed the vanity of sundry things of
good account in the world, in comparison of other things of less esteem: and
has therefore preferred, First, A good name before a good ointment. Secondly,
The day of death before the birth day. Thirdly, To go to the house of
mourning, before going to the house of feasting. Fourthly, To hear the rebuke
of the wise before the song of fools. In this verse he goes on with the like
argument, not preferring elder times before the present, though generally men
are apt so to do. Parts two, 1. A prohibition of taking it for granted that
elder times are better then these, and of the inquiry after the reason of it.
Say not thou, what is it that the former times were better then these? 2. A
reason of the prohibition taken from the want of wisdom in such an
apprehension, and enquiry; for thou do not enquire wisely, or out of
wisdom concerning this.

Doctr. 1. The ordinary conceit that men have of the excellency of former times
above these, and their ordinary inquiry into the reason thereof, is not out of
wisdom. Heathen Authors may be quoted, not for divine or Evangelical points,
but natural or moral. Both Heathen and Christians are wont to have such a
conceit, that former times were better. Horace his old man, is laudator
temporis acti se puero. Again says he, Damnosa quid non imminuit diese Aetas
parentum pejor Avis tulit nos nequiores, mox daturos progeniem vitiosiorem.
Boethius de consolatione Philosophiae. Fortunae, nimium prior Aetas, etc.

Thus ordinarily men extol the cheapness of former times, their great
hospitality, their kind neighborhood, their honest dealing; their skilful
workmanship, none such now adays; their liberal alms deeds, their devout
piety, their deep wisdom, their valiant acts; The reasons which men are wont
to give of it, are not wise: as, First, Lassa effaeta natura, The decay of the
strength and goodness of nature, in the world and all the creatures. But this
is no good reason; for nature decayed by the flood; yet the times have been
better. Secondly, The goodness of the old religion, Ier. 44, 17, 18. The
Heathen thought the Empire flourished more under the worship of Jupiter and
other false gods, then under Christian Religion. The devouter Papists think
the same, that it was a better world under their Religion, then ours; but if
the old Religion have been worse, the following times may be worse for their
sins, Jer. 41.21, 22, 23. Thirdly, The change of times which some think are
always for the worse. So Emanuel Sa, But neither times nor stars were made
to rule us.

Reasons of the want of wisdom of such a conceit and such enquiry. First, From
the like estate of former times as of these; no new thing under the Sun,
Eccles. 1.9.

Secondly, From the cause of the worse appearance of present times from fond
mistakings. As, First, In youth want of Judgment to discern and judge of good
or evil. Thy Judgment then was green and raw; young men's spirits are green and
cheerful, and so looking through a green glass (as it were) thou saw all
things green and pleasant. Old men are splenetick and sad, and see all things
through dark and sad fumes, and so accordingly think hardly of them. Besides
by better experience, old men now can discern much evil, which before they
could not observe. Secondly, Through ignorance of history, which speaks of as
bad times as ours Or else through the choice that Historians make to tell of
notable matters, and neglect common occurrences: besides its pleasant to read
in stories of great wars, and exploits; but to feel them would seem
Tragical. Thirdly, Through following sense in this conceit, evils present seem
worst, as in governments so in the whole life of man. Fourthly, Through
coffeehouse with a man's own personal condition, and envy at others, and
vain glory in our selves; hence Nestor, Oh mihi praeteritos referat si, etc.
Vitio malignitatis humanae vetera semper in laud, praesentia fastidio esse.
Tacitus. Fifthly, Through curiosity, whilst men look more at others then
themselves, whereas if every man labored to amend himself, the times would
soon amend.

Reason 23. From the true estate of this matter, which may be discerned and
observed in these particulars. First, When Princes and people are good in Gods
sight, the times are better, 2 Chronicles. 15.1, to 6. Prove. 29.2. when they are
wicked, then worse, Ibid. Jer. 22.15, to 18. Levit. 26, throughout, Deuteronomy. 28.
David's time better then Saul's, But Rehoboams afterward worse. Secondly, When
Churches are well administered, and encouraged therein, the times are better,
else worse, Hos. 2.16, to 23, with verse 8, 9. Thirdly, Sometimes the times are
better for something, and worse for others, both formerly and after. David's
time better then Solomon's for war and noble victories. Solomon's better for
peace and plenty, and building and Merchandise. In the same times, one place
may be growing better, when another grows worse: Ephesus may be decaying when
Thyatyra increases, Rev. 2.4, 19 Some in every age are good, even now there be
men antiqua fide, priscis moribus; And some in every age are naught.

Reason 4. From the principal cause of all passages in the world: which is not
man's weakness, or goodness, but chiefly the wise and strong and good
providence of God: who presents every age with a new stage of acts and
actors, 1 Cor. 4.9. And if a Poet would not present his spectators but with
choice variety of matters, how much less God?

Object. Nebuchadnezzars Image may seem to imply a decay of each age, from
gold to silver, to brass, at last to Iron, Dan. 2.31, 32, 33.

Answ. First, This Image concerned times 400 years after Solomon's days.
Secondly, After all those Monarchies destroyed, the latter times will be best,
Dan. 7.27, with chap. 2, 44. Thirdly, The Image does not decipher the manners
(to wit, virtues, or vices) of the times, but the several conditions of the
Monarchies. That of Babel being more full of Majesty, Dan. 4.36. and Peace,
Jer. 29.7. That of Persia inseriour herein, Dan. 9.25. troublelous times. That
of Macedonia making strong and loud noise like brass. That of Rome crushing
all the former like Iron.

Use 1. To teach us to observe the depravation of nature, in the blindness of
our minds: who are so far from discerning spiritual things, 1 Cor. 2.14. that
we cannot rightly judge of moral or civil things, Romans 1.21. Jude 10. Genesis 6.5.

Use 2. To reprove the fond admiration of elder times, though there be use of
antiquity, and of the study of antiquity, yet not to approve all their sayings
and doings, as best.

Use 3. To stir us up to a wise consideration of our present times, and the
amendment thereof. For this end, First, Every one endeavor to amend one, and
as many more as are under charge, Josh. 24.13. Secondly, Consider and see to
the good administration of Churches. If Joseph in the house of Jacob be sold
into Egypt, look for a public famine. Thirdly, Let Magistrates and Courts
walk in righteousness and peace. The whole Country fares the better for it.

Eccles. 7.11, 12. 11. Wisdom is good with an inheritance: and by it there is
profit to them that see the Sun. 12. For wisdom is a defense, and money is a
defense: but the excellency of knowledge is, that wisdom gives life to them
that have it.

SOlomon in the former verse, having judged it to spring from want of wisdom,
to conceive the former times to be always better then the latter, and to
enquire (as men ordinarily do) of the reason thereof: He gives in these and
the following uses, three several observations, touching the better and worse
estate of one age above another, as at any time, so for his own time. First,
For his own time, wherein wisdom and wealth abounded; he tells us not that
it was better then other times, but that it was (so far forth) a good time;
wisdom says he is good with an inheritance, and profitable for men, v. 11. And
this he proves, 1. From the benefit which either of them yield apart: wisdom
is a defense, or rather a protection or refreshing, and money is the like, v.
12. Secondly, From the more excellent benefit of wisdom, but the excellency of
wisdom is, it gives life to the owners of it, v. 12. Secondly, He calls us
to consider the work of God in the estate of the times; as in his own age, so
in every age: and the insufficiency of any man to make straight that which God
has made crooked, verse 13. and therefore to make a good use of the
vicissitude of changes from age to age, verse 14. Thirdly, He declares that in
the best times, at least in his own time, he has seen much evil, which he
specifyeth, verse 15. to the end of the Chapter; and some good, verse 19.28.

Doct. 1. Wisdom and wealth are then most profitable (or do then most good)
when they are enjoyed together, (or when they are met together.) It is then
best for any person in whom they are so met, and best for any age, when the
same age enjoys both. Thus much God implies in his blessing of Solomon, 1
Kings 3.10, to 13. For he prefers Solomon above all former and present Kings
in respect of the concurrences of both these.

Reason 1. From the defect that is found in either wisdom or wealth alone. Of
wisdom alone, First, It is not heard nor regarded, Eccles. 9.16. Secondly, It
seldom gets up to such places of authority, where it may put forth it
self, Prove. 19.7. He wants friends to speak and make way for him. Of wealth
alone, First, it lies unprofitably by us, neither doing our selves or others
that good it might, Prove. 17.16. Luke 8.14. Secondly, It makes men worse,
Eccles. 5.13. Proud, 1 Timothy 6.17. Covetous, Hab. 2.5. and Churlish, 1 Samuel
25.10, 11. Thirdly, It exposes us to contempt, 1 Samuel 25.25,

Reason 2. From some benefit in either of them alone. Wisdom is a defense, the
word is a shadow in the Text. Which is, First, For defense, Psalm. 17.8.
Secondly, For refreshing, Isay 25.4, 5. Wealth is a defense and refreshing, 1.
Against hunger, thirst, cold, nakedness, and injuries of Suits. 2. Procuring
us many friends, Prove. 14, 20. and many other outward comforts, Eccles, 10, 19.
Wisdom is a defense and refreshing, First, As conveighing us under the wings
of Christ, Matthew. 7.24, 25. and so, 1. Giving life to us, and direction to our
way; 2. Defending us from sin, hell, wrath, Job. 28.28. and afflictions and
evils, Prove. 22.35. Secondly, Connselling others for their good, Eccles. 10.10.

Reas. 3. From the complete profit of both wisdom and wealth together. For, 1.
Wisdom employeth wealth to the best advantage, both for another world, Luke
16.8, 9. and for this world. First, For our selves and others in the education
of children. Secondly, In peace and war, Prove. 24.5, 6. 2. Wealth employeth
wisdom to the best advantage. it is a Crown to the wise, Prove. 14.24. A Crown
for Honor and Authority, Hos. 13.1. Job having lost his wealth, lost his
honor and authority, Job 29. throughout, compared with Chap. 30, 1, 9, to 13.

Use 1. To refute the Popish opinion of the perfection of the estate of
voluntary poverty.

Use 2. To show us the feeble and comfortless estate of such as want both
wisdom and wealth.

Use 3. To teach wise men to seek for wealth, and wealthy men for wisdom. And
all that want both to seek both. If either alone be so helpful, how much more
both together? If either al one be defective, not so both together.

Use 4. To teach such as would marry, to seek both these together, if they may
be had. But let the wealthy men rather seek a wise wife, as David did Abigal,
then a wealthy.

Use 5. To teach us what use to make of them both together, for a defense
refreshing.

Use 6. To prefer wisdom above wealth; wisdom is the more excellent as
giving life; Text. If we trust in the shadow of wealth, we shall find it
(like Jonahs gourd) failing us when we have most need. Prove. 11.4. Therefore
crack not the conscience for wealth, Prove. 10.2.

Eccles. 7.13, 14. 13. Consider the works of God: for who can make strait what
he has made crooked? 14. In the day of prosperity be joyful, but in the day
of adversity consider: God also has set the one against the other, to the end
that man should find nothing after him.

DOct. Whatsoever the estate of times be, it is out part to consider the work
of God as so disposing the times, and in setting good and evil times one
against another; and accordingly in good times to be in goodness, and in ill
times to look at Gods hand as only able to amend therein. As who should say,
look not at the creature as the chief agent in the estate of the times, but
consider his hand in all estates, and make use of them, as his hand leads
unto. Job 1.21.

1. It is Gods work, first, to send, 1. Good times, 2 Chronicles. 2.11. 2 Evil
times, Prove. 28.2. Secondly, to set good and evil times in a vicissitude or
enterchange, one contrary over against another, Jer. 18.7, 9. In good times,
first, God makes men's, or at least some chief men's hearts and ways right
before him, 1 Samuel 13.14, Secondly, God gives them a right course, and good
success in their proceedings, Jer. 22.15, 16. 2 Chronicles. 17.3, 4, 5. In evil
times, first, God gives men up to the crookedness of their own hearts and
ways, Psalm. 125, 5. and 81.11, 12. 2 Chronicles. 28 1. Secondly, God sends them
cross and crooked issues of their ways, 2 Chronicles. 28.1, to 6. and v. 16. to 20.
Ier. 22.17, 18, 19. Psalm 18.26.

2. God sets these good and evil times enterchangeably one against another.
Saul's times were bad, the times of David and Solomon good; Rehoboam and Abijam
bad, Asa and Iehosophat good, Ioram and Ioash bad; Vzziah and Jothan good, Ahaz
bad; Hezekiah good, Manasseth and Amon bad; Josias good, his successors to the
captivity bad; after the captivity good.

Reason 1. From Gods peoples abuse of Prosperity, unto self confidence, Psalm.
30.6, 7. and Luxury, Deuteronomy. 32.15. Hence follows calamity and adversity.

Reas. 2. From the humiliation and Reformation of Gods people in adversity,
Hos. 5.15. with chap. 6.1, 2.

Reas. 3. To the end we should find nothing after God; as in the Text. To wit,
first, no stability in the creature, but unsettled vicissitudes. Secondly, No
fault in God and his administrations. So the phrase and word is taken, John
14.30. Job 31.7.

3. Accordingly it is our parts, in good times to be in goodness, v. 14.
Implies, First, to be in a good frame. Secondly, to take a good course.
Thirdly, to be of good cheer or comfort, to be joyful. As husbandmen make Hay
when the Sun shines, and Mariners hoyse up and spread abroad their sails
when the wind blows fair, Acts 9.31.

Reas. 1. From Gods expectation of store of good fruit in such times, Isa. 5.1,
to 4.

Reason 2. From Gods sudden change of times, when they are thus abused, Isay 5,
5, 6. Deuteronomy. 28.47, 48,

In evil times to look at Gods hand, as only able to amend them, Prove. 21.1.

Reason 1. From Gods soeveraign power over, first, Men's hearts, Prove. 21.1.
Secondly, the change of times, Acts 1.7. Psalm. 31.15.

Reason 2. From the unprofitableness of all the use of creature-means and helps
without God, Isay 22.8, to 14. Hos. 5.13, 14. 2 Chro. 28.20, 21.

Use 1. To teach us in all the estate of times, not to look so much at the
Creatures or Instruments, but at the hand of God. If Princes be wicked, God
gives such, and the People into their hands, Hos. 13.11. Zach. 11.6. If
Princes be good, the Lord gives such as a favor to his people, 2 Chro. 2.11.
Heathens could say, Deus nobis haec otia fecit.

Use 2. To teach us, whatever the times be, not to look at them as
unchangeable; for God will set one of them contrary to another, and we know not
how soon.

Use 3. To teach us therefore in good times to be in goodness; that is, First,
be in a good and thankful frame. Secondly, take a good course, Acts 9.31. be
fruitful. Thirdly, be of good comfort. Break off from sinful courses; It will
prolong tranquillity, Dan. 4.27.

Use 4. To teach us in ill times, not chiefly to quarrel the creature, muchless
to quarrel Gods providence, Isay 8.21. Neither to imagine that we can redress
the evil of the times by our own wisdom or power; No, look we rather up to God,
who can make straight that which is crooked, both in men's hearts, ways, or
estates. And therefore use we such means as may prevail with him so to do.

Means: First, Let our uncircumcised hearts be humbled to accept of punishment
of our iniquities, and to confess our iniquities and the iniquities of our
fathers; where we have Confession, and Contrition, Lev. 26.40.41. Secondly,
look up to Christ our Redeemer, the Prince of the Kings of the earth to deliver
us, Judge. 10.15. Thirdly, serious Reformation, Judge. 10.15.

Eccles. 7.15, 16, 17, 18. 15. All things have I seen in the days of my
vanity: there is a just man that perishes in his righteousness, and there is
a wicked man that prolongeth his life in his wickedness. 16. Be not righteous
over much, neither make thy self over wise: why should thou die before thy
time? 17. Be not overmuch wicked, neither be thou foolish: why should thou
die before thy time? 18. It is good that thou should take hold of this, yea,
also from this withdraw not thy hand: for he that fears God shall come forth
of them all.

COherence, see in verse 11, 12.

Doctr. In the best times of Church and Commonwealth, a wise man may observe,
there are just men that perish in their righteousness, and there are wicked
men that continue long in their wickedness. By perishing, sundry understand
crushing and breaking, or oppression in their righteousness, in their
righteous and just cause; as Naboth in Ahabs time, 1 Kings 21.13. and Abimelech
in Saul's time, I Sam. 22.16, 18, 19. But it will be hard, if not impossible, to
show such an instance in Solomon's time, though in David's time Vriah so
perished; but that was before Solomon was born. But he speaks of what he had
seen, in his time. By a wicked man continuing long in his wickedness, they
understand prolonging his days, or his life in wickedness; But his life is not
in the Text. And if that were the sense, it would cross his reason which he
gives in v. 17. why they should not continue long in wickedness: taken from
the shortness of the lives of such; for why should thou die before thy time?
I take it therefore by a just man, is meant, such a just man as is just in his
own righteousness, and at last decays and perishes in it. The same word is
translated void, Deuteronomy. 32, 28. void of counsel, is, perishing in their
counsels. So the rich man is said to fade away and perish in his ways, as the
flower perishes and sadeth in the heat of the Sun, John 1.11. Thus the Jews
establishing their own righteousness, Romans 10.3. perished in their
righteousness, and did not obtain the righteousness of Christ, Romans 11, 7,
and 9, 31, 32. And thus Solomon might observe many in his age; and like enough
an eminent man in the Church, Abiather the high Priest, 1 Kings 2.26, 27.
Ezekiel observed many such in his time, Ezekiel. 18.24. That many do continue
long in their wickedness, appears by Solomon's testimony, Eccles. 8, 12. by
David's, Psalm. 68.21. by Jobs, Job 3, 2. by Isai. 65.20.

Reasons of the just man's perishing in his righteousness, 1. From the
carnalnesse of such a just man's heart, his nature is not borne anew, but only
awed by some power, either of, First, Legal Terrors, Deuteronomy. 5.27. Secondly,
Good Education, 2 Chronicles. 24.2, 17, 18. Thirdly, Good Company: Such as return
to evil, were always dogs and swine, though washed and cleansed, 2 Pet. 2.18,
22.

Reason 2. From Gods rejection of all self confidence, Ier. 2.27. Luke 18.9,
14. 1 Samuel 2.9.

Reason 3. From the power of the spirit of the Gospel to blow upon and wither
all his carnal and moral excellency, Isai. 40.6, 7, 8.

Reason 4. From the stability only of faith in Christ, and the righteousness
of faith. Isai. 7.9. 2 Cor. 1.24. Romans 11.20.

Reasons of the wickeds long continuance in wickedness, 1. From the
suteablenesse of it to our nature, Genesis 6.5. Job 15.16. Jer. 11.15.

Reason 2. From Gods judicial leaving of men to their own ways, especially
after refusal of means of grace, Ezekiel. 24.13. Rev. 22.11.

Use 1. Not to be righteous overmuch, verse 16. that is, First, Do not
continue in this righteousness, in the same sense as be not wicked overmuch.
Secondly, Make not too much of it: for upon Trial It neither is our
righteousness, Phil. 3.7, 8. nor a good evidence of it; trust not in it, Luke
18.9, It is a mercy if God shake us out of it. A double shaking is requisite to
enjoy a settled Kingdom; shaking, first, of our earth which was by the law, Heb.
12.26. Secondly, of our heaven which is by the conviction of our righteousness
(in which we place our heaven upon earth) to be loss and dross till we come
to partake in Christ, and faith in him, John i6.7, 8, 9.

Use 2. Not be wicked overmuch, that is, not to multiply wickedness by
continuing long in it, not make more of wickedness then it is worth, by
promising our selves rest in it, Deuteronomy. 29.19. Psalm, 36.2. nor make your selves
more wicked then you are, as Cain did by despair, Genesis 4.13.

Use 3. To humble us in the sense of the corruption of our nature, who are
sooner weary of our righteousness, then of our wickedness. In the one we
decay, in the other we continue long.

Eccles. 7.16, 17, 18. 16. Be not righteous overmuch, neither make thy self
overwise: why should thou destroy thy self? 17. Be not overmuch wicked,
neither be thou foolish: why should thou die before thy time? 18. It is good
that thou should take hold of this, yea, also from this withdraw not thine
hand: for he that fears God shall come forth of them all.

IN the former verse Solomon delivered his third observation, touching the
estate of the present times, to wit, what notable things he had observed in his
own time. First, that he has observed in the days of his vanity, a just man
perishing in his righteousness: and a wicked man holding out long in his
wickedness. A Second, see verse 19. A Third, see verse 20. A Fourth, see verse
21.22. A Fifth, see verse 23.24. A Sixth, see verse 25.26. But from that first
observation, Solomon infers a double Corollary, First, Against excessive
righteousness, which he disswadeth from; 1. By the disease accompanying it,
which is overmuch wisdom: 2. By the danger following it: Why will thou destroy
thy self? Secondly, Against continuance and growth in wickedness, which he
diwadeth from, First, By the disease accompanying it, Folly, be not foolish:
Secondly, By the danger following it, untimely Death, verse 17. and urges the
acceptance of both these Counsels by two motives, 1. By the goodness of both.
2. By the help of God to eschew both the contrary evils, verse 18. Be not
righteous overmuch; First, Some take this and the next verse to be spoken by
Solomon in the person of an Epicure or carnal Politician: Seeing righteous men
do sometime perish in their righteousness, when wicked men prolong their
days in wickedness; It is a good course not to be overjust. And yet least
that should seem too gross and offensive, It is a good course also not to be
overwicked, but to keep a mean between both. But if Solomon speak in the
person of the wicked, he would not second it with his own approbation of the
goodness of both courses, verse 18. Besides Solomon would not leave such
corrupt counsel without some aspersion of folly or vanity upon it, as he does
in the like case, Eccles. 4.5, 6. Verse 5. shows verse 6. to be spoken in the
person of the sloathful man.

Secondly, Others think by just overmuch, he means rigorously just, who will
remit no punishments, nor debts, nor rights, but exact Justice to extremity.
And indeed had David punished Joab for his murder of Abner and Amasa, he had
destroyed himself, 2 Samuel 3.39. But that overmuch righteousness is opposed to
clemency or moderation; whereas this here is opposed to wickedness.

Thirdly, Others therefore understand the righteousness here spoken of to be
Vniversalis justitia, universal righteousness, opposite to all wickedness.
But neither can that be the meaning of the word here. For, 1. No man can exceed
in that righteousness, he cannot be overmuch righteous in that sense, no,
though he were as righteous as Angels, as Christ Jesus, yea, infinitely
righteous as God is, Psalm. 16.3. to the excellent. 2. Neither can a man in
Scripture phrase be said to perish in that righteousness, though he should dye
for it. Stephen dying for his righteousness, or any other Martyr, is never
said to perish in his righteousness, but to glorify God, Joh. 21.18, 19, yea
and to honor and prefer himself, 2 Timothy 2.12. 2 Cor. 4, 17. But in
Scripture phrase a man is said to perish in his iniquity, Josh. 22.20.

Fourthly, It remains therefore that by overmuch righteousness, is meant,
righteousness over and above the rule of the word; as by overmuch wisdom
(coupled herewith) is meant, wisdom above that which is written, 1 Cor. 4.6. Of
this overmuch righteousness there be three sorts: 1. That which is called Legal
righteousness; so called, not because it is answerable to the Law, but because
judiciaries take it so, as Paul sometimes did, and other Jews, and Papists,
Phil. 3.6.

Quest. 1. But how can this be overmuch, which is over little?

Answ. As wisdom is called overmuch, which yet falls short of true wisdom.

Quest. 2. Wherein stands the overmuchness of this righteousness?

Answ. 1. In man's overmuch esteem of it, and overmuch confidence of his own
estate by it; He takes it to be true righteousness, whereas it is neither
true Justification, Phil. 3.7, 8. Nor Sanctification, or inherent
righteousness, Matthew. 5.20. 2 In a man's overmuch confidence of his ability by
the strength of it; The Israelites by it undertook and vowed universal
obedience; which without a better heart they could not perform, Deuteronomy. 5.27, 29.
As first, when we presume to walk in the strength of it, and not by says in
Christ, Matthew. 26.33, 35. Secondly, when we discern no defect in our best
duties, Neh. 13.22. Thirdly, when we think we have earned any reward at Gods
hand by it, Luke 17.10.

2. Righteousness of works of Supererogation, Micah 6.6, 7. works above what
the law required; in which also a man may perish.

3. Righteousness of works of good intention, as that of Vzzah, intending to
save the Ark by touching it against the Law, 2 Samuel 6.6. with Numb. 4.15. In
which he died, 2 Samuel 6.7. So Saul's sacrifice out of a good intention, but
against a Commandment, lost his Kingdom, 1 Samuel 13.12, 13, 14. See also, 1 Samuel 15.21, 22, 23.

4. Righteousness inherent, prized above the word; Righteousness of a cause
over eagerly maintained; as in Jobs case, justifying himself rather then God,
which was overmuch righteousness. Yet this fourth may be rather handled as a
consectary in the verse; for no man perishes in this righteousness, though he
may fall foully.

Doct. Excess of righteousness, or to be righteous overmuch, is accompanied
with an overweening conceit of a man's own wisdom; and followed with causlesse
destruction of a man's self, verse. 16.

Solomon joining this warning, Neither make thy self overwise, to the former,
Be not righteous overmuch, implies, that an overweening conceit of our own
wisdom, does accompany overmuch righteousness. And adding this Reason [for why
will thou destroy thy self?] He implies, that these will procure destruction,
and that without cause. And therefore he asks why?

Reason 1. Why it is accompanied with overmuch wisdom; because it makes us
wise without the word, and above the word, which ought not to be, 1 Cor. 4, 6.
The word is the rule of wisdom, Esaias 8.20.

Reason 2. Why it is followed with certain danger of destruction; because,
First, it is ever joined with pride, which is a forerunner of destruction,
Prove. 16.18. Secondly, it reflecteth imperfection and insufficiency upon Gods
wisdom and word. For it is less dishonor to God, that a man do a sin
against the word, then a good duty above the word. The one argues frailty and
imperfection in us; the other in God. Thirdly, it submits not it self to
the righteousness of Christ, but men in it go about to set up a Savior
without Christ, and against him, Romans 9.31, 32. with 11.7. Christ is indeed our
Wisdom, 1 Cor. 1.24. and Righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30. Jer. 23.6.

Use 1. To prevent and refute the mis-applying of this Text to the reproach and
discouragement of growth and forwardness in grace and Christian duties. Even
the Heathen Philosopher Aristotle could say, Though virtue consists in a
mediocrity between two extremes, yet not in a mediocrity of degrees of
goodness, but in a hyperbole or excess. Politic. l. 7. c. 1. Yea, it
reproves the despising of legal duties; for though they be not
righteousness, yet they are gifts of the Spirit, restraining from sin,
constraining to duty, and a greater gift from God then riches or honor. Brass
is good, only it is counterfeit, when it is put off for gold.

Use 2. To dissuade and direct from all this excess of righteousness here
forbidden; not from the duties, but from taking them for our righteousness;
when we have lived long in them, they are either our righteousness imputed or
inherent.

Quest. What would you have us to do more?

Answ. 1. Know, why Christ is Good, as Matthew. 19.17. feel your, First, Want of
him and faith in him, John 16.7, 8.2. Worth of him, Cant. 4.10. Secondly,
Listen duly to the word for some promise, doctrine, or example of grace, in
which Christ is wont to convey his spirit to lost souls to beget Faith. 1.
Either persuading us of grace from God to our souls in him, Psalm. 119.43. 2. Or
at least setting up him in our hearts as our sovereign good, Psalm. 73.25, 36.
Thirdly, If you feel him not applying promises to you, nor himself in any word
of grace with power, pray over the promises, and meditate on them; they will so
give faith. Observe if this do not utterly pull down all our high thoughts of
former worth in our selves, Prove. 30.2. and do not make us sensible of our own
disability to any duty, 2 Cor. 3.15. If the Lord thus carry us forth, it will
take us off from overmuch righteousness, which will leave us destitute and
desolate of Christ, for our justification, and of the spirit for our
sanctification. Beware likewise of resting in works of good intention, without
or beside the word.

Sincere righteousness may be overmuch prized, when we first, Presume to walk
in the strength of it, and not of faith, Matthew. 26.33, 35. Secondly, when we
discern no defects in our best duties, Neh. 13.22. Thirdly, when we think we
have earned any reward at Gods hand by it, Luke 17.10.

Eccles. 7. v. 17. 17. Be not overmuch wicked, neither be thou foolish; why
should thou die before thy time?


BE not wicked overmuch] though the word is, (...) as before ((...) not be not
overmuch wicked, but do not wickedly overmuch) but yet if we take it as is
translated, the sense is the same.

To be wicked overmuch, implies two things: 1. Aggravation of sin beyond the
word. 2. Multiplication of it. First, to make a man's self more wicked then the
word makes him: So excessively wicked, as thereupon to shut out a man's self
from all hope of mercy, or otherwise worse then he is. This excess a man that
is convinced of the emptiness of his righteousness which he prized overmuch
before, is apt to sink into, even to despair. Cain, who before thought himself
as righteous as his brother, and his sacrifice as acceptable as his, being
convinced by God of his wickedness sunck into despair of mercy, Gen: 4.13.
Hence also some think they have sinned against the Holy Ghost. Others that they
have quenched the Spirit, when as rather the Spirit has enlightened and awaked
them. But this sense does not fully answer the opposition in verse 14. though
it answer well enough to verse 16.

Secondly the phrase may well be translated, Do not evil much, that is, Do not
multiply transgression, as Amos 4.4. The word is used in this sense. Sin is
multiplied either 1. By continuance in it, Romans 6.1. 2. By growth unto full
measure of iniquity, Math. 23.32. [A curse]

Doctr. Excessive aggravation of sin, and all continuance and growth in sin, is
accompanied with folly, and followed with untimely death. Sin is excessively
Aggravated when it is made, First, greater then can be forgiven, as Genesis 4.13.
See the Original. So when we judge we have sinned against the Holy Ghost, when
we have only lost the comfort of the spirit. Secondly, Greater then will be
forgiven, in regard either of our present hardness of heart, which we despair
of softning, or in regard of our person, which we judge to be reprobate.
Thirdly, A sin of an higher kind then it is, as that to be a sin of
presumption, when it is but a sin of infirmity, though against light. Fourthly,
our sin, and springing up in us, which is but cast into us by Satan; as
thoughts of blasphemy darted into us, which our hearts tremble at and abhor.
The weeds that are cast in over the pale, into a man's garden, are not the weeds
of the garden, till the soil give rooting to them, that is, consent. This is
folly, as not judging of our selves or our sins according to the word, which is
the rule of wisdom, Esaias 8.20. 2 Timothy 3.17. But according, 1. To our present
sense, which in spiritual matters is blind and foolish, and very changeable.
2. To the sugggestion of our enemy. This brings to untimely death, sometime
by violent self-murder, Matthew. 27.4, 5.

Quest. But how can a man die before his time?

Answ. Not before the time which God has appointed, Job 14.5. yet before the
time, first, of the course of Nature. Secondly, of our expectation of it.
Thirdly, of our preparation for it. Continuance and growth in sin is, First,
foolish, Prove. 14.16. and 13.9. As utterly against the Word, Romans 6.1. And as
flattering us with empty hopes of Impunity, Deuteronomy. 29, 19. and of repentance
hereafter. Secondly, Destructive and deadly before the time, Psalm. 68.21. and
55.23. 1. Every sin which we commit setting us a step further off from
salvation, Psalm. 119, 155. Romans 13.11, [a part] 2. as kindling a greater fire
of Gods wrath, and adding more Fuel to the fire, Deuteronomy. 29.19.20. Amos 2.13, 3.
As hardening the heart more and more unto impenitency, Heb. 3.13. Romans 2.15. 4.
As filling a vessel of dishonor the sooner full to the brim, Genesis 15.16.

Quest. But how is this continuance and growth in sin said to be overmuch?

Answ. Because the former course of our wickedness may suffice us, 1 Pet. 4.3.

Use 1. To dehort from aggravation of sin, in any excessive measure above the
word: though according to the word it be most wholesome, Psalm. 40, 12. Ezra 9.6.

Use 2. To dehort from continuance and growth in sin, Dan. 4.27. 1 Pet. 4.3.
Continuance implies, First, Repetition of the act, after we know it to be sin;
Prove. 19.19. not so Judah, Genesis 38.26. Secondly, Impenitency after it, only
forbearance of the act: which may be feared in Judah, Genesis 38, 26. till after
Joseph had humbled (as an instrument in Gods hand) him and his brethren.
Thirdly, Toleration of the root of it, without mortification of it. Thus Jonah
repenting of his foresaking his call, but not mortifying the pride of his heart
(which was the root of it) brake forth again, Jonah 4.9. Growth in sin as
when First, More resolute, Jer. 44.16, 17. Secondly, More skilful at it, Jer.
4.22. wise to do evil. Thirdly, more bold, Isai. 3.9. Fourthly, More
outrageous, proceeding from evil to worse, to higher degrees of wickedness, 2 Timothy 3.13. Isai. 1.5.

Eccles. 7. v. 18. 18. It is good that thou should take hold of this, yea,
also from this withdraw not thine hand: for he that fears God shall come
forth of them all.


THe two former Admonitions in the verses next aforegoing Solomon amplifieth,
First, By a motive to the taking hold of them, taken from the goodness
thereof. Secondly, By the means whereby we may perform what is required, and
eschew the evils dehorted from: and that means is the fear of God. Thirdly,
By an argument from the strength and supportance, which this wisdom brings
to a wise man, above great friends, verse 19.

Doctr. 1. It is a good thing to take hold of such admonitions as may keep us
from excess either of righteousness or wickedness, or from overmuch either
righteousness or wickedness. To take hold, which is done, First, By Faith,
both 1. In the word, else it profitteth not, Heb. 4.2. 2. In the Lord, to help
us by his strength, both of power, wisdom, and grace, Isai. 27.5. Secondly, By
hearty affection, as a precious treasure, Psalm. 119.11. Thirdly, By caution and
circumspection. Here to take heed, is to take hold, Acts 16.14. Heb. 2.1.
wanting in Jehu, 2 Kings 10 31. Fourthly, By practice, so the word is taken,
Prove. 2.19. It is good not to be over-righteous, First, To prevent the evil of
desolation threatened, verse 16. Desolation signifies, 1. Solitude left to a
solitary condition, 2. Confusion, (as Dan. 4.19.) Astonishment. 3. Destruction.
Overmuch righteousness brings, 1. Desertion from God, Luke 1.53, and 18, 9,
14. we first deserting him, Romans 10.3. Desertion from men, Job 32.1. 2.
Confusion through disappointment of a man's end and hopes, Romans 9.30, 31, 32. 3.
Destruction: For what shall satisfy for former sins and for defects of this
righteousness. Secondly, To obtain the contrary solace. 1. Of peace with God,
Romans 5.1. Isai. 32.19. 2. Of establishment and encouragement in ill hours,
Isai. 28.16. with 1 Pet. 2.6. 3. Of Salvation, Prove. 12.18. It is good not to
be overwicked; First, To prevent the evils of despair and of untimely death.
As also to prevent the evils of continuance and growth in sin, mentioned in
verse 17. page 144. Secondly, To obtain the good 1. Of hope of possibility of
help, It takes hold of Gods strength, Isai. 27.5. Mark 1.40. and stirs up
to the use of means, Ezra 10.2, 3, 4. 2. Of sincere reformation or breaking
off the course of sin, First, Prolonging of tranquillity, Dan. 4.27. Secondly,
Finding of mercy, Prove. 28.13.

Use 1. To whet upon us both these admonitions, to beware both of overmuch
righteousness, and of overmuch wickedness in all the former particulars.

Use 2. To exhort us to grow up and walk on in the fear of God; which might
have been handled, as a distinct doctrine being expressly mentioned in the Text.
The fear of God is a good preservation against excess both of righteousness
and wickedness. Against excess of righteousness, Deuteronomy. 5.27, with 29.
Against excess of wickedness, Prove. 16.6. and 14, 16, and 28, 14, Jer. 32.40.

Reason 1. It emptieth a man of self confidence, Phil. 2.12, 13.

Reason 2. It keeps the heart soft, Prove, 28.14.

Reason 3. To exhort us how to carry our selves toward wholesome admonitions,
to wit, as here Solomon warns, to take hold of them in all the four
particulars specified in opening the meaning of the Text, Prove. 4.13.

Eccles. 7. v. 19. 19. Wisdom strengthens the wise, more then ten mighty men
which are in the City.


THese words give another reason, why we should beware of the folly of sin, and
of the overmuch wisdom of excessive righteousness, taken from the safeguard
or strong protection and deliverance which this wisdom will procure to a wise
man, and that amplified a Minori from the less supportance and deliverance,
which many great friends in Court or City might afford him.

Doct. 1. The wisdom of an innocent and truly righteous life, will yield a man
greater supportance and safer deliverance then many great friends in Court or
City, Prove. 24.5. Job. 22.23, 30. For the original Text speaks of this
wisdom, that is, this wisdom whereby a man avoydeth both the folly of
continuance in sin, verse 17. and the overmuch wisdom of excessive
righteousness, verse 16. (In both which men undo or destroy themselves) this
wisdom will strengthen a man more, to wit, By supportance, and By deliverance,
then ten (that is many) (...) Princely Lords, and friends in the City, meaning
the Court which resided in the City, and whereto they resorted. Ten] often put
for many, Numb. 14.22. Job 19.3.

Reason 1. From the presence and protection of God with such whose ways are
pure and upright before him, 2 Chronicles. 16.9. Psalm. 18.20, 21, 23, 24. God is
First, The light of our countenance, Psalm. 42.11, 43, 5. Secondly, The staff
of our maintenance, Psalm. 16.5. Thirdly, The horn of our deliverance, Psalm.
18.2.

Reason 2. From the protection and Ministry of Angels, who are greater then
the greatest men, Psalm. 34.7, and 91, 11, 12. 2 Kings 6.15, to 20.

Reason 3. From the favor, which ways of true righteousness find even of
strangers, 1 Pet. 3.13. Job 5.19, to 23. even of enemies, Prove. 16.7.

Reason 4. From the failing of all great friends, when Gods hand is heavy upon
him: as also in death when righteousness fails not, Prove. 11.4. Psalm, 146.3,
4, and 88, 18. Job. 6.15, to 21, and 9, 13.

Use 1. To remove the stumbling block out of the way, which hinders many from
breaking off their sinful courses, to wit, from the loss of their great
friends; Nay the ways of true righteousness procure great friends, by Gods
overruling hand, Prove. 22.11. 2 Kings 10.15, 16. Jehu was but an Hypocrite, yet
would countenance a good man, and take countenance from him; even wicked
Princes by persuasion have befriended the Church.

Use 2. To exhort such private Christians, and the whole state of the Country,
to walk and grow up in this wisdom, it may be our strength when all else may
fail us in City and Country, Psalm. 27.10, 11.

Eccles. 7. v. 20. 20. For there is not a just man upon Earth, that does good
and sins not.


SOlomon having commended this wisdom (as strengthening the wise above many
great friends in Court or City) where by a man neither makes himself
over-righteous, nor over-wicked, in this verse he gives a reason of it, taken
from the infirmity of the most righteous man upon Earth. As who should say, do
not make your self over-righteous, so righteous as no fault to be found in you
(as Ephraim did, Hos. 12.8.) For there is not a just man upon Earth, that does
good and sins not,

Doct. 1. Perfection of righteousness, so as to do good, without sin, is not
to be found in any man, no not in the best man upon the Earth, 1 Kings 8.46.
Psalm. 130.3, and 143, 2. Job. 9.3. and verse 30.31. Clothes defile, As
testifying our sinful nakedness which was the cause of it, Genesis 3.7. The
meaning of the doctrine is, First, That in many things (and in some things more
then other) all men even the best men do sin, Jam. 3.2. either omitting good,
or committing evil. Noah, Abraham, Lot, Moses, David, Peter. Secondly, That in
all things in our best actions, we sin something. Neh. 13.22. Exodus 28.38.
Psalm. 80.4. Rev. 8.3.4.]

Reason 1. From Gods wise and just desertion of every one of his servants,
sometimes or other for a season. Either To know what is in our hearts, 2 Chro.
32 31. or to chasten, First, Our carnal self confidence, Matthew. 26, 33, 35.
and so to chasten our neglect of stirring up our selves to lay hold of God,
Isai. 64.6.7. Secondly, Our uncircumspect and unjust walking, neglect of
pondering the paths of our feet, Psalm. 119.9. Prove. 4.26.

Reason 2. From the contrary lusting between the flesh and spirit, Gal. 5.17.
hence flows an impossibility of doing any one duty perfectly. Lust in him
sins, not the person. If rebellious or irregular subjects of confederate
Princes trespass one upon another, it is not the trespass of the state,
whilst the Princes condemn it, and punish it, now the judgment and will, are
the (...) in a man, the carnal part are but as rebellious subjects.

Use 1. To refute, 1. Perfection of works held by Papists Catharists of old,
and herewith possibility of keeping the law. 2 Justification by works, Psalm.
143.2. Romans 3.23, 24. 3 Merit of Works. 4 Supererogation. 5 The immaculate
perfection of the Virgin Mary, (...) in the Text comprehends women as well as
men, Genesis 1.26.27.

Use 2. To convince carnal wicked men of their abundance of sin, seeing the
most godly and just fall, Job 15.16.

Use 3. To show us where our happiness lies, to wit, not in our own
innocence, but in the covering of our sins, Psalm. 32.1, 2. And therefore we to
seek for all our righteousness in Christ, Phil. 3.7, 8, 9. Romans 3.23, 24.

Use 4. To mortify pride of our best duties.

Use 5. To teach us to bear evils at Gods hand patiently, Micah. 7.9.

Use 6. Not to be masterly censorious of the failings of our brethren, Jam.
3.1, 2. John 8.7.

Use 7. To comfort the godly righteous against the fear and grief of death,
in our selves, or our Christian friends. In death the spirits of just men are
made perfect, Heb. 12.23. else death were not the last enemy, if sin remained
after it, contrary to 1 Cor. 15.26.

Eccles. 7.21, 22. 21. Also take no heed unto all words that are spoken, lest
thou hear thy servant curse thee. 22. For often times also thine own heart
knows, that thou thy self likewise have cursed others.

SOlomon having observed verse. 20. that there is not a just man upon earth,
that does good and sins not; he hence infers, this Corollary, Not to set
a man's heart upon all the words that are spoken, not upon all their hard
sayings and ill speeches, wherein all men, even the most wise and just, are
sometimes too blame, either in speaking or in giving occasion to be spoken.

Parts two: first, an Exhoration, not to set our hearts on, all the words
spoken; that is, 1. Not to listen after them, 1 Samuel 24.9. with 1 Samuel 24.8, 9,
10. 2 Not to be over deeply affected with them, 1 Samuel 18.7, 8. 3 Not to pursue
the same with revenge, 2 Samuel 19.19, 20. Secondly, Confirmation by Reasons two:
1. From the inconveniency which may easily attend it; so a man may hear his own
servant cursing him or sleighting him, v. 21. 2. From the convenience of Gods
wise and just hand, in measuring to us as we have measured to others: which
that we have done, Solomon argues from the testimony of his own conscience, v.
22.

Doct. 1. It is not good to set a man's heart upon all men's speeches of him, no
not upon the hard and slight speeches of his own servants against him, to wit,
First, In case men speak vanity, to wit, 1, Out of a vanity of mind, not upon
any grounded cause or just occasion, Psalm. 12.2. and 144.8. 2. Unto vanity
words, that are not likely to weaken a man in his calling, 1 Cor. 4.3. else
Paul stirred, if his calling suffered, 2 Cor. 10.10, 11. Secondly, In case the
words be spoken by men whose tongues are their own, when a man can have no
means to restrain, Psalm. 38.12, 13, 14. Thirdly, In case of apparent evidence
of our Innocence to the contrary, Job 31.35, 36, 27. Fourthly, In time of
public or private, special and weighty; A vocation another way, by
Humiliation, 2 Samuel 16.10, 11. and by Rejoicing, 2 Samuel 19.22. Otherwise it is
meet in due time to take notice of any grounded and serious speech, that may
tend to the prejudice of our calling: and thereby to be stirred up, First, To
search our hearts and ways, to see if we have not done the same or the like
evil. Secondly, To clear our selves if innocent: to repent and amend if guilty.

Reason 2. From the vanity often found in such speeches, who take liberty to
speak at random, without occasion, without consideration, without any real
detriment to our selves or callings, Psalm. 73.9.

Reason 2. From the love and pity we are to bear to men; occasions of enmity
and discord we should put out of our minds, Levit. 19.18.

Reason 3. From the office of our memory and heart, which is the Treasury of
our souls, Matthew. 12, 35. and therefore not to be filled with trash, Jer. 4.14.
Luke 2.51. on the contrary.

Reason 4. From the peace and tranquillity of our own spirits which should not
depend upon men's judgments or speeches, but upon Gods, 1 Cor. 4.3, 2 Cor. 1.12.

Reason 5. From the privity of our own conscience to our own slight speeches
of others, Eccles. 7.21, 22.

Use 1. To teach us this part of the circumcision of the heart and ear,
neither, First, To listen with the ear unto all vain speeches of a man's
self: Secondly, To set the heart thereupon in such a manner, as to trouble our
selves and others in vain:

Use 2. From the latter reason mentioned in the Text, learn we, First, To
walk circumspectly in the sight of our own hearts and consciences, else they
will bear witness against us, 1 Kings 2.44. Secondly, To be the more patient
if others wrong us in the like kind, as our own hearts tell us we have wronged
others, Judge 1.6, 7. Matthew. 7.1, 2.

Eccles. 7.23, 24, 25. 23. All this have I proved by wisdom: I said, I will be
wise, but it was far from me. 24. That which is far off, and exceeding
deep, who can find it out? 25. I applied mine heart to know, and to search,
and to seek out wisdom, and the reason of things, and to know the wickedness
of folly, even of foolishness and madness.

IN these words Solomon makes another observation of that which was meet for
all men to observe by his example, even what befell himself in the search of
wisdom in his own times; which was, First, That in all his search of wisdom
(to wit, by the works of creation and providence, and by tracing out happiness
in the courses which men are went to take for it) he found that wisdom was too
far off, and too deep for him, verse 23.24. Secondly, That missing of wisdom
in the way, he applied his heart, or turned it about to seek for wisdom in
taking account of himself, and seeking to know the wickedness of his own
folly, and the foolishness of his own madness, verse 25. And the reason [of
things] is better translated, and the account of my self or my ways, etc.
verse 25.

Doctr. 1. The sense of our vast and deep distances from attaining wisdom, by
the study of the creatures, and of the vanity of the ways of men, is a just
motive to apply our hearts to make diligent search for wisdom in taking account
of our own ways, and in the knowledge of the wickedness of our folly, and the
foolishness of our own madness. To know, to seek, to search, verse 25. do all
imply a diligent search: The Doctrine consists of two branches; First, That
by the knowledge of the creatures he shall find himself still at a great
distance from wisdom, and wisdom more deep then to be dug out of the
creatures. Secondly, that hereupon Solomon was moved to seek it in looking
homewards into his own heart, and ways, and the folly and madness, and
wickedness thereof. The former branch is testified, 1 Cor. 1.21. Romans 1.21,
22. Job 28.12, 13, 14, and verse 20.21, 22.

Reasons of the former, 1. From the distance and depth of Christ from the
creatures, and from the knowledge of them all, Christ is the wisdom both of
God, 1 Cor. 1.24. and of us, 1 Cor. 1.30. But the wisest could never discern
Christ by the creature, 1 Cor. 2, 6, to 9. Hence not the creature but the word
is perfect to convert souls, Psalm. 19.1, to 7.

Reason 2. From the aptness of the creature, and the knowledge of it (by
reason of the curse that lies upon it) to puff us up, Isai. 47, 10. Solomon
confesses himself, I said I will be wise this way, Presuming of his
knowledge. Text. of the latter, That hereupon Solomon was moved to search after
wisdom in taking account of himself, and the folly of his own course.

Reason 1. From the excellency of man himself, above all the creatures, he is
the Lord of them all, and so their Lord, Genesis 1.28, 29. And therefore more may
be found in observing a man's self, then all the other creatures.

Reason 2. From the vanity and vexation of spirit which all the creatures yield
to a man. A man is justly occasioned to look into the root and cause of it in
himself.

Use 1. To convince all the wise Philosophers of the Heathens of the vast
distance of wisdom from them. For they had no further means of wisdom, then
what Solomon improving to the utmost, found far off from conveying true
wisdom to him, Romans 1.22. A warning to Scholars, not to overvalue wisdom and
knowledge, which they have from the creatures.

Use 2. To teach us that in taking just account of our selves and our ways, we
shall find our former course Folly, even the wickedness of Folly and
Madness, even the foolishness of madness, 2 Samuel 24.19. Acts 26.11. Job
40.4, 5, and 42, 6. Jer. 2.19. 2 Chronicles. 16.9. Ezekiel. 6.9, and 36, 31.

Use 3. To teach us a difference of the wisdom of God, revealed in the
creatures, It is far off and deep, Text. Not so in the Gospel, Deuteronomy. 30.11,
to 14. with Rom, 10.6.7.

Use 4. To teach us there is much wisdom, may be learned, from knowing our own
wickedness, foolishness and madness, he was more then a common wise man that
said, Prove. 30.2. Surely I am more foolish then any man, 1 Cor. 3.18. Jer.
10.14, For First, The sense of our own folly and wickedness makes us low and
base, and so humbles us before the Lord. Secondly, The sense of our folly
directs us to seek true wisdom in Christ, and in his word.

Eccles. 7.26. 26. And I find more bitter then death, the woman whose heart is
snares and nets, and her hands as bands: who so pleases God, shall escape from
her, but the sinner shall be taken by her.


SOlomon in the three former verses, having observed that in all the former
search after wisdom, he had not found it in the creature, he therefore applied
his heart to seek out by wisdom, the wickedness of his own folly, and the
foolishness of his own madness, And in these verses (to the end of the
Chapter) he gives the Church an account both of what he had found upon taking
account, and of his want of taking account. To wit, three things, First, An
adulterous and Idolatrous woman more bitter then death, whom he describes, 1.
By her effects, 1. She is as snares slily to catch, 2. Her heart as Traps. 3.
Her hands as bands. 2. By the subject persons about whom she is conversant,
and they are either good in Gods sight, and they are delivered from her; or
sinners, and they are taken by her, verse 26. Secondly, The rariety of faithful
admonitions amongst men especially amongst women verse 28. which he amplifieth
by his diligent and incessant search, verse 27. Thirdly, The vast distance of a
man by his fall, from his state of Creation. Or the vain and sinful fruits of
man's fall from the state wherein God created him, verse 29.

Doctr. 1. A man that sets himself unfeignedly (or to use Solomon's words,
that applies and turns his heart) wisely to search out his own wickedness,
folly and madness, shall find the instruments that led him into temptation
and sin, more bitter then death. As Solomon here found his wives and
Concubines, who drew him to maintenance of Idolatry, 1 Kings 11.3, 4.

Reason 1. From the shame and indignity put upon him by his wives and
Concubines, that were Idolaters, Pleading it seems liberty of conscience:
whence he first grants toleration, then countenance and assistance to their
Idols, erecting Temples to them: whence Altars, Ornaments, Priest, and all upon
mount Olivet, before the face of the Lord in his Temple, 1 Kings 11.7, 8. 2
Kings 23.13.

Reason 2. From the bitterness of sin, and that even above death, Jer. 2.19.
Acts 8, 23. Deuteronomy. 32.32, 33. All the ingredients of bitterness are found in
sin, which have made men bitterly to mourn as, First, The loss of the
blessing of a heavenly Father, Genesis 27.34. a minori. Secondly, Cruel bondage,
worse then Egyptian, Exodus 1.14. Thirdly, Bitter water causing the curse, Numb.
5.24. Yea sin is more bitter then death. As First, Being the death of the
soul, Romans 7.11. which is so much the more bitter then the death of the body,
as the life of the soul is more sweet and precious then the life of the body.
Secondly, Depriving us of the presence and favor of God which is better then
life, Isai. 59.2. Psalm. 63.3.

Reason 3. From the bitterness of godly sorrow or repentance, Mat. 26.75.
Zach. 12.10. Matters of such bitterness in godly sorrows, First, For that we
have pierced our dearest and best friends, Zach. 12.10. Secondly, That by sin
we have destroyed the beauty, and strength, 1. Of family, as of our first borne
or only Child. 2 Of Church and Common wealth, as in the mourning for Josiah at
Hadadrimmon, Zach. 12.10, 11. Hence Lam. 3.15. with 2 Chronicles. 35.25. Solomon
could not but see in his fall the division of the Kingdom, 1 Kings 11.40. hence
corruption of religion in them, then in Judah also, to the utter destruction of
all.

Use 1. To teach us concerning Solomon, First, That Solomon did indeed repent
after his fall. Secondly, That he wrote this book after his repentance.

Use 2. To weane all men from sin, It will be bitterness in the end [2 Samuel
2.26.] Acts 8.23. Prove. 23.31, 32. Prove. 5.34, 5. Prove. 20.17.

Use 3. To weane us from delighting in sinful companions, they will be bitter
to us in the end, as death, and more bitter too; Trust not in the friendship of
such: for if ever they or we repent, we shall be ready to condemn and betray
one another.

Use 4. To teach us a sign of true repentance, when sin grows as bitter,
yea more bitter to us then death.

Use 5. To show us the danger of women once corrupted; how apt, and slye, and
strong they be to draw on stronger then themselves to corruption, Neh. 13.26.

Use 6. To be upright in Gods sight, and not to rest in a sinful state and
course, the one is preserved from such women and snares; The other given up to
be taken by her.

Eccles. 7.27.28. 27. Bebold, this I have found (says the Preacher,) counting
one by one to find out the account. 28. Which yet my soul seeks, but I find
not: one man among a thousand have I found, but a woman among all those have I
not found.

SOlomon here inserteth the manner and nature of the account which he took of
his own wickedness and folly, which he describes by three Adjuncts or
Qualities, First, That it was exact and particular, one by one. Secondly, That
it was constant and continual, which still my soul seeks. Thirdly, That it
was defective, which still my soul seeks, but I find not.

Doctr. 1. The acount which a penitent soul takes of his wickedness and
folly, is a particular and constant account and yet defective. Particular
account, Lament. 3.40. Zeph. 2.1. where one part of the sense is, Fan your
selves. Psalm. 51. verse. 5. original sin, verse. 10. a foul heart, Adulterous,
verse. 14. Bloodguiltiness, murder, Ezekiel. 6.9. Zeph. 3.11. Constant and growing
account, Psalm. 119.59. with Psalm. 139.23, 24. Defective account, Psalm. 19.12.
and 38.4.

Reason of particular account, 1. From the illumination of conscience,
especially when it is wakened to repentance, Prove. 20.27. God deals with his
servants when he humbles them, as with carnal men, he enters into judgment
with them, Psalm. 0.21. and 10.15. Conscience enlightened and awakened, fits as
it were Gods vicegerent in the soul, who in his judicial proceeding is exact,
and particular, Mat. 12.36. Eccles. 12.14. Psalm. 90.8.

Reason of constant account, 1. From the sweetness of godly sorrow, 2 Cor.
7.9, 10. the deeper the sweeter. And sorrow is the deeper and greater, by how
much the deeper the search is. As in bodily wounds, the deeper search into old
sores, the greater pain to the body.

Reason of Defective account, 1. From the deep deceitfulness of our hearts,
Jer. 17.9. 2 From the innumerable multitude of our sins, Psalm. 40.12. and 19,
22. 3 From the Imperfection of all our best knowledge of spiritual good and
evil things, 1 Cor. 13.9.

Use 1. To reprove our overly, and slippery conceit of perfect accounts. Many
are loath to enter into any account at all; like bankrupt Merchants; or if they
do, it is but overly, Jer. 8.6. They that do, are loath to pursue it
constantly, soon slipped from it. The Papists require a perfect examination of
all particular mortal sins (as they call them) with all the circumstances of
them.

Use 2. To teach us (after Solomon's example) what manner of Account books we
should keep between the Lord, and our souls, to wit,

First, Exact and particular; motives, 1. It prevents Gods examining and
judging us, when we are strict in examining and judging our selves, 1 Cor.
11.28, 31. 2 It will make our, first, Repentance more thorough and sincere.
Secondly, prayers more fervent and humble. Thirdly, Christ more precious and
glorious. Fourthly, Mortification more powerful. Fifthly, heart more watchful.
Sixthly life more regular, Psalm. 119.59. 3. It will leave the conscience,
first, more peaceable, sin unaccounted of, will be like a debt unreckoned, and
terrify, or at least trouble the conscience, Psalm. 25.7. Job 13.26. Secondly,
more pure, sin unaccounted for is unrepented, and like a Canaanite, will let
in the devil at the back door; as Jonah that repented of disobedience to Gods
call, but not of the pride of his heart, the cause of it; hence he is
passionate again for disgrace, Chap. 4.1.

Or the second and third may be put together, as a motive from the benefit
redounding, first, to our selves, in our Consciences, hearts, and lives.
Secondly, To our Duties, in our repentance, prayer, and mortification. Thirdly,
to Christ.

Secondly, constant motives, 1. Else our hearts will grow hard and barren, and
full of lusts and passions, as the soil but once plowed will grow fallow, and
barren of good fruit, but abounding in weeds.

Thirdly, sensible of its own Defectivenesse.

Motives. 1. It will call in for an higher search, even from God himself
without fear and terror, Psalm. 139.23, 24. 2. It will stir up to prayer,
for pardon of secret sins, Psalm, 19.12.

Use 3. To teach us the right way of judging and admonishing others without
arrogance or Hypocrisy; Solomon here passes a deep censure upon men, and
women, v. 28. but before this he takes a strict account of himself. This
method is needful, to reckon first with our selves, Mat. 7.5.

Eccles. 7. v. 28.
Doct. 1. There is a great scarcity of men (worthy the name of men, or quitting
themselves like men,) and a greater scarcity of women worrhy of the name of
women: and Kings of all men (especially penitent Kings) have most cause to to
say so. Or, There is a great scarcity of good men, and a greater scarsity of
good women, especially about the Court. For Solomon speaks of what himself
found; One man among a thousand have I found, which argues a great scarcity of
men, and surely he does not mean that men for the most part are no men, but
not good men, not such as are worthy the name of men, that quit themselves like
men, as they should according to 1 Cor. 16.13. in our several relations and
employments, 2 Samuel 10.12. See the like phrase, Prove. 18.22. So 1 Chronicles. 6, 10.
Jehojada or Azariah (either of both, for the holy ghost gives liberty to
understand either) (Sacerdotem egit) executed the Priests office; why, did not
their Predecessors and successors execute the same office? true, but not with
like Priestly wisdom, courage, zeal, faithfulness. There is such a like
phrase in Job 33.23, One of a thousand to declare to a man his righteousness
and so his failing and falling short of it: that is a faithful admonisher of
the scarcity of faithful men, David (a Courtier) complains, Psalm. 12, 1.
Prove. 31.10.

Reasons of few men, 1. From the paucity of the Elect, Matthew. 20.16. And if not
Elect then not effectually called, and then Christ not being united to us, we
are still full of selfishnesse, self-conceit, self-will, self-seeking.

Reason 2. From the hardness and straitness of the gate, and ways of
righteousness, with the contrary liberty and ease of the gate and ways of sin
and death, Matthew. 7.13.14.

Reas. 3. From the variety of the changes of relations, wherein a man stands. A
man that is a good servant, if he become a Church member, he can despise his
Master, whether he be carnal (because such:) or a brother because then equal in
Christ, hence 1 Timothy 6.1, 2.

Reasons of fewer women. 1. From their greater liablenesse to deceit and
temptation, 1 Timothy 2.14.

Reas. 2. From their greater vehemence and impotency in their passions and
lusts, not only on good objects, 2 Samuel 1.26. but on evil also, 1 Kings 21.25.

Reason 3. From their great superstition, Acts 13, 50. 2 Timothy, 3.6, 7. This
Solomon found by experience.

Reasons of fewest in Court, 1. From the greatest paucity and rarity of great
men called, 1 Cor. 1.26.

Reason 2. From the affected liberty of great men, especially, Jer. 5.5.

Reason 3. From the self-seeking of flattery frequent in Courtiers, Hos. 7.3,
5. 2 Chronicles. 24.17. 1 Kings 22.13.

Reason 4. From the temptations that follow the Court, Immunity from
Controlment, Amos 7.13. Isai. 30.10. Impunity from the hand of Justice. The
Court is commonly made a sanctuary for iniquity.

Use 1. To refute the Papists note of the Church; multitude; Not one of a
thousand, more Mahumetans then Christians of all sorts.

Use 2. To diswade men from blessing themselves in leading such a life, as most
men lead, Exodus 23, 2. Scarcity of good store of company in good ways is no
just discouragement from walking in them, yet with this caution, not therefore
to neglect the multitude of the godly, whether in matters of Judgment or
practice, 1 Cor. 14, 36. 1 Cor 11.16.

Use 3. To humble both men and women for this scarcity of goodness amongst us.
See how low sin debaseth, we are not worthy the name of men and women by reason
thereof, Prove. 30.2. Psalm. 49.20. and 73.22. 1 Cor. 15.32. Eccles. 3.18. Grace
makes us like to Angels, yea to God himself: amongst men, one of a thousand,
but sin, makes us rather beasts then men. Not one man scarce of a thousand,
or woman, that quit themselves well in all their relations.

Use 4. To weane us from affecting to live in the Court where, of all places,
goodness is most rare. God threatened preferment, in a great Court, for a great
plague, 2 Kings 20.18.

Use 5. To teach good men, and good women especially to be the more thankful,
that God should show us such special grace, and favor, as to pass by
thousands, and call us to goodness. Universal righteousness endoweth us with
rare excellency, such as is scarce found in a thousand.

Eccles. 7.29. 29. Lo, this only have I found, that God has made man
upright: but they have sought out many inventions.


IN this verse we have set down the third experiment or event which Solomon
found upon taking account of his own wickedness and folly, to wit, the
righteousness of God in his work about man, but man's perverse subtilty in
inventing ways of backsliding (or Apostasy from God.)

Quest: 1. How does he say he found this only, seeing he found two other things
before? First, The bitterness of wicked women, verse 26. Secondly, The
scarcity of good men and greater scarcity of good women, verse 18.

Answ, By Only is meant chiefly, as Josh. 1.7, 8. Gal. 2.10. Prove. 4.3. (with
1 Chronicles. 3.5.) Cant. 6, 9.

Quest. 2. How is God said to make man Righteous?

Answ. Righteous, First, In his first Creation, Genesis 1.26, 27. Secondly, His
own children (such as himself and his father before him) in their
regeneration, Jer. 2.21.

Quest. What is meant by inventions and man's seeking them out?

Answ. Inventions are translated engines, 2 Chronicles. 26.25. as slings to offend
the enemy, and Bulwarks to defend our selves. Seeking our these argues a
perverse diligence to deal subtly in inventing ways of corrupting our selves.

Doctr. 1. A penitent soul taking good account of his wickedness and folly,
shall evidently and eminently find the righteousness of God in all his work
upon us, and the perverseness and subtilty of our inventions to corrupt our
selves even from our first Parents to this day. Evidently] for lo or behold
says he. Eminently] for, says he, this only or chiefly, or eminently, have
I found. Inventions] He means no profitable inventions for the good of our
selves or others, as Arts, or Manufactors or occupations: but such inventions
whereby we seek to start away from God, and to corrupt our selves. As some
horses put into a good Pastute, yet will seek round about the sense to find a
gap to range out. Thus Moses taught backsliding Israel ( Deuteronomy. 31.19) to see
Gods righteousness, Deuteronomy. 32.4. Their own perverseness, Deuteronomy. 32.5, 15. Neh.
9.33. Job 33.27, 28. God made Adam righteous at first, Genesis 1, 26, 27. To wit,
First, In knowledge, Colos. 3.10. giving him a right understanding of things.
Secondly, In holiness and righteousness setting his heart and affections upon
their proper objects, Ephesians. 4.24. Right] First, As suitable to the righteous Law
of God which is a straight and right Rule, Psalm. 19.8. As setting the inferior
parts of the soul and whole man in a right order to the superior; will to the
judgment or conscience, affections to the will, Prove. 16.32. outward members
to both, Romans 6.13. all to God, Romans 6.13. all which are now disordered and
perverted, Psalm. 125.4, 5. Thirdly, As being in a state well pleasing to God,
right in Gods sight, 2 Chronicles, 29.2.

Reason of God so making us at first. The justice and holiness of God required
it of himself, that if he create man to a spiritual and supernatural end (to
wit, fellowship with himself) and require of him obedience to a spiritual and
holy law to lead him to that end, that then he should lift him up above his
reason to an holy estate, by original righteousness, otherwise from his first
creation he had been made sinful and crooked.

Reason of reforming man to a state of righteousness, The praise of the glory
of his grace and mercy in Christ Jesus, Ephesians, 2.4, 5.

Reasons of man seeking inventions. 1. From the liberty of will God left man
unto, 2 Chronicles. 32.31.

Reason 2. From the forwardness not to rest satisfied in the condition God
has provided for him: but he would he active to improve his condition by his
own wit and strength. Adam and all his posterity made righteous, sought out
many inventions to fall off from God. Eve, and by her persuasion, Adam invented
a way to get wisdom in the knowledge of good and evil, Genesis 2.6. Solomon's
wives invented many wiles to draw him to tolerate them in the liberty of their
Religion. Solemon himself invented many devices how to satisfy himself in
satisfying them. Conscience is tender, Faith is the gift of God: His Father
David compelled no Pagans to circumcision. His Subjects invented many shifts,
to put off from themselves the faithfulness of an wholesome advertisement to
Solomon. The common people put it off to the Nobles, the Nobles to the Priests,
the Priests to the Prophets, the Prophets excused themselves by the Kings
transcendent wisdom above them, Eccles. 8.1. So David before him, sought many
inventions to cloak his sin with Bathshebah.

Reason of finding this as chiefly grievous to a penitent soul, From the proper
nature of repentance, which is deeplyest Affected with sin as it is First, Most
dishonorable to God. Secondly, Most injurious to the grace of Christ, contrary
to means and mercies, and pernicious to the Church of Christ. Thirdly,
Committed with the greatest perverseness and foolish subtilty of our own hearts.

Use 1. To refute the Popish doctrine that original righteousness in Adam by
Creation was wholly supernatural and given by free grace. But then Adam had
been right without it, in which he was not, but right by it. It was indeed,
First, Supernatural, as not flowing from the principles of nature; a man is a
perfect man without it for substance. Secondly, As not deserved by men who had
done neither good nor evil.

Secondly, Natural, as due, First, to the purity of Gods nature to make us so
perfect. Secondly, To the integrity of man's nature, without which he was not so
perfect in qualities as were meet for Gods pure nature to make. The Papists
herein extol the freeness of grace to Adam, not to magnify the grace of God,
but to derogate from the grace of Christ. For if nature were entire and perfect
without Gods Image, then the want of it in corrupt nature is no sin but natural
to man; And so original sin depraving nature, and requiring necessity of a new
birth in Christ, is no sin, but suitable to right nature; and so original sin is
no sin, not only after baptism, but even before baptism. But concupiscence is
not of Gods work in nature, 1 John 2.16.

Object. Concupiscence and Rebellion of the lower parts of the soul against the
higher is natural. For the man being made of a body and a soul, must needs be
carried both to spiritual and sensual objects. And so this Rebellion and
stirring of the one part against the other, will be found to arise from the
principles of pure nature.

Answ. The body may affect sensual objects, and the soul spiritual, and both
without sin, in subordination of sensual things to spiritual, and of both to
God.

Use 2. To teach us a true sign of repentance, never to blame God for our
falls, but our own perverse subtilty. God made us right, and the regenerate
twice right: and his work has been upright to usward, in leaving us to our
falls: we provoked him to it by our selfefulnesse. But it is we that have
perverted our ways, and took pains, (sought out devices) and cunning
inventions to do wickedly. Yea, this finding out our own perverse subtilty in
seeking out inventions to depart from God, and deceive our selves, should more
deeply affect us and afflict us, then all other evils besides; This bringing
forth most dishonor to God, Injury and abuse to the gifts and graces of
Christ, and corruption of nature to ripeness and perfection.

Use 3. To teach us to loath all evil inventions, Romans 1.30. Its a fruit of a
reprobate mind, verse 28. with 30. such are inventors of Fashions, Oaths,
Lusts, and Torments.

Use 4. To exhort us not to think our selves right till we attain that estate
wherein God made us at first: and that with greater contentment in it, then he
took; least we seek as he did many inventions.

Eccles. 8.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Who is the wise man? and who knows the
interpretation of a thing? a man's wisdom makes his face to shine, and the
boldness of his face shall be changed. 2. I counsel thee to keep the Kings
commandment, and that in regard of the oath of God. 3. Be not hasty to go out
of his sight; stand not in an evil thing, for he does whatsoever pleases him.
4. Where the word of a King is, there is power: and who may say unto him, What
do thou? 5. Whosoever keeps the commandment shall feel no evil thing, and a
wise man's heart discerns both time and judgment.

THe former Chapter Solomon ended with a complaint of the inventions which men
(though made righteous) are wont to seek out, both to lead themselves into sin,
and to excuse themselves from holy duty, either of pure worship to God, or
faithful love to a brother fallen into sin; who being fallen, might after be
healed by wise and faithful admonition: but that all sorts of men are wont to
seek out many inventions to excuse themselves from that unwelcome office, as
they count it. It was said above, that mean men put it off to Nobles, Nobles to
the Priests, the Priests to the Prophets; the Prophets, and indeed generally
all the sorts of Solomon's loyal subjects put it off by the inventions which
here in these words Solomon both propounds, and refuteth.

Invention 1. From Solomon's eminency of wisdom, together with the unsearchable
depth of his counsels and proceedings; which were so deep, as they were not
able to search out the bottom, the meaning or interpretation of them: Who is as
the man (that is, as Solomon) the wise man, 1 Kings 4.31 And who knows the
interpretation (the reason or meaning) of his matters? Our ignorance and
weakness (might his Subjects say) will dash us out of countenance, when we
speak to him.

Refutation 1. From the power of wisdom even in a mean man (as Adam is here
meant, as also in Psalm 49.2.) wisdom makes his face to shine. Secondly, from
the change of the strength or boldness of his face, which may be referred,
either to the former antecedent, and then it is meant, The the wise man's face,
that is, Solomon's face, the boldness or strength of it (as the word
signifies) shall be changed upon a wise and just admonition, or presentment of
his sin before him (as Dan. 5.6.) Or else it may be referred to the strength
and boldness of a mean man's face, which shall be doubled (as the word also
signifies) in speaking upon just ground, in humble and discreet manner, even
to the King himself, as 2 Samuel 12.7.

Invention 2. Taken from the loyalty and submission of Subjects to such great
Princes. I am to observe (for so it is in the original) the mouth of the King,
and that in regard of the oath of God, v. 2. to wit, the oath of Allegiance. As
who should say, It is not for me to enquire and dispute of matters of State,
Princes commands; but to observe and do what I am commanded. If Solomon
command Masons and Carpenters to build Temples to his wives Idols, and the
Nobles to oversee the work, and all his Subjects to contribute to it, it is not
for me to gainsay, but to obey. My oath of Allegiance binds me far.

Refutation. Be not hasty to go out of his sight] that is, out of the Kings
sight, to execute every commandment which he puts upon thee. ( Joab went
slowly out from the presence of King David in such a case (2 Samuel 24.3, 4,)
Stand not in an evil thing] as they do that perform the works of sinners,
Psalm 1.1. For the King does [many times] (not according to what is right and
well pleasing in the sight of God, but) whatsoever pleases himself, v. 3.

Invention 3. From the Power and uncontrollable Authority of the kings
Commands, and the danger of such as shall resist or speak against them,
especially to his face. Where the word of a king is, there is power: and who
may say unto him, What do thou? v. 4.

Refutation, First from the safety of Attending Gods Commandment rather then
Man's: Whosoever keeps the Commandment, shall feel no evil thing. v. 5. Secondly
from the Discretion of a wise man's heart to observe both Time and Judgment,
that is a judicious and right manner in dealing with the king or any other
great one. v. 5.

That these words are thus to be taken by way of Objection and Answer, or
Invention and Refutation, appears, first partly by the Coherence with the
former Chapter: secondly partly from the unleasonableness of the Preacher
otherwise if he should here extol his own Transcendent wisdom and sovereign
power, when he is declaring and confessing his deepest penitential sorrows,
from v. 26 to the end of the foregoing Chapter.

Doctr. It is not the Eminency of the kings person and wisdom, nor the Depth
of the kings counsels and proceedings, nor the loyalty and sworn Allegiance of
the Subjects, nor the sovereign Authority and power of the Commands of Princes,
nor any such like other Invention that can excuse Subjects from Admonishing
Princes (according to our Callings) of their grievous Falls into notorious
Scandals. For Solomon here removes and refuteth all these excuses as vain
Inventions. 2 Samuel 12.1 to 12. 1 Chronicles. 21.3, 4. 1 Chr. 6.10. 1 Kings 18.17,
18. and 20.42. and 21.20 to 24. 2 Kings 1.16. 2 Chronicles. 16.7, 8, 9. and 19.2. 2
Kings 5.13.

Object. Job 34.18.

Answ. There is no Color for an Objection if the words were not much corrupted
in the Translation. The Original reads it thus, That says to a king, Thou
art wicked; and to Princes, Ye are ungodly. Where Elihu uses it as an Argument
to justify Gods Righteousness, because he accepts no man's person, no not
Princes.

Reasons. First, from the vanity of all such Pretenses as might seem to excuse
us from this Duty; as, 1 The transcendent wisdom and depth of some Princes
above their poor Subjects. Answ. First, The wisest are not always wise, Job
32.9. great men, to wit, great in wisdom and power. Solomon sometime saw his
own madness. Eccl. 7.25.

Secondly, Wisdom in a mean person will make his face shine, that is, make it,
1 Amiable, Number. 6.25.26. 2 Honorable and glorious, Acts 6.15. 3 Reverend and
awful, as Exodus 34.30. Thirdly, From the falling of a bold and stern spirit
before a wise Reproof: for so I rather take it, because the word is ever taken
in ill part, as 1 for Sternness, Deuteronomy. 28.50. Isai, 33.19. Dan. 8.23. 2
Impudency and rude Boldness, Prove. 7.13. 3 Hardness and obstinacy, Prove. 21.29.
Thus fell the countenance of David before Nathan: of Saul before Jonathan: 1 Samuel 19.4, 5, 6. of Ahab before Elijah, 1 Kings 21.27. of Felix before Paul,
Acts 24.25. or if the strength of the kings countenance change not, thine shall
be doubled, 22.18, 19. 1 Kings Dan. 3.13, 16.

2. The Loyalty of an obedient Subject, and that ratified by Oath, v. 2. Ans.
First, Yet there may be too much haste in obeying. Hest. 3.15. Dan. 2.13, 15.
as when Kings command. 1 for trial, 1 Kings 3.24, 25. 2 with change of mind, ^
n 6.14. 3 unlawful things: which to obey will breed smart, first from Gods
hand: secondly from Man's, Hos. 5.11. Dan. 6.24. Secondly, Obedience is only due
in the Lord, Ephesians. 6.1. not against him, Acts 4.19. Thirdly, An Oath and Gods
name in it, binds not to sin against God, but rather the contrary.

3 The sovereign power and uncontrollable authority of Princes, v. 4. ^ns.
First Gods Commandment and the keeping of it is a Preservative from evil, v.
5. he is higher then Princes, Eccl. 5.8. Prove. 21.1. Secondly, a wise man's
heart will observe a right time and manner, v. 5. so did Abigail, 1 Samuel 25.36,
37. and Nathan, 2 Samuel 12.1 to 14.

Reas. 2. From the Duty we owe first to God the king of kings: secondly to the
King by Covenant: thirdly to the peace of the Church and Commonwealth.

Use 1 To exhort Subjects to be faithful in admonishing Magistrates, when God
leaves them to scandalous falls, and gives us a Call to it. Which they do 1
when they call us to execute their sinful Commands, as 1 Chronicles. 21.3, 4. 2
When by our Place we are to watch over them Ezekiel. 3.17 to 21. 3 When they are
not the sons of Belial, nor Dogs, nor Swine, but will hear us attending upon
them, 1 Samuel 25.17. Matthew. 7.6, 2 Kings, 5.13. Fear not the stifness of their
faces, Ezekiel. 2, 6. nor their wisdom, power, will.

Use 2 To teach us the best Ornament of the face: it is not jewels nor laces,
nor painting, but wisdom that makes the face to shine, v. 1.

Use 3 To teach great men to let their countenance fall at any just Admonition:
The strength of his face shall be changed, v. 1.

Use 4. To teach a lawful use of an Oath of fidelity and subjection to
Magistrates, v. 2.

Use 5 To forbear haste in executing Magistrates Commands, unless it be in
lawful and expedient matters, v. 3. Serve not kings pleasures in evil. Doeg
herein did wickedly, 1 Samuel 22.18. the Egyptian Midwives better, Exodus 1.16,
17. and the Guard of Saul, 1 Samuel 22.16, 17. and 14.44, 45.

Use 6. The Sovereignty of Princes leaves them scarce any Faithful Friends or
Admonitors, scarce one of a Thousand, v. 5. See the misery of Sovereignty.

Use 7 To encourage to walk in the path of Gods Commandments, from the
Indemnity and Safety of such a Course, v. 5. Moses felt no harm from Pharaoh,
nor Samuel from Saul, nor Nathan from David, nor Elijah from Ahab, nor Jehu
from Jehosaphat, nor Amos from Amaziah.

Object. But Hanani did from Asa, 2 Chronicles. 16.10. Zachariah from Joash, 2 Chronicles. 24.20, 21. Vriah from Jehoiakim, Jer. 26, 23. John fron Herod, Mark 6,
27. Stephen from the high Priests, Acts 7.51 to 59.

Answ. First, God does often prevent such evil entertainment of the
faithfullness of his Servants. Secondly, If they suffer Imprisonment,
Banishment, Death for Gods Commandment, it is no Evil, but a Crown of
Martyrdom.

Eccles. 8.5. A wise man's heart discerns both time and judgment.


THese words are a second Answer to the thid Invention which Solomon's Subjects
made to excuse themselves for dealing faithfully with him in some word of
Admonition, when he was falling into this great sin of harkning to his wives in
the Toleration, yea and maintenance of their Idolatrous Religion.

The Invention or excuse was taken from the Sovereignty and incontroulable
Power and Authority of Princes, and the danger of opposing them (though but in
word) in their way, v. 4. Whereto Solomon answers, and opposes first the
safety of Obedience to the Commandment of God: Whosoever keeps the Commandment,
shall feel no evil thing. Secondly, the discretion of a wise man's heart in so
observing the fit time and season, and the manner and way of an Admonition as
might prevent all danger in dispencing of it even to a king or any other
Superior. And a wise man's heart discerrneth both Time and Judgment, v. 5.
Thirdly, the Insufficiency of retaining our own life by retaining the kings
favor, Eccl. 8.8.

Time] that is a fit season of an Admonition.

Judgment] that is the manner, order or way of it, as the word is translated 1 Samuel 8.11.

Doctr. A wise man's heart does so well discern the time and manner of an
Admonition, as that he may dispense it safely, though it were to a Superior,
even to a king, 1 Samuel 25.3, 36, 37. and 19.4, 5, 6. 2 Samuel 12.1, to 12. Dan.
4.27.

Quest. When is the fit time or season of an admonition, especially of
superiors?

Answ. 1. When we are called on to be the instruments in sin, as Joab to David,
1 Chronicles. 21.2, 3. Secondly, when they come to us for counsel, in the same or
other matters, 1 Kings 14.1, to 16. Thirdly, when others are in danger to be
corrupted, unless present witness be born against the sin, Gal. 2.13, 14.
Fourthly, when neither admonisher nor admonished, are distempered with passion,
nor prejudice, nor any choking impediment; but rather God offers an
opportunity by some word of favor or encouragement, 1 Samuel 25.36, 37. Hest.
7.2, 3, 4. We must hazard our favors for the service of God and his people.

Quest. 2. What is the fit manner, or order, or way of dispensing an Admonition.

Answ. According to certain Rules, whereof some concern First, the person
admonishing; the Admonisher. Secondly, the person admonished. Thirdly, the
offense for which admonition is given. Fourthly, the admonition it self.

1 Rules concerning the Admonisher: 1. The Admonisher should have a calling to
it through some relation between himself and the offender. As we find it in
all kinds of Relations, First, a Minister, 2 Samuel 12.1, to 12. Secondly, a
Councellor, 2 Samuel 19, 5, 6, 7. Thirdly, a yoak-fellow, Husband, Job 2.10.
Wise, 1 Samuel 25.36, 37. Fourthly, a son, 1 Samuel 19.4. Fifthly, a Servant, 2
Kings 5.13. Sixthly, a Subject, Dan. 4.27. Seventhly, a Brother, Lev. 19.17.
Coloss. 4.17. Eighthly, a Friend, Prove. 27.5, 6. Yea, a stranger traveling by
the way, and seeing his fellow-Traveller sin, he has as good a calling to help
him up, as if himself or his beast were fallen. The relation of a companion
requires it. 2 He should be furnished with love to the offender, Lev. 19.17. 1
Cor. 16.14. 3 He should first admonish, judge, and cleanse himself, Matthew.
7.5. Romans 2.1.

2 Rules concerning the Admonished. First, they should not be scorners, Prove.
9.7, 8, 9. Hos. 4.4. Matthew. 7.6. but such as may be capable of reformation.
Secondly, brethren, especially to be admonished, yea though excommunicate,
whilst there is hope, 2 These. 3.15. Else, if wedded to his sin, let him alone,
Hos. 4.17. And of brethren, difference to be made, First, of spirits; some are
more sluggish, they to be admonished more sharply, Titus 1.12, 3. Jude 23. Some
more tender; they to be admonished with more meekness, Gal. 6.1. Jude 22.
Secondly, Of years and place, 1. Men of greater years and place, rather
exhorted then reproved, 1 Timothy 5.1. Dan. 4.27. 2 Inferiors with more liberty
and plainness. Thirdly, any man capable of hearing or bearing a word of
admonition.

3 Rules concerning the sinners admonished. First, they must be certainly known
and convinced, 1 Cor. 5.1. Matthew. 18.15. we may not reprove upon a suspicion, 1
Cor. 13.5. nor upon our own inquisition; It is as if I should say, Let me put
my finger in your eyes to feel if there be not a moat; Nor upon any uncertain
hearsay, Esaias 11.3. Secondly, a difference must be put between Moats and
Beams, Gnats and Camels, Matthew. 23, 24. Camels and Beams may not be admonished
with gentle reproofs, 1 Samuel 2.23, 24.

4 Rules concerning the Admonition it self. First, it should be dispensed in
most wholesome words; such as may be most fit to gain a sinner, and heal his
soul. Wholesome gaining words are, First, general terms, especially at first,
and against precious and gainful sins and dangerous to be openly rebuked, Acts
19.26, 37. Secondly, Clothed in a parable, 2 Samuel 12.1, 2, 3. etc. a garment
is best seen how it becomes us, on another man's back. Thirdly, Delivered in
Scripture phrase that the offender may see God reproving him in his own words,
rather then man, Matthew. 15.7, 8, 9. Fourthly, Such as acknowledge some good
where it is, as well as see fault, Rev. 2.2, 3, 4. Pills would be given in
Sugar. 2. In order, less sins would be first reproved. John first reproved
Herod for less matters, Mark 6.20. before he came to the matter of Herodias
[Vada prius pertentanda] Jer. 12.5.

Reason of the Doctrine, From a wise man's selfe-denyal; hence God guides, and
blesses him, Prove. 3.5, 6, 7.

Use 1. To instruct us in this great and difficult, yet most necessary duty of
love, Admonition. To neglect it wholly, is an hatred of our brother in our
heart, Levit. 19.17. All the excuses of it are sinful inventions: To tell
others of it, not themselves, is a slander and malice, Prove. 26.28. To admonish
offenders themselves not in fit time and manner, is to spill the admonition, to
take an Ordinance in vain.

Use 2. To teach the admonished to take such a duty in good part, as a precious
balm, Psalm. 141.5. as a jewel or golden ear-ring, Prove. 25.12.

Eccles. 8. v. 6, 7. 6. Because to every purpose there is time and judgment:
therefore the misery of man is great upon him. 7. For he knows not that which
shall be: for who can tell him when it shall be?

SOlomon. had in the former verse given it as one means of safety to a subject
(in admonishing his Prince going astray) to wit, a wise man's heart discerning
both time and judgment (the fit season and fit manner of such a duty.) In
these words he amplifieth this fit time and judgment by the universality of
the subject to which time and judgment is fitted: and that is to every purpose
or business, and he means every lawful and good purpose or business. For
there is no time nor manner fit to commit sin; whence he infers as a
Corollary, that the misery of man is great upon him: And withal he gives the
reason, why such great misery falls upon men, in respect of the time and
judgment, fitted to every action, taken from man's ignorance of that time and
judgment, which he expresses both by a man's own ignorance thereof, and by
other men's unfitness to tell him, verse 7. Who shall tell him for the time
when it shall be? or for the manner how it shall be? the word signifies both.
The words afford three observations, which we may handle in order, and make use
of them together.

Doct. 1. To every lawful purpose and business there is a fit time and manner
for the doing of it. For persons, Acts 13.36, with verse 25. For thoughts, 1
Kings 5.5. with 2 Samuel 7.3. For words, Prove. 25.11. For actions, Psalm. 32.6.
Isai. 55.6. John 2.4, and 7, 8.

Reason 1. From the Sovereignty of God to appoint times and seasons, Acts 17.7.

Reason 2. From the beauty of every thing in its time, Eccles. 3.11.

Reason 3. From the necessity of the concurrence of all due circumstances to
make an action good, 2 Samuel 17.7. 2 Kings 5.26.

DOct. 2. Men ordinarily are ignorant of the time and manner of doing any
business, especially spiritually good, verse. 7. As the Hebrew renders it, (to
wit, what that time) should be, and how or after what manner it should be,
Eccles. 9.12. 2 Cor. 3.5. Jer. 10.23. The Text speaks chiefly of ordinary
men, not of the godly wise: for the wise know time and judgment, verse 5. But
ordinary men, they neither know time and judgment themselves, nor do others
tell them. Ordinary men consult with men like themselves, who mislead them, 1
Kings 12.8.

Reason 1. From the want of the inward light of the image of God, they are
darkness, John 1.5. Ephesians. 5.8.

Reason 2. They are self-confident and full, walking without counsel, Prove.
14.16, and 28.26.

Reason 3. If they consult, it is not with God, Isai. 30.1, 2. Psalm. 10.4. nor
with his word, and then no light, Isai, 8.20. but with foolish and wicked men
like themselves, 1 Kings 12.8.

Doctr. 3. For want of discerning and observing fit time and manner, the misery
of man is great upon him, verse 6. Genesis 27, 12, to 24. with Chap. 31.40, 41. 1 Samuel 8.5, to 18, and 13, 8, to 13. 2 Kings 5.26, 27. 1 Kings 12.7, 19. 2 Chronicles.
35.22.23, 24.

Reason 1. From Gods delight and good pleasure to vouchsafe his presence, his
concourse and his blessing, when actions are done in Gods time, and after his
manner, Psalm. 32.6. Isai. 55.6. And his refusal thereof when otherwise, Numb.
14.42. 1 Samuel 13.13. Heb. 12.17.

Reason. 2. From the snare and net that lies upon men in every action, done
out of due time and manner, Eccles. 9, 12. 2 Chronicles. 35.22, 23, 24, with Lament.
4.20. Crosses may befall a man in the best actions: but snares, inextricable
difficulties, befall men only in evil ways, and good things done out of due
time and manner.

Use 1. To teach us to discern and observe, not only our words and all our
ways, but even the fit time and manner of them, as we do desire to be freed
of the great misery that else may befall us. Jacob sought the blessing out of
due time and manner: It cost him twenty years hard service; and his mother
that counseled him amiss, never lived to see him again. The Israelites
sought a King out of due time and manner, and brought upon themselves the
misery of twenty years Tyranny. It is dangerous missing the time of our
conversion, Luke 19.42, 43.44. Missing the time of helping on our Families to
Godward, ( Hos. 14.7.) they utterly miscarry, 1 Samuel 20.30. So for the Church
and Temple work, Hag. 1.2. So for the Commonwealth, 1 Kings 9.4, 5, 6, 7. and
Chap. 11.23, 24, 25. and Chap. 12.7, 19.

Means of discerning fit Time and Manner, First, Inward light of the spirit,
and Image of God, Isai. 30.21. Prove. 4.18, 19. Fear of God and love to man
give much light, Prove. 25.12. 1 John 2.10, 11. Secondly, Avoid
selfe-confidence, Prove. 3.5, 6, 7. and Chap. 28.26. Thirdly, Consult with God,
In fasting and prayer, Esth, 4.6. with Chap. 5.2. In his word, Psalm. 119.24,
and verse 105. In the times and opportunities of providence, Psalm, 32.8. In the
Counsels of godly wise, 1 Kings 12.7. Fourthly, Fit manner in all actions is,
Faith, Romans 14.23. and Love, 1 Cor. 16.14. For the end, Gods glory, 1 Cor.
10.31. and the good of others, 1 Cor. 10.24.

Eccles. 8. v. 8. 8. There is no man that has power over the spirit to retain
the spirit, neither has he power in the day of death: and there is no
discharge in that war, neither shall wickehness deliver those that are given to
it.


AMongst the Inventions which Solomon's Subjects found out to excuse themselves
from dealing faithfully with him, when he sell to the Toleration and
maintenance of Idolatry in building Temples to his Wives Idols, and endowing
them with liberal maintenance, and in employing the hands and service of his
Subjects in such Structures; This was the Third, That where the word of a king
is, there is power (or Dominion or Authority v. 4.) and that power is
irresistible and uncontrollable; Who may say unto him, What do thou?

This Invention or Excuse Solomon takes away; First by the safety of Obedience
to Gods Commandment; Whosoever keeps the Commandment, shall feel no evil, v.
5. Secondly by the discretion which a wise man has v. 5. to observe fit time
and judgment; for missing whereof great misery falls upon men, v. 6, 7.
Thirdly by the restraint of Magistrates power from reaching to a double Object.
1 To restrain or constrain the spirit or conscience. 2 To discharge from death;
which latter power (to discharge or deliver from death) he denies also to all
wickedness (which men will not stick to commit, to prevent the kings wrath,
which else might be as the messenger of death, Pro. 16.14.) v. 8. Fourthly by
the wise man's observation of one man's Rule sometime over another for hurt. v. 9.

Power] here, is a word of the same Notation with that v. 4. implying Authority
and Dominion, whence Sultan; There is not a man that has Dominion over the
Spirit.

Spirit] is not here meant the Soul to retain it in the body; for 1. That is
expressed in the next part of the verse; neither is there power or dominion, to
wit in a king, in the day of death to discharge a Subject in that War. 2 The
Verb translated to retain, is rather to compel, to restrain or constrain, and
properly signifies coercere; as David called his son by Abigail, by a name
from this Root Chileab; 2 Samuel 3.3. because of his Mothers restraint of him
from shedding blood; whence also (...) a Prison, 2 Kings 17.4. To retain the
soul in the body, is wont to be expressed in an other Phrase in that Language,
Psalm, 22.29. but by spirit is here meant the Conscience, as elsewhere often,
Pro. 20.27. and 18.14. Acts 20.22.

Doctr. There is not a man, no not the king, that has a Coercive power over
the Conscience.

He cannot 1 Constrain to sin forbiden of God, Dan. 3.13 to 18, nor restrain
from Duty commanded of God, Dan. 6.7, 10, 22. 2 Bind Conscience in things
indifferent; that is, lay such a weight or burden upon a Commandment of his
own, that it shall be a sin to the Conscience to neglect it. If man's
Commandment could bind the Conscience, then the Commandments of men would be
the doctrines of Religion, against Matthew. 15 9. 3 By outward Punishments
compel a man to do against his Conscience; to wit, he cannot, that is, he
ought not till Conscience be convinced, and then it is self-condemned.

Reas. 1 From the immediate subjection of Conscience to God; For first there
God only writes his Law, Romans 2.15 Secondly, God only can discern, judge, and
punish fins against Conscience: discern, Jer. 17.10. judge and punish, Job 6.4.
Luke 12.4, 5. Jam. 4, 12. hence subjection of the Conscience to man is flat
Idolatry,

Reas. 2 From the immediate spiritual Dominion of the Conscience over the man,
Romans 14.5, 14, 23. Acts 20.22.

Use 1 To Resolve a great Question of Conscience Whether a King or Magistrate
may compel men to profess and practice the Religion established by law of his
Country?

Answ. First for false Religion, It is out of Question; no he sins in doing
it, and the People in obeying it. 1 Kin. 15.30.

Secondly for the true Religion, as to worship the true God the maker of Heaven
and Earth, the Father Son and Holy Ghost, we answer in six Propositions.

Propos. 1. David and other Godly kings of Israel did not force conquered Pagan
Nations to worship the God of Israel, whether they lived in their own Country,
or dwelt in the Land of Israel. As in case an Heathen Proselyte came to join
to the Church of Israel, it was requisite he should circumcise his males, Exodus
12.48. but not required that his wife should be of like Religion with him,
Numb. 12.1. The Law in Ezra 10. and Neh. 13. concerning an Israelite marrying a
Pagan, and so Malach. 2.11. not an Heathen marrying a Pagan before his
conversion. It is not therefore a solid answer which some do give, that the
Kings of Israel are no Precedents for Christian Kings, partly because they were
Types of Christ, and because their Land was Typical and Sacramental. For what
they did as Kings, Heathen Kings did the same lawfully. And the Land of Israel
did not fotbid Pagans to dwell in the Land, as the Gibeonites, and Captives.

Propos. 2. Neither did the good Kings of Israel, nor may Christian Kings
compel any of their Subjects to the fellowship of the Church, to yield up
themselves to their Covenants Sacraments, and Censures, unless they were fit
for it, and persuaded to it. This concerns the second Commandment, as the
former did the first, Genesis 9.27. Psalm. 110.3. Exodus 12.48. If he will eat the
Passover, then let him first circumcise his males: else he may forbear both.

Propos. 3. It is not lawful for Magistrates to suffer to live, First,
Blasphemers of the true God, whether Christians or Pagans within their power,
Dan. 3.29, and 6, 26. 1 Kings 20.23, 28, 42. whether in the Land of Israel or
out of it: yet Ahab no Type of Christ. Secondly, Israelites or Christians
Apostate to Idolatry, Deuteronomy. 17.2, to 7. in respect of their Apostasy from the
Covenant, verse 2. Thirdly, Witches, Exodus 22.18. Levit. 20.27. with 22.23.
Fourthly, Seducers to Idolatry, Deuteronomy. 13.1, to 5, 11. and to Heresy, Matthew.
5.15. 2 Pet. 2.1, 2, 3. Deuteronomy. 13.10. Zach. 13.3?

Object. But is not this to punish a man for his conscience, and so to act
contrary to the doctrine in hand?

Answ. It is not conscience that binds to these sins, but sinning against
light of conscience. Blasphemers, Apostates, Witches, Heretics are (...).
Titus 3.10, 11. Paul has tender respect of an ignorant weak conscience. 1
Cor. 8.7.10, 11. not so of an hardened, 1 Timothy 4.2. Such a conscience does not
extenuate, but aggravate sin, as being a punishment of sin against light and
conscience.

Propos. 4. Magistrates may compel Church Members to observe Church orders,
according to the word, and others not to disturb them; Ezra 7.26, 27.

Propos. 5. Magistrates may compel all to hear the word of God, Acts 3.22, 23.
yet if men take exception at the calling, as being either too Romish, too near
to Rome, or too far from it, Let men be first convinced of the lawfulness to
hear the word of God from any, Jer. 28.1, to 6. 2 Chronicles. 35.21, 22.

Propos. 6. No man can pretend conscience for Atheism; for no Nation so
barbarous, but is taken with conscience of a God.

Use 2. To enquire, how then do Ministers and Churches bind conscience, Psalm.
149.6, to Matthew. 16.19, and 18, 18.

Answ. Not by any Injunctions of their own, but by Ministerial declaring the
Commandments of God, and the holy Ghost ratifying the same from Christ.

Use 3. To refute the Popish and prelatical error of humane laws, binding
conscience.

Use 4. To allow power to Magistrates, where God allows it, Matthew. 22.21.
Romans 13.7. Hence give them honor, else their power is violated and taken away,
Mark 6.4, 5. The former Objection (page 176.) may be propounded and resolved
thus:

Object. If Blasphemers, Idolaters, Seducers to Idolatry and Heresy, be
punishable even with death, then conscience is subject to coersive power.

Answ. Conscience is either Natural, Romans 2.14. Weak, 1 Cor. 8.7. or Seared,
through the just judgment of God blinding the mind and conscience, and
hardening the heart, thereby to punish sin against conscience, or at least the
not receiving of the truth with love, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2. 2 These. 2.10, 11. Romans
1.28. Natural conscience is not to be strained according to proposition. 1,
page 175. 2 Timothy 2.25, 26. weak conscience is not to be despised, Romans 14.3.
Seared conscience does not extenuate but increase both sin and punishment,
Isai. 44.20. 2 These. 2.11.12. Romans 1.28, 32. especially after once or twice
admonition, Titus 3.10.

Doctr. 2. It is neither in the power of the King, nor in the dexterity of the
craft-masters of wickedness, to discharge a man of his warfare in the day of
death, (...) are crast-masters of wickedness, Psalm. 49.6, to 10.

Reasons of the former, 1. From Gods determinate appointment of our ends, Job
14 5. Acts 17.26.

Reason 2. From the preciousnesse of a man's life and soul, greater then any man
can give to God, Psalm. 49, 7, 8, 9.

Reason 3. From the impotency of Princes to deliver and discharge themselves
from the War and stroke of death, Psalm. 23.29.

Reason of the latter, From the wages and desert of sin, Romans 6.23.

Use 1. To teach us there is a warfare between a man and death, 1 Cor. 15.26,
54. As appears, First, From the resemblance between death and war, in the
effects; in death (as in war) we conflict, de summa rerum about all our
chiefest worldly Comforts, Goods, Lands, Honors, Pleasures, Wife, Children,
Liberty, Life. In Death (as in war) greatest violence is offered to us, and
we use against it all our strength, ( Job 2.4.) 1. Of Nature, 2. Of Art, Diet,
and Physic. Death (as war) conquering, carries captive to the Prison of the
grave, and many to Hell, if deam be not overcome. Death feeds on them, Psalm.
49.14. Secondly, From the causes of this war, Our earnest desire to preserve
our selves, John 21.18. 2 Cor. 5.4. whence death to Philosophers was counted,
(...), as most contrary and destructive to nature. Again sin which brought in
Death ( Romans 5.12.) adds a venomous sting to it, 1 Cor. 15.56. whence to a
carnal heart, Gods wrath, Fear of hell, Satan's outrage, Horror of conscience;
whence we are to learn, First, To prepare for this warfare: There is no
avoiding it, Profane confidence will not avail us, Isai. 28.14, 15.

Means or preparations against death, 1. Death to sin, Romans 6.8, 9. 2. Death
to the world, Gal. 6.14. 1 Cor. 7.29, 30, 31. 1 Cor. 15.30, 31. 3. Faith in
Christ, Job 13, 15. 2 Timothy 1, 12. Psalm. 49.1, 2, 5, 15. 4. Walking with God, as
Henoch, Genesis 5.24, with Heb. 11.5. Henoches privilege is thus far
communicated to all such as walk with God that though they escape not death,
yet the bitterness of death, Prove. 11.4, 19, and 12, 28. Such leave their
souls to God with a quiet heart, their bodies to the grave with good report,
and a blessed covenant behind them to their posterity; thus death will be our
advantage, Phil. 1.21. Secondly, To abhor all selfmurder, as not from humane
nature, but from Satan. For even corrupt nature desires to preserve it self.

Use 2. To teach us not to do evil at Princes commands, nor to refuse to do
good, for fear of their displeasure. For they cannot deliver us from death:
This is Solomon's scope.

Use 3. To teach us to serve such a master, as to whom alone it belongs to
save from death, Rev. 1.18. Psalm. 68.20.

Eccles. 8.9. 9. All this I have seen, and applied my self unto every work
that is done under the Sun: there is a time wherein one man rules over another
to his own hurt.


COherence, see in verse 8. The words contain a fourth resutation of the third
Invention, mentioned verse 4. As who should say, where the word of the King is,
there is power; but know withal, that where this power is always obeyed, at
all times submitted to, this power or rule (for it is the same word with that,
verse 4.) will be hurtful and pernicious to him that obeys it; There is a
time when one rules over another for hurt to him. And this he proves by his
own diligent and serious observation and testimony; All this have I seen, and
applied n y heart, (...) or in applying my heart to the consideration of all
things done under the Sun.

Doctr. 1. A penitent and prudent soul, that casts his eyes about him, and
considers all things that are done under the Sun, shall observe a time
wherein that man that rules over another, rules over him for hurt to him
(...) translated One man: better The man, whatsoever the man be; be it Solomon,
he in his rule had a time wherein he set his people a work to erect and adorn
Idols Temples: And this was the rent and ruin of the ten Tribes, 1 Kings
11.31, 33. (11 Kings 12.28, 29: with Chap. 14.15, 16.) their Apostasy and
captivity. Judah also followed the way of Israel to their Apostasy and
captivity also, 2 Kings 17.18, 19. So David before him, 2 Samuel 11.4, 15. 2 Samuel
24.1, 17. So Asa, 2 Chronicles. 16.10. So Jehosophat a Chron. 18.1, with 21, 3, 6,
8, 10. So Hezekiah, 2 Kings 20.16, 17, 18. So Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 35.22.

Reason 1. From Gods good pleasure, to leave every child of his at some time
or other, to some spiritual desertion, 2 Chronicles. 32.31. Wherein Gods counsel is:
First, To make us feel our need of Christ, Isai. 38.14. A soul oppressed cries
out for an undertaker or surety. Secondly, To make us like unto Christ, Luke
22.53. yet with this difference, he being sifted, no chafe or dross was found
in him, John 14.30. not so we, Luke 22.31, 32. Thirdly, To make us know what is
in our hearts, 2 Chronicles. 32.31. especially self-exacting, 2 Chronicles. 32.25. Psalm.
30.6, 7. and to heal it, 2 Cor. 12.7. Genesis 32; 25. Fourthly, To chasten the
peoples sin, who might Idolize their rulers, 2 Samuel 24.1. Lament. 4.20.

Reason 2. From the power of corrupt nature, which though subdued to grace,
will sometimes break the yoke, as Esau did Jacobs yoke. Genesis 27.40.

Use 1. To teach Magistrates an holy and humble jealousy over themselves, and
watchfulness also over themselves, and one another. [The Application of this
to our present Governor see in the Schedule annexed.]

Use 2. To teach the people not to swallow down all the Commandments of their
Rulers, least sometimes they should Rule you to evil. This is Solomon's scope
here, Acts 4.19. Micah 6.16. Hos. 5.11.

Use 3. To provoke people to pray for their Magistrates, that Christ would keep
them in that time of Trial.

Eccles. 8.10. And so I saw the wicked buried, who had come and gone from the
place of the Holy, and they were forgotten in the City, where they had so done:
this is also vanity.


THis verse does depend upon the former, by way of prevention of an Objection,
thus, If one rule over another to his hurt, the hurt will as well redowne to him
that rules, as to them that are ruled; wicked Rulers often come to an untimely
end, yea want burial ( Eccles. 3, 6.) 1 Kings 14.11. and 16.4. and 21.23, 24.
2 Kings 9.33, 34. And infamy follows them after death, 1 Kings 15.30. Whereto
Solomon answers, and by his own experience confirms it, It is not always
so, I have seen a time wherein one rules over another to his hurt (that is, to
the hurt of him that ruled [to wit, of the subject] not so of the Ruler:) And
in so (doing) that as in Ruling wickedly to the hurt of others, I have seen the
wicked buried, who had come and gone from the place of the holy: I have seen
also the wicked forgotten in the City wherein they have so done, that is, had
so wickedly ruled. This is also vanity. This increases vanity amongst men, and
aggravateth the vanity of the condition of the sons of men.

Doctr. 1. The place or seat of judgment is the place of the Holy one.

For he speaks here of wicked Rulers, whom he describes to have been
conversant in the Judgment seat, in an Hebrew Phrase, they had come and gone
from the place of the holy; Holy, in the singular number, that is, of the Holy
one. The holy one is God, Esaias 57.15. The place of the Holy one is, Heaven,
Esaias 66.1. The Temple, Acts 21, 28. The Throne, or Seat of judgment, Psalm.
82.1. The humble heart, Esaias 57.15. The third is here meant. For he speaks of
Kings, v. 4. and of them as wicked, v. 9, 10.

Reason 1. From Gods Ordinance thereof, Romans 13.1, 2.

Reason 2. From his presence there, Psalm. 82.2. Prove. 29.26. 2 Chronicles. 19.6.

Reason 3. From his ends there chiefly to be attended, 2 Chronicles. 19.6.

Use, To teach Magistrates to put off carnal Affections (as shoos were put off
by Moses,) when we come to the Judgment seat, Exodus 3.5. The like was done by
Joshua, Josh. 5.15.

Doctr. 2. When a wicked Ruler finds a burial, and the memory of his wicked
Rule is buried with him, It is a vanity. Or himself finds a Funeral, and
his wicked Rule no memorable Obloquie.

When wicked Rulers come to an untimely end, and their Tyranny meets with
just obloquie, it does not a little avail, first, to the honor of God, Exodus
14.17. and 15.1. Secondly, to the edification and warning of men. Senacherib in
Herodot. So Virgils Mezentius Discite Justitiam For want of this Belshazzar was
reproved, Dan. 5.20, etc. But yet it sometimes comes to pass, they do meet
with burial, and no infamy upon their Names, partly by the power of their
successors, their children; and partly by a worse succeeding in their room.

Reason of the vanity of this, 1. It is an occasion of great growth of
wickedness, v. 11. For first, the Subjects comply with wicked Rulers, if they
meet with no great calamity in their life or death. Secondly, other wicked
Princes presume to do the like upon their wicked example; Indemnity and
impunity, v. 11.

Reason 2. It is a fruit of the curse brought upon the civil State, through
the fall of our first parents. Otherwise all evil should befall evil ones, and
all good good ones.

Reason 3. It is no advantage to wicked Princes, so buried, and so forgotten;
for the less check they meet withal here, the more they shall meet withal
hereafter, Eccles. 5.8.

Use 1. To teach us to give honor to God, and to take warning to our selves,
when we see God calling Princes to account, Psalm. 76.12. and 107.40. Job 12.21,
etc.

Use 2. To teach Princes and Rulers, to rule in the fear of God righteously, 2 Samuel 23.3. So they may expect comely burial, and honorable memorial. 2 Chronicles. 16.14. and 24.16. and 32.33. and 35.24. Not so others, 2 Chronicles. 21.19,
etc. and 33.20 Jer. 22.18, 19.

Use 3. To teach all men, even private men, to do well in our generations; for
if God recompense Princes, surely he will not spare meaner persons, Prove. 10.7.
Psalm. 112.6.

Eccles. 8. v. 11. Because sentence against an evil work is not executed
speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do
evil.


DOct. 1. Sentence is not so soon executed, as past, against an evil work,
Zeph. 2.2. When an evil work is done sentence passes speedily, Zach. 5.1, to
4, A flying Roll to imply swiftness, Mil. 3.5. Genesis 4.7. Sin lies at the
door, as a Sergeant or Jailer, to watch and keep, and dog him wheresoever he
goes. No sinner but goes up and down with his Keeper, Psalm 37.13. and 9.16.
3 Pet. 2.1, 3.

The sentence is passed speedily, First, in Gods counsel, Micah 2.3. Jer.
18.11. Secondly, in the curse of Gods law, Genesis 2.17, Gal. 3.10. Thirdly, in
the conscience of the sinner oftentimes, 2 Samuel 24.10. Like the sentence
written on the wall of the house, Dan. 5.5. Fourthly, In the preparation of the
causes to conviction and execution, to wit, in the causes, one link draws
another. By David's adultery with Bathsheba, a spirit of uncleanness got into
his house. Hence Amnon defiles Famar, she was Absolons sister, and that
draws Absolon to revenge; Absolons beauty draws on the King to pardon him;
Bathshebas father being Eliam (2 Samuel 11.3.) and Eliam being the son of
Ahitophel, (2 Samuel 23.34.) turned off Ahitophel from David to Absolon, 2 Samuel
15.31. yet is not executed speedily, Genesis 6.3. Numb. 14.33. 1 Kings 21.29.

Quest. But why should the Lord be pleased to delay execution, seeing many
evils grow upon it: As first, It obscureth Gods justice: The punishment of a
sin coming so long after, seems rather a calamity, then a just judgment of
this or that sin. Secondly, Gods providence is hence called into question,
Psalm. 73.11, 12. Mal. 2.17. Thirdly, Among men, The good are discouraged, Psalm.
73.12, 13, 14. And the wicked are hardened, As in the Text.

To these Objections may be answered: First, God can clear his justice in his
own time, and in his own way; by suitableness of the judgment, Judges 1.7.
and Remorse of conscience, Genesis 42.21. Secondly, God will in every age clear
his providence by some remarkable judgment, Psalm 9.16. Psalm 58.10, 11.
Thirdly, Good men must judge of things by the word, not by present events,
Psalm 73.17. If all men be hardened, it is that God aimed at, for their
incorrigiblenesse, Esaias 1.5. or for the wickedness of their fathers Hos. 4.14.

Reason of delay: 1. Meet it is God should show his patience, as well as his
justice, Exodus 34.6. Psalm 145.8. Slow to anger, good to all, especially,
having placed the government of the world in the hand of a Mediator, Exodus
33.2, 3. Secondly, To lead on some to repentance, Romans 2.4. 2 Pet. 3.9, 15. 1 Timothy 1.16. Thirdly, to reward humiliation, though not sincere, 1 Kings 21.29. 2 Chronicles. 12.6, 7. Fourthly, to give way to others to fulfill the measure of their
sins, Genes. 15.16. and so to make way for the treasuring up, and showing forth
his power and wrath, Romans 2.5. Deuteronomy. 32.34, 35.

Doct. 2. The delay of punishment upon sin, fills the heart of sinners to do
evil:

Fills them, First with resolution to sin, Jer. 44.16, 17. and with
boldness, Esaias 3.9. Secondly, with custom in sin, Jer. 13.23. Thirdly, with
skill in sin, Jer. 14.22.

Reason 1. From the depraying of their judgments by this means; either to
think, First, there is no God, Psalm 41.1. or at least that he regards not
things below. Secondly, that God is like themselves, Psalm 50.21. Thirdly, That
such and such evils are no sin.

Reason 2. From the depravation of our wills by impunity: Not to fear God,
Psalm 55.19.

Use 1. To take notice of the venomous corruption of our nature, that can suck
such poison out of such a sweet Attribute, as the patience of God.

Use 2. To beware of such an abuse.

Use 3. To exhort as to be more filled with forwardness to good, and hatred of
evil; first, by the judgments of God against sin; secondly, by the mercies of
God to the godly.

Use 4. To teach Courts and Churches, neither of them to be too slow in
executing sentence against evil doers.

Eccles. 8.12.13. 12. Though a sinner do evil an hundred times, and his days
be prolonged; yet surely I know that it shall be well with them that fear God,
which fear before him. 13. But it shall not be well with the wicked, neither
shall he prolong his days which are as a shadow, because he fears not before
God.

IN the former verse Solomon declared the abuse which wicked men make of Gods
patience, and of man's also; Because sentence is not executed speedily against
an evil work, the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil.
In these words he gives an Antidote against this abuse, taken from his own
knowledge and certain observation of the good estate of them that fear God;
and the evil estate of the wicked.

The good estate of the godly he amplifieth, First, by the Diverse; Though a
sinner do evil an hundred times, and his punishment be prolonged; yet it shall
be well with them that fear God. Secondly, By the contrary estate of the
wicked, It shall not be well with the wicked, neither shall he prolong his
days; the brevity whereof is amplified by the simile of a shadow. Thirdly, by
the cause of this their different estate, because the one feared before the
face of God; the other does not fear before God. Fourthly, By an argument,
from Solomon's own testimony thereof; and that not out of conjecture, but out of
his own certain knowledge.

Doctr. 1. Howsoever a wicked man may sin often, and escape long, yet a godly
wise man may fully assure himself and others, that it shall go well with them
that fear God; but neither well, nor long, with the wicked.

Sin oft] the text says an hundred times; a certain number of multitude, for
an uncertain; (...) is not, and his days be prolonged; Days is not in the
sentence: and that is denied in the next verse, He shall not prolong his days.
But the meaning is, and a prolonging be to him, to wit, of execution of
sentence, punishment be long delayed, and so he long escapes.

Yet surely I know] And so a godly wise man may know, and assure himself and
others, That it shall be well with them that fear God.

Quest. Why does he not rather say, That it shall not be well with the wicked?
that would make the opposition more direct.

Answ. First, because many times the long continuance of the wicked in their
sinful course with impunity is a punishment and hardship to the godly: Saul's
reign is David's banishment; Ahabs reign is Micaiahs imprisonment, 1 Kings
22.27. Secondly, because the godly are apt to stumble at the sight of the
Impunity and prosperity of the wicked, compared with their own straits, Psalm
73. Jer. 12.1. and the godly must first have Cordials, before the wicked
receive their Corrasives, Matthew. 25.34, 41. Esaias 3.10, 11. Prove. 11.31. Psalm
55.23. Job 15.31, etc.

Quest. How, or wherein does it appear, that notwithstanding the long patience
of God to wicked men, yet certainly it shall go well with the godly; but
neither well nor long with the wicked?

Answ. First, in that it is a pledge of greater mercy reserved for them that
fear God, the more that God prolongeth his patience, and long sufferance to
wicked men, Romans 9.22, 23. Secondly, in that this long patience of God to the
wicked, is an evidence of greater wrath prepared and treasured up for them,
Romans 2.4, 5. Thirdly, In that there is a speedy shortning of the rage of the
wicked over the godly, Psalm 125.3. Fourthly, In that the days of the wicked
are always cut off suddenly, before the time, either of their expectation, or
at least of their preparation. Amos 8.9. The Sun shall go down at noon
implies, partly a great change and immediate from heigh to depth, Psalm 92.7.
And partly a sudden change, before the business and the day be half finished.

Reason. From the fear of God in the godly, and the want of the fear of God in
the wicked. This Reason is expressly given in the Text, It shall be well with
them that fear God, which fear before him, V. 12. It shall be evil with the
wicked, because he fears not before God, V. 13.

Before God] The Hebrew is, before the face of God; that is before, first his
presence in his Ordinances, Psalm 105.14. Secondly, his presence in his
Providence, Prove. 5.21. Psalm 119.168. and 34.16.

Fear of God] First, in holy reverence of his great and glorious Majesty, and
goodness, Jer. 130.4. Hos. 3.5. Secondly, in humble sense of our great
weakness and unworthiness, Phil. 2.12, 13. Thirdly, In awful shunning to
displease him, Prove. 16.6.

Use 1. To restrain us from quarrelling at Gods providence, because it may
sometimes seem to go worse with Gods people, then with the wicked, Jer. 12.1.
Say it confidently, and it shall go well with the godly, Psalm 73.1. Not so to
the wicked.

Use 2. To take heed of abusing Gods patience unto hardness of heart in sin.

Use 3. To support the spirit of such as fear God, in the midst of the
prosperity of the wicked, and in the midst of your own afflictions.

Use 4. To teach us the fear of God, Fear before his face, his Ordinances,
and his Providence. It is a certain presage of good success, 2 Chronicles. 20.3,
12, 15. and 11, 12. It is an overcomming (or denial) of our selves which else
being wanting would enfeeble us, 1 Samuel 2.9. Judge. 7.2.

Eccles. 8.14.15. 14. There is a vanity which is done upon the Earth, that
there be just men unto whom it happens according to the work of the wicked:
again, there be wicked men, to whom it happens according to the work of the
righteous; I said, that this also is vanity. 15. Then I commended mirth,
because a man has no better thing under the Sun, then to eat, and to drink,
and to be merry: for that shall abide with him of his labor the days of his
life, which God gives him under the Sun.

IN these Verses, to the end of the twelfth verse of the ninth Chapter, Solomon
declares and sets forth another vanity which he observed in the world, the
promiscuous successes and events that befall good men and bad, chiefly by the
mis-government of Princes.

In this Fourth verse he propounds one kind of it, That there be just men to
whom it happens according to the work of the wicked: and on the contrary
there be wicked men to whom it happens according to the work of the righteous.

This promiscuous event he amplifieth: First, By the adjunct vanity of it,
there is a vanity done upon the Earth, I said this is also vanity, vanity
ushereth it in, and waits upon it after; verse 14. both are vanity, both that
the just find, according to the work of the wicked; and that the wicked find
according to the work of the just. Secondly, By the effect it wrought in
Solomon, which is the use he made of it, to commend mirth. And that he proves;
First, By the equality of the goodness hereof, the free and cheerful use of
the good things of this life, being equal to any other course which a man can
take in such a case. Secondly, By the Permanency of this good with him as a
sauce to sweeten all his labor in the days of his life which God gives him,
verse 15. The coherence of these words with the former, is, that Solomon saw
some wicked Rulers honorably buried, the punishment of some offenders
prolonged, and thereby to outward view it might appear that the estate of
wicked men was better then the estate of the godly (save only that says
knows the contrary) verse 10. to 13. He thereby takes occasion to observe
and set forth this vanity more distinctly and fully, the promiscuous estate and
success of good and bad men in these, and in the following verses. The
promiscuous events are of three sorts: First, That the good men fare as the
evil should fare, and that evil fare as good should do, Text. Secondly, That
sometimes both fare alike: If good men fare well, so do the wicked; if the
wicked fare evil, so do the good: Chap. 9.1, 2, etc. to 10. Thirdly, That men
of best ability and dexterity are disappointed of their hopes and means, verse
11, 12.

Doctr. 1. It is a vanity to be observed upon the earth, that sometimes it
befalls just men according to the work of the wicked: and it sometimes
befalls the wicked according to the work of the righteous, Luke 16.25. Psalm.
73.12, 13, 14.

Reason 1. Through the wickedness or weakness of rulers in Commonwealth and
Church, Psalm. 12.8. Isai. 59.15. Malach. 3.15. 2 Samuel 16.3, 4. Ezekiel. 13.22.

Reason 2. Through the wise Providence of God, Dispensing good things to the
wicked, To lead them to repentance Romans 2.4. Or else to harden them in
impenitency, Romans 2.5. Dispensing evil things to the righteous: First, For
chastisement and mortification of sin, 1 Cor. 11.32. Secondly, For Trial, Dan.
11.35. Isai. 27.9. Thirdly, For our good at the latter end, Deuteronomy. 8.16. Heb.
5.8. Job 23.10. All these three ends are co-incident.

Reasons of vanity, there is a fourfold vanity in it: 1. Of uncomelinesse,
Prove. 11.22, and 26, 1, 8.

Reason 2. Of unprofitablenesse; The wicked make an ill use of it, Psalm. 55.19.
So do the godly, Psalm. 73.13, 14.

Reason 3. Vanity of uncertainty, Acts 20.22. not knowing what shall befall me.

Reason 4. Of Confusion, following the fall, and the condition of all earthly
things after the fall, Romans 8.20. Not that there is any vanity in Gods
administrations of it self: All his acts are wisdom and righteousness, but
First, In men it is a sinful vanity, to wit, of unprofitablenesse in the
sufferers, and of folly in the doers of it, viz. In such as exalt the wicked,
and discourage the good. Secondly, In other creatures, I mean in the disposal
of them in this manner, It is a penal vanity.

Use for the wicked, Not to account themselves righteous though it happen to
them according to the work of the righteous. Either thence learn to repent,
Romans 2.4. Or look for wrath upon wrath, verse 5. This Use is gathered from the
verse before the Text, Eccles. 8.13.

Use for godly men, To commend mirth to a godly heart, as here Solomon does.
Then I commended mirth or joy, verse 15. That is, First, A free use of the
creatures, Meat, Drink, and the like, verse 15. and Chap. 9.7, 8, 9. Secondly,
Contentment in a man's estate. Thirdly, Delight therein.

Reason 1. If it fare well with us, It is better with us then many other just
men.

Reason 2. It abides with us, or cleaves to us of our labor, it is the
result of our labor through mercy.

Reason 3. Joy is as Oil to the wheels, it strengthens us to all the duties
of our calling, or makes them easy Neh. 8.10.

Reason 4. If it go ill with us, yet we have convenience, yea much more then
we deserve, Genesis 32.10. Lament. 3.20. and mourning for crosses does more hurt
then good, 2 Cor. 7.10.

Object, But ought not a man to be humbled under crosses?

Answ. 1. Yes, but when we have been humbled, then bear all cheerfully and
thankfully, 1 Samuel 1, 7, 18. 2 Samuel 12.20, to 24. 2 Cor. 12.7, 8, 9. Abandon
therefore sullenness and coffeehouse under crosses. 2. To follow diligent
labor in our calling. It is that whereto joy and mirth is joined: the same
word with that, Genesis 29.34. Eccles. 5.12. 3. To Reckon our lives by days, as
the wise man here does, Psalm. 90.12. Genesis 47.9. It will help us, First, Not to
promise our selves multitudes of years, Psalm. 39.5. Secondly, To prepare to
give account for each day, Psalm. 90.12. Thirdly, To Improve and make use of
present opportunity, Heb. 3.15. Fourthly, To forecast provision for the day,
Matthew. 6.11. 4. To look at every day as a new gift of God, Text, verse 15.

Eccles. 8.16.17. 16. When I applied mine heart to know wisdom, and to see the
business that is done upon the Earth: (for also there is that neither day nor
night sees sleep with his eyes.) 17. Then I beheld all the work of God, that
a man cannot find out the work that is done under the Sun, because though a
man labor to seek it out, yea further, though a wise man think to know it,
yet shall not be able to find it.

IN the two former verses Solomon observed it as a great vanity, the
promiscuous event and estate that befell good men and bad, especially through
the mis-government of Princes. In these two verses he observes the like
promiscuous event and estate of both good and bad, from the work and providence
of God. Which various dispensation of all events alike to all sorts of men
(good and bad) Solomon here sets forth by the Adjunct thereof, his own
serious meditation, and study, and enquiry after the reason of it, after the
wisdom and counsel of Gods proceeding in it; which study and meditation of
his, he enlarges and amplifieth in these verses, and in the former part of the
next Chapter. In these verses by two Adjuncts, First, By the restlesnesse and
assiduity of it, so as he found no rest nor sleep night nor day, to seek out
this matter, verse 16. Secondly, By the fruitlesnesse of it, he could not find
what he sought. Which he sets forth by a double amplification, a diversis;
1. Of labor in searching, though a man labor in seeking it out; 2. Of
wisdom, yea if a wise man think and purpose, and profess to seek it, and to
find it out, and to know it, yet he shall not be able to attain it, verse 17.

Doct. 1. A man that shall apply his heart to search and discern the wisdom
of God in his work and dealing with the righteous and with the wicked, though
himself be wise, and his labor great to find it out, yet his labor shall be
fruitless, and himself restless. He speaks here of the wisdom of God in
his work and dealing with the righteous and with the wicked (both alike) as
appears by the verse before, verse 15. and the verses following, Chap. 9.
verse 1.2, 3. His labor shall be fruitless, for he shall not find out what
he sought for verse 17. and himself restless as Solomon himself confesses
(and he seems to speak it of himself) there is that neither day nor night
sees sleep with his eyes, Psalm. 73.16. Jer. 12.1, 2. Habac. 1.13, 14, 15. Job
9.10, 11, 12.

Reasons why fruitless: 1. From Gods concealment many times of the causes and
reasons of the afflictions of his people, especially in the beginning of their
troubles, till toward the end. Job was long before he saw the reason of Gods
strange hand upon himself, Job 10.2, to 7. And it is a great part of their
affliction, that they cannot discern the reason of Gods dealing with them. God
concealeth his mind, till we have learned to prefer his wisdom and will
above our own, when Job stooped to this ( Job 40.2, to 5. with Chap. 42.5, 6,)
then he not only saw a gracious Issue, but the cause of all his troubles, from
Gods conference with Satan.

Reason 2. From the power of God to have brought to pass any ends of his own
and ours in dealing bountifully with the godly, and justly with the wicked, if
it had pleased him. Though sanctified affliction be wholesome to the godly, yet
God was able to have humbled and healed them without such outward crosses and
afflictions. The spirit of grace could do it effectually by the word. That God
chooses rather to do it by afflictions, what man can find the reason? Or if
some reason might be rendered in regard of our fellowship with the first Adam in
sin and vanity, and with the second Adam in afflictions, yet why might not God
have chosen rather to afflict the godly in the inner man, then in the outward
man? and why might not the wicked have undergone greater afflictions in this
world?

Reason. 3. From the free choice which God makes of some men (both of the good
and of the bad) to deal well with some of both sorts, and to deal sharply with
others of both sorts, Job 21.23, 24, 25.

Reasons. why restless, 1. From the disproportion between the faculty and the
object. The wisdom of God in these ways of his providence is beyond our
reach. And therefore as when the members of the body are reached and stretched
beyond their compass, it chaseth away all sleep and rest: so when the mind is
set upon the rack by such transcendent meditations, it rendeth the soul with
vexation and restless disquietnesse.

Reason 2. From the force of earnest intention of the mind in difficult and
abstruse studies to waste and scatter those cool and moist vapors which rise
from the stomach to cool the brain, and would stop the passage of the animal
spirits to the senses, and so procure sleep. For the animal spirits of the
brain being heated with agitation and study, do also heat those vapors, and
so attenuate and disperse, and spend them that they cannot stop the passage of
the spirits to the senses and so sleep is chased away. This is a natural cause
which is the more aggravated by the hand of God taking away natural rest from
such as cannot rest satisfied in his will, unless they may be of his counsel,
Job 33.13.

Use 1. To teach us to content our selves in seeking out by our own wisdom, the
counsel of God in his dealing with our selves or others; but by faith and
patience to wait for a good issue. Faith first sees Gods hand in all, and
sanctifies the name of his sovereignty; He is the Potter, we the clay. Wisdom,
Job 9.4. Righteousness, Jer. 12.1. Grace to his people, and faithfulness,
Psalm. 119.75. Secondly, stirs up to prayer for a profitable use of all,
Psalm 143.10: Thirdly, humbles us under the mighty hand of God, 1 Pet. 5.6.
Fourthly, directs us to the word for further counsel, Psalm 73.17.

Use 2. To confine our evening meditations to matters within our compass.
Evening meditations should rather be Devotionall then Scholasticall. To beat
our brains, will leave it without fruit or rest.

Use 3. To acknowledge it (as Solomon here does penitentially) as a vanity in
our selves, that we have sought to find out Gods work and wisdom by our own
wisdom.

Eccles. 9. v. 1, 2. 1. For all this, I considered in my heart, even to declare
all this, that the righteous and the wise, and their works are in the hand of
God: no man knows either love or hatred, by all that is before them. 2. All
things come alike to all: there is one event to the righteous and to the
wicked: to the good; and to the clean, and to the unclean; to him that
sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not: as is the good, so is the sinner:
and he that swears as he that fears an oath.

IN the two last verses of the former Chapter Solomon set forth his serious
inquisition after the reason, and wisdom, and counsel of God in ordering the
like promiscuous events to the righteous and to the wicked. And he sets it
forth by a twofold Adjunct: 1. The restlesness of himself in it, He saw no
sleep with his eyes, verse. 16.2. The fruitlesness of it, He could not find it,
though a wise man and laboring to find it, Chap. 8. verse 17.

In these two verses, he sets forth the same inquisition by the effect it
wrought in him; The giving of his heart to declare all this, to wit, that
follows, viz. to declare four observations, which he had found out touching
this matter. First, That the righteous and the wise, and their works are in
the hand of God: verse 1. Secondly, That no man can know the love or hatred of
God to themselves or others, by any outward events, verse 1. or by all that is
before them before their eyes obvious to them. Thirdly, That all things come
alike to all sorts of all; which he expresses by a distribution of the
subject, verse 2. To the righteous and to the wicked, To the good and to the
unclean, To him that sacrifices and that sacrifices not, To the good and to
the sinner, To him that swears and to him that fears an oath. Fourthly,
That this is an evil among all things done under the Sun, verse 3.

Doctr. 1: That which a man gives his heart to seek and to find of all the
ways of God, so far as he has found it, he should also give his heart to
declare it. Solomon told us in verse 16. of the former Chapter, he set his
heart, with much labor to seek the reason, and wisdom and counsel of God, in
the promiscuous events that befall the sons of men; that which he sought he
found not: but what upon search he did find, he here tells us he set his
heart upon it to declare it, Job 5.27. Eccles. 7.25, to 29.

Reason 1. From the end of all Gods works, whether of Creation or Providence:
It is that they may be known; and that God may be known in them: Psalm. 107.43.
and 78, 4, to 7, and 111.4. (no man can remember, what he knows not) Joel 1.3.

Reason 2. From the end of all our knowledge of God, which is (this for one of
them) to tell it to others, Eccles. 12.9. 1 Cor. 12.7. No light is to be put
under a bushel, Matthew. 5.15. All knowledge is light; Talents not to be buried.

Use 1. To teach us not to be sparing this way; what we have searched and
learned in any kind of good knowledge, the more ready to be to communicate it,
Job 5.27, and 15, 17, 18.

Use 2. To teach us to enquire and search knowledge; younger persons from the
more aged, to give them occasion to declare what they have searched out, Job
8.8, 9, 10. Prove. 20.5. A seasonable question is here a good bucket.

Doctr. 2. The righteous, the wise, and their works are in the hand of God,
verse 1. That is, First, He is the disposer of them after his own will: they
are in his power and pleasure to order one way or other; so the phrase taken,
Genesis 16.6, and 31, 29. Job 1.12, and 2, 6. Secondly, He receives the knowledge
of them, and of the disposal of them to himself; so the phrase also taken,
Acts 1.7. Both these meanings are here pertinent, Psalm. 31, 15. Jer. 10.23.
Prove. 20.24.

Reason. 1. From Gods absolute sovereignty over the creatures, Jer. 18.6. As
being the cause, First, The efficient, procreant, and conservant. Secondly, the
final cause of them all, Romans 11.36.

Reason 2. From the precious esteem and regard which God has of his righteous
servants and their ways, Isai. 43.2, 4. Psalm. 1.6.

Reason 3. From the righteous men's recommendation of themselves and their
ways, into the hand of God, Psalm. 37.5. 2 Timothy 1.12. These also wisely
consider and observe how God keeps and guides them, Psalm. 107.43.

Reason 4. From the wicked man's sleighting and despising his own way, Prove.
19.16. As he that regards not to choose his way, but goes through thick and
thin, he despises his way: So he that cares not whether his way be pure or
filthy. These three last Reasons show why the righteous and their ways are
more expressly said to be in the hand of God, then wicked men and their ways
be, though the ways of the wicked are in Gods hand also. Isai. 45.1, and 10,
5, 6, and 37, 29. Psalm. 125.5.

Use 1. For comfort to the righteous, If we and our ways be in the hand of
God, where can they be safer? there let us rest. And therefore also in all
estates to be the more Contentful, Psalm. 39.9. Thankful, Job 1.21. and
Fruitful; and so to grow the more humbled in sinful failings, and the more
enlarged in Faith on God in well doing. It might humble a good heart, that
himself fell into any sin; but the more that God in displeasure gave him up to
it, Isai. 63.17. In well doing it is a comfort to have done well: but much
greater that God helped us, 1 Chronicles. 29.10, 14.

Use 2. To instruct us to be wise as well as righteous in not trusting to our
own power and will, for both are in Gods hand, Prove. 3.5, 6. James 4, 13, 14,
15.

Use 3. To abase wicked men, whom God does nor vouchsafe to carry in his hand,
neither them, nor their works.

Doctr. 3. No man can certainly discern the love or hatred of God to himself
or others, by their outward events and estates.

No man knoweth] knowledge is certi Axiomatis Judicium. If no man knows, then
no man certainly discerns.

Love or hatred] to wit, of God; for of God he spoke in the words next before:
the righteous, and the wise, and their works are in the hands of God.

To himself or others] for if he discern not the love or hatred of God to
himself, much less to others: And if he could discern it to himself, he
might to others; and if to others, he might discern it to himself. For outward
things are alike discernable in both.

By all that is before them] that is, by all things lying open to their outward
senses, as prosperous, or adverse estates and events. Matthew. 6.19, 20. If a man
might know the love of God to him by outward things, those outward things would
be as treasure to him, which Christ denies.

Reason 1. From the corruption and changeableness of outward things, Matthew.
6.19. and therefore they cannot be certain evidences of an unchangeable and
uncorruptible estate.

Reason 2. From the like events and successes, and estates to all, Eccles. 9.2.
Good name to Demetrius, 3 John 12. as well as to the false Prophets, Luke 6.26.
Wealth to the rich Epicure, Luke 12.16. as well as to Abraham, Genesis 24.35. and
to Isaac, Genesis 26.12. Pleasure to the wicked, Job 21.11, 12. as well as to the
godly, Eccles. 2.10. Health and strength to Epicures, Psalm. 73.4. as well as to
Caleb, Josh. 14.11. Beauty to Absalom and such, 2 Samuel 14.25. Prove. 11.22. as
well as to Sarah, Rebecca, and Rachel. Long life to Ismael, Genesis 25.17. as well
as to Isaac, Genesis 35.28. Learning and wisdom to the Egyptians, Acts 7.22. as
well as to Moses and Daniel, Acts 7.22. Dan. 1.17. Crosses to Bastards, Psalm
78.33. as well as to sons, Psalm 73.14. Hebr. 12.8. Sickness to the
disobedient, Deuteronomy. 28.59, 60. as well as to David, Psalm 41.8. Poverty to Jobs
scorners, Job. 30.3. as well as to Lazarus, Luke 16.20. Sudden death to the
disobedient, Psalm 55.23. Prove. 29.1. as well as to Jeroboams good son, 1
Kings 14.12, 13. Violent death. Jonathan died in the field, and by the hand of
the uncircumcised; as well as Saul, 1 Samuel 31, 1, 2.

Reason 3. From the curse and vanity that lies upon all the creatures by the
fall, Genesis 3.17. It is a bondage to the creature to minister to the wicked, not
to minister to the godly. Romans 8.20, 21. This is the reason of the former
Reason.

Object. Did not Cain know Gods acceptance of Abel above himself by an outward
sign of fire from heaven, or the like? Genesis 4.4, 5.

Answ. That was a miraculous event, as was also the fire that fell upon Eliahs
Sacrifice, 1 Kings 18.38. But Solomon speaks of ordinary common events.

Object. 2. But is there not great difference of a godly man's bearing the
events and estates that befall him; and a wicked man's bearing his?

Answ. Yes: But Solomon speaks not of outward fruits, but outward events.

Object. 3. Psalm 41.11.

Answ. David knew not the favor of God from the outward deliverance, but from
the grace of God secretly revealed in it. So any benefits sprinkled with the
blood of Christ, may hold forth everlasting mercies, Psalm 136.23, 24, 25.

Use 1. Against Papists: First, then outward prosperity is no certain sign of
the Church; though Bell trmin make it his fifteenth note De Notis Ecclesiae, l.
4. c. 18. Secondly, who abuse this place from the corrupt vulgar Latin
Translation, to undermine and destroy the assurance of faith of the love of God
to a faithful soul, against evident Scripture, 1 John 3.14, etc. 1 Cor. 2.12.
Romans 8.16. 2 Pet. 1.10. It is a whorish Church that brings not up her
children to know their father.

Use 2. To teach us to judge wisely of the chastisements of the godly; not to
misconstrue Gods meaning in them to our selves, or others lying under them,
Psalm 41.1, 2, 3. This mis-judging was the sin of Jobs friends, for which
Gods wrath was kindled, Job 42.7.

Use 3. To warn wicked men neither to bless themselves in their prosperity, as
if that were a sign of Gods favor, Zach. 11.5. Nor in their adversity to
promise to themselves impunity in another world, because they have their
punishment in this world.

Use 4. To exhort to look at things within us, and from us, for the knowledge
of Gods love to us; Within us, 1. The testimony of the spirit, Romans 8.16. 1
John 3.24. 2. The gifts of the spirit accompanying salvation, Acts 16.30.31. 1
John 14, 18, 19. From us, our election of God to be our God, Psalm 73.25.

Doctr. 4. All the sons of men are ranked into two sorts, Righteous or
wicked, good men or sinners, clean or unclean, Malac. 3.18. 1 John 5.19.

Reason 1. From Gods eternal purpose to make all the vessels of the house of
the world either to honor or dishonor, Romans 9.21.

Reason 2. From the different original root of all men, either flesh or spirit,
John 3.6.

Reason 3. From the two different ways that all men take, Matthew. 7.13, 14. 1
John 3.7, 8.

Reason 4. From the largeness of the two covenants, dividing all men between
them, Gal. 3.10. and 4.24, etc. Romans 6.14, etc. and 8.1, 5.

Reason 5. From the integrity of the whole man, required in Gods service: which
being wanting, men serve the devil, Matthew. 6.24 Acts 26.18. Colos. 1.13.

Use 1. Against purgatory; for presuppose the truth of the doctrine, and there
be but two places for these two sorts, to be bestowed in after this life,
Matthew. 25.32, etc.

Use 2. To try what our estate is; every one of us belongs either to one of
these sorts, or to the other.

Marks of difference (besides the former difference mentioned in the reasons)
1. What people do we belong to? to such we are gathered after death, Numb.
20.24. Genesis 25.17. 2. Where is all a man's delight, Psalm 16.3. Psalm 26.5. and
139.21, 22. and communion, Psalm. 120.5. thither shall he be gathered after
death, and not with the contrary, Psalm 26.9. If we delight in men for
righteousness sake, then the more righteous they be, the more we delight in
them, Psalm. 16.3.

Doctr. 5, All the righteous in the world are also good and clean, offering
Sacrifices, and fearing Oaths. And all the wicked are also unclean, sinners,
negligent Sacrificers, and fearlesse swearers.

Good] as first, filled with good Treasure, Matthew. 12.35. Secondly, brings
forth good fruit, Matthew. 7, 18, and so fitted for good uses. 2 Timothy 2.21, Not
so the wicked, Matthew. 12.35. Tit. 1.16.

Clean, First, by imputation of the righteousness of Christ, Ezekiel. 36.25.
Secondly, by sanctification of the spirit, Esaias 43.3. Psalm 73.1. The wicked
are neither Matthew. 7.23. The sinner erreth first, from the rule or way, Psalm
14.3, Secondly, from the mark or end, Prove. 16.25.

Sacrificing, as first, observing Gods stratute-worship, Psalm 119.5. Secondly,
setting their hearts and delight, and cost upon it, 1 Chronicles. 29.3. and 21.24.
Genesis 4.4.

This the wicked either neglect altogether, 2 Chronicles. 15.3. Psalm 119.155. Or
perform perfunctorily, Malac. 1.7, etc.

The Righteous fear an oath, first, As not daring to take it in vain. Secondly,
as observing it religiously, when taken Josh. 9.19. 2 Samuel 9.1. Not so the
wicked, Hos. 4.2. Jer. 23.10. Ezekiel. 17.18, 19.

Use. For trial of our estates, whether we be righteous or wicked by these
fruits.

Eccles. 9.3, to 6. This is an evil among all things that are done under the
Sun, that there is one event unto all; yea, also the heart of the sons of men
is full of evil, and madness is in their heart while they live, and after that
they go to the dead. 4. For to him that is joined to all the living, there is
hope: for a living dog is better then a dead lion. 5. For the living know that
they shall die: but the dead know not any thing, neither have they any more a
reward: for the memory of them is forgotten. 6. Also their love, and their
hatred, and their envy is now perished, neither have they any more a portion
for ever in any thing that is done under the Sun.

THe forth thing that Solomon observed, and thought it meet to declare from the
promiscuous events of all alike unto all, is the evil of it, especially the
evil effect of it in the hearts of the sons of men. Coherence see in v. 1, 2.

Doct. Amongst all the evils that are done under the Sun, this equality of
events to all sorts of men alike, It silleth the hearts of men with evil and
madness, all their life time, even to their death, v. 3. As who should say,
this makes them live an ill life, and die an ill death: yea live madly, and
die madly. Moses and Aaron were as well excluded from Canaan, as the unbelieving
and murmuring Israelites. Josiah was as well slain by an Arrow in battle against
his enemies, as Ahab; Nebuchadnezzar is said to have lived forty years in a
victorious reign, as well as David. See many more such like instances in verse
1. Doct. 3.

This is an evil, first, Afflictive, both to good men, Psalm 73.21. and to evil
men, Psalm 112.10. Secondly, Corruptive; it fills the hearts of men with
first, Evil of wickedness or sin; secondly, Madness, v. 3.

First, evil of sin. The ground of this evil imagination springs occasionally
from these promiscuous events, as conceiving they flow from the not guidance of
them by providence, 1. Evil imaginations in particular, that the basest life
here is better then the best life hereafter: confirmed by a Proverb, A living
Dog is better then a dead Lion, v. 4. And this they hold forth in four
instances: First, in stay and provision of supply; The living have something to
trust unto; see the Hebrew, v. 4. The dead have neither friends, nor money, nor
strength, etc. Secondly, In knowledge even of some suture things: The living
know that they shall die; the dead know nothing at all, v. 5. Thirdly, In
rewards; The dead have no more a reward, no not so much as a memorial of their
good deeds, whilst they lived, v. 5. But the living meet with some reward here,
Eccles. 4.9. Hest. 6.3, 10. Ezekiel. 29.19. Fourthly, In the enjoyment of the
objects of their affections, v. 6. their love and their hatred, and envy is now
perished, viz. They have neither affections nor objects of them left; nor any
portion in things here below: beyond which they look not, v. 6. Hence the most
famous of the Heathens have preferred the meanest life on earth, above all the
hopes they had of another world. Homer reports of his Achilles, He had rather
be a servant to a poor Country clown here, then to be a King to all the souls
departed. So Mecaenas in Seneca had rather live in many diseases then dye. It
is another evil imagination, to think God like wicked men, (to wit, in liking
well of them) Psalm 50.21. 2 Evil Resolutions, Eccles, 8.11. 1 Cor. 15.32. Isai.
56.12. 3. Evil speeches and practices, Isai. 10.11. Job 3.1. etc. Men's hearts
are also said to be filled with madness as well as with wickedness, by
occasion of like events to all, In that they break forth, First, To outrageous
violence in sin, Psalm. 73.5, 6. Secondly, To foolish vainglorious boasting in
sin. The Hebrew word comes of a root that signifies to praise or glory,
Isai. 3, 9. And filled they be with wickedness and madness from this occasion
all their life time, even to death, Job 21.13. Psalm. 55.19.

Use 1. To show a great difference between the righteous and the wicked: The
hope of the wicked is only in this life, verse 4. Job 8.13, 14. But the
righteous has his chief hope and trust in another, 1 Cor. 15.19. Prove. 14.32.
The wicked had rather live a dogs life here, then hazard his estate in another
world. If he hasten his death, it is through Satan's efficiency; the righteous
longs for dissolution, Phil. 1.23. The wicked knows little of any future
thing, but that he shall dye, verse 5. The godly knows that when he dies, he
shall see God, shall be like him, etc. Job 19.25, 26, 27. 1 John 32. The wicked
shall have reward in everlasting fire, Psalm. 9.17. but at best themselves look
for none. The godly shall have a reward in eternal glory, Isai. 49.4. The
wicked shall never exercise their love any more after this life, nor shall ever
meet with any thing lovely, verse 6. Though they shall not employ their hatred
or envy about earthly things here, yet they shall both hate God, and envy the
happiness of his Saints: But the righteous shall abound in love to God, and in
Gods love to them, Psalm. 16.11. We shall abound also in mutual love to all the
Saints and Angels; the greatest strangers there will love us better then our
best friends here, Psalm. 17.15. Our hatred will not be wanting against Satan
and wicked persecutors, Rev. 6.10. Our zeal also shall then abound, (that which
is here translated envy, signifies also Zeal, Isai. 37.32.) The wicked have no
portion but in this life, Psalm. 17.14. The portion of our inheritance is after
this life. 1 Pet. 1.4, 5.

Use 2. Not to misconstrue Gods dealings with our selves or others: It is a
root of Atheism, and will make us worse then the devils: For they believe
there is a God, and tremble, James 2.19.

Use 3. To teach us not to rest in a carnal condition, it leaves us without
knowledge, without reward, and without portion.

Eccles. 9.7, to 10. 7. Go thy way eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine
with a merry heart; for God now accepts thy works. 8. Let thy garments be
always white, and let thy head lack no ointment. 9. Live joyfully with the
wife whom thou love all the days of the life of thy vanity, which he has
given thee under the Sun, all the days of thy vanity: for that is thy portion
in this life, and in thy labor which thou take under the Sun. 10. Whatsoever
thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might: for there is no work, nor
device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither thou go.

SOlomon having in the former verses declared four observations which he
gathered from Gods dispensing like events to all: He now gives some practical
directions from the same ground: First, That a man should take all the good
which the providence of God puts into his hand, verse 7.8, 9. Secondly, That
he should do all the good which God puts into his hand to do, verse 10.

1. The good which he directs a man to take, is in the enjoyment of the
comfortable use of all the blessings which God gives him in this life. Which
blessings are chiefly five: First, Meat or Bread, It to be eaten with joy,
verse 7. Secondly, Wine, It to be drunken with a cheerful heart, verse 7.
Thirdly, Garments, and they to be always white. Fourthly, Ointments, and they
not to be lacking to the head, verse 8. Fifthly, The wife beloved, and she to
be joyfully lived withal, all the days of thy vanity, verse. 9.

Reason 1. From Gods acceptance of our work, verse 7.

Reason 2. From the portion allotted to us of God, verse 9. especially in the
joyful fellowship of his wife.

2. The good that we are any way able to do, he exhorts to do, by a Reason
from the vacancy and cessation of all employment and business of mind, and
hand in the grave; and the grave described by our Adjunct, Act, or walking to
it, verse 10. Solomon here speaks not in the person of an Epicure, but in the
name of the holy Ghost.

Reason 1. From the like speeches in the like sense spoken often before in his
own person, Chap. 2.24, and 3, 12, 13, 22, and 5, 18, 19, and 8, 15.

Reason 2. Epicures are not wont to speak so Religiously, First, Of life as
vanity; which Solomon here does feelingly, verse 9. Secondly, Of the days of
our life as Gods gift, verse 9. Thirdly, Of the course of our life, as a
journey to the grave, verse 10. Fourthly, Of our love to our wives, and
fellowship with them constantly, avoiding strange lusts, verse 9.

Object. But garments always white, and wife always joyed in it, seems to
deny fasts at any time.

Answ. Solomon speaks not of extraordinary times, and duties, but of ordinary
course.

Doctr. 1. The uncertainty of outward events calls all men to take all the
good, and to do all the good that God puts into their hand all the days of
their life. Of the former part now. Eccles. 3.12, 13, 22. and 5, 18, 19. Acts
2.46. and 14, 17. [a minore] yet it holds in heathens also, Psalm. 104.15. The
Jews in cheerfulness used white garments, Luke 16.19. Prove. 5.19. for joyful
love of wife. Times of humiliation are not ordinary, so also times of Apostasy
are excepted, Hos. 9.1.

Reasons of the former part of the Doctrine, 1. From the contrary walking of
wicked men, fretting and vexing themselves with the promiscuous dispensation of
outward events, and filling their hearts with wickedness and madness, upon
that occasion, verse 3. to 6.

Reason 2. From Gods acceptance of our work herein It is acceptable to God,
that we should use cheerfully what God gives freely and cheerfully, Psalm.
145.16, Deuteronomy. 26.14. for First, It is an improvement and use of the creature to
that end God gave them, Psalm. 104.15, And so a fulfilling of one part of the
third Commandment. Secondly, The contrary is a weariness to God, not to
accept and use the gifts he offers, Isai. 7.10, to 13. In which respects not
only godly men, but all men are bound to cheerful acceptance of Gods goodness,
without sadness and mourning.

Reason 3. From the portion which God gives us in this life for our outward
man (as his grace for the inner man,) 2 Cor. 12.9. First, it is Gods gift, and
admeasurement, Eccles. 5.18. His talents are to be employed. Secondly, It is
our substance, supplying our wants and losses, Acts 20.24. He is a poor man in
the midst of abundance, that wants this, Eccles. 5.19, 20. Thirdly, it is
that by occupying of which we increase our estates, Neh. 9.15. In special
manner, this to be a man's portion, is attributed to a man's joyful life with
his wife, v. 9. As who should say: The best portion a man can have with a wife,
is a joyful life with her all his days; as if he had no portion without this,
whatsoever wealth, or friends, or beauty, or parts, he had with her; without
this joyfulnesse with her, it were no portion at all, Prove. 5.18. It is a
portion, first, as given of God, Eccles. 9.19. [ Prove. 19.14.] Secondly, for a
stay and support of his life, Genesis 2.18. Thirdly, to employ for his further
advantage, Prove. 31.11, 12.

Reason 4. From the wearisome vanity of this life, without making use of the
comforts of it, v. 9. Psalm 78.33. Vanity first of brevity, Psalm 39.5,
Secondly, of vanity or emptiness, Psalm 39.6. Esaias 55.2. Thirdly, of
disappointment or frustration, Esaias 49.4. Fourthly, Corruption, Romans 8.20, 21.

Reason 5. From the necessary support of a man in his labors, v. 9. This
comfortable use of the creatures, is as Oil to the wheels, Neh. 8.10.

Reason 6. From the gift of every day of our life to us from Gods hand, v. 9.
Job 14.5, Psalm 31.15. Acts 17.26. Therefore every day some refreshing.

Use 1. To teach the children of God to take Solomon's counsel here; for to them
it is chiefly given, whose work God accepts; In seeking reconcilement with
God, and fellowship in his Christ and Kingdom, Matthew. 6.33. 1 Timothy 4.3. Tit.
1.15. Hos. 9.1.

Rules to do it safely: Observe, First, two Rules of piety: Prayer before, 1 Timothy 4.4, 5. and Thanksgiving after, Deuteronomy. 8.10. Secondly, a Rule of justice;
thine own, not the bread of Idleness, Oppression, Deceit, Prove, 31.27. and
4.17. and 20.17. 2 Kings 4.7. Thirdly, a Rule of sobriety, Luke 21.34.
Fourthly, a Rule of wisdom, 1. Regarding the end of meat and drink, which is
strength and cheerfulness, Eccles. 10.17. Of Apparel, is beside, 1 Necessiy.
2 Comeliness. 3 Adorning the inner man of the heart, 1 Pet. 3.3, 4. 2 Regarding
future times and posterity, Prove. 21.20. 3 In frugality, saving remnants, John
6.12. Fifthly, a Rule of charity and mercy, in ministering part to others that
want necessaries, Neh. 8.10.

Use 2. To stir up Christian yoke-fellows especially to this duty. Means.
First, uprightness of heart, Job 20.5. Secondly, care of mutual pleasing, 1
Cor. 7.33, 34.

Use 3. To take heed of grieving Gods spirit, which takes such care for our
refreshing, Ephesians 4.30.

Use 4. To stir up to a Christian state and course; It is not a way of
melancholy, but seasonable cheerfulness.

Use 5. To teach us to look at this life as vanity, and all the days of it;
and therefore to lay up an enduring substance, in the life to come, Hebr.
10.34. and patiently to bear many disappointments in this life.

Use 6. To look at every day as a gift from God, Lam. 3.23* and therefore to
employ it to his advantage.

Eccles. 9. v. 10. 10. Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might;
for there is no work nor device nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither
thou go.


THe Doctrine from this and the three former verses was this: That the
uncertainty of outward events calls all men to take all the good, and to do
all the good that God puts into their hands, all the days of our life. Of
the former part, to wit, of taking all the good, has been spoken in the three
former verses: It remains now to speak of doing all the good that God puts
into our hands all the days of our life.

Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, implies three things: First, that which
falls within our Calling or Commission, or Authority, as Genesis 16.6. Unlawful
things, or things lawful, but out of our Calling are not to be done though
they be in our hand, Micah 2.1. Secondly, that which falls within the
compass of our power and ability, as the phrase is used, Genesis 31.29.
Otherwise, though it be in our calling, yet having power, we may omit it, 2 Samuel 3.39: Thirdly, that which God gives us opportunity and occasion to do,
as the phrase is used, 1 Samuel 10.7. Gal. 6.10. Eccles. 11, 2, 6.

Reason 1. From the vacancy and cessation of all business in the grave whether
thou go; as in the Text.

No work] no performance, or accomplishment of any business. No device] The
Hebrew word signifies two things: First, a device or cunning engine, 2 Chronicles.
26.15. Secondly, an account, as Eccles. 7.27. Both here meant: In the grave
there is no ability or opportunity, either to devise or invent any good; Or, to
make up, or cast up any accounts.

Nor knowledge] to understand truth or falsehood, good or evil. Nor wisdom, to
consider of any good ends, or of any good means leading thereto.

Reason 2. From the love which we owe to God, and the measure of it, which is
with all our might, Deuteronomy. 6.5.

Reason 3. From our stewardship, and Gods Lordship of that which God puts
into our hands. The work is the Lords as our sovereign master, 1 Cor. 16.10.
Church work. Jer. 48.10. Warlike execution, 1 Samuel 14.45. wrought with God,
Col. 3.23, 24. Servants work; we are but Factors for him. There is an heavy
curse upon negligence in his work, Jer. 48.10,

Use 1. To reprove, first, inordinate walking without a calling, when the hand
finds nothing to do, Matthew. 20.6. Secondly, negligence in a calling, where
the hand puts not forth his might, Prove. 10.4.

Use 2. To exhort all men to a conscionable faithfulness and diligence in all
the work your hand finds to do. The three reasons in the Text are as so
many motives: Besides, First, Satan bestirreth himself busily, and sets all
his instruments aworke to choke the work of reformation, with store of tares.
Secondly, The more improvement of our talents here, the greater will our reward
be in heaven, Luke 19.16, 17, 18, 19. yea, it will ashame us to receive such a
plenteous recompense of reward for so small service. There will be rest enough
in the grave, Isai. 57.2. And recompense enough in heaven, 1 Cor. 15.58.
Thirdly, The hands of our fellow laborers faint in England, what through
multitude of variety of work, and what through mists and fogs of temptations
about them, Neh. 4.10.

Use 3. To teach men to finish and perfect their accounts with God and man
here; for there is no perfecting accounts in the grave, Luke 16.2.

Use 4. To look at the whole course of our lives as a journey to the grave,
whether we go to work, or to meat, or to Sea, or to Church, or to Law, or to
Field; to the grave we are going. Which is a matter, First, Of Admonition to
carnal persons to hasten spiritual preparation. Secondly, Of consolation to the
godly, and warning also against security, Romans 13.11.

Eccles. 9.11. 11. I returned and saw under the Sun, that the race is not to
the swift, nor battle to the strong, neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet
riches to men of understanding, nor yet favor to men of skill; but time and
chance happens to them all.


IN the former Chapter Solomon had observed this vanity, that it often
befalls the righteous according to the work of the wicked, and to the wicked
according to the work of the righteous, verse 14. This vanity Solomon has
amplified in the latter end of the former Chapter, and in the former part of
this Chapter by sundry arguments. Amongst other arguments he amplified it with
this observation, that all events fall alike to all, to the good, and to the
evil, clean and unclean, holy and profane. And least it should be said that
godliness or holiness and uncleanness make no great difference in men's
actions, but as Rabshakeh said, wisdom and strength are for the war, ( Isai.
36.5.) so events fall out, as wisdom and strength, swiftness (or speed) skill
(or knowledge) do direct them, Solomon here denies that, and tells us it is
not in the power of the likelyest means to attain their ends, or to effect
their work. And this he shows us in five instances. 1. The Race is not to
the swift. 2. The Battle is not to the strong. 3. Bread is not to the wise. 4.
Riches are not to men of understanding. 5. Favor (either of Princes or people)
is not to men of knowledge. And besides he proves it, First, By a reason or
cause thereof in God, taken from the overruling power of the higher cause or
Agent, Gods disposing of time and chance; for says he, Time, or Chance, or
Occurrence comes to all these. The word translated Chance, here, is
translated Occurrent (or occurrence) 1 Kings 5.8, 4. Secondly, By a reason or
cause in man, his ignorance of his time: which is amplified by the calamity or
misery following it, verse 12.

Doctr. 1. Men of the best abilities and sufficiencies for any work, do often
meet with the like events and disappointments, as they do that want them.
Swiftest men and horses are ablest, and most sufficient and most fit for the
Race: yet the Race is not to the swift; why then it is to them that want
swiftness; it is to the slow. The strong are best able to win the Battle, yet
the Battle is not to them; why then it is to the weak: men of wisdom are most
like to cast about for means of subsistence for bread: Prove. 21.20. yet bread
is not to the wise: and then it is to simple people. Men of understanding are
most likely to attain riches; yet riches is not to them, but to shallower
heads. Men of knowledge are most likely to win favor from high and low: yet
favor is not to men of knowledge, but to ignorant men, Psalm. 33.16, 17. Amos
2.14, 15, 16. 1 Samuel 17.50. 2 Cor. 11.27.

Reason 1. Because chance (or occurrence) comes to all these, that is, some
occurrence which Gods providence casts in by the way, that disappointeth all
the most likely means and abilities. As the stone that was cast out of David's
sling, chanced by Gods providence to fall and to sink into Goliahs forehead, 1 Samuel 17.49.

Reasons why God does cast in such Occurrences. 1. From his own Sovereign
prerogative, in disposing of all events, and effecting all works, Ephesians. 4.11.
To make a thing be, is the act and name of Jehovah, which he will not
communicate to the creature, Isai. 42.8. Lament. 3.37. Hence in a man's own
strength no man prevails, 1 Samuel 2.9.

Reason 2. From the creatures abuse of his talents; First, Either by confidence
in them without God, Isai. 10.12, to 29. Ajax thought it was for cowards and
weaklings to call upon God for succor, not for him, whence he was foiled.
Secondly, Or by arming them and using them against God, Amos 2.12, to 16.

Reason 2. From the time that God has set to all a man's successes and changes.
Time is sometime put for the variety of conditions and changes of good or evil
that befall men, as Psalm. 31.15. so here. Now when these times or changes come,
no means that the creature can use can prevail to withstand, Jer. 46.17.

Use. 1. To discourage us from confidence and boasting in our gifts and parts,
Jer. 9.23, and 17, 5, 6. 2 Chronicles. 25.8. God can easily disappoint us, First,
Either by taking away our power to use our parts, Amos 2.14, 15. Secondly, Or
by taking away our will to use them, 2 Samuel 3.18, 21, 23. Thirdly, Or by giving
greater parts, (at least for the present) to our adversaries, Isai. 30.16.
Fourthly, Or by casting in some casual event, 1 Kings 22.34. Fifthly, Or by
sending some unseen Angels to cross us, and to help our adversaries, Josh.
5.13.14. It is a like vanity to boast in our gifts and parts (ascribing our
good successes to them) after Achievement of our ends and desires, as in
confidence in them before hand Amos 6.13. Psalm. 44.3, 5; 6, 7, 8.

Use 2. To prevent the discouragement of such as want gifts and parts or
means, 2 Chronicles. 14.11. 2 Cor. 12.9. It may moderate our fears in times of
strong and formidable assaults against us, Isai. 51.12, 13. It is a
forgetfulness of God to fear creatures; It may support us also in our weak
provisions and strength against winter journeyes, huge storms and tempest,
etc. Psalm. 46.1, 3, and 93, 3, 4. The safety of Mariners and Passengers lives
and estates, lies not on Ropes or Gables, Anchors or Ships, Guns or Weapons,
but in the name and hand of the Lord, he swadleth and rules the Sea, Job 38 9,
10, 11.

Use 3. To remove the vulgar conceit of fortune and chance out of this place.
It is nothing but Gods disposing of occasions and events casual to us, but
counsels to him; what is chance to others, is the Lord to Job, Job 1.21.
chances are as much in Gods hand as times, Psalm. 91.10. And therefore to bear
all chances that befall us, as befalling us from the wise hand and providence of
the Lord.

Eccles. 9.12. 12. For man also knows not his time, as the fishes that are
taken in an evil net, and as the birds that are caught in the snare, so are the
sons of men snared in an evil time, when it falls suddenly upon them.


SOlomon had said in the former verse, that it is not in men to attain the ends
which they are best furnished with sufficiency of abilities to attain, v. 11.

A double reason or cause he gives thereof: First, one in God; Times and
chances are in the hand of God, and he causes them to fall upon men, in all
their ways, v. 11. Secondly the other in man; his ignorance of his time, the
time that he should take for every action, though he be fitted with ability to
perform it, v. 12. [But this was formerly spoken to by Solomon in Chap. 8.6.]
Therefore this verse may rather be taken as an amplification of the reason
given in the former verse. There it was said, Men are often disappointed,
because time and chance befell all their actions, and affairs: and that he
amplifieth by an argument of equals; Time also falls upon man himself, and
chance therewith; and this set forth by the adjunct, ignorance of man, of what
times shall befall him; And that amplified by the misery which thereby falls
suddenly upon man; and that sudden misery is set forth by a twofold comparison,
first, of Fishes taken in an evil Net; secondly, of Birds taken in a snare.

Doctr. The sons of men are commonly ignorant and uncertain of the times that
do befall them, Genesis 27.2. Acts 20.22. James 4.14. Prove. 27.1. Eccles. 11.2, 6.

Reason 1. From the Lords pleasure to reserve this as a sovereign prerogative
in his own power, Acts 1.7.

Reason 2. To train up his servants to a childlike dependence on Gods will,
James 4.14, 15. also to a watchful preparation for sudden changes, Mark 13.35,
36. Luke 12.35, to 40. Likewise to fruitfulness in doing all the good we can
find to do for the present, Eccles. 9.10. and Chap. 11.2, 6. Besides, to the
obedience of faith, and to follow God blindfold. Foreknowledge of cross events
hinders obedience; Jonah 4.2. foreknowledge of good events makes obedience
mercenary, as John 6.26.

Reason 3. To surprise wicked men with sudden judgments; as Birds in an evil
snare, and Fishes in a net, Psalm. 37.13. and 73.18, 19. Dan. 5.5, 6.

Use 1. For a sad warning to wicked men, not to continue in such an estate;
they know not what shall befall them, what times shall come upon them: but what
evil does come, will be sudden calamity, Job 21.13. 1 These 5.2, 3.

Use 2. To reprove the vanity and impiety of such as consult with witches about
the events of things, and the times that should come over them; What got Saul
by the witch of Endor? or Haman by sorcery? or Balack by Balaam?

Use 3. To learn us an holy use of our ignorance of our times, according to
Gods ends mentioned in the second Reason.

Eccles. 9.13, to 18. 13 This wisdom have I seen also under the sun, and it
seemed great unto me: 14 There was a little city, and few men within it, and
there came a great King against it, and besieged it, and built great bulwarks
against it. 15 Now there was found in it a poor wise man, and he by his wisdom
delivered the city, yet no man remembered that same poor man. 16 Then said I,
wisdom is better then strength: neverthesesse the poor man's wisdom is despised,
and his words are not heard. 17 The words of wise men are heard in quiet more
then the cry of him that rules among fools. 18 Wisdom is better then weapons
of war: but one sinner destroys much good.

SOlomon having observed in, v. 11. that the battle is not to the strong;
bread is not to the wise; In these two verses he gives an instance of the
disappointment of great strength (by such a subject as was least able to resist
it) to wit, by weak means in a weak subject; and of the neglect of such a wise
man. The weak subject is, first, A little City; secondly, few men in it. The
great strength against it, first, There came a great King against it; secondly,
he besieged it; thirdly, he built great bulwarks against it, v. 14. The weak
means, A poor wise man found in the City, and by his wisdom delivered the City,
v. 15. Which act of the poor man is amplied by the slender requital of that
poor man, expressed in an argument a Diversis: yet no man remembered that poor
man, v. 15. All which passages Solomon sets forth, first, by the Adjunct,
wisdom, great wisdom, which he observed in it, v. 13. Secondly, By the wise
observations which he gathered from it: First, that wisdom is better then
strength. Secondly, That a poor man's wisdom is neglected, v. 16. Thirdly, that
the words of the wise are more heard in quiet, then the cry of a Ruler among
fools, v. 17. Fourthly, That wisdom is better then weapons of war. Fifthly,
that one sinner destroys much good, v. 18.

Doctr. It is a matter of much wisdom (or a matter affording much wisdom to the
observers of it) A little City of small strength, and few inhabitants, besieged
by a great King, with strong bulwarks, to be preserved and delivered by one
poor man; and yet the poor man to be neglected. So Abel (in Beth-maacha) by a
wise woman, 2 Samuel 20.15, etc. Samaria by Elisha, 2 Kings 7.1, etc. Jerusalem
by Isaiah, 2 Kings 19.2, etc. Thebes by Epaminondas, Lampsacum from Alexander
the great by Anaximenes, Siracuse by Archimedes, from Marcellus. Alexandria by
Anatolius from the Roman forces. See Valor. Max. l. 7. c. 3. Eusebius. lib. 7. c.
26.

Reasons of this power of wisdom: First, Gods pleasure to magnify and exalt
gifts of mind above gifts of body; as the soul it self is more excellent then
the body, Prove. 21.22. Eccles. 7.19. Secondly, From the wisdom of spiritual
wisdom, to entrust God with the cause of the City it self, 2 Chronicles. 20.12, 15.
Prove. 18.10. [ Prove. 30.26.]

Reason of neglect of the wise poor: First, the envy of the rich. Secondly, the
conceit of his want of means to get any wisdom but by some chance happening on a
good course, Matthew. 13.54, 55. Thirdly, from the vanity incident to all the
good things of man by the fall, Eccles. 1.2. Fourthly, from the wisdom of God
to prevent a poor wise man's pride.

Use 1. To teach wise men to observe the greater wisdom in the greater passages
of humane affairs, by weaker means verse. 13. Where God sows much, we should
reap the more.

Use 2. To teach us Wisdom is better then strength or weapons of war, v. 16, 18.

Use 3. To observe the neglected condition of a poor wise man, v. 15, 16.

Use 4. To observe a time of silence and quietness wherein to utter words of
wisdom.

Use 5. To teach us that as one poor wise man may do his Country much good;
so may a sinner by his wickedness do his Country much hurt, v. 18. Achan did
much hurt, Josh. 7.11, 12. Jonah also, though a good man, yet erring out of the
way, and wandering in sin, Jonah 1.11.

Reason. From the contagion of sin, 1 Cor. 5.6. The troublers of Israel, are
the sinners in Zion, 1 Kings 18.17, 18.

Eccles. 10.1. 1 Dead flies cause the ointment of the apothecary to send forth
a stinking savor; so does a little folly him that is in reputation for wisdom
and honor.


SOlomon having showed the vanity incident to the wisdom of a poor man, to wit,
1. To be neglected, not heard. Secondly, if heard, and followed, yet he to be
forgotten, chap. 9. v. 15, 16. In this verse he shows the vanity incident to
the wise man, who is also honorable, to a man in reputation for wisdom and
honor, which is, to be blemished with a little folly; and that little folly to
be like a dead fly corrupting a precious box of Ointment. So this little folly
to corrupt and blemish the excellency of wisdom in an honorable person:

In the Text three things are compared with three: First, a man of reputation
for wisdom and honor, with the precious Ointment of an Apothecary. Secondly,
a little folly, with a dead fly. Thirdly, the evil which a little folly does to
such a wise honorable man, with the evil which a dead fly does to precious
ointment; which is double, (...) causes it to putrify, (...) causes it to
send forth a putrified savor.

Doctr. As an honorable wise man is like an Apothecaries precious ointment;
and a little folly like to a dead fly: So is the corruption which a dead fly
causes in that ointment, like the hurt which a little folly does to an
honorable wise man.

The Apothecaries precious Ointment excels, First, in quality, as Odor,
John 12.3. perfuming a whole house, Cant. 1.3. and Color, Psalm. 104.15.
Secondly, in manner of skilful confection. Thirdly, in efficacy or virtue, for
healing and refreshing, Prove. 27.9. So does the wisdom of an honorable wise
man excel, first, in odor; it sends a sweet perfume all the Country over,
1 Kings 3.28. Secondly, In color, causing the face to shine like an ointment,
Eccles. 8.1. Acts 6.15. Thirdly, in manner of skilful confection: Fourthly, in
efficacy and virtue, Prove. 27.9.

A little folly is like a dead fly; like, first, in quantity; both little.
Secondly, in quality; both of them, 1. Base and contemptible; 2. Unprofitable;
3. Noisome and troublesome, Psalm 78.45. Exodus 8.24. A living fly is no better;
a dead fly baser, [as in a like, Eccles 9.4.] As a dead fly causes a precious
Ointment to putrify, and to send forth an evil savor: So does a little folly
corrupt and dishonor an honorable wise man.

Pineda marvelled how a dead fly should so much corrupt a precious Ointment,
seeing he found it not so in his country. But there is a difference, first, of
flies; which in Eastern Countries are many of them more venomous and noisome,
Psalm 78.45. Secondly, of Ointments, which in those Countries are more pure and
precious: which in ours are more gross and greasy; they anointed their heads
and faces, Matthew. 6.17. Eccles. 9.7.

Solomon's folly in loving strange women cotrupted his spirit to take them as
wives and concubines: then to tolerate their Religion: then to adorn it with
countenance of goodly Temples, and with maintenance of Priests and Sacrifices.
Whence the Mount Olivet, on which their Temples were built, was called the
mountain of corruption, 2 Kings 23.13. yea it corrupted all Israel and Judah.

A pang of folly in David, so weakened his reputation, as offended all Israel
with the savor of it, and caused a great rebellion against him.

A little folly in Asa banishing the Prophet, in Jehosophat making affinity
with Ahab, in Vzziah offering Incense, in Hezekiah showing his Treasures, in
Josiah going to war against Pharaoh Necho, corrupted, and dishonored the
Government of them all.

Reason 1. From a more observable desilement of the most pure and precious
things, as in the purest clear linen the smallest spot is soon espied.

Reason 2. From the vanity which God sees it meet the best gifts and parts
should be stained withal, Isai. 23.9.

Use 1. To exhort men of place and honor to seek after wisdom; both together
makes them as precious Ointment. Folly in dignity is a great deformity,
Eccles. 10.6. Prove. 26.1, 8.

Use 2. To teach wise men not to bear with themselves in little follys, much
less in great.

Use 3. To teach wise and honorable men to make account of an hour and power
of temptation, and to deny and suspect themselves, that God may be pleased to
keep them from falling shamefully.

Eccles. 10.2, 3. 2 A wise man's heart is at his right hand, but a fools heart
at his left. 3 Yea also when he that is a fool walks by the way, his wisdom
fails him, and he says to every one that he is a fool.

THese words prevent an Objection which might arise from the former.

Object. If the wisdom of the poor, and of the rich are subject to such
vanities (as have been showed in the end of the former Chapter, and in the
beginning of this) then where is the excellency of wisdom above folly?

Answ. In two things; first, in placing of the heart; the heart of the wise is
at his right hand; of the fool at his left, v. 2. Secondly, In the failing of a
fools heart in his ordinary course and way, and thereby bewraying himself
openly to be a fool, verse 3.

Doctr. 1. There is a great difference between a wise man and a fool, in the
placing and carrying of their hearts. It is not to be thought there is any
observable difference in the heart of a wise man and of a fool; for then some
Anatomists would have observed it. But the heart is put Metonymically for the
mind, judgment, and will of a man. And the Right and Left hand are put
Metaphorically. The meaning is, First, A wise man does not aim at sinister
ends in his work, Matthew. 6.3. He aymeth sincerely at the glory of God, and the
good of himself and others. A foolish Pharisee (Christ calls them so, Matthew.
23.17, 19.] he does all to be seen of men, Matsh. 6.2, 5, 16. 2 Kings 10.16. or
for some selfish end or other. Secondly, A wise man carries his thoughts and
works with strength and dexterity. As the Right hand is counted the stronger
then the Left: so what is wrought with strength is attributed to the Right
hand, Psalm. 118.15, 16, and 98, 1. Thirdly, A wise man may be said to have his
heart at his Right hand, in that he takes all things in the fairest and best
sense from God or man, Psalm. 119.75. Matthew. 1.19. On the contrary a fool makes
a sinister construction of that which is well meant from God or man, 2 Samuel
10.2, 3, Eccles. 8.11. Psalm. 50.21. Romans 2.4, 5: Fourthly, The Right hand is a
place of pre-eminence and blessing, Genesis 48.14, 17, 18, 19. In which respect a
wise man takes ways of preferment to highest honor before the most high,
Prove. 15.24, and 10, 20, 21, and 12, 26. Matthew. 25.33. And for carrying on
their hearts in their course of life, there is great difference, between the
wise and the fool. The fool in his ordinary and daily course of life, (which in
verse 3. is called his way) his heart fails him, and fails him so far
that he expresses and discovers his folly openly to all that observe him.
Not that Solomon here speaks of a natural fool, that as he walks in the
Streets, discovers to all that he is a fool by his looks and gesture: Solomon
seldom or never speaks of them in all his writings: but he speaks of a
carnal wicked man, destitute both of spiritual wisdom, and wisdom fit for his
calling: And the words may according to the Text be translated, yea also as he
that is a fool walks in his way, his heart fails him, and he says to all
men he is a fool, Psalm. 36.1. 2 Timothy 3.9. 1 Timothy 5.24, 25,

Reason 1. From the deep deceitfulness and weakness of the heart unless the
Lord dwell in it, strengthen it, keep it, and guide it; Jer. 17.9. God is the
strength of the godly wise man's heart, Psalm. 73.26. But in an hypocrite (much
more in an open wicked man,) his heart is empty at his best: and being empty,
Satan will soon repossesse him, and hurry him to open offenses and
miscarriages, Matthew. 12.44, 45.

Reason 2. From the failing of the heart the way will be openly vain, and
foolish, and wicked. Text.

Use 1. To teach us not to neglect wisdom, though a poor man's wisdom be
despised, and he forgotten: and an honorable man's wisdom is corrupted with
some dead and stinking fly, some time or other. For though this be true, yet
there is great pre-eminence in a wise man above a fool, as both these verses
show.

Use 2. For trial of a wise man and a foolish, according to the different
placing of a man's heart on his right hand or left. [This to be amplified
according to the estate of the present Auditory.]

Use 3. To teach us not to trust in our own hearts, we are then fools, Prove.
28.26. Our hearts are empty naturally; and empty hearts will fail us and
proclaim our folly. It is good to have our hearts filled with Christ, with his
spirit, and with his grace, Ephesians. 3.17. Heb, 13.9.

Eccles. 10.4. 4. If the spirit of the ruler rise up against thee, leave not
thy place: for yielding pacifieth great offenses.


SOlomon having observed, that one dead fly and one little strain of folly
staineth the reputation and honor of wise men of high place, he proceeds in
the rest of this Chapter to declare what those dead flies or vanities be in
particular throughout this Chapter. But to prevent disloyal thoughts, which
thereupon might arise in the heart or carriage of Subjects toward their
Governors, he hedgeth in his discourse with a twofold direction and
instruction. Of loyalty, 1. One in the beginning of his discourse, v 4. 2 The
other in the end of it, verse 20.

Parts of the verse, 1 A direction to a right and loyal carriage of a man's
self in case the spirit of the Ruler rise up against a man; If so, yet leave
not thy place. 2. A reason of it, from the benefit of a better course: for
yiedling pacifieth great offenses.

Doct. 1. The rising of the spirit of a Prince against a Subject, does not give
leave to a Subject to leave his place; but calls him rather to lay down his
spirit. The spirit of a Prince is not a sudden passion, but an habitual Bent of
displeasure. [For spirit is an habitual Bent, Prove. 18.14. Number. ^.14.] His
place is not meant of place of habitation chiefly, for in times of deep and
bitter displeasure, ^t is lawful to leave the country, 1 Kings 19.1, 2, 3,
etc. John 4.1, 3. Nor the place of a man's office, if the office be civil, and
such as a man may lay down and leave without sin against God, but detriment to
himself. For if the leaving of a man's civil office may prevent the danger of
his life, it were better laid down with safety then kept with displeasure and
perril. But by place is meant the relation of a Subject, his Loyalty, 1 Samuel
24.4, and Chap. 26, 11. Place is by the Septuagint translated (...), Job. 38.12.

Reason 1. From the ground and foundation of Authority and subjection between
Prince and People: Which is, First, An Ordinance of God, Romans 13.1, 2.
Secondly, The Covenant of the people confirmed by the Oath of God between them,
Eccles. 8.2. 2 Samuel 5.3. 2 Kings 11.17. Until therefore the body of the people
did find such great cause of complaint of their Ruler as to have broken the
fundamental Articles of their Covenant, the Rulers transgression of his course
and duty to the Subject is no cause of discharge of the Subjects duty to him.

Reason 2. From the benefit and efficacy of yiedling, it pacifieth great wrath,
Text. Yiedling in soft answers, Prove. 15.1. And in actual submission to his
will, Prove. 25.15.

Use 1. To teach us not to rise up in our spirits against Rulers, if they
should rise up against us. It is not lawful for us to leave our place of
subjection and Loyalty: which dissolveth the relation or the exercise of it.
Which argues it is not lawful for servants to run from their Masters, for
therein they dissolve their relations, Genesis 16.6, etc. 1 Pet. 2.18, etc.
unless there be peril of life or limb to the servant.

Quest. Whether may it be lawful for a State to rise against their King or
Ruler?

Answ. First, not for every injury to the State, which may stand with the
safety of it. Secondly, in atrocious evil they may oppose him, 1 Samuel 14.44,
45. and 22.17, Thirdly, Tyrant sine Titulo, they may depose, as Athaliah, 2
Kings 11.12, 16. Fourthly, Subverters of the safety of the State, they are
first by all gentle means to Reduce and heal. If all other remedies be
hopeless, they may Curare, Ne quid Republica Detrimenti capiat.

Use 2. To quiet and subject our hearts to an holy yielding unto God in all
Afflictions, Psalm 119.75. 1 Samuel 3.18. 2 Kings 20.19.

Eccles. 10.5, 6, 7. 5 There is an evil which I have seen under the sun, as an
error which proceeds from the ruler. 6 Folly is set in great dignity, and
the rich sit in low place. 7 I have seen servants upon horses, and Princes
walking as servants upon the earth.

IN these verses Solomon notes, the first of those dead flies which will
putrify the reputation and wisdom of Princes; and that is, the mis-imployment
of their favors and honors. Where,

First, the men advanced are, 1. Fools, yea folly it self. 2. Poor men, in
opposition to rich. 3. Servants. Those debased are, 1. Wise, in opposition to
fools. 2. Rich, not only, in outward estate, but in parts and gifts fit for
government. 3. Princes.

Secondly, the mis-imployment or misplacing is, 1. Folly in great dignity; Rich
in low place. 2. Princes walking as servants; servants riding on hors-back like
Princes.

Thirdly, the cause of this: the face or countenance of the Prince to the one
against the other.

Fourthly, the vanity of it; it is, 1. An error. 2. An evil error.

Doctr. 1. It is an error, and an evil error, that proceeds from the face
of a Ruler, the advancement of mean and weak men, and the debasement of able
and noble persons. Doeg an Edomite advanced, 1 Samuel 22.9. Haman an Amalakite,
Hest. 3.1.

Reason of this error. First, fellowship of Princes in their education with
vain persons, 1 Kings 12.8. It was a great error in Solomon, to make no better
choice of his sons School-fellows, and Play-fellows. Secondly, Princes
indulgent respect to servants brought up under them, Prove. 29.21. Thirdly, the
servitude of some Princes to their passions and lusts; and the serviceablenesse
of some base men to Princes herein. So Doeg to Saul's cruelty and enmity against
David and the Priests, 1 Samuel 22.9, etc.

Reason of the evil of the error. First, it is uncomely, Prove. 19.10. and
26.1. As if the weak and uncomely members of the body should be set in highest
place, to open view. Secondly, it is burdensome to the whole state of a
Commonwealth, the rule of a servant, Prove. 30.21, 22.

Reason of the proceeding of this error from the face of the Ruler. From the
efficacy of the Kings face, or countenance in the advancement or debasement of
persons about him. It is not the desert of an unworthy person that honors
him, but only the Kings countenance, Prove. 16.15.

Use 1. To teach men to prevent this error, by choosing for their children
good companions (as much as may be) at School, at play.

Use 2. To teach our people here (whose government is elective) to make choice
of men of greatest worth for wisdom, for sufficiency, for birth.

Use 3. To look at it as more safe for the Commonwealth to put the eminency of
honor and power rather in the hand of the Magistracy then in the Commonalty.

Use 4. To teach us to prefer God and his ways above our selves, and our wills.
He is the Prince of Princes, our wisdom is folly.

Eccles. 10.8.9.10. 8 He that diggeth a pit shall fall into it, and whosoever
breaks an hedge, a serpent shall bite him. 9 Whosoever removes stones, shall be
hurt therewith, and he that cleaves wood, shall he endangered thereby. 10 If
the iron be blunt, and he do not whet the edge, then must he put to more
strength.

IN these verses Solomon reckons up, in pithy and Proverbial speeches and
parables, other dead flies found in Princes and Statesmen, though otherwise in
reputation for their wisdom and honor. The former verses declared the First
dead fly, the mis-imployment of Princes favors and honors, verse 8.9, 10.
The Second is the digging of a Pit for innocent and well-deserving men to fall
into, an usual practice in Statesmen, but dangerous: Otherwise digging of a Pit
for a wicked guilty man to fall into, is safe; 1 Kings 2.36, to 46. The Third
is breaking an hedge, that is some defense set about Church or Commonwealth,
whether Counsel, Laws, or Guard of military men, verse 8. Fourthly, Removing
stones] that is, Massy and unweildy persons, as Zach. 12.3. Fifthly, Cleaving
of wood] that is, making division between persons firmly and closely
compacted, verse 9. Sixthly, Blunt affronts put upon people by a weak arm, it
is as striking with blunt Iron, without much strength put to, verse 10. To
help this, he directs to the use of wisdom, which is profitable to direct,
to set an edge upon business, verse 10.

Doctr. 1. The digging of a Pit, The breaking of an Hedge, The removing of
Stones, The cleaving of Wood, and Blunt affronts upon the people by a weak
Arm, are all of them dead flies usually found in Statesmen, but always
dangerous.

The digging of a Pit] To wit, for an innocent or well-deserving man to fall
into, Psalm. 7.15. So Saul plotted against David, 1 Samuel 18.17. but fell into
that Pit himself, 1 Samuel 31.3, 6. So Haman prepared a Galhouse for Mordecay,
but was hanged on it himself, Esth. 7.9, 10.

The breaking of an Hedge] is the violating of some defense set for the guard
or safety of a people, or state, as an Hedge is set about a Pasture of Cattle.
Such an Hedge, dangerous to be broken, are Laws and liberties, Jer. 34.11: to
17. Counselors and Parliaments, 1 Kings 12.13. and Faithful and valiant guard
of military men, 1 Samuel 18.13, and 19, 1:

Removing of stones] That is, of Massy and unweildy persons, 1 Samuel 19.11. 1 Samuel: 18.13. Prove, 26.27. Zach. 12.3.

Cleaving of wood] Making division between persons firmly and closes
compacted, may soon endanger him that does it.

Blunt Iron, the edge not whetted, requires more strength; and if strength be
wanting, the blunt stroke or affront is dangerous, 1 Kings 12.13, 14.

Reason 1. Of their falling into a Pit that dig it, from Gods righteousness
and wisdom to take the wily in their own craftiness, Job 5.12, 13. Prove. 3.29.

Reason 2. Of a Serpents biting them that break the Hedge, from Gods
establishment of ancient Bounds, Prove. 23.10, 11. and from the old Serpents
power when men go out of their calling, as in our callings Angels guard us,
Psalm. 91.11, 12.

Reason 3. Of hurt by removing stones, It is a tempting of God to presume
beyond our strength.

Reason 4. Of hurt by cleaving wood, from Gods hatred of sowing discord, Prove.
6.16, 19.

Reason 5. Of hurt by blunt affronts, from Gods wrathful resistance of the
proud, Job 40.11, 12.

Use 1. To learn Statesmen wisdom to direct all their affairs.

Eccles. 10.11. But wisdom is profitable to direct. 11 Surely the serpent
will bite without enchantment, and a babbler is no better.

BUt wisdom is profitable [or excellent] to direct, If the Serpent do bite
without enchantment, there is no profit to the Master of the tongue. In the
former verse Solomon had observed sundry vanities (as it were indeed flies)
found in men of Reputation for Wisdom and Honor. And here before he proceeds
to declare any more of these dead flies, he interserteth a remedy to prevent
such miscarriages, which is wisdom.

But wisdom (says he) is profitable to direct, as an Antidote against all the
former dead flies; which he proves; 1. By the unprofitableness of words, when
hurt is done: If the Serpent bite without enchantment, in vain are all great
words, sweet words, afterward, v. 11.2. By the effect of wisdom, and the
words thereof: The words of a wise man are grace, v. 12. But the lips of a
fool, First, they swallow up the Speaker, v. 12. Secondly, They breath, 1. In
the beginning foolishness. 2. In the end mischievous madness, v. 13. Thirdly,
They multiply many matters; for so the word signifies many projects, and those
such as leave men doubtful and in suspense what will be the end or issue of
all, v. 14. Fourthly, They weary themselves and one another in their undue
courses and projects. And this amplified by the cause thereof, their ignorance
of the principles or high way-road (broad way) of Government, expressed in a
Proverbial speech, because he knows not (that is none of them knows) the
way to the City, v. 16.

The 11th verse I turn, If the Serpens bite without enchantment, there is no
profit to the Master of the tongue. For so the words properly signify, and are
so translated, Eccles. 2.11. There is no profit. And the Master of the Tongue
is a man skilful in speech, able and powerful in speech; as the Master of
dreams, ( Genesis 37.19.) is a man skilful in dreams: A Master of wing ( Prove.
1.17.) is skillful in flying: A Master of horns, Dan. 8.6. is powerful in his
horns. [And so Mr. Perkins translateth this verse in his Discourse of
Witchcraft, Chap. 4. Sect. 1.

Doct. Wisdom is profitable to direct to the right avoydance of all such dead
flies as are usually found dangerous in Statesmen of Reputation. Or, Wisdom
is of excellent use (or profitable) etc. For the word signifies Excellency as
well as Profit; and so it is translated, Eccles. 7.12. Hence Solomon prayed for
this gift of all other, as most requisite for Government, 1 Kings 3, 9.

Reason. 1. Wisdom discerns and chooses the right end of Government, which
is, The punishment of evil doers, The praise of the good, Romans 13.4. 1 Timothy
2.2. I say, discerns and chooses; for Wisdom is not in the head only, as
discerning, but in the heart, as choosing the best good. Else, he that
discerns good, but chooses it not, is still a fool.

Reason. 2. Wisdom discerns and chooses the best means tending and
leading to those ends: As 1. Righteous Laws, Deuteronomy. 4.6, 8. 2. Wise
Counselors, 1 Kings 12.6. 3. Just Judges, 2 Chronicles. 19.5, 6, 7. Psalm 82.2, 5.
4. Valiant Soldiers, 1 Samuel 16.18. 1 Chronicles. 12.8. 1 Samuel 14.52. 5. Diligent
Improvement. First, of Earth by Husbandry, Eccles. 5.9. Prove. 14.4. 2. Of Sea
by Merchandise, 1 Kings 10.22, 23, 28, 29. Both which are wrapped up in the
cunning Artificer or Artist, Esaias 3.3.

Reason 3. Wisdom considers the estate of the people, what it will
willingly bear, and what it is able to bear, 1 Kings 12.7. Neh. 5.18.

Reason 4. Wisdom deriveth all its light and strength from the Prince of
wisdom, who is wisdom it self, the wisdom of the Father, Prove. 8.12, 15.
and so denies it self, Prove. 3.5, 6, 7.

Use 1. To teach Magistrates to lay aside all false guides in steering the
course of Government. It is not wit that is profitable to direct, Eccles. 4.13.
but wifedome. Nor favor to Favorites unfit for Government, Eccles. 10.6, 7.
Nor strength, Eccles. 9.16.

Use 2. To teach Magistrates to improve their wisdom in all the former
particulars mentioned in the Reasons.

Doctr. As a Serpent biting without enchantment cannot afterward be healed
with skilful words: so neither can a mischief befallen a Prince or People for
want of wisdom, be afterward healed by great or sweet words. The Scripture
speaks of some Serpents which will not be charmed. Psalm. 58.4, 5. Jer. 8.17.
But it implies that some may be, and are charmed by Enchanters, joining
societies cunningly with the Devil, (as the phrase is, Psalm. 58.5.) and when
they are not charmed; then they sting without interruption and without remedy
many times. So when a Prince has not used wisdom to direct his affairs, he
may be strong with a mortal mischief to himself and the state, and then
skilful words will do no good. Rehoboam neglecting to charm the peoples
discontent before hand, 1 Kings 12.13, to 19. afterward in vain came Adoram,
what words soever he gave them to gather up Tribute, verse 18. yea, in vain
were Abijams savoury words afterward, 2 Chronicles. 13.4, to 13.

Reason From the strong and venomous and Malignant inflammation which harsh and
foolish words may kindle in an understanding and free people. It was a
Malignant inflammation which brake forth from the people incensed when they
rejected the seed of David, 1 Kings 12.16.

Use 1. To observe the power of charmers by their covenant with Satan, who has
power over Serpents [and therefore they are called the power of the enemy, Luke
10.19.] Yet this power is limited, he cannot heal after biting, at least could
not then, though his commission may be enlarged since. Neither can he charm
some Serpents, Psalm. 58.5. Jer. 8.17. How much less can he charm the seed of
the woman? without special commission, and when he does bite them, It is but
the heel, Genesis 3.15.

Use 2. To show us the mighty virtue and efficacy of wisdom, that can charm
malignant, and venomous minds.

Eccles. 10. v. 12, to 15. 12. The words of a wise man's mouth are gracious: but
the lips of a fool will swallow up himself. 13 The beginning of the words of
his mouth is foolishness: and the end of his talk is mischievous madness. 14 A
fool also is full of words, a man cannot tell what shall be: and what shall be
after him, who can tell him. 15 The labor of the foolish wearieth every one of
them, because he knows not how to go to the city.

COherence see in verse 10. These words (The words of the wise man is grace)
are a Reason of what he said, verse 10. That wisdom is profitable to direct,
taken from the grace of a wise man's words, which makes the argument of force,
howsoever grace be taken.

Doctr. 1. The words of the wise (even of wise Statesmen) are grace. Of
Statesmen Solomon here speaks, from the beginning of this Chapter to the end.
And he speaks of such wisdom as is profitable to direct in state affairs,
verse 10. Their words may be said to be grace. First, As flowing from the grace
and favor of God, Psalm. 45.2. Secondly, As ministering grace to the people,
Ephesians. 4.29. 1 Kings 8, 55, to verse 61. 1 Chronicles. 29.18. At least expressing
the grace and favor of God, and the Princes favor and grace to them, Psalm.
122.6, 7, 8, 9. Esth. 10.3. seeking their wealth, speaking peace. Thirdly, As
finding acceptance with the people, Prove. 10.32. 2 Samuel 3.59. Esth. 10.3.
Accepted of the multitude of his brethren.

Doctr. 2. The words of fools (especially of foolish Statesmen) the beginning
of them is foolishness, the end of them is madness, pernicious, and
mischievous to themselves and others. And their ways are variable and of
doubtful event, and wearysome even to themselves and all men, Esth. 3.8, 9.
Hamon began his speech with a foolish complaint against better men then
himself, accusing them of that for a vice which was a virtue (to live a
separate course of life from the vain world, Numb. 23.9.) but the end of his
speech was pernicious and mischievous madness to the Jews, Esth. 3.9. and to
himself. It swallowed up himself, Esth. 7 4, 5, 6, etc. 1 Kings 12.14. It was
a foolish beginning to acknowledge his Fathers rigor, but the end of his
speech was mischievous madness to threaten more rigor. Variable in their
projects, Jer. 2.36, 37, and verse 23. Wearisome ways, Habac. 2.13. Isai.
47.13. Isai. 57.9, 10.

Reason 1. From the ignorance of such persons (foolish Statesmen) of the
principles of civil government; employed in that proverbial speech, that they
know not the way to the City, which is wont to be a broad Road way, but these
discern it not, like men that have lost their way, Psalm. 107.4, and 40.

Reason 2. From Gods rejection of them, and their ways. Psalm. 107.40. Jer.
2.37,

Use 1. To teach Magistrates to speak words of grace.

Use 2. To show the folly and danger of foolish Statesmen.

Eccles. 10.16. to 19. 16 Woe to thee, O land, when thy King is a child, and
thy princes eat in the morning. 17 Blessed art thou, O land, when thy Kings is
the some of nobles, and thy princes eat in due season, for strength, and not
for drunkenness. 18 By much slothfulness the building decays, and through
idleness of the hands, the house droppeth thorough. 19 A feast is made for
laughter, and wine makes merry, but money answers all things.

IN these words over and above all the former, Solomon observes two other
vanities incident to Statesmen, viz. Childishness and Intemperancy, or
Epicurisme. Which he amplifieth, first, By the Adjunct, woeful estate of a
land, where so it is, v. 16. Secondly, by the contrary blessed estate of such a
land whose King is the son of Nobles, and Princes eat in due season, for
strength, not for excess, v. 17. Thirdly, by the effects; which are, 1.
Remissness in government, called here, much slothfulness and idleness of
bands. And (that which easily flows from thence) the decay of the state of
the Commonwealth, expressed under the comparison of the decay of the house, v.
18. 2. Prodigal expense of money which grows from their intemperancy in
feasts, as the former did from childishness of government, v. 19.

Doctr. Is is a woeful estate of a Country or Commonwealth, where the King is
childish, and the Princes Epicures (or intemperate.) On the contrary, the State
is blessed, where the King is Noble, and the Princes temperate.

The word translated woe, does signify an Island. And because Islands were at
first more desolate, and less inhabited then the continent; therefore they
called the dolfull fowls that lodged in that Island, by the name of Islands;
such fowls, as do not affect the company of men nor beasts; as Scritchowles,
and Bitterness, and Ostriches; etc. and so the word comes to signify woeful
or woe; such a kind of woe as accompanies desolate Islands, Desolation it
self. Woe to thee O Land, whose King is childish, and whose Princes are
riotous, they shall be as a desolate Island, an habitation for scritchowles,
and every doleful bird.

A child] not so much in years; For Solomon himself was very young when he
came to the Crown; David says of him, he was young and tender, 1 Chronicles. 29.1.
Joash was but seven years old, when he began to reign, yet he ruled well all
the days of his youth, from the good council of his uncle Jehojada, 2 Chronicles.
24.1. Vzziah was but sixteen years old, yet he reigned well in his young time,
by the good counsel of Zachariah, 2 Chronicles. 26.3, 4, 5. Josiah was but eight
years old, and he surpassed them all, 2 Chronicles. 34.1. Only Manasseth, of all
the young Kings, beginning to reign at twelve years, he did evil in his youth,
2 Chronicles. 33.1.

A child therefore is rather meant childish, 1. In understanding, 1 Cor: 14.20.
2 In affection and disposition: First, cleaving to young Counselors, 1 Kings
12.8. Secondly, soon wavering in Religion, Ephesians. 4.14. Thirdly, led by sense
and sensible objects, more then by depth of judgment and reason; led by
passions and lusts of youth, pastimes and recreations, but careless of matters
of importance. Thus Rehoboam is said to be young and tender in heart, when he
was above forty one years old, 1 Kings 14.21. with 2 Chronicles. 13.7. And so indeed
Solomon expresses this childishness in slothfulness and remissness of
government, v. 18. as by eating in the morning, he expresses luxurious
feasting, v. 19.

Whose Princes eat in the morning] which implies, both the unseasonablenesse
of their eating, especially their feasting then, as v. 19. expounds it of the
morning, being the principal time of judgment, Jer. 21.12. And the excess and
riot of their eating, to wit, for gluttouy and drunkenness, rather then for
strength, as appears by the opposition of good Princes diet, v. 17.

Reason 1. From the danger of childish government to a State, as also of
riotous government. Which dangers be 1. Remissness of government or
slothfulness, whence the decay of all good in a Commonwealth, as in a house is
neglected; as decay of justice, trading, military power, and skill, honor and
reputation with foreign Princes and States; and which is worst of all, decay
in Religion, and purity thereof; whence also dropping in of contentious
corruptions into all sorts. 2. Prodigal expense of the treasure of the State
in feasting and banqueting, in Masks and Revels, where money must answer all;
and that not a purse full, or pocket full, or bag full, or chest full, but a
whole Kings Treasury; and when that fails, then illegal exactions of the
subjects estates.

The son of Nobles] not so much of Noble ancestors, for most Kings are such,
and yet their Kingdoms not always blessed. Yea sometimes they that are raised
from low estates, (as David from following the sheep) may be blessed Princes,
and the Land blessed in them. But a son of Nobles, is a Noble son, a man of a
noble spirit, or Heroes, (for from the Hebrew word Hero it seems to be
derived) are so called of whiteness, not so much for wearing white Garments,
as being bright and glorious, Viro Illustres, and clarissimi, opposed to Dark
or obscure men, Prove. 22.29.

A man of a Noble spirit, First, Notabilis, well known and approved for his
virtues, Deuteronomy. 1.13. Secondly, Of a public spirit, regards public good
ends, more then private self ends, Psalm 137.6. Thirdly, Affects rather to be
loved, then feared, and yet to be feared to with due reverence; Servile natures
are imperious and cruel: [aut servit humiliter, aut superbe dominatur] Noble
spirits (as of Lions) will parcere subjectis, be moderate in punishments,
merciful in suppliants. Fourthly, regards honor above life, much more
before money, preferring the fifth Commandment above the sixth, much more
above the eighth.

Eat in due season, 1. For time, not in the morning. 2. For measure, not for
excess in gluttony and drunkenness, but sparingly.

But for strength, 1. Of body and mind. 2. Of fitness to the duties of their
place.

Reason of the blessedness of the State by such, 1. Vigilance, and diligent
attention of such to State affairs; not suffering decays in the good of the
State; nor droppings in of the mischievous ruinous evils, Secondly, provident
frugality, in preserving the Treasure of the State, 2 Chronicles. 9.27. 1 Kings
10.21.

Use 1. To teach us what to pray for in behalf of our native Country, 1. What
evils to be avoided. 2. What blessings to be desired.

Use 2. To teach us what manner of Magistrates are to be chosen in our little
Commonwealth, and how they are to walk. It is fellowship with Christ, and
living by faith in him, that girdeth us up to our callings, sitting loose from
the head breeds a paralytick distemper in the body.

Use 3. To teach all men a right use of meats and drinks; Large breakfasts
break the necks of our strength, and of our callings. The end of feasts should
be for strength, and so moderate as our money may answer.

Use 4. To teach householders to beware of slothfulness and ill husbandry; it
will ruin our houses: for from thence is the comparison here fetched.

Use 5. To teach us, a wise use of money; To be responsable to all our expenses.

Eccles. 10. v. 20. 20 Curse not the king, no not in thy thought, and curse not
the rich in thy bedchamber: for a bird of the aier shall carry the voice, and
that which has wings, shall tell the matter.


SOlomon having declared many vanities (like dead flies) found in Princes and
Statesmen; He now directs wise subjects to some such Christian duties as are
fit to be practiced at all times; but most needful and seasonable to be
attended to in evil and dangerous times, in this and the whole Context of the
next Chapter. As first, To beware of cursing Princes and Statesmen, however
corrupt their government be, v. 20. Secondly, To bestow our Talents liberally
whilst time serves, before evil come upon the earth, chap. 11.1, 2, etc.
Thirdly, to be diligent in our callings early and late, v. 4, 5, 6.

Parts two: First, a commandment, forbidding to curse the King; or rich and
great men, his Princes and Officers. And this prohibition amplified by the
strictness of it, forbidding the cursing of them; where it might be supposed to
be done with greatest secrecy and safety: not the King, in thy thought; the
rich, in thy bedchamber. Secondly, a Reason, from the danger of discovery of
it, by speedy and unlikely means: for the birds of the air, the master of
wings will declare the word or matter.

Doctr. Though the King should be childish, and Princes intemperate and
sloathful, and both of them suffer the State to fall to decay, yet it is
neither lawful nor safe for private men to revile or curse either of them; no,
not in the greatest, Exodus 22.28. where the prohibition is general without
restraint to good Magistrates.

For opening of the point to be shown; First, How far a private subject may
go in such a case. Secondly, How, far he may not go. A private Subject may,
First, Conceive of a King as he sees him plainly to be, and so of other
Statesmen. And accordingly (as his calling requires it) he may reprove them
all to their faces, 2 Samuel 12.9. 1 Samuel 13.13, 14. 1 Kings 18.18, and 21, 20. 2 Chronicles. 19.2. Ezekiel. 21.25. This is not to villifie or curse him, but to restore
and heal them, or at least to leave them without excuse. Secondly, He may
complain of their wickedness to God and confess it, Dan. 9.8. Thirdly, He
may speak of it to Subjects so far as to prevent the corrupting of them by
the authority or example of their Governors, 2 Kings 6.32. Hos. 5.11, and 7,
3, 5. Public persons and the whole people may resist them in evil, 2 Chronicles.
26.17, 18. 1 Samuel 14.44.45: But none may, First, Despise their callings or
governments which are of God, Jude 8. Secondly, They may not revile them, nor
make them worse then they be; (...) is to make light, as metals by clipping or
washing, 2 Samuel 16.7, 8. David was no son of Belial, nor bloody to the house of
Saul, though so to Vriah. Thirdly, Imprecate or wish evil to them, Matthew. 5.44.
a fortiori.

Object. Did not Paul revile Ananias? Acts 23.3.

Answ. He knew him to be a Judge (verse 2. Sit thou to judgment? etc.)
though he knew him, not to be the high Priest. But he did not revile him but
reproved him gravely for his Hypocrisy, a whited wall; and Iniquity,
commanding him to be smitten against Law: And prophesied his destruction. Nor
does he say he would not have said so much to him, if he had known him to be
the high Priest, for Jeremy did say so much to Pashur, Jer. 20.1. to 6. Though
the high Priesthood was then accomplished in Christ: yet while the Temple
stood, the shadows were to be buried with honor, but this was no dishonor to
his place to reprore him justly.

Reason 1. They are by their place Fathers of the Country, Isai. 49.23. and
Fathers (though wicked) are not to be despised nor cursed. Exodus 21.17. Prove.
30.17.

Reason 2. They bear the name, and place, and Image of Gods sovereignty and
authority, Exodus 22.28. Psalm: 82.6.

Reason 3. They are heads of the whole body of the State, 1 Samuel 15.17. And so
in cursing them we curse our selves and the whole State.

Reason 4. From the danger which will redound to our selves by discovery of our
words. Princes have long ears, and quicsighted eyes [Birds of the Aire] are
put hyperbollically for unlikely means, not so fitly expounded Angels: for we
do not read of their Ministry in that kind, though a spirit of prophecy has
done as much, 2 Kings 6.11, 12. Nor Devils though they be called Fowls of the
Air, Matthew. 13, 4, 19. But if they had a commission so to do, it would
disturb all States. But the saying is verified, First, Sometimes in Birds
occasionally discovering secrets, as the Swallow revealed Besrus his murder of
his Father: who as he sat by the fire with his neighbors, the swallows
chirping and singing above in the chimney, he proked them down and killed
them; and when they that sat by him found fault with him for it, as an
unnatural cruelty, he excused himself, that the burden of their song was a
burden to him, which was, Besrus has slain his Father, whence he being
apprehended and brought before the Magistrates, confessed the murder and was
executed. So Ibici Grues discovered the murder of the Poet Ibicus; whence the
Proverb, Ibici Grues. Secondly, Sometimes in words flying like winged Fowls;
flying in the mouths of idle talkers or indiscret speakers; Of spies or
promooters: And of faithful Subjects, Esth. 2.21, 22, 23.

Use 1. To observe the divine authority of Gods word and the spiritual
Sovereignty thereof, putting a law upon our very thoughts, which no law of man
can do, 2 Cor. 10.4.

Use 2. To teach Magistrates to be the more careful of preserving Gods honor,
since he is careful of preserving theirs, even in the secret Clossets of their
Subjects. What a fearful ingratitude were it in a Prince to curse and swear
and blaspheme the name of God, who would have them not cursed, no not in secret.

Use 3. To teach us to observe Gods care of our safety, who does prevent us
with such wary cautions, least we fall into danger unexpectly. We therefore
ought to be the more regardful of the safety of his honor, and of his
Ordinances.

Use 4. To take up this lesson and Counsel of Solomon, not to meddle out of our
callings in State matters to the provocation of Princes. Yea, to bridle our
Tongues, though Princes be not such public blessings as were to be wished. How
much more ought we to be far off from reviling or villifying good
Magistrates? God took it ill at Mirians hand and Aarons, Numb. 12.1, 2, 8, 9.
and worse at the hands of Corah, and his company: Numb. 16.3, to 33.

Eccles. 11.1, 2, 3. 1 Cast thy bread upon the waters for thou shall find it
after many days. 2 Give a portion to seven, and also to eight, for thou
know not what evil shall be upon the earth. 3 If the clouds be full of
rain, they empty themselves upon the earth: and if the tree fall toward the
South, or toward the north, in the place where the tree falls, there it shall
be.

COherence, see above in Chap. 10. verse 20. Solomon having showed sundry
several vanities, which (like dead flies) are found in Statesmen, he proceeds
to direct his wise Subjects to some such Christian duties as are requisito at
all times, but especially in such dangerous times as the vanity of great men
are wont to bring upon a State, from verse 20. of Chap. 10. to the end of the
eighth, Discourse of the vanity of the estate of the creatures, till we come to
conclude the whole Book. As First, To beware of cursing Princes and Statesmen,
how corrupt soever their Government be: the better to provide for our own
safety, Chap. 10.20. Secondly, To be the more liberal to pious and charitable
uses in regard of the troubles coming upon the Land, where such misgovernment
is found, Chap. 11.1, 2, 3. Thirdly, To be the more diligent and fruitsul in
the duties of our calling, verse 4.5, 6. Fourthly, To break off a course of
sin, and to hasten repentance, and turning unto God, howsoever the time be,
verse 7. to verse 8. of Chap. 12. Whereupon Solomon concludes the whole Book,
Chap. 12. verse 9, to 14. The Text is an exhortation to liberality, or
Beneficence, Cast thy Bread, Give a Portion, etc. Which is amplified by a
twofold state of the Subject; First, By the fleeting estate of the Subject,
like waters, verse 2. Secondly, By the variety of subject persons or multitude
of them, to 7. and 8, verse 2. And confirmed by four motives; First, From the
recompense thereof at last, in fullness of days thou shall find it verse 1.
Secondly, From the uncertainty of future calamities threatening the State; for
thou know not what evil shall be upon the country, verse 2. Thirdly, From
the example of the Clouds, who, when they are full, empty themselves upon the
Earth, verse 3. Fourthly, From the certainty of the rest or abode of a benefit
where it is bestowed, set forth by the similitude of a Tree lying where it
falls, verse 3.

Doctr. 1. When dangerous times hang over the public State, it is a point of
holy wisdom to be liberal and bountiful to charitable and pious uses,
especially there, where there is least hope of recompense in man's eye: Bread
cast upon the face of the waters is utterly lost in man's reason; it will either
sink or swim away. Yet cast thy Bread there especially in dangerous times,
when thou know not what evils are coming upon the Land. There be six or
seven properties of Alms Deeds, or other good offices of Christian love, and
bounty, which Solomon comprehends (even all of them in these words.) First,
to be doing good readily and roundly, not so as if a gift, or good work stuck
in a man's fingers: employed in the word Cast, not give only, or draw out, but
cast. God loves a cheerful giver, 2 Cor. 9.7. Secondly, To do it usefully and
helpfully, cast thy Bread, not stones, not scorpions, not scraps, not refuse:
but such things as may do true good, may be a staff and support to others, as
Bread. Bread (in Matthew. 6.11.) is put for all profitable outward things.
Thirdly, to do it justly of a man's own, not others; not to rob one to succor
another; give the bread; Prove. 5.16, 17. Isai. 61.8. Pay debts first, give
after. Fourthly, To do it freely without hope of recompense from them on whom
you cast your bread. Bread cast on water will either sink or swim away, Luke
14.13, 14. By waters is not here meant locus irriguus, moist and fruitful
ground, as Esaias 32, 20. for there it is not said besides all waters (where such
places are fruitful:) but upon the face of the waters. Nor here meant watery
faces, weeping for want, though that be part of the meaning, Fifthly, To do it
sincerely, without aim of vainglory. This bread thus cast upon the face of the
waters, stays not to be seen of men, but either sinketh or swimmeth away.
Bread given as the Pharisees did for vainglory, is cast rather upon pillars of
Marble, or of Brass, rather then upon fleeting waters. Sixthly, to do it
frequently and often, not rarely, and to a few; give a portion to seven, and
also to eight, v. 2. Seven put for many, 1 Samuel 2.5. Micah 5.5. A good man
disperseth his beneficence, to wit, to many, Psalm. 112.9. The larger the field
is, wherein seed is scattered the more hope of a plentiful harvest. Seventhly,
to do it wisely and discreetly; Give a portion to seven, and also to eight,
implies, 1. Not all to others, leaving none for home; but give a part. 2. Not
all to some, none to others, but a part to seven, and also to eight. 3. Not a
Pittance, but a portion; such a proportion as whereon a poor man may work, and
occupy, to do some good withal, as with a portion.

Reason 1. From the recompense; For in multitude of days thou shall find it.
Text. Which implies, First, length of days, promised to men fruitful this
way: which often holds in proper speech, Psalm. 34, 12, 14. Do good, and it
is a way to see good days long, Dan. 4.27. Liberal men seldom die young.
Abraham lived long, Genesis 25.7, 8. Psahn 41.2. Secondly, if they should dye
sooner, their children will find it, Psalm. 37.25, 26. Thirdly, sometimes
themselves find speedy recompense in the same kind, 1 Kings 17.13 to 16.
Fourthly, sometimes they find it with usury, or advantage in spiritual and
eternal grace and glory, Luke 16, 10, etc. Gal. 6.6 to 9. 1 Timothy 6.18, 19. 2 Timothy 1.16, etc.

Reason 2. From the uncertainty of suture calamities, or rather certainty of
their coming, but uncertainly in what kind. Text, v. 2. And therefore first,
it is good to be giving, whilst we have it, least all be swept away in a deluge
of Public calamity. Secondly, it is wisdom by this means to prolong
tranquillity, Dan. 4.27. Thirdly, it is seasonable to prepare against a storm,
Psalm 41.1, 3.

Reason 3. From the example of the clouds, which being full of water, pour
down rain, Text verse 3. and that both upon earth and Sea. Not like rich men,
who the more rich they grow, grow the more niggardly, and give more sparingly
then the poorer sort. Yea, the clouds by pouring out rain regain it again both
from the Sea and earth, by ascending vapors; and so do liberal men gain by
bounty, Prove. 11.25.

Reason 4. From the uncertainty of the rest of a benefit, where it is bestowed:
as a tree rests where it falls, Text verse. 3. Benefit will be reaped from
thence to thee, though they should not be the better for it, Isay 49.4, 5.
Psalm. 35, 13. how much more when they do reap benefit by our benificence, Job
29.13. and 31.20.

Use 1. To exhort to unwearied and abundant fruitfulness in all these kinds, by
all these Reasons, as so many motives. Prove. 19.17. Luke 6.38.

Eccles. 11.4.5.6. 4 He that observes the wind, shall not sow, and he that
regards the clouds, shall not reap. 5 As thou know not what is the way of
the spirit, nor how the bones do grow in the womb of her that is with child:
even so thou know not the works of God who makes all. 6 In the morning sow
thy seed, and in the evening withhould not thine hand: for thou know not
whether shall prosper, either this or that, or whether they both shall be alike
good.

SOlomon in regard of the dangers of the-times, when Kings are childish, and
Princes humerous, exhorted to liberality in v. 1, 2, 3. which was the second
duty he inferred upon that occasion. In these words he presses still the same,
but with an enlargement unto all faithfulness and diligence in any duty of a
man's calling, especially in such dangerous times; which is a third improvement
of such evil times. To set forward this duty, he removes a doubt which might
hinder a man from Benificence and fruitfulness in his course and calling. The
doubt is taken either from the sear of some danger, or danger that might befall
a man in so doing, which he expresses under a proverbial comparison, taken
from husbandmen, who for fear of foul weather do sometimes neglect some duty
of husbandry in seed time or harvest, v. 4. Or else, from some difficulty,
which sometimes accompany Christian and holy, and great undertakings of duty,
especially such duties as may help forward Reformation in such times.

To the former he answers, v. 4. That such fears of damage and danger are
more dangerous then the hurt we fear: For they will prevent the performance of
all good duties, and the recompense of that performance: As an husbandman that
observes the wind shall never sow, and he that observes the clouds shall
never reap, v. 4.

To the latter he answers, by opposing the strange and secret assistance, and
success, and deliverance which God gives unto men in the duties of their
calling. Which he amplifieth by a comparison from the like secret assistance
and deliverance which God gives to the child fashioned in the womb, both in
the framing of his spirit (or soul) and in the setting and ordering of his
bones; which is a strange, yet ordinary secret in nature, like unto which all
the works which a man undertaketh in his calling are fashioned and wrought of
God, who works all, v. 5. And thus it comes to pass, when God is pleased
to put to his helping hand to us in the works of our calling; otherwise nothing
prospers in our hand.

From both which Solomon infers an exhortation to diligence, and
fruitfulness in our calling, directly contrary to the former doubts and
difficulties. The Objector propounded doubts and difficulties, and thereupon
neglected to sow. But Solomon infers a contrary conclusion; therefore to sow
more abundantly and diligently. In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening
let not thy hand rest, or cease. Reason whereof he gives, from the uncertainty
of the event or issue, reserved of God to this or that duty or work, For thou
know not whether shall prosper, this or that; or whether both shall be alike
good, v. 6.

Doctr. He that shall be discouraged from Beneficence in his course, and from
faithfulness in his calling, by doubts and fears of uncertain dangers and
damages, shall never do good in this world, nor receive good in the world that
is to come.

He that observes the wind] that is, so observes it, as to forbear sowing.

Shall never sow] that is, never do good in this life, which is a time of
sowing.

He that observes the clouds] which are as uncertain signs of bad weather, as
the wind.

He shall never reap] to wit, any recompense of his work, in the other world,
which is the harvest time chiefly, Matthew. 13.39. though there is also an
haryest time of reaping even in this world, Prove. 11.31. As if a man shall be
loath to cast his bread upon the waters, for fear of sickness, old age, store
of children growing on, the unsetledness of the times, etc. Such an one shall
both lose his seed, his good work, and his harvest of reward from God. As the
Husbandman that keeps his Corn in his Garner or Barn, for fear of sowing in
doubtful weather, shall both lose his crop, and in time vermin and other
casualty will consume his grane in his barn.

Reason 1. From the uncertainty of the events of all endeavors, in an ordinary
course. Text, v. 6, Act. 20.22. God so providing that the godly should live by
faith; and the wicked should either first, grow unprofitable in their Talents,
because God is an hard master, Matthew. 25.24. Secondly, grow hardened, either in
pride, if they prosper, Amos 6.13. Habac. 1.16. Or in discontent if they be
crossed, Isai. 8.21.

Reason 2. From the sorrow and affliction that God has annexed to all the
labors of our calling, Genesis 3.19.

Reason 3. From Satan's readiness and watchfulness to stir up and aggravate
dangers and discouragements to any goodness, Rev. 12.4.

Reason 4. From the trials which God puts upon us, by causing many dangers and
evils to hover over us, though not to bring them upon us, but to try our
obedience. So the people in the wilderness feared thirst, and famine and the
Anakims, but it was only to try their obedience. For God was ever ready with
supply, Deuteronomy. 8.2.

Reason 5. From our own faithless and sluggish hearts, which are ready to
imagine fears of evil, where none be. Prove. 26.13. Lions are as much afraid of
Streets, as men of deserts.

Use 1. To teach us wisely to consider what good duties God requires of us in
our Christian course and calling, and set upon it without fear or forlorn
discouragement. Every man in his place, The Magistrate, Neh. 6.9, 11. The
Minister, Acts 20.22, 23, 24. Luke 13.31, 32. Yea the wife, 1 Pet. 3.6. Yea
children and servants, fear not turning to God for fear of carnal parts,
Masters, Fellows, etc.

Quest. But may not a man for fear of danger hold off his hand from some duty
in some cases?

Answ. Yes, in case two things concur; First, The dangers be certain, not as
winds and Clouds which may as well blow over, as bring foul weather.
Secondly, The dangers be of greater damage, then the duty can be of use to my
felfe and others. Thus David spared Joab, 2 Samuel 3.39. and the Jews forbore
the building of the Temple, Ezra 4.23, 24. Otherwise fear not their fears, 1
Pet. 3.14. Prove. 29.25. Luke 12.4, 5.

Use 2. To look at all good duties, as sowing of seed, Gal. 6.7, 8. As
therefore a man would make choice of precious seed. So do every work in the
best manner, let sacrifices be of the fattest, Gen 4.3, 4.

Use 3. To expect an harvest, a reaping time according to our seed, Gal. 6.7,
to 10.

Eccles. 11.5.6. 5 As thou know not what is the way of the Spirit, nor how
the bones do grow in the womb of her that is with child: even so thou know
not the works of God who makes all, etc.


IN these words Solomon exhorts to fruitfulness in good duties, the duties
of our calling especially those that are most behooveful in ill times: by
removing the impediments, which are three: First, From the hazard and danger
(yet uncertain danger) that may befall our selves, of which was spoken in verse
4. Secondly, From the difficulty which may be in sundry duties needful to be
performed in ill times, especially in case a man's calling require him to seek
reformation of public evils, verse 5, Which he removes by the unknown help
and success, that God will cast in, and afford such hard attempts, which
exceed the skill and strength of man. This he sets forth by the like help
of God ordinarily put forth in producing two great works, both of them far
exceeding the strength and skill of man: First, As thou know not the way of
the spirit, to wit, of its conveyance into the child bred in the womb, and
its work there. Secondly, As thou know not the way of the bones in the
womb of her that is with child: So thou know not the work of God which
works all, verse 5. Thirdly, From the uncertainty of prosperous or good
success; from whence Solomon gathers rather a motive to continual
fruitfulness in good duties upon all opportunities verse 6. In the morning sow
thy seed, and in the evening withhold not thy hand, for thou know not
whether shall prosper, etc. The expression is an Allegory taken from Husbandry,
sow in all seasons, Morning, Evening, in Winter, in the Spring; for thou
know not whether seed time shall prosper, etc.

Doctr. 1. As is the way of the spirit, and of the bones of the woman with
child, so is the way of God in working our works for us, secret and hidden
from us; yet, when he pleases carry them on effectually. The way of the
spirit] is the way of entrance of it into the infant conceived in the womb.
To beget a soul, is beyond the skill or strength of the Parents, yea, or to
frame the body in the womb; yea, we know not how God works it: Whether,
First, By Creation of nothing? If so, whether God makes it pure? then how
comes it to be defiled? the body being without sin (as a carcass after
death) cannot defile the soul with sin. If impure? then how is not God the
Author of sin. Secondly, By Propagation: If so, then it is made either of the
whole soul of the Parents: and then the Parents would dye; or of part of the
soul, and then the soul were partible or divisible; and the soul of the Parents
would be maimed; or of the seed of the soul: but it has no excrement, as
having no superfluity of nourishment. Thirdly, By transfusion; as one candle
transfuseth the like candle light into prepared matter: If so, then why do not
acts of generation often speed in couples most suitable? and why are the souls
of children so often unlike to Parents?

Fourthly, By efformation, as the Potter forms a vessel out of Clay; which of
all the rest is most probable, to wit, that God forms the soul though not of
nothing (which is properly Creation) but of pre-existent matter, whether of the
spirituous part of the seed (which is easy for God to do) or of the souls of
the Parents, as of Adams rib he made his wifes body, which no man can do but
only God, it being more then God has given to nature to produce such a work.
Hence God is said to be a Former of souls, Zach. 12.1. as a Potter of a vessel
of Clay.

Or the way of the spirit] may be meant, the manner of its fashioning the
Organs of the body, in case it be thought instrumental to God, in being (as
they say it is) Sui domicilij architectrix, how comes the soul to work so
skilful and curious a Fabric which it knows not, nor can shape the like when
it is grown up to ripest understanding, skill, and experience. Only it is the
work of the Lord, who when he pleases to concur, the work is carried on
effectually.

Also the way of the spirit] It is an hidden secret to us, if spirit be
extended farther to signify breath (as often it does) how the child in the
womb can take its breath twenty weeks in the womb. If it breath not, how does
the child live? If it do breath, how comes it to pass, it is not stifled
in the womb?

The way of the bones of her that is with childe] For so the way may be
repeated from the former part of the sentence, How they come to be opened to
give passage to the Infant, or how closed and shut again; and both without
breaking: And how in some soon and easily, in others late and hardly, Job
10.10, 11, 12: Psalm. 139.13; to 16, So is it in all the great works of God,
which we do transact, or pass through; As in our regeneration, John 3.8. and
Chap. 1.13. In our victories over many and great corruptions and temptations.
So in men's public vocations. It seemed an incredible work to Moses to deliver
Israel from Pharaoh. So to Hester, to work deliverance for her people. So to
Samuel to anoint a King against Saul, 1 Samuel 16.2. So to Nehemiah to repair
Jerusalem, yet according to the good hand of God, it was done, Neh. 2.8. So to
Zerubbabel to build a Temple which required Solomon's Treasure, Hag. 2.1, 2, 3.
etc.

Use 1. To teach women with child, not to faint under the danger or difficulty
of their Travel: but to look up to God who works all. God as he has given a
soul to the child, you know not what way, and as he has fashioned the bones
of the child, you know not how: so he it is that works safe, and comfortable
deliverance, Isai. 66.9.

Use 2. To encourage men to undertake the works of their calling, though never
so difficult and dangerous; go on, be doing: Little does any many know, by what
weak means God brings mighty things to pass. Wherefore has God so
mightily stretched forth his powerful Arm in our first coming into the world?
but to give us a pledge from our tender years of his power and readiness to
assist us, in all the works he has to do by us? Isai. 46.3, 4.

Use 3. To stir us up to give up our selves to the Lord in the new birth
especially: which though it be a great work and difficult, yea, impossible to
flesh and blood: yet we little know, when God is pleased to set in, how much
may be wrought beyond what we can ask or think.

Eccles. 11.6. 6. In the Morning sow thy seed, and in the Evening withhold not
thine hand: for thou know not whether shall prosper, either this or that, or
whether they both shall be alike good.


COherence, see in verse 5.6.

Doctr. 1. The works or labors of a man in his course and calling they are his
seed. The Metaphor is borrowed from husbandry, who sow their seed in all
seasons, Morning Evening, Winter, Spring, Hos. 10.12. Prove. 11.18. Psalm. 126.5,
6. Job 4.8.

Use 1. From the proportion our works have to fruit; whence they are often
called fruits, Phil. 1.11. Col. 1.6. Matthew. 21.34. Romans 1.13. Now it is an
usual thing in nature that the seed of all fruitful trees lies in their
fruits, Genesis 1.12.

Reason 2. From the smalnesse of it in it self, Matthew. 13.31, yet yielding
great growth and increase, Gal. 6.6, 7. Psalm. 126.5, 6. It was a small seed
that word, 2 King, 5.8. yet brought forth great Increase.

Reason 3. From the lying of it for a time (as it were under the clods' and
furrows of the earth) in obscurity seeming rather to fall into loss then to
promise increase, Psalm 126.5.

Use 1. To provoke to sow precious seed; let our ways be fruitful, and
fruitful in the best works. No fruit but has his seed in it; and the better
the seed, the richer the Harvest; every man in his calling, let him do his
works of the best.

Use 2. To encourage every man to wait for a greater increase of his labor
then it is worth; The seed is little worth to the harvest, 1 Kings 19.19, 20.

Doct. 2. Our ignorance and uncertainty of success of our labors in our
callings, should not dishearten us, but rather encourage us to a greater
diligence, and fruitfulness in them, Acts 20.22.

Reason 1. From the strict account we must give of our time and Talents unto
God, Ephesians. 5.15. Matthew. 25, 26, 27.

Reason 2. From the abundant recompense of reward to fruitfulness in good
duties, 1 Cor. 15.58.

Reason 3. From the greater hopes of a more plentiful harvest, when more
variety of seed is sown; if one miscarry, the other may take; yea and none will
be lost. The Merchant that tradeth in many barks, is more like to see a safe
return of some.

Reason 4. From the greater exercise of faith, hope, and patience, where events
are uncertain, 2 Cor. 5.7. 1 Cor. 9.10 Jam. 5.7.

Use 1. To exhort to fruitfulness in our course and calling upon all occasions
and opportunities; In the morning sow thy seed, in the evening let not thy hand
rest. Seed in the Garner multiplieth not, yea rather decreaseth and corrupts,
Minister in his calling, 2 Timothy 4.1, 2. Magistrate in his, Psalm 101.8. Every
man in his, Prove. 10.4, 5.

Use 2. To persuade us to contentment in ignorance and uncertainty of events;
and learn we rather the more dependence on the Lord for his blessing: and be
more thankful for any good success at any time.

Use 3. To be more fruitful in that which is good, for our ignorance sake of
the events of our labor. Text.

Eccles. 11.7, 8. 7 Truly the light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for
the eyes to behold the Sun. 8 But if a man live many years, and rejoice in them
all, yet let him remember the days of darkness, for they shall be many, all
that comes is vanity.

COherence, see verse. 1, 2, 3. These words express and declare the fourth
wholesome instruction which Solomon gives to men that live in the ruinous times
of a civil State: wherein he teaches all men this holy duty, that however the
times here may fall out to their own particular, yet to remember the dark times
that remain after this life is ended, and therefore so to provide and prepare
in this life, as that we may with comfort leave it. Which duty Solomon
requires may not be neglected, notwithstanding three diverse things which might
occasion the neglect of it: First, the sweetness of life for the present, v.
7. Secondly, the long continuance of life to some men. Thirdly, the prosperity
and comfortable estate that may befall some men in their long life. Yet to
remember, first, the days of darkness (which are coming after this life
ended) are many. Secondly, That all the future time and work will be but vanity,
v. 8.

The light is sweet, and it is a pleasant thing for the eyes to behold the
Sun; light is a Periphrasis of this natural life, Job 3.20. so here. As who
should say, life is sweet; and so they that behold the Sun, are put for men
living in this world: Eccles. 7.11. And here both are put in opposition to the
days of darkness after this life ended, which are days of death and burial.

Doctr. Though life be sweet, and to some men long, yea and comfortable all
their days, yet let them remember that the days which are coming are many
both of darkness and vanity. The sweetness of death is argued by even Peter's
lothness to die, even when an aged Christian, and the cause of death is
honorable and grateful, John 21.18. Days of death and burial are days of
darkness, Job 10.21, 22. And in hell the darkness is extreme, and everlasting;
the darkness is outward or extreme, Matthew. 22.13. notwithstanding the fire,
Matthew. 25.41. as a fire of Brimstone, Esaias 30, 33.

Reason of life's sweetness, First, from many desirable comforts which we
enjoy in this life, congruous and suitable to all our senses, and to all our
affections. Secondly, from the intimate union of soul and body, so as they
both make but one person. Hence lothnesse to part; we will lose any member to
save head and heart, or any vital part.

Some men spend their days in prosperity, Job 21.13:

Reason 1. From the reward of godliness, Prove. 3.16.

Reason 2. From the patience and bounty of God to evil men, Genesis 25.17.

Reasons why the days of darkness and vanity are many. First, from their
continuance to the resurrection in the end of the world, Joh 14.12.

Secondly, from the ignorance and oblivion of all things in the grave, Psalm.
88.12. and 6.5.

Thirdly, from the disappointment of any labor all that time, Eccles. 9.10.
Psalm. 30.9.

This to be remembred] words of sense in the Hebrew are understood with
affection and action; so this word Eccles. 12.1. which implies here, 1.
Continual mindful knowledge of it. 2. So to be affected with care and
conscience of it, as that it may take deeper impression in us then all the
transient cares and comforts of this natural life, whereof though the days be
many, yet not so many. 3. So to provide in this life as that when our bodies
shall sleep in darkness, yet our souls may enjoy the light and comfort of
everlasting life and blessedness.

Reason 1. From the benefit of such remembrance. In so doing we remember God,
Eccles. 12.1. and our selves also, Luke 16.4.

Reason 2. From the danger and folly brutish folly of such forgetfulness, Job
21.13. Ecces. 3, 21.

Use of life's sweetness, 1. For thankfulness to God, who has given us life,
and all the lively comforts of it, Joh 10.12. For thankfulness to Christ, who
laid down this life for our sakes, Matthew. 20.28. whence we are to live to him,
2 Cor. 5.15.

Use 2. To learn to behold a greater sweetness in the life of grace, in union
with Christ in the light of Gods countenance, Psalm. 4.6, 7, and 63, 3.

Use of many days of darkness and vanity, and remembrance hereof, 1. To warn
us not to be so taken up with the sweetness of this life, as to forget the
far longer time to come.

Use 2. To teach us not to envy the many prosperous days of wicked men here;
Their lightsome days here are but a few to their dark days behind.

Use 3. To provide here for life in death, and for light in darkness, and for
felicity against vanity. Means hereof; First, Meditation frequent, and
constant, and serious of the shortness of this life, and of all the comforts
of it, Isai. 40.6, 7, 8. Secondly, Not to rest in a state of darkness here,
Ephesians. 5.8. 1 John 1.6. Thirdly, Behold Christ losing his sweet life for us, and
mourn over him, Zach. 12.10. Fourthly, Walk in his light, 1 John 1.7.

Eccles. 11.9, 10. 9 Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth, and let thy heart
cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart,
and in the sight of thine eyes: but know thou, that for all these things God
will bring thee into judgment. 10 Therefore remove sorrow from thy heart, and
put a way evil from thy flesh: for childhood and youth are vanity.

FOr a fifth wholesome counsel and instruction, Solomon gives it unto young
men, which is twofold: First, To know God will bring them to judgment, verse
9.10. Secondly, To remember their Creator in the days of their youth, verse. 1.
to 7. And both this and the former Counsels, are but further motives and
directions to take the counsel given, verse 6.4. sowing our seed in the
Morning, and in the Evening not to cease.

Reason 1. For after this life ended, many will be the days of darkness, and
they will be days of vanity, verse 7.8.

Reason 2. For youth is the morning of our Age, and so a fit time to sow good
seed, and usually misimployed to the sowing of vanity; verse 9.10. And there be
three words that express it: (...) does properly signify the morning of Age,
v. 10 (...) youth is (as the word signifies) the choice Age of a man's life, as
that 1. Which is chosen to most employments of action, 2. Wherein a man is to
choose what course to take; 3. And which a man would choose to live in always.
(...) is childhood, which is the green flourishing blood of Age or life.

Parts, First, An Ironical concession to children and youth to rejoice in their
days and ways, Rejoice O young man, etc. Secondly, A serious Admonition to
know the judgment of God reserved for them; but know that, etc. verse 9.
Thirdly, Hence an exhortation to put away and remove the passions and lusts of
youth and childhood, verse 10. Therefore remove the Irascible passions of the
heart and evil from thy flesh, that is, the lusts of the flesh. Fourthly, a
Reason of that exhortation from the vanity of childhood and youth, verse 10.

Doctr. 1. God is wont in an holy scorn to give up children and youth in their
own days, to take their own ways and to rejoice (or applaud themselves) in
them. See the like kind of Irony or holy scorn, 1 Kings 18.27, and 22, 15.
and 2 Chronicles. 25.8.

Quest. But does not God speak seriously, as allowing children and youth more
liberties then are meet for riper years? as Chap. 9.7, 8, 9.

Answ. There be some lawful liberties which God does allow to that age, as
Zach. 8.5, and 9, 17. But if he had spoken of these, he would have given some
just ground of encouragement (for it is your portion or the like;) but here he
rather gives a check and admonition against it, from a ground that is wont to
dampe not lawful but carnal delights. But know that for all these things God
will bring thee to judgment. The ways of, 1. Childhood, First, Ignorance, 1
Cor. 14.20. Secondly, Vanity; serious in trifles, and trifling in serious
things, Text. verse 10. Thirdly, Folly. Fourthly, Falsehood, Psalm. 58.3.
Fifthly, Forwardness, Matthew. 11.16, 17. 2. Youth, First, High conceits of
their own sufficiency and worth, 1 Timothy 3.6. Secondly, Inordinate and excessive
love of liberty. Thirdly, Wantonness. Fourthly, Strong affections upon weak
grounds. Fifthly, Impatience of counsels and reproves, which is stubbornness,
Jer. 31.18, 19. Sixthly, Prodigality, Luke 15.12, 13. Seventhly Impudency,
Isai. 3.5. God gives up children and Youth to these ways; First, by not
giving them his grace, either restraining or converting so soon. Secondly, By
taking from them such Parents, governors and friends, as might restrain them,
2 Chronicles. 24.17. As he that takes away a damme gives a running River leave to
run strongly. Thirdly, By giving them up to a company of flatterers and
Paresites, sons of Belial, who encourage them to evil, 2 Chronicles. 24.17, 18, and
harden them against wise and grave counsel, 1 Kings 12.10, 11. Fourthly, By
suiting the heart with fit and strong objects, and leaving the heart to the
impetuousnesse of its own passions and lusts.

Reason 1. From the Idol of self-fulnesse which God sees in the heart of
youth, according to which he answers them and all others, Ezekiel. 14.4.

Reason 2. From their wilful disobedience, Psalm. 81.11.

Reason 3. From his delight to scorn scorners, Prove. 3:34. Psalm. 2.3, 4.

Reason 4. From his purpose to magnify his grace the more, and to humble them
the more in their conversion, Jer. 31.18, 19.

Use 1. To humble childhood and youth the more, the flower of whose Age is so
much corrupted. If our choice days be so wicked, what are our dregs? If our
first fruits be so unclean, what is our whole lump? yea, and this spiritual
judgment should humble youth the more; for it is a more dreadful judgment for
God to scorn, then to frown and threaten.

Doctr. 2. God would have children and youth to know that God will bring them
to judgment for all their childish and youthful courses, and for their delight
in them, Psalm. 50.18, to 22. Rev. 20.12. 2 Cor. 5.10. Eccles. 12.14.

Reason 1. From Gods unpartial justice to all, Romans 2.6, to 11. God takes no
pleasure in proper youth, Psalm. 147, 10. nor pity on carnal children.

Reason 2. From the proportion which God keeps in recompencing like measure,
yea, double measure of torment to deliciousness, Rev. 18.7.

Use 1. To charge children and youth to put away and remove from them their
passions and Iusts, the evils of their flesh, verse 10. Youths eagerly pursue
their lusts, and boisterously contend for them: But lusts overwhelme with the
greater torments, and Potentes potenter torquebuntur.

Use 2. To discover and convince the vanity of childhood and youth, verse 10.
In regard, First, Of the many corruptions incident to their Age, mentioned
above. Secondly, Of their fond rejoicing in them, as a fool in his Fetters and
Shackles. Thirdly, Of the danger growing thereby, of Impenitency here, and of
Judgment hereafter.

Use 3. To exhort both to remember their Creator in their prime days, Eccles.
12.1.

Eccles. 12.1. 1 Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the
evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have no
pleasure in them.


SOlomon to restrain children and youth from the vanities of their Age,
propounded to them a double Antidote: First, The knowledge of Gods approaching
Judgment, whereto he will bring them for all the evils of their youth, Chap.
11. verse 9. whence he inferred two Corollaries; 1. An exhortation to put away
youthful passions and lusts. 2. The vanity of childhood and youth, Chap. 11. v
10. Secondly, The remembrance of their Creators in the days of their youth,
Chap. 12.1. The copulative And, implies a connection upon the former, as the
Addition of another remedy like the former.

Doctr. 1. The remembrance of our Creator in the days of our youth, is a
Sovereign remedy against the vanities both of youth and Age. It is a remedy
against the vanities of youth before spoken of; and the words following,
[Before the evil days come, etc.] argue it is a remedy against the wearisome
vanities of old Age, Remember words of sense in the Hebrew Tongue are to be
understood with Affection and Action, by reason of the combination and
concatenation of all the faculties of the soul in pure nature, like as of links
in a chain, draw one and draw all, break one and break all, Luke 23.42. 1 Samuel 1.19. Psalm. 106, 4, 7. Heb. 13.3. Rev. 2.5. Remembrance of God implies
and infers, 1. Turning to him, Psalm. 22.27. 2. Trust and joy in him, Isai.
51.13. 3. Service and obedience to him, Deuteronomy. 8.11.19. Psalm. 9.17. Judge. 3.7.
4. Thankfulness to him, Deuteronomy. 8.18.

Thy Creator] Sets forth God as the Author and fountain of all our being
out of nothing. Which argues God to be, 1. The end of all our being, Prove.
16.4. 2. Our preserver and Governor, Isai. 40.26. 3, Our owner and possessour,
and Lord, Isai. 43.1. 4. Intimately acquainted with all our ways, Psalm. 33.15.
5. Unwilling, yea disdaining to have his work deformed or corrupted, Deuteronomy.
32.5, 6. 6. Able easily to destroy us, Psalm. 104.29, 30.

Creators] Implies more Creators then one, all the three persons concurring in
the work, Genesis 1.26.

Remember Jesus Christ your Redeemer; 1. As one that dyed and rose again for
us, 2 Timothy 2.8. 2. And without whom we are strangers from God, Ephesians, 2.12* 3. In
whom we become new creatures, 2 Cor. 5.17. 4. And through whom the Father is
well pleased with you, Matthew. 3.17.

Remember the holy Ghost, First, Who uniteth us to Christ, 1 Cor. 6, 17. and
without whom we are carnal and sensual, Jude 19. John 3.6. Secondly, Who
sanctifies us to God, and that in a Creating way, Psalm. 51.10, 11. Mortifying
our passions and lusts, Romans 8, 13. Quickening us to righteousness. Thirdly,
Who pacifieth and comfort our consciences, John 14.16, 17. and that in a
creating way, Psalm. 31.12.

Reason 1. From the vanity of youth and Age without this remembrance of our
Creators, Text. Eccles. 12.1, with Chap. 11.9.

Reason 2. From the benefit of this yoke upon Youth, Lament. 3.27, to 30.

Reason 3. From the sanctification of the whole lump of our life, by the
sanctifying of these first fruits, Romans 11.16.

Use 1. To reprove forgetfulness of our Creator in this time of youth. It
causes old age to perish in such, to be good for nothing, Job 30.1, 2, 3 Youth
and childhood is the seed time of grace and all goodness. If in the spring no
seed be sown, or none but Cockel and Darnel, and such weeds, what hope of
Harvest? Isai. 17.10, 11. From a threefold cause of difficulty, 1. Custom in
sin, Jer. 13.29. 2. Satan's long possession, Mark 9.21, 29. 3. Gods rejection,
Prove. 1.24. to 28.

Use 2. To exhort children and youth to heed this counsel. As the people said
to the blind man, Arise, he calls thee, Mark 10.49. so here. God accepts
the first ripe fruits Micah 7.1. He takes it then so kindly, that he will after
pass by many backslidings, Jer. 2.2. with ch, 3, 1, 2, 3. It is the ornament of
youth, of young men, of maids, Jer. 2.32.

Means by which God uses to heal such. First, attention to the word, Psalm.
119.9. Prove. 8.34. Secondly, mourning for stubbornness, and prayer for
converting grace, Jer. 31.18, 19. Thirdly, abandoning of bad company, Psalm.
119.115. Fourthly, Reforming known evils upon reproof, Prove. 1.23.

Eccles. 12. part of v. 1. While the evil days come not, nor the years draw
nigh, wherein thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them.


THese words begin a description, first, of the wearisom evils of old age, from
the latter part of this verse to the end of the sixth: Secondly, of death, v. 7.
And both of them brought in as a double strong motive, to urge young men in
their youth to remember their Creator.

This former Reason is taken from the support and remedy which the remembrance
of our Creator in the days of our youth will give to the evils of old age, v.
1, to 6. The latter from our dissolution, and return to God in death, v. 7.

Doctr. The decays of old age are evil, and unpleasant times, and old age it
self will so acknowledge it, 2 Samuel 19.35. and yet he was of the better sort
of old men, and very well provided of all helps, v. 32. and as then but 80.
years old, Genesis 47.9. Psalm 90.10.

The evils of old age are partly 1. Natural, First, in the estate: The loss
of dearest friends and acquaintance, Genesis 37.34, 35. and 42.36. And contempt of
younger people, Job 30.1, 12, 13. Secondly, in the body, Dimnesse and decay of
all the senses, 2 Samuel 19.34, 35. And manifold pains and aches, and diseases
incident to that age.

2. Moral, first, seeking wealth greedily, yet loath to use it; Secondly, slow
and cold in proceedings, yea timorous and fearful; yet chasing at others
backwardness. Thirdly, hard to be pleased himself, and as hard to please
others. Fourthly, complaining of present times, but praising former days of
old, which the old men of those days as much complained of as he of these.

3. Spiritual, First, Ignorance. Secondly, uncapablenesse' and untractableness
to be taught or admonished, Eccles. 4.13: Thirdly, pride of spirit. Fourthly,
deceitfulness. Fifthly, impenitency, through custom, and hardening in sin,
and self-conceit.

Reason 1. From sins of youth. Job 20.11.

Reason 2. From the vanity of all creature comforts, which must fade, Isai.
40.6.

Reason 3. From the necessity of ripening in that age, either for hell or
heaven, Job 5.26. in the autumn of our age.

Reason of old men's acknowledgement of it, From their querulous and
discontented spirit.

Doctr. 3. The remembrance of God in the days of youth, is a comfortable
Preservative against the evil and unplesant times of age. For as an antidote
against this evil Solomon prescribes this. Hence the age of Abraham and David
are called a good old age, Genesis 25.8. 1 Chronicles. 20, 28,

Reason 1. From the blessing of good old age, removing and healing the contrary
evils; 1. Natural, first, in the estate: Friends not lost, but gone before,
and we haste after them. A Crown of glory instead of contempt, Prove. 16.31.
Secondly, in the body: The power and life of faith, to put strength in
weakness, health in sikness, ease in pain. Hebr. 11.34. Josh. 14.10. The
benefit of Gods fear, Prove. 3.7, 8.

2. Moral and spiritual: Corruptions now more mortified then ever, 2 Timothy
4.7. Grace more lively, powerful, and fruitful, Psalm 92.14* 2 Cor. 4.16.
Heaven (as an haven) in view, seasoning and sweetning all, 2 Timothy 4.8.

Reason 2. From the gracious and powerful presence of God, to support them in
age, whom he has guided in youth, Esaias 46.3, 4.

Use 1. To set on Solomon's counsel upon young men, to be the more mindful of
their Creator in the days of their youth, to find the evils of old age either
more fully removed, or more easily borne. If young men neglect this duty in
their best times, they will be far more indisposed in their evil days.

Use 2. To provoke such as are entering upon old age, to be more sollicitous of
remembering God and themselves, seeing they are hasting fast into these evils.
It is a just reproof to such as take no notice of decays of nature. See the
simile, Hos. 7.9.

Use 3. To enforce carnal old men to redeem the opportunities that are lost;
The evil of the times Paul makes a motive to this duty, Ephesians. 5.15, 16.

Eccles. 12.2. to 7. 2 While the sun, or the light, or the moon, or the stars
be not darkened, nor the clouds return not after the rain: 3 In the day when
the keepers of the house shall tremble, and the strong men shall bow
themselves, and the grinders cease, because they are few, and those that look
out of the window be darkened: 4 And the doors shall be shut in the streets,
when the sound of the grinding is low, ane he shall rise up at the voice of the
bird, and all the daughters of music shall be brought low. 5 Also when they
shall be afraid of that which is high, and fear shall be in the way, and the
almond tree shall flourish, and the grasshopper shall be a burden, and desire
shall fail: because man goes to his long home, and the mourners go about the
streets. 6 Or ever the silver cord be loosed, or the golden bowl be broken, or
the Pitcher be broken at the fountain, or the wheel broken at the cistern.

SOlomon having styled old age an evil and unpleasant time, v. 1. he now
proceeds to describe more particularly the decays and infirmities of nature
in old men, which make their days evil and unpleasant; which are of three
sorts: First some such as befall the former part of old age, whilst as yet they
are able to go abroad, verse 2. to part of the fifth. Secondly, some of
decrepit old age, when death is very near approaching, and themselves drawing
on fast to it. Latter part of v. 5. with v. 6, 7. Thirdly, Death it self, v. 7.

The decays and infirmities of old age; whilst as yet they are able to walk
abroad, be

First, the darkness of the lights about them, whether natural as Sun,
light (of the day when the Sun is under a cloud) Moon, Stars: or artificial
lights, as Candles, Torches, etc. This darkness comes not from the decay of
those lights, but from the dimness of our sight, whence need of spectacles. I
do not understand this to be a description of adversity; for though darkness
be often put for adversity, and light for prosperity, yet we read not of the
Sun, Moon and Stars put together for prosperity; nor the darkness of them
put for adversity.

Secondly, The returning of the clouds after rain] is an allusion to the
winterly state of old age. In Summer after rain the clouds break up, and fair
weather follows; but in winter season after rain clouds still remain, and
return. So, though in youth, after weeping and coughs, and rheumes dried up,
the brain is clearer and drier: yet in old age, after colds, and coughs, and
rheumes, and Pozes, there still remain and return clouds, and vapors, and sumes
in the brain, through the store of superfluous and excrementitious moisture of
old bodies.

Thirdly, When the keepers of the house tremble] verse. 3. Some take those
keepers of the house to be the five senses, which are indeed the keepers of the
body; but their decay is not fitly called trembling. And besides, of their
decay he speaks expressly in the sequel. The keepers of the house] are
therefore the hands and arms which in young men are steady and strong, and do
also keep both the body and house by repulsing annoyances, and providing
useful things, food, raiment, etc. These tremble, grow feeble, and shake in
old age.

Fourthly, The strong men bow themselves] when the thighs and legs, which in
young men went straight and strong, now buckle, and stoop, that an old man
stands in need of a staff to support him.

Fifthly, The grinders cease, because they are few] when the teeth cease to
chew meat, many of them being worn out. Teeth come not with us into the world,
and they commonly leave old men (at least many of them) before they leave the
world.

Sixthly, Those that look out at the windows are darkned] when the eyes grow so
dim that we cannot see well with spectacles, which is a further degree of
dimnesse of sight then was mentioned in verse. 2.

Seventhly, The doors are shut without, when (or because) the sound of the
grinding is low] verse. 4. that is, the lips (which are the doors, Psalm
141.3.) are shut together, when for want of teeth to grind the meat, the meat
is rolled and chavelled in the mouth, and had need of shut lips to keep it from
falling out of the mouth:

Eighthly, He shall rise up at the sound of the hird] the least noise of a
Swallow or other bird, will waken an old man, through the natural dryness of
his brain, and through the weariness of any posture; in the day time he is
weary of sitting, and soon goes to bed with the Lamb; in the night he is weary
of lying, and soon rises with the Lark.

Ninthly, The daughters of music are abased] when either Instruments of speech
fail which make music, or Instruments of hearing fail which receive music.
Speech and hearing both fail, as in Barzillai, 2 Samuel 19.35. Which is the more
observable, that old men whose hearing is so quick as to be wakened with the
sound of a bird, and yet the exquisiteness of the sense of hearing (to delight
in the sound of music) is quite gone.

Tenthly, They shall be afraid of that which is high, and fear shall be in the
way] verse 5. because old men are afraid of climbing in regard of the
stiffenesse of their joints, and unweildinesse of their bodies. They fear any
stumbling stone in the way, least it give them a fall, or any thing that
meets them, least it throw them down.

Eleventhly, The Almond Tree flourisheth] When his head grows gray and hoary,
which is a floutishing Ornament, Prove. 16.31. but an evident decay of due
moisture to nourish the hair of the head and Beard. The Almond Tree is the
first that flourishes in the spring, Jer. 1.11, 12. and has his name from
early blossoming; it is here a resemblance of an hoary head, yet with this
difference, 1. The Almond Tree flourishes in the Spring, the hoary head in the
winter of our Age. 2. The Tree flourishes before fruit, but the head
flourishes after it: And yet it may indeed be said, that the hoary head is the
flourishing of the old man in the spring of another world of Immortality.

Twelfthly, The Grasshopper or Locust shall be a burden] Whether by his noise
(but of that before in the voice of a Bird, verse 4.) or (by an Hyperbole) by
his weight, an old man cannot bear the lightest burden; but most fitly his
slownesse of digestion. Though the locust be a clean and wholesome food, and
much used in those Countries (especially of the poorer sort) Levit. 11.22.
Matthew. 3.4. yet it is heavy and burdensome to an old man's stomach,

Thirteenthly, Desire faileth] Or appetite; either to meat or drink, or
especially to marriage fellowship.

The latter sort of particular infirmities accompanying old Age, are such
decays of nature in old men, as are found in their decrepit Age, when they are
drawing on to death, and mourners go about the Streets; for they are not
called till death, or till entrance into the gates of it.

First, When man goes to his long home] That is, to the house of his age, the
grave where he shall rest whilst the world stands, Job. 14.12.

Secondly, The mourners go about the Streets] To wit, the women skilful in
mourning for the dead, and that with such affection and gesture, and
lamentation, as to stir up mourning in a whole company, Amos 5.16. Jer. 22.18.

Thirdly, Or ever the silver cord be loosed] That is, the marrow of the back
bone, which runs from the Brain through the neck, to the bottom of the
back through 24 joints, and takes in therewith all the sinews: whence
follows a shaking and trembling of all the joints, and utter feebleness to
use any limb without help, v. 6. Or rather the sinews well, are the
ligaments of all the members, and loosned by cold humors and Palsy distempers.

Fourthly, The Golden Boul is broken] When the Scull is parted in the sutures
or seames of it, whence the Chaps fall, the Almonds of the ears are stopped,
part lifting up again. For the Hebrew is the same with Golgotha which
signifies a Scull, 2 Kings 9.35. Matthew. 27.33. It is a Bowl because it is
round, and golden both for the color, and for the precious use of it to
contain and preserve the Brain.

Fourthly, The Pitcher broken at the Spring] That is, the bladder is broken at
the spring of water, the Issuing forth of the water or the retentive faculty of
the muscle at the neck of the bladder being broken, so that water (urine)
issues from him insensibly, without stay.

Fifthly, The wheel broken at the Cisterne] Is the Lungs broken off from their
motion of inspiration and respiration by phlegm from the stomach, which is as
the Cisterne from all the body. The Lungs are as a wheel transmitting the Air
in and out, up and down: But though there be no open passage between the
Stomach and the Lungs (and therefore is no ordinary purging of the Lungs but
upwards by spitting and coughing) yet when the Stomach is surcharged with
phlegm, it distilleth it into the Lungs and stops them; look as when a man
or beast is dead, there seems no way of entrance into the bladder for water,
no not for Air (for if you blow it full of wind, none will issue out:) And
yet whilst there is life in the body, both water and sand pass through little
veins into the bladder. So by the like secret passages does the Cisterne of
the Stomach convey phlegm to the Lungs, even to the stifling of them. And
upon this stoppage of the Lungs with phlegm, that the wheel cannot turn the
Air (or breath) up and down, in and out, follows rutling in the Throat,
breaking off the motion of the Lungs, and so death suddenly follows.

Doctr, 1. The wisdom of God would have young men to take particular and
special notice of the decays and infirmities of old age, and by all and every
of them to be stirred up to the remembrance of their Creator in the days of
their youth. Solomon the eldest son of wisdom reckons up these infirmities
of Age, not to show his skill, but to teach us to discern these, and to
provoke us by every one of them, and much more by all together, to remember our
Creator early.

Reason 1. From our backwardness to take notice of these decays in our
selves, much less in others, and most of all in our young time, when there are
no cords in our death, Hos. 7.9.

Reason 2. From the unlistinesse and undisposednesse of old age to attend
spiritual duties in the midst of bodily infirmities. (As in Aaron in like
bitterness, Levit. 10.19. And in the Israelites in anguish, Exodus 6.9.)

Reason 3. From the unsupportable wearisomnesse of these evils unto old age,
when it is not eased and supported by grace.

Use 1. To show us the many bitter fruits of the sin of our first Parents, even
to our bodies, 1. Death. 2. Strong cords to Death.

Use 2. To teach us both the lessons Solomon here calls upon us to learn, 1.
The remembrance of these infirmities. 2. The remembrance of our Creator by
them, and that in our youth, before they befall us in age.

Object. But what can these crosses and the remembrance of them do to a kindly
work of conversion? They are all but punishments of sin, and so sanctions of
the law, and the law makes nothing perfect, Heb. 7.19.

Answ. First, Yet no commandment of God is vain when the spirit coworketh.
Secondly, These infirmities as the law it self, drive us to Christ, Gal. 3.24.
And he, 1. Takes away our sins, John 1.29. 2. Bears our infirmities, Matthew.
8.17. Psalm. 103.3. and he supporteth us in them, Isai. 46.4, and 40, 28. to 31.
3. He renews the inner man with proportionable strength and comfort, 2 Cor.
4.16.

Use 3. To comfort godly old men, in that God takes particular notice of all
our decays and infirmities.

Eccles. 12.7. 7. Then shall the dust return to the Earth as it was: and the
spirit shall return unto God who gave it.


COherence see in verse 2. In these words are set forth, First, The first and
last condition of the body, in regard of its material cause, Dust returns to
the Earth out of which it was taken. Secondly, The first and last condition of
the soul, in regard of the efficient cause and disposing hand; The spitit
returns to God that gave it. Meaning. Dust] By a Metonimy of the material
cause for the effect, Dust for man's body made of Dust, Genesis 2.7. Return to the
Earth, First, By burial in the Earth, after the manner of the Jews. Though in
burning and drowning it finally returns to Dust, to Earth also. Secondly, By
rotting in the Grave, and dissolving to Earth at last.

Spirit] Soul, as being here opposed to the body. Returturneth to God] Not
every soul to dwell with him (for here the speech is of all men;) but to be
disposed of by him, for his final estate. That gave it] First, By breathing it
into his face at the first Creation. Secondly, By forming every soul of a
sinful matter of the souls of the Parents, or of the spirituous part of their
seed, Zach. 12.1.

Doctr. 1. As our bodies being made of Dust do in Death reture to Dust; so our
souls being given us of God, return again to God, Genesis 2.7. The body is
made, not of the heart of the Earth, that is rich in metals, nor of the soil
of the Earth that is rich in fruits, nor of the sand of the Earth which is
profitable for Ballast, for houre-glasses, or for a Sea bound, Jer. 5.22. but
of the dust of the Earth, which of all the rest is most unprofitable like
unsavory Salt, Matthew. 5.13. Stones are firm matter, Clay tough, but dust
easily dislipated and scattered with every blast of wind.

Object. But is not our body mixed of the four Elements?

Answ. Yes. Reason 1. For all these are found in us, our spirits are fiery, our
breath is airy, our blood and humors watery, our flesh and bones, muscles and
sinews have much Earthly matter in them.

Reason 2. We are nourished by all these Elements.

Reason 3, We are dissolved into all these Elements. But yet God first took
dust, then wetted it, and made Clay of it, and fashioned it into the form of
humane body, hence Job 4.19. The first foundation and matter was dust, clay
made of it, and our bodies of clay. Dust only is expressed as being first and
predominant.

Use 1. For instruction to all men; First, To behold Gods wonderful power,
wisdom and goodness, who out of a dust-heap has formed such a curious and
glorious work, Psalm. 139.14. All the Devils in hell cannot suddenly make a
Louse of dust, Exodus 8.18, 19. and Moses and Aaron did make but Lice of dust,
verse 17. Secondly, To be lowly and humble-minded especially when we come in
Gods presence. Genesis 18.27. Isai, 45.9. 1 Kings 8.27. Secondly, To be mindful of
our mortality, Genesis 3.19. every blast of Gods displeasure scatters our dusty
Tabernacle, even of great men, Isai^ 40.15, 23, 24. And therefore to remember
our Creator, and prepare for a change, Eccles. 12.1, 7.

Use 2. For comfort to the godly. First, He will not deal with us after our
sins, Psalm 103.13, 14. Secondly, To encourage us against the fear of men
whom the moth shall chavel to dust, Isai. 51.7, 8. To strengthen our faith in
Gods power to raise us, 1. Out of outward abasement; 1 Samuel 2.8. 2. Out of
inward abasement, Psalm. 119.25. And 3. out of the grave, Dan. 12.2. Our bodies
shall return to dust, that is, they shall dye, corrupt, and return to dust.
Genesis 3.19. hence Job 17.13, 14, and 21, 26, and 24, 20. It so falls out to
great men, Psalm 82.7. and mean, wise men and fools, Psalm. 49.10. rich men and
poor, Psalm. 49.10, 16, 17. good men and bad, Psalm. 30.9. and all men, Job 30,
23. Isai. 40.6, 7. except only Christ who saw no corruption, and so no dust,
Acts 2 31. and such as remain alive at the last day, 1 Cor. 15.51. 1 These.
4.17.

Reason 1. From the wages of sin, Romans 15.12, etc.

Reason 2. To root out the root of sin, Romans 6.7. Original sin is fitly
compared (by Epiphanius) to a wild Fig Tree, rooted in the joints of the
stone-wall of a goodly Palace, If it be cut and lopped (as it is by repentance
and mortification) yet it sprouteth again, but when the walls are taken down,
and the stones cast asunder, body and soul parted, then being built again, the
root is shaken out utterly.

Reason 3. To prepare the bodies of men for an immortal estate, 1 Cor. 15.50.

Use 1. To refute the vanity of carnal minds, who think to escape this common
condition of all men, Isai. 28.15, 18.

Use 2. To exhort to the remembrance of our Creator and to prepare for a
change. Here we have no abiding City, we seek one to come, Heb. 13.14. we are
but Tenants at will: our Tabernacles Earthly.

Use 3. To strike terror into the hearts of the wicked, who return to dust
now accursed after the fall, Genesis 3.17, 19. It is now the food of the Serpent.
Genesis 3.14. And it is meat and drink to Satan, to torment the wicked who are
accursed from God, and so depart, Matthew. 25.41.

Use 3. To comfort the godly in distress, Job 3.22. Art thou in sickness and
pain? thou art but grinding to dust, and then ease. Art thou grieved with a
body of sin? Romans 7.24. Dust will set thee free. Do thou desire to be
dissolved and to be with Christ? Phil. 1.23. Dust will dissolve thee, and be a
friend of the Bridegroom to bring thee to Christ. The soul of every man is
Gods gift, Genesis 2.7. Jer. 38.16. Zach. 12.1. Heb. 12.9.

Reason From Gods immediate hand put forth above the means in making the soul
in the body; which though it be not by Creation of nothing, yet it is by
efformation of preexistent matter, whether of the spirituous part of the seed,
or the souls of the Parents, see notes in Chap. 11.5.

Use 1. To employ the soul in Gods service, to which end it was made, Prove.
16.4. yea to return to him with advantage, Matthew. 25.27.

Use 2. To feed it with spiritual food, as word, Sacraments, etc. for it is a
spirit.

Use 3. Then God may take it again at his pleasure, Job 1.21. at death the
soul returns to God again, Luke 23.43, 46. Acts 7.59.

Reason 1. From the account to be made, and the reward to be received,

Use 1. To assure the Immortality of the soul, and to reprove the brutish
ignorance of such as consider it not, Eccles. 3.21.

Use 2. To exhort to prepare for this return, and therefore to remember our
Creator in the days of our youth.

Use 3. To comfort the godly in assurance of their return to God at the last.

Eccles. 12. v. 8. 8. Vanity of vanities (says the Preacher) all is vanity.


IN these words Solomon repeateth the conclusion of the whole book, which he
laid down in the beginning, Chap. 1.2. and has proved by sundry arguments
throughout the book, especially by an Induction of many particulars. And now
having finished his proof thereof, and demonstrated last of all, the vanity of
childhood and old age, youth and death, he repeateth again his conclusion, as
that which he has fully cleared, vanity of, etc.

Doctr. 1. The whole estate of the creature from first to last and the whole
estate of man from his childhood to his old age, yea to death it self, is a
state of excessive vanity, vanity of vanities, university of vanities. Romans
8.20.

Excess of vanity] For therefore it is called by an not vain but vanity it
self, yea, vanity of vanities; which is a superlative vanity, as holy of
holies is a superlative holiness. Variety of vanities] for it is vanities in
the Plural number, vanities of many sorts; University, or Universality of
vanities] All is vanity. The universality of all creatures is vanity, and all
vanities is found in the creatures. The vanity the creature is subject to, is
called the bondage of corruption, Romans 8.20, 21. which is not meant of natural
corruption, such as might be in beasts before the fall; for when generation was
to be, there was to be corruption. But would have been no vanity, because the
creature had then finished his work, as the silkworme (after a sort) has done
and so departs. But he means a corruption that fell upon the creature by
the fall; which is a corruption, 1. Through enmity of one creature against
another, when they also suffer most that are most innocent, Job 12.7, 8. 2.
Through their inward debility, or infirmity, whence First, Their often
abortions both in Cattle, Women, fruitful Trees, Olives, Vines, and Figs
casting their fruit. Secondly, Their labor to bring forth what fruit they do
yield, even beyond their strength, whence necessity in the soil of lying
fallow; in living creatures of barrenness, Genesis 3.17, and 4, 12. Levit. 26.20.
only weeds and Briars, and Thorns (and such fruits of the curse) are brought
forth with more ease, Gen 3.17, 18. Thirdly, Through abuse, by making the
creatures the objects of our best affections, Psalm. 20.7. Prove. 18.11. Job
31.24. Isai: 44.17. Ezekiel. 16.15. Thus we place our Sovereign good in the
creature comforts; and by making them instruments of wickedness whether
against God or against man, 2 Timothy 4.10, Jonah 2.8. Hos. 2.8. Jer. 22.21. Jer.
22, 17. Micah 2.1, 2. Job 24.15, 16.

Reason 1. From the fall of our first parents, Genesis 3.17.18.

Reason 2. From the sins of any person or people in succeeding Generations,
Genesis 4.12. Lev. 26.19, 20,

Use, See in Notes on Eccles. 11.7.

Eccles. 12. v. 9. And moreover, because the Preacher was wise, he still taught
the people knowledge: yea he gave good heed, and sought out, and set in order
many proverbs.


FRom this verse to the end of the chapter is the conclusion, which consists
of two parts: First, an encouragement to the reading of this and other books of
Scripture, from verse 9, to 12. Secondly, the sum or scupe, and use of this and
the other books of Scripture, to fear God, and keep his commandments; set
forth and confirmed by a twofold Reason: first, from the complete duty of man.
Secondly, from the exact judgment of God, verse 14. The former of these, to
wit, the encouragement to the reading of this and other books of Scripture, is
set on by seven Arguments: First, from Solomon improvement of his wisdom to
teach the people knowledge; and that proportionably, according to his wisdom.
The more wise the Preacher was, the more he taught the people knowledge, v. 9.

Secondly, from the elaborate diligence in pondering or weighing, seeking out,
ordering fit matters or words.

Thirdly, from the matter and frame of his words; they were words 1. Of
knowledge. 2. Of weight or power; the word signifies to rule or have
authority, as if the words were fit to command says and obedience, verse 9. 3.
Acceptable words, words of delight, v. 10. 4. Upright. 5. Of truth, v. 10.

Fourthly, from their efficacy, as 1. Goads. 2. Nails, v. 11.

Fifthly, from their authority, 1. Ministerial, fastened by the masters of
Assemblies. 2. Principal, or Sovereign, given by one Pastor, verse 11.

Sixthly, from their sufficiency; of these my son be enlightened (or
admonished) verse 12.

Seventhly, from the vanity and wearisomnesse of reading many of other books,
verse 12.

Doctr. The more wise a Governor (or Ruler) especially a Preacher is, the more
he teaches the people knowledge. If it be read, Because the Preacher was wise,
he still taught the people knowledge, it comes to the same issue. For if the
wisdom of Solomon caused him to teach the people knowledge, then the more wise
a man is, the more his wisdom will incline him to teach men knowledge. But in
Solomon's phrase it is used in way of comparison, as Eccles. 2.15. However this
is evident, It is the wisdom of a Ruler, especially of a Preacher, to teach
the people knowledge, 2 Chronicles. 17.7, 8, 9. Colos. 2.1, 2. 1 Cor. 10.1. and
12.1. and 14.18, 19, 20. 1 These. 4.13. 2 Pet. 3.8. Jer. 3.15.

Reason 1. From wise men's knowledge of the excellency of knowledge, which
ignorant men know not, and therefore regard not, Prove. 1.22. Eccles. 2.13, 14.
and 7.12. Prove. 19.2. Hos. 4.6. Isai. 27.11.

Reason 2. From their calling. They have a Pastoral charge of the people, yea
of the souls of the people, Rulers, Psalm. 78.70.71, 72. 2 Samuel 24.17.
Preachers, Heb. 13:17. God gives to non power over the bodies of his people,
but he gives them also charge over their souls. [see verse 1.]

Reason 3. For regard to their own comfort. Ignorant subjects will be either, 1.
Rebels, and unruly, 2 Chronicles. 15.3, 5, 6. 2. Flatterers, Hos. 7.3, 5. 3.
Barbarians. Ignorant people will be either 1. unprofitable hearers, Jer. 5.3,
4. 2. Persecutors, (which is worse) Acts 3.17. 1 Timothy 1.13.

Use 1. To teach all men of wisdom, that have people under them, whether in
Church, as Preachers; Commonwealth, as Magistrates; Family, as Parents,
Masters; that it is a part of your wisdom to teach your people knowledge; and
the more wisdom, the more to teach them knowledge. Preachers, Jer. 3.15.
Magistrates, as before. Householders, to their Wives, 1 Pet. 3.17. Children,
Ephesians. 6.4. Deuteronomy. 6.7. Servants. Genesis 18, 19. Schoolmasters and Tutors, Prove.
30.

Magistrates teach knowledge, (not only as Solomon here by writing) but,
First, by providing and sending forth good Ministers, 2 Chronicles. 17.7, 8, 9.
Secondly, by erecting and publishing good laws, Deuteronomy. 4.5, 6. especially for
the free passage of true Religion, Ezra 7.23. Thirdly, by removing stumbling
blocks (Teachers of lies) out of the way, 2 Chronicles. 17.6. Fourthly, by
punishment of evil doers, Judge. 8, 7, 16. Prove. 19.25 and 21.11. Fifthly, by
preferment and encouragement of wel-doers, Prove. 22.11. Psalm. 101, 6. Sixthly,
by example, Psalm. 122.1, 2.

Ministers teach knowledge, first, by dispensing ordinances, Jer. 31.15.
Secondly, by exemplary conversation, 1 Timothy 4.12. Householders teach by
Chatechising, Prove. 22.6. Wholesome Discipline, Prove. 29.15. and godly example,
1 Chronicles. 28.19.

All of them teach by maintenance of Schools of good learning, Acts 7.22. Else
knowledge is more hard to be attained, John 7.15.

Use 2. To teach people to be as willing to learn knowledge; else how shall
others teach knowledge?

Use 3. To teach us what is indeed knowledge; to wit, such things as Solomon
taught, Prove. 9.10. As first, the vanity of the creature, especially of a man's
self by nature, as in Ecclesiastes. Secondly, the precious sweetness of the
love of Christ, in the Canticles. Thirdly, the right ordering of Commonwealths,
or Families, as in the Proverbs, Prove. 9.30.

Eccles. 12. part of v. 9. with 10. Yea he gave good heed, and sought out, and
set in order many Proverbs.

10. The Preacher sought to find out acceptable words; and that which was
written was upright, even words of truth.


SOlomon in teaching the people, he sought out, and weighed, and set in order
words of weight and delight, words of uprightness and truth.

Solomon, though a wise man, (none like him;) yea, though immediately inspired
by the Holy Ghost; yet he set all his Logic awork in teachings and writings to
the people. For whereas there be three acts or exercises of Logic, 1
Invention; 2 Judgment; 3 Method; and in these three the whole work of Logic
is accomplished; Solomon set all these a work to find out a fit matter and
words for the instruction of the people. Investigavit, he sought out, is the
work of invention; libravit, trutinavit, he weighed (as in a balance) is the
work of judgment. He set in order, is the work of method.

Words of weight] (...) Proverbs, that is, words of weight, of power, of
authority, such as are apt to sink, not only (like David's stone into the
forehead of Goliath) but into the heart of the stoutest.

Reason why so called, from their effect: First, as convincing and pressing
down a proud spirit, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. Secondly, lifting up an humble spirit,
Isai. 66.2. and 50.4. Thirdly, directing and ordering their own lives, and
others, Ps. 119.125.

Words of delight, or acceptable words, not to the humors of the people, but
first, to the good pleasure of God, Gal. 1.10. Secondly to the estate of the
people, Gal. 4.20.

Reason 1. As being most suitable to the image of God in his children. These
words are as a seal, their hearts as wax; For all delight springs from
correspondency between the faculty and the object.

Reason 2. As making us men of delight, first to God; secondly, to our
brethren, Psalm 16.3.

Words or writings of uprightness or righteousness.

Reason 1. As suitable to Gods will, which is the rule of Right.

Reason 2. As aiming at right ends, the glory of God, the good of Churches,
Commonwealths, Families, souls.

Reason 3. As making us upright.

Words of truth.

Reason 1. As proceeding from the Spirit of truth.

Reason 2. As speaking of all men's persons, estates; of God, his counsels and
ways, as they be without error or guile.

Reason 3. As making us true.

Object. 1. But Penmen of Scripture speak from immediate revelation, 2 Timothy
3.16. 2 Pet. 1.21. Therefore not in a way of Logical discourse or study.

Answ. It follows not; for God breaths as well in meditation as in sudden
raptures, Jude 3. 1 Timothy 4, 13, 15. 2 Timothy 2.15.

Object. 2. Luke 21 14, 15.

Answ. It is a word of encouragement to Martyrs and Confessors that suffer in
a good cause, to expect immediate assistance, where they cannot well forecast or
premeditate to answer to sudden and unknown questions. Otherwise, if a man knew
beforehand their Interrogatories, it were expedient to study how, and what to
answer, Prove. 15.28.

Use 1. To reprove wearisomness of the instructions taught in this book: When
will our Teacher have done with this argument? that we might have none of
Christ; but indeed a gracious heart sees the more need of Christ in the vanity
of the creature.

Use 2. To reprove the rejection of studied Sermons.

Use 3. To teach Preachers the Imitation of Solomon in studious Invention,
Judgment, and order of words, first of power; secondly, of delight; thirdly,
of uprightness; fourthly, of truth, Jer. 48.10. Jude 3. Talents should be
employed to best advantage.

Use 4. Sermons may be elaborate without quotations.

Use 5. To exhort to the diligent reading and hearing of Scripture, even
Solomon's books; they are studiously written: they are words of power, delight,
uprightness, truth.

Eccles. 12.11. 11. The words of the wise are as goads, and as nails fastened
by the masters of assemblies, which are given from one shepherd.


COherence, see in verse 9.

Doctr. 1. The Penmen of Scriptures, and Teachers (...) Gods people were for
their spirit (or gifts) wise men; for their place in the Church, masters of the
Assemblies, and for their calling given by one shepherd, Prove. 11.30.

Reason 1. From their immediate carriage by the holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.21.

Reason 2. From their discerning between the percious and vile, Jer. 15.19. and
applying a fit word to either sort, Isai. 50.4.

Reason 3. From writing and teaching unchangeable rules, for all persons, in
all ages, to which nothing can be added, nor ought taken away, Deuteronomy. 12.32.

Reason 4. From fitness to withstand all oppositions, Luke 21.15. Acts 6.9, 10.

Masters of Assemblies, as being first, some of them Magistrates, though
Prophets also, as Moses, Joshuah, Samuel, Daved, Mordecai, Nehemiah. Secondly,
Some Priests, as Jeremy, Ezekiel, etc. Thirdly, all of them Prophets,
immediately inspired by the Holy Ghost, and so watchmen set over the flock,
Jer. 1.9, 10. Ezekiel. 3.17.

Object. But their place in the Church is ministerial, not masterly, 2 Cor.
1.24. and 4, 5. 1 Pet. 5.3.

Answ. True, because they command nothing in their own name, but Christ's, 1
Cor. 4.1. but for the Churches good, 2 Cor. 13.10. 2 But yet in the name of
Christ they call the Assemblies together, Acts 6.2. and they rule them being
gathered, with commandments, tebukes, and with all authority, Tit. 2.15, One
shepheard] is Christ, John 10.11, 16. 1 Pet. 2.25, and 5.5.

Reason 1. As laying down his life to purchase us, Joh. 10.11.

Reason 2. As providing food for us, leading us into green pastures, by still
waters, Psalm. 23.1, 2.

Reason 3. As healing our diseases and seeking us out in our wanderings, Psalm.
23.3 Ezekiel. 34.16. Luke 15.4. he gives the masters of the Assemblies, Jer.
3.15. Ephesians. 4.8, 11.

Reason 1. As instituting their callings, Ephesians. 4.8, 11.

Reason 2. As furnishing them with gifts.

Reason 3. As opening a door for their entrance, Joh. 10.9. Acts 20.28.

Use, see after the next Doctrine:

Doct. 2. The words of Scripture are as goades and nails, fastened or
implanted by the masters of the assemblies given by one Pastor. As Goads to
stir up the people to duty, 2 Pet. 1.13, and 3, 1. and to subdue an enemy
like Shamgars Goad, Judge. 3.31. 2 Cor. 10.4, 5: As Nails sticking fast in the
foul, Psalm 119.93. and fastening us to God, John 15.7. To our brethren, and to
our duties, Neh. 10, 29. Fastened or planted; as Genesis 2.8. as if they were not
dead (as door nails) nor dry pegs, or stakes; or nails, but living plants,
James 1.21. where his (...) may seem to allude to Solomon's (...) in this place;
Ministers are Planters, not only in the first gathering of Churches, 1 Cor.
3.67. but also in carrying on the rest of the work, as in building. Implanted
implies, First, The heart is pierced, and cut by the word (as in graffing or
planting) Acts 2.37. Secondly, The word taking root in the heart, wanting in
the stony ground, Matthew. 13.21. not shaken out by wine, music, merry company,
building business, etc. Thirdly, Living in us, Heb. 4.12. Fourthly, Growing in
us, Acts 19.20. Fifthly, Fruitful in us, Luke 8.15. Col. 1, 5, 6.

By the Masters of the Assemblies] Implies they have a Ministerial work, in
implanting and driving these nails to the head, 1 Cor. 3.6, 2 Pet. 1.13. These
words and the exciting and fastening power of them are given by one Pastor, to
wit, by Christ, as was opened in the former Doctrine, Psalm. 68.11.

Reason 1. The word is revealed by his spirit, 2 Timothy, 3.16. 2 Pet. 1.21.

Reason 2. His spirit sharpneth and points it as a Goad, Psalm. 45.5.

Reason 3. His spirit implanteth and fasteneth them.

Both the Doctrines may be thus comprised in one.

Doctr. The words of Scripture are the words of the wise, quickening like Goads
and fastened like Nails, implanted by many Masters. of the Assemblies, yet
given by one Pastor.

Use 1. See here what manner of persons the penmen of Scriptures and the
Preachers of them be, to wit, 1. For their gifts, wise. 2. For their office,
Masters of Assemblies. 3. For their calling, given by one Pastor, as in the
former Doctrine.

Use 2. To teach the Masters of Assemblies, how the word should be handled
wisely according to the sense of Scripture, and to the estate of the people. As
Goades, 1. Sharply, piercingly, Titus 1.13. quickening a dull spirit, Psalm.
119.93. 2. Subduing and wounding an enemy, whether lust or gainsayer (as
Shamgars Goad, Judge. 3.31.) 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. Titus 1.9. As Nails, 1. Driving at
first the sharp but small end into the heart; things that may most easily sink
and take place, and enter, Heb. 5.11, 12, 13. 2. Following the word with
stronger matter which may hold the heart strongly and closely to God, to
Brethren, and to Duty.

Implanted] this done by dispensing the word, 1. In faithful simplicity, Jer.
23.28, 29. Humane wit and authorities added to it do but adulterate it, like
as Paint does marble, or as honey and wine in childrens milk: as painted
glass windows darken the light: as a bumbasted sword hinders cutting. 2. In
manifestation of the spirit breathing and speaking in the Scripture, and
breathing and speaking in the hearts, and words, and lives of Ministers. Hence
power, 1 Cor. 2.2, 3, 4. 2 Cor. 13.3, 4.

Use 3. To teach us the state of the people without Masters of the Assemblies,
to be wanting, first in heavenly wisdom, Jer. 4.22. Secondly, in forwardness;
hence need of a goad to prick them forward. Heb. 5.11. Thirdly, in
stedfastness; hence need of nails to fasten them, Ephesians. 4.14.

Use 4. For trial, when the word has had his kindly and true effect, and work
in us; to wit, first when it quickneth us; secondly, when it strengthens us;
thirdly, when it is implanted in us.

Use 5. To teach us to make use of Christ, as our shepherd, whether we be
masters of Assemblies, or sheep fed by them.

Eccles. 12.12. 12. And further, by these, my son, be admonished: of many
books there is no end, and much study is a weariness of the flesh.


IN these words, as in the former Solomon exhorts his son, and in him all
his subjects; and in his subjects all Christians, yea all men to be admonished
by these books of Scripture, whether penned by Solomon or other masters of the
Assemblies. See this former argument in v. 9.

In this verse, first, from the sufficiency of these books, by these my son be
thou admonished. Secondly, from the unprofitablenesse and wearisomnesse of
making and studying many other books, Of making many books there is no end, and
much study a weariness of the flesh.

Doct. It is the duty of every son of wisdom to be admonished by the books of
Scripture, whether written by Solomon, or by other Prophets; whether sharpened
or fastened by the masters of Assemblies, Psalm 19.11.

To be admonished implies three things: First, to be enlightened, making the
word a light or lanthorn, Psalm. 119.105. So the word is translated, shine as
the light, Dan. 12.3. or brightness. Secondly, to be warned, and so first
reclaimed from evil, or sin: secondly preserved from evil of punishment
approaching, Ezekiel. 3.17. to 21. and 33.4, 5, 6. Thirdly, to be made circumspect
to duty; so the word is translated take heed, Ezra 4.22. and so used Psalm.
19.11.

Reason 1. From our relation to God and his Prophets: we are their children,
they therefore are our fathers, My son, Text. Acts 3.25. God is our father
and Master, Mal. 1.6. and therefore all his words are warnings [as of the
Centurion to his servants, Matthew. 8.9.]

Reason 2. From the benefit of taking warning, and great danger of the
contrary, Psalm. 19.11. Col. 1.28. Ezekiel. 3.17, to 21. and 33, 4, 5.

Reason 3. From the sufficiency of Scripture to that end, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. If
they suffice not, none else will, Luke 16.29, 31.

Reason 4. From the unprofitableness, or boundless endlesnesse of reading or
writing many books; one book alleges and refers to another: neither does a
man studious of books know where to stint himself. Hence falls in, 1.
Vanity, as of many words, so of many books. 2. Impotency of concocting them. 3.
Fastidious loathing of Scriptures.

Reason 5. From the wearisomness of much study to the flesh, it beats and
h^ateth the brain, it intends and stretches the mind, as if the body were
set upon the rack, yea sometimes to the breaking of a man's wit, as the string
of an instrument stretched too high or too far. As in wrestling, so in
studying, there is a striving, then weariness, then despair of overcomming,
then giving over, then taking up, striving again, and so etc. Much study dries
up the sweetest moisture of the body, whether blood or marrow: consumes the
cheerful spirits, whether of brain or heart, and so breeds morosity,
harshnesse of spirit, troublesome to a man's self and others.

Use 1. To refute the additions of the Decrees of Popes, of the Apocrypha, of
the Canons of Councels, of the Traditions of Fathers to the Scriptures, for the
direction of faith and life, Prove. 30.6.

Use 2. To teach us what we are without the Scriptures; Dark, and want
enlightening; stubborn, and want breaking, and warning; rash, and want
circumspect guiding,

Use 3. To reprove the stubbornness of most men, who will not be warned nor
enlightened by the Scriptures, nor made circumspect, Jer. 44.16, 17. Such will
profit by no means else, Luke 16.29, 30, 31.

Object. Yes, By affliction and correction?

Answ. No, not without instruction from the word, Prove. 6.23. I^ is a sign God
will destroy such, 1 Samuel 2.25. 2 Chronicles. 25, 16. Prove. 29.1. Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20,
21. The meanest child that will be warned is better then such, Eccl. 4.13. A man
that will not be admonished, will become poor, though a King.

Use 4. To teach such as are to warn others, to warn them from the Scriptures;
from every vice to every duty. As Paul convinced the Jews, Acts 28.23.

Use 5. To wean us from the vanity of affectation of much reading.

Object. Much reading and study 1. helps a barren wit and weak judgment, by
inventing new things, and clearing and confirming the old. 2. Solomon himself
wrote many books, 1 Kings 4, 32, 33.

Answ. Solomon's books that were not Scripture are lost, least we should
attribute too much light to them: Therefore no books for this admonition in
ways of Religion to be attended to, but the Scriptures; others so far as they
explain or apply these.

Secondly, Books for other ends, not so much to be sought after for variety,
but for choice.

Thirdly, those books we do use, we should seek to digest them by sound
judgment, and serious meditation.

Eccles. 12.13. Let us bear the conclusion of the whole matter: Fear God, and
keep his Commandments, for this is the whole duty of man.


THese two last verses contain a second part of the conclusion of the whole
Chapter: The former was a pithy exhortation to receive this book, and other
books of Scripture penned and opened by the masters of the Assemblies, and
given by Christ, v. 9: to 12.

This latter is a consectary of the sum and scope of the whole book, which is
summed up in these two, Fear God, keep his Commandments. Which is amplified
by an Introduction calling for audience and attention, Let us hear the end
(sum, conclusion) of the whole matter, to wit, of the whole foregoing
discourse of the vanities of the creatures, and of all the conditions thereof.
And confirmed by a twofold argument, 1. From the sum of man's duty and safety
for this (to fear God and to keep his Commandments) is the whole of man, the
whole duty of man, verse 13. the whole safety and stay of man, that which
stays with him. 2. From the strict exactness of the last judgment, verse 14.

Doctr. 1. It is a conclusion worthy of all attention; that the ends and scope
of discovering and discerning all earthly vanities, is to fear God and keep
his Commandments; the same course John Baptist took to the same end, Isai.
40.6, 7, 8. Its a conclusion worthy of all attention; for Solomon calls upon
himself as well as upon all his people, let us hear, etc. As a Cock clappeth
his own sides with his wings, to stir up himself, before he awaken others with
his crowing. For clearing this point it would be opened, 1. What is the fear
of God? 2. What are meant by his Commandments? 3. What is meant by the keeping
of them.

The fear of God it is an holy affection of the heart, whereby we are affected
toward God offended with the greatest terror, and toward God reconciled with
greatest reverence, Heb. 12.28. godly fear, Isai. 8.13, 2 Psalm. 90.11, and
119, 53. Luke 12.4, 5. 3 Heb. 1^.28. Psalm 130.4. Exodus 15.11. fearful in prais,
Hos. 3.5. Hence being affected to God, offended with greatest terror, First, we
eschew all sin whereby God is offended whether man take notice of it or no, Job
1.8, and 31, 21, 23. Secondly, no worldly dangers feared so much as God;
displeasure, Luke 12.4, 5. Thirdly, No matter so weighty as to seek Christ in
whom our reconciliation is wrought, 2 Cor. 5.11, 14.

Hence being affected to God reconciled with greatest reverence, First, Christ
in whom we are reconciled is most reverenced and adored, Psalm. 130.4. and most
closely cleaved to, Jer. 39.40. Secondly, His word most venerable and awful,
Isai. 66.2. Psalm 119.16. Thirdly, Our own ability is distrusted and we walk in
awful dependence on Christ in our whole service of God, Phil. 2.12, 13. Hebr.
12.28. Romans 11.20. 1 Pet. 1.17, 18. Reverence arising from apprehension of his
transcendent greatness, and goodness, we worship him, and endeavor to
approve our selves to him, to be accepted of him.

2. The Commandments, be the ten Commandments; Deuteronomy. 4.13. which is further
explained in the Gospel by believing on Christ, 1 John 3.23.

3. To keep these Commandments is set forth by comparisons. As our way, Josh.
1.7. As our Treasure, Rev. 3.20, 21. As the apple of our eye, Prove. 7.2. And as
our life and soul, Prove. 19.16. that is, with all diligence, faithfulness,
tenderness, and pre-eminence.

Reason 1. From the whole of man wrapped up in the fear God and keeping his
Commandments; it is our whole perfection and safety; life makes us equal to a
Plant, sense to a Beast, reason to a man, grace (fearing God and keeping his
Commandments) to Angels, Luke 20.36. Isai. 6.2. Psalm. 103.20. It compleateth
our conformity to the Image of God: It is our whole duty, and attaineth an
everlasting happy estate Deuteronomy. 5.29. else we walk in vanity, Psalm. 39.5, 6.
and fear death, hell, the faces of men.

Reason 2. From the vanity of seeking after Gods fear, and yet not weaned from
the vanities of the world, Mark 6.20.

Reason 3. From the vanity of weanednesse from earthly vanities, without
learning the fear of God, and keeping his Commandments; such was all the
devotion of Popery, leaving great estates, yea Kingdoms to live and dye in a
Friars Coule, Isai. 1.11, 12, 13.

Reason 4. Of the attention due to this word and counsel: First, From the
dullness of our hearing, Heb. 5.11. Secondly, From the weightinesse of the
duty, Text. Thirdly, From the noise of worldly matters and imbred lusts
hindering our attention.

Use 1. To refute the Antinomians who abrogate the Commandments, and in sum
hold forth, Grace without Christ, Christ without Faith, Faith without the word
of promise applied particularly to me by the spirit, And the word of the Gospel
without the word of the law.

Use 2. To teach us to make these two duties our whole work, Deuteronomy. 5.29.

Eccles. 12.14. 14. For God shall bring every work into judgment, with every
secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil.


IN the former verse Solomon gave it for a conclusion of the whole Book, Fear
God, and keep his Commandments.

Which duty he presses by a twofold Argument; First, from the weight of the
Duty, it is the sum and safety of the whole man, verse 13. Secondly, from the
universal and strict account which God will take of every work done under the
Sun. Text. v. 14. So this last end of the book is the last end of the world.

Doctr. There is no work, whether it be open or secret, good or evil, but God
will bring it to judgment.

No work] whether, first, Of the heart as counsels, thoughts, affections, 1
Cor. 4.5. Jer. 17.9, 10. Secondly, of the lips, as words, Matthew. 12.36. Jude
15. Thirdly, of the hands, or other outward members of the body, 2 Cor. 5.10.
Eccles. 11.9. Psalm 50.21. Not only of all the children of men, but even of
evil Angels also, 1 Cor. 6.3:

Though never so secret] (...) absconditum, velatum, hidden or secret; so the
word signifies, not as the vulgar Latin turns it, erratum, absurdly; for
when he says, pro omni errato, sive Bonum, sive malum sit, it argues some
erratum is bonum. But if it be an erratum, an error or fault, how is it good?
if good, how is it erratum, an error or fault? See then their vanity that
think the vulgar Latin authentical; or the Church of Rome infallible.

God will bring all to judgement] many things in this world, Prove. 11.31. Psalm
58.10.11. All things whatsoever, at the last day, 2 Cor. 5.10. Romans 2.16. Acts
17.31. Matthew. 25.31, to 46.

Reason 1. It is for the honor of God, to rectify all the iniquity of
judgement-seats, and other obloquies here below, Eccles. 5.8. and 3.16, 17.
with Micah 7.3, 4. As his infinite wisdom knows all iniquity, so his
infinite justice cannot but give due recompense to all.

Reason 2. It is for the honor of Christ, John 5.23, 29. To declare the honor
first, of his power, in raising the dead by his voice, John 5.28, 29. Secondly,
of his glory, Matthew. 25.31. all the elements burning about him, 2 Pet. 3.10.
all the Angels and Saints attending him, each one as bright as the Sun, Matthew.
25.31. Jude 14. a glorious high Throne set in the air for him, Matthew. 25.31.
all the creatures presented before him, and bowing to him, Romans 14.10, 11.
Thirdly, the honor of his wisdom, in making manifest the secret counsels of
all hearts, with all secret conveyances, and that particularly 1 Cor. 4.5. Luke
12.2. Fourthly, of his justice; both showing the cause of all his own
administrations; why often it went ill with the godly, and well with the
wicked, Esaias 28.17. and rewarding all according to their works and the fruits
of them, Jer. 17.10. which will not be accomplished whilst the world lasts;
neither the good that some have done by their laws, books, counsels, examples,
etc. nor the evil of others.

Reason 3. It is for the honor of the Church, and of all the godly, 2 These.
1.10. Micah 7.9.

Use 1. For information, 1. That the account taken at the last day will be
general, of all Nations and persons; and also particular of every singular
cause and person, Romans 14.12. Matthew. 12.36. Psalm 50.21. And that not secret,
but open, so as all men may judge of all secret conveyances, Luke 12.2. 1 Cor.
4.5. Secondly, that the day of judgment will be of longer continuance, then a
night or day: For so many businesses of all Nations, and persons cannot be
examined openly, in the space of a few hours or years: The day of grace is of
many years of (1 Cor. 6.2.) so also is that of judgment.

Use 2. To exhort to repentance, and faith, that he who shall be our judge, may
be our Savior, Acts 17.30, 31. 1 Cor. 11.31. 2 These. 1.10.

Use 3. To bridle all licentiousness and boldness in sin, and pleasure in it,
Eccles. 11.9. Acts 24.25.

Use 4. To exhort to sincere and conscionable, awful, and fruitful obedience,
1 Pet. 1.17. 2 Pet. 3.11, to 14. 2 Cor. 5.9, 10. Text, v. 13, 14. Luke 12.1, 2.
1 Cor. 15.58.

Use 5. To exhort to judge others sparingly and charitably, 1 Cor. 4.5. Romans
14.10. Matthew. 7.1, 2. Jam. 2.13. But to provoke them earnestly to prepare from
this day, 2 Cor. 5.10, 11.

Use 6. To encourage the Saints to patience, constancy, and comfort in well
doing, and ill suffering, 1 Cor. 15.58. 1 These. 4.17.2. 2 These. 1.6, 7.

FINIS.

