THE CORPORATION of WEAVERS At London and Canterbury do Humbly Offer to the
Consideration of The Honorable House of COMMONS.
That this Kingdom will sustain great Evils and Damage, if a Bill now
depending in this House should pass into a Law; which Bill enjoins the Wear of
Cloth or Leather, and consequently Restrains the Wear of Silks and Stuffs,
mixed with Wool, Silk und Hair, viz.
THE restraint of wearing such Silks and Stuffs by the Nobility and Gentry
seven Months in the Year, and by the Commonalty at all times, will necessarily
impoverish and depopulate this Kingdom, there being no Trade that employ so
many people as those relating to the Manufacturing of Silk and Hair; for upon
the most modest Computation they are judged to be several Hundreds of Thousands
of Weavers, Throwsters, Windsters, Dyers, and other Dependants thereupon; many
of which have (according to Law) served Seven Years Apprentiship to their
several Trades, and have no other Freehold or Inheritance for themselves and
Families to subsist on, and who by such a Law will (in a manner) be deprived of
their Trades, and thereby necessitated to seek their Living in other parts, or
become chargeable to the places of their abodes; For that the Merchant cannot
give Credit, nor the Weaver, Throwster, etc. supply their Journeymen and
Windsters the year round, without returns of Moneys for their Commodities; And
their Journeymen, etc. possess nothing but what they get by their daily Labor
to supply their daily Wants, Nor can their Journeymen, etc. expect to be
employed in the Manufacturing of Cloth, for that (as hereafter is evident)
Exportatien of Cloth to Turkey will be abated, and consequently the present
Manufactures of Wool want employment.

That although this Bill provides that Stuffs made of Mohair Yarn (being lined
with Cloth or Stuffs made of Wool) may be worn in upper Garments by men only,
yet such Stuffs (if Camlets are meant thereby) do not consume the 8th. part of
Mohair Yarn imported, nor will they employ a 30th. part of the Manufactures
that Mohair Yarn do now employ: For that Hair Shaggs, the Ground and Shoot
whereof is Woollen Yarn, and the several Commodities hereafter mentioned, viz.
Hair Prunella, which are customarily worn by the Clergy in the Summer season,
together with Camlets, Barratines, Crispiana's, Tamalta's, Calamancces, Mohair,
Farrendiens, Morella's, and diverse other Stuffs are made of three parts of
Mohair Yarn, and but one part Silk, and these are chiefly for the use of Women
in the Winter season who are not allowed to wear the same.

And although this Bill provides that Women's Garments may be lined with Silk,
etc. yet such Linings have Customarily been imported from the Indies, and the
English Manufactures of Silk and Hair by such Provision no ways benefited.

That such a Law will destroy the intention of the Bill it self, by lessening
the Consumption of English Wool, and impoverishing the Manufactures thereof.
For that the greatest part of our coarse Cloths and Stuffs made of English
Wool are Transported beyond the Seas, and chiefly to Turkey, in return whereof
the Merchants necessarily import Raw Silk and Mohair Yarn wholly
unmanufactured, which imploys so many Thousands in this Kingdom. Now it the
Consumption of Silk and Hair be abated, as it must be by the restraint of the
wear thereof, the Exportation of Cloth which goes out fully manufactur'd, must
proportionably abate thereunto for that Turkey does not afford Commodities
proper for England to be brought in returns, other than Raw Silk and Mohair
Yarn. So that Whereas the Turkey Company have so late Exported 25 or 30
thousand Cloths in one Year, they will by this Restraint be greatly reduced.
And for that every of the Nobility, Gentry, and better sorts of Tradesmen and
their Families will not wear our coarse Clothes made of English Wool, but fine
Dutch Clothes, and Clothes made of Spanish Wool. It being evident, and the
Clothiers themselves will acknowledge that Salisbury, Devonshire and Worcester
Clothes from 11 s. per yard and upwards have not one Lock of English Wool
contained in them, except Clothes made of that small quantity of English Wool
which Lempster affords, the quantity whereof is very inconsiderable. Upon which
it is manifest, That the more Silks are worn in England (if Manufactur'd here)
the greater is the Consumption of English Wool, for such persons as wears a
Silk or Mohair Garment does certainly expend more English Wool, that being
return of English Woollen Cloth.

And the Consumption of Wool will also be lessened by the Restraint of the
wear of Stuffs, made of part Wool, and part Silk; for that the several Stuffs
hereafter mentioned, viz Bombazines Anthorines, Silk-Sayes, Crape, Silk
Masquerade, Stripped Cheneys, Virgins Beauty, Drafts of all sorts, Druggets of
all sorts, Silk shades, Worsted Barratines, Glassamines, Katharina's, Tameenes,
Estameenes, and all other or most Norwich Stuffs, with great Numbers of other
sluifs too many to be here inserted, having but one part of Silk in them and
nine parts of Worsted (which is our English Sheeps Wool; yet because of that
little part of Silk, must not be worn in Apparel.

That this Restraint will not only ruin the English Manufactures of Silk and
Hair, but also great Numbers of French Protestants that fled hither from the
Persecurions in France, who will be necessitated to depart into other parts,
for it is well known that the far greater Numbers of such Protestant Strangers
have been employed and wholly subsist by Manufacturing of Silk and Mohair Yarn.

But now if it shall please the Parliament instead of Restraining the Wear of
our own Manufactures to prohibit the Wearing of Silks and stuffs Manufactured
the Foreign part, and that be cause Manufactured silks heretofore Imported
from France was the return or product of Cloth, made of English Wool, but of
late Years has been the return of Money only, whereby the Consumptlon of Wool
has been abated about fix hundred thousand 1. per. Annum, this would certainly
enrich this Nation; and cause a greater Consumption of Wool.

For these Reasons and for that the said Restraints will in a manner prohibit
the use of Silk and Hair stuffs, and be the present ruin of many Mercers and
others, whose Stocks consist in Silks and Hair stuff. It is humbly prayed,
That this Honorable House will be pleased to lay aside the aforesaid Bill.

LONDON. Printed for John Wallis. 1689.


