SINGING OF PSALMS A GOSPEL-ORDINANCE. OR A TREATISE, WHEREIN Are handled
these Particulars: 1. Touching the Duty it self. 2. Touching the Matter to be
Sung. 3. Touching the Singers. 4. Touching the manner of Singing.


By JOHN COTTON, Teacher of the Church at Boston in New England.

LONDON, Printed for J. R. at the Sun and Fountain in Pauls-Church-yard: and
H. A. at the Crown in Popes-Head-Alley. 1650.

OF THE SINGING OF PSALMS.
CHAP. J. Propounding the several Questions about it; and handling the First.
TO prevent the godly-minded from making melody to the Lord in Singing his
Praises with one accord (J mean with one heart, and one voice) Satan has
mightily bestirred himself, to breed a discord in the hearts of some, by
filling their heads with four heads of scruples about the Duty.

1. Touching the Duty it self of singing Psalms with lively voice, whether
there be any such Worship at all now to be allowed and practiced in the days
of the New Testament.?

2. Touching the matter to be sung, whether Scripture Psalms penned by David,
Asaph, Moses, Solomon, Hezekiah, Habakkuk, Zachary, Simeon, Deborah, Mary,
Elizabeth, or the like: Or songs immediately indicted by some personal
spiritual gift of some Officer, or Member of the Church?

3. Touching the Singers, If vocal singing may be allowed.

Who must Sing? 1. Whether one for all the rest, the rest only saying Amen? or
the whole Congregation? 2. Whether women as well as men, or men alone? 3.
Whether carnal men and Pagans, as well as Church Members and Christians?


4. Touching the manner of singing; Whether the Psalm may be sung, either 1.
In Meeter Devised? 2. In Tunes Invented? 3. In Order, after the Reading of it?


For the first Question, we lay down this Conclusion for a Doctrine of Truth;
That singing of Psalms with a lively voice, is an holy Duty of Gods Worship
now in the days of the New Testament. When we say, singing with lively voice,
we suppose none will so far misconstrue us, as to think we exclude singing
with the heart; For God is a Spirit: and to worship him with the voice without
the Spirit, were but lip-labor* which (being rested in) is but lost labor (
Isa. 29.13.) or at most, profits but little, 1 Timothy 4.8. But this we say, As
we are to make melody in our hearts, so with our voices also. In opposition to
this, there be some Anti-psalmists, who do not acknowledge any singing at all
with the voice in the New Testament, but only spiritual songs of joy and
comfort of the heart in the word of Christ.

1. Proof for the Truth.

The first proof for the truth is taken from the Commandment of the Lord by
Paul, who instructs and exhorts the Ephesians, To speak one to another in
Psalms and Hymns and spiritual Songs, (...), etc. Ephesians. 5.19. And so in
Col. 3.16. Teaching and admonishing one another in Psalms, Hymns, etc. which
cannot be done without lively voice. And so in 1 Cor. 14.15, 16. The Apostle
commands the Church of Corinth, that such as sing in the Church, should not
only sing in the Spirit, but with understanding also: that is, not only with
their own understanding (for all that sung with the Spirit did so) but with the
understanding of the hearers, that so he that occupied the place of the
unlearned, might be edified, and say, Amen, at such giving of thanks. Whence
it follows unavoydably, That singing of Psalms is not only a making of
melody to the Lord with inward grace in the heart, but also with lively and
audible voice, which is the point in Question.

Ob^ect. 1. This place in the Corinths makes nothing to the cause in hand; For
these Corinthian Psalms, were not the Psalms of David, nor sung by the whole
Congregation, much less in Meeter and Tunes devised by men, as ours be; but
they were spiritual songs, immediately inspired and endited by the Holy Ghost,
and sung only by him that received that gift, as the Spirit gave him
utterance.

Answ. Neither did we allege the place, to prove the singing of David's
Psalms, by the whole Congregation in such like Meeter and Tunes as ours be.
These points do all of them belong to the other Questions, which follow to be
handled (God willing) ^n their place. But to this purpose we allege the place,
That singing of Psalms in the New Testament, is to be dispensed in Christian
Churches, not only with inward grace in the heart, making melody to the Lord;
but also with outward audible lively voice: which is the very point in hand,
and which this commandment of the Apostle does clearly demonstrate.

2. Object. The Apostle to the Ephesians and Colossians, does not say, Sing one
to another in Psalms, but speak or preach one to another; or in other word^,
Teach and admonish one another, The Psalms dwelling in their hearts, they were
to dispense them in a way of Teaching and Admonishing. But as for singing he
makes no mention of that, until he came to teach them the manner of
dispensing the words of Christ unto God in the end of the verse. And then
indeed he teaches them to sing in the Spirit, making melody with grace in the
heart unto God.

Answ. Such as tremble at the word (as the framer of this objection professes
himself to do,) they should rather bow their ^udgements and practice to
Scripture and language, then bow the ^ence of Scripture to their own
conceptions against the language of Scripture. It is one thing, to speak one
to another in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual songs, as is done in singing,
another thing to preach and teach one another, out of Psalms, and Hymns, and
spiritual Songs. It is true, they were to Teach and admonish one another out
of the Psalms, and the scope of Paul will reach that. But if Paul had only
meant that, to wit, That they should teach and preach one to another out of the
Psalms, he would not have said* Speak ye one to another in Psalms* or with
Psalms: but out of the Psalms or from the Psalms; for such is the language
of the Holy Ghost in expressing such a duty. Paul is said to have expounded,
and testified, and persuaded the Jews out of the Law of Moses, and out of the
Prophets, Acts 28.23. So Philip is said to begin to Preach Jesus to the Eunuch,
(...), from that Scripture in Isaiah, or at that Scripture, Act. 8.35. He did
not Preach Jesus to him in speaking that Scripture.

Object. If that speaking of the Ephesians one to another in Psalms, did not
hold forth their expounding and preaching in Psalms one to another, but only
the bare reading or singing the letter of the Psalms, This were such a service
wherein there in nothing of Christ held forth externally. I speak not of the
matter of the Psalms, (which is full of Christ, as other Scriptures:) but of
the outward manner of dispensing it. There is nothing held forth in the singing
of it after the usual manner, but what nature and art may attain unto. There
is no exercise of any spiritual gift held forth in it, as is in all other
administrations, which Christ has ordained.

2. Besides, as such a singing is not a gift of Christ, so neither does it tend
to the glory of Christ. The Church not edified by it: else a Pagan singing with
us, might edify the Church.

3. From both these, it appears, That such singing of Psalms tends to the
dishonor of Christ: seeing it holds forth externally no more, then what a
carnal man (a man out of Christ) yea a Pagan might express.

Answ. 1. Singing of Psalms holds forth as much of Christ externally, as
reading of the Word, or as the hearing of it read or preached, or as the
falling down upon our knees in prayer, and saying, Amen, in the end of it. Fot
though the Word, when it is publicly read, ought also to be opened after the
reading: yet the very reading of it, is it self an Ordinance, and is not
without a blessing to the faithful reader or hearer of it, ^o more then other
Ordinances. Or else there would be some Ordinances of God like unto humane
Ceremonies, empty and beggarly.

Answ. 2. Moral duties, even in Pagans, may edify the Church, as Abimeleths
reproof of Abraham and Sarah, Genesis 20. Pro. 9, 10.

Answ. 3. Singing of Psalms is accompanied and blessed of God (by his grace)
with many gracious effects, above nature or art; As 1. It allayeth the passions
of melancholy and choler, yea and scatters the furious temptatians of evil
spirits, 1 Samuel 16.23. Whence also is helps to assuage enmity, and to restore
friendship and favor, as in Saul to David. It was not the sound of David's
Harp that could have this power, either over the evil spirit, or over the
sinful passions of Saul himself, if the sound of the Harp had not been
quickened and enlived, as it were by a spiritual song, and by the Spirit of God
breathing therein.

2. Singing of a spiritual song, prepares to prophecy, by ministering the
Spirit, 2 King. 3.15. Whilst the Minstrell played, the hand of the Lord (that
is, his Spirit) came upon Elisha: The Minstrells playing, if it had not been
accompanied with a spiritual song, it could not have conveyed such a
spiritual blessing. In 1 Samuel 10.5, 6. they could not be said (as there they
be) to have prophesied with Harpes and Violls, unless they had sung some holy
songs, together with their playing on Instruments. For Prophecy is an unterance
only of the word of God, and of the things of God contained in it; which
Instruments without voice cannot do. Nor had their playing with Instruments
been a means of conveying the Spirit to Saul, had not their voices concurred
and sung with their Instruments.

3. Singing of Psalms honors God with our glory, Psalm. 108.1. and Psalm.
57.^, 8. Where David's glory being distinguished not only from his Harp, but
from his heart, it cannot fitly be understood of any other member, but his
tongue, by which he was wont in singing to glorify God.

Object. These gracious effects and fruits of singing Psalms* do plead as
much for singing and playing with instruments, as for singing with voices.

Answ. 1. This last effect of singing to the glory of God with our glory, is
peculiar only to singing with our tongues.

Answ. 2. Suppose it were true, that these effects of singing Psalms did plead
as much for singing and playing with Instruments, as singing with voices; yet
evident it is, that singing with voices had the pre-eminence* as that which
uttering the word of God, did chiefly utter the Spirit of God breathing in it.
And withal evident likewise it is, that it is no impeachment to an Ordinance,
that the outward dispensing of it may be performed by nature and art: but
notwithstanding that, it may be accompanied of God with a spiritual blessing.

Answ. 3. Singing with Instruments was typical, and so a ceremonial worship,
and therefore is ceased. But singing with heart and voice is a moral worship,
such as is written in the hearts of all men by nature: As to pray in distress,
so when we are mercy, and have cause of solemn thankesgiving unto God, then to
sing Psalms, which the Holy Ghost by the Apostle James approves and
sanctifies, Jam. 5.13. Or suppose singing with Instruments were not typical,
but only an external solemnity of worship, fitted to the solace of the
outward senses of children under age, (such as the Israelites were under the
Old Testament, Gal. 4.1, 2, ^.) yet now in the grown age of the heirs of the
New Testament, such external pompous solemnities are ceased, and no external
worship reserved, but such as holds forth simplicity, and gravitie; nor is
any voice now to be heard in the Church of Christ, but such as is significant
and edifying by signification, (1 Cor. 14.10, 11, 26.) which the voice of
Instruments is not.

Answ. 4. It is an honor to Christ, and to his grace, not only when we hold
forth spiritual gifts, but also when we perform Christian duties. And duties
performed in Faith (without which prayer it self is not accepted) they go not
without a spiritual blessing, though Nature and Art might perform the same
for the outward work. The Trayling of the weapons of the Israelites, and their
Military March, both in silence and shouting, about the walls of Jericho, was
no greater work externally, then carnal men and Pagans might have performed
as well as Israelites; but this being done by Israelites in faith and obedience
to Gods command, it was mighty through God to cast down the high and strong
walls of Jericho, Josh. 6.13.14, 15, 16, 20. And the Apostle looking at this
and the like Precedents, sets forth Faith as that which is prevalent and
effectual in both Testaments, howsoever the work or worship be external*
Heb. 11.30. In like manner is it with the reading of the Word, and the hearing
of it, as also the silent joining in Prayer, and concluding it with Amen,
though all these be such duties as Nature and Art may perform the outward
work of them: yet when the people of God do perform the same in the faith of
Christ, and in the obedience of Gods command, they find a gracious blessing of
God. Yea carnal and profane persons and Pagans, though they cannot expect the
like blessing from their empty outside performances; yet they sometimes taste
more sweetness and enlargement therein, then flesh and blood could imagine, 1 Samuel 10.5, 6. Saul joining with the Prophets in their holy melody found another
Spirit coming on him, which also argues (by the way) that the joining of
profane and carnal hypocrites in such spiritual songs, does not evacuate the
blessing of God to his people, but rather reach forth some spiritual blessing,
(though common) to such carnal hypocrites.

Object. It may be in the old Testament, such an outward worship as Nature and
Art could accomplish, might be allowed and blessed of God: But now in the New
Testament, as God is a Spirit, so he allows and blesses no worship, but what
is dispensed in Spirit and Truth.

Answ. God was a Spirit in the old Testament, as well as in the New; nor did he
then allow and bless any worship, but what either was performed in Spirit and
Truth, or did convey Spirit and Truth. Albeit more external rites in worship
were then appointed* then in the New Testament are now continued; for which end
Christ alleges those words in the place in John, to which you allude: But
nevertheless, though Christ have not limited his worship to any certain place
now, as then (which was the point Christ there speaks to;) nor does he rest
in external performance; yet evident it is, God has appointed in these days
of the Gospel sundry external worships now as well as then, (and the same in
both Testaments to be performed in Spirit and Truth;) as hearing and reading
the Word, kneeling in Prayer, and saying* Amen; All which Nature and Art may
perform as well as the singing of Psalms with vocal melody.

CHAP. II. Propounding and clearing the second Proof for singing Psalms with
lively voice.
THe second Proof is taken from the examples of Christ himself, and of his
Saints and Disciples in the New Testament. Christ himself with his Disciples
sung a Psalm or an Hymn together in the end of the administration of the
Lords Supper, Math. 26.30. And Paul and Silas are said to have sing a Psalm in
the Prison, so as the Prisoners heard them, Acts 16.25. Now if in singing they
had only spiritually rejoiced, and not expressed their joy and their song in
audible and lively voice, the Prisoners could not have heard them. The stranger
does not know nor meddle with the spiritual joy of the heart, Pro. 14.10.

Object. 1. The place in Math. 26.30. may as well be translated They praised
God, as they sung an Hymn.

Answ. Though the meaning be, they praised God, yet the word implies, they
praised God with an Hymn; for it is improper in that language to translate the
word to Praise (whether God or man) but either with a Song, or with a Poem. I^
is more probable, then any reason can wave, that Christ and his Disciples did
shut up the Lords Supper with singing one of their Hebrew Psalms, as the Jews
were wont to shut up their Celebration of the Passover (as their own Records
tell us) with singing Psalm 111. with the five other Psalms next following
together. But all that I now intend, is to show that Christ and his Disciples
sang together, and therefore with the voice as well as the heart.

Object. 2. They might be said to sing together, if one alone sing and the rest
said Amen, in the close: as men may be said to pray together, where one alone
speaks, and the rest consent.

Answ. 1. True: but then one at least speaks with an audible and lively
voice, though the rest do not. And that is enough to clear the point in hand,
that singing in the New Testament, consists not only in making melody with
grace in the heart, but also in singing to the Lord with lively voice.

Answ. 2. If the Disciples did not join in singing that Hymn, but only by
silent consent, they might as well be said. To have taken the bread, and
blessed it, and broken it, and distributed it, (and so the wine;) for all this
Christ did with their silent consent. But what Christ did alone is expressly
recorded, as done by himself: when it comes to the singing of the Psalm,
that is recorded as done by them in the Plural number, When they had sung an
Hymn, they departed into the Mount of Olives: They that departed into the
Mount of Olives, they sung the Psalm. Now it was not Christ alone, but the
whole eleven Disciples with him that departed into the Mount of Olives. And
therefore it was Christ with his Disciples that sung the Psalm together.

Object. 3. Against the proof from Acts 16.25. It is not said (say some) that
Paul and Silas sung the Psalms of David or Asaph, much less with Meeter and
Tunes devised by men. Had they so done, the Prisoners that heard them might
have sung for the outward dispensation such a song of praise to God, as well as
they.

Answ. We do not allege this Example of theirs (as has been often said in
like case before) to prove they sang any Psalm of David, though it stand with
good reason, that they joining together in singing, did rather sing a Psalm
(or Hymn) known to them both, then any new Song devised by either of them;
But what Psalms are to be sung is another Question, which (by the help of
Christ) we shall speak to in the sequel. Neither do we allege their
Example to prove, they sang in a devised Meeter or Tune. For themselves being
Hebrews, it is likely they sang the Hebrew Songs in the tunes of the
Sanctuary, but that also is another Question, of which we are to speak in his
place, when we come to it. All that we gather from this place now, is, no more
then the words do plainly hold forth, that they sung an Hymn to God, not
only with inward melody of grace in their hearts, but also with outward melody
of the voice; for else the Prisoners could not have heard them.

Against this; it is of no force to object (as some do) that if they had sung
any of the Psalms of David or Asaph with an audible voice, then the other
Prisoners also might have joined with them, and have worshipped (externally at
least) as well as they.

For the answer is plain and ready: First, the Prison was in Philippi, a City
of Macedonia, consisting partly of a Colony of the Romans, partly of the
Grecians: no Jews at all are mentioned to be Inhabitants there, much less
Prisoners at that time. And for Pagans to join in singing Hebrew Songs* in
Hebrew verses and tunes, it seems to be far beyond either their skill, or
devotion.

Secondly, suppose the Prisoners had been Jews (of which there is to hint at
all in the Text*) and suppose those Prisoners hearing the melody of Paul and
Silas, and knowing the Song, had joined in the outward singing of it, and that
without any grace in their hearts (none of all which things appear in the
story) yet suppose all this; shall the unbelief of those Jews make the holy
worship of these Apostles, and their faith to God, or the faith of God to them,
of none effect? Paul renounceth and abhors such carnal reasonings, Romans 3.3.

CHAP. III. Propounding, and clearing the third Proof, for singing Psalms
with a lively voice.
A Third proof of this truth, is taken from the Prophecies of the old
Testament, foretelling and persuading such a duty in the New, Isa. 52.8. with
the voice together shall they sing. And that is foretold of the times, when the
feet of the Messengers of glad tidings shall be beautiful, who shall say unto
Zion, Thy God reigns. Which Paul explaineth of the times of the Gospel, Romans
10.14. Psalm. 100.1. Make a joyful noise unto the Lord all ye Lands: and verse.
2. Come before his presence with singing. All ye lands, implies the Nations
of the Gentiles, as well as of the Jews; which pertains to the times of the
New Testament; So that now all are exhorted to sing before the presence of God,
with a loud noise or voice.

So Psalm. 95.1. O come, let us sing unto the Lord: let us make a joyful noise
to the rock of our salvation. And ver. 2. Let us make a joyful noise unto him
with Psalms. Which Psalm the Apostle himself interprets to be meant of the
times of the Gospel. Which is the more to be observed, because the Psalmist,
exhorting to the holy and reverent performance of the ordinary duties of the
Sabbath* he mentions first thankesgiving in singing of Psalms with a loud
voice, and the Reasons thereof, verse. 1. to 5. And then solemn Prayer with the
reasons thereof, verse. 6, 7. and then faithful attention to the preaching of
the Word on that day, not hardening their hearts against it, through unbelief,
in the end of ver. 7. and verse. 8. to 11. To day if ye will hear his voice
harden not your hearts. And this day, the Apostle interprets to be meant not
of the 7.th day of rest from the Creation; nor of the day of rest, wherein
Joshua gave the people inheritance and rest in Canaan; but of the day of rest
in the New Testament, Heb. 4.3, to 9. Whence the Apostle infers, That there
is remaining to us another Sabbatisme, or day of rest, now in the days of the
Gospel, different from the seventh day of rest, kept in regard of Gods rest
from the Creation, and different from the day of rest in Joshuahs time: but the
day of rest remaining to us, he declares to be that day wherein the Lord Jesus
entered into his rest. And that was our Lords day, which David (so long before)
foretold should be celebrated with solemn Prayer, preaching and hearing the
Word, and singing of Psalms, and that with a joyful noise.

Object. 1. Though David exhorts all Lands to sing to the Lord with a loud
noise, it does not appear we should make such a manner of loud noise, as our
form of singing is, no more then such a loud noise, as was made in David's
days, with ten stringed Instruments; for so the Lord was to be praised. I do
acknowledge from these Texts, That it is the duty of all those who are called
to the knowledge of the Truth, when they do come before the Lord, not to come
before him with sorrow and sadness, and with a dejected spirit, but with a
singing; or else, they dishonor the Lord Jesus, the spiritual chief singer,
author of their new Song. But although this prophecy does foretell of the
joyful approaching of the spiritual worshippers before the Lord; yet it
binds them no more to make such a noise, as the singing book teaches, then
the trees are to clap their hands, as Isaiah prophecieth; or as the new
Converts are bound to come with external singing, when they come to join
themselves with the Church, Isai. 51.11. And as for such a manner of noise, as
is made in our mixed Assemblies, the Psalm speaks nothing to it.

Answ. The manner of noise which is made by singing in our Assemblies, it
pertains not to the present Question in hand: and therefore we refer it to
the sequel. The Question now is, whether in the days of the New Testament, we
are to sing the praises of God, with a loud voyse, or noyce. And for this we
allege, beside the Text in Isaiah, the Prophecies of David, who foretells,
and exhorts all Lands (at least the Churches and people of God in all lands)
To make a joyful noise unto the Lord, to make a joyful noise unto him with
Psalms, to come before his presence with singing* Psalm. 100.1, 2. and Psalm.
95.1, 2.

Yea but this binds us no more to make such a manner of loud noise, as our
form of singing is, then to make such a loud noise, as was made in David's
days, with ten stringed Instruments; for so the Lord was to be praised.

Answ. So the Lord was to be praised? Praised with ten stringed Instruments:
When was he so to be praised? In David's days? True: And therefore it was the
duty of all the people in any land, that became Proselytes to the Church of
Israel in the days of David, and during all the time of the Temple worship, to
come before the Lord, not only with the loud noise of singing Psalms, but of
playing with Instruments. But after the days, not only of David, but of the
Temple, and that worship be past, in the day when our Jehovah (the Lord Jesus)
has entered into his rest, in the day of our Lord, when he commands us not to
harden our hearts, but to hear his voice, to fall down and worship before him
in prayer, (both which are to be performed every Lords day) he then commands
us to come and sing unto the Lord, to make a joyful noise to the rock of our
salvation, and to make a joyful noise unto him with Psalms, Psalm. 95.1, 2.
Here is now no mention of making a joyful noise with Instruments, but with
Psalms. And therefore the making a joyful noise with Psalms does still
continue, even on our Lords days: when making a joyful noise with Instruments
continues not, but is laid down in silence: save only so far as it is kept
alive in the antitype, the affections of our hearts (our Praecordia) making
melody with the songs and professions of our lips, and with the gracious and
peaceable conversation of our lives.

When you acknowledge it to be the duty of such as are called to the knowledge
of the Truth, to come before the Lord, not with sorrow and sadness, and with a
dejected spirit, but with singing.

What singing do you mean? If you mean only the gracious rejoicing of the
heart, that indeed, though it be requisite to avoid hypocrisy, yet it is not
complete to reach the full extent of the duty, the duty of making a joyful
noise with Psalms. Our chief Singer (of whom you speak,) when he set the
Lord, and his own death and resurrection before his, face, (which he was to
undergo for our sakes) he was not only glad in his heart, but his glory also
(that is, his tongue) rejoiced in singing a Psalm at his last Supper, Psalm.
16.8, 9. with Math. 26.30. And therefore it will be a discord from the practice
of our chief Singer, and so a dishonor to him, if our hearts sing with joy,
but our glory (to wit, our tongues) be mute with silence. Say not then, as you
do;

We are no more bound to make a loud noise with our voices, then the trees are
to clap their hands, (as Isaiah prophecieth) or then the new Converts were to
come with external singing of Psalms Isai. 51.11.

For in so saying, you will not avoyde the authority of the Commandment, nor
the necessity of that duty of singing. For when God redeemed his people out
of the Captivity of Babel, not only their hearts (the hearts of them who were
returning to Zion) were filled with rejoicing, but even their tongues also with
singing, Psalm. 126.1, 2. And though the Trees cannot be said in proper speech
to clap their hands, (for they have no hands to clap) yet common sense will
easily tell you, that there is a Mataphor either in clapping of hands, or in
the trees. If trees be taken properly, then clapping of hands is put (by a
Metaphor) for the flourishing fruitfulness of the trees of the field, which
(by the blessing of God) is wont to follow the prosperity of the Church, in
such abundance, that their boughs and branches shall clap and dash themselves
and their fruit one upon another, whereby (as by hands) they reach forth
refreshing and food to the children of the Church. But if Trees be put by a
Metaphor for trees of righteousness, (as the Saints are so called, Isa. 61,
3.) then they shall clap their hands, and shout for joy* and sing aloud,
(expressing external signs of comfort) to behold and consider the wonderful
goodness of the Lord, to themselves and their brethren. And so in the same
verse, Isai. 55.12. when the Mountains and hills are said to break forth
before the Saints into singing, if there be not a Metaphor in singing then
Mountains and hills are put (by a Metaphor) for Princes and men of high
degree, (as Psalm. 72.3.) which shall give example to others in holy rejoicing,
and particularly in singing praises to the Lord. So that these Texts in Isaiah,
which you thought might excuse you from singing with the voice, (which David
exhorted to be done with a loud voice) they will not exempt you at all from
this duty, but rather bind you the stronger to it. And therefore look as when
David says; I cried to the Lord with my voice, (Psalm. 3, 4. and 77.1.) a man
shall detract from his meaning, that shall say, he cried only to God with his
heart: So when David exhorts the Gentile Churches to make a joyful noise
unto God with Psalms; you do detract in like sort from his meaning, when you
make his meaning to be, not that we should sing unto God with our voices, but
that we should only make melody to him, with grace in our hearts. Such
detracting from the Word is alike disallowed, and accursed of God, as is adding
to the Word.

Object. 2. Singing of Psalms with the voice, is but a type of singing Psalms
with grace in the heart.

Answ. 1. No Scripture speaks of it as a type: nor does any evidence of
reason so declare it.

2. You might as well say, that Praying with the voice was a type of praying
with the heart, and so is now abolished.

3, If singing of Psalms with a loud noise, had been a typical worship, David
would not have exhorted us to the practice of it on the Lords day of the New
Testament, Psalm. 95.1, 2.7.

4. Christ and his Apostles would not have used it in the Lords Supper, which
is a feast of the New Testament, Mat. 26.30. nor would Paul and Silas have used
it in prison among the Gentiles, Acts 16.25.

5. The light of Nature, which is never wont to teach us types and shadows,
does as well teach us to praise God in singing with our tongues, in times of
our rejoicing, as to cry to God with our voices in times of our distresses.

CHAP. IV. Propounding the second Question, Stating it, and Prooving it.
THe second Question about singing of Psalms, concerns the matter of the
Psalms to be sung; for there be some who do not scruple singing with the
voice (as the former sort did) but singing of the Psalms of David now in these
days of the New Testament. As conceiving David's Psalms were penned for Temple
worship, during the Paedagogy of the old Testament. But now in the days of the
New Testament, when God has promised to power out his Spirit upon all flesh,
now the whole worship of God should be carried on, not by set forms of
Psalms, (no more then by set forms of Prayer) b^t by personal spiritual
gifts, whereby some one or other of the members of the Church, having received
a Psalm by the enditement of the Spirit, he sings it openly in the public
Assembly of the Church, and the rest of the Brethren say Amen to it in the
close.

But touching the persons of those who should sing it pertains to the third
Question. This second Question chiefly concerns the matter to be sung,
whether the Psalms of David, or some Psalm or Hymn, endited by the personal
gift of this or that member of the Church. Wherein we hold and believe;

1. That not only the Psalms of David, but any other spiritual Songs
recorded in Scripture, may lawfully be sung in Christian Churches, as the song
of Moses, and Asaph, Heman and ^than, Solomon and Hezekiah, Habacuck and
Zachary, Hannah and Deborah, Mary and Elizabeth, and the like.

2. We grant also, that any private Christian, who has a gift to frame a
spiritual Song, may both frame it, and sing it privately, for his own private
comfort, and remembrance of some special benefit, or deliverance: Nor do we
forbid the private use of an Instrument of Music therewithal; So that
attention to the Instrument, do not divert the heart from attention to the
matter of the Song.

Neither do we deny, but that in the public thankesgivings of the Church, if
the Lord should furnish any of the members of the Church with a Spiritual gift
to compose a Psalm upon any special occasion, he may lawfully be allowed to
sing it before the Church, and the rest hearing it, and approving it, may go
along with him in Spirit, and say Amen to it. When Christ ascended up on high,
to sit upon his throne of glory, look as Princes are wont to do in the day of
their Coronation, [ Spargere Missilia and Donaria] so did he power out his
gifts abundantly on all sorts, gifts of Miracles, Healing, Tongues, Psalms.
And the Churches were willing, when they saw such special gifts of the Spirit
powered out to make use of them, as occasion served. Whence it was, that sundry
of the members of the Church of Corinth, as they had received a gift of Psalms
and tongues from the Lord Jesus, so they had allowance from the Church ^o
employ their gifts to the public edification of the Church. But as such gifts
now are not ordinarily bestowed, (which were at first given chiefly for
admiration and conviction of Infidels, 1 Cor. 14.22.) so we would not call upon
men now, to prefer their ordinary common gift, as more fit for the public
edifying of the Church, before the extraordinary gifts of the holy men of God
in Scripture, who by the Spirit were guided to prepare spiritual songs*
suitable to all the conditions and affections and temptations of the Church and
people of God in all ages. So then the Question is, whether the Psalms of
David, and Asaph, and such other Hymns and spiritual Songs endited by the
Prophets, and recorded in Scripture, be appointed by God, to be ordinarily sung
in Christian Churches, or whether laying aside Scripture-Songs, we are to sing
only such spiritual Songs, as shall be endited by the personal (but
ordinary) gifts of any ordinary Officer or member of the Church? The former we
hold to be the Truth, others the latter.

The Reasons of our Faith and Practice, are these:

1. Taken from the Commandment, or exhortation of the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.19. Be
you filled with the Spirit (says he) speaking to your selves (that is, one to
another) in Psalms and Hymns and spiritual Songs, singing and making melody
in your hearts to the Lord. To the like purpose is his Commandment and
exhortation to the Colossians* Chap. 3. ver. 16. Let the word of Christ dwell
in you richly, in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing one another, in Psalms
and Hymns and spiritual Songs, singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord.
In both which places, as the Apostle exhorts us to singing so he instructs
us what the matter of our Song should be, to wit* Psalms, Hymns* and
spiritual Songs; Now those three be the very Titles of the Songs of David, as
they are delivered to us by the Holy Ghost himself: some of them are called
(...) that is Psalms* some (...) that is* Hymns; some (...) that is, Songs
spiritual ^ongs. Now what reason can be given why the Apostle should direct us
in our singing to the very titles of David's Psalms, if it were not his meaning
that we should sing them? Yea, either we must exclude the Psalms of David,
from the name of Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs; or else we must be
forced to acknowledge, that we are exhorted to sing them, as well as any other.

CHAP. V.
BEfore we proceed to any further Reasons of the point, let us first (by the
help of Christ) clear the Objections against this. The Objections are many,
and some of them seem more weighty, and some more light: let us unpartially
and evenly (by the Lords guidance) weigh them all in the Balance of the
Sanctuary.

Object. 1. If Paul had meant David's Psalms, or Scripture- songs, it had been
an easy matter to have named David's Psalms, or Scripture- songs, as David
himself named his songs, the Psalms or Songs of David, when he delivered them
to the chief Musician, and to his company to be sung.

Answ. 1. It may as justly be said, if Paul had meant to exclude David's
Psalms, or Scripture- songs, it had been as easy to have excluded them by
name, and to have limited them only to such Psalms and Songs, as the Spirit
should suggest unto their hearts.

Answ. 2. The Apostle expressly names Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual
Songs, and they three are the very express Titles of the Psalms in the
Psalme-Booke. Now why he should direct them to the very Titles of David's
Psalms and yet not mean the Psalms, that bear those Titles, can a good
conscience give a good reason for it?

Answ. 2. When David gave his Psalms and Songs to the Musicians in Israel, it
was meet he should set his name to them, or by some other mark make it
appear, that the Psalms were inspired and delivered by a Prophet of God. But
after the Book of Psalms was generally known and received to be of divine
inspiration, (as other Oracles of God) the Psalms are as usually alleged in
the New Testament, without the name of David, as with it, Luke 24 44. Asts
13.33.

Object. 2. The Psalms here committed to the spiritual Singers to be sung,
are the words of Christ, which are to dwell richly in us, Col. 3.16. But the
Psalms dedicated to the sons of Corah, were the words of David and Asaph.
And so the Holy Ghost calls them. Not but that the words spoken by the mouth
of David and Asaph, where the words of Christ, but that the words which are to
be the spiritual songs of the Saints, wherein they are to teach one another,
and to sing unto God, they are words spoken to the heart, by the voice of the
Spirit of Christ. Besides, the word of Christ, is properly the Gospel, by way
of eminency, in way of opposition to the Law, given by Moses.

Answ. 1. The words of David and Asaph, as they were the words of Chtist in the
mouth of David and Asaph: so they were the words of Christ also in the mouths
of the sons of Corah, or any other Singers in the Temple. If any of them did
not sing them with the Spirit of Christ as well as David and Asaph spoke, and
penned them by the Spirit of Christ, it was a sinful defect in them, but not
in the word it self* nor in the godly Singers of the Temple, (such as Heman,
and Jeduthun, and others) who were spiritual, and holy men, and sang them with
melody in their hearts, as well as in their voices. And it will be alike
sinful defect in the New Testament, in such as sing the Psalms of David, to
sing them without some measure of the Spirit of David. For the Apostle expressly
requires, that we should sing with grace in our hearts. But if the words of
David and Asaph, be the words of Christ, and be sung of the Church, with grace
in the heart, we demand whether this act of the Church be not an act of Faith,
and of the obedeince of Faith to the word of Christ, in that Text of the
Appostle?

Answ. 2. It is an unsafe and unsavory expression, to speak of the words of
David and Asaph, as if they were only the words of Christ in the mouths of
spiritual Singers. For if they were not the words of Christ in the mouths of
carnal Singers also, then the holy Scriptures were not the word of Christ, if
they be read by a carnal reader. So the unbelief of man shall make the faith
of God of none effect; yea the word of God, not to be the word of God.

Answ. 3. Let it be considered in the fear of God, whether the words of David
and Asaph, sung with grace in the heart unto God, be not as truly and properly
(in the Apostles sense) the word of Christ, as any Song endited by the private
gift of any Saint of God now living? If so, then the Apostle encourages us to
sing the Psalms of David and Asaph with their Spirit: If not, then there be
Christians now, that are carried by a more infallible Spirit, then the Prophets
were in old time. And yet Paul speaks of the Saints now, as led by the Spirt
of God, Romans 8.14. But Peter speaks of the Prophets then, as carried ((...))
by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.21. Which puts this difference, that such as are
led by the Spirit may err; but such as are carried by the Spirit, are carried
and lifted above themselves by the Holy Ghost, and cannot err: and so was
David and Asaph.

4. Though the words of Christ be the Gospel, yet the words of David are not to
be shut out of the Gospel; for the Gospel was preached to Israel, when David
and the other Prophets were preached, yea and some parts of Moses also, Heb.
4.2. Joh. 5.46.

Object. 3. But if the Apostle had intended to commend to the Churches the
singing of the Psalms and Hymns and spiritual Songs of David and Asaph, what
need was there for him to exhort either the Ephesians to be filled with the
Spirit, or the Colossians, to have the word of Christ dwell richly in them, for
such a service? For any small measure of the Spirit, and of the Word, will
suffice to sing the Psalms of David and Asaph, in their words, and in the
meeter and tunes accustomed. But to invent new spiritual Songs, fit to teach
and admonish the Church, would require a full measure of the Spirit, and a rich
treasure of the word to dwell in us. And therefore Paul bids the Ephesians,
to be filled with the Spirit, in singing the spiritual songs of the New
Testament, as drunkards are filled with wine, and in the strength and spirits
of their wine, invent and sing their wanton Sonnets.

Answ. 1. Paul did exhort them to be filled with the Spirit, as drunkards be
with wine, not that they might invent, and sing spiritual Songs, as drunkards
do wanton Sonnets; for neither do drunkards filled with wine, usually invent
Sonnets, but sing such as they learned before, when they were sober; nor does
the Apostle speak of inventing Songs at all, either wanton Songs by drunkards,
or spiritual Songs by the faithful; but only to be filled with the Spirit,
as drunkards be with wine, that so they might avoid the riotous and excessive
mirth of Drunkards, and employ and improve their holy mirth and joy, to the
singing Psalms and Hymns and spiritual Songs, for their own mutual
edification and consolation, and for holy thankesgiving and praise unto the
Lord.

Answ. 2. Though it do not require such a full measure of the Spirit, nor rich
portion of the Word dwelling in us, to sing a Psalm invented and penned to our
hands: yet a full and rich measure of the Word and Spirit will be needful to
perform all those duties, which the Apostle in those Texts calls for. For
the Apostle calls to the improvement, as of the whole word of Christ* unto
the teaching and admonishing of one another, so of the Psalms, not only unto
those two heads, but also besides those, unto a further third end, to wit, unto
the singing of them unto Gods praise. Now to be able to improve the whole word
of God to these two spiritual ends, and the Psalms to all those three
spiritual ends does require a full and rich measure both of Spirit and Word to
dwell in us.

Answ. 3. It will require a full and rich measure both of Word and Spirit to
dwell in us, to direct and appoint a fit Psalm, (out of the Book of Psalms)
suitable to the present occasions of singing to Gods praise, and to the
instruction and admonition of the Church, according to the present estate of
their affections, or afflictions, their consolation, or conversation in hand.

Answ. 4. It will require a fuller and richer measure of the Word and Spirit to
dwell in us, then a carnal heart would imagine even to utter a Song with such
grace in the heart, as might make melody to the Lord; It requires a good
measure of the indwelling Spirit, and word of God to pray in the Spirit; but
much more to sing in the Spirit, wherein our senses delighted with the melody
are apt to steal away our hearts from spiritual fervency. Deborah found her
heart dull to be awakened, so much as to utter the song, which she had
prepared by the Spirit for her and Barak to sing together, Judge. 5.12. Awake,
Awake, (says she) Awake, Awake Deborah, utter a song, that fourefold
ingemination, Awake, Awake, Awake, Awake, utter a song, argues in the best of
Gods servants, a deep drowsinesse of spirit, when we should come to utter a
spiritual Song spiritually: like as that fourfold ingemination to the Church
of Jerusalem, to Return, Return, Return, Return, Cant. 6.13. argues a
deep and strong averseness of the Spirit of the Jews unto Conversion, and
returning to the Lord.

Object. 4. The Apostle calls the whole word of Christ dwelling in us,
Psalms and Hymns and spiritual Songs, neither does he limit us to one
Prophet more then to another, unless you will say, that the words of Christ in
the Gospel* or which was prophesied by the rest of the Prophets, were not
spiritual songs; But the Apostle calls them all Psalms and Hymns and
spiritual Songs, as well as David's, if they dwell in the heart. For the words
of Christ there, (to wit, in the heart) are songs for the Spirit, or else they
are no songs to any man. Therefore as yet, to sing the Prophecies of David
after our common manner, is no worship commanded or taught us in holy Writ.

Answ. 1. It is a groundless Assertion to say, that Paul calls the whole
word of God dwelling in us, Psalms and Hymns and spiritual Songs. For why
then should the Holy Ghost give that style and Title of Psalms and Hymns and
spiritual Songs only to the Book of Psalms, and to none else of all of the
Books of the Prophets or Apostles. Again, if Paul called the words of all the
Prophets, Psalms and Hymns and spiritual Songs, why then did not the
Prophets in their own language pen them with musical accents, as well as the
Psalms of David and Asaph?

Besides, if the words of all the Prophets were spiritual Songs, why then did
the Prophets themselves find the Books of their own Prophecies bitter in
their bellies? Rev. 10.10. There be many words of the Prophets, that are more
fit matter for humiliation and mourning before the Lord, then fit to be sung as
spiritual songs unto the Lord. But suppose there be many words of Christ, and
of his Prophets, that are fit matter for spiritual re^oycing (as indeed all
the Doctrines and promises of Grace be) yet what warrant have we to sing them,
as in some Cathedral Churches and Colleges, the Bible-Clerks do sing their
Chapters out of the old and New Testament?

Answ. 2. Whether the words of Christ in the Gospel, or in the Prophets, be
spiritual Songs or no, yet if the Psalms of David be also the words of
Christ, if they likewise dwell in our hearts, and if they be spiritual Songs
too, then it will unavoydably follow, That the same word of the Apostle that
commands us to sing Psalms and Hymns and spiritual Songs, commands us
also to sing the Psalms of David and Asaph unto the Lord, unless you will say
that the Psalms of David and Asaph, (though dwelling in the heart,) are
neither Psalms, nor Hymns, nor spiritual Songs, howsoever the Holy Ghost
entitle them by such names. How then can you say, that to sing the Prophecies
of David, does not yet appear to be a worship of God commanded or taught in
holy writ? As for our common manner of singing of them, we shall have occasion
to speak to that hereafter.

Object. 5. David's Psalms considered, not as Scriptures divinely inspired, but
as spiritual Songs seem to be appropriated to the Temple-worship. 1. Because
they are appointed to be sung by proper Officers and Musical Instruments,
belonging to the Temple, as appears by the Titles of several Psalms. 2.
Because neither Christ, nor the Apostles in their writings used them at all,
otherwise then as the other writings of Moses, and the Prophets, for
instruction and illustration, teaching us how to use the same. Those Psalms
therefore as Songs, being proper to that service of the Temple, are abolished
with the Temple worship.

Answ. 1. Both these Reasons are too slender to confine David's Psalms to
Temple-worship. For 1. Though some of David's Psalms were appointed to be sung
by the Officers and Musical Instruments of the Temple, yet not above one part
of three, considering the length of the 119. Psalm. There be an hundred and
fifty Psalms in all, and of all these not above 57. are appointed to be sung
by the Officers and Instruments of the Temple: and Psalm 119. is none of them;
so that two parts of three are free from any express reference to the Temple.

2. The matter of some Psalms does evidently argue, they were not appointed to
be sung always in the Temple; or at least did agree more properly to other
times then those, wherein the Temple stood. The 74th Psalm (which was a Psalm
of Asaph, but joined with the Psalms of David) complained that the enemies had
sent Gods Sanctuary into the fire, (as the Hebrew words be) and had defiled by
casting down the dwelling place of her Name to the ground, ver. 7. The 44th
Psalm, though it was committed to the sons of Corah, yet surely it was
chiefly intended (as Paul applies part of it) to the times of the New
Testament; For I suppose it could never be verified of any times of the Jewish
Temple, (first, or second) that ever God gave up the people of Israel as sheep
for meat, to be killed all the day, to be appointed for the slaughter to be
sore broken in the place of Dragons, and covered with the shadow of death, when
as yet though all this evil was come upon them, they had not forgotten their
God, nor dealt falsely in his Covenant; nor their hearts turned back, nor their
steps declined from his way* ver. ^7. to 23. Paul indeed acknowledges this
very word to be accomplished in the Saints of the Primitive Churches in the
Apostles times, ( Romans 8.36.) but where shall we find the like innocence,
with the like calamity met together in the children of Israel, whilst the
Temple was standing? And is it credible, the Psalm was confined to be sung in
the Temple, where they could not sing it, but with a sad reproof to themselves
for their discord in practice, and yet forbidden to be sung in the Churches of
the New Testament, where (in some ages at least) they might sing it, both with
heart, and voice, and practice, all of them keeping holy concent and harmony
together?

3. It appears by the Titles of such Psalms as are directed to the Officers
and Instruments of the Temple-Musick, That there was something typical or
rudimentall in the manner of singing some of the Psalms of David and Asaph in
the Temple-worship. But this does no more argue, that the whole service of God
in singing David's Psalms was typical or rudimentall, then it will argue
prayer to be a typical and Temple worship, because prayer in the Temple was
offered with Incense, and so with the Temple and with the Incense to be
abolished. He that will make the Psalms of David (as they are songs) to be
types of the spiritual songs of the New Testament, and therefore now the
singing of them to be abolished. He might as well say (with Mr. Smith) that the
Letters in the Scriptures of the old Testament, were typical, (typing out the
Law written in our hear^s) and so abolish all reading of the holy Scriptures
now in the days of the New Testament.

4. As it has been showed above, that singing of Psalms with lively voice, is
not a ceremonial but a moral duty, and so continues now in the days of the
New Testament; so it may be as truly said, that the singing of David's Psalms,
and other Scripture-songs, is in like sort not a ceremonial but a moral
duty; and so of like continuance in the New Testament. The Psalms of David,
and Asaph, and the rest, are as full of holy and lively, spiritual, and
evangelicall meditations, and affections, Instruments, prayers, and praises, as
any that we can expect to be endited by any Officer or member of the Christian
Churches now. Yea it is to be feared that the Psalms compiled by the devoutest
Christians now, would fall short of those of David and Asaph, in spirit and
life. How then can we make the Psalms of David and Asaph ceremonial types of
the spiritual songs of the faithful in the New Testament, when as types are
wont to be more carnal, and worldly, and literal, and less spiritual and
lively, then the antitypes? But here the antitypes are less spiritual and
lively then the types.

5. As for that other Reason taken from the practice of Christ, and his
Apostles, who in their writings never used the Psalms of David for spiritual
songs as the writings of Moses and other Prophets for instruction and
illustration; this is of as small force as the former.

For 1. Writings are not a place or season for the use of spiritual songs.
Psalms are to be used for songs in Church Assemblies, and private Soliloques
and Conferences, not in Writings: And yet so far as Psalms may be used for
songs in writing, Paul so used them in his Epistles written to the Ephesians
and Colossians, where he ^nstructeth both Churches, and in them all others to
sing these Psalms and Hymns and spiritual Songs. Amongst which these Psalms
of David and Asaph, if the^ be not principally intended, yet surely they are
plainly included* or else they are neither the word of Christ, nor are they
Psalms and Hymns and spiritual Songs.

2. It is not credible, that Christ never used the Psalms of David and Asaph
for spiritual Songs. For the use of those Psalms for Songs, was doubtless a
part of Gods worship whilst the Temple stood. And if Christ had neglected any
part of that worship* which was then in force, how then did himself say, That
it became him to fulfill all righteousness? Mat. 3.15.

Besides, many things Jesus did and said (and so did the Apostles) which are
not written in the Gospel nor Acts nor Epistles, Joh. 21.25. And yet this is
said, that he with his Disciples sung an Hymn, Mat. 26.30. And Hymns is the
general title for the whole Book of Psalms; For though it be translated, The
Book of Psalms, yet every one that knows that language, knows the word
is, The Book of Hymns: So that look, as when in ordinary speech we say, They
sung a Psalm, we mean one of the Psalms of David or Asaph, (unless some
other be named) because such are wont to be sung in ordinary use; So when the
Evangelists say, Christ and his Disciples sung an Hymn, the people of God
would not easily understand any other but one or more of David's Hymns, because
such were wont to be the ordinary songs used in the worship of God. And surely
if Christ and his Disciples had sung any other Hymn, then one of these Psalms
of David and Asaph, which were wont to be sung in their Temples and Synag^gues,
the Evangelists who are wont to record far less matters in things which
pertain to Gods worship, they would not have omitted the substituting of an
Hymn endited for this special occasion, in stead of the Hymns wont to be
sung in the end of the Passover.

The like may be said of Paul and Silas, who are recorded ( Acts 16.25.) to
have sung an Hymn to God, (for so is the word;) where common understanding
would take it for one or more of the Hymns of David or Asaph, and not any
other new invented spiritual song, unless some hint in the Text might carry
us from the ordinary meaning and use of the word amongst the people of God.

Ob^ect. 6. We are called upon by David himself to sing New Songs, Psalm.
96.1. and often elsewhere, and such as had gifts then used them for enditing and
singing new songs, as Asaph, Heman, Ethan etc. The four Beasts, Rev. 5.9. and
the 144000 followers of the Lamb d^d sing a new Song; as did they also, who
had gotten victory over the beast, Rev. 15.3.4.

Answ. 1. There is no estate and condition that ever befell the Church and
people of God, or can befall them but the Holy Ghost, as he did foresee the
same* so he has provided and recorded some Scripture-Psalme, suitable
thereunto. And these Psalms being cho^en out suitably to the new occasions and
new conditions of Gods people, and sung by them with new hearts and renewed
affections, will ever be found new songs. Words of eternal truth and grace,
are ever old (as the Gospel is an eternal Gospel) and ever new; as the
commandment of love is a new commandment as well as old. As to the new
Creature all things are become new, 2 Cor. 5.17, 18. Daily mercies are to him
new mercies, Lam. 3.23. etc. Duties of Humiliation, which have been of ancient
practice in the Church, are to him, as New wine. But to an old and carnal
heart, that lies under the state of vanity and corruption of nature, there is
nothing new, no new thing under the Sun, Eccles. 1.9.

2. David's exhortation to sing a New Song, pertained to them in the old
Testament, as well as to us in the New. And yet they upon new occasions sang
the old Songs of David, and that with, acceptance, 2 Chronicles. 5.13. 2 Chronicles.
20.21. Ezra 3.11.

3. Asaph, Heman, and E^han, were men endued with an infallible measure of a
Spirit of Prophecy, in enditing those Psalms, which the Church of Israel
received from them. Give us the like men with the like gifts, and we shall
receive and sing their Psalms, as the Church of Israel did the other.

4. The places objected out of the Revelation, admit a further answer, though
the former might serve; the new Song mentioned Rev. 5.9, 10. may either be
understood metonymically for a Donology or Thankesgiving, which the Saints in
the Church should give to Christ upon occasion of his revealing a clear
exposition of the Revelation; or else, if it be understood literally, that they
sang that very song, as it is there penned by the Holy Ghost, then it
appears, that at such a time that Song shall be translated into Number and
Meeter, fit to be sung, and shall be sung by the Church, when they shall see
such a clear exposition of the Revelation come to light, as shall provoke them
to give glory to Christ, who has received power to open the book, and by the
same Power has redeemed his people, and called them to be Kings and Priests
unto God his Father. And thus, this place only shows, that it will ^e
lawful to sing other Songs, besides those of David and Asaph: but yet such
only, as are penned by an infallible Spirit; or else upon special occasion,
by men of spiritual gifts, which we deny not.

The Song of the 144000. followers of the Lamb, it is not expressly said to be
a New Song, but as it were a New Song, Rev. 14.3. New to them who had been wont
to hear the worshippers of the Beast to sing and rejoice in their own merits,
and superstitious devotions: And new also in respect of the renewed affections,
wherewith they sang it: But yet the same ancient Song which the sheep and
Saints of Christ, were wont to sing, even in David's time, of the righteousness
of Christ, even of his only, and of their own blessedness in his not
imputing their sins to them. Thus David's Psalms in the spiritual use and
sense of them are new Songs, or as it were New Songs, to this day, unto all
that are renewed by grace, to look for their righteousness in Christ, and not
in the works of the Law; for which David was wont to sing, no flesh living
could be justified by them. And though it be said, That no man could learn
that Song, but the 144000. who were redeemed from the earth; yet it is not
meant of the words and sentences of the Song, but of the spiritual sense and
use of the Song, which no man indeed can learn, but they that have felt the
grace and power of their Redemption by the Lord Jesus. As no man knows the
new Name, but they that have received it, Revel. 2.17.

The Song of those who had gotten victory over the beast, ( Rev. 15.) is said
to be the Song of Moses and of the Lamb, ver. 3. And surely the matter of
Moses Song, (Exodus 15.) might justly yield fit matter for the like Doxology (or
thankesgiving) upon the like occasion: As the like did fall out in the year
88. Rome being spiritual Egypt, Rev. 11.8. And the Pope with his Prelates
resembling Pharaoh with his Taskmasters, and the Spanish Armado marching forth
with the like pride and fury, to bring us back to the Egyptian bondage; and
the Redemption from them all being alike miraculous; upon which miraculous
deliverance, not only the matter of Moses Song, but the very words also were
then fitly used, and still may be for a spiritual Song of thankesgiving unto
the Lord, both for that and the like deliverances.

And as for the Song of the Lamb, which those that had victory over the Beast
did sing surely all those Songs of David, which celebrate either his own
deliverances from Saul, or the deliverance of the Church from Egypt, or
Babylon, or from other enemies, may justly own and bear that Title. For when
David acknowledges and professes, that in his Songs, the Spirit of the Lord
spoke by him, and that his word was in his tongue, (2 Samuel 23.2.) What Spirit
of the Lord was that, but the Spirit of the Lord Jesus? And what are then such
Songs, but the Songs of the Lamb, through whose Redemption the Church and
Saints enjoy all their deliverances? And surely, the Song of the Lamb,
recorded (in Revel. 15.3, 4.) seems evidently to point at sundry Psalms of
David, out of which it was compiled and collected, and which therefore were
suitable and fit to be sung upon occasion of their victory over the Beast,
especially with respect and reference to those special sentences, which were
fetched from thence, though with some small variation, such as is wont to be
found in all the Scriptures of the New Testament, quoted out of the old.

Rev. 15.3.
Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty.

Just and true are thy ways, Thou King of Saints

And ver. 4. Thou only art Holy. Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and
glorify thy Name? For all Nations shall come and worship before thee.

For thy Judgments are made manifest.

Psalm. 86.10.
Thou art great, and do wondrous things, thou art God alone.

Ver. 8. Among the Gods, there is none like unto thee, nor any works like thy
works.

Psalm. 111.2. The works of the Lord are great.

Ver. 4. And Wonderful.

Ver. 7. The works of his hand are truth and judgment.

Psalm. 71.22. O thou Holy One of Israel.

Psalm. 86.9. All Nations whom thou have made, shall come and worship before
thee, O Lord, and glorify thy Name.

Psalm. 9.16. The Lord is known by the Judgment which he executes.

Psalm. 64.9. All men shall fear and shall declare the work of God; For they
shall wisely consider of his doings.

In as much therefore as these who got the victory over the Beast, are said to
have sang the Song of the Lamb, and this Song of the Lamb is expressly fetched
from several words of praise to the Lamb, in several Psalms of David; One
of these two things (if not both) will from hence justly be deduced.

1. Either this, That any of those Psalms of David may be sung to the praise
of the Lamb, out of which those words of praise are fetched (as when the
people of God are said to have praised God with such a word in a Psalm, it is
meant they sung the whole Psalm; as, 2 Chronicles. 5.13. and 20.21. Ezra. 3.11.)
all of them pointing at Psalm 136.

Or else secondly, That it may be lawful upon special and extraordinary
occasions, to compile a spiritual Song out of David's words of praise dispersed
in several Psalms of David, and other Psalmists in Scripture, and to sing
them, composed together as a Psalm of praise unto the Lord. And both these
willingly admit: For these are still the divine Meditations, and spiritual
expressions of the holy men of God in Scripture, which God has prepared for
the setting forth of his own glory.

Object. 7. As the Apostle writing to Timothy about Prayer in general, and
prescribing no form of prayer, it is therefore justly argued, that we are to
use no set forms of Prayer at all: So the same Apostle exhorting the Churches
to sing, and not prescribing any forms of Psalms, hence it follows, that he
allows not the singing of David's Psalms. And whatsoever Arguments, strike
against stinted forms of Prayer, strike against all forms of Psalms also, as
stinting and quenching the Spirit, etc.

Answ. 1. It is not true, that the Apostle exhorting to Sing, does not
prescribe any forms of Psalms. For in the same Texts where he does exhort the
Churches and people of God to sing, he does direct them also to sing Psalms
and Hymns and spiritual Songs: which are the express titles of the very
forms of Psalms endited by David and Asaph as has been showed above. Neither
can it be truly said, that he allows not the singing of David's Psalms.
Unless it might be truly said, that the Psalms of David, are neither Psalms,
nor Hymns, nor spiritual Songs.

Answ. 2. The Scripture puts a manifest difference between these two, set
forms of Prayer, and set forms of Psalms; also between set forms devised
and prescribed by men, and set forms appointed by God. Set forms of Prayer
the Lord did never ordinarily prescribe unto his people, neither in the old
Testament, nor in the New: but set forms of Psalms no man doubts, were
ordinarily prescribed in the old Testament, and we suppose in the New also, in
the Texts alleged.

Again, set forms devised and appointed by men, I will not deny to be justly
rejected by the true meaning of the second Commandment: but God that forbad us
to make to our selves any Images or imaginations and inventions for worship,
did never forbid himself to devise and appoint for us what form of worship
himself pleased, either in the old Testament, or in the New. And therefore
what ever Arguments strike against set forms of Prayer invented and prescribed
by men, there is none of them strike against set forms of Psalms appointed by
God. Neither can it with any color be pretended, that the Psalms of David
being devised and appointed by the Holy Ghost himself, should either stint or
quench the Spirit, unless it might be thought, that Gods own Ordinance to
convey, and quicken, and enlarge the Spirit, should become an impediment and
restraint to the Spirit.

Object. 8. The edification of the Church and body of Christ under the New
Testament, ought to be carried on by the personal and proper gifts of Gods
Spirit, Ephesians. 4.7, 8.11, 16. 1 Pet. 4.10, 11. Romans 12.4.6. 1 Cor. 12. But in
singing of Psalms of David, there is no more personal gift manifested, then
there is in reading a stinted form of Prayer.

Answ. These Scriptures prove that God has given the gifts of the Spirit for
the edification of his Church: and that they who have received the gifts of the
Spirit, should employ them to the edification of the Church. And some of those
Scriptures prove also, that they who have received any gifts, though outward
gifts of wealth and honor, should improve and employ them to the good of the
Church. But none of them prove, that all the edification of the Church should
be carried on by the personal and proper gifts of the present members of the
Church. For then the Church should not be edified now in these days by the
gifts of the penmen of Scripture, whether Apostles, Prophets, or Evangelists,
which is expressly repugnant to some of the Scriptures alleged by you. For in
Ephesians. 4.8. to 13. and in 1 Cor. 12. it is expressly said, that God gave Apostles,
Prophets, and Evangelists, for the edifying of the Church, till the whole body
of Christ be perfected at the day of his coming. And least you should dream
of new Apostles to be raised up in every age, the Holy Ghost tells us, the
Church of the Jews at their last conversion shall be built upon the foundation
of the Lambs twelve Apostles, Rev. 21.14. The twelve Apostles of the Lamb
shall have a fundamental influence in the rearing and building of the Church
of the Jews, not by their resurrection to life again in those days, but by
the power of the Spirit breathing in their gifts and writings. And as Abel
being dead yet speaks, Heb. 11.4. and that to edification: So the Apostles
though dead speak also; and David being dead speaks, and sings likewise to
the edification of the body of Christ, till we come to sing Hallelujahs in
heavenly glory.

Say not these writings of the Apostles and Evangelists, of David and the
Prophets, do not speak to the edification of the Church, but as they are
expounded and applied by the spiritual gifts of the Ministers and people of
God in each age. For the very reading of them is an Ordinance of God, and no
Ordinance of God is empty and beggarly, and destitute of the Spirit: which is
the vanity of men's traditions, and may not be imputed to any of Gods
Ordinances.

Neither ought you to say, That in singing the Psalms of David, there is no
more personal gift manifested, then there is in reading a stinted form of
Prayer.

For 1. in reading a stinted form of prayer, there is no gift of the Spirit at
all manifested, but rather (as I conceive) a manifest breach of the second
Commandment of God, which is a grieving of the Spirit. But in singing of the
Psalms of David, there is a gift of the Spirit manifested, even the gift of
obedience to the command of the Apostle. And that is the personal gift of him
that sings.

And secondly, all the treasures of the gifts of the Spirit breathing in the
Psalms of David are likewise manifested in the reverent and holy singing of
them. You might more truly have said, there is no more personal gift of the
Spirit manifested in singing the Psalms of David then in reading the Psalms
of David; because either of both those duties are alike acts of obedience to
Gods Commandment. But if you had so said, your objection had answered it self.

Object. 9. Many of Gods people now have gifts to compose spiritual Songs, as
well as carnal Poets to make carnal Sonnets, or as drunkards that make Songs
of Gods people. Now every one that has a gift is to administer it by Christ's
Command, 1 Pet. 4.10. And if any for want of experience of such a gift in
themselves, should question it, they may consider the promise of pouring out
the Spirit in a more plentiful measure, now in the days of the New Testament,
then in the old.

Answ. 1. Though many of Gods people have gifts to compose spiritual Songs, as
well as carnal Poets carnal Sonnets, and Drunkards profane Sonnets; yet that
will not argue, that the spiritual Songs, which many of Gods people have gifts
to compose, are fit to be sung in the public holy Assemblies of the Saints,
no more then the carnal and profane Sonnets of drunken Poets are fit to be
sung in civil Assemblies. Let drunken carnal Poets sing their carnal Sonnets
in their Tavernes and Alehouses, and such of Gods people as have received a
gift to compose a spiritual Song fit for their private solace, sing it in
their private houses. But every spiritual Song, fit for private solace, is not
fit to be sung in the solemn Assemblies of the Church for public
edification: no more then it is fit for every private Christian who has a gift
to compose a spiritual prayer to utter and power forth the same in the
public Congregation of the Church.

Answ. 2. It is more then probable, that many of the people of God in the old
Testament had gifts to compose spiritual Songs, besides David and Asaph: and
yet unless their gift were carried along by an infallible Spirit, they were
not received among the Songs of the Temple.

Answ. 3. Suppose that spiritual Songs composed by an ordinary gift, might be
received among the public Songs of the Congregation, yet will it thence
follow, that the Church shall be bound to sing only such Songs, and deprive
themselves of the Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs of David and Asaph,
which were composed with a far larger measure and power of the Holy Ghost?

Answ. 4. It is readily granted, that as every man has received a gift, so let
him administer and dispense it, according to the Text alleged, 1 Pet. 4.10.
But yet in Christ's way, every private gift is not fit for public
Administration; nor every public gift fit to be administered to the shouldring
out of a greater gift then it self.

Answ. 5. If such as want the experience of such a gift of spiritual Poetry in
themselves, should be encouraged to expect it from the promise of pouring out
the Spirit on all flesh in the days of the Gospel, ( Acts 2.17.) they might as
well look for the gifts of tongues, and healing, and miracles. For it is the
same Spirit (though not the same measure) which is there promised to be powered
out upon all flesh; Let every man administer the gifts of the Spirit, according
to the measure which he has received within his own line.

Object. 10. But the Lord is as full of the Spirit now to help us to endite
Psalms, as in the days of David and Asaph. And it seems a dishonor to
Christ, to dispense his word by reading and singing, without the exercise of
the glorious and various Administrations of the spiritual gifts of the New
Testament.

Answ. 1. The Lord is as full of the Spirit now, and as able to furnish us with
a Prophetical Spirit now to endite Prophetical Scriptures, as he did furnish
the Prophets in the old Testament. But yet God thought it no dishonor to
Christ to leave us the Scriptures of the old Prophets for our edification in
the New Testament, as well as in the old. It is the same Spirit of the same
Christ that spoke by the Prophets of the old Testament, and speaks in the
Saints of the New. And it is no dishonor to Christ to dispense his word, and
to guide the body of his Church, as well by the unity of the same Spirit, as by
the variety of the diverse gifts of the Spirit now. And though we do not
exercise the glorious and various Administrations of the spiritual gifts of
the New Testament, in the enditing of New Psalms, no more then in the enditing
of new Scriptures. Yet we can neither sing the old Psalms of David, nor read
the old Scriptures of the Prophets acceptably to God, nor comfortably to our
selves without the exercise of the gracious and various spiritual gifts of the
New Testament.

Object. 11. We have examples in the New Testament, of exercising personal
gifts, as well in singing, as in praying and Prophesying, 1 Cor. 14. Which
Epistle is directed to all the Saints, 1 Cor. 1.2. in all places. And
consequently, that Church is to be Precedentiall in dispensing personal gifts
in this Ordinance of Singing, as well as in any other.

Answ. 1. The Directions given in that Epistle to the Church of Corinth, we
willingly grant are Precedentiall to all the Churches, as well as the
Directions given in other Epistles to other Churches. And the Directions there
given be, that in dispensing spiritual gifts, Prophecy be preferred before
Tongues, nor any Tongues dispensed without interpretation; That order be
observed without confusion; That diverse may speak without interruption; That
no man may speak without subjection; That women be not permitted to speak
unto usurpation; That all things be done to edification. And all these
Directions are Precedentiall to all such Churches as have received the like
gifts. But there is no direction given to the Church of Corinth, or any other,
that every man should have a gift of tongues, or a gift of compiling a Psalm;
or if he have a gift of compiling a Psalm for his private use by an ordinary
Spirit, that then he should present it to be sung before the whole Church, and
the Church to say Amen to his Psalm. For the gift of Psalms, which the
Apostle there speaks of, was not an ordinary gift to compile some spiritual
Ditty in verse, but extraordinary, as joined with the gift of strange Tongues.
For it appears by the Context, that the gift of Tongues was used by the
Members of the Church of Corinth, four ways: 1. In speaking mysteries, ver.
2. 2. In prayer, ver. 14. 3. In singing, ver. 15. 4. In thankesgiving, ver. 17.
So that the singing there mentioned, was by an extraordinary gift, as the
Tongues were, in which it was dispensed.

Object. Indeed the gift of Tongues, wherein these Psalms seem to be uttered,
was extraordinary, but it does not follow that the gift of composing those
Psalms was an extraordinary gift, no more then prayer wherewith it was joined,
ver. 15. or Prophecy, ver. 26. Singing Psalms and Prophecy differing no
otherwise then Poetry and Prose; and if it was extraordinary in the
Corinthians, we have no warrant for public ordinary singing in the New
Testament from any example.

Answ. 1. As the gift of Tongues was extraordinary, so was every Ordinance
dispensed in it, whether Prayer, or Psalm. or Prophecy, all of them
extraordinary, both for sublimity of matter, (in the Spirit he speaks
Mysteries, ver. 2.) and for power and demonstration of the Spirit, and for
suddenness and dexterity of utterance without previous study, or meditation,
as Acts 2.4.11. What though there be an ordinary gift of Prayer and
Prophesying, as well as of singing? Yet nevertheless the Apostles and Prophets
had an extraordinary gift of Prayer and Prophesying: and so had those
Corinthians also an extraordinary gift (though in less measure) of Praying and
Prophesying and Singing also.

It is not credible that he who would have new wine put into new Bottles, would
power forth ordinary and common matters in new Tongues, and so raise
extraordinary expectation of ordinary things.

Answ. 2. It is an uncouth comparison, to make no more difference between
singing Psalms and Prophecy, then between Poetry and Prose. In Prophecy we
open the Scriptures and Counsels of God: in Psalms we open the Counsels and
thankesgivings of our own hearts; In Psalms we sing to glorify God; in
Prophecy we speak to edify men; you might with far more reason and
congruitie have said, That Prayer and singing Psalms differ no otherwise then
Poetry and Prose. And yet there is more difference even between them, then so,
as the Apostle James notes, James 5.13.

Answ. 3. When you say, that if the singing in the Church of Corinth was
extraordinary, then we have no warrant for our public ordinary singing in the
New Testament from any example: Neither does the Argument follow, nor if it
did, is it of any force. For though this example of singing in the Church of
Corinth was extraordinary: yet that singing of Christ and his Disciples at the
last Supper was ordinary, Mat. 26.30. And though there were no example of
puhlique ordinary Singing in the New Testament, yet it is enough that there is
a precept of public ordinary Singing given to the Churches, both of the
Ephesians, and of the Colossians, Ephesians. 5.19. Colos. 3.16. And what the Spirit
speaks to those Churches, it speaks to all.

CHAP. VI. Propounding a second and third Argument, for the singing of David's
Psalms.
HAving thus (by the help of Christ) cleared the first Argument, for the
Singing of David's Psalms, and such like Scripture- Psalms; Let us now proceed
to a second Argument, taken from the end and use of the Psalms of David. The
Psalms of David and Asaph, and the like, were written for a threefold end, as
we see expressed by the Apostle, Col. 3 16. to wit, 1. For Instruction, or
Teaching. 2. For Admonition. 3. For singing Praise and Thankesgiving to the
Lord.


Now if the Psalms of David, and the like, were written (as doubtless they
were) in the Old Testament for this threefold end, and each of them of moral
(that is, of general and perpetual use) and none of them abrogated in the New
Testament, look then as it would be a sacrilegious sin, to take away from
the Psalms either of the two former uses (the use of Instruction, or
Admonition;) so it will be alike Sacrilege to deprive them of the threefold
use, by forbidding them to be sung for praise and thankesgiving to the Lord.
Whereto a third Argument may be added, taken from the duty of singing of
Psalms every Sabbath, and the defect of provision of other Psalms, if the
Psalms of David, and other Scripture- Psalms be refused. It appears from
Psalm 95.1, 2, 7, etc. That when we present our selves before the Lord, to
hear the voice of his word (as we do every Lords day) we should come before
his presence with singing of Psalms. If so, then some must have a gift, either
to prepare set forms of Psalms aforehand for every Sabbath day; or at least a
gift, upon the present occasion, suddenly to invent and utter a Psalm fit for
the present Sabbath from week to week: Neither of both which are easy to be
believed. For if it were so, then doubtless Christ would have appointed some
or other Officer to attend to this duty of compiling Psalms, as he has
appointed Elders to attend to the Ministry of the Word, and Prayer, Acts 6.4.
Or else he would inspire some or other Member of the Church with such a Gift
and Spirit of Psalmistry, as might suite the occasions of the Church from
Sabbath to Sabbath. But neither of both these do we find, either in the
Scriptures of the New Testament, or in experience; we find neither Ordinance
appointing it, nor Providence granting it. And yet evident it is, that the
gracious providence of God, is not wanting in supplying well ordered Churches,
with all such gifts of Preaching, and Prayer, and Rule, and the like, as God
has required for the edification of the Church to the end of the world.
Neither is it credible, that Christ would take us off from singing the Psalms
of David and Asaph, which were of divine and infallible inspiration, and leave
us to an uncertain and common gift of private brethren.

If it be said, the Church of Corinth wanted not such gifts of Psalms, nor
such members as did compile, 1 Cor. 14.26.

Answ. It is true, neither did they want gifts of tongues, and of Revelation in
the same Text. But these were extraordinary gifts, fit to glorify Christ in
his first ascension into Glory, and fit to commend and confirm the Gospel to
Pagans, but no where promised to be continued to Churches in after ages, nor no
where commanded to be imitated: much less our common gifts, and the Psalms
endited by the same to be substituted in their rooms, and David's Psalms to be
silenced, that our Psalms might be attended.

CHAP. VII. Concerning the Singers: and first, whether one alone to sing, or
the whole Church.
THe third Question about Singing of Psalms, concerns the Singers. For
though vocal Singing be approved, and also the Singing of David's Psalms, yet
still it remains to some a Question, who must sing them. And here a threefold
scruple arises. 1. Whether one be to sing for all the rest, the rest joining
only in spirit, and saying, Amen; or the whole Congregation? 2. Whether women,
as well as men; or men alone? 3. Whether carnal men and Pagans may be
permitted to sing with us, or Christians alone, and Church Members?

Touching the first of these Scruples; It is out of doubt. 1. That a Christian
man for his own private solace and edification, may sing a Psalm alone by
himself; as Asaph had his Songs by night, Psalm. 77.6.2. It is granted, that he
who had a spiritual and extraordinary Gift of enditing a Psalm, might sing it
himself, and the rest of the Church join with him in Spirit, saying Amen:
though in the old Testament, he that endited the Psalm, gave it to the Master
of Song, to be sung publicly, by others as well as himself. But the Question
is of Singing the Psalms of David and other Scripture Psalms, whether they
are to be sung by the whole Congregation, or by one alone for all the rest,
(the rest joining only in the Spirit, and in the close) saying, Amen; And to
make good this latter way,

Object. 1. It is alleged, In the Church of Corinth, one had a Psalm, 1 Cor.
14.26. And he that had a Psalm sung in the Spirit, and was directed to sing
with understanding also, (that is, in a tongue understood by the whole Church)
that they might join with him in Spirit, and say Amen, ver. 15, 16.

Answ. This only concerned the extraordinary Psalms, endited by such as had
also a gift of Tongues as well as of Psalms. For therefore it is, that such
are directed, as they sing in the Spirit, that is, by a spiritual gift, so to
sing with understanding also, to wit, with the understanding of the Church. But
this concerns not the Singing of the Psalms of David, which now are not
given by any peculiar gift to any one man.

Object. 2. It is also alleged, That Singing of Psalms is an act of Prophecy.
And the Prophets were to speak one after another, and if any thing were
revealed to another that sat by, the first was to hold his peace, 1 Cor.
14.30, 31.

Answ. Prophecy is taken two ways in Scriptures, to omit other acceptions of
the word, not pertinent to the point in hand. 1. Sometimes more strictly and
properly, for Preaching, that is, for expounding and applying Scripture to
edification. 2. Sometimes more largely, for the publishing of spiritual things
to the glory of God, and edification of our selves or others. And in this sense
Master Perkins (in his Prophetica) makes two parts of it, 1. Preaching of the
Word. 2. Prayer; for which he quoteth, Genesis 20.7. Abraham is a Prophet, and he
shall pray for thee; he quoteth also, 1 Chronicles. 25.1. where the Sons of Asaph,
Heman, and Jeduthun, who were Singers, are said to Prophecy with Harpes. Which
argues that singing of Psalms as well as Prayer, may in some sense, (to wit,
in this large sense) be called an act of Prophecy. But in this sense Paul does
not speak of Prophecy; for he does expressly distinguish it from Prayer, and
much more from singing, 1 Cor. 11.4, 5. And in this 14 Chapter to the
Corinthians, he does plainly distinguish prophecy from singing Psalms; for
when he exhorts them to covet after spiritual gifts, chiefly, that they
might Prophecy, (1 Cor. 14.1.) it is not his meaning, they should chiefly covet
after the gift of enditing or singing of Psalms, but rather after the gift of
Preaching, to wit, of expounding and applying Scripture to edification. When
therefore Paul directs the Prophets to speak one by one, ver. 30, 31. He
speaks not of that kind of Prophecy, whereby many may sing one and the same
Psalm together, but of the other kind of Prophecy, which is Preaching.
Howbeit, true it is also, that if many shall sing several Psalms at one and
the same time together in one and the same Congregation, it would breed the
like confusion in the Church, as if the Prophets should speak two or three, or
more of them at once.


If it be said, Why, is it not a confusion for so many voices to join together
in singing a Psalm, though it be one and the same Psalm?

Answ. No more now in the New Testament, then it was in the Old, when the
Trumpeters and Singers were as one, to make one sound to be heard in praising
the Lord, and when they lift up their voice, with the Trumpeters, and Cymbals,
and Instruments of Music* and praised the Lord, saying, for he is good, for
his mercy endures for ever, 2 Chronicles. 5.13. For then God showed his approbation
and acceptance of that concourse and consent of so many voices together, by
filling the house of the Lord with a Cloud, which was a gracious sign of his
visible presence with them, and acceptance of them, and of their worship. And
surely, If the concourse and consent of so many voices had been a confusion,
doubtless it would have been as much displeasing to God in the old Testament,
as in the New. For God is not a God of confusion in the Churches of the Saints,
whether of the New Testament, or of the old, 1 Cor. 14.33. And if our desire
be, the will of God may be done on earth as it is done by the Angels in
Heaven, we read of a multitude of an heavenly host of Angels, praising God,
and saying, Glory be to God on High, etc. without any confusion.

Object. 3. Scarce any example can be given of any entire Congregation, that
sang together, mentioned in Scripture.

Answ. 1. Though no example could be given, yet it is a sufficient warrant for
the Duty, if any Precept have been given of it in Scripture, and the Precept is
plain in Colos. 3.16. where the whole Church of Colosse is exhorted to have
the word of Christ dwell richly in them, not only to Teach and Admonish one
another, (as well in the Psalms, as other Scriptures) but also to sing the
Psalms with holy melody to the Lord. If God had reserved this Duty to some
select Choristers, he would have given some direction in the New Testament for
their Qualification and Election: But since he speaks nothing of any such
select Musicians, he commends this Duty to the whole Church.

Answ. 2. It is not safely said, that scarce any example in Scripture can be
given of any entire Congregation that sang together.

For 1. In Exodus 15.1. Moses and the chilrdren of Israel are said to sing a
Song of Thankesgiving to the Lord. And the same, they, that sang this Song, the
same are said soon to forget Gods works, and not to wait for his Counsel,
but to fall a lusting, Psalm. 106.12, 13, 14. which was the body of the people.

2. Christ and his Disciples when they administered and received the Lords
Supper, (which was a Church Act) they were an entire Congregation. And they
after Supper sung a Psalm or Hymn, Mat. 26.30. To say, that one sang it, and
the other joined in Spirit, saying Amen, has no foot-hold in the Text. It
might as well be said, they all took the bread, they all blessed it, and brake
it, and gave it, in that one did it, and all the rest joined in Spirit, and
consented, and like enough to the blessing of it, said Amen.

3. It is no strain of wit, but a solid and judicious exposition of the fourth
Chapter of the Revelation, to make it a description of a particular visible
Church of Christ, according to the platform and pattern of the New Testament:
where, as the four living Creatures, are the four sorts of Officers, so the
twenty-foure Elders set forth the brethren in the Church, who are as Elders (in
respect of their ripe age, Gal. 4.1, 2, 3.) and twenty-foure, in number,
answering to the twenty-foure Orders of Priests and Levites, 1 Chronicles. 25.9.
etc. And these are all said to join together in singing a new Song unto the
Lamb, Rev. 5.8, 9, 10.

Object. 4. If the whole Church should sing together, then all the members were
Teachers. For the Apostle bids us to Teach and Admonish one another in
Psalms, Colos. 3.16. But the same Apostle denies all to be Teachers, 1 Cor.
12.29.

Answ. Though the Apostle bid us to Teach and Admonish one another in Psalms;
yet he does not say, that we should teach one another by singing Psalms
together; But he there holds forth a twofold use and improvement of the
whole word of God dwelling richly in us, and a threefold use and improvement of
the Psalms. The whole word of God dwelling richly in us, is to be improved to
the Teaching and admonishing of one another: but the Psalms are to be
improved, not only to both these ends (as all the rest of the Word beside) but
to a threefold end also, even to the Singing of Praises to the Lord. Now in
this third end, all the Congregation may join, in improving the Psalms
thereunto, though not in the Public teaching or Admonishing of the Church by
them, yet in setting forth the Praises, the Counsels, the works of God
declared in them.

Answ. 2. Though not every one that Sings a Psalm, may be said forthwith to
Teach or Admonish them that sing with him, yet he that appoints the Psalm
to be sung, may be said to teach and Admonish the whole Congregation that are
to sing it, or hear it. Julian the Apostate, took himself to be admonished,
yea and reproved when the Christians sang in his hearing the 115. and 97.
Psalms; which declare the vanity of Id^ls, and the confusion of such as
worship them, as is recorded in the Church-Story by Socrates, Theodoret,
Nicephorus.

Answ. 3. Though the Apostle deny all to be Teachers, his meaning is only to
deny, that they are all Teachers by public Office, to attend upon Expounding
and applying Scripture to public edification: But it was no part of his
meaning, either to forbid private Teaching, or Adomition of one another, (for
then Aquila and Priscilla had gone too far in instructing Apollos, Acts
18.26.) or to forbid the quickening and edifying of the Spirit of one another,
by singing together Psalms of Instruction, Admonition, Consolation to
themselves, and Prayers and Praises to the Lord.

CHAP. VIII. Whether Women may sing as well as Men.
THe second scruple about Singers is, Whether women may sing as well as men.
For in this point there be some that deal with us, as Pharaoh dealt with the
Israelites, who though he was at first utterly unwilling that any of them
should go to sacrifice to the Lord in the Wilderness, yet being at length
convinced that they must go, then he was content the men should go, but not
the Women, Exodus 10.11. So here, some that were altogether against singing of
Psalms at all with lively voice, yet being convinced, that it is a moral
worship of God warranted in Scripture, then if there must be a Singing, one
alone must sing, not all, (or if all) the Men only, and not the Women.

And their Reason is. 1. Because it is not permitted to a woman to speak in
the Church, 1 Cor. 14.34. how then shall they Sing? 2. Much less it is
permitted to them to Prophecy in the Church, 1 Timothy 2.11, 12. And singing of
Psalms is a kind of Prophesying.

One answer may at once remove both these scruples and withal clear the
Truth, It is apparent by the scope and context of both those Scriptures, That a
woman is not permitted to speak in the Church, in two cases. 1. By way of
Teaching, whether in expounding, or applying Scripture. For this the Apostle
accounts an act of Authority, which is unlawful for a Woman to usurp over
the man, 2 Timothy 2.13. And besides, the woman is more subject to Error then the
man, ver. 14. And therefore might soon prove a Seducer, if she became a
Teacher.

2. It is not permitted to a woman to speak in the Church, by way of
propounding Questions, though under pretense of desire to learn for her own
satisfaction; but rather it is required she should ask her husband at home, 1
Cor. 14.35.

For under pretense of Questioning, for learning sake, she might so propound
her Question, as to Teach her Teachers; or if not so, yet to open a door to
some of her own weak and erroneous apprehensions, or at least soon exceed the
bounds of womanly modesty.

Nevertheless in two other cases, it is clear a woman is allowed to speak in
the Church. 1. In way of subjection, when she is to give account of her
offense. Thus Peter Questioned Saphyra before the Church touching the price of
land sold by her and her husband, which her husband had concealed by his lie:
And she accordingly spoke in the Church to give answer to his Question, Acts
5.8. 2 In way of singing forth the Praises of the Lord, together with the rest
of the Congregation. For it is evident the Apostle lays no greater restraint
upon the women for silence in the Church, then the Law had put upon them
before. For so himself speaks in the place alleged, 1 Cor. 14.34. It is not
permitted to the women to speak, but to be under subjection, as also says the
Law. The Apostle then requires the same subjection in the woman, which the Law
had put upon them: no more. Now it is certain, the Law, yea the Lawgiver Moses
did permit Miriam and the women that went out after her to sing forth the
praises of the Lord, as well as the men, and to answer the men in their Song of
thankesgiving; Sing ye to the Lord, for he has triumphed gloriously: the
horse and his rider has he thrown into the Sea, Exodus 15.20, 21. Which may be
a ground sufficient to justify the lawful practice of women in singing
together with men the Praises of the Lord. And accordingly the ancient practice
of women in the Primitive Churches to sing the public praises of the Lord;
we read recorded in the Ecclesiastical History, Socrates 2. Book, Chapter
18. of the Greek Copy, and Chap. 16. of the Latin, Theodoret third Book,
Chapter 17.

CHAP. IX. Whether carnal men may sing, as well as godly Christians?
THe third scruple about the Singers remains, Whether carnal men and Pagans
may be permitted to sing with us, or Christians alone, and Church Members?

What we believe in this point, may be summed up in these three particulars.

1. That the Church and the members thereof are called to sing to the Praises
of God, and to their mutual edification: For they were Churches of Christ, and
members of Churches, whom the Apostle exhorts to speak to themselves, and
make melody to the Lord with Psalms and Hymns and spiritual songs, Ephesians.
5.19. Colos. 3.16.

2. That the Praising of God with Psalms is comely for all the upright,
whether received into the Fellowship of any particular visible Church, or no.
For so much the words of David hold forth, Praise is comely for the upright,
Psalm. 33.1.3.

3. Though spiritual gifts are necessary to make melody to the Lord in
singing; yet spiritual gifts are neither the only, nor chief ground of
singing; but the chief ground thereof is the moral duty lying upon all men by
the Commandment of God; If any be merry to sing Psalms* Jam. 5.13. As in
Prayer, though spiritual gifts be requisite to make it acceptable; yet the
duty of Prayer lies upon all men, by that Commandment which forbids
Atheism; it is the fool that says in his heart, There is no God; of whom it
is said, they call not upon the Lord, Psalm. 14.1.4. Which also may serve for a
just Argument and proof of the point.

1. If by the Commandment of God, and indeed by the light of Nature* if all
men be bound to pray unto God in their distresses. (as even Jonah's Mariners
will confess in a storm, Jonah 1.6.) then all men are likewise bound to sing
to the praise of God in their deliverances, and comforts; For the word runs
alike level, Is any afflicted, let him pray? Is any merry? let him sing
Psalms, James, 5.13.

A second proof may be taken from the general Commandment to all men upon
earth to sing to the Lord, Psalm. 96.1. Sing unto the Lord all the earth, Psalm.
100.1, 2. Make a joyful noise unto the Lord all ye Lands, come before his
presence with singing. Psalm. 68.32. Sing unto the Lord all the Kingdoms of the
earth, O sing Praises unto the Lord. And indeed the grounds and ends of
Singing, though some of them do more peculiarly concern the Church and people
of God (and therefore they of all others are most bound to abound in this
Duty;) yet sundry of the grounds and end of Singing are common to all the
sons of men, and therefore none of them to be exempted from this service. As,
the sovereignty of God, The Lord is a great God, and a great King above all
Gods, Psalm. 95.3. And therefore make a joyful noise to him with Psalms, ver.
2. He is to be feared above all Gods, Psalm. 96.4. And therefore sing unto him
all the earth.

The greatness of Gods works of Creation and Providence, they are other
grounds of Singing, and they concern all the sons of men in common, Psalm,
145.6. to 10. The Lord gives food to all flesh, ver. 15* 16. Therefore let all
flesh bless his holy Name, ver. 21. Let every thing that has breath Praise
the Lord for his mighty Acts, and for his execellent Greatness, Psalm. 150.2.
to 6. The end of singing is to praise the Lord for his goodness, and to stir
up our selves and others to serve the Lord with cheerfulness and glad hearts.
And therefore Travelers, Prisoners, Sickmen, Seamen, being saved from several
distresses by the good hand of God, they are all of them commanded to praise
the Lord for his goodness, and to declare his wonders before the sons of
men, Psalm. 107.6. to 32.

Object. 1. Against the singing of all sorts of men in the Congregation,
carnal as well as Christian, is taken from the examples of Song set forth in
Scripture, which both in the old Testament, and in the New, were only
performed by the Church and Church Members. As the Song of Moses at the red Sea
was sung by Moses, and the children of Israel, Exodus 15.1. His other Song,
Deuteronomy. 32. he was commanded to teach it to the children of Israel, Deuteronomy. 31.19.
The Song of Deborah was sung by her and Barak, Judge. 5.1. Under the Kings of
Judah, and after the return from Captivity, the Officers of the Church only
sang for the more orderly carrying on of that Ordinance, 1 Chronicles. 6.31, 32. and
16.4. Neh, 11.22, 23.

In the New Testament, Christ and his Apostles sang in a place apart from
others, Mat. 26.30.

In the Church of Corinth, none but the brethren had liberty of Prophecy, in
Teaching or Singing Psalms. In the Revelation the four Beasts, and the
twenty-foure Elders, and the 144000. who sung the praises of God and of the
Lamb, were apparent representations of the Church her Officers and Members,
Rev. 5.9. and 14.3. and 15.1, 2, 3, 4.

Answ. 1. All these examples prove no more, but what we willingly grant, and
what in the former part of this discourse, we have been occasioned to maintain
and prove, to wit, that it is lawful, not only for one man alone, but for a
whole Church, Officers and Members, to sing the praises of the Lord in heart
and voice together with one accord, and so much all these places do evince.

2. We live not by examples only, but by precepts also. And evident precepts
have been alleged already, for the general practice of Singing by all the
sons of men upon the face of the earth.

3. Some of these examples do allow even wicked men and Apostates to sing,
though it be to upbraide and convince their wickedness. As that Song of Moses,
Deuteronomy. 32. was appointed to be sung by the children of Israel, not only in
Canaan, but in their State of Apostasy, and calamity, When evil should
befall them in the latter days, Deuteronomy. 31.19.21, 22.29.

Object. 2. It is one of the peculiar privileges of the Church, that the
public dispensation of the Word is committed only to them, Romans 3.2. and
9.4. But singing for the matter of it, is nothing else, but the word, Col.
3.16. And the act of singing in public, is the public dispensation of it.

Answ. 1. The public dispensation of the Word, to wit, by Preaching, that is,
by exposition and application of the word, and that in way of office, is
committed only to the Church, and to some select members of the Church,
chiefly for the Churches sake, though the benefit thereof may redound also to
men without. But the public dis^ensation of the word is not so confined to
the Church, but that occasionally men without may publicly as well as
privately, dispense the counsel and will of God both to the Church* and to men
out of the Church. And it may be a sin both in Gods people and in others, not
to hearken to it. Pharaoh Necho (though neither Israelite nor Proselyte) yet by
his Ambassadors did publicly declare the counsel of God to Josiah: and it
was a dangerous sin in Josiah, that he did not hearken to the words of Necho,
which the Text says, were from the mouth of God, 2 Chronicles. 35.21, 22. Balaam
publicly dispensed the counsel and word of God throughout the 23. and 24th
Chapters of Numbers, to Balack and the Princes of Moab: and it was a desolating
sin in Balack and the Princes of Moab, that they did not hearken to him: and
it would have been a sin in the Church of Israel also, if they hearing of the
same, had not received his Prophecies (which God put into his mouth) as the
word of God. The King of the Philistims reproved both Abraham and Sarah from
the word of the Lord Genesis 20.9, 10.16. and it had been a sin in them both, to
have neglected his reproof.

Answ. 2. It is one thing publicly to dispense any Ordinance or worship of
God, which is peculiar unto the Church, (as the Seals, and Censures, and the
like:) another thing to join with the Church in such parts of the public
worship of God, which are not peculiar to the Church, but common to all the
sons of men. Of which sort the public prayers and praises of God be, and to
the Psalms also; which though they be dispensed and offered up in the very
words of God, yet due praises are not therefore the more undue, because they
are offered up in due words

Object. 3. It is confusion for the Church and the world to sing together, in a
mixed Assembly.

Answ. 1. All that are out of the Church, are not forthwith the world, many are
called out of the world (and so indeed all ought to be, except the children of
the faithful) before they be received into the Church. And such though they do
sing with the Church, yet it is not a singing of the Church and world together;
because they are not of the world, but Christ has called them out of the
world, and the world hates them.

Answ. 2. It is no confusion, but lawful communion, for Church and world to
join together in a mixed Assembly, to perform such duties, as God requires of
them in common: as to hear the word of God, and the like. In Antioch in
Pisidia, the whole City almost (the greatest part whereof were Pagans) came
together to hear the word of God, Acts 13.44. Was this a confusion? And what
if the Apostles had prayed in that mixed Assembly, and all the faithful had
said Amen to their prayers, and what if Pagans also understanding what they
prayed, had said Amen with them, had it been a confusion? Yea what if in such
an Assembly, they should not depart without the public praises of God in a
Psalm, and that whole mixed Assembly should join together in the singing of
it, would it be a confusion? If it be no confusion for all sorts of men to
join together in a mixed Assembly to hear the word of God, because it is a
duty required of them all; then neither is it a confusion, but a lawful
communion to join together in singing the praises of God in a Psalm, because
it is a duty required of them all. David foretells, that all the Kings of
the earth (and why not their people as well?) shall praise the Lord, when they
hear the words of his mouth. Yea they shall sing in the ways of the Lord,
that great is the glory of the Lord, Psalm. 138.4* 5.

Object. 4. The end of singing is to instruct, admonish, and comfort the
Church: but the world must not instruct the Church, the Church having received
sufficient gifts by Christ's ascension to edify it self, Ephesians. 4.7. to 12. This
were to borrow Jewels of the Egyptians to make a golden calfe, and to put the
Arc into a Cart, to be drawn by oxen, that should be carried by Levites.

Answ. 1. The end of singing is not only to instruct, admonish, and comfort
the Church, but such also as are godly, though out of the Church. Praise is
comely for the upright, whether in the Church, or out of it. Nay further, the
end of singing is not only to instruct, and admonish, and comfort the upright*
but also to instruct, and convince, and reprove wicked, as has been showed,
Deuteronomy. 31.19.

Answ. 2. The end of singing, is not only to instruct, and convince, and
edify men but also to praise and glorify God, Psalm. 96.1, ^ Though the Church
might be sufficient to edify it self: yet is it not sufficient to glorify
God alone: which is a duty lying upon all the sons of men, yea in their
kind, upon all the creatures.

Answ. 3. Though the Church have received from Christ's ascension sufficient
helps within it self, to edify it self: yet if his Providence also cast in
other helps from without to edify it, it is from the virtue of the same
ascension of Christ sitting at Gods right hand; and such helps are not to be
rejected. Josiah did not well to reject the admonition of Pharaoh Necho:
Abraham and Sarah did well to receive the admonition of Abimelech. And yet
neither Pharaoh nor Abimelech were of the Church.

Answ. 4. The admonition and instruction given in the singing of a Psalm, is
rather given by him that penned the Psalm, and by him that appoints the
Psalm to be sung, then by every Singer, unless the admonition and instruction
be to himself by the words: and unless there be a stirring up of affection to
himself and others, by the blessing of God upon the harmony.

Answ. 5. Though it was an abuse of the Egyptian Jewels, to borrow them to
make a golden calfe; yet it was no abuse of them to offer them to God for the
building and furnishing of the work of the Tabernacle. God forbid any
Christian soul should please it self in comparing the Praises of the holy and
glorious God to the golden calfe; for though the Singing of the praises of God
by carnal men, may be compared to the employment of Egyptian Jewels to that
end for which they are used: yet that end being the praising of God, and in
such a way as God has enjoined to all men, it is not an employment of
Egyptian Jewels to the making of a golden calfe, but to the Praises of the
living God, who is the Savior of all men, especially of all them that believe.

Nor is there any resemblance between putting the Arc upon a Cart to be
carried by Oxen, which should have been carried by Levites, and the permitting
of men out of the Church to join in singing the Praises of the Lord. For
neither do the members of the Church (to whom the Lord has chiefly committed
the singing forth of his praises) lay aside this duty, and leave it to
Non-Members, (as the Levites laid aside the carrying of the Arc, and left in
the Cart and Oxen:) neither are Non-Members as a Cart and Oxen, upon whom this
duty was never laid: But are all of them enjoined, as to hear his Word* and
to call upon his Name, so to sing forth the praises due unto his Name from all
his creatures. There is much more just cause of fear, lest this new opinion of
Rejecting of singing of David's Psalms, and disallowing any Psalms to be sung,
but such as are invented by ordinary common gifts, and the same to be sung
only by them that invent them, least this new Opinion, I say, be worse then
the new Cart of the Philistims; for that was to carry the Ark of God to his
place; but this new Opinion tends to carry this Ordinance of singing Psalms
out of the Country. And there is the like cause of fear least this
over-prizing our personal spiritual common gifts, and the Psalms endited by
them, above the Psalms of David, be not indeed the erecting of a golden calfe,
in stead of the Cherubims of the Tabernacle.

Object. 5. If Pagans and profane persons may sing, they may prophecy also in
Christ's spiritual Temple.

Answ. It has been showed above, that Prophecy is taken two ways in
Scripture. 1. More properly for preaching the Word, that is expounding and
applying Scripture to edification. 2. More generally for speaking or publishing
the holy things of God, to the glory of God. In the former of these ways, it
is not for Pagans, or profane persons, ordinarily and allowably to Prophecy in
Christ's spiritual Temple, which is his Church. But in the latter way, it is
not unlawful as to say Amen, to the public prayers of the Church, and
thereby to express their joining in prayer, (which is one act of Prophecy;) so
to join with them in singing Psalms; which it has been showed above, is a
duty common to them with the Church, as well to join with them in hearing the
Word. Wherein whether they edify the Church or no* certain it is, it tends
to the glory of God, that Gods praises should be set forth by all the sons of
men. And it is a further glory to God, that such Pagans and profane persons
should sing the word of God to their own conviction and confusion of face: And
from both, some edification and comfort redoundeth to the Church, to see the
wicked convinced, and Gods Name to be glorified. For it is an honor to God,
and a comfort to his Church, that our God is not as their God, our enemies
being judges and witnesses.

Object. 6. The godly Jews would not suffer the Samaritans to build the Temple
with them, though they offered themselves, Ezra 4.2, 3. And if singing be
Prophesying in any sense, and any way tending to the comfort or edification of
the Church, why should we suffer profane persons to sing with us?

Answ. That the godly Jews did reject the Samaritans from building with them,
it was not out of moral consideration, as if it were unlawful for Heathens to
contribute their assistance to the worship or Ordinances of God; but out of a
ceremonial respect, because no Heathens or unclean persons might be allowed to
come into the Temple of the Lord, Act. 21.28. 2 Chronicles. 23.19. But by the death
of Christ the Partition wall of Ceremonies is broken down: and we may allow
Heathens and profane persons to come into our holy Assemblies, 1 Cor. 14.24.
which they would not admit. Certain it is, the godly Jews themselves did
receive liberal contributions and oblations from the Kings of Persia, toward
the building and maintenance of the Temple, Ezra 7.21. to 24. and Chap. 8.24.
to 30. which was a moral acknowledgement of the honor due to the God of
Israel, as well by Gentiles as Jews. If therefore the Jews would accept
acknowledgment of moral homage and service from Heathens and profane persons
to the God of Israel; why may not Christians accept from Pagans and profane
persons, their acknowledgement of moral homage and service to our God, in
singing forth his praises amongst us?

Object. 7. Such carnal and profane people, are not worthy to take the Name
and Praises of God in their mouths; nor are they able to make melody to the
Lord; by singing to him with grace in their hearts, as is required, Col. 3.16.

Answ. 1. If we speak of the worthiness of desert, John Baptist was not
worthy to loose the latchet of Christ's shoe, much less to sing forth his
glorious praise. But if we speak of the worthiness of fitness, though it be
true, their unclean lips are not fit to take the holy word of God into their
mouths; yet the holy word of God is fit to come into their minds and mouths
also, to convince and reprove them of their Apostasy from God, and rebellion
against him, Deuteronomy. 31.19. And howsoever they be unfit and unworthy to take Gods
Name and Praise into their mouths; yet surely the Lord is worthy of all Praise
and Glory, Blessing and Thankesgiving from them, and all the Creatures which he
has made.

Answ. 2. It is true, carnal and profane persons are not able to make melody,
and sing to the Lord with grace in their hearts; yet that defect does no more
excuse carnal persons from singing, then it does excuse them from Prayer,
which they cannot perform acceptably to God, without a Spirit of grace and
faith. To Pray (and so to Sing) without Faith is a sin; but not pray at all
is a greater sin: the one is Hypocrisy, the other Atheism.

Object. 8. Though the Scribes and Pharisees joined in the Temple-Songs upon
the words of David in the worldly Sanctuary: yet the melody made by such
carnal and clean mouths, was far more beautiful and glorious, then ours in
the Assemblies made with a multitude of all manner of Singers, upon the same
words of David and Asaph. For although they that sang in the Temple in those
days were carnal, yet they were appointed to sing, and were choice Singers,
endued with choice (though common) singing gifts, which made the service most
beautiful, as men call beauty. But the melody of our Assembly compared with
theirs, has no outward beauty in it. So that if their melody were a Type of
ours, then the Type is more glorious then the Antitype, which is a dishonor to
Christ.

Answ. 1. It is no dishonor at all to Christ, that the Type should be far
more beautiful and glorious to the outward man, then the Antitype. Solomon was
a type of Christ, and the Temple of Solomon was a type of his body; and both
Solomon himself and his Temple were far more beautiful and glorious then
Christ himself to the outward man, Isa. 53.2. Yet this was no dishonor to
Christ, whose beauty and glory was so divine and heavenly in the inner man,
that all their outward beauty and glory, were but dim and dark shadows to it.

Answ. 2. We do not say, that their melody in the Temple, which was made with
voices, was a type of our melody made with our voices, and singing the same
Psalms of David and Asaph. For though their Choristers were types of the whole
Church, and their instruments of Music were types of the inward affections of
our hearts, in singing forth the Praises of the Lord, to the honor of his
name, to their own edification.

Answ. 3. Though their melody might be more beautiful and glorious to the
outward appearance, as being more artificial and more musical: yet seeing the
Spirit of Grace is more abundantly poured out in the New Testament, then in the
old, if the holy Singers sing with more life and grace of the Spirit, our
melody is the more beautiful and glorious before the Lord, and his spiritual
Saints, though theirs was more beautiful and glorious in the outward sense.

Answ. 4. Whether the Scribes and the Pharisees were any of them Musicians of
the Temple, endued with choice gifts, and appointed to that office, (as you
say) though we do not know it, yet neither will we deny it. But this we dare
say, That if they were appointed to sing, so now not any choice order of men,
but all the sons of men are commanded to Sing, as well as to Pray, as has
been showed above.

Object. 9. Where many sing together, (as in a great mixed Assembly) many sing
they know not what: and they that do know what they sing, cannot but see, that
many of the Psalms, which they do sing, are not suitable to their own
condition. And how then can they sing such Psalms, as Songs of their own?

Answ. 1. The ignorance of men in discerning the true matter, or the right
manner of a Duty, does not excuse them from performance of the Duty: we
speak of such moral Duties, as the moral Law of God and the Law of Nature
requires to be done. What if a man know not what nor how to pray? Yet that
will not excuse him either from praying himself, or from joining with others
that are better acquainted with prayer, then himself. So it is here, what if
many a man know not what, nor how to sing to Gods Praise? yet that will not
excuse him, either from singing himself, or joining with others, that have
more spiritual skill in that kind then himself.

Answ. 2. It is an ignorance of a man's self, and of the ways of God* to
think that any Psalm is unsuitable to his own condition. For every Psalm
sets forth either the attributes and works of God and his Christ, and this
yields me matter of holy reverence, Blessing, and Praise: Or else it
describes the estate and ways of the Church and People of God, and this
affects me with compassion, instruction, or imitation: Or else it deciphereth
the estate and ways of the wicked, and this holds forth to me a word of
admonition: Or else it does lively express mine own affections and
afflictions, temptations and comforts, and then it furnishes me with fit
matter and words to present mine own condition before the Lord. But whatsoever
the matter of the Psalm concerning God or his Christ, the godly, or the
wicked, my self, or others, the good or evil estate of one, or other. It ever
ministers fit matter and occasion to me of singing forth the Praises of the
Lord, since the Name of God is to be blessed in all, whether it go well or ill
with our selves or others.

CHAP. X. Of the manner of Singing.
THe fourth and last head of Scruples remains, touching the manner of
Singing: concerning which a threefold Scruple arises.

1. Whether it be lawful to sing Psalms in Meeter devised by men?

2. Whether in Tunes invented?

3. Whether it be lawful in Order unto Singing, to read the Psalm?

The two former of these Scruples, because they stand upon one and the same
ground, may fitly be handled together.

The judgment of the Churches of Christ in these Points, is doubtless suitable
to their Practice, That it is lawful to sing Psalms in English verses (which
run in number, measure, and meeter) and in such grave and melodious tunes, as
do well befit both the holiness and gravity of the matter, and the capacity
of the Singers.

A double ground or reason may be given hereof: The former is this; If it be
lawful to translate and turn the Hebrew Bible into English Prose in order to
reading, then it is lawful also to translate and turn David's Hebrew Psalms,
and verse into our English Psalms and Verse, in order to Singing. But the
former of these, is a confessed Truth, and generally received amongst
Protestants; except only Mr. Smith, who had a s^ngular conceit in this Point,
That all Letters in the writings of the old Testament were typical (^yping out
the Law written in our hearts:) and therefore (...) ^^ve all reading of the
holy Scripture to be abolished under the New Testament. But Christ himself
commanded his Disciples to search the Scriptures, Joh. 5.39. And how shall they
search them, except they read them? And the noble Beraeans are commanded for
searching the Scriptures, in the examining of Paul's Doctrine, Acts 17.11, 12.
which how could they have done without reading? And wherefore did all the
Apostles and Evangelists write the New Testament in Greek? a language of all
more generally known then the Latin, and therefore much more then any other
in the world, as Tully himself testifies Pro Archia Poeta: was it not for
this end, that the New Testament might be read, and generally understood of all
Nations? And where it was not understood, there it might most easily be
translated out of a language well known unto the several language of every
Nation? And as for the old Testament, it was translated to their hands out of
the Hebrew into Greek almost three hundred years before the Apostles times.
Yea wherefore did God commit the whole Counsel of his will and word to
writing, for the edification and salvation of all his people, but that it might
be read and understood of them all? If then it be the holy will of God, that
the Hebrew Scriptures should be translated into English Prose in order unto
reading, then it is in like sort his holy will, that the Hebrew Psalms (which
are Poems and Verses) should be translated into English Poems and Verses in
order to Singing.

The Consequence is evident and undeniable. For presupposing that God would
have the Scriptures read of English men as well as of other Nations, then as a
necessary means to that end, he would have the Scriptures translated into the
English Tongue, that English People might be able to read them. In like sort,
presupposing that God would have the Psalms of David, and other Scripture-
Psalms to be sung of English men, (as has been evinced above in the second
Point) then as a necessary means to that end, he would have Scripture- Psalms
(which are Poems and Verses) to be translated into English- Psalms (which are
in like sort Poems and Verses) that English People might be able to sing them.
Now as all Verses in all Poems do consist of a certain number, and measure of
Syllables; so do our English Verses (as they do in some other Nations) run
in meeter also, which make the Verses more easy for memory, and fit for melody.

A second ground of this Point is this: If it be not lawful to translate
Hebrew Psalms (which are Verses) into English Verses, which run in number,
measure, and meeter of syllables:) then it is not lawful to express the
elegancy of the Original language in a translation; for it is an artificial
elegancy which the holy Penmen of Scripture used that they penned the Psalms,
and such like Poetical books of Scriptures not in prose, (which men use in
common speech) but in verses, which observe a certain number and measure of
syllables, and some of them run in meeter also, as those know that know the
Hebrew, and as Buxtorf. shows in his Thesaur. page 629. Now surely then it
were a sacrilegious niceness, to think it unlawful lively to express all
the artificial elegancies of the Hebrew Text, so far as we are able to
imitate the same in a translation. Yea doubtless it were a part of due
Faithfulness in a Translator, as to declare the whole Counsel of God, word
for word; so to express lively every elegancy of the Holy Ghost* (as much as
the vulgar language can reach) that so the People of God may be kindly
affected, as well with the manner, as with the matter of the holy Scriptures.

And for the English Tunes that we use in singing of Psalms, take this for a
ground; Since God has commanded us to sing Psalms and Hymns and spiritual
Songs, and amongst others, those of David: and yet withal has hid from us the
Hebrew Tunes, and the musical Accents wherewith the Psalms of David were wont
to be sung. It must needs be that the Lord allows us to sing them in any such
grave, and solemn, and plain Tunes, as do fitly suite the gravitie of the
matter, the solemnity of Gods worship, and the capacity of a plain People.
As, to instance in a like case, when the Lord instituted the Paschall Supper,
and therein a whole Lamb to be eaten, the head, feet, and purtenances, and
made no mention what drink they should use in it, whether wine, or water, or
beer, or other liquor; It was therefore left to their liberty, to use any
such liquor as they were wont to drink fit for such meat as was to be eaten,
and for such stomachs as were to feed upon it: So here when the Lord appointed
us to sing David's Psalms, and does not appoint us in what Tunes, He therefore
plainly leaves us to our liberty, to make use of such Tunes as are suitable
to such an Ordinance* and to them that partake in it.

Object. 1. It will not follow, that because the word is to be dispensed in a
known tongue, and so translated into it* therefore Hebrew Songs into English
Song. For the former, we have the warrant of the Word to dispense it for
edification, exhortation and comfort; but no word for the other, nor no gifts
of that kind given for the Churches profit, to dispense the word this way.
Such Songs therefore, and such Tunes (which are called grave Church-Tunes) are
not of God. Nor do I believe that the Levites invented any New Tunes, I have
no faith to believe that ever God betrusted man's corrupt nature, to frame any
thing in Gods worship to his praise. But suppose God had so far honored the
worldly Singers then; yet it will not follow, that the Lord Jesus allows us
the like liberty now. He will not now allow any flesh to boast in his
presence, who is not able to bring to pass so much as a good thought.

Answ. To weaken the argument for translating Hebrew Songs into English Songs
and Tunes, taken from the like warrant of translating Hebrew Scriptures into
English Scriptures; This objection denies, that we have either the like word,
or the like gift, or* the like liberty. Whereto our answer is, we have all
alike equally.

For 1. that we have the like word for singing Hebrew Songs, has been proved
above, out of Colos. 3.16. and Ephesians. 5.19. And the same word that commands us
to sing them, commands us also the translation of Hebrew Songs into English
Songs, as a necessary means to the acceptable singing of them. For if we
should sing Hebrew Songs in the Hebrew tongue, the People (the body of the
Church) should sing without understanding, which were directly contrary to the
Apostles Direction, 1 Cor. 14.15.

2. That we have also the like gift of translating Hebrew Songs into English
Songs, as well as Hebrew Prose into English Prose, is evident by the event. For
we have not only as many but more Translations of the Hebrew Psalms into
English Psalms, then of the Hebrew Bible into the English Bible.

If it be said, such a gift of translating Hebrew Songs into English Songs, is
but a Poetical gift, not a spiritual gift.

Answ. It might as well be said, the translating of the Hebrew Scriptures into
English, is not a spiritual gift, but a Grammatical, or Rhetorical gift.
Whatsoever the art or skill be, Grammatical, Rhetorical, Poetical, they are
all of them gifts of God (though common) and given chiefly for the service and
edification of the Church of God.

3. That we have also the like liberty of inventing Tunes, appears from what
has been said already; For if God have given us liberty and warrant to sing
Psalms and Hymns and spiritual Songs, then we must sing them in some Tunes.
Now the Tunes of the Temple are lost and hidden from us, so that we cannot
sing them at all; and therefore we must sing such other Tunes, as are suitable
to the matter, though invented by men.

But you do not believe that the Levites ever invented any New Tune.

Answ. Either the Levites invented New Tunes, or the Psalmists delivered
musical Accents, and Notes together with the Psalms: which seeing we
understand not, either we must not sing a^ all, or we must make use of such
Tunes, as are invented by others.

But you cannot believe, that ever God betrusted man's corrupt nature, to frame
any thing in Gods worship to his Praise.

Answ. Then you cannot believe, that ever God betrusted the Hebrew and Greek
Scriptures, to be read in the Christian Churches in English words; for all
English words are framed by English men, in corrupt nature, to wit, without the
immediate assistance of the Holy Ghost in the framing of them. And if we may
not make use of Tunes invented by men for the singing of the Psalms, then
neither may we make use of words invented by men for the Reading of the
Psalms, and other Scriptures. The one is as much a worship of God as the
other: And English words are as much an invention of man as English Tunes. But
least you should begin hereupon to take up a scruple against the Reading also
of Scriptures in English words, as well as against the singing of Psalms in
English Tunes, and both upon this pretense of the inventions of men in the
worship of God, be not ignorant, that such godly men as have been desirous of
Reformation, and most zealous against humane inventions in the worship of God,
they always intended such humane inventions in the worship of God, as had no
warrant but the wit and will of man, not such as had warrant either from
consequence of Scripture, or light of Nature, or civil custom. For a woman to
cover her head in time of public Prayer, or Prophesying, and for a man to
uncover his head, the Apostle warranteth both from the light of Nature, and the
custom of the Churches, 1 Cor. 11.4. to 16.

The Kiss of love in holy Assemblies was warranted, not by divine institution,
(for then it were a sin in us to neglect it now;) but by occasion of civil
custom in those Nations; where, it being usual in their Civil Assemblies to
greet one another with a kiss of love, The Apostles do not disallow the use
of it in holy Assemblies, but only require the sincerity and holiness of the
love expressed in such kisses, 1 Cor. 16.20. 1 These. 5.26. 1 Pet. 5.14. These
Apostles did not believe in this Point, as you do, that God never betrusted
corrupt Nature, to frame any thing in Gods worship to his Praise.

It is true, man's corrupt Nature cannot bring forth a good thought, to wit, a
gracious thought, and that of it self, but yet by the help of Christ, it may
bring forth both knowledge by Tongues, and Tunes by Music; and that with as
good allowance in the New Testament as in the Old. God did as much disallow any
flesh to boast in his presence in the old Testament, as in the New, Jer. 9.23,
24. But what cause has any flesh to boast, either of his spiritual, or common
gifts? Seeing both are gifts, and received of God: and if received, why should
men boast, as if they had not received them? 1 Cor. 4.7.

Object. 2. To sing with man's melody and meeter, does not hold forth any
spiritual gift of Christ, but only the art and nature of man: whereas Prayer
and Preaching do hold forth spiritual gifts. And the tuning of Scripture by
man's art, it is no gift of Grace, neither does it redound to the praise of
Grace.

Answ. Though Prayer and Preaching do hold forth spirittuall gifts, yet all
the Duties that tend to edification, do not hold forth spiritual gifts, but
some of them common gifts only. The reading of the Scriptures tends to
edification, as being it self an Ordinance of God, though exposition
afterward be added also, which is another Ordinance, Deuteronomy, 31.11, 12, 13. And
yet reading of the Scriptures is no spiritual gift. Aquila, and Symmachus, and
Theodotian, translated the Hebrew Scriptures into Greek, and yet none of them
were endued with spiritual gifts, or at best but common. To say Amen at the
end of a public Prayer, tends to edification; and yet Amen may be said
without holding forth any spiritual gift.

But that which is ground of your scruple seems to be this, that that which
is no gift of Grace, how can it redound to the Praise of Grace?

But the Answer is ready, that such things as help either the understanding,
or the affection, and are appointed of God for his worship; they do tend to
edification, and so to the praise of grace, though they may be performed by a
gift of God in Nature or art, without any spiritual gift of Grace: Translation
of the Scriptures into the Mother Tongue, and the reading of them in a known
tongue, do both of them help the understanding: and being appointed of God,
they tend to the edification of the people in the Grace of Christ. The
translating of the Psalms into verse, in number, measure, and meeter, and
suiting the Ditty with apt Tunes, do help to stir up the affection: And the
singing of Psalms being appointed of God, they tend to make a gracious melody
to the Praise of God and edification of his People. The sound of Aarons Bells,
and the blast of the silver Trumpets, and the workmanship of Hiram* the Tyrian
in Solomon's Temple, did none of them hold forth any spiritual gift of grace:
The gift of God in Nature and Art might ^each them all. Yet all these being
appointed by God, the putting forth of these gifts did tend to the edification
of the Church of God in the Grace of Christ.

Object. 3. The Meeter of the late Translators, though it come nearer to the
Original, then the former Meeters, yet not so near as the Prose. They frame
their words and sentences more to the Meeter, then the Prose. Yea they
sometimes break the Attributes of God, and for the verse sake put Jah for
Jehovah: which is a mangling of the word.

Answ. The meeter and verse of the late Translators, comes as near to the
words and sense of the Original* as does the Prose; especially considering
they do withal express the holy Art of the Original Hebrew Poetry, which
the Prose does not attend unto. Neither do the Translators break the
Attributes of God, when for the verse sake, they put Jah for Jehovah; For both
Jah and Jehovah do hold forth one and the same Attribute of God, even his
eternal being. The Evangelists and Apostles give us a pattern of greater
changes of the Attributes of God, then that; any yet without breaking of the
Attributes of God, and much more without mangling of the word of God. It is an
usual thing with them to translate Jehovah the Lord, Mat. 22.44. with Psalm.
110.1. And yet Jehovah holds forth his eternal essence, the Lord his
Sovereign Dominion. It were sacrilegious Blasphemy to call this changing
either the breaking of Gods Attributes, or the mangling of his word. Besides,
its very rare when the Translators do make any such change of Jah for Jehovah:
and to prevent all stumbling, either of your self, or others at it, I suppose
they will help it in the next Edition of the Psalms.

Object. 4. What delight can the Lord take in such Praises of himself, where
sinful men, or the Man of sin has an hand in making the melody?

Answ. God delights that his will should be obeyed: at least he abhors
that his will should be disobeyed, though by sinful men, 1 Samuel 15.22, 23.
Since God commands all men in distress to call upon him, and all men in
their mirth, to sing his Praise, what is mortal sinful man, (Dust and Ashes)
that he should forbid, what God has commanded? God knows how to allow, yea
and to reward what is his own: when yet he takes no pleasure in the sinful
manner of performance of any Duty. God took notice of Ahabs humiliation, and
rewarded it with respite of temporal judgments, though he took no pleasure
in his sinful hypocrisy, 1 Kings 21.27* 28, 29. And yet they that had an hand
in making the Melody of the English Psalms, (whether in old England or New)
were men of a better spirit then Ahab. But I can but marveile, why you should
put in the man of sin, as having any hand at all, in making this Melody. For
neither the man of sin (by whom I suppose you mean Antichrist) nor any
Antichristian Church have had any hand in turning David's Psalms into English
Songs and Tunes, or are wont to make any Melody in the Singing of them, yea
they reject them as Genevah Gigs; And they be Cathedral Priests of an
Antichristian spirit, that have scoffed at Puritan-Ministers, as calling the
People to sing one of Hopkins Jiggs, and so hop into the Pulpit. God keep all
Anti-Psalmists from the like Antichristian Spirit. They that have been in
Antichristian Churches can tell you* that Popish Churches are not wont to sing
David's Psalms translated into verse in their own Country Meeter, but they
only sing the Prose of David's Psalms in Cathedral Notes. Which how far
your self close withal, I leave to your self to consider.

CHAP. XI. Of Reading the Psalms in order to Singing.
THe last scruple remaining in the manner of singing, Concerns the order of
singing after the Reading of the Psalms. For it is doubted by some, and
concluded by others that reading of the Psalms is not to be allowed in order
to singing. We for our parts easily grant, that where all have books and can
read, or else can say the Psalm by heart, it were needless there to read
each line of the Psalm before hand in order to singing. But if it be granted,
which is already proved, that the Psalms to be ordinarily sung in Public,
are Scripture- Psalms, and those to be sung by the body of the Congregation.
Then to this end it will be a necessary help, that the words of the Psalm be
openly read before hand, line after line, or two lines together, that so they
who want either books or skill to read, may know what is to be sung, and join
with the rest in the duty of singing; It is no unwarrantable invention of man,
brought into the worship of God, to make use of such means, which the light of
Nature teaches us* to be either necessary or convenient helps, either to the
hearing or understanding of what it said in the worship of God. Scaffolds
erected in Meeting houses are inventions of men; no express precept, nor
example in Scripture calls for them; and yet the light of Nature easily
suggesteth it, that they help to hearing, and so to edification, in as much as
they draw multitudes of people to sit within the Ministers voice; That which
helps the very outward sense of hearing, helps also knowledge and
understanding, and so edification. And therefore no man takes exceptions at
Scaffolds as inventions of men* though they be used to help forward Gods
worship, and spiritual edification; because they are not brought in, nor used
for spiritual means immediately* but remotely, so far as they are fit to
help the outward sense of hearing and so understanding. Of like use is reading
in order to Singing. It gives the People to hear, and so to understand, what
is to be sung, that so they may join with the rest in singing of the Psalm:
and by Singing be stirred up to use holy Harmony, both with the Lord and his
People.

Object, 1. The Scripture mentions no ordinary reading in any Church, but
that which is joined with interpertation.

Answ. 1. The Scripture does expressly mention Baruch to have read the word in a
Church Assembly, without adjoining any interpretation to it, Jer. 36.6, 7.

Answ. 2. As Preaching, of the word is an Ordinance, so reading the word in
order to Preaching, is an Ordinance also. In like sort, as singing of Psalms
is an Ordinance, so reading the Psalms in order to singing, is allowable also.

Answ. 3. It is mentioned in Scripture, that the children of Israel did all
join in singing the Song of Moses at the Red Sea, Exodus 15.1. Now it is not
credible, that they who were bred and brought up in bondage, were brought up to
read. It were much if one of a thousand of them could read. If most of them
could not read, how could they join in singing that Psalm, unless some or
other read, or pronounced the Psalm to them?

Answ. 4. Though it be true, that the Church of Israel had such an Ordinance
amongst them, that after the reading of the Law, or the Prophets, some or other
of the Priests or Levites, or Prophets, were wont to expound the same to the
people, ( Acts 13.15. and 15.21. Neh. 8.7, 8.) yet the very reading of the word
it self was also an Ordinance, though no Exposition followed, Deuteronomy. 31.11, 12,
13. Deuteronomy. 27.14. to 26.

Object. 2. The Scripture prescribes not what Officer shall perform this act,
to read the Psalm in order to singing.

Answ. The Scripture prescribes this, as it does many other matters of
ordering Gods house, to wit, under general Rules. It is no where expressly
prescribed in Scripture, who shall be the Mouth of the rest in the public
Admonition, or Excommunication of an Offender; yet by general Rules, it may
easily be collected, That public dispensations of the Church, do ordinarily
pertain to the public Officers of the Church. Any of the preaching or ruling
Elders may warrantably go before the people, in putting the words of the
Psalm into their mouths.

Object. 3. This reading of the Psalm does hinder the melody, the
understanding, the affection in singing.

Answ. If a man's prejudice against reading do not hinder himself, Reading
hinders none of these; not melody, for the Reading is not in the art of
singing, but in the pause; nor the understanding, for it helps such as cannot
read, or want Books to understand what is to be sung, which otherwise they
could hardly perceive; nor the affection, for when the melody is not
interrupted, and the understanding furthered, the affection is rather helped
then hindered; or if it be hindered, lay the fault where it is, rather in a coy,
or cold heart, then in a distinct and intelligent Reading.

CHAP. XII. Answering the Objections brought from the ancient Practice of the
Primitive Churches.
OBject. 1. That practice which was anciently used in the Churches immediately
after the Apostles times, is most probable to be nearest the constitution of
the Apostles; and that practice which followed a great while after it, is most
probable to be furthest off; as the water is purest and clearest, nearest the
fountain, and runs more troubled, and muddy afterward. Now the practice of
singing Psalms, which were made by the faithful, was first in use: For those
Psalms which the Primitive Christians used before day in the time of
Persecution, wherein they sang Praises to Christ their God (as Pliny writes to
Trajan) they are said to be made of the faithful.

These were in use, even in John's time, after he was called from Banishment
(after Domitians death) to order the Churches; which practice also continued
about three hundred years; wherein there was more purity in Doctrine and
Discipline, (as uses to be under Persecution) then afterward.

Answ. 1. This Syllogism falls short of Truth in both the Propo^^tions: For
it is not always true, that the practice which was used in the Churches
immediately after the purest times, is nearest to their constitution, (as the
water is purest and clearest next the fountain;) and that which follows a
great while after it, is furthest off. As water near the fountain may fall
out to be troubled, and so become less clear and pure, then in his running
course further off. The night following the day, though it be nearest to the
day, yet it is more dark, then the day following after, though it be further
off from the day before. The Elders and People that lived in the days of
Joshuah, they served the Lord: but when that Generation were gathered to their
Fathers, there arose another Generation after them, which knew not the Lord,
and they did evil in the sight of the Lord, and served Baalim, Judge. 3.7. to
11. Paul forewarneth the Elders of Ephesus; He knew that after his departure
grievous Wolves should come in amongst them, not sparing the flock, Acts
20.29, 30. And Eusebius complains out of Hesesippus, That after the Apostles
times, the Church did not long remain a chaste and undefiled Virgin, Histor.
Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 26.

2. Neither is it true, that the practice of singing Scripture- Psalms
followed a great while after the Apostles times, as if the faithful had only
made use of their own personal gifts in compiling Psalms for the first three
hundred years. For it is evident that in the next Century after the Apostles
times, the Church did (as Tertullian testifies, Apologet, Chap. 39.) Deo
canere, either de Scripturis Sanctis, or de proprio ingenio, that is, either
out of the holy Scriptures, or out of their own gift. Yea and Pliny himself,
(which is all the Testimony you allege of the Churches practice for three
hundred years) he does not express what Psalms they sang, whether out of the
holy Scriptures, or out of their own gift, or that any one alone did sing, but
that they did Carmen Christo quasi Deo dicere suo invicem, Plin. Epist. lib.
10. Epist. 97. Which Tertullian and others express, they did Caetus
antelucanos habere ad canendum Deo and Christo, Apologet. cap. 2. They met
before day to sing Praises to God and Christ, and to confederate Discipline.

3. Though they had made use of their personal gifts, more then they did in
the times of the Primitive Persecutions, during the first three hundred years,
yet that would not argue they neglected the use of David's Psalms; much less
would it encourage us to neglect the use of David's Psalms now. During the
times o^ those bloody Persecutions, as the sufferings of the Saints abounded,
so did their Consolations (through Christ) abound also. As God honored sundry
of them with miraculous gifts, so especially with a large measure of spiritual
joy in the Lord, which might furnish them with more enlargement of heart, to
compile Psalms to set forth his Praise, then God is wont to bestow in more
peaceable times.

4. Though sometimes they sang Scripture- Psalms, and sometimes spiritual
Songs by personal Gifts: yet both sorts evidence the judgment and practice of
those times, touching vocal Singing. They did not only make melody to the
Lord with Grace in their hearts, but with Songs also in their mouths. Yea
Justin Martyr, (who flourished within fifty years after the Apostles time) or
whosoever was the Author of those Questions and Answers ad Orthodoxes amongst
his works, though he speak of Musical Instruments, as utterly unfit for Church
Assemblies, yet simple singing with the voice he much magnifieth; as that which
stirs up the heart to spiritual joy, and holy desires; as that which
subdueth the passions and concupiscences of the flesh; as that which scatters
the evil suggestions of spiritual enemies; as that which waters, and
refreshes the soul to fruitfulness in good Duties; as that which stirs up
courage and constancy in wrestlings for the Truth; and as that which gives
some medicine to all the griefs, which befall a man through sad and sorrowful
Accidents in this life, Justin in Answ. to Q. 107.

5. After the three hundred years after Christ were expired, yet not long
after the times of Persecution returned in the days of Julian the Apostata,
when the Christians of Antioch, together with the women and children, sang such
Psalms of David as cursed and reproached Heathen Idols and Idolaters,
Socrates Eccles. Histor. lib. 2. cap. 16. in Gn. cap. 18. Theodoret expresses
by name. Psalm. 115. and Psalm. 68. Histor. Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 17.

6. Although before the three hundred years were expired, we read in
Eusebius, that one Nepos (though a Millenary) was well respected, as for other
good gifts and works, so for diverse Psalms and Hymns composed by him, (which
some brethren did willingly use a long time after;) yet we suppose, that was
such a practice, as your self would not allow, to sing set forms of Psalms
invented by men, and to continue to sing them after their departure, and in the
mean time, to refuse set forms of Psalms endited by the Holy Ghost; as if
the Psalms endited by an extraordinary measure of the Spirit, were more
unclean, then the Psalms endited by the common gift of an Ordinary Elder or
Brother.

Object. 2. Samosatenus the Heretic, (who denied the Diety of the Lord Jesus)
was the first that within those first three hundred years, opposed this
singing by personal gifts.

Answ. Not out of respect to David's Psalms, but to avoid the Hymns which did
set forth the Glory and Godhead of Christ, and to bring in Psalms, which did
set forth his own Heresy, and therewith his own Praises, as Eusebius
testifies, Eccles. Hist. lib. 7. cap. 24. in lat. cap. 30. in gr.

Object. 3. The practice of singing David's Psalms was a later invention,
brought into the Church of Antioch by Flavianus and Diodorus. And hence this
custom was taken up by Ambrose and Augustine: but vehemently opposed by one
Hilary a Ruler there, because they sang out of a Book. Hence Augustine turned
a Patron for it, forced thereto rather by the importunity of the people, then
of his own accord: as being destitute of weapons out of the word of God for it:
and therefore afterward repented of it, and wished the Custom removed.

Answ. 1. Tertullians testimony alleged above, does evidently evince, that the
singing of Scripture- Psalms (and so of David's was in use in the Church,
before Flavianus and The^dorus were borne, Apologet. cap. 39. For Tertullian
was about 140. years before them.

2. The practice brought in by Flavianus and Diodorus, was rather some new
fashion of singing David's Psalms, then the singing of them. For as Theodoret
reports it, they were the first that divided the Quire of Singers into two
sides, and appointed one side of them to answer the other in the singing of
them: and used the same at the Monuments of the dead, and that sometimes all
the night long. But these inventions savoured rather of superstition, then of
pure Primitive Devotion: though they wrought a good effect upon Theodosius,
when Flavianus sent those Songs to be sung at his Table, to moderate his wrath
against the Citizens of Antioch; see Theodoret, Hist. Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 24.
Zozomen, Hist. Eccles. lib. 7. cap. 23.

3. It is spoken without warrant of Antiquity, that Ambrose and Augustine took
up the practice of singing David's Psalms from Flavianus and Diodorus. For
neither did they bring it in, (as was shown out of Tertullian;) nor is the
slacknesse of some Churches in receiving an Ordinance, a just exception against
the Ordinance, but rather a just reprehension of their negligence. And so much
does Augustine confess in his 119 Epistle, chap. 18. Where speaking of this
practice of singing of Psalms, though it be, says he, so useful to the
stirring up of the heart in godliness, and to kindle the affection of divine
reading: yet the custom of Churches is diverse about it, and the most members
of the African Churches, Pigriora sunt, have been more sloathfull in receiving
it. In so much that the Donatists do reprehend us, that we sing soberly the
divine Songs of the Prophets, whereas they inflame their drunkenness (as it
were) by a Trumpet of exhortation to the singing of Psalms, composed by their
own humane wit.

By which reproof of the Donatists, it may appear that the custom of singing
David's Psalms was in use in the African Churches, and in Millain also of
former times; and that the Custom brought into the Church of Millain to keep
the people awake in their night Watches against the Arrian violence, was the
singing of Psalms after the Eastern manner, with more curiosity of Music,
and one side of the Singers answering another. And of this is Augustine to be
understood in the ninth book of his Confessions, chap. 7.

4. It is not true, That Augustine became a Patron of singing David's Psalms,
rather forced to it by the importunity of the people, then of his own accord.
For he says expressly in the same Chapter of the same Epistle; That the
practice of singing Psalms and Hymns is to be done without doubting, seeing
it may be defended out of the Scriptures, in which we find both the Doctrines,
and Examples, and Precepts of Christ, and of his Apostles for it. And the same
Augustine in his first Tome and third Rule, (as it is titled) Nolite (says he)
cantare, nisi quod legitis esse cantandum. Quod autem non ita Scriptum est ut
cantetur, non cantetur; that is* do not sing but what you read is to be sung,
but that which is not written that it should be sung, let it not be sung. Nor
is it true, that Augustine repented, that the custom of singing David's Psalms
was brought into the Church, or that he wished rather it were taken away.

For though when he saw his heart more taken up with the melody of the Tune,
then with the sweetness of the matter, he could have wished the sweetness of
the melody removed from his own ears, and from the Church: yet still he would
have them sung after the manner of the Church of Alexandria, and Athanasius:
And then correcting himself; But when J remember, says he, my Tears which J
powered out at the singing of thy Church, in the first restoring of my Faith,
and how J am still moved, not with the Song, but with the matter sung, when it
is sung with a clear voice, and convenient tune or modulation, J do again
acknowledge the great utility of this Institution.

And though he do waver between the peril of delight to the sense, and
experiment of wholsomnesse to the soul: yet his scruple was not of the
lawfulness of singing David's Psalms, but partly of the pleasantness of the
Tunes (which might be more artificial, then the gravity of the Ordinance
required) partly of the expediency thereof to himself, till his heart were
more spiritual. His writing against Hilarious jubentibus fratribus, does not
argue, he wrote against his will, but by a good call, in defense of singing
David's Psalms against a man that took up any occasion to carp at Gods
Ministers, August. Retract. lib. 2. cap. 11.

Object. 4. Besides it is to be noted, that Forms of divine Service and
Letanies begun to be used at the same time, in many places. In the French
Churches, and in Constantines Cour^ and Camp, both himself and his Soldiers
using a Form of Prayer, the Churches (as is wont under Christian Magistrates)
growing proud and lazy. At which time they had also their Regular and
Canonical Singers appointed hereunto by Office: The Psalms composed by
private Christians (whom they call Idiots) being interdicted in one and the
same Counsel of Laodicea, till at length all was turned into a Pageant in the
year 666. the fatal figure of Antichrist: it being impossible (as it seems)
that the lively gifts of Gods Spirit in his people, should breath any longer
when Forms are once set up in the Church, etc.

Answ. Though Constantine appointed a form of Prayer to his Soldiers, (
Eusebius. lib. 4. de vit. Constantin. cap. 20.) yet we do not read that he
limited them to the use of it; much less that forms of divine Service and
Letanies were brought into the Church in his time, nor scarce of an hundred
years after. Neither were Regular and Canonical Singers brought into the
Church in his time. The Council of Laodicea which allowed them, and
interdicted Psalms composed by diverse Christians, was near about sixty years
after him.

2. Their forbidding any to sing, but such as were appointed to sing, ( Council.
Laodic. Can. 15.) though they did it to abuse the Peoples abuse of the Psalms
by singing out of Tune; yet their care might better have been bestowed in
learning the people to know and keep the Tune, and in advising such as had
loud and strong voices, and were skillful of Song, to have led and kept the
people in a decent melody. But otherwise for their prohibiting of singing of
Psalms composed by private men, and the reading of any books in the Church,
but the writings of the Prophets and Apostles, as they do in Canon 59. that so
they might establish the reading of Scripture-bookes, and the singing of
Scripture- Psalms. It is so far from superstition, that it tends rather to
prefer divine Institutions, above humane Inventions. When they interdicted
the Psalms composed by private Christians, whom they called Idiots, or as we
call them in our language, simple fools. You are not ignorant that an Idol in
their language signifies no more but a private man; and in the same sense the
Apostle himself uses it, 1 Cor. 14.16. though the Translators turn it
unlearned.

Neither do Forms of Gods Praise stop the breathing of the lively Gifts of
Gods Spirit, when the Forms are no other, but such as were indicted by the
immediate Inspiration of the Holy Ghost; For when the Psalms of David, and of
other holy men of God, were commended to the Church of Israel, and by them were
ordinarily sung in the Temple and elsewhere, would you say it did hinder the
free passage of the breathing of the lively gifts of Gods Spirit, either in the
Ministry of the Priests, or in the writings and Sermons of the Prophets?
Surely Elisha found it otherwise, 2 Kings 3.15. and the whole Church of Judah.
As for 666 (which you call the fatal figure of Antichrist) judge you in your
own soul before the Lord, whether it do more savor of an Antichristian
spirit, for the whole Church to sing the Psalms of David with one accord, or
to sing Te Deum, or some other Anthem devised by a private spirit, one man
alone? Sure it is (as we said before) Antichristian Churches do utterly reject
the singing of David's Psalms in the Meeter of each Nation in their Mother
Tongue, yea and do reproach such Psalms as Genevah jiggs; so far are they
off from closing with singing of them as an Invention of their own.

Object. 5. Let no man think, that the singing of David's Psalms is an
Ordinance of God, because many Christians have found their affections stirred
(as Augustine also did) in the singing of them. This does not justify this
practice, no more then it does Preaching by a false calling, because some have
found conversion by it: no more then it does the receiving the seal of the
Supper in a false Church, and that with the Idolatrous gesture of kneeling,
because some have found quickening and strengthening Grace therein. For Gods
goodness many times goes beyond his Truth.

Answ. We cannot say, That Gods goodness goes beyond his Truth, though
sometime he show a man mercy out of his way. For we have the truth of Gods word
to testify, that so sometime he does as Saul found converting grace in going
to Damascus to persecute the Saints. But this we say, that when God does thus,
he either convinces a man of the error of his way, before he show him favor
in it, (as he did Saul;) or else the way it self, or Duty is of God, though
there be some falling in the circumstance of it. Many of Israel that came to
the Passover in Hezekiahs time in their uncleanness, yet they found mercy
with the Lord. But it was because the Ordinance and Duty was of God, the
failing was only in the manner of Preparation to it, 2 Chronicles. 30.18, 19, 20.
But if Micah set up an invention of his own in his house, though he may promise
himself a blessing in some orderly circumstance of it, (as he did Judge.
17.13.) yet let him be sure he shall find a curse in stead of a blessing,
according as God has expressed it, Deuteronomy. 7.26. It is granted and bewailed, that
there has been found some sinful failings in sundry circumstances of some
Ministers callings: And yet because the substance of the calling was of God;
many have found saving blessings in attending on their Ministry. And the Lords
Supper administered by them being of God, though the gesture in which it was
received was corrupt, the Lord was pleased to accept and bless what was his
own, and to pass by sins of ignorance in his people. But can it ever be
proved that when any practice of Gods worship has been but an humane and
Antichristian invention, that it has been nevertheless blessed with the
communication of spiritual affections, and that not seldom and rarely, but
frequently and usually; not to one or two Saints, but generally; not to the
weakest, but to the strongest Christians? We are verily persuaded no such
instance can be given since the world began. God is not wont to honor and
bless the ways of superstition, with the reward of sincere devotion. But
surely God has delighted to bless the singing of his holy Psalms, with
gracious and spiritual affections, not only in Augustines time, and in
Justine Martyrs before him, but from age to age to his Saints, usually,
generally, and abundantly: so that doubtless the servants of God defraud their
souls of much spiritual good, and comfort, who defraud themselves of the
Fellowship of this Ordinance.

But ^ere is the misery of the present age, that those Ordinances that men have
practiced, either without the knowledge of the true grounds thereof, or without
the life and sense of the comfort of them, or without the sincere love of them,
they have therefore afterward in the hour and power of Temptation cast them
aside, and so forsaken the holy Institutions of God, to embrace and please
themselves in their own imaginations. How much more safe were it, for humble
and sincere Christians, to walk in Gods holy fear, and in sense of their own
ignorance, infirmities, and temptations, to suspect their own private
apprehensions, and humbly to beg a Spirit of Light and Truth, to lead them into
all Truth, and meekly to cons^lt with Brethren without setting up any Idol or
forestalled Imag^nation in their hearts, before they resolve to run a by-way,
to the grief and scandal of their Brethren. It is a Palsy distemper in a
member to be carried with a different motion from the rest of the body: The
Lord heal our swervings, and stablish us with a Spirit of Truth and Grace in
Christ Jesus.

FINIS.

