Scarronides: OR, Le VIRGILE Travesty.

A Mock-Poem.

Being the First Book of Virgils AEneis in English, Burlesque.

Non minimum est insigniter ineptire. PLIN. EP. Imprimatur, Roger L'estrange.

LONDON: Printed by E. Cotes for Henry Brom at the Gun in Ivy-lane. 1664.

To the READER.
THE Reader is desired, for the better comparing of the Latin and English
together, to read on forward unto the ensuing Letter of Direction, before he
compare the former with the Original.

LE VIRGILE TRAVESTY.
ARma virumque cano,
I Sing the man, (read it who list,
A Trojan, true, as ever pist)
Trojae qui primus ab oris
Italiam, fato profugus, Lavinaque venit
Littora

Who from Troy Town, by wind and weather
To Italy, (and God knows whither)
Was packt, and wrackt, and lost, and tossed,
And bounc'd from Pillar unto Post.
multum ille and terris jactatus, and alto
Long wandered he through thick and thin,
Half-rosted now; now wet to the skin;
By Sea and Land; by Day and Night;
Vi Superum, --
Forced (as it is said) by the Gods spite:
Although the wiser sort suppose
-- saevae memorem Junonis ob iram
'Twas by an old Grudge of Juno's
A Murrain curry all Cursed Wives!
He needs must go, the Devil drives.
Multa quoque; and bello passus, dum conderet urbem
Much suffered he likewise in War,
Many dry blows, and many a scarr:
Many a Rap, and much ado
At Quarter-staffe, and Cudgells too,
Before he could be quiet for 'um:
(Pox of all Knaves, for I abhor 'um)
But this same Younker at the last,
(All Brawls and Squabbles overpast)
And all these Rake-hells overcome,
-- atque altae moenia Romae.
Did build a pretty Grange, called Rome.
Musa mihi causas memora; quo Numine laeso:
But oh my Muse! put me in mind,
To which of the Gods was he unkind?
Quidve dolens Regina Deum,
Or what, the Plague, did Juno mean,
(That cross-grained, peevish, scolding Queen,
That scratching, catter-wawling Puss,)
tot volvere casus ^signem pietate virum, tot adire labores ^pulerit?
To use an Honest Fellow thus?
(To curry him like Pelts at Tanners)
tantaene animis coelestibus ira?
Have Goddesses no better Manners?
Urbs antiqua suit, Tyrii tenuere Colo^i, ^arthago
A little Town there was of Old,
Thatcht with good Straw to keep out Cold;
Hight Carthage, which (if not belied)
Was by the Tyrians occupy'd;
-- stuaiis asperima belli;
The lustiest Carles all thereabouts,
Rich Chuffs, and very sturdy Louts.
Quam Juno fertur terris magis omnibus unam,
Now this same Carthage you must know,
Juno did love out of all who:
There are alive that yet will swear it,
No Village like it, no place near it:
Posthabita coluisse Samo,
Except a place (forsooth) that is famous
For her known Birth, a Farm called Samos;
Here she her Trinkets kept, and odd things,
Her Needles, Poking-sticks, and Bodkins;
And here, (in house, which her own key-locks)
heic illius alma, Heic currus suit
She used to keep her Coach and Peacocks.
This place then mainly pleased her humor,
Progeniem sed eaim Trojano a sanguine duci
Audierat Tyrias ol^m quae verteret arces.

But she had heard a scurvy Rumor;
That Trojans, Armed in Coats of Chamlet,
Should one day overthrow her Hamlet:
Plunder her Chests, Joynt-stools and Tables,
And burn her Cow-houses, and Stables.
Id metuens,
She fearful of this sad Prediction,
(Which proved a True one, and no Fiction)
Nec dum etiam causae irarum, saeviquae dolores
Exciderant animo; ^manet alta mente repostum
Judicium Paridis,

And mindful of her injured Honor,
When Paris gave the Apple from her;
Did many years bend her devotion,
To drown AEneas on the Ocean;
And many a slippery trick she played him,
Till Jove at last over Sea conveyed him,
Tantae molis erat Romanam condere gentem
Vix e conspectu Siculae telluris, in altum,
Vela dabunt laeti, et spumas salis aere ruebant.

(So hard it is, where an old Grutch is,
To: get out of a woman's Clutches.)
AEneas had not been o'th water
Above an hour, or such a matter;
Nor further rowed, then we may rate
'Twixt Rarsons-Dock, and Billinsgate,
Or say betwixt Dover and Calice,
Cum Juno, aelernum servans sub pecture vulnus,
Haec secum: Mean incepto desistere victam?

When Juno (full of her old Malice)
Thus with her self began to mutter,
Cannot I drown these Crows in the Gutter?
Must they go on fearing no Colors?
And cannot I squander their Scullers?
Must these same Trojan Rascals nose me,
Quippe vetor fatis!
Because the Fates (forsooth) oppose me?
Pallasne exurere classem Argivum potuit?
Pallas could burn Wherries, and Galleys,
And clatter Mortals bones like Tallies:
Ast ego, quae Divum incedo Regina, Jovisque
Et Soror, and Conjux, una cum gente tot annos
Bella gero.

But I, Jove's Sister, and his Wife,
Can do no Mischief for my life.
Talia flammato secum Dea cord volutans,
Juno enraged, and fretting thus,
AEoliam venit heic vasto rex AEolus antro
Luctanteis ventos, tempestatesque sonoras
Imperio premit,

Runs me unto one AEolus:
This AEolus, as Stories tell us,
Could backward blow like a Smiths Bellows;
A Day, a Week, a Month together,
And by his farting, make foul weather:
Blow men, and Trees, and Houses down;
Great Ships, and almost Fishes drown.
He was, in fine, the loud'st of Farters:
Yet could command his Hinder-quarters,
Correct his Tail, and only blow,
If there occasion were, or so:
Sed Pater omnipotens --
-- regemque dedit, qui soedere certo
Et premere, et laxas sciret dare jussus habenas.

Whom Jove observing to be so stern
In the wise conduct of his Postern,
He made him King of all the Puffers,
Which he (because he knew them Huffers)
Durst no where venture, I must tell ye,
But in the Caverns of his Belly:
Which having but one Postern Gate
For these mad Boys to sally at,
He might the faster peg them in,
And by the plucking out a Pin,
Then (at his ease) Arsing about,
To any Quarter let them out.
Ad quem tum Juno supplex his vocibus usa est:
To this same King, Queen Juno posted,
And thus in flattering Terms accosted.
AEole (namque tibi Divum pater atque hominum Rex
Et mulcere dedit fluctus and tollere ventos)

Thou mighty King, whose potent sway
The Lawless Blust'rers do obey;
Whose Nod the stubborn'st Winds do dread;
(Even although in Scotland bred.)
Thou, whose unruly Empire reaches
As far as the wide Compass stretches,
Hear a poor Queens Request, and say
Thou Wilt do it; for I must have no Nay.
Gens inimica mihi Tyrrhenum navigat aequor,
Illum in Italiam partans,

There are a few Tatter-de-malions
That (with a Pox) would be Italians,
And into Latium now are going,
With Oars, and Skulls, tugging, and rowing
A Crew of drunken, roaring Ruffins,
Lewd, wandering, sturdy Ragamuffins;
Rascals, I hate, as I do Garlic,
And yet the Rogues are stout, and warlike:
Incute vim ventis, submersasque obrue puppes,
Aut age diversas, and disjice corpora ponto.
Sunt mihi bis septem praestanti corpore Nymphae:
Quarum, quae forma pulcherrima, deiopeiam
Connubio jungam stabili, propriamque dicabo:

If therefore, thou will smoke these Roysters
And sowse them all, like pickled Oysters,
There is a Pretty Maid of Mine,
Called Die, shall be thy Concubine.
AEolus harkned to this Story,
With no small Pride, no little Glory;
To have a Queen, so gay, and trim,
Come to request a Boon of him!
But the Wench, in the tail of the Preamble,
Oh that! That made his Bowels wamble.
(And Wind you know (under Correction)
Is a main Causer of Erection.)
He, listening stood, wrigling, and scraping,
But durst not bow, for fear of scaping;
Until at last, with Cap in hand Sr,
AEolus haec contra: Tuus o Regina quid optes
Explorare labor; mihi jussa capessere fas est.
Tu mihi, quodcunque hoc regni, tu sceptra, Jovemque
Concilias.

He thus returned his modest Answer.
O Queen (quoth he) my thanks are real,
That you will use your servant AEol:
And should I not pay your Civility,
Toth' utmost of my poor Ability,
Who are great Joves Sister and Wife,
It were e'ene pity of my Life.
I Will play these Rake-hells such a Hunts-up,
Shall make them glad to turn their Rumps up.
Say you no more, the Thing is done;
I Will drown 'em every Mothers Son.
But since your Grace is nice of smelling,
I wish you were at your own dwelling.
There Is Reason for it, (saving your favor)
For truly (Madam) I shall savor.
But I beseech your Grace, in no wise
Forget the Woman, that you promise.
Juno at that, away does go
As swift as Arrow out of Bow,
And in less while, then I am speaking,
Was got as high, as top of Mons Salopiensis.
Reking:
No bigger now then School-boyes Kite,
And now clean vanished out of sight.
AEol, who all this while stood gaping
At her fine Peacocks gawdy-trapping,
Seeing her Mount Olympus staircase,
Began t'untruss to ease his Carcass.
Twice belch't he loud from Lungs of Leather,
To call his roaring Troops together:
And twice (as who should say we come)
They roared 'ith concave of his womb:
Hac ubi dicta cavum conversa cuspide montem
Impulit in latus, ac venti, velut agmine facto,
Qua data porta ruunt, and terras turbine perflant.
Incubuere mari, totumque a sedibus imis.

With that he turns his Buttock seaward,
And with a Gibing kind of Nayword;
Quoth he, Blind Harpers have among ye;
It Is Ten to one but I bedung ye.
At that same word, lifting one leg,
And pulling out his trusty peg;
Una Eurusque Notusque ruunt, creberque procellis
Africus, and vastos volvunt ad littora fluctus.
Insequitur elamorque virum stridorque rudentum.
Eripiunt subito nubes, coelumque diemque
Teucrorum ex oculis, ponto nox incubat atra.
Intonuere poli, and crebris micat ignibus ether,
Praesentemque viris intent at omnia mortem.

He let at once his General Muster
Of all that ere could blow, or bluster;
And (like a Coxcomb) in his Tuell
Left not one puff to cool his Gruell,
Have you not seen below the Sphere
A mortal drink called Bottle-Bear
How, by the Tapster when the Stopple
Is ravished from the teeming Bottle,
It bounces, foams, and froths, and flitters,
As it were troubled with the squitters?
Even so, when AEol plucked the plugg
From the Muzzle of his double Jugg,
The Winds burst out with such a rattle,
As he had broke the strings that twattle.
Bounce cries the Port-hole, out they fly
And make the World dance Barnaby;
Throughout the Seas, and Coasts they wander;
One Boreas was their Chief Commander;
A huffing Jack, a plund'ring Tearer,
A vap'ring Scab, and a great Swearer.
This Fellow, and his boisterous Rout,
Finds Me 'oth' Sea, the Trojans out.
AEneas; and his Wandering Mates
Were, at that time, angling for Sprats;
Thinking no harm, no more then we do,
(For all was fine, and fair to see too)
When all 'oth' sudden; who would think it!
(By this good drink, I mean to drink it)!
It grew so dark, that wanting light,
They could not feel the Fishes bite;
And straight ere one could say, What Is This?
The winds began to howl and hiss,
And in the turning of a hand Sir
They grew so big, one could not stand Sir.
Then followed Rain, Lightning, and Thunder,
As the whole world would fly asunder.
AEneas, hearing the winds threatening,
And By the Lightning
seeing Monstrous Billows beating,
Knowing they purposed to dispatch him,
And that the Haddocks watch't to catch him,
Ex templo AEneae solvuntur frigore membra:
Presently fell in a cold sweat,
So sick he could not drink nor eat,
'Twas all the World to Twenty Pound,
He had not fallen into a swound:
But by Joves favor being blessed,
With Guts in's head above the rest,
Like to a cunning Chapman, He
Made Virtue of Necessity;
And in the midst of all Despayrs,
Thought it his best to fall to prayers;
Ingemit, et duplices tendens ad sidera palmas
Talia voce refert:

With woeful heart, and blubbered eyes,
Lifting his Mutton-fists to the skies,
He therefore prayed, O Jupiter,
Either hear now, or never hear;
Now, now, thy Trusty Trojans cherish,
Help now, or never, else we perish.
-- o Danaum sortissime gentis
Tydeide; Mean Iliacis occumbere campis
Non potuisse, tuaque animam hanc effundere dextra:
Saevus ubi AEacidae telo jacet Hecto,

Could not Tydides, at Troy Town
Should he be hanged, once knock me down?
Nor yet the Merry Greek Achilles,
When he killed lusty Hector, kill These?
And must we now be sent for Dishes,
To Sharks, and such like Greedy Fictes?
Talia jactanti,
Thus went he on with his Orisons,
Which if you mark them well were wise ones,
Now praying, now expostulating,
But he might even have held his prating,
For Jove if he had been more near him,
The noise was such, could no ways hear him.
stridens Aquilone procella
Velum adversa ferit, fluctusque ad sidera tollit.
Franguntur remi: tum prora avertit, and undis
Vat latus

The winds grew louder still and louder,
And played their Gambals with a Powder;
Then, then indeed began the pudder,
Here an Oar broke, and there a Rudder,
Here a Boat kicking on the Surges,
And there one sinking in a Gurges.
Tres, Notus abreptas in saxa latentia torquet
Three Boats a Wind, called Notus russe^
Upon a paltry bed of Mussels,
-- tres, Eurus ab alto
In Brevia, and Syrteis urget, (miserabile visu)

And three did roaring Eurus dable ye,
In Quick-sand deep most lamentably.
Unam, quae Lycios, fidumque vehebat Orontem,
Ipsius ante oculos, ingens a vertice pontus
In puppim serit. Excutitur, pronusque Magister
Volvitur in caput. Ast illam ter fluctus ibidem
Torquet agens circum, and rapidus ^rat aequore vortex.

One Wherry that the Lycians carried,
And one Orontes never married;
Was just about the time of Dinner,
O're-whelm'd, and all the men within her.
Orontes, though he was confounded,
Yet very loath to be thus drownded;
Did all he could, with might and main,
To have swom back to Land again.
His skill he to the trial puts,
But could not do it for his Gutts:
And therefore was sowst up for Cod-Fish;
(I doubt he proved but very odd-fish)
Apparent rari nantes in gurgite vasto,
Arma virum, tabulaeque, et Troja gaza per undas.

Now might you see the Trojans triming
Upon the foaming Billows swimming:
Sculls, Oars, and Stretchers with their Benches,
Floating amongst the Row^ing Trenches;
Hats, Capps, and Cassocks, Bands and Ruffs,
(Indeed I think, they wore no Cuffes)
Balk-staves, and Cudgells, Pikes and Truncheons,
Brown-bread and cheese that swam by luncheons
With Treasure past all Mortals matching,
That any man might have for fetching.
Interea magno misceri murmr Pontum,
Emissamque Hiemem sensit Neptuuus, et imis
Stagna refusa vadis.

In the mean time, this hurly-burly,
That still increased more loud and surly,
Roused Neptune with the strange Commotion,
Who lived 'ith bottom of the Ocean.
This Neptune was of old, a Fisher,
And to AEneas a well-wisher:
'Cause on a time, Venus, that bore him,
Spoke a good word to her Father for hm;
And made him for his good Conditions
King over all his Pools, and Fish Ponds.
This Blade, when first he heard the Sea ring,
Was pickling, Pilchards, Sprats, and Herring,
But at the noise he throws his Tray,
Fishes, and Salt, and all away.
And taking up his three-forkt Trout-spear,
-- graviter commotus, et alto
Prospicie^s, summa placidum caput extulit unda.
(...) AEneae (...) videt aequore Classem:
Fluctibus oppress^s Tr^as, coelique ruina.
Nec (...) doli sratrem Junonis, and (...).

Hey, hey (quoth he) what a brave rout's here!
Under his Arms he had two Bladders,
By which he mounted without Ladders,
And thrusting's head above the Water,
Says, What a Vengeance ho's the matter?
Then seeing round how things were varied,
And how the Trojans had miscarried;
He strait began to smell a Rat,
And soon peeceiv'd what they would be at:
For he knew all Juno's contriving,
And spite as well as any living.
Have you not seen upon a River
A Water-dog, that is a diver,
Bring out his Mallard, and est-soons
Be-shake his shaggy Pantaloons?
So Neptune when he first appears,
Shakes the salt Liquor from his ears,
And made the winds themselves to doubt him,
He threw the water so about him:
Vexed at the Plucks to see this clutter,
He scarce could speak, but spurt and sputter;
Eurum ad se Zephyrumque vocat, dehinc talia fatur.
Tantane vos generis tenuit fiducia vestri?
Jam coelum Terramque meo sine Numine Venti
Miscere, and tantas audetis tollere moles?
Quos ego: -- sed motos proestat componere Fluctus;
Post mihi non simili poena commissa luetis.

Till beck'ning Zephirus, and Eurus,
He thus began in language furious.
How durst you Rogues take the opinion
To vapor here in my Dominion,
Without my leave, and make a lurry,
That men cannot be quiet for ye,
Rascals I shall! But well! go too,
I now have something else to do:
If ere again I catch you creaking,
It Is odds I spoil your Bag-pipes squeaking.
Maturate Fugam, Regique haec dicite vestro:
Non illi Imperium pelagi --

And Sirrah, you there: goodman Speaking to Boreas himself.
Blaster,
Go tell that farting fool your Master,
That such a whistling scab as he,
Was never cut out to rule the Sea;
Sed mihi sort datum. Tenet ille immania saxa,
Vestras Eure domos. Illa se jactet in. Aula
AEolus, and clauso ventorum carcere regnet.

But that it to my Empire fell;
Bid him go vapor in his Cell.
There let him puff and domineer,
But make no more such folsting here:
And for what is past, (if my aim miss not)
I Will teach him fizzle in my Pispot.
Sic ait, and dicto citius tumida aequora placat,
Scarce had he bubled out his sentence
But that they fled to show repentance,
And he that erst had made a din most,
Now, cried the Devil take the hindmost.
Even as a flock of Geese do slutter,
When crafty Reynard comes to Supper.
So nimbly flew away these Scoundrels,
Glad they had escaped, and saved their Poundrels.
Collectasque fugat nubes, solemque reducit
Cymothoe simul and Triton adnixus acuto
Detrudunt naveis scopulo; levat ipse Tridenti.
Et vastas aperit Syrteis, and temperat aequor

Now all was fair again and frolic,
The Sea no more troubled with Cholick,
The Sun shone bright as on a May Day;
Had there bin grass, one might have made hay,
But yet some Boats stuck on the Flatts,
Their men all dashed like Water-Ratts;
Neptune at that his speed re-doubles,
To ease them of their peck of Troubles:
He thrust his Muck-fork in two faddom,
Betwixt the Boats, and that that stayed um,
And lifted them shiere off, as clever
As he had had a Crow or Leaver;
Now Sirs (quoth he) you may go forward,
And row East, West, or South, or Norward,
If the Rogues come again, I Will swill 'um
I love a Dog that comes from Ilium,
And you AEneas, and your men,
If ere you come this way again,
I hope you will call, or Is It be sorry,
I Will have a Dish of Lobsters for ye:
AEneas who was gentle-hearted,
Scraped him a leg, and so they parted.
They take their Sculls again and ply um,
Hanging their Jerkins out to dry nm:
Away they cut as swift as Swallows,
Plowing the Sea as men do Fallowes;
Till ere a man could well tell Ten,
Or go to the door, and back again,
-- Quae proxima littora cursu
Contendunt petere.

They all as plainly saw the the other
Side, as we now see one another:
Then there old tugging was and pulling,
Never such plying, and such sculling,
They whoop't and sung gladder and gladder,
I think March-hares were never madder.
At last, all dangers notwithstanding,
Est in secess^ longo locus; Insula portum
Efficit objectu laterum, quibus omnis ab alto
Frangitur, inque siaus scindit sese unda reductos.

They came unto a Place of Landing;
A pair of stayrs they found, not big stairs;
Just such another pair as Trigg-stairs:
Not made for Watermen, but Women,
That use to come, and wash their Linen:
There was old striving then, and thrusting
Which with their Sculler should get first in.
Sirs (quoth AEneas) show some breeding,
Let Us have no more haste than good speeding,
Have patience Gentles, I implore ye,
And let your betters go before ye.
With that they all gave place, and reason,
It else had been no less than Treason:
-- AEneas collectis navibus omni
Ex numero subit; ac magno telluris amore
Egressi optata Troes potiuntur arena.
Et sale tabentes artus in littore ponunt.

Whilst our AEneas at two leapings,
Set the first foot upon the steppings;
Then all the Rest came in a bundle
As they would burst each others Trundle:
Weary they were, the wind had douc'tum,
And so they sat em down, and lous'd um.
Ac primum Silici scintillam excudit Achates
Suscepitque ignem soliis, atque arida circum
Nutrimenta dedit, rapuitque in fomite flammam.
Tum Cererem, corruptam undis, Cerealiaque arma
Expediunt, sessi rerum, fragesque receptas
Et torrere parant flammis, and frangere saxo.

After a while, a fellow knocks
Fire with a Steel, and Tinder-box.
For each man had his Flint and Touch-wood,
The World besides could show no such wood;
Then sticks they gather, leaves and Briars,
And fall a making them good fires,
Then Skellets, Pans, and Posnets put on
To make them Porridge without Mutton.
AEneas scopulum interea conscendit, and omnem
Prospectum late pelago petit.

In the mean time AEneas got him
Up to a Hill, to look about him,
And as he there a while stood gazing,
-- tres littore cervos
Prospicit Errantes

He saw some sheep below him grazing,
Constitit hic, Ar^umqu; manu, cele^que (...) Corripuit.
Oh ho (quoth he) I Will soon be wy'ye,
Be sworn I Am glad at heart to see ye.
This said, away my youth does go,
And fetches straight a good Yew-Bow,
His Arrows under's belt he sticks too,
(For he could shoot at Butts, and Pricks too)
His head he put a good steel Cap on,
Because he knew not what might happen:
And thus as if he went to battle,
He goes to murder poor men's Cattle.
Ductoresque ipsos, primum capita alta ferentes
Cornibus arboreis sternit

His Arrow in the string he nocks,
And shoots among the harmless Flocks,
These proved by chance to be the fairest,
But he still shot at that was nearest.
Nec prius absistit, quam septem ingentia victor
Corpora fundit humi.

Seven Lordly Tups he wounded mortal,
The other shots he made were short all:
These to his hungry Mates he lurryes,
(Pray what is his due, that Mutton worries?)
-- Et socios partitur in omnes.
Here lads (quoth he) here is sides, and haunches,
Fall too, and fill your empty paunches.
Scarce had he made an end of boasting,
Pars in srusta secant, virubusque trementia figunt:
Littore ahena loca^t alii, flammasque ministant.

But some to boiling fell, some roasting;
'Twas soon enough, and to it they fall,
They eat up Mutton, gutts and all,
Yet scarce could satisfy their hungers,
These Trojans were such Mutton mongers.
Vina bon^s quae deinde cadis onerarat Acestes
Littore Trinacrio, dederatque abeuntibus Heroes,
Dividit, and dictis m^ entia pectora mulcet.

There was by chance a stoop of Liquor,
Cork't up in Bottles made of Wicker,
Given by mine Hostess, I conceive,
When first AEneas took his leave,
This Drink (to make their feast the fuller)
AEneas fetched out of his Sculler,
And like a man had something in him,
Gave it as free as ere 'twas gi'n him;
Himself a Dish, he first poured out,
For fear it would not go about;
Then stroaking up his Whiskers greasy,
He thus begins, in Words most easy.
O socii, (neque enim ignari sumus ante malorum)
^pissi graviora. Da it Deus his quaque finem:
^s et (...) rabiem, peaitusque so^ntes
^ccestis scopulos; vos and Cyclopea saxa
^perti.

Here Lads, have at ye, and be merry,
We Are got at last, safe over the Ferry;
And though w'ave had but angry wark, yet
Let Us make the best of a bad market:
To day let us drink, and hang to morrow,
A grain of mirth's worth pounds of sorrow;
Revocate animos, moestumque timorem
^ite; sorsan and haec oli^ m^minisse juvabit.
(...) varios casus, per ^ot discrimina rerum
^ndimus in Latium, seeds ubi sata quietas
^endunt.

Be blithe and jolly then, as may be,
Faint heart you know never won fair Lady:
What though a while we fare but hardly,
Yet in the end does our reward lie:
We shall have Houses, Lands, and Doxies,
With dainty patches, where no Pox is:
And then all this, that seems t'undo us,
Will be but sport, and pastime to us.
Talia voce refert, curisque ingentibus ager
(...) vultu simulat: premit altum cord dolorem.

Thus did this subtle Fornicator
Set a good Face on a bad matter;
As who would make 'um understand
How pretty a fellow he was on's hand;
When I (for all is brave n'alls) must tell ye,
His Heart then panted in his Belly.
Implentur ve^eris Bacchi, pinguisque ferinae.
Down glides his Ale over his Pallat,
As glib as 't had been Oil of Sallet;
And all the rest in their due order
Quafft' till their Drink would go no further.
Postquam exempta fames, epulis mensaque remota,
Amissos longo socios sermon requirunt.

Now having spent their drink and vittles,
They rise, and wipe their greasy Thwittles,
And streaking then began to mind 'um,
Of those were left at sea behind 'um:
With that, AEneas made a motion
To climb the Hills, and look on the Ocean,
If from the Cliffs, and Promontories
They might espy their fellow Tories;
At that they went, some this, some that way,
Some went not far, and some a great way,
Some whoopt, some hallowed, and some shouted,
Svemqu^ metumque inter dubii, seu vivere credant,
Sive extrema pati;

Some thought'um fafe, and others doubted,
Some laid their ears to ground in cunning,
To list if they could hear 'um coming;
But all in vain, for none could spy 'um,
They feared their friends, when none were nie'um
At last by General Approbation,
They laid 'um down, as was the fashion,
And slept, being tired, with pains and feasting,
When Belly's full, Bones would be resting.
Asleep they lie snorting and snoring,
With such a noise, as made the shore ring,
Or such a din as Dogs do utter,
When they by night together clutter;
Snarling and swearing in lewd fashion
For Bitch of evil conversation:
-- Cum Jupiter aethere summo
Despiciens mare velivolum terrasque jacentes
Littoraque --

When Jove, who was belike at leisure,
(Walking or for his health, or pleasure)
Looking about on every side him,
et Lybiae defixit lumina Regnis.
O'th Lybian Coasts at last espied them,
And said in merry kind of Japing,
Indeed Sirs have I taken you napping.
Scarce had he spoke, when all oth' sudden,
Whilst he was on the Trojans studd'ing,
Who should come there to do her duty,
But Venus, that was Queen of Beauty!
See Servius upon Virgil.
This Venus without counterfeiting,
Was a fine Lass on's own begetting,
Thou never saw prettyer in thy life,
Although he had her not by's Wife,
But by a Fish-wench he was kind to,
And so she came in at the Window:
Now Venus was AEneas' Mother,
And him she had by such another
Royster as Jove was, when on Ground-sell
He and her Mother met in Council,
In the behalf then of her by-blow,
Which had endured many a dry-blow,
Atque illum tales jactantem pectore curas
Tristior, and laobrymis oculos suffusa nitentes
Alloquitur Venus.

She weeping came, sighing, and throbbing,
And hardly could she speak for sobbing:
Until at last, with a fine Linning
Wrought round with blew of her own spinning
Wiping her face with Tears, and snivel,
^he thus began in words most civil.
-- O qui res hominumque Deumque
Eternis regis Imperiis, and fulmine terres.

O thou, of. Gods, and men, the King,
That can do any kind of thing;
That past their wits do Mortals frighten,
When thou or thunder do, or lighten,
What could AEneas do to thee!
Who car'st a fart for no body;
Quid Troes potuere? quibus tot funera passis.
^^nctus ob Italiam terrarum clauditur Orbis?

Or thy poor Trojans what have they done,
That thus they still must Fools be made on,
And that thou will for no persuasions
Let them go follow their occasions?
Certe hinc Romanos ^im, volventibus annis,
Hinc sore ductores, revocato a sanguine Teucri.
Qui mare, qui terras, omni ditione tenerent
Pollicitus. Quae te Genitor sententia vertit?

I Am sure you promised me, and swore it,
(E'ven let who can forgive you for it)
That you would make'um, This, and That,
Kings, Captains, and I know not what,
And that out of your Bounteous Givings,
They should have all both Lands, and Livings,
And all live well in Italy;
But I perceive 'twas all a lie.
Olli subridens hominum sator atque Deorum.
Jove, (stroking up his great M^achoes)
Smiled for to see her so out-rageous,
(For had she broke a Pot, or Platter,
He could not well be angry at her,
He loved her so, and it is so common,
^ither in Man, or else in Woman;
Their Bastards they will clip, and kiss ye
More dearly then their lawful Issue,)
Vultu quo Coelum, Tempestatesque serenat
^scula libavit Gnatae; dehinc talia fatur.

Jove looking then most sweetly at her,
For she had made his Mouth to water)
^ook Venus by the Chin, and gave her,
A Kiss of no unwelcome savor.
Parce metu Cytherea, manent immota tuorum
^ata tibi. Cernes urbem, and promissa Lavini
Moenia, sublimemque feres ad sydera coeli
Magnanimum AEneam.

My pretty Wench (quoth he) I prithee,
^et's have no more such puling with thee:
All shall be well enough, never fear it,
And by my Beard once more I swear it:
Thy Son AEneas thou do doubt so,
Which makes thee whimper, cry, and pout so,
Shall be a King, or Prince at least;
I speak in earnest, not in jest.
With that he whistled out most mainly,
You might have heard his Fist as plainly
From one side of the Sky to the the other,
As you and I hear one another.
Thrice whistled he when by and by,
Out came his Footboy Mercury,
And asked him without more ado,
What 'twas he whistled for, and who?
This Merc'ry you must understand Sir
Had formerly been a Rope-Dancer:
A nimble Rascal, and a Dapper,
Full deftly could he cut a Caper,
See Plaut. in Amphytr.
Dance, run, and leap, frisk, and curvett,
Tumble, and do the Sommerset:
And fly with Artificial Wings
Tied to his head, and heels, with strings:
'Twas he first taught to fly in the Air,
As we have seen at Bartle-Faire;
A nimble witty Knave, I warrant,
And one that well could say his Errant;
An ex'lent servant (in plain-dealing)
But that he was inclined to stealing.
Haec ait, and Maja genitum demittit ab alto,
^t terrae, utque novae pateant Carthaginis arces
Hospitio Teucr^s, ne fati ne scia Dido
Finibus arceret. Volat ille per era magnum
Remigio Alarm, and Lybiae citus adstitit oris

Sirrah (quoth Jove) go take your Pumps,
And have to Carthage, stir your stumps;
And as thou art a cunning Prater,
Play me the fine Insinuator.
Dido and all her Carthaginians
Possess throughout with kind opinions
Of the poor Trojans, lest Queen Dido
Not knowing Things so well as I do,
Should show 'um all a Trick of Passe-pass,
And chance t'indict them for a Trespass.
Away he flies sans further speech,
As he had had a Squib in's breech;
And suddenly without discerning
-- Ponuntque ferocia Poeni
Corda, volente D^o; inprimis Regina quietum
Accipit in Teucros animum, mentemque benignam.

Set all the Trojans Bowels yerning.
Dido for her part swore a Trojan
Should do the Feat for her, or no man.
Mean while the Trojans slept at ease,
Unless sometimes bit by white Fleas,
Their soft Repose in quiet taking,
At pius AEneas, per noctem plurima volens,
^t primum lux alma data est, --

Only AEneas he was waking,
Who whilst the night was dark and ore-cast,
Like one that had an ex'lent forecast,
Lay thinking now his Gutts grew limber,
How they might get more Belly-Timber;
No sooner the first Light came creeping,
But that he cried, Ah fool! art peeping?
And up he starts, to go a stealing,
Either a Mutt'ning, or a Vealing,
And yet he thought being a stranger,
To go alone might be some danger;
-- ipse uno graditur comitatus Achate
Bin^ manu lato crispans hastilia ferro.

Therefore he deemed it not amiss
To call a Trusty friend of his;
And that he might go on the bolder,
He laid a Two-hand Batt on's shoulder.
Thus going then abroad for food,
Cui matter media sese tulit obvia silva.
Virginis os habitumque gerens.

He meets his Mother in a Wood;
So smug she was, and so arrayed,
He took his Mother for a Maid:
A great mistake in her, whose Bum
So often had been God Mars his Drum:
Full often when Smug was blowing Bellows,
Would she be trucking with good Fellows;
And let her self be chuck't as tamely,
As if therein, there did no blame lie,
By Mars, and many a one beside,
Or else she foully is belied.
-- Heus, inquit, juvenes, monstrate mearum
Vidistis siquam hic errantem forte sororum,
Succinctam pharetra, and maculosae tegmine lyncis,
^ut spumantis apri cursum clamore prementem.

Well met (young man) quoth Venus kindly,
As you came through the Woods behind ye,
Pray did you not for all your have, note
A Lass in Petti-coat and Wast-coat;
With such a Pelt as mine thrown over her,
Driving a Sow, and Piggs before her?
-- Venetis contra sic filius orsus:
Nulla tuarum audita mihi, neque visa sororum.
(...) quam te memorem virgo? namque haud tibi vultus
Mo^talis, nec vox hominam sonat: o dea certe.

No truly, (quoth AEneas mild)
I saw nor Man, Woman, nor Child;
Yet though I say it, had I been nigh her,
I could as soon as others spy her:
But who art thou, that speak so shrill,
As if thy words came through a Quill?
Thou art of gentle Kindred surely,
Thou look and speak so demurely:
An Phoebi soror, an Nympharum sanguinis u^a,
Therefore good Mris. or good Lady,
I do beseech you, if it may be,
To put us out of fear of Dangers,
-- quo sub coelo tandem, quibus orbis in oris
Jactemur doceas --

Tell's where we are for we are strangers.
Tum Venus: Haud equidem tali me dignor honor.
Venus, at that, wriggling and mumping,
Cries, pray young man, leave off your frumping
For until now I Have met with no man,
E're took me for a Gentlewoman:
She that I ask for, is my Sister;
I wonder how the Pox you mist her!
We were this morning sent in haste
To fetch a Sow that lies at Mast.
Punica regna vides, Tyrios, and Agenoris urbem.
Your Town was built by one Agenor;
The Land's so good, it needs no Meanor;
Imperium Dido Tyria regit urbe profecta,
One Dido now is Queen on it, who,
Run hither a good while ago:
She is a Queen of Gentle-bearing,
Whose story will be worth the hearing:
-- longa est injuria, longae
ambages, sed summa sequar fastigia rerum

But should I tell it all outright,
I think 'twould last a Winters night.
Huic Conjux Sichaeus erat, ditissimus agri
Therefore in short, this same Queen Dido,
Who now, alas! is left a Widow,
Had one Sichaeus to her Honey,
A wealthy man in Land, and Money;
-- Ille Sichaeum
Impius (...) aras, atque auri caecus amore,
Cla^s ferro (...) superat --

Whom one Pigmalion, unawares
Killed, as he was saying on's Prayers;
Only for Lucre of his Pelf,
Which he had thought to have had himself;
-- aegram
(Multa malus simula^s) va^ sp^ lusit amantem.

And fob'd Queen Dido off, some season,
(Who cried, and blubbered out of Reason)
By telling her a Flim-flam prattle,
That he was gone to buy some Cattle:
But on a time, as without doubt
Murder at some odd time will out,
One night as she did sleep, and snore,
As she had never slept before,
Ipsa sed in so^is (...) imag^
^gis, ^ra modis attollens pallid^ (...):

Into her Chamber, doors unlocking,
Comes me her Husband without knocking;
A Linck he in his hand did brandish,
His face was Paler, then your band is:
Near her he came, and would have kissed her,
At which she well nigh had bepiss'd her;
But being a Ghost of civil fashion,
He gave her Words of Consolation.
Quoth he, I murdered am, my Jewel,
By ways most barbarous and cruel:
And for to show I tell no Fibbs,
-- trajectaque pecta^a (...)
(...): --

Look what a hole here is in my Ribbs:
And if thou stay'st, that Rogue Pigmalion
Intends to use thee like a Stallion:
Tum celerare fugam patriaque excedere suadet,
Auxiliumque viae, veteres ^ellure recludit
The sauros, igno^ arge^ti pondus and auri.

Therefore be gone, thou and thy Meany,
But leave the Rascal never a penny,
To bless himself, it lies each farthing,
In an old Butter-pot in the Garding.
His commota fugam, Dido, sociosque parabat:
Coveniunt, quibus aut odium crudele tyranni,
Aut metus acer erat: naves quae forte paratae,
Corripiunt, over antque auro: portantur avari
Pygmalionis opes pelago: dux foemina sacti.

Dido, at this, rises up early,
And with her servants very fairly,
Not caring for Pigmalions Curses,
Steals all his Money-Baggs, and Purses;
And in a Boat prepared o'th nonce,
Ship't all his Goods away at once,
And got off safe, whilst all this Gear,
Was ordered by a Wastcoteer.
Devenere locos, ubi nunc ingentia cernes
Moenia, surgentemque novae Carthaginis arcem:
Mercatique solum, facti de nomine ^yrsam,
Taurino quant um possent circundare terg^.

At last she came with all her People,
To yonder Town with the Spire-steeple,
And bought as much good feeding ground for
Five Marks as some would give five pound for;
Where now she lives a Hu^-wife wary,
Has her ground stockt, and keeps a Dairy:
Sed vos qui tandem? quibus aut venistis ab oris?
Quove tenetis iter? --.

And now young man, I pray ye show me
Whence do you come, or whither go ye?
-- Quaerenti, talibus ille
Suspirans, im^que trahens a pectore vocem:
O dea, si prima repetens ab origin pergam,
Et vacet a^ales nostrorum audire laborum:
Ante diem clauso componet vesper olympo.

This being said, our lusty Swabber
Groaned like a woman in her Labor,
And looking rufully upon her,
Oh! Dame (quoth he) brim full of Honor,
Should I begin my story spinning,
From the first end, to the last Beginning,
I doubt to finish we should miss time,
For it would last till t'morrow this time.
Nos Troja antiqua (si vestras forte per aures
Trojae nomen ^t --

We Trojans are of Troy-Town Race,
(If ever: you heard of such a place.)
Sum pius AEneas, rapt^squi ex host penates
Class ve^o mecum, --

And I the AEneas famed in Battle,
But more adored for Tail, and Twattle.
Who bring along our Countrey-Gods,
A company of smoaky Toads,
Caught out o'th fire, from the Greek,
When all the Town was of a Reek;
And can derive my pedigree,
(Although I say it) with any He,
That is perhaps fuller of Pride,
Especially by the Mothers side.
Did my Fame never, hither come?
I Am talked of far, and near at home;
To tell you truly as a friend,
Italiam quaero, patriam, and genus ab Jove summo.
For Italy we did intend,
And put to Sea in paltry weather
Bis denis Phrygium conscendi navibus aequor,
Matr^ dea monstrante viam, data fata sequutus:
Vix septem convulsae undis, Euroque super surt.

With twenty pair of Oars together:
Of which there hardly are left seven,
Which put into the shore last Even.
-- Nec plur a quer ontem
Passa Venus medio sic interfata dolor est

Venus the while AEneas eyeing,
And seeing he could scarce hold crying;
Thus cut him off in courteous fashion,
In The midst on's pitiful Rolation:
Quisquis es, haud (credo) invlsus coelestibus, auras.
Vitales carpis, Tyriam qui adveneris urbem.

Who e're thou art, take heart I say,
Rome cannot be built all on a Day;
And though y' have suffered some dysasters;
Yet let me tell you this, my Masters,
It Is a good sign that those Gods love ye,
For all your haste, that hither drove ye:
You might have walked your Pumps apieces,
Ever light on such a Place as this is.
Perge modo, atque hinc te regina ad limina perfer.
Go me to the Queen now out of hand,
And show her how your matters stand;
She Will make you welcome for her part;
She loves tall fellows in her heart:
Namque tibi reduces socios, classemque relatam
Nuntio --

There, on my honest word, you will meet
Your lost Companions, I foresee't;
And have all things that you would wish,
Nifrustra augurium vani docuere parents.
Or surely I was taught amiss:
(And I a Father had, could make
For time of need an Almanac,)
Cheer up your hearts, your spirits rally,
And never stand fooling, shall I, shall I,
But budge, jogg on, bestirre your Toes,
Perge modo, and qua te ducit via, dirige gressu^.
There lies your way, follow your Nose.
Dixit: and avertens rosea cervice (...):
Ambrosiaeq: comae divinu^ vertice odorem
Spiravere: pedes vestis de^luxit (...):
Et vera in^essu p^tuit dea, ille ubi (...)
Ag^ovit, tali sugientem est voce seq^utus.

With that she turned to go away,
And did her freckled Neck display;
By which, and by a certain whiffe
Came from her Armpits, or her Cliffe,
And a fine hobble in her pace,
AEneas knew his Mothers grace:
Quid na^um toties crudelis tu quoque falsis
^udis imaginibus? cur dextrae jungere dextram
^on datur, ac veras audire, and reddere voces?

Mother (quoth he) why do thou run thus,
And with thy Mumming cheat thy Son thus?
Why may we not shake one another
By the hand, and talk like Son and Mother?
Oh think upon our woeful Cases,
Whilst thus we wander in strange Places!
At Venus obscuro gradientes aere sepsit
^t multo ^ebulae circum dea fudit amictu:
(...) ne quis eos, neu quis contingere posset,
^olirive moram, --

But she was gone, for when she list,
She foist away could in a Mist;
Nor could she tarry, to say truly,
For she had made a promise newly,
To meet a friend of hers to dally,
Ipsa Paphum sub^imis abit, --
In a blind street they call Ram-Ally:
AEneas then began to find,
That there was something in the wind,
And said, my Mother's a mad-shaver,
No man alive knows where to have her;
But I Would as live as half a Crown
We two could walk so into the Town.
Venus heard what he said, for she
Could hear, as far as we can see;
And in a moment to befriend 'um,
Two Cloaks invisible did lend 'um.
Thus cloak't their Knavery to shelter,
Corripuere viam interea, qua semita monstrat:
Jamque ascendebant co^em, qui plurimus urbi
Imminet adversasque aspectat desuper arces.

Away they trudge it helter skelter,
Until AEneas, and his friend,
Safely arrived at the Towns-end.
Miratur molem AEneas, magalia quondam:
AEneas star'd about and wondered,
To see of Houses a whole Hundred;
But when he saw the Folks were there,
He thought it had been Carthage fair.
I^stant ardentes Tyrii: pars, ducere muros
Molirique arcem, and manibus subvolvere saxa:
Pars, aptare locum tecto, and concludere sulco.

The Town was full, all in a pother,
Some doing one thing, some another;
Some digging were, some making Mortar,
Some hewing stones, and such a Quarter;
For they were all, as story tells,
Building or doing something else;
Qualis apes aestate nova per florea rura
Exercet sub sole labor, --

And to be short, all that he sees,
Were working busily as Bees.
Lucus in urbe fuit media, laetissimus umbra:
In The middle of the Town there stood,
A goodly Elm o're-grown with Wood;
And under that were Stocks most duly,
To lock them fast that were unruly:
There sat they down to ease their travel,
Picking their sweaty Toes from gravel,
And looked about as they lay lurking,
Infert se septus nebula (mirabile dictu)
Per medios, miscetque viris, neque cernitur ulli.

To see the busy Tyrians working:
But none could see them for their spell,
They were so hid, they might as well,
Though they had been never so nigh 'um,
See through a double-dore as spy 'um.
Near stood the Church, a pretty Building;
Plain as a Pike-staff without Guilding,
I cannot liken any to it,
Unless't be Pancrage, if you know it.
Hic templum Junoni ingens Sidonia Dido
Condebat --

This Church Queen Dido it is related
Built, and to Juno dedicated,
And was beholding unto none;
But built it all both stick and stone,
At her own proper cost, and charges,
No Church in the Country near so large is,
It was well laid with Lime and Mortar:
(For so the Workmen did exhort her.)
Because it would be so much stronger,
And so you know would last the longer.
It had a door peg'd with a pin,
To shut Folks out, or let Folks in,
And in a pretty wooden-steeple
A Low-Bell hung to call the People.
AEneas, and his Friend went thither,
Seeing a many Folks together,
Whose misty Cloaks, so well did hide 'um,
That in they went, and no one spied 'um.
Artificumque manus inter se, operumque labores
Miratur, videt Iliacas ex ordine pugnas,
Bellaque tam fama totum vulgata per orbem.
At^idas, Priamumque, and saevum ambobus Achillem.
Constitit, and lachryma^s: Quis jam locus (inquit) Achate;
Quae regio in terris nostri non ple^a laboris?

But then they wondr'd to behold
The Images so manifold,
That staring stood in sundry places,
As if they would fly in their faces.
Then (quoth AEneas) to's Comrade
This Fellow, Master was on's Trade
That pictured These; Look, look, as I am
An honest man, yonder is our Priam;
See where he stands in Silk, and Satin
As he would speak both Greek and Latin,
Whoop! yonder is Hector too, and Troylus,
Look thee, how here the Grecians spoil us;
-- videbat, uti bellantes Pergama circum
Hac fugerent Graii, premeret Trojana juventus:
Hac Phryges, instaret curru tristatus Achilles.

And there our Trusty Trojans do
Bang them and pay them, quid for quo.
Yonder Achilles gives a Rap,
With his Cock's feather, in his Cap;
And yonder is one, for all is Bravado
Knocks him with lusty Bastinado.
How came These here t'be pictured thus?
Sure all the World has heard of us.
Haec dum Dardanio AE^eae miranda vid^n ur,
Dam stupet, obtutuque haeret defixus in uno:
Regina ad templum forma pulcherrima Dido
Iacessit, magno juvenum stipante caterva:

Whilst thus AEneas sad, and muddy,
Stood musing in a dark brown study;
In comes Queen Dido, that fair Lady,
In Apron white as on a May Day;
A crew of Roysters waited on her,
Which there were called her men of Honor:
All clad in fair Blew-Coats, and Badges,
To whom Queen Dido paid good Wages.
Qualis in Eurotae ripis, aut per juga Cynthi
Exercet Diana choros, quam mill sequutae
Hinc atque hinc glomerantur Oreades: illa (...)
^rt humero, gradiensque deas supereminet omnes.

Even as a Proper Woman shows
When unto Wake, or Fair she goes,
Clad in her best Apparel, so,
Queen Dido all this time did show,
And was so brave a Buxom Lass,
That she did all in the Town surpass.
Into the midst of the Church she marches,
And there betwixt a pair of Arches,
Upon a Stool set for the nonce,
She went to rest her Marrow-bones,
And on a Cushion stuff't with Flocks,
She clapped her dainty pair of Docks.
Tum fo^ibus divae, media testudine templi,
Septa armis, solioque alt e subnixa resedit.
Ju^a dabat, legesque viris, operumque laborem
Par^ibus aeq^bat justis, aut sort t^ahcbat.

There Dido sat in State each day,
To hear what any one could say,
Some to rebuke, and for to sooth some;
And give out Laws, wholesome, or toothsome;
To punish such as had Insolence,
And make them good Nolens, or Volens:
And there likewise each morning-tide,
She did the young-mens Tasks divide,
Wherein great Policy did lurk,
Each knew his Jobbe of Journy-work:
And fell about it without Jangling:
But that which kept them most from wrangling
Was that they still drew cuts to know,
Whether they should work hard, or no,
And who had th'longest cut, and the best,
Had still more work, then all the rest.
Cum subito AEneas concursu accedere magno
A^tea, Sergestumque videt, fortemque Cloanthum,
Teucrorumque alios: ater quos aequore turbo
Dispulerat, penitusque alias advexerat oras.

Here whilst AEneas squeezed and thrust is,
To see Queen Dido doing Justice:
Who should he but his fellows spy?
Got into Dido's Company.
There Antheus was, (no mortal fiercer)
And one Surgestus too, a Mercer,
With other Trojans, that would vapor;
Cloanthus too the Woollen-Draper:
All which, and forty Trojans more,
Were wonderfully got to shore.
Obstupuit simul ipse, simul perculsus Achates:
At This, AEneas, and his friend
Were even almost, at their wits end;
Z'lid (Jove forgive me, that I swear)
Quoth he, how think thou came they here?
Nay quoth the the other presently,
AEneas, what a Pox know I?
Laetitiaque m^tuque avidi conju^gere dextras
And (...): sed res animos incognita ^urbat,
(...), and ^ube cava speculantur amicti,
Quae ^ortuna vi: (...): --

AEneas was so glad on's kin,
He ready was t'leap out on's skin,
And so was the other, for (in sadness)
They were even mad, 'twixt fear, and gladness,
And yet it seems, they were so wise,
To keep them safe in their disguise;
Until their friends, had tried the Opinions,
Of the kind-hearted Carthaginians.
Postquam introgressi, and coram data copia fandi,
Maximus Ilioneus placido sic pectore coep^t:

At last they saw one Ilioneus,
A Trojan very Ceremonious;
A Youth of very fine Condition,
A very pretty Rhetorician;
One that could write, and read; and had
Been bred at Free School from a Lad,
Thrust up to Dido in good fashion,
And thus begins his fine Oration.
O regina, novam cui condere Jupiter urbem,
Justitiaque dedit gentes fraenare superbas,
Troes te miseri, ventis maria omnia vecti
Ora nus, probibe insandos a navibus ignes:
Parce pio generi, and propius res aspice nostras.

O Queen, who here have built a Village,
And keep'st thy Ground in hearty Tillage:
O Thou, who have the Royal Science,
To Govern Men as wild, as Lions,
Behold us here, who look like men,
New eaten, and spewed up again.
So spitefully has fortune crossed us,
So woefully the Seas have tossed us.
A few poor Trojans here you see,
Even as poor, as poor may be;
Thrown on this Shore by Wind, and Weather,
Ill luck, the Devil and all together;
And humbly do beseech your Grace,
To pity our most woeful case.
Your Men are all in hurly-burly,
And look upon us grim, and furly,
So that if you be not good to us,
They Will burn our Boats, and quite undo us.
Therefore we pray you send some one,
To bid'um let our Boats alone.
Non nos aut ferro Libycos populare penates
Venimus aut raptas ad littora vertere praedas:
Non ea vis anima, nec tanta superbia victis.

Alas! we come not to purloyne,
Either your Cattle, or your Coin,
Neither to filch Linen, or Woollen:
Nor yet to steal away your Pullen;
We Have no such knavish ends, as these;
But only to beg Bread, and Cheese.
Est locus, (Hesperiam Graii cognomine dic^nt)
^era antiqua, potens armis, atque ubere glebae;
Oenotrii coluere viri: nunc fama, minores
Italiam dixisse, ducis de nomine gentem;
H^c cursus suit. --

We were a going to a Place,
A hardish kind of Name it has,
Where once your what shal'call'ums (rot'um!
It makes me mad IN have forgot'um)
Lived a great while; but now do see,
It Is known by the Name of Italy:
Cum subito assurgens nimbosus Orion
In vada coeca tulit, penitusque procacibus Austris,
Perque undas, superante salo, perque invia saxa
Dispulit, huc pauci vestris adnavimus oris:

When on a sudden one Orion,
Poudr'd upon us, like a Lion,
And squandered us on Flats, and Shelves,
Enough to make us drown our selves:
So that of Sixscore men, and deft ones,
Even here (O Queen) are all are left on's.
Quod genus hoc hominum? quaeve hunc tam barbara morem
Permi^tit patria? --

Then what should aile your Tyrians thus
To Scowle, and look askew at us;
Or where the Devil were they bred,
Sure rancker Clowns never lived by bread;
And (for to tell your Grace my thought)
I think they are better fed, then taught.
For (as I am an honest man
Let'um deny it, if they can)
Hospicio prohibemur arenae.
Bella cient, primaque vet ant consistere terra.

No sooner landed we to bait us;
But that the Rogues threw Cow-turds at us;
But Queen, I hope, thou wilt teach the Wretches,
Henceforth to meddle with their Matches.
Rex erat AEneas nobis: quo justior alter
Nec pietate fuit, nec bello major, and armis.
Quem si fata virum servant, si vescitur* aur^
AEtherea, nec adhuc crudelibus accubat umbris:
Non metus: officio nec te certasse priorem
(...) --

AEneas once did us command,
A taller fellow of his hand,
Nor honester, never did, or shall,
Draw out a Trapstick to a wall.
If he but live, and that already,
He be not drowned in some eddy,
You of your cost will never repent you,
For to a penny he will content you.
Quassatam ventis liceat subducere classem,
Et sylvis aptare trabes, and stringere remos:
Si datur Italiam, sociis, and rege recepto,
Tendere, ut Italiam laeti, Latiumque petamus:

Look then of the Trojans, and befriend'um,
Let Us draw our Boats ashore, and mend'um.
We'll promise you if that we meet,
Our Captain with the rest of the Fleet,
And if he be not turned t'a Gudgeon,
We toward Italy will trudge on;
Sin absumpta salus, and te, pater optime Teucrum,
Pontus habet Libyae, nec spes jam restat Iuli:
At freto Sycaniae saltem, sedesque paratas,
Unde huc advecti, regemque petamus Acestem.

And if that he shall still be lacking,
Then back again we'll straight be packing.
Tumbreviter Dido, vultum demissa profatur:
Soluice cord metum Teucri: secludite curas.
Res dura, and regni novitas me talia cogu^
Moliri --

Dido like woman of good fashion,
Gave special heed to his Relation;
And all the while he did relate it,
Mump't like a Bride, that would be at it.
At last, when he had told his Tale
Mantling like Mare in Martingale
She thus replied; Trojans be cherry,
Pluck up your Hearts, and rest you merry,
Our Towns-folks here are something wary,
Not that they any Ill Will bear you;
For they are very honest Fellows,
But that of late a Chance befell us.
To tell you true, the other day
When all my folks were gone toth' hay,
A lusty Rascal, such a one
As one of you (dispraise to none)
Comes into the yard, and off of the Hedge,
Where all our Clouts, were hung to Bleach;
Whips me a bran-new Flaxen-Smock,
The very best of all my Stock;
And runs away w'it in a Trice:
('T had never been on my back past Twice.)
But you I know such baseness scorn,
You all a^e men well bred; and born.
Quis genus (...), quis Troj^ ^esciat urbem?
Virtutesque, virosque, aut tanti i^cendia belli?
Non ob^usa adeo gestamus pectora Poeui:
Nec tam adversus ^quos Tyria sol ^git ab urbe:

Who has not heard of the Trojan People,
And of AEneas, and his Swipple;
Nor shall you find us Dames of Tire,
So far removed from Phoebus fire;
But we can cherish lusty Yeomen,
And carry Toys like other Women.
Seu vos Hesperiam magnam, Saturniaque arva,
Sive Erycis fines, regemque optatis Acest^m,
Auxilio tutos dimittam, opibusque juvabo.

Therefore you shall, whether you go
Straight on to Italy, or no;
Or whether you row on the Main,
To your own Parish back again,
Have what you want; nor will I dun ye,
But pay me when you can get money:
Vultis and his mecum pariter considere regnis?
terbem quam statuo, vestra est: subducite naves:
Tros Tyriusque mihi nullo discrimine agetur.

But if you will tarry here; This Town,
That I now build shall be your own,
And be as free, you Trojans shall,
As any Tyrian on'um all.
A Man's a Man, as I have read,
Though he have but a Hose on's Head;
Atque utinam rex ipse Noto compulsus eodem
Afforet AEneas: --

And I could wish, that the same weather
That blew your tattered Scullers hither,
Would blow AEneas hither too,
And then there were no more to do;
-- Per littora certos
Limittam, and Libyae lustrare extrema jubebo,
Si quibus ejectus sylvis, aut urbibus errat.

But I Will send out my Men, who knows
But he may now be picking Sloes
In our Town-Woods, or getting Nuts,
For very need to fill his Guts.
His animum arrecti dictis, and sortis Achates,
Et pater AEneas, jam dudum erumpere nubem
Ardebunt. --

AEneas in his Misty Cloak,
Heard every word Queen Dido spoke.
Her Hony-words made his Mouth water,
And he even twitter'd to be at her,
But he was so over joy'd, he stood,
Like a great Sloven made of Wood;
And could not speak (though he were willing)
Would one have g'in him Forty shilling.
-- Prior AEneam compellat Achates.
^ate dea, quae nunc animo sententia surgit?
Omnia tuta vides, classemseciosque receptos.
Unus abest, medio in fluctu quem vidimus ipse
Submersum: --

At last his Friend jog'd him with his hand;
How like a Logger-head you stand,
Quoth he, for certainly I think,
You Are either mad or in thy drink:
Do thou not see our Friends all round,
Excepting one, whom we saw drowned;
And all as well, as Heart can wish,
And yet thou stand'st as mute as Fish!
Vix ea fa^us erat, cum circumsusa repene
Scindit se nubes, and in aethera purgat apertum:
Resti^it AEneas, claraque in luce ^efulsit,

Scarce had he spoke, but off he threw
His Mantle made of Mists so-blew,
And stood as plainly to be seen,
As any there, God bless the Queen.
Os humerosque Deo similis; namque ipse decoram
Caesari^m nato genitrix, lun eaque juventae
Purpureum, and laetos oculis afflarat honores:

For's Mother had so dizend him,
That he should show both neat, and trim;
Though (truly!) he was but an od man,
(Pa^
Splay-mouth'd, Crump-shoulder'd like the Go^
Yet could he not in the nick invent
Her Majesty a Complement;
But scratcht his Head, and began to sputter,
His elbow rubbed, and kept a clutter,
^opping, and mowing, till at last
All difficulties over-past,
Tum si reginam alloquitur, cunctisque repent
^provisus ait: Coram, quem quaeritis adsum
^ojus AEneas --

In Courtly-Phrase, it thus came out.
Madam (quoth he) your humble Trout,
that same AEneas whom you prize thus,
^s here without Deceptio Visus
(...) that same very man am here,
And come to taste of your good Cheer.
O sola insandos Troiae* miserata labores^:
Quae nos, relliquias Da^aum terraej* marisque,
Omnibus ex^stos jam casibus, omnium eg^nos,
Urbe, domo socias: grates persolvere dignas
No^ opis est nostrae, Dido: nec quicquid ubique est
Gentis Dardaniae, magnum quae sparsa per orbem.
Dii tibi (si qua pios respectant numina, si quid
Usquam justitiae est, and men's sibi conscia recti)
Praemia digna serant; --

O Dido Primrose of Perfection,
Who only grantest kind Protection
To wandering Trojans, how shall we,
Ever pay Thee, for this Courtesy!
We never can my dainty Friend,
Then let Jove do it, and there is an end.
-- Sic satus, amicum
Ilionea petit dextra, laevaque Serestum:
Post alios, fortemque Gyan; fortemque Cloanthum.

Thus having ended his fine Speech,
Toward the Queen he turned his Breech;
And spoke to's men, says Lads how is it?
Come give me every one a Fist,
How do thou Guy, and Srs. how do ye?
Now by my troth, I Am glad to see you,
It Is better being here I trow,
Then where we were a while a go,
No longer since, then yesterday;
Welcome to Tire as I may say,
With that to shaking hands they fall,
And he most friendly shook them all,
Surely he was no Counterfeiter,
No Bandog could have shook 'em better.
Obstupuit primo aspectu Sidonia Dido,
Casu deinde viri tanto: and sic ore loquuta est:

Queen Dido ravished to behold,
The Carriage Sweet of this Springold,
Star'd for a while, as she would look through him,
And then thus brake her mind unto him.
Quis te, nate dea* per la^t a pericula casus
Insequitur! quae vis immanibus applicat oris!

O Thou who'st so finely bin bred,
And com'n art such honest kindred,
By what strange luck have thou been hurried
As if the Fates would thee have worried
It Is strange thou have not burst thy hoops
Thou Have been so banged about the stoops.
Tune. ^lle AEneas. quem Dardanio Anchisae
Alma Venus Phrygii genui^ S^ntis ad und am?

Art Thou AEneas with great Ware,
So famous for a Cudgel-player
Whom Venus with her fine devices
Bore that old Knocker good Anchises?
Aque equidem Teucrum memini. Sidona venire,
Finibus expulsum patriis, nova regna petentem
Auxilio Beli: --

My Father Belus went with Teucer
(I think he had not many Sprucer)
To take possession of an Island,
That was some Twenty Rood of dry-land.
Ipse hostis Teucros insigni laud ferebat:
Seque ortum antiqua Teucrorum a stirpe volebat.

And he still gave great commendations,
Of Trojans 'bove all other Nations;
He could have named you all by dozens
And told me you, and he were Cousins.
Quare agite, o tectis juvenes succedite nostri^
Me quoque per multos similis fortuna labores
Jactatam, hac demum voluit cotsistere terra.
Non ignara mali, miseris succurrere disco.

Therefore young Men to Carthage you,
Are welcome without more a do.
I have my self (I Would have you know)
Been driven to my shifts ever now;
And therefore in my Jurisdiction,
Pity a Beast, that is in Affliction:
Sic memorat: simul AEneam in regia ducit
^ecta: --

With that she stretched forth a hand,
So white, it made AEneas stand.
Amazed to see it. (for know that she
Still washed her Hands in Chamber-Lee)
And led AEneas in kind fashion,
Toward her Graces Habitation;
And made a Curtzy at the door,
And prayed him to go in before;
But he most courteously cried no,
I hope I Am better bred then so;
But let him say what he say could,
Dido swore Faith, and Troth he should;
Well (quoth AEneas) I see still,
Women, and Fools must have their will;
And thereupon, without more talking,
Enters before her proudly stalking.
Scarce were they got within the doors;
But Dido called her Maids all Whores,
And a great coil, and scolding kept,
Because the House was not clean swept:
Nec minus interia soci is ad littora mittit
Viginti tauros, magnorum horrentia centum
Te^ suum, pingues centum cum matribus agnos:

Then all in have away she sends
Victuals unto AEneas friends;
Pease-Porridge, Bacon, Puddings, Sowse;
Of The very best, she had in the house;
Butter, and Curds, and Cheeses plenty,
To fill their Guts, that were full empty;
Bidding them eat, and never save it,
But call for more, and they should have it.
At domos interior regali splendida luxu
Instruitur, mediisque parant convivia tectis.

This being ^ne, the dainty Queen
Conducts the Trojans further in,
Into a Parlour neat she takes 'um,
And there most fairly welcome makes 'um:
She served 'um drink, and victuals up,
As long as they would eat, or sup,
Whilst each one there so played the Glutton,
That he was forced to unbutton.
No sooner had the Trojans bold,
Stuffed their Guts full, as they would hold;
But that AEneas straight begun,
Omnis in Ascanio chari stat cura parentis.
All-to-bethink him of his Son.
See Ser^ upon (...).
Now you must know, that he had had,
A wench, and by that wench, a Lad.
The Less I reason had to name,
When (be it spoken to their shame)
The Greeks when first they took Troy City,
Did thrust to death, without all pity:
Of womankind sure as I breath
The first that ever died that death.
AEneas rapidum ad naves praemittit Achatem,
Ascanio ferat haec, ipsumque ad moenia ducat.

His Son, Ascanius hight, a Page,
About some dozen years of age,
This Boy, AEneas sent Achates
To fetch, quoth he, since we feed gratis,
Why should not now my little Bastard,
(That I dare swear will prove no dastard)
Come to Queen Dido's House, and Feast,
As we have done of the very Best?
Go fetch him then, Mu^era praeterea Iliacis erepta ruinis
Far jubet, pallam signis, auroque rigentem,
Et circumtextum crocco velamen Acantho,
Ornatus Argivae, Helenae: quos illa Mycenis,
Pergama cum peteret, inconcessosque Hymenaeos*
Extulerat. --

and let him bring's
Out of my Coffer, those gay things,
I saved at Troy; which for their fineness
He shall present unto her Highness.
There is a Riding-hood, and safeguard
Of yellow Lace, bound with a brave guard,
Which Hellen wore; the very day,
That Paris stole her quite away.
Praeterea sceptrum, Ilione quod gesserat clim
Maxima natarum Priami, colloque monile
Baccatum, and duplicem gemmis auroque coronam.

Then there is a Distaffe neatly wrought
That Paris too for Hellen bought,
For carved-work fit to be seen,
Betwixt the Legs of any Queen.
And then there is a fair great Ruff
Made of a pure, and costly Stuff
To wear about her Highness Neck,
Like Mrs. Cockaynes in the Peake,
And last, a Quoife, wrought gorgeously
With Tinsell, and Blew-Coventry:
Then go as fast, as the can I preethee
And bring him, and these Presents with thee.
Haec celerans, iter ad naves tendebat Achates.
At Cytherea novas arts, nova pectora versat
Consilia --

Away goes he, as he was bidden,
Running as fast, as he had ridden;
But Venus, that same cunning Dame
Had yet another Trick to play 'um.
Quippe domum timet ambiguam Tyriosque bilingues,
She had no very good Opinion,
Of your so smooth tongued Carthaginian,
Nor knew she but the Queen might be
As full of Craft, as Courtesy.
Urit atrox Juno --
And she was sure that Juno would
Do all the Mischief, that she could;
Therefore she in all have did run,
T'a Boy, called Cupid, was her Son.
This Cupid was a little tyny,
Cogging, Lying, Peevish Nynny;
No bigger then a good point-tag;
But yet a vile unhappy wag.
He never would go to School; but play
The Truant every other day;
Run men into the Breech with pins,
Throw stones at Folks, and break their shins;
Kill peoples Hens, and steal their Chicks,
And do a Thousand Roguy Tricks:
But with a Bow the Shit-breech'd-elfe
Would shoot like Robin-Hood himself;
And had I warrant every dart,
Poisoned with such a subtle Art,
That where they hat, their power was so
It made Folks love, would they or no:
And for this Trick, the hopeful Youth
Was called the God of Love forsooth.
To this young Squire Dame Venus trotted
As I (if you have not forgot it)
Told you before, and thus begun,
To Flatter up her Graceless Son,
Gnate, meae vires, mea magna potentia, solus
Gnate, patris summi qui tela Typh^ea tem^is;
Ad te confugio, and supplex t^a numina posco.

My Goldylocks, (quoth she) my Joy,
My pretty, little-tyny-Boy;
Thy Mother Venus comes to thee
TO implore thy little Deity.
F^ater ut AEneas pelag^tuus omnia circum
Littora jactetur, odi^s Junonis i^iquae,
Nota tibi. --

Thou know as well as any Other
How Juno vile has used thy Brother
Our poor AEneas, what a Clatter,
She made to drown him on the water;
Nay she would do more mischief still,
If the Cursed Queen might have her will.
Hunc Phoenissa tenet Dido, blandisque moratur
Vocibus: and vereor, quo se Jnnonia vertant
Hospitia, h ud tanto cessabit cardine rerum.

AEneas now is at a Place
Called Carthage with a handsome Lass,
Queen Dido named, where now he is
Made on as much, as heart can wish;
Quocirca capere ante dolis and cingere flamma
Reginam medit^, ne quo se numine mutet:

But least the Queen should change her mind
As Weather-Cocks do with the wind,
And thorough Juno's wiles at last,
Show him a Woman's slippery cast;
My pretty Archer let us Two
Show the Proud Slut what we can do.
My Son AEneas does dispatch
Achates, to the Wharfe to fetch
My little Grand child, who must come,
To sup in Dido's dining-roome.
Now since that thus in short the Case is
And that thou can so well cut faces:
-- Faciem mutatus and ora Cupido
Pro dulci Aseanio veniat.

Tu faciem illius noctem non amplius unam
Fall dolo, and notos pueri puer indue vultus:
Ut cum te gremio accipiet latissima Dido,
Regales inter mensas, laticemque Lyaeum,
Cum dabit amplexus, atque oscula dulcia figet,
Occultum inspires ignem, sallasque veneno.

I would have thee to set thy Phys'*
Nomy in such a shape as his;
And go along as meek, and mild,
As any little sucking Child.
When thou come there, I know the Queen
Will clip, and kiss thy Cheek, and Chin;
Dandle, and give thee Figgs, and Reasons;
Then must thou play thy Petty-Treasons,
Lick her Lips, Flatter her, and Cog,
And set her Highness so of the Gog,
That when she'as laid by Fame and Honor,
Thy Brother may to work upon her.
Hunc ego sopitum somno super alta Cythera
^t super Idalium sacrata sede recondam.

This is my Plot, and that naught cross it,
^'ll make the Child a sleeping Posset.
And when he is fast, I will him hide
^'th' top of the Garret upon I Would.
Paret Amor dictis (...) genetricis, and alas
Eruit, and gressu gaudens inc^dit Iuli.

Cupid, who Mischief loved, I think,
Better by half then Meat, or Drink;
Without all manner of Reply,
Prepares him for his Roguery.
His wings he from his shoulders throws,
Because they would not go into's Clothes,
And dressed himself to such a wonder,
That none could know the Lads asunder.
At Venus Ascanio p^acidam per membra quietem
Irrigat, and fotum gremio dea tollit in altos
Idaliae locus: ubi mollis amaracus illum
Floribus, and dulci aspirans complectitur (...)

But Venus gave the other a Sop,
That made him sleep like any Top;
And whilst he taking was a Nap,
She laid him neatly in her Lap,
And Carried him to a House that stood
Upon an Hill in a old Wood:
And when she had the Urchin there,
She laid him up in Lavander.
Jamque ibat dicto parens* --
In the mean time, Sir Cupid goes
To the Court in young Iulus Clothes;
Cum venit, aulaeis jam se regina superbis
Aurea composuit sponda, mediamque locavit.
Jam pater AEneas and jam Trojana juventus
Convenient: strato ju^ super discumbitur ostro.

Who should he see when he came there;
But Dido sitting in a Chair,
In The midst of all the Trojan Blades,
Vap'ring, and Swearing at her Mayds.
Under her Feet a Cricket stood,
Whereon she stamped as she were Wood;
And likewise there was finely put,
A Cushion underneath her Scut.
There as she fate upon her Crupper,
Quinquaginta intus famulae, quibus ordine longo
Cura penum struere, and flammis adolere penates.
Centum aliae, totidemque pares aetate ministri,
Qui dapibus mensas enerent, and pocula ponant.

She bad her Folks to bring in Supper,
And in they brought a Thundering Meal,
Great Joints of Mutton, Porke and Veal,
Hens, Geese, and Turkies, Ducks, and Bustards,
And at the last, Fools, Flawns and Custards,
The Trojans eat, and make good Cheer
Tunning themselves with Ale, and Beer,
There was old drinking, and old singing,
And all the while, the Bells were ringing,
One would have thought, by the great Feast,
T'ad been a Wedding at the least.
Whilst thus they eat, and drink, and chat,
Ille, ubi complexu AEneae, colloque p^pendit,
Et magnum falsi implevit genitoris amorem,
Reginam petit, haec oculis, haec pectore toto
Haeret: and interdum gremio fovet, inscia Dido,
Insidea^ quantus miserae deus. --

Cupid, that little Cogging Brat,
So cunning was in Counterfeiting,
AEneas thought him on's own getting.
At last Queen Dido in her Lap,
Sets me the Mounte-banking-Ape,
And kissed his Lips all of a Lather,
Then thus bespeaks the new-made Father.
By the Mack (quoth she) thou Trojan trusty,
Thou gott'st This Boy, when thou were lusty;
And any one that does but note him,
May soon know who it was begot him;
I dare be sworn it was thou did get him,
He Is even as like thee, as thou had spit him.
-- At memor ille
Matris Acidaliae, paulatim ab^lere Sichaeum
Incipit, and vivo tentat praevertere amore
Jampridem resides animos. --

Whilst thus the Youth she kissed, and dandled,
Cupid had so the matter handled,
That she began to feel a Grumbling
As People do that would be Tumbling.
Postquam prima quies epulis, mens^que remotae:
Crateras magnos statuunt, and vina coronant.

When they had Supt, and that the waiters,
Had Trenchers taken away, and Platters;
Hic r^gina gravem gemmis, qu^oque poposcit,
Impl^visque morg pateram: quam Belus, and omnes
A Belo soli^i --

Up from her Chair Queen Dido starts,
And takes a Mug, that held Two Quarts
Of Drink, that she with much forbearing
Had saved long since for her Sheep-shearing:
And thus begins, Here Sirs, here is to you,
And from my heart much good may do you:
Adsis laetitiae Bacchus dator, and (...) Juno:
Et vos o coetum Tyrii celebrate saventes.

AEneas, here is a Health to thee,
To Pusse and to good Company;
And he that will not do, as I do,
Proclaims himself no friend to Dido.
I do pronounce him to be no Man,
And may he never kiss a Woman.
Dixit, and in mensa laticum libavit honorem:
Prima^ libato summo tenus at^igit ore.

With that she set it to her Nose,
And off at once the Rumkin goes;
No drop besides her Mussel falling,
Until that she had supt it all in.
Then turning't Alias K^ly.
Topsey on her Thumb
Says look, here is Super-naculum.
AEneas, as the story tells,
And all the Rest did bless themselves,
To see her trowle of such a Pitcher,
And yet to have her Face no richer,
By Jove (quoth he) knocking his knuckles;
I Would not drink with her for Shoe-buckles:
But Madam (says he) sweetly bowing,
I hope your Grace does not make Ending one and Beginning another.
plowing:
For if you do at this large rate,
There will be many an aching pate;
-- Ille impiger hau^it
Spumantem pateram, and pleno se poluit auro.

With that he took a lusty Swimmer
Here Sirs (quoth he) I drink this Brimmer
In kind return for our Protections,
Unto Queen Dido's best Affections.
Post alii proceres,
Down went their Cups, and to it they fell,
Roaring and Swaggering pell mell,
cithara crinitus Iopas
Personat aurata, docuit quae maximus Atlas.
Hic canit errantem Lunam. --

Whilst a Blind-Harper did advance,
That wore Queen Dido's Cognizance,
A Minstrel that Iopas hight;
Who played, and sung to 'um all night,
He sung them Songs, Ballads, and Catches,
Of Men's Devices, Women's Patches;
With ancient Songs of high Renown
And even one, they called Troy Town:
At that, AEneas shook his Noddle,
As one would do an empty Bottle,
(Quoth he) if he that wrote this Ditty,
Had been with us in the midst of the City.
When Faggot-sticks, flew in Folks Chopps,
And knocked men down, as thick as Hopps,
I do believe for all is fine Chiming,
He would have had small mind of Riming:
Yet for to give the Devil his due,
Who e're he was the Ballads true.
In^elix Dido, longumque bibebat amorem.
From Dido then a belch did fly,
It Is thought she meant it for a sigh,
And tears ran down, her fair long Nose,
The Queen was Maudlin I suppose.
Multa super Priamo rogitans, super Hectore multa*
Nunc quibus Auro^ae venisset ^itius armis;
Nunc quales Diomedis equi, nunc quantus Achilles:
Immo age, and a prima dic hospes origin nobis
Insidias, inquit, Danaum, casusque tuorum,
Erroresque tuos. --

(Quoth she) AEneas out of Jesting,
Thou needs must tell at my Requesting,
All the whole Tale of Troyes Condition,
Since first you troubled were with Grecian;
Hectors great Fights, and Priams Speeches,
And eke describe Achilles Breeches,
How strong he was, when he did grapple,
And if Tydides horse were dapple.
Tell me I say of Paris Lechery,
The Grecians Quarrels, and there Treachery,
Your Challenges, your Fights, and Battles,
And how you lost your Goods and Chattles;
And to what Places you have wandered
E're since you were so basely Squandered.
All these things would I know most duly,
Then tell me speedily, and truly.
FINIS.

