A SERIOUS MEDITATION FOR SINNERS, Which is set forth in several Discourses,
Which passed between a Soul at her departure, and the Members of the Body.

In Three PARTS.

By Edward Carrey.

Licensed according to Order.

Printed for J. Blare at the Looking-Glass on London Bridge.

A Serious MEDITATION FOR SINNERS, etc.
Part I.
YOu that are in the Glory of your Prime,
Be sure that you make good use of your time;
For when time's past, you cannot it recall;
Time still runs on, it stays for none at all.
Do not serve Satan, shun his ill advise,
Because he will contrive for to entice
You in your Youth, to act those things that is ill,
And much displeasing to God's blessed will.
One sin there is which now I shall declare,
He does entice young Children for to swear,
Before some scarce have learned their A B C,
They Will Curse and Band; alas! more is the pity.
It Is to be doubted that their Parents they,
In wickedness do spend their time away;
For if that they in fear of GOD did live,
They would to them better instructions give.
Both Rich and Poor of your Children take care,
And don't allow them for to Curse and swear,
Lest they through your neglect be forced to mourn,
And Curse the hour wherein they was born.
Be careful to instruct them in their youth,
To serve the Lord in Spirit and in truth,
Allow them not to keep ill Company,
For fear they come to shame and misery.
Likewise you Children, in your Blooming Spring,
Let not your disobedience sorrow bring,
To fill your Aged parents hearts with woe;
But unto them still due obedience show.
Honor your Parents do not them despise,
Be always dutiful to them likewise,
And don't run on against the Laws of GOD,
For fear lest he should scourge you with his Rod.
Let Young and Old, both Rich and poor amend,
Their wicked lives and not so much offend,
Your Gracious God who now is offended sore,
Lest he forsake you, and never own you more.
Oh what condition would that soul be in,
That now s delighting and glorying in sin;
If God should turn his glorious day to night,
Who knows then where his Soul will take its flight.
Oh think on this in time both Rich and poor,
Take care, and don't offend your God no more;
That when God's pleased his messenger to send,
You may prepared be, then for your end.
You that these Lines does Read or hear I pray,
Reform your Lives, and do not fool away
Your dear and precious time in wickedness,
If that you ever do hope for heavens Bliss.
Part. II. The Souls Lamentation.
I pray give ear unto the dismal state,
O^ one who was a wicked Reprobate:
That when he came upon his bed to dye,
His precious soul was forced these words to cry;
Soul.
Oh eyes! where are you now? who often was
So quick and sharp on vanity to gaze,
Come, come direct n e now and be my guide!
Unto some pl^ce where I my self may hide.
Eyes.
Alas! dear soul, we cannot be thy guide,
Therefore thy suit to us must be denied;
For we are dim also, our strings are broke;
Our sight is gone, of it there is no hope.
Soul.
Oh Ears! who oftentimes was wont to be,
Much Recreated with sweet harmony
Of Music, which you always loved to hear,
Likewise pleasant d scourse pleased you most dear^
Ears.
Oh! can you hear of any one now, who
That can or will me any comfort show:
No s^ul we cannot hear no comfort for thee,
Because ou^ hearing's gone, and dull we be.
Soul.
Oh Tongue! You that would often brag and boast,
And had such way of a daunting Discourse,
Come speak up now for me with Courage bold,
To take my part, and don't thy speech withold.
You oftentimes would take God's Name in Vain;
What is the cause you do your speech refrain?
Alas the tongue is dumb, and grown so weak,
That unto me it can no comfort speak.
Oh Hands! who that in War took such delight,
Who in your prime that was such hands to fight;
Come stir up now, put forth your strength for me,
E're I am lost to all eternity.
Hands.
Though formerly we were such hands of might,
Alas! poor soul! for thee we cannot fight;
We are grown feeble, and in such a case,
We cannot move our selves out of the place.
Soul.
Oh! feet, I Am in distress, can you help me?
Who that was won^ so nimble for to be;
My case is bad, stand up for me therefore,
And carry me where I may be seen no more.
Alas! the feet are dead, and cold as Clay,
They cannot stir to carry me hence away:
I now am helpless left, where can I flee,
To hide my self from Satan's tyranny?
Oh! filthy Carcass! Oh thou lump of sin!
Who have always so vile; and wicked been;
I for the time which thou so illy spent,
Shall be kept in everlasting torment.
Alas! alas! I now shall forced be
From hence into a gulf of Misery,
In cruel torments for to make my moan,
Whilst happy souls rejoice in Heaven's throne.
A Righteous man when he does come to die;
He need not fear the sting of death, for why?
Because that he will be accompanied,
With Angels bright before that he is dead.
Who waits to take his Soul so soon as she,
Is separated then from his Body,
To carry her hence to Christ who that will say,
Thou art welcome soul unto Eternal Joy.
Part. III. Christ's Comfort to Sinners.
I Once did suffer Death upon the Cross,
For to Redeem poor sinners that were lost;
With a bleeding heart for Sinners I did Groan,
I died for thee, come Soul thou art my own.
Thee for thy good works shall partaker be,
Of Heaven's Crown with a blessed Company,
Of Saints and Angels that will thee surround,
With great Triumphing Joys when thee art Crowned.
The glorious heavenly host shall thee attend,
Thy Joy and pleasures never shall have an end;
Whilst wicked ones for sin in torments be,
Thee shall have rest in paradise with me.
Now to Conclude, all you that do design,
Heaven for your dera souls, repent in time;
That when you come this mortal life to leave.
Christ Jes^s may your precious Soul Receive.
The Esquires Tragedy. Tune of forgive me if your looks I thought.
OH fairest but unkindest she
that ever was admired,
To be so cruel unto me.
since you my heart have fired,
Your looks to me did seem most kind
when first I did behold you,
But oh the torments of my mind,
I oftentimes have told you.
In thee I place my chiefest joy,
I seek no other treasure,
Then do not all my hopes destroy,
who loves thee out of measure:
Forbear to triumph in disdain,
since here I lie and languish,
True love is a tormenting pain,
which fills my soul with anguish.
The silent night I spend in tears,
and melt in lamentation,
And yet no glance of love appears,
but utrer detestation;
Regarding not my perious moan,
my sighs and sad lamenting,
Your heart like flint or marble-stone,
feel not the least relenting.
Your beauty gave the fatal wound,
and did at first allure me,
In chains of love I now lie bound,
and you alone can cure me;
Cast not a loyal love away,
who at your feet lies bleeding;
Unto my sight one smile convey,
for which my tears are pleading.
Why should ^o charming beauty bright,
resolve to be so cruel;
O let me not be ruined quite
in love's destroying fuel;
See how my eyes like fountains flow,
with christial tears before thee,
Then do not seek his overthrow,
who does this ^ay ado^e thee.
Behold I am t^y Captive slave,
thy wounded love, bel^eve me,
And you alone my life can save,
and therefore ^ow rep^^e^e me,
Yet though my t^ief you will not remove,
but still with torments fill me,
Yet I cannot forbear to love,
although with scorn you kill me.
If thus you are resolved to frown,
and slight my friendly favor,
Then to the grave I will go down,
farewell thou world for ever;
I find she triumphs in disdain,
and still denis the blessing;
Why should I live to feel this pain,
which is beyond expressing.
This said, his naked sword he drew,
and to his heart he sent it,
And as he bid the world adieu,
she bitterly lamented,
Crying, I was unfortunate,
would I had died before him,
Thus did she weep when 'twas too late,
for tears could not restore him.
FINIS.

