AN ABSTRACT OF Laws and Government. Wherein as in a Mirror may be seen the
wisdom and perfection of the Government of Christ's Kingdom. Accomodable to
any State or form of Government in the world, that is not Antichristian or
Tyrannical. Collected and digested into the ensuing Method, by that Godly,
Grave, and Judicious Divine, Mr. JOHN COTTON, of Boston in New England, in his
Lifetime, and presented to the general Court of the Massachusetts. And now
published after his death, by William Aspinwall.

Isa. 33. 22. Jehovah is our Judge, Jehovah is our Lawgiver, Jehovah is our
King, he will save us. LONDON, Printed by M. S. for Livewel Chapman, and are to
be sold at the Crown in Pope's Head Alley, 1655.

To the Reader.
Gentle Reader,
I Have here presented thee with an Abstract of Laws and Government, collected
out of the Scriptures, and digested into this method, by that godly, grave, and
judicious Divine, Mr. John Cotton, accomodated to the Colonie of the
Massachusetts in New England, and commended to the general Court there. Which
had they then had the heart to have received, it might have been better both
with them there, and us here, then now it is. Concerning which Model, I dare
not pronounce, that it is without imperfection in every particular: Yet this I
dare be bold to say, that it far surpasses all the Municipall Laws and
Statutes of any of the Gentile Nations or Corporations under the cope of
Heaven. Wherefore I thought it not unmeet to publish it to the view of all, for
the common good. If any thing be wanting in the Copy, let it not be imputed
unto the Author, who (had his labor found deserved acceptance) would
undoubtedly have made a more through search, and perfect explanation of all the
rules and laws of judgment and justice, scattered here and there, throughout
the books of Moses, and other Scriptures. Which had he perfected in his
lifetime, might have redounded to the universal good of all the Nations that
acknowledge the Kingly office of our Lord Jesus. For though the great ones of
the world, who covet to graspe more power into their hands then Christ ever
betrusted them withal, are ready to asperse the poor Saints of Christ, which
wait for the coming of his Kingdom, as if they were a company of giddy heads,
and unstable, such as are either averse to all Government, or know not what
Government they would have; yet the truth is, they know well what Government
they would have; and (might they be encouraged and countenanced) are able to
give a clear demonstration thereof from the Scriptures of truth, both what the
Laws thereof be, and what manner of Officers of all sorts, from the highest to
the lowest, which I doubt not but some of them will take opportunity to do
according to the holy will and word of Christ. So as if any thing be yet
wanting in this which I here present thee withal, they will make a supplement
thereof in due time.

In the mean while accept of this, which is worthy thy consideration, and does
contain the very marrow and sum of all or most of those Laws, which Jesus
Christ, the eternal wisdom of the Father, thought necessary for the
administration of his Kingdom in righteousness and peace. And if thou
possibly meetest with some rules, to which no Scriptures are annexed for proof
(as in the second and third Chapters, and some Sections in the fourth, fifth,
and ninth Chapters) consider, that those are not properly Laws, but prudentiall
Rules, which he commended to that Colony, to be ratified with the common assent
of the freemen in each Town, or by their Representatives in the general
Court, as public Contracts. Which being once made and assented to for their
own convenience, do bind as Covenants do, until by like public consent
they be abrogated and made void. For though the Author attribute the word [Law]
unto some of them; yet, that it was not his meaning they should be enacted as
Laws (if you take the word Law in a proper sense) appears by his conclusion,
taken out of Isa. 33. 22. The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the
Lord is our King, he will save us. Amen. He knew full well that it would be an
intrenchment upon the Royal power of Jesus Christ, for them or any other of
the sons of Adam, to ordain Laws: And indeed Laws of righteousness (such
as Christ's laws be) have these three incommunicable properties.

1. They are unvariable, and bind all persons in all ages, and in all Nations.

2. They are undispensable by any created powers.

3. They bind not only the outward man to obedience, but also the spirit and
conscience. None of which can be spoken of any humane Laws or Constitutions
whatsoever. Wherefore, when thou meetest with such an expression (calling such
prudentiall rules and Contracts by the name Law) interpret it heartily. Because
such agreements being once made by mutual consent, the Covenantees are obliged
by the law of righteousness, to make good their agreements, until they he
reversed by the like common consent for a public good, which in all
prudentiall Contracts and Covenants may lawfully be done. For cujus est
instituere, ejus est destituere.

Possibly thou may meet with some particulars, which may not be fully
cleared to thine apprehension, as in Chap. 20. Sect. 12. 18. 20. But in that
case, have recourse to the word of God it self, whereunto the Author does
faithfully lead thee, and would have thee receive nothing from him, but what
agrees therewith. And if any thing may possibly be thought to be omitted (as
who can see all things Uno intuitu.
at once) let thine ingenuity make diligent search, and supply what the Author
in his life time had not opportunity to perfect. And be persuaded this to do;
Weigh the Laws here collected, I mean the Scriptures themselves, which yield
right rules of judgment in all causes both Civil and Criminal; and judge
equally and impartially, whether there be any laws in any State in the world,
so just and equal as these be. Which were they duly attended unto; would
undoubtedly preserve inviolable, the liberty of the Subject, against all
tyrannical and usurping powers.

The perfection of these Laws may appear from hence; that though they be but
few, yet are they such as reach to all persons, nations, and times, and are a
perfect Standard to admeasure all Judicial actions and causes, whether Civil
or Criminal, by Sea or by Land.

The impartiality of these Laws appears in this, that there is no respect of
persons in judgment, whether they be poor, or whether they be rich.

And thirdly, the consideration of the Author of these Laws might be a
sufficient argument to commend them unto us, to wit, Jesus Christ the eternal
wisdom of the Father, he is our Lawgiver: And he had no secret design to
rear up an external glorious pompous government for himself or his
Vicegerents and Substitutes, but to preserve his people in a state of
holiness, righteousness, and peace. Neither did he attain this dignity by
the blood and treasure of his Subjects; but he laid down his own life, and
shed his dearest blood to purchase and procure this liberty for them. Oh! who
would not be in love with such Laws, and such a Sovereign?

Quest:
If it be said, but what may be done to attain this?

Answ.
I answer; It is not my purpose to persuade this, or any other Nation (were they
willing to hear) to enact or ratify these by any power of their own (in a
solemn convention of their Representatives) as Laws: Neither do I believe it
was the Authors intention so to do, when he drew up this Model. For alas, what
energie or virtue can such an act of a company of poor sinful creatures add
unto the most perfect and wholesome laws of God? It is enough for us, and
indeed it is all that can be done by any people upon earth,

1. To declare by their Representatives, their voluntary subjection unto them,
as unto the laws of the Lord their God.

2. After such professed subjection, to fall unto the practice thereof, in the
name and strength of Christ their King and Lawgiver. According as it is
written, Deuteronomy. 5. 27, 28, 29. All that Jehovah our God shall speak unto thee,
we will both hear and do. And Jehovah heard the voice of your words, when ye
spoke unto me: And Jehovah said unto me, I have heard the voice of the words
of this people, which they have spoken unto thee, they have done well [in] all
that they have spoken. Who will give to them, that this may be their heart, to
fear me, and to keep all my commandments all days, that it may be well with
them, and with their sons for ever.

This Abstract may serve for this use principally (which I conceive was the
maine scope of that good man, who was the Author of it) to show the complete
sufficiency of the word of God alone, to direct his people in judgment of all
causes, both Civil and criminal, as we are wonted to distinguish them. Which
being by him done, and with all sweetness and amiablenesse of spirit tendered
(but not accepted) he surceased to press it any further at that season,
knowing full well that the Lords people shall be a willing people in the day of
his power. But the truth is, both they and we, and other the Gentile Nations,
are loath to be persuaded to dwell in the Tents of Shem, and to lay aside our
old earthly forms of government, to submit to the government of Christ. Nor
shall we Gentiles be willing (I fear) to take up his yoke which is easy, and
burden light, until he has broken us under the hard and heavy yokes of men,
and thereby weaned us from all our old forms and customs. The principal
Remoraes and lets whereof I conceive to be in Courtiers and Lawyers: For should
Christ's Kingdom be erected indeed, it would cross the lusts and luster of
external pomp and glory of the one, and the Mammon of unrighteousness of the
other. So that there will be a necessity, that the little stone cut out of the
mountain without hands should crush and break these obstacles, ere the way
can be prepared for erecting his Kingdom, wherein dwells righteousness. And
verily great will be the benefit of this Kingdom of CHRIST, when it shall be
submitted unto by the Nations, for then righteousness and peace will kiss
each other, Psalm 95. 10. And God will extend peace as a River, and the glory
of the Gentiles as a flowing stream, Isa 66. 12. All burdens and tyrannical
exactions will be removed, Isa. 60. 17. God will make their Officers peace, and
their Exactors righteousness. And then it will be no difficult matter to spare
many hundred thousand pounds per annum, in so great and populous Nations as
these be, without neglecting the public tranquillity of the State, and the
security of the same by a powerful Militia both at Land and Sea, so long as
the necessity of the Nations may require. But the season is not yet full come
for these things, and there yet remains some of the sufferings of Christ to be
fulfilled in the Saints, and judgments upon his and their Enemies. Wherefore I
shall cease to say any more hereof at this time, and commend all these things
to thy wise consideration. And the Lord give thee understanding in all things,
which is the hearty prayer of him that wishes all health and happiness to
thee, and peace upon all the Israel of God,

Will: Aspinwall,

AN ABSTRACT OF Laws and Government, etc.
CHAP. I. 1. Of Magistrates.
All the Magistrates are to be chosen 1. BY the free Burgesses, Deuteronomy. 1. 13. Or
present.
Give for your selves wise men, and understanding, and Or approved.
known amongst your Tribes, and I will place them for Heb. your heads.
Rulers over you. 2. Out of the free Burgesses, Deuteronomy. 17. 15. Thou shall in
Heb. in setting, thou shall set over thee.
any wise set over thee the King, whom the Lord thy God shall choose for
himself; from among thy brethren shall thou set a King over thee.

Jer. 30. 21. And their Nobles shall be of themselves, and their Governor
shall proceed from the mids of them, and I will cause him to draw near, and he
shall approach unto me.

3. Out of the ablest of men, and most approved amongst them, Deuteronomy. 1. 13.
before mentioned. Exodus 18. 21. Moreover thou shall Heb. take or receive from
all the people.
provide out of all the people Heb. men of courage, strength, prowes, and
wealth.
able men, fearnig God, men of truth, hating coveousnesse; and thou shall place
over them rulers of thousands, and rulers of hundreds, and rulers of tens. 4.
Out of the ranks of Noblemen, or Gentlemen amongst them, the best that God
sends unto their Country, if they be qualified with gifts fit for Government,
either eminently above others, or not inferior unto others, Eccles. 10. 17.
Blessed be thou O land, when thy King is the son of Nobles, and thy Princes
eat in due season, for strength, and not for drunkenness. Jer. 30. 21. Their
Nobles shall be of themselves, etc.

Sect. 2. The Governor has joint power with the Assistants to govern the
whole Country according to the Laws hereafter mentioned. Of himself he has
power (and in his absence the Deputy Governor) to moderate all public
actions in a Commonwealth.

As 1. To send out Warrants for the calling of general Courts. 2. To order and
transact all actions in the Court, when he sits, and to gather suffrages and
votes, and to pronounce sentence according to the greater part of them.

Sect. 3. The power of the Governor with the rest of the Counselors, is

1. To consult and provide for the maintenance of the State and people, Numb.
11. from verse. 4. to 16. 2. To direct in all hard matters, wherein appeal is
made to them from inferior Courts. Exodus 18. 22. And let them judge the people
at all seasons: and it shall be, that every Heb. great matter, or case.
hard matter they Heb. cause to be brought or transmit.
shall bring unto thee, but every small matter they shall judge themselves: so
make it lighter for thee, and they shall bear [the burden] with thee. Deuteronomy.
17. 8, 9. If there Heb. If the matter be hidden from thee concerning the
judgment. Or if it be too high and admirable.
arise a matter too hard for thee in judgment between blood and blood, between
plea and plea, and between stroke and stroke, matters of controversy within
thy gates: then shall thou arise, and get thee up unto the place which Jehovah
thy God shall choose for himself. And thou shall go unto the Priests, the
Levites, and unto the Judge that shall be in those days: and thou shall
enquire, and they shall show thee the sentence of the judgment: And thou shall
do according to that sentence, etc. 3. To preserve Religion pure. Exodus 32. 27.
And he said unto them, thus says Jehovah the God of Israel, put every man his
sword by Heb. his thigh.
his side, and go in and out from gate to gate, throughout the Camp, and slay
every man his brother, and every man his companion, and every man his neighbor,
etc. Exodus 25. 40. And Heb. And see, and make.
look THOU make them according to their pattern which thou wast caused to see
in the mount. 2. Caron. 19. 11. And behold, Amariah the chief Priest is over
you in all the matters of the Lord, and Zebadiah the son of Ishmael, the
ruler of the house of Judah, for all the Kings matters, also the Levites shall
be Officers before you. 4. To oversee the Forts and munition of the Country,
and to take order for the protection of the country from foreign invasions, or
intestine sedition, and if need shall require, with consent of the people to
enterpriz: wars. 2 King. 20. 13. And Hezekiah hearkened unto them, and showed
them the house of his precious things, and all the house of his armor, etc. 2
Chr. 32. 2, etc. And when Hezekiah saw that Senacherib was come; and That his
face was for war.
that he purposed to fight against Jerusalem. Then he took counsel with his
Princes, and his mighty men, to stop the waters of the fountains which [were]
without the City, and they did help him. So there was gathered much people
together, and they stopped all the fountains, and the brook that overflowed
through the midds of the Land, saying, Why should the Kings of Assyria come and
find much water? Also he strengthened himself, and built up all the wall that
was broken, and raised it up to the Towers, and another wall without, and
repaired Millo in the City of David, and made darts and shields in abundance.
And he set Captains of War over the people, and gathered them together to him
in the street of the gate of the City, and spoke Heb. To their heart.
comfortably to them. etc. Exodus 17. 9. And Moses said to Joshuah, choose us
out men, and go out, fight with Amalek, tomorrow I will stand on the top of
the hill with the rod of God in mine hand. Prove. 24. 6. For by wise counsel
thou shall make thy war, and in multitude of Counselors there is safety.
Sect. 4. And because these great affairs of the State cannot well and
sufficiently be attended, nor safely and wisely administered, if they be often
changed; therefore the Counselors are to be chosen for life, unless they give
just cause of removal. Which if they do, then they are to be removed by the
general Court. 1 King. 12. 6. And King Rehoboam consulted with the old men
that stood before Solomon his Father, while he yet lived. Prove. 28. 2. For the
transgression of the land, many are the Princes thereof, but by a wise knowing
man it shall also be prolonged.

Sect. 5. The power of the Governor sitting with the Counselors and
Assistants, is to hear and determine all causes, whether Civil or Criminal,
which are brought before them throughout the whole Commonwealth: Yet reserving
liberty of Appeals from them to the general Courts. Exodus 18. 22. And let
them judge the people at all seasons: and it shall be that every great matter
they shall Or transfer.
bring unto thee, but every small matter they themselves shall judge; so shall
it be easier for thee, and they shall bear the [burden] with thee. Deuteronomy. 1.
16, 17. And I charged your Judges at that time, saying, Hear between your
brethren, and judge righteously between every man and his brother, and his
stranger. Ye shall not Heb. Acknowledge faces.
respect persons in judgment, you shall hear the small as well as the great,
you shall not be afraid of the face of man, for the judgment is Gods: and the
cause that is too hard for you, cause it to be brought to me, and I will hear
it.

Sect. 6. Every Town is to have Judges within themselves, who shall be once in
a month (or in 3. months at furthest) to hear and determine both Civil
causes and pleas of less value, and crimes also which are not capital, yet
reserving liberty of appeal to the Court of Governor and Assistants. Deuteronomy.
16. 18. Judges and Officers shall thou make thee in all thy gates, which
Jehovah thy God gives thee throughout thy tribes, and they shall judge the
people with judgment of righteousness. Exodus 18. 21, 22. Moreover thou shall
Or take, or receive.
provide out of all the people Heb. men of courage, strength, prowes, and
wealth.
able men, fearing God, men of truth, hating covetousness: and thou shall
place over them rulers of thousands, and rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties,
and rulers of tens. And let them judge the people at all seasons: and it shall
be, that every great matter they shall bring unto thee, but every small matter
they themselves shall judge, etc. Jer. 36. 10, 11, 12. Then read Baruch in the
book the words of Jeremiah in the house of Jehovah: in the chamber of Gemariah
the son of Shaphan the Scribe, in the higher Court, at the entry of the new
gate of the house of Jehovah, in the ears of all the people.

And Michaiah the son of Gemariah, the son of Shaphan heard out of the
book all the words of Jehovah. And he went down into the Kings house, into
the Scribes Chamber, and lo there, all the Princes were sitting: Elishamah the
Scribe, and Delaiah the son of Shemaiah, and Elnathan the son of Achbor,
and Gemariah the son of Shaphan, and Zedekiah the son of Hananiah, and all
the Princes.

Sect. 7. For the better expedition and execution of Justice, and of all
affairs incident to every Court, every Court shall have certain Officers: As a
Secretary to enroll all the acts of the Court. 1 King. 4. 3. Elihoreph and
Abiah the sons of Shisha, Scribes, Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud, Recorder.
So also 2 Samuel 20. 24. And besides, Ministers of Justice, to attach, and fetch,
and set persons before the Magistrates, and also to execute Deuteronomy. 25. 2. He
shall cause him to be beaten, Math. 18. 34. and 5. 25, 26.
the sentence of the Court upon the offenders. John 7. 32. 45. And the
Pharisees and chief Priests sent Officers to take him. Then came the Officers
to the chief Priests and Pharisees, and they said unto them, why have ye not
brought him? Acts 5. 26, 27. Then went the Captain with the Officers, and
brought them without violence (for they feared the people, lest they should
have been stoned.) And when they had brought them, they set them before the
Council, and the high Priest asked them, etc. And for the same end, it shall
be lawful for the Governor, or any two of the Counselors, or Assistants, or
Judges, to give Warrants to an Officer to fetch any Delinquent before them, and
to examine the cause: And if he be found culpable of crime, to take order by
Sureties, or safe custody, for his appearance at Court. Levit. 24. 12. And
they put him in ward, that the mind of the Lord might be showed them. So Numb.
15. 34. And they put him in ward, etc. And further, for the same end, and to
prevent the offenders lying long in prison; It shall be lawful for the
Governor, with one of the Council, or any two of the Assistants, or Judges,
to see execution done upon any offender, for any crime that is not capital,
according to the laws established. Yet still referring liberty of appeal from
them to the Court, and from an inferior Court to a higher Court.

CHAP. II. Of free Burgesses, and free Inhabitants.
Sect. 1. ALL the free Burgesses (excepting such as were admitted freemen,
before the establishment of Churches in this Country) shall be received and
admitted out of the members of some or other of the Churches already
established in this Country, and such members as are admitted by their own
Church unto the Lords table.

Sect. 2. These free Burgesses shall give power to choose in their own Towns
fit and able men, out of themselves, to be ordinary Judges of inferior causes
in their own Town. And against the approaches of the General Court, to choose
two or three for Deputies or Committees, to join with the Governor and
Assistants of the whole Country, to make up and constitute a general Court.

Sect. 3. The general Court shall have power, by the warrant of the Governor,
or of the deputy Governor, or of any three of the Councillors or Assistants,
or by the warrant of any twelve of the deputies of the Country, to assemble
once every quarter, or half year, or oftener, as the affairs of the Country
require, and to sit together till their affairs be dispatched. And secondly,
to call the Governor and all the rest of the public Magistrates and Officers
unto place, and to call them to account for the breach of any Laws established
or other misdemenor, and to censure therein as the quality of the fact may
require. And thirdly, to make and repeal Laws. And fourthly, to dispose all the
Lands in the Country, and to assign them to several towns or persons, as
shall be thought fit. And fifthly, to impose a levy of moneys for the public
service of the Commonwealth, as shall be thought requisite for the protection
and provision of the whole. And sixthly, to hear and determine all causes
whether civil or criminal, wherein appleal shall be made unto them, or which
they shall see cause to assume into their own cognizance and judicature. And
seventhly, to assist the Governor and Councillors in the maintenance of the
purity and unity of Religion, and accordingly to set forward and uphold all
such good courses, as shall be thought fit for that end, by the advice of the
Elders with consent of the Churches, and to repress the contrary.

Sect. 4. In this general Court, nothing shall be concluded but with common
consent of the greater part, of the Governor and Assistants, together with the
greater part of the deputies of the Towns. Unless it be in the election of
Officers (where the liber^y of the people is to be preserved) or in judging
matters of offense against the Law, wherein both parties are to stand to the
direction of the Law.

Sect. 5. All the householders in every Town shall be accounted as the free
inhabitants of the Country, and shall accordingly enjoy freedom of common; and
inheritance of such lands as the general Court, or the several Towns wherein
they dwell, shall allot unto them; after they have taken an oath, or given
other security, to be true and faithful unto the State, and subject to such
good and wholesome Laws as are established in the Country by the general Court.

CHAP. III. Of the protection and provision of the Country.
Sect. 1. A Law to be made (if it be not made already) for the training of all
men in the Country (fit to bear arms) unto the exercise of Military
discipline. And withal another Law, for the maintenance of Military Officers
and Forte.

Sect. 2. Because fish is the chief staple commodity of this Country, therefore
all due encouragements to be given to such hands as shall set forward the trade
of fishing. And for that end, a Law to be made, that whosoever shall apply
themselves to set forward the trade of fishing (as fishermen, Mariners or
Ship-wrights) shall be allowed man for man, some or other of the laborers of
the Country, to plant and reap for them, in the seasons of the year, at the
public charge of the Commonwealth, for the space of these seven years next
ensuing: And such labourerrs to be appointed and paid by the Treasurer of the
Commonwealth.

Sect. 3. Because no Commonwealth can maintain either their Authority at
home, or their honor and power abroad, without sufficient treasure: A Law
therefore to be made for the erecting and furnishing of the Treasury of the
Commonwealth, which is to be supplied and furnished,

1. By the yearly payment. 1. Of 1d. or an acre of land occupied througout the
country. Lands occupied in common by a town, to be paid out of the treasury or
stock of the same town. 2. Of 1d for every beast, horse, or cow. 3. Of some
proportionable rate upon Merchants goods.
2. By the payment of a barrel of gunpowder or such munition, out of every
ship that brings in foreign commodities. 3. By fines or mulcts put upon
Trespassors.
Sect. 4. A Treasurer to be chosen by the free Bugesses, out of the Assistants,
who shall receive and keep the Treasury, and make disbursments out of it,
according to the direction of the general Court, or of the Governor and
Council, whereof they are to give an account at the general Court. It shall
also pertain to the Office of the Treasurer, diligently to survey and oversee,
all the munitions of the country, canons, culverings, muskets, powder, match,
bullets, etc. and to give account thereof to the Governor and Council.

Sect. 5. A Treasury also, or Magazine, or storehouse to be erected and
furnished in every Town, distinct from the Treasury of the Church, that
provisions of corn and of other necessaries may be laid up at the best hand,
for the provision of such poor, as are not members of the Church, as it is
written Deuteronomy. 14. 28, 29. Thou shall lay it up within thy gates. And the Levite
(because he has no part nor inheritance with thee) and the stranger, and the
fatherless, and the widow which are within thy gates, shall come and shall
eat, and be satisfied, that Jehovah thy God may bless thee, in all the work
of thy hand, which thou do: And out of it such Officers may be maintained
(as Captains or the like) who do any public service for the Town. But chiefly
this treasury will be requisite for the preserving of the livelihood of each
Town within it self: that in case the inheritance of the lands that belong to
any Town, come to be alienated from the townsmen (which may unavoidably fall
out) yet a supply may be made to the livelihood of the Town, by a reasonable
rent charge upon such alienations (laid by the common consent of the
land-owners, and townsmen) to be paid into the Treasury of the Town.

This treasury to be paid. 1. By the yearly payment of some small rate upon
acres of lands and beasts. 2. By fines and amercements put upon trespassers,
condemned in the town Courts. 3. By a rent charge upon alienation of
town-lands.

Sect. 6. A town treasurer to be appointed, for the oversight and ordering of
this treasury, chosen out of the free Burgesses by the free Burgesses of the
same town. Who is to dispose of things under his charge, and according to the
direction of the Judges of the town, and to give an account to the towns Court,
to the Judges and free Burgesses of the town, or to some so elected by them.

CHAP. IV. Of right of Inheritances.
Sect. 1. FOr as much as the right of disposal of the inheritance of all the
lands in the country lies in the general Court; whatsoever lands are given
and assigned by the general Court, to any town or person, shall belong and
remain by right of inheritance, to such towns and their successors, and to
such persons and to their heirs and assigns, as their propriety for ever.

Sect. 2. Whatsoever lands (belonging to any town) shall be given by the town,
or by such Officers therein as they shall appoint, unto any person; the same
shall belong and remain to such person and his heirs and assigns, as his
proper right for ever.

Sect. 3. In dividing of lands to the several persons in each town, regard is
to be had partly to the number of persons in a family (to the more the greater
allotment to be assigned, to the fewer, less) Numb. 26. 53, 54. Unto these
shall the land be divided for an inheritance, according to the number of names.
To many thou shall give the more inheritance, and to few, thou shall give the
less inheritance: to every one shall his inheritance be given, according to
those that were numbered of him. And partly to the number of beasts, by which a
man is fit to occupy the land assigned to him, and to subdue it, Numb. 35. 3.
And the Cities shall they have to dwell in; and the suburbs thereof shall be
for their cattle, and for their goods, and for their beasts. So eminent
respect in this case may be given to men of eminent qualities or descent, in
assigning to them more large and honorable accommodations in regard of their
greater disbarsments to public changes. Deuteronomy. 3. 15. And I gave Gilead unto
Machir. Josh. 15. 13. And unto Caleb the son of Jephunneh, he gave a part
among the children of Judah, according to the Heb. mouth.
commandment of Jehovah to Joshua: the city of Arba the father of Anak, Heb.
this is Hebron.
which (city) is Hebrou. Josh. 19. 49, 50. When they had made an end of
dividing the land for inheritance by their coasts, the children of Irael gave
an inheritance to Joshua the son of Nun among them. According to Heb. mouth.
the word of the Lord, they gave him the City which he asked, even
Timnath-Serah, in mount Ephraim: and he built the city, and dwelt therein.

Sect. 4. For as much as all civil affairs are to be administered and ordered,
so as may best conduce to the upholding and setting forward of the worship of
God in Church Fellowship: It is therefore to be ordered, that wheresoever the
Lands of any man's inheritance may fall, yet no man shall set his dwelling house
above the distance of half a mile (or a mile at furthest) from the meeting
house of the Congregation, where the Church does usually assemble for the
worship of God. Acts 1. 12. Then returned they to Jerusalem from the mount
called Olivet, which is from Jerusalem a Sabbath days journey.

Sect. 5. Inheritances are to descend naturally to the next of his Kin,
according to the law of nature, delivered by God, Numb. 27. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
The daughters of Zelophedad spoke right: Heb. in giving thou shall give them.
Thou shall surely give them a possession of inheritance among their Fathers
brethren, and thou shall cause the inheritance of their fathers to pass unto
them. And thou shall speak unto the children of Israel, saying; If a man dye,
and have no son, then ye shall cause his inheritance to pass unto his
daughter. And if he have no daughter; then ye shall give his inheritance unto
his brethren. And if he have no brethren; then ye shall give his inheritance
unto his fathers brethren. And if his father have no brethren; then ye shall
give his inheritance Heb. to him that is left him of his kin.
unto his Kinsman that is next to him of his family, and he shall possess it:
and it shall be unto the children of Israel for a statute of judgment, as
Jehovah commanded Moses.

Sect. 6. If a man have more sons then one, then a double portion to be
assigned and bequeathed to the eldest son, according to the Law of God. Deuteronomy.
21. 17. But he shall acknowledge the son of the hated for the first born, by
giving him a double portion, of all that is found with him; for he is the
beginning of his strength, the right of the first born is his. Unless his own
demerit does deprive him of the dignity of his birthright. 1 Chr. 5. 1. Now
the sons of Reuben the firstborn of Israel, for he was the firstborn: but
for as much as he defiled his fathers bed, his birthright was given to the
sons of Joseph, the son of Israel: and the geneologie is not to be reckoned
after the birthright.

Sect. 7. The will of a Testator is to be approved or disallowed by the Court
of Governor and Assistants, or by the Court of Judges in each Town. Yet not
to be disallowed, unless it appear either to be counterfeit, or unequal,
either against the Law of God, or against the public weal, or against the
due right of the Legatees. Heb. 9. 17. For a testament is of force after men
are dead, otherwise it is of no strength at all. Gal. 3. 15. Though it be but a
man's testament, yet if it be confirmed, no man disannulleth or adds thereto.

Sect. 8. As God in old time in the Commonwealth of Israel, forbade the
alienation of lands from one Tribe to another. Numb. 36. 7. So shall not the
inheritance of the children of Israel remove from tribe to tribe: So to prevent
the like inconvenience in the alienation of lands from one Town to another, it
were requisite to be ordered.

1. That no free Burgess or free inhabitant of any Town, shall sell the lands
allotted to him in the Town, but to some one or other of the free Burgesses or
free inhabitants of the same Town. Unless the free Burgesses of the Town give
consent to such sale, or refuse to give a due price, answerable to what others
offer without fraud.

2. That if such lands be sold to any other, the sale shall be made with the
reservation of such a rentcharge to be paid to the Town-stock, or Treasury of
the Town, as either the former occupiers of the land were wont to pay, toward
all the public charges thereof, whether in Church or Town: or at least, after
the rate of 2d. the acre, or some such like proportion.

3. That if any free Burgess or free Inhabitant of any Town, or the Heir of
any of their lands, shall remove their dwelling from one Town to another: none
of them shall carry away the whole benefit of the lands, which they possessed
in the Town whence they removed; but if they still keep the right of
inheritance of the land in their own hands (and not sell it as before) then
they shall reserve a like proportion of rentcharge out of their land, to be
paid to the public Treasury of the Town, as has been wont to be paid out of
it, to the public charges of the Town and Church: or at least after the rate
of 2d. an acre, as before.

4. That if the inheritance of a free Burgess or free inhabitant of any Town
fall to his daughters (as it will do, for want of heirs males) that then, if
such daughters do not marry to some of the inhabitants of the same Town, where
their inheritance lies, nor sell their inheritance to some of the same Town as
before; that then they reserve a like proportion of rentcharge out of their
lands, to be paid to the public treasury of the Town, as has been wont to be
paid out of them to the public charges of the Town and Church; or at least
after the rate of 2d. an acre as before. Provided always, that nothing be paid
to the maintenance of the Church, out of the treasury of the Town, but by the
free consent of the free Bugesses of the town.

CHAP. V. Of Commerce.
Sect. 1. IT shall be lawful for the Governor, with one or more of the
Council to appoint a reasonable rate of prices of all such commodities, as are
(out of the Ships) to be bought and sold in this Country.

Sect. 2. In trucking and trading with the Indians; no man shall give them, for
any commodity, of their silver or gold, or any weapons of war, neither
gunnes, gunpowder, nor swords, nor any other munition, which might come to be
used against our selves.

Sect. 3. To the intent that all oppression in bying and selling may be
avoided: It shall be lawful for the Judges in every town, with the consent of
the free Burgesses, to appoint certain select men, to set a reasonable rate
upon all commodities, and proportionably to limit the wages of workmen and
laborers, and the rates agreed upon by them, and ratified by the Judges to
bind all the inhabitants of the town. The like course to be taken by the
Governor and Assistants, for the rating of prices throughout the country; and
all to be confirmed (if need be) by the general Court.

Sect. 4. Just weights and balances to be kept between buyers and sellers. And
for default thereof, the profit so wickedly and corruptly gotten and gained,
with as much more added thereunto, it to be forfeited to the public treasury
of the Commonwealth; Lev. 19. 36. Heb. Balances of righteousness, and stones
of righteousness.
Just balances, just Or weight.
weights, a just ephah, and a just bin shall ye have. Prove. 11. 1. Balances of
deceit is abomination to Jehovah: but a perfect Heb. a weight and balances of
judgment.
stone is his delight. Prove. 15. 11. A Heb. Diverse weights and diverse measures.
just weight and balance are Jehovahs: all the stones of the bag are his
work. Prove. 20. 10. A stone and a stone, an epha and an epha, both of them are
like abomination to Jehovah.

Sect. 5. If a man borrow ought of his neighbor upon a pledge, the lender shall
not make choice of what pledge he will have, nor take such a pledge as is of
daily necessary use to the debtor; or if he do take it, he shall restore it
again the same day. Deuteronomy. 24. 6. No man shall take the nether or upper millstone
to pledge, for he takes the soul to pledge.
Deuteronomy. 24. 10, 11, 12, 13. When thou do lend thy Heb. Friend or companion.
brother any thing, thou shall not go into his house to fetch his pledge. Thou
shall stand abroad: and the man to whom thou do lend, shall bring out the
pledge abroad unto thee. And if the man be poor, thou shall not Heb. lie down.
sleep with his pledge. In Heb. in returning, thou shall cause to return to him.
any case thou shall deliver him the pledge again when the Sun goes down, that
he may Heb. lie down.
sleep in his own raiment and bless thee; and it shall be righteousness unto
thee before Jehovah thy God. Exodus 22. 26, 27. If thou take thy neighbors
raiment to pledge, thou shall deliver it unto him again, by that the sun goes
down. For it is his or her covering only, it is his raiment for his skin;
wherein shall he sleep? and it shall come to pass, when he cries unto me,
that I will hear, for I am gracious.

Sect. 6. No increase to be taken of a poor brother or neighbor for any thing
lent unto him. Exodus 22. 25. If thou lend money to any of my people, that is
poor by thee, thou shall not be to him as an usurer: thou shall not lay upon
him usury. Lev. 25. 35, 36, 37. And if thy brother be waxen poor, and his hand
failleth with thee; then thou shall strengthen him, the stranger and the
sojourner, that he may live with thee. Take thou no usury of him, or increase,
but fear thy God: that thy brother may live with thee. Thou shall not give him
thy money upon usury, nor give him thy victuals for increase. Deuteronomy. 23. 19.
Thou shall not lend upon usury to thy brother, usury of money, usury of
victuals; usury of any thing that is lent upon usury.

Sect. 7. If borrowed goods be lost or hurt in the owners absence; the borrower
is to make them good: But in the owners presence, wherein he sees his goods no
otherwise used then with his consent; the borrower shall not make them good. If
they were hired, the hire is to be paid and no more. If a man borrow ought of
his neighbor, and it be hurt or dye, the owner thereof not being with it, he
shall surely make it good. But if the owner thereof be with it, he shall not
make it good: if it be a hired thing, it goes for the hire, Exodus 24. 14 15.

CHAP. VI. Of Trespasses.
Sect. 1. IF a man's swine or other beasts, or a fire kindled by him break out
into another man's field, or corn; he shall make full restitution of the damage
done by them, and of the loss of time which others have had, by carrying such
swine or beasts to the owner, or to the fould: But if a man put his swine or
beast into another man's field, restitution is to be made of the best of his
own, though it were much better then that which was destroyed, or hurt. Exodus
22. 5, 6. If a man shall cause a field or vineyard to be eaten, and shall put
in his beast, and shall feed in another man's field: of the best of his own
vineyard shall he make restitution. If fire break out and catch in thorns, so
that the corn rick, or the standing, or the field be consumed: he that kindled
the fire, shall Heb. in making restitution, shall make restitution.
surely make restitution.

Sect. 2. If a man kill another man's beast, or dig and open a pit, and leave it
uncovered, and a beast fall into it; he that killed the beast, and the owner of
that pit, shall make restitution. Lev 24. 18. He that Heb. smites the life of
a beast.
kills a beast, shall make it good, Heb. life for life, or soul for soul.
beast for beast Exodus 21. 33, 34. And if a man shall open a pit, or if a man
shall dig a pit and not cover it: and an ox or an ass fall therein: The owner
of the pit shall make it good, he shall cause money to return to the owners
thereof, and the dead shall be his.

Sect. 3. If one man's beast kill the beast of another, the owner of the beast
shall make restitution. Exodus 21. 35, 36. And if one man's ox hurt Heb. the ox
of his neighbor.
another, that he dye; then they shall sell the live ox, and divide the money
of it, and the dead ox also shall they divide. Or if it be known that the ox
has used to push in time past, and his owner has not kept him in, he shall
surely pay ox for ox, and the dead shall be his own.

Sect. 4. If a man's ox or other beast, gore or bite, and kill a man or woman
(whether child or riper age) the beast shall be killed, and no benefit of the
dead beast reserved to the owner. But if the ox or beast were wont to push or
bite in time past, and the owner has been told of it, and has not kept him
in, then both the ox or beast shall be forfeited and killed, and the owner
also put to death, or else fined to pay, what the Judges and persons damnified
shall lay upon him. Exodus 21. 28, 29, 30, 31, 32. If an ox gore a man or
woman, that they dye, then the ox shall be Heb. in stoning shall be stoned.
surely stoned, and his flesh shall not be eaten, but the owner of the ox Heb.
is innocent, or guiltless.
shall be quit. But if the ox were wont to push in times past, and it has
been testified to his owner, and he has not kept him in, but that he has
killed a man or a woman: the ox shall be stoned, and his owner also shall be
put to death. If there be laid on him Heb. a price of redemption.
a sum of money, then he shall give for the ransom of his life, According
to all that is.
whatsoever is laid upon him. Whether he have gored a son, or gored a daughter,
according to this judgment shall it be done unto him. If the ox shall push a
manservant, or a maidservant, he shall give unto the master thirty Silver,
thirty sheckles.
sheckles, and the ox shall be stoned.

Sect. 5. If a man deliver goods to his neighbor to keep, and they be said to
be lost, or stolen from him, the keeper of the goods shall be put to his oath
touching his own innocence; which if he take, and no evidence appear to the
contrary, he shall be quit. But if he be found false or unfaithful, he shall
pay double unto his neighbor. Exodus 22. 7, 8, 9. If a man shall deliver unto
his neighbor money, or Heb. Vessels.
stuff to keep, and it be stolen out of the man's house: if the thief be
found, let him pay double: if the thief be not found, then the master of the
house shall be brought Or unto God.
unto the judges: if he have not put his hand unto his neighbors goods. For
all manner of trespass for ox, for ass, for sheep, for raiment, for any lost
thing, which another says that it is his, the cause of both parties shall come
before the Judges: whom the Judges shall condemn, he shall pay double unto his
neighbor.

But if a man take hire for goods committed to him, and they be stolen, the
keeper shall make restitution. Exodus 22. 12. And if it be stolen from him, he
shall make restitution unto the owner thereof. But if the beast so kept for
hire dye, or be hurt, or be driven away, no man seeing it; an oath shall be
taken of the keeper, that it was without his default, and it shall be accepted.
But if the Beast be torn in pieces, a piece brought for witness excuses the
keeper. Exodus 22. 10, 11. If a man deliver unto his neighbor an ass, or an
ox, or a sheep, or any beast to keep, and it dye, or be hurt or driven away,
no man seeing it. The oath of Jehovah shall be betwixt them both, if he have
not put his hand unto his neighbors goods: and the owner thereof shall accept
it, and he shall not make restitution.

CHAP. VII. Of crimes. And first of such as deserve capital punishment, or
cutting off from a man's people, whether by death or banishment.
Sect. 1. BLasphemy (which is a cursing of God, or wicked denial of God by
Atheism, or the like) to be punished with death. Lev. 24. 15, 16. Whosoever
curses his God, shall bear his sin. And he that Heb. boreth through, or
curses.
blasphemeth the name Jehovah, Heb. in dying shall dye.
shall be surely put to death, all the congregation in stoning shall stone him:
as well the stranger as he that is born in the land, when he Boreth through, or
curses.
blasphemeth the name, shall be put to death.

. 2. Idolatry to be punished with death. Deuteronomy. 13. from 1. to 11. If there
arise among you a Prophet, or a dreamer of dreams, and gives thee a sign, or
a wonder.

2 And the sign or the wonder come to pass, whereof he spoke unto thee,
saying: Let us go after other Gods, which thou have not known, and let us
serve them.

3 Thou shall not hearken unto the words of that Prophet, or that dreamer of
dreams: for Jehovah your God proves you, to know whether you love Jehovah your
God, with all your heart, and with all your soul.

4 Ye shall walk after Jehovah your God, and fear him: and keep his
commandments, and obey his voice, and you shall serve him, and cleave unto him.

5 And that Prophet, or that dreamer of dreams, even he shall be put to death,
because he has spoken rebellion against Jehovah your God, which brought you
out of the land of Egypt, and redeemed you out of the house Heb. Servants.
of bondage, to thrust thee out of the way which Jehovah thy God commanded thee
to walk in it: so shall thou put evil away from the midst of thee.

6. If thy brother the son of thy mother, or thy son, or thy daughter, or the
wife of thy bosom, or thy friend, which is as thine own soul, entice thee
secretly, saying: Let us go and serve other gods, which thou have not known,
thou, nor thy fathers.

7. Of the gods of the people, which are round about you, nigh unto thee, or
far off from thee; from the end of the earth, to the end of the earth.

8. Thou shall not consent unto him, nor hearken unto him; neither shall thine
eye pity him, neither shall thou Or use clemency.
spare, neither shall thou conceal him.

9. But Heb. in killing, thou shall kill him.
thou shall surely kill him, thine hand shall be first upon him, to put him to
death; and afterward the hand of all the people.

10. And thou shall stone him with stones, that he dye; because he has sought
to thrust thee away from Jehovah thy God, which brought thee out out of the
land of Egypt, from the house of Heb. Servants.
bondage.

11. And all Israel, shall hear, and fear: and shall do no more any such
wickedness, as this is, Heb. in the mids of thee.
among you.

Sect. 3. Witchcraft (which is fellowship by covenant with a familiar spirit)
to be punished with death. Exodus 22. 18. Thou shall not suffer a witch to live.

Deuteronomy. 18. 10. There shall not be found among you, one who makes his son or
his daughter to pass through the fire; that devineth devinations, an observer
of times, or an inchanter, or a witch.

11. Or Heb. one that joins himself in fellowship, to wit, with the Devil.
a charmer, or a consulter with familiar spirits, or a wizard, or a Heb. One
that seeks to the dead.
necromancer.

12. For all that do these things are an abomination to Jehovah: and because of
these abominations Jehovah thy God does drive them out from before thee.

Lev. 20. 27. A man also or a woman, that has a familiar spirit, or that is a
Or foreteller of things to come.
wizard, shall surely be put to death; they shall stone them with stones, their
blood shall be upon them.

Sect. 4. Consulters with witches are not to be tolerated, but either to be
cut of by death, or by banishment. Lev. 20. 6. And the soul that Heb. sets
his face.
turns after familiar spirits and after wizards, to go a whoring after them:
I will even set my face against that very soul, and I will cut him off from
among my people.

Sect. 5. Heresy (which is the maintenance of some wicked error, overthrowing
the foundation of our christian Religion, with obstinacy) if it be joined with
endeavor to seduce others thereunto; to be punished with death. Because such
an heritick (no less then an Idolater) seeks to thrust the souls of men from
the Lord thy God. Deuteronomy. 13. 10. 13. And thou shall stone him with stones, that
he dye; because he has sought to thrust thee away from Jehovah thy God, which
brought thee out of the land of Egypt, from the house Heb. Servants.
of bondage.

Sect. 6. To worship God in a molten or graven Image, to be punished with
death. Exodus 32. 27, 28. And he said unto them, thus says Jehovah the God of
Israel, put every man his sword by his side, and go in and out from gate to
gate throughout the Camp, and slay every man his brother, and every man his
companion, and every man his neighbor. And the children of Levy did, according
to the word of Moses: and there fell of the people that day, about three
thousand men.

Sect. 7. Such members of the Church as do wilfully reject (to wit, after
admonition and conviction) the Churches established, their admonition and
censures, shall be cut off by banishment.

Sect. 8. Whosoever shall revile the Religion and worship of God, and the
Government of the Church, as it is now established, to be cut of by banishment.

Sect. 9. Wilful perjury whether before the judgment seat, or in private
conference, to be punished with banishment. Just is, that such a man's name
should be cut off from his people, who profaneth so grossly the name of God
before his people.

These three last Sections have no Scripture annexed in my copy. But I suppose
the Author groundeth his judgment for banishment, upon Numb. 15. 30, 31. The
soul that does ought with a high hand, whether he be borne in the Land or a
stranger, he reproacheth Jehovah: and that very soul shall be cut of from the
midst of his people Because he has despised the words of Jehovah, and has
broken his commandment; in cutting off that very soul shall be cut off, his
iniquity upon him.

Sect. 10. Profanation of the Lords day, in a careless or scornful neglect or
contempt thereof, to be punished with death. Numb. 15 from 30. to 36. But the
soul that does ought with a high hand, whether he be born in the land or a
stranger, he reproacheth Jehovah: and that very soul shall be cut off from
Heb. The midst of.
among his people. Because he has despised the word of Jehovah, and has
broken his commandment: that very soul Heb. In cutting off, shall be cut off.
shall be utterly cut off, his iniquity [shall be] upon him. And while the
children of Israel were in the wilderness; they found a man gathering sticks,
upon the Sabbath day. And they that found him gathering sticks, caused him to
be brought unto Moses and unto Aaron, and unto all the Congregation. And they
put him in ward, because it was not declared what should be done unto him. And
Jehovah said unto Moses, the man shall Heb. In dying shall dye.
surely be put to death; all the Congregation shall stone him with stones,
without the camp. And all the Congregation brought him without the camp, and
stoned him with stones, that he dyed; as Jehovah commanded Moses.

Sect. 11. To plot and practice the betraying of the Country, or any
principal Fort in it, into the hand of any foreign State, Spanish, French,
Dutch, or the like, contrary to the Allegiance we profess and owe to our dread
Sovereign Lord King Charles, his Heyrs and Successors (whilst he is pleased to
protect us, as his loyal Subjects) shall be punished with death. This has no
Scripture annexed in my Copy, but I suppose is grounded upon the reason of the
fame punishment, in the sixteenth Section, by the rule of proportion. For as
the destroying of the life of a man is punished with death, so the betraying of
a State is the destruction thereof, and culpable of the like punishment.

Unreverend and dshonourable carriage to Magistrates, to be punished with
banishment for a time, till they acknowledge their fault, and profess
reformation. Numb. 12. 11. 14, 15. And Aaron said to Moses: Alas my Lord, iay
not the sin upon us, wherein we have done foolishly, and wherein we have
sinned. And the Lord said to Moses, if her father Heb. In spitting had spit.
had spit in her face, should she not be ashamed seven days? let her be shut
out of the camp seven days, and after Heb. let her be added, or gathered.
let her be received in again. And Miriam was shut out from the Camp seven
days, and the people journeyed not till Miriam Heb. added, or gathered.
was brought in again.

Quere, whether this was a civil Censure of banishment, or Church-censure of
excommunication: The like quere might be made of the censure upon the seventh,
eighth, and ninth Sections.

Sect. 13. Cursing of the Magistrates in highest ranks amongst us (to wit, of
the Governor and Council) to be punished with death. Exo. 22. 28 Thou shall
not curse Or Judges.
the Gods: nor shall thou curse Or him that is exalted by the people.
the ruler of thy people. 2 Samuel 19. 21. Shall not Shemei be put to death for
this, because he cursed Jehovah's anointed? 1 King. 2. 8, 9. 46. And behold,
thou have with thee Shimei the son of Gera, the son of Jemini of Bahurim:
who cursed me with a bitter curse, in the day when I went to Mahanaim: but he
came down to meet me at Jordan, and I swear to him by Jehovah, saying, I will
not put thee to death by the sword. But now do not thou hold him guiltless,
for thou art a wise man: and thou know what thou ought to do to him, but
bring thou down his hoarie head to the grave with blood. And the King
commanded Benajah the son of Jehojadah, which went out, and fell upon him
that he dyed, etc.

14. Rebellion, Sedition, insurrection (by taking up arms against the present
Government, established in the Country) to be punished with death. Numb. 16. 1,
2, 3. 31, 32, 33. Now Korah the son of Izhar, the son of Kohath, the son of
Levi: and Dathan and Abiram sons of Eliah, and Or the son of Peleth, sons
of Reuben, took [men.] And they rose up before Moses, and Heb. Men.
certain of the children of Israel, two hundred and fifty: Princes of the
assembly, famous in the congregation, men Heb. Name.
of renown. And they gathered themselves together against Moses and against
Aaron, and said to them, Heb. It is too much for you.
ye take too much upon you: for all the assembly even all of them are holy, and
Jehovah in the mids of them: Wherefore then lift up your selves above the
congregation of Jehovah? And it came to pass as Heb. to wit, Moses.
he had made an end of speaking all these words: that the earth clave asunder
that was under them. And the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up, and
their houses: and every man which appertained to Korah, and all their goods.
And they and all that appertained to them, went down alive into the grave: and
the earth closed upon them, and they perished from among the congregation.

Sect. 15. Rebellious children (whether they continue in riot and drunkenness,
after due correction from their Parents, or whether they curse, or smite their
Parents) are to be put to death. Deuteronomy. 21. 18, 19, 20, 21. If a man have a
stubborn and rebellious son, which will not Heb. Hear.
obey the voice of his father, and the voice of his mother: and they chasten
him, and he will not hearken to them. Then shall his father and mother lay hold
on him, and bring him unto the elders of his City, and to the gate of his
place. And they shall say unto the elders of his City, this our son is
stubborn and rebellious, he will not hearken to our voice: he is a glutton and
a drunkard. And all the men of his City shall stone him with stones, that he
dye: so shall thou put away evil from among you, and all Israel shall hear
and fear. Lev. 20. 9. For every one who curses his father, or his mother Heb.
in dying shall dye.
shall surely be put to death: he has cursed his father or his mother, his
blood [shall be] upon him. Exo. 21. 17. 15. And he that curses his father, or
his mother, Heb. in dying shall dye.
shall surely be put to death. And he that smites his father, or his mother,
Heb. in dying shall dye.
shall surely be put to death.

Sect. 16. Murder (which is a wilful manslaughter, not in a man's necessary
and just defense, nor casually committed, but out of hatred or cruelty) to be
punished with death. Exodus 21. 12, 13, 14. He that smites a man, so that he
dye, shall Heb. In dying shall dye.
surely be put to death.

But if a man lie not in wait, and God deliver him into his hand, then will I
appoint thee a place, whether he shall fly. But if a man come presumptuosly
upon his neighbor, to slay him with guile: thou shall take him from mine
altar, that he may dye. Numb. 35. from v 16. to 24. And if he smite him with an
instrument of Iron (so that he dye) he is a murderer: the murderer Heb. In
dying shall dye.
shall surely be put to death. And if he smite Heb. with a stone in the hand.
him with throwing a stone (wherewith he may dye) and he dye, he is a murderer:
the murderer Heb. In dying shall dye.
shall surely be put to death. Or if he smight him with a hand weapon of wood,
(wherewith he may dye) and he dye, he is a murderer: the murderer Heb. In dying
shall dye.
shall surely be put to death: The revenger of blood, he shall slay the
murderer; when he meets him, he shall slay him. And he if he thrust him of
hatred; or hurl at him, by laying of wait, that he dye. Or in emnity smite
him with his hand, that he dye, he that smote him Heb. In dying shall dye.
shall surely be put to death, he is a murderer: the revenger of blood, shall
slay the murderer, when he meets him. But if he thrust him suddenly, without
emnity; or have cost upon him any thing, without laying in wait. Or with any
stone wherewith a man may dye (not seeing) and cast it upon that he dye; not
hating him, nor seeking his harm. Then the Congregation shall judge, between
the slayer, and the revenger of blood: according to these judgments. And the
Congregation shall deliver the slayer, out of the hand of the revenger of
blood, etc. Genesis 9. 6. He that sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be
shed: for in the Image of God, he made man.

Sect. 17. Adultery (which is the defiling of the marriage bed) to be punished
with death. Lev. 20. 9. And the man that commits adultery with another man's
wife, which commits adultery with his neighbors wife: the adulterer and the
adulteress, Heb. In dying shall dye.
shall surely be put to death. Deuteronomy. 22. 22. If aman be found lying with a
woman married to a husband, then they shall both of them dye, the man that lay
with the woman, and the woman: so shall thou put away evil from Israel.

Defiling of a woman espoused, is a kind of adultery, and punishable by death
of both parties; but if the woman be forced, then by the death of the man
only. Deuteronomy. 22. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. If a damsel be a virgin, betrothed to an
husband: and a man find her in the City, and lie with her. Then ye shall
bring them out unto the gate of that City, and ye shall stone them with
stones, that they dye: the damsel, because she cried not in the City, and the
man, because he has humbled his neighbors wife: so thou shall put away evil
from among you. But if a man find a betrothed maid in the field, and the man
Or detain her by force.
force her, and lie with her: then the man only that lay with her, shall dye.
But unto the damsel thou shall do nothing, there is in the damsel no sin
worthy of death: because, as when a man rises up against his neighbor Heb.
And kills him with his soul or life.
and slays him; so is this matter. For he found her in the field: the
betrothed damsel cried, and there was none to save her.

Sect. 18. Incest (which is the defiling of any that are near of kin, within
the degrees prohibited in Leviticus) to be punished with death. Lev. 20. 11,
12. 14. 17. 19, 20, 21. And the man that lies with his fathers wife, has
uncovered his fathers nakedness: both of them Heb. In dying shall dye.
shall be surely put to death, their blood [shall be] upon them. And that man
which lies with his daughter in law, both of them Heb. In dying they shall dye.
shall surely be put to death: they have wrought confusion, their blood [shall
be] upon them. And the man take a wife and her mother, [it is] wickedness:
they shall burn both him and them with fire, that there be no wickedness
among you. And if a man shall take his sister, his fathers daughter, or his
mothers daughter, and see her nakedness, and she see his nakedness, it is a
Or a reproach.
wicked thing, and they shall be cut off in the sight Of the children of their
people.
of their people; he has uncovered his sisters nakedness, he shall bear his
iniquity. And thou shall not uncover the nakedness of thy mothers sister, nor
of thy fathers sister: for he Heb. makes naked.
uncovereth his near kin, they shall bear their iniquity. And if a man lie
with his uncles wife, he has uncovered his uncles nakedness: they shall bear
their sin, they shall dye childlesse. And if a man shall take his brothers
wife, it is an unclean thing; he has uncovered his brothers nakedness, they
shall be childlesse.

Sect. 19. Unnatural filthiness to be punished with death; whether Sodomie
(which is carnal fellowship of man with man, or woman with woman): or buggery,
which is carnal fellowship of man or woman with beast or fowl. Lev. 20. 13. 15,
16. If a man also lie with mankind, Heb. with the copulations of a woman.
as he lies with a woman: both of them have committed abomination, they Heb.
In dying they shall dye.
shall surely be put to death, their blood [shall be] upon them. And if a man
Heb. In dying they shall dye.
lie with a beast, Heb. give his lying with a beast.
he Heb. to have beastly copulation therewith.
shall surely be put to death; and ye shall slay the beast. And if a woman
approach unto any beast, Heb. In dying they shall dye.
and lie down thereunto; thou shall kill the woman and the beast: they shall
surely be put to death, their blood [shall be] upon them.

Sect. 20. Pollution of a woman known to be in her flowers, to be punished with
death. Lev. 20. 18. And if a man lie with a woman having her sickness, and
uncover her nakedness, he has Heb. made naked.
discovered her fountain, and she has discovered the fountain of her blood:
and both of them shall be cut off from among their people.

Sect. 21. Whoredom with a maid in her fathers house, kept secret, till after
her marriage with another; to be punished with death. Deuteronomy. 22. 20, 21. But if
this thing be Heb. Truth.
true; the tokens of virginity are not found for the virgin. Then they shall
shall bring out the damsel, to the door of her fathers house, and the men of
her City shall stone her with stones, that she dye, because she has wrought
folly in Israel, to play the whore in her fathers house: so shall thou put away
evil from among you.

Sect. 22. Man-stealing, to be punished with death. Exodus 21. 16. And he that
steals a man, and sells him, or if he be found in his hand, Heb. in dying
shall dye.
shall surely be put to death. Deuteronomy. 24. 7. If a man be found stealing Heb. A
soul.
any of his brethren of the children of Israel, and make gain of him, or sell
him: then that very thief shall dye, and thou shall put evil away from among
you.

Sect. 23. False witness against life, to be punishned with death. Deuteronomy. 19.
16. 21. If a Heb. A witness of wrong.
false witness rise up against a man; Or spare.
to testify against that which is wrong. And thine eye shall not Heb. soul
for soul.
pity: life for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for
foot.

CHAP. VIII. Of other crimes less heinous, such as are to be punished with
some corporal punishment or Fine.
Sect. 1. FOrcing of a maid or a rape, is not punished by Gods law by death.
But 1. with a fine or penalty to the father of the maid. 2. With marriage of
the maid defiled; to wit, if she and her father consent. 3. With corporal
punishment of stripes. By proportion of the law, Deuteronomy. 22. 17, 18.
For this wrong is a real slander: and worse to make an whore, then to say
one is a whore. Deuteronomy. 22 28, 29. If a man find a damsel a maid, which is not
betrothed, and lay hold of her, and lie with her: and they be found. Then the
man that lay with her shall give unto the damsels father, fifty [shekels] of
silver: and she shall be his wife, because he has humbled her, he may not put
her away all his days. Deuteronomy. 22. 17, 18. And lo he has given occasion of
speech [aagainst her] saying, I found not Heb. the tokens of thy daughters
virginity.
thy daughter a maid, yet these are the tokens of my daughters virginity: and
they shall spread the cloth, before the Elders of the City. And the Elders of
that City shall take that man: and shall chastise him.

Sect. 2. Fornication to be punished. 1. With marriage of the maid, or giving
her a sufficient dowry. Exodus 22. 16. And if a man entice a maid that is not
betrothed, and lie with her: he Heb. Endowing, he shall endow her.
shall surely endow her to be his wife. If her father In refusing does refuse.
utterly refuse, to give her to him: he shall Heb. weigh.
pay money, according to the dowry of virgins. 2. It is to be punished with
stripes (though fewer) from the equity of the former case.

Sect. 3. Rash and profane swearing and cursing to be punished. 1. With loss
of honor or office if he be a Magistrate or Officer. Meet it is that their
name should be dishonored, who do dishonor Gods name. 2. With loss of
freedom. 3. With disability to give testimony. 4. With corporal punishment;
either by stripes, or by branding them with an hot iron, or boring through the
tongue, as he has bored and pierced Gods name. This seems to be grounded upon
the equity of the Law of blasphemy, in the 7. Chapter and 1. Section, by way
of proportion. However my copy has no Scriptures annexed.

Sect. 4. Drunkenesse (or transforming Gods image into a beast) is to to be
punished with the punishment of beasts. Prove. 26. 3. A whip for the horse, a
bridle for the ass: and a rod for the baek of fools.

. 5. Mayming or wounding of a freeman (whether free Burgess or free
inhabitant) to be punished with a fine, and with loss of member for member, or
some valuable recompense, and to pay for his cure and for the loss of his
time. Exodus 21. 18, 19. 22, 23, 24, 25. And if men strive together, and Heb. a
man smite his neighbor.
one smite another, with a stone, or with his fist: and he dye not, Heb.
falls upon his bed
but keeps his bed. If he rise again and walk abroad, upon his staff, then
shall he that smote him be quit: only he shall Heb. Give for his rest ^^
cessation.
pay for the loss of his time, and Heb. In healing shall cause him t^ be
healed.
shall cause him to be thoroughly healed. And if men strive, and hurt a woman
with child, so that her fruit depart from her, and yet no Or death.
mischief follow: he Heb. in punishing, he shall be punished.
shall be surely punished, according as the woman's husband will lay upon him,
and he shall pay as the Judges [shall determine.] But if any Or death b^
mischief follow, then thou shall give life for life, eye for eye, tooth for
tooth: hand for hand, foot for foot. Burning for burning, wound for wound:
stripe for stripe. Lev. 24. 19. 20. And if a man cause a blemish, in his
neighbor: as he has done, so shall be done to him. Breach for breach, eye for
eye, tooth for tooth: as he has caused a blemish in a man, so shall it be done
to him again.

But if it be the mayming or wounding of a servant, the servant to go forth
free from such a service. Exo. 21. 20, 21. 26, 27. And if a man smite his
servant or his maid with a rod, and he lie under his hand: Heb. in avenging
they shall be avenged.
he shall surely be punished. Notwithstanding if he continue a day or two
days: he shall not be punished Or avenged.
for he is his money. And if a man smite the eye of his servant, or the eye of
bis maid, that it perish: Heb. shall dismiss him, because of his eye.
he shall let him go free for his eye sake

And if he smite out his man-servants tooth, or his maidservants tooth, he
Heb. shall dismiss him, because of his tooth.
shall let him go free for his tooths sake.

Sect. 6. If a man steal a beast, and it be found in his hand, he shall make
restitution two for one. If it be killed and sold, restitution is to be made,
of five oxen for one, and of four sheep for one. Exodus 22. 1. 4. If a man
steal an ox or a sheep, and kill it, or sell it: he shall restore five oxen
for an ox, and four sheep for a sheep. If the theft Heb. in finding be found.
be certainly found in his hand alive, whether ox, or ass, or sheep, he shall
restore double.

If the thief be not able to make restitution, then he is to be sold by the
Magistrate for a servant, till by his labor he may make due restitution. Exodus
22. 3. If the sun be risen upon him, there shall be blood shed for him: Heb.
in restoring he should restore.
he should make full restitution, if he have nothing, then shall he be sold for
his theft.

Sect. 7. If a Thief be found breaking up a house by night, and be slain, his
smiter is guiltless. Exodus 22. 2. If a thief be found breaking up, and be
smitten that he dye: No blood [shall be shed] for him.

But in the day time he is to make full restitution, or if he be not able, then
to be sold, as before.

Sect. 8. Slanders are to be punished. 1. By as public acknowledgment, as the
slander was public. 2. By a mulct or fine of money, where the slander
brings damage. 3. By stripes, if the slander be gross and odious, and
against such persons whom a man ought to honor and cherish, whether they be
his superiors, or in some degree of equality with himself, as his wife. Deuteronomy.
22. 17, 18, 19. And lo he has given occasion of speech [against her] saying,
I found not Heb. the tokens of thy daughters virginity.
thy daughter a maid, yet these are the tokens of my daughters virginity: and
they shall spread the cloth before the elders of the City. And the elders of
the City shall take that man: and shall chastise him. And they may amerce him
in an hundred [sheckels] of silver, and shall give to the father of the
damsel, because he has brought an evil name upon a virgin of Israel: and
she shall be his wife, he may not put her her away all his days.

CHAP. IX. Of the trial of Causes, whether civil or criminal, and the
execution of sentence.
SECT. 1. IN the trial of all causes, no judgment shall pass, but either upon
confession of the party, or upon the testimony of two witnesses. Deuteronomy. 19. 4.
One witness shall not rise up against a man, for any iniquity, or for any sin,
in any sin that he sins: at the mouth of two witnesses, or at the mouth of
three witnesses, shall the matter be established. Deuteronomy. 17. 6. At the mouth of
two witnesses, or three witnesses, shall he that is worthy of death be put to
death: he shall not dye at the mouth of one witness.

Sect. 2. Trial by Jurors shall not be denied, where either the Delinquent
requires it, in causes criminal; or the Plaintiff or Defendant in causes
civil. Partly to preserve the liberty of the people, and partly to prevent
suspicion of partiality of any Magistrate in the Court.

Sect. 3. The Jurors are not to be chosen by any Magistrates, or Officers, but
by the free Burgesses of each Town. Especially out of such Town, as can give
best light to the causes depending in Court, and who are least obnoxious to
suspicion of partiality: And the Jurors so chosen, to be nominated to the
Court, and to attend the service of the Court.

Sect. 4. The sentence of Judgment, upon criminal causes and persons, shall be
executed in the presence of the Magistrates, or some of them at the least.
Deuteronomy. 25. 2. And it shall be, if the wicked man be worthy to be beaten; that
the Judge shall cause him to lie down, and to be beaten before his face,
according to his fault, by a cetain number.

Sect. 5. Stripes are not to be inflicted, but where the crime of the offender
is accompanied with childish or brutish folly, or with rude filthiness, or
with stubborn insolency, or with beastly cruelty, or with idle vagrancy. But
when stripes are due, not above forty are to be inflicted. Deuteronomy. 25. 3. Forty
stripes he may give him, and not exceed: lest [if] he should exceed and beat
him above these with Heb. a great striking.
many stripes, then thy brother should seem vile unto thee.

Sect. 6. No free man (whether free Burgess, or free inhabitant) to be
imprisoned, but either upon conviction, or at least probable suspicion of some
crime formerly mentioned, and the cause of his imprisonment to be declared, and
tried at the next Court following at furthest. 2 Samuel 23. 3. He that rules
over men [must be] just, ruling in the fear of God. Deuteronomy. 25. 43. 46. Thou
shall not rule over him with rigor: but shall fear thy God. But over your
brethren the children of Israel, one over his brother, ye shall not rule with
rigor. According to the manner of the Egyptians, Exodus 1. 13, 14. who made
the children of Israel to serve with rigor. And they made their lives bitter
unto them with hard bondage, etc.

CHAP. X. Of causes criminal between our people and foreign Nations.
Sect. 1. IN case any of our people should do wrong to men of another Nation,
upon complaint made to the Governor, or some other of the Council or
Assistants, the fact is diligently to be inquired into; and being found to be
true, full restitution is to be made out of the goods of the offender (as the
case shall require) and the offender himself to be severely punished,
according to the quality of the crime. Mat. 7. 12. Therefore all things
whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them; for
this is the law and the Prophets.

Sect. 2. In case the people of another Nation have done any wrong to any of
ours, right is first to be demanded of the Governor of that people, and
justice upon the Malefactor, which if it be granted and performed, then no
breach of peace to follow. Deuteronomy. 20. 10, 12. When thou come nigh unto a City,
to fight against it; then proclaim peace unto it. And it shall be, if it make
thee an answer of peace, and open unto thee: then it shall be that all the
people that are found therein, should be tributaries unto thee, and they shall
serve thee. 2 Samuel 20. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. Then she spoke, saying: Heb. In
speaking it is wont to be said from the beginning, saying, inquiring they shall
inquire of Abel, and so they perfectly concluded.
they were wont to speak in old time, saying, they shall surely ask counsel
at Abel, and so they ended [the matter.]

Sect. 3. If right of justice be denied, and it will not stand with the honor
of God, and safety of our Nation that the wrong be passed over, then war is
to be denounced and undertaken. Deuteronomy. 22. 12, 13. But if it will make no peace
with thee, but will make war with thee: then besiege thou it straightly.

And the Lord thy God will deliver it into thine hands: and thou shall smite
every male thereof with the Heb. the mouth of the sword.
edge of the sword.

Sect. 4. Some Minister is to be set forth to go along with the Army for their
instruction and encouragement. Deuteronomy. 20. 1, 2, 3, 4. And it shall be, when ye
are come nigh unto the battle; then the Priest shall approach and speak unto
the people.

And he shall say to them, Hear o Israel, ye are approaching this day unto
battle against your enemies: let not the heart of any of you be tender, fear
not, nor be solitous, Or hasty.
neither be ye terrified Heb. from before them.
because of them.

For Jehovah your your God, he goes with you: to fight Or on your side.
for you, with your enemies, to save you.

Sect. 5. Men betrothed and not married, or newly married; and such as have
newly built or planted, and not reaped the fruit of their labors: and such as
are faint-hearted, are not to be pressed or forced against their wills to go
forth to war. Deuteronomy. 20. 5, 6, 7, 8. And the Officers shall speak to to the
people, saying: what man [is there] that has built a new house, and Or
imitated it.
has not dedicated it? let him go, and return to his house; lest he dye in
the battle, and another Or imitate it.
man dedicate it.

And what man [is there] that has planted a vineyard, and has not Heb. made
it common.
eaten of it? let him go and return to his house: lest he dye in the battle,
and another man Heb. make it common.
eat of it.

And what man [is there] that bath betrothed a wife, and has not taken her?
let him go, and return to his house; lest he dye in the battle, and another
man take her.

And the Officers Heb. shall add to speak.
shall speak further to the people: and they shall say, what man [is there]
that is fearful, and Heb. tender heart.
faint-hearted? let him go, and return to his house; lest his brethrens heart
Heb. melt.
faint, as well as his heart.

Deuteronomy. 24, 5. When a man takes a new wife, be shall not go forth with the
army, nor Heb. nor shall any thing pass upon him.
be charged with any business: he shall be Heb. innocent to his house.
free at home one year, and shall cheer up his wife which he has taken.

Sect. 6. Captains are to be chosen by the Officers. Deuteronomy. 20. 9. And it shall
be, when the Officers have made an end of speaking to the people: they shall
make Captains of the Armies to lead the people.

Sect 7 All wickedness is to be removed out of the Camp by severe discipline.
Deuteronomy. 23 9. 12, 13, 14. When the host goes forth to war against thine
enemies; then keep thy self, from every wicked thing.

And there shall be a place for thee, without the Camp: and thou shall go
thither, abroad.

And thou shall have a paddle upon thy weapon: and it shall be, when thou will
ease thy self abroad, thou shall dig therewith, and shall turn back, and
cover that which comes from thee.

For Jehovah thy God walks in the midoest of thy Camp, to deliver thee, and
to give up thine enemies before thee, therefore shall thy Camp be holy: that he
may not see in thee the nakedness of any thing, and turn away from thee.

Sect. 8. Aid in war from men of a corrupt and false religion is not to be
accepted, much less sought for. 2 Chronicles. 25. 7, 8. But there came a man of God
to him, saying, O King, let not the army of Israel go with thee: for Jehovah
[is] not with Israel [to wit] all the children of Ephraim.

But if to go thou [determine], make thy self strong for the Or War.
battle: God will make thee fall before the enemy, for God has power, to help
and to cast down.

Sect. 9. Women (especially such as have not lain by man) little children and
cattle, are to be spared and reserved for spoil. Deuteronomy. 20. 14. But the women
and the little ones, and the cattle, and all that is in the City, all the
spoil thereof thou shall take as a prey to thy self: and thou shall eat the
spoil of thine enemies, which Jehovah thy God has given thee.

Sect. 10. Fruit Trees, that may be of use for meat to our own Soldiers, are
not to be cut down or destroyed, and consequently not corn. Deuteronomy. 20. 19, 20.
When thou shall besiege a City many days, in making war against it to take
it, thou shall not destroy the Heb. wood.
trees thereof by forcing an axe against them, for thou may eat thereof,
and thou shall not cut them down: for o man it is to be employed by thee in the
siege.

But the tree which thou know, that it is not a tree for meat, that thou
may destroy and cut down: that thou may build a bulworke against the
City that is making war with thee, until thou have subdued it.

Sect. 11. The spoils gotten by war, are to be divided into two parts,
between the Soldiers and the Commonwealth that sent them forth. Numb. 31. 27.
And divide the prey into two parts, between them that took the war upon
them, who went out to battle; and between all the congregation.

Sect. 12. A tribute from both is to be levied to the Lord, and given to the
treasury of the Church. A fiftieth part out of the Commonwealths part; and a
five hundredth part out of the part of the Soldiers. Numb. 31. 28, 29, 47. And
levy a Heb. A portion.
tribute for Jehovah, of the men of war that went out to war, one soul of
five hundred: both of the persons, and of the beeves, and of the asses, and of
the sheep.

Take ye it of their half; and give it unto Eleazar the Priest, for an heave
offering of Jehovah.

Even of the children of Isreal's half, Moses took, one portion of fifty, of
the men and of the beasts; and gave them to the Levites, that keep the charge
of the Tabernacle of Jehovah, as Jehovah commanded Moses.

Sect. 13. If all the Soldiers return back again in peace, not one lacking;
It is acceptable to the Lord, if they offer, over and above their tribute, a
voluntary oblation to the treasury of the Church: For a memorial of the
redemption of their lives, by the special providence and salvation of the Lord
of Hosts.

Numb. 31. 48, 49, 50. And the Officers which were over the thousands of the
host, the Captains of thousands, and Captains of hundreds, came near unto
Moses.

And they said unto Moses, thy servants have taken the Heb head.
sum of the men of war that are Heb. in our hand.
under our charge; and there Heb. There is not a man numbered from us.
lacks not one of us.

We have therefore brought Heb. The oblation of Jehovah.
an oblation for the LORD, every one that has found a vessel of gold, a
chain and bracelet, a ring, an eare-ring or tablet: to make an atonement for
our souls before Jehovah.

And Moses and Eleazar the Priest took the gold of them: every wrought
vessel.

Isa. 33. 22. Jehovah is our Judge, Jehovah is our Lawgiver, Jehovah is our
King, he will save us. Amen.
FINIS.
An Analysis of Laws and Government accomodated to New England.
Laws concern 1. Either persons 1. Magistrates. 1. Governor. 2. Assistants.
1. Counselors. 2. Judges. 1. Of the whole Country 2. Of each Town.


2. People.
2. Or causes 1. Civil, and they concern 1. Either public State 1. Of the
whole country. 1. For their protection. 2. For their provision.
2. Of each town concerning 1. For their Lands. 2. For their Treasury.

2. Or particular persons. 1. In their personal Inheritance and proprieties 2.
In their mutual commerce, whether in a way 1. Of buying and selling 2. Of
lending and borrowing.


2. Criminal. 1. Between the members of our Commonwealth, and they are 1.
Either Trespasses. 2. Or capital crimes.
2. Between our people and foreign Nations, whether in case 1. That we do them
wrong. 2. That they do us wrong.




These are the principal faults which have escaped the Press, which I would
desire the Reader to correct.
PAge 2. l. 20. add Josh. 24. 1. And Joshua gathered together all the tribes of
Israel to Shechem, etc. p. 5. l. 34. for any two, read any one or two. p. 7. l.
21. r. liberty. p. 8. l. 26 r. paid for out. p. 10. l. 2. r. account at. p. 14.
l. 17. r. Prove, 16. 11 p 16. l. 1. r. standing corn. p. 16. l. 37. r. thirty
[shekels] of silver, and blot out the marg. p. 20. l. 4. r. their God. p. 24.
l. 4. r. cast it upon him, etc. p. 24. l. 11. r. Lev. 20. 10. p. 25. l. 3. r.
takes p. 25. in the margent, the note with the letter u appertains to x, and
that to the letter x which belongs to u. p. 26. l. 11. r. against him. p. 29.
l. 16. r. Deuteronomy. 19. 15 p. 30. l. 25. r. Lev. 25. p. 31. l. 15. r. important
wrong. p. 31. l. 21. r. shall be. p. 32. l. 3. r. sent. l. 9. r. solicitous. l.
11. blot out one your; and in the marg. for imitated it, read initiated it, and
for imitate r. initiate, and for tender heart r. tender hearted.


