AN EXPOSITION UPON The Thirteenth CHAPTER OF THE REVELATION.

By that Reverend and Eminent servant of the Lord, Mr. JOHN COTTON, Teacher to
the Church at Boston in NEW ENGLAND.

Taken from his mouth in Short-writing, and some part of it Corrected by
himself soon after the Preaching thereof, and all of it since Viewed over by a
friend to Him, and to the Truth: wherein some Mistakes were amended, but
nothing of the Sense altered.

LONDON, Printed for Tim. Smart, at the Hand and Bible in the Old-Bayly. 1656.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
THE tongue of the just, or righteous (says Solomon, Prove. 10. 20.) is as
choice silver. The words that fall from the tongue of such are very precious
and profitable. And truly such are the words that dropped from the tongue and
lips of this holy and righteous man Mr. Cotton: As he himself had by his own
blessed experience found the tongue of that righteous man (Dr Sibbs) as choice
silver, yea better then the choicest gold of Ophir, by which the Lord was
pleased to convey heavenly and eternal treasure into his soul: Even so also
have many precious souls (some now above in glory, others still here below)
found the words that have distilled from his tongue to be above much fine gold,
and of more weight and value then the greatest treasure of this whole world.
Diverse that are yet alive, and do remain unto this present, may and can hear
witness to the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth. But I shall
crave leave to name only one now amongst the Saints at rest, who was indeed one
of a thousand in his time and place, viz. that great and eminent man, Dr.
Preston, whose heart the Lord wrought powerfully upon by the tongue of Mr.
Cotton, and that not long after his heart had been seized upon by the tongue of
that sweet Singer before mentioned. And because the story is so remarkable, I
shall be willing to relate in brief the substance of what I had sometimes in
private from the tongue of this our Reverend Author himself. He being
according to his course to Preach before the University and Scholars in
Cambridg, had a great conflict in himself about the composing of his Sermon,
viz. whether after the plain and profitable way, by raising of Doctrines, with
propounding the Reasons and Uses of the same. Or after the mode of the
University at that time, which was to stuff and fill their Serm^ns with as
much Quotation and citing of Authors as might p^ssibly be. On the one side
'twas suggested to him, that if he should not go the former way, he should not
be faithful to the Lord in seeking his glory, but his own, etc. And on the
other side, if he should not show his Learning, it would not only be a
disparagement unto himself, but also unto the College which had so lately
chosen him out of another to be Fellow (for he was chosen Fellow in Emanuel
College out of Trinity, where according to his year it fell out so as he could
not be capable of a Fellowship) What? is this that Cotton that was so famous,
and had such a name, for a great Scholar? what a poor choice has Emanuel
College made? Thus he was tossed too and again, pro and con in his thoughts
(as I think he said) about a fortnight, the Lord seeming to try his sincerity
at the first; but at length he came to a resolution to deny himself, what ever
the world might judge or say of him: His Text (if I mistake not) being in 2
Cor. 2. 16. And who is sufficient for these things? Two or three Doctrines (as
it seems) he raised from the words. The Scholars came generally with great
expectation to hear a more then ordinary learned Sermon from him that was so
famous throughout the University: and thereupon the Masters of Art at the
beginning stood up, erectis auribus, amongst whom Mr. Preston was one; but
soon perceiving which way he went, which was so extremely contrary to their
expectation, they sat them down in great discontent, pulling their hats over
their eyes, thereby to express their dislike of the Sermon: but before 'twas
ended, something dropped from the tongue of the Preacher, which the Lord made
unto Mr. Preston to be as choice silver indeed; whereby he was so affected,
that he was made to stand up again, and change his posture, and attend to what
was spoken, in another manner then he and the rest had done. These things Mr.
Preston afterward, getting to be acquainted with Mr. Cotton (by coming to him
under pretense of borrowing a Book of him, which he might have easily had
elsewhere, and returning it again) related particularly unto him.

Thus our Reverend Author by denying himself for the Lord, had that cast in
upon him (viz. the gaining of such an eminent person to Christ) which was a
thousand times better then the airy applause of the world, in being accounted a
learned man: Yet neither did he loose that way, but had the repute of that too
(and not without cause) to his dying day; notwithstanding his continual care
to avoid all appearance of affectation in the course of his Ministry, either in
regard of showing Learning, or in the manner of expressing what he did deliver:
whereby the power and effect of his Preaching did appear to be wholly of God,
being desirous to speak to the understanding and capacity even of the meanest,
and by manifestation of the Truth, to commend himself to every man's conscience
in the sight of God, A taste whereof we have in these Sermons of his here
published.

It were too great arrogance for me to think to add any authority to these
or any other of his precious labors by my commendation of them, I might as
well go about to add to the light of the Sun by my Candle: The very name of
Cotton is enough to set an high price upon what ever has that stamp: Only
(being earnestly desired by the Christian brother, the publisher of this
Exposi^ion, who having the pen of a ready Writer, did take those Notes from the
mouth of the Preacher, to give my testimony to the world that these were indeed
the very Sermons of that holy Servant of the Lord, whose name they bear) I
shall willingly affirm and testify (having lived in that American wilderness
about 13. or 14. years in the Town next adjoining to Boston, and so had
thereby the happy privilege of enjoying the benefit of the precious labors of
Mr. Cottons, in his Lecture upon every fifth day in the week) I say I do here
declare and testify unto the world that these Sermons upon the 13th. Chapter
of the Revelation, for the substance of them (giving allowance for such defects
of the Amanvensis, which cannot but be expected ordinarily, and yet I confess
are but very few in this Treatise) were published by that faithful servant of
the Lord, Mr. John Cotton, about the 11. and 12. months (if I mistake not) of
the year, 1639. and the first and second of the year 1640. upon his weekly
Lecture at Boston in New England, where he went over the other Chapters of the
Revelation, as he did this thirteenth Chapter: and indeed they that were
acquainted with his Preaching, may easily discern his very spirit in them all
along.

Now that the holy spirit of the Lord may breath in these holy Labors of his
precious Servant, so as the Reader may experience the truth of that divine
sentence mentioned in the beginning, The tongue of the righteous is as choice
silver, is the unfeigned desire of

The servant for Jesus sake, Thomas Allen.
Norwich, the 1. day of the 1. month, 1654-55.
AN EXPOSITION Upon the thirteenth Chapter of the REVELATION.
Revel. 13. 1, 2. And I stood upon the sand of the Sea, and saw a Beast rise up
out of the Sea, having seven heads, and ten horns, and upon his horns ten
Crowns, and upon his heads the name of blasphemy.

And the Beast which I saw was like unto a Leopard, and his feet were as the
feet of a Bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a Lion: and the Dragon gave him
his power, and his seat, and great authority.


YOU have heard from the last Chapter, that when the Dragon (that is the
Devil, as he ruled the Roman Pagan Empire) was cast down out of Heaven, (that
is, dethroned from his heavenly and Divine worship) he endeavored by all
means to oppress the Church (that is, the woman) that brought forth a
Christian Emperor, her and her seed. 1. By persecution. 2. By an inundation of
damnable Heresies, and barbarous Nations. 3. By open War; which open war is
expressed in the last verse of the former Chapter, and here more fully described
in this Chapter, a whereof has been now read.

The war which is made against the Church, is here described to be managed by
two beasts which the Devil raised up; One he calls a Beast rising up out of
the Sea, described from the first verse to the end of the tenth. Another Beast
he beheld coming up out of the Earth, from the 11th. verse to the end of the
Chapter.

Now the former of these Beasts is described by three arguments.

1. By his Original or Fountain from whence he springs; he rises up out of
the Sea, which is amplified by the place of John's beholding him; I stood upon
the sand of the Sea.

2. He is described by his shape, here is his figure and resemblance: For his
head, he had seven heads, and they amplified by honorable Ornaments (or rather
dishonorable indeed, but honorable in the beasts view) namely upon his heads
the name of blasphemy. 2. For his horns, he had ten horns, and they are set
forth by their Crowns which he had on his horns; He had so many horns, so many
Crowns, upon his ten horns, ten Crowns. And as his shape is set forth by his
head and horns, so also by his resemblance, or likeness; the whole shape or
bulk of the Beast is like a Leopard: The Leopard is of the femenine gender, and
signifies the female of the Panthers; the she Panther, spotted and ravenous,
famous for her speedy race, and yet of a good smell, by which she allures other
beasts to her, and as she has occasion, does devour them. And as his
resemblance for his whole shape is like a Leopard, so for his feet he is like a
Bear: And for his mouth, he has the mouth of a Lion: This is the second
argument by which he is described.

3. The third argument whereby he is described is his state, and that amplified
by three arguments. 1. By the efficient cause. 2. By the variable change of it:
And 3ly. by a wise conclusion and observation. For the efficient cause of it,
it is said to be the Dragon; he gave him his power and authority. For the
variable change of it, it was, 1. Great, for it is here called Power, and
Seat, and great Authority. 2. One of his heads was wounded; I saw one of his
heads as it were wounded to death. And thirdly, this wound was healed: this is
the variable change of it. 1. Great authority, honorable seat. 2. Wounded to
death. And thirdly, healed of that deadly wound. And this healing is amplified
by five Effects, or Consequents. The first was the worlds wondering: All the
world wondered after the Beast: The admiration was a^ this great change (so
happily achieved as they thought) that he should recover that desperate
danger. The second effect it wrought was, worship both toward himself: And
secondly, to the Dragon that gave him power. The third effect of this healing
was, liberty to blaspheme: There was a mouth given him to speak great things
and blasphemies. A fourth effect was, Authority and Power (to do what?) First,
To continue forty two months, verse. 5. Secondly, Power to make war with the
Saints, and to overcome them, that was the fourth effect that followed his
healing. The fifth effect was amplitude, or largeness of his Dominion: Power
was given him over all Kindreds, Tongues, and Nations, verse. 7. And all that
dwell upon the earth shall worship him, verse. 8. Which worshippers are
described by their estrangement from the number of Gods elect, whose names are
not written in the book of the life of the Lamb, and the Lamb set forth by the
eternal efficacy of his death, Slain from the foundation of the world. This
is the second part of the description of the Beast.

The third part is a conclusion, which contains a word of Caution, and
Consolation, or a word of Attention and Consolation in the ninth and tenth
verses. If any man have ears to hear, let him hear; as if it were a matter
worthy of observation and diligent attention, and of exact understanding and of
consolation, in the tenth verse. He that leads into captivity shall go into
captivity; he that kills with the sword, must he killed with the sword, etc.
This is the former Beast and his description.

The latter Beast is in the eleventh verse to the end: I beheld another Beast
coming up out of the earth, etc. He is described by his variety from the former
beast: For his Original, he comes not as the other Beast out of the Sea, but
from the Earth: And for his resemblance, he has two horns like a Lamb, and he
spoke lik a Dragon. 2. He is described by his power, as in the twelfth verse,
but I will not now speak further of him.

Now for the meaning of the words; It is that which the holy Ghost calls us
diligently to attend unto; He that has cares to hear, let him hear: If any
man have an ear to understand, any apprehension of spiritual mysteries, any
capacity of matters of Religion, let him hear what manner of beast the Devil
stirred up, and set against the Church, to make war against the Saint^, as if
it were a matter that few would understand but such as were of spiritual
understanding, and who will listen duly to a diligent observation of this
description, the matter whereof is weighty, and challenges all our intentions;
and the more, because it is very rare to meet with that which will satisfy a
diligent Reader in the Exposition hereof; But yet so much light God casts
almost into the head of every man that takes this Book in hand, especially in
his name and fear (according to his promise, Cap. 1. verse. 3) that he adds
some light more than has been before brought to his hand. Here you see are two
Beasts, what is the former? Many take it to be the Roman Empire, some take it
to be the Roman Pagan, some the Roman Christian Empire, but I fear neither of
them are right: It is not the Roman Papan Empire, that is, take the Empire as
it was before the conversion of Rome from Pagan to Christian, in the days of
Tyberius, and other persecuting Emperors, till Constantine: This Beast was not
the Roman Pagan Empire, I will give you a double reason from the Text, the
first is this.

1. The Pagan Empire was described as this Beast is, in Rev. 12. 3. Behold a
great red Dragon, having seven heads and tenn horns; but with this difference,
The seven heads had seven Crowns upon their heads: Now this Beast has also
seven heads, which make it like the other, but these Crowns are not upon the
heads, but upon the horns, which makes a great difference, an evident sign it
is not the Roman Pagan Empire.

2. Again, it is said of this Beast, that he continues 42. months, and that
is as long as the Church was in the wilderness; for the Church continues in
the wilderness (as in chap. 12. 6.) a thousand two hundred and threescore
days, which is just 42. months: And so Chap. 11. 2. It is said, The holy City
they shall tread under foot forty two months, all the time that the two
witnesses prophesied in sackcloath, which was a thousand, two hundred and
threescore days. Now it is certain the Roman Pagan Empire did not continue as
long as the Church was in the wilderness; for the Church went not into the
wilderness till the Pagan Empire ceased to be Pagan, and was translated to
Christian. Now the Roman Pagan Empire was removed as by a great Earthquake in
Constantines time, and changed from Pagan to Christian; it cannot therefore be
the Roman Pagan Empire, though many judicious Divines have gone that way.

What then, may it be the Christian Empire? Many have run that way, but neither
is it so:

1. For it is said, this Dragon gave to him his power, his seat, and great
authority; now the seat of the Roman pagan Empire indeed was Rome, but the
Dragon did not give the Christian Emperors Rome for their Seat, they would
never sit there; but the^e sat at Constantinople, and prepared it to sit
there, and for that end Constantine named it after himself, Constantinople;
and if they had occasion to come into the Western parts of Italy, they would
sit at Ravenna, but at Rome they would not come, unless it were Guest-wise.

2. Though it be true, as they say, the Roman Christian Emperor had a deadly
wound given him by barbarous Nations, yet when it was healed, the whole world
did not admire him: When Charles the great did heal the wound, yet all the
world did not wonder after him; It is true, France, and Germany, and Italy did
admire him, but all the Eastern parts did not submit to him, no nor England,
nor Scotland, nor Sweden, nor many other parts, they did not acknowledge the
Western Emperor, gave him neither civil nor religious worship.

3. Neither does this suffer it to be the Roman Christian Empire, that it
should be a note of perdition and reprobation to honor the Roman Christian
Emperors; for they that have lived under the Roman Christian Emperor, have
not hazarded their salvation by that subjection: but here it is said in the
eighth verse, that they that honor this beast are such, whose names are not
written in the book of the life of the Lamb: So that for these reasons I dare
not so conceive this Beast to he either Roman Pagan, or Roman Christian Empire.

What then, is it Antichrist? The third sort of Interpreters run that way, and
I would not exclude that wholly, but yet neither dare I consent to rest in it;
for when we open the Oracles of God, we must not always give the Comments and
Judgments of men for Scripture truths (though the men be highly to be
reverenced:) But in this place their Interpretation does not satisfy me, I
will give my reason; Antichrist does evidently appear to be the other Beast
that comes out of the Earth, which is said to have two horns like a Lamb, etc.

You may say, but Antichrist may be more ways considered then one, as he is
invested with temporal sovera^gnty and dominion, and so he may be the former
beast: and as he is invested with spiritual supremacy, and so he may be the
latter Beast; and indeed so, many Interpreters take it: but consider these
descriptions.

1. They differ in number; John says, I saw a beast rise out of the Sea; and
then it is said in verse. 11. I beheld another beast; it is not therefore the
same.

2. They differ, as in number, so in their original; the first rose out of the
sea, the second out of the earth.

3. They differ in their shape; The first beast had ten horns, the second had
but two horns like a Lamb.

4. They differ (and are apparently distinguished in the exercise of their
power, for he exercises all the power of the first Beast in his presence: And
it is said also in the 12th. verse. He causes the earth and them that dwell
therein to worship the first beast: and he causes them to make an image of the
first beast, and he had power to gve life to the image of the beast, etc. So
that the description seems to be different; The second beast gives all his
power to the first, and yet honors himself too.

But that which most of all prevails with me, and which wholly captivates my
Judgment to lean another way, is this, That whereas they say the first beast
was the Pope, as Dominus in Temporalibus, as Lord in Temporalls; and the second
beast is the Pope, as he is Dominus in Spiritualibus. It is evident that the
Pope did not invest himself with temporal authority at the first: But at
first claimed spiritual and universal Episcopacy, oversight over all the
Churches; he was first supreme head of the Church in his spiritual
Jurisdiction, and did not claim dominion in Temporalls till after his wound
was healed, and then he took power to depose the Emperor of the East, and
translated his Empire from Greece to France, this was his Dominion in earthly
Monarchies which he took in the latter place: And therefore I would rather say,
that the second beast is the Pope in both respects, as Lord and Sovereign, high
Priest in Spiritualls, and the high Priest also over the Kings of the world in
Temporalls: He had two horns like a Lamb, as the successor of Peter, and as
if he had nothing but from Christ, but he spoke like a Dragon; When he had once
power by his Lamb-like horns, he then spoke like a Dragon: Therefore to speak
that which I conceive to be the truth, I do look at this first beast as indeed
of like condition with the Pope, and very nearly joined to him. The Pope is one
of the heads and rulers of this Beast, but yet distinguished from the beast it
self, and is not the same with the beast.

This therefore (all things weighed according to the Text) I conceive to be the
first beast, the Roman Catholic visible Church.

The seven heads and ten horns are a clear description of the Roman State:
(...).
Now this State here is neither the Pagan Roman Empire, nor the Christian Roman
Empire, as has been showed. And therefore it must needs be a third Roman State
distinct from the former, and succeeding in their place; and what is that but
the Roman Catholic visible Church? Of this Church the Pope is the head both
as universal Bishop over all Churches, and chiefly Lord in Temporalls, that
had both Swords, and obtained both Authorities, to be highest supreme head in
Spirituals, as also supreme head in Temporalls, he was Sovereign Governor in
all: And the Roman Catholic visible Church, it comes just in the room of the
Roman Empire: how was it described? The beast that had seven heads, and ten
horns, this comes in his room; the one governs all the world in his way, and
the other all the Churches another way: This is the Beast that the Dragon stirs
up to make War with the Saints. Now to appply this description to this Church,
for the better understanding of the Text.

Q^: I saw a beast rise out of the Sea:] You may ask what is the Sea from
whence this beast arises?

Answ. The Sea is the collection of many waters; The gathering together of the
waters called the Seas, Genesis 1. 9, 10. And what are the waters? The waters
which thou saw^st are People, and Nations, and Languages, and Tongues, Rev. 17.
15. So then, what is the beast here that arises out of the Sea? It is some
sovereign State that arises out of the connection of many Nations into one
body, as you know the Roman Catholic Church is not confined within the lifts
of the City of Rome, (though there the head is seated) but the whole Roman Sea;
it is well called a Sea in that respect, it is that which comprehends all
Nations, whether subject to the Eastern or Western Emperor; yea and other
Nations that did not submit themselves to the one or other, as if they did
recollect themselves as into one Sea, all banks are broken down in the Sea, yet
there is no distinction, but all is one Sea, one vast body: And such is the
Roman Catholic visible Church, all partitions are here broken down, all
Churches make but one visible Catholic Church.

And again, it is well said to arise out of the Sea, according to the like
description which Daniel makes of the four Monarchs, in Dan. 7. He saw the
four winds of heaven strive upon the great Sea, and four Beasts came up from
the sea; diverse one from another: From the multiplied agitations of the Sea it
came to pass four great Monarchs did arise: Just thus, from the tumult of
particular Churches did this Beast arise; for when they could not agree in the
Churches, but some were of one mind, some of another, it was the wisdom, as
they thought, of Christian Princes and Bishops (but it was but humane wisdom,
and was indeed from the Dragon, and not from Christ) they thought it would be
best to have but one church, and the Bishop of Rome to be the head, though at
first they divided them to four, but in the end they would have the Bishop of
Rome over all, that so they might have unity; for they say unity springs from
one head; and unless you have one head, you cannot have unity: Therefore, from
the particular Church of a Congregation, they came to Diocesan, from Diocesan,
to Metropolitan; from Metropolitan to Patriarchal, from Patriarchal to
Cecumenical: And so it comes to pass, all Churches must be gathered into one
Sea, that is, one Catholic Church: For look what reason they had to set
Bishops over particular Churches: So having many Bishops, by the same reason
they must have some Metropolitan, and of many Metrapolitans, four or five
Patriarchs, and of them one Chief, that is the Pope, the Father of Fathers, he
must be the grand Governor of all: Therefore does he rise out of the Sea, out
of the Sea of Tumult, and Sea of Contention: And if you take Sea for corruption
in Doctrine, and worship, and Government (as some good Interpreters do) it was
from thence also that this beast did arise; This beast did arise out of them
all; for had either pure Doctrine, or worship, or Discipline been well looked
unto, it had not been possible that such a beast as the Catholic visible Roman
Church should have bin raised up.

It is further described to have seven heads, and ten horns: The holy Ghost
describes them so fully, that we need no further interpretation of them: He
tells us in the 17. Chapter of this book, the ninth and tenth verses; The seven
heads are seven Mountains on which the Woman sits, which are the mountains
of the City of Rome, it is built upon seven hills, and the seven heads are also
seven Kings, that is, seven Kingly governments, sovereign governments: The
first were Kings, then Consuls, then Decemvins, then Dictators, then Tribunes,
and then the Caesar's: Five were fallen, that is, were past in John's time, the
sixth were then extant, and they were the Caesar's; the Pope he makes the
seventh: Now the Pope then is the seventh of these Heads, but the seventh head
and the beast are two distinct things, though he be one that rules the beast,
and has a great influence in the guiding of it: He was to receive a deadly
wound, and after became an eighth head, whereas he was but one of the seven: So
that he is one of the Heads, but there is difference between the head and the
beast, and the beast it self: And it is said, He exercises all the power of
the first Beast; that in conclusion, what the Pope decrees, that stands: So
that it is not a general Council that determines any thing authentically
without him, but he does all that the first beast does; He would have the
Catholic Church honored, but it is that himself may be honored, as the Lord
of the Church: So therefore for the heads, these are the seven Heads.

And for the Horns, he tells you they are so many Kings, which were not then
risen to Sovereign Power, but John saw it in a Mystery before hand; But when
this Beast arises, this Pontifex maximus, then they receive a Kingdom at the
same time, Chap. 17. 12. And the several Kingdoms that then were broken off
from the Roman Empire (whereof England was one) they were so many several
Kings that all gave their dominion to the Beast with one consent, and so were
his protectors, ver. 17. They were his Beauty and his Strength, as the Horns
are to the Beast: So it is true, here is a great Beast indeed, of a vast
comprehension, here is an universal visible Church, and he has seven Heads;
that is, Seven Hills, there he sits, and seven Governments; There are seven
Heads, both of the one and other, both Hills and Governments, whereof five were
fallen, and the sixth was when John wrote: The seventh was to rise in their
rooms, and that is, He that has two Horns like a Lamb, and spoke like a
Dragon, and does exercise all the Power of the first Beast: what power is in
the Church, the Pope has the ordering thereof; And it is said here, that these
Horns had ten Crowns, but so had not the Horns of Pagan Rome. The heads of
Pagan Rome had sovereign Authority, and lived like Princes, but so had not the
Pope, they did not wear the Crowns though they affect temporal dominion, but
leave the Crowns to the horns, leave them to Crowned Kings that give their
power to him.

Now upon these Heads are names of Blasphemy.] The old High Priest of the
Jewish Synagogue he had a plate of pure Gold, and there was graven upon it,
holiness to the Lord, Exodus 28. 36, 37. This Beast has not holiness to the
Lord, but names of Blasphemy, the Pontifex maximus; His head is full of names
of Blasphemy; But the Pope exceeds all in this case, for who ever took upon him
as he to pardon Sin? A name of Blasphemy; To be Judge of Scriptures, a name
of blasphemy: He has many other names of Blasphemy; he will dispense with
Oaths of allegiance, and all civil subjection; he will dispense with marriages
most incestuous, and does exalt himself above all that is called God,
especially the Gods of the Earth. His heads are full of names of Blasphemy (as
we shall come to speak God willing, in the 5 and 6 verses.)

Now it is said of this Beast, he is like a she Leopard.] It is in the 17
Chap. compared to a woman, to show, that the Roman catholic visible Church is
as fitly resembled by a woman as a she Panther, and such is this Beast: Can a
Leopard change his spots, Jer. 13. 23. Is it not a State full of spots, and the
spots are not the spots of Gods people, but spots of herisie, and spots of
Idolatry, and spots of Tyranny, and great variety of all spots of Blasphemy: To
tell the spots of that Sea, were ineeed to enter into a Sea of wickedness,
which that Church abounds withal. Can a Leopard change his spots; This church
they make account cannot err, and so how should they change? for they that
cannot err, to what purpose should they change? yet of a very sweet and
fragrant smell, as they they perfume their Temples with incense, and love to
please ambitious minds, and to fill covetous hearts; they are sweet also, and
fair to voluptous spirits, with their Brothel houses, etc.

But for the Leopard, Bear, and Lion, I suppose there is special reference to
them all, In Dan. 7. 4, 5, 6. where he resembles the Monarch of Babell to a
Lion, and the Monarch of Persia to a Bear, and the Monarch of Greece to a
Leopard: There the Leopard is the last of the three, here it is the first, to
show a direct contrary course that this Beast takes in his rise to the old
Monarchies. Of the great Monarchies, the first was a Lion, full of magnanimity,
the next was a Bear, full of cruelty, a Bear that devoures mucb flesh, and the
Leopard, the spotted Beast comes after, cruel as the former: Now here the
Leopard is first, the whole shape is sweet and savoury; other beasts would
follow him by the smell; and so this church seems in the wole bulk sweet and
savory to inveagle all unstable Souls; But where he gets hold, he lays his
paw like a Bear, presses hard, and holds fast, and will not let go; Just
like the Persian State, they hold fast; Never did any of the States last so
long as the Papal State; The Assyrian lasted, long but yet did not continue
above a thousand years; but this is to continue 1260. days, that is, so many
years, in a great deal of Power and Authority; And therefore as by subtilty he
draws others to him, so them he holds fast, that it is mavelous hard to
root out where he has got hold; you may cut off his head, as it is in England;
but it is a wonder to see what pains there is to have the Government of Christ
brought in, and of the Beast cast out: they will make so many Statutes in
Parliament, that you can have no wills confirmed, nor Marriages made, but by
them, nor no Parliments Acts pass but through their hands; you have so many
matters in the State depending on them, that one would think it impossible ever
to root them out: you may take off the Beast his head; you may thrust the
Leopard out at windows, but he will take hold with his feet, that you shall
have much ado to root him out: The great profits, and great preferments they
sink deep in the hearts of carnal men.

And he has a mouth like a Lion.] How did the Lion of Babell speak
presumptuously; what God is able to deliver you out of the firey furnace? etc.
and he commands all that will not worship his Image should be cast into the
fyery furnace: Just such is the mouth of this Beast; who so will not worship
the Image of this Beast shall be killed, in the 15 v. of this chapter. So you
see this is the Roman Catholic visible church.

And the Dragon gave this church power.] All that the Roman Emperor could do
before, that does the Catholic church; that which the old Roman Emperor did by
force of arms, that does the Roman Church by the power of Religion and
conscience: The Dragon gave him his power, and Seat, and great Authority. And
Satan will work by the power of conscience, making them believe that all must
be subject to them: He gave them his Seat: what was the Seat of the old Roman
Emperor? It was Rome, Satan gave that to the Beast; There is his Seat, and
great Authority, insomuch that all the world were deeply taken with the
reverence they owe as to the Imperial mother City; So to this sovereign mother
Church, and their holy Father the Pope that was the head of that Church: This
is the plain description of this first Beast. I cannot proceed now to open the
wounding of one of the heads of this Beast, nor of the healing of that wound,
nor of his war against the Saints: I am the longer in this, because the more
clearly these things are opened, the more fully will the counsel of the holy
Ghost appear in the sequel. If any man have ears to hear, let him hear: do
not think that these things concern Students only, and Scollars; But what is
this to common christians? He that has an ear, let him hear what the holy
Ghost says: It is the same charge which he gave concerning the Epistles which
were common to all churches; If any man have an ear let him hear what the
Spirit says unto the Churches: Those general doctrines necessary for all
Christians to understand, the same charge is laid upon all to hear what is
spoken concerning this beast; If thou understandest Religion, if thou would
be, or art a member of a Church of Christ know this point; If any man have an
ear let him hear this.

But you will say to me* shall we make it an Article of our Creed to believe
the Catholic Church; and shall we now make it an Article of Faith to believe
it to be a Monster? I believe the holy Catholic Church, and shall we make it a
Beast?

To this I answer; The holy Catholic Church we make it an Article of our
Creed, that is, a company of the Godly called out of the world; we look at them
all as those for whom Christ shed his blood: But we must not look at this as a
visible Catholic Church, much less the Roman Church as the Catholic Church:
we believe the Catholic Church is invisible; we believe no visible Church, but
Congregations; and therefore if you come to hear of a Roman Catholic visible
Church, whereof the Pope is the head, and who takes upon him all this
Sovereignty and power here described, we look at such a body as a great B^ast:
Communion of Saints we acknowledge, and that all the Churches of Christ have
one and the same power amongst them: The Church of this Congregation has power
within it self equal to what others have, and none have power one over
another: None of us are like Leopards to other beasts, perfumed to draw other
beasts after us, and then like Bears to clasp them in to be subject to this
Church, and then speak like Lions, that all shall be subject to our commands:
This is a Beast, and this is no Catholic Church; This is a Catholic Church of
the Devil, but not of Christ. Thus have you the two first verses opened unto
you.

Come we now to gather one brief note from the words:

The visible Catholic Roman Church is in the esteem of the holy Ghost a
monstrous Beast, Doct.
that is the note.

That it is the beast here described, you have heard it opened: Some Roman
State it must be, and you have heard it can neither be Rome-Pagan, nor
Rome-Christian: It must therefore be the Roman Church; for it is described by
seven heads, and ten horns, which are the Arms of Rome, as they are described
in the Revelations.

That it is in the eyes of the holy Ghost a monstrous beast is here evident;
for imagine a beast set before you with seven heads, and ten horns, would it
not seem a monster, and unnatural? that it should look like a Leopard, all
sported, and feet like a Bear? and look at his mouth, and that is like a Lion,
is not this a monster? to say nothing of his blasphemies, which makes him a
wicked beast: but look at his visage which is here resembled, and what is here
deciphered but a monster? It holds forth his description in other places, in
Chap. 16. 13. There came forth three unclean spirits out of the mouth of the
Dragon (that is the Devil) and out of the mouth of the Beast, and out of the
mouth of the false Prophet. And you shall also read, that the beast was taken,
and with him the false Prophet; these were two still, they could not be made
one, Rev. 19. 20. And they were both cast alive into a lake of fire burning
with brimstone, both the the first beast and the latter beast, the beast and
the false Prophet: He like a Lamb comes in sheeps clothing, but inwardly is a
ravening wolf.

Now why is it such a monstrous beast?

If God had made such a kind of creature; a Leopard is no monster, nor a
Bear, nor a Lion: But if you make a Beast of all these, that will be a
monster, that is contrary to the course of nature, clear besides the ordinary
course of natural generation, that makes a thing monstrous, this then is the
reason of the point.

A beast engendered against the course of nature, Reason.
that is a monster, especially if there be so many uncouth shapes of which it
is composed: And it is not so with this universal Catholic visible Church?
Do but consider what kind of Church the Lord instituted, the Church of a
particular congregation: If thy brother trespass against thee, go and tell
him his fault between thee and him, etc. If he will not hear thee, take with
thee one or two more, etc. If he shall neglect to hear them, tell it to the
Church, Mat. 18. 15, 16, 17, 18. What, the Catholic visible Church, when will
that meet think you? And is it ever to be expected that when they do meet, that
every brother of this country and other countries must go to Rome, and tell
the Trespasses of his brother against him, and send for those that have
offended him, and thus and thus plead with them? And when do you think that a
Catholic Church will heal all offenses between brethren? Will not this be a
monstrous beast when the Catholic Church must hear and remove offenses? That
Church which Christ has ordained will hear the offenses of brethren, and a
brother has liberty to tell his offense to the Church, and at length the
matter will be brought to an issue, when they they have two witnesses, then the
Church sees what is to be done: Now to have a Catholic visible Church, what a
monstrous disturbance will that be to the free dispensation of the government
of Christ? and yet the rulers thereof will be the only visible
Church-governnours of the world.

Again, you read in 1 Cor. 14. 23. When the whole Church (says the Apostle)
shall come together into one place, etc. The Church therefore which the
Apostles instituted may be gathered into one place, that all may hear, and all
may be edefied: Why, is it possible that all Churches should be gathered into
one place? or should all hear if they were gathered? or will they be ever so
gathered? what a wondrous beast will this be?

Again, whereas Christ has said, his Kingdom is not of this world, and has
appointed to his Disciples, that they should not be Lords over Gods heritage, 1
Pet. 5. 3. and in Mat. 20. from 23. to 29. It shall not be so among you: But
whosoever will be great among you, let him be your Minister: and let every
soul be subject to the authority of the higher powers. Well now, if there must
be a Catholic Church, and an Officer that shall rule all Nations, and that in
so many Nations with Spiritual and Temporal Dominion, carry all before him,
will it not be a Monster? What a disproportion is this to the Churches of
Christ, and to the Officers thereof? Not to speak of their other monstrous
usurpations of the head of this Church, but take the body as it is, how they
speak like a Lion, and hold fast when they get like a Bear, and are spotted
like a Leopard, that they are nothing but hotch-potch, and mingle-mangle: If
any man have understanding, let him understand what kind of Church this is that
is thus deciphered, and described, this visible Catholic Church. For the Use.

It may first teach us the great and just reason which all Protestant Churches
have to withdraw themselves from the fellowship of the Church of Rome, Use 1.
from the Catholic visible Roman Church, though they look at those that submit
not to them as Schismatics and Heretics; I pray you consider would they have
us submit to this great beast? would they have the Lambs of Christ (for such
are the Churches of Christ) to submit to a Lion, Bear, or Leopard? Has any
Lamb in the world (much less a Lamb of Christ) so many Heads and Horns, and
such spots, and such fee^, and such a mouth? Therefore I pray you consider, it
is not time for the Lambs of Christ, and for all the Churches of Christ to fly
off from this Monster, and to abandon them utterly, as having no part nor
portion with such a beast as this?

Secondly, Use 2.
let this be another Use; it may teach us how Christian Protestant Churches
wrong themselves that leave any footsteps of this government in their Churches:
For that is part of the image of the beast; for the second beast, when he was
advanced, he would have an image of the first beast, they must have Provincial
and Diocesan Churches, and National Churches, and carry I know not how many
hundred congregations into one National Church, and there must be some
Diocesan and Metrapolitan church, and the rest must be inferior to that:
Though this be not so great a monster as the great Beast, yet it is an image of
this beast; can any brother tell his offense to such a church? And will you
have him stay till the whole National church meets? Or will you have him stay
till the Diocesan church meets, and carry his offenses to the Visitation? Do
you think they will right his cause then? Are a few such kind of men, the
Chancellor, and Register, and Surrogate, and Apparitor, do you think the church
that our Savior bids us tell? Are these they that are gathered together, that
all may hear, and all may be edefied? Do these serve the Lord Jesus, and not
their own bellies? I say therefore, you may see what great reason men have to
withdraw from subjection in spiritual matters to the Image of this great
beast that in some measure represent the same state as they.

Thirdly, Use 3.
let it be a seasonable advertisement to all (if I were to speak to Princes) to
all Princes, but however to all Magistrates, how to make use of their Authority
to be as Protectors of the Church, and in respect of their spiritual estate,
as children of the church, but not to give the horns to the church (though
horns be for beauty and strength:) you see it makes the Church a monster, and
it is to make a beast of the Church: And so if you should make Church Officers
Justices of Peace, or Counselors, or prostitute your own Government to them,
that if the Church condemn any, then you must do so too (as heretofore if a man
were condemned by the Church, and by them delivered to the secular power, then
burn him presently;) this puts your Horns upon the Churches head, unto
monstrous deformity: And therefore it is necessary for Magistrates to keep
their power in their own hands, and not to take things Ipso facto, from the
Church, but to consider what is done, and then they are to confirm what the
Church does according to God; Here are ten horns, and these are ten Kings by
the holy Ghosts interpretation, and they add to the monstrousness of this
Beast, by giving their power thereto. Why, does this mishape a Christian
Church, for Magistrates to submit their crowns to the Church? No, God forbid,
it is an honor and happiness to them, when Kings are nursing Fathers to the
church, and bow down their faces to the earth, Isa. 49. 23. But why then does
he put it as a part of the misshapen state of the Church, that it had ten
horns, to wit, because these Kings did give their strength and power to the
Beast, that the Beast did act these Horns acording to the power of his lust, as
Chap. 17. v. 17. as it was truly accomplished in all the Kings of Europe, that
did submit all their Scepters, and Thrones, and Crowns, and Dignities to the
Bishop of Rome; That if he command this or that, there must be room for him,
what ever becomes of Princes, Laws, and Endeavors, and all acts and
enterprises of War, or Peace: He had their horns on his head, he might push
with them as he would: This made the Church a monster, when sovereign power was
obnoxious to the Bishop of Rome, when without Excomunication, whether a cause
were of God or no, Magistrates proceeded, if the Church had censured: As a
Beast that has horns on his head, as he turns, so must the power of his horns
be set and put forth: If therefore the Catholic Church, or any Officer of it
shall condemn a man as an Heretic, and then deliver him to the secular power,
they never dispute the cause, but take it for granted; If their holy mother
Church condemn him, the Secular Power must push and crush him to the very
Earth, and trample him under foot, and rend his bowels from his body, if he
once be delivered to them. Now this makes the Church a beast, that has this
power over the Princes of the Earth, that look what is their lust, or their
ignorance, or their error, and the contrary adjudged by them to be Heresy,
that the Secular power must mayntain the one, and condemn the other. It is a
comfortable thing for Churches to be strengthened and protected by civil
Magistrates: But if they captivate their power to the Church, that what Church
Rulers call for not according to the Word, but their Lusts, that the civil
Magistrate must confirm, that makes the Church a Beast: And therefore be wise
now O ye Kings, be instructed O ye Judges of the earth, serve the Lord with
fear, and rejoice with trembling, etc. Psalm. 2. 11, 12. Kiss the Lord Jesus,
submit to him, and in him to the church; Lick the dust off the feet of the
church, dispensing his counsel and will: But when by implicit obedience the
Commonwealth must he prostitute to the Beast, it makes the Beast more
monstrous then it is: The authority of Princes in that kind makes such churches
to be very beastly and ugly monsters.

Fourthly, Use 4.
let it be of this use to raise up our hearts in holy thankfulness to God,
that has delivered us from this Monster, both our Fathers from this great
beast, and our selves from the remnants of the Image of this beast, from all
Dioce^san and National Churches, and from Metropollitan and Catholic visible
Churches that are Images of this great beast. You know how much the civil Laws
of Christian Kingdoms do strengthen Ecclesiastical power, that if once a
Church exco^municat a man, you know the power of the Law, if once this or that
court excomunicate a man, though it be but for not paying fees, when it may be
he has no money, or thinks it not lawful to maintain them by his purse: yea
when he is excommunicate, it may be for going to hear a Sermon in another
place, when he has nothing but reading at home; or if a man fast with his
neighbors in his house, then what power there is out of such a Court, civil
Courts of Justice confirm, there comes a Significavit, that if he shall live
so excommunicate: and if he continue and stay out a certain time, then the
Commonwealth apprehends him, and never considers whether the cause be just or
unjust: I confess there is a liberty to traverse such a cause; but if a man
want money, or want friends, he may be taken and carried to Prison, and there
he may lie and rott for any of these misshapen Clergy men: But I say it is a
great liberty to be freed from this great beast, that he has no finger amongst
us, we are out of his paw, and out of his smell: It was a matter in question
here not long ago, whether the Court should not take a course to punish such
persons as stood excommunicate out of the Church, if they should stand long
excommunicate, but it was a good providence of God that such a thing was
prevented: Let not any Court, Ipso facto, take things from the Church; If such
a Law were made (the Fathers live not for ever;) and if such a Law were once
established, that a Churchmember standing so long excommunicated, the
Commonwealth then should proceed against him; were this established, it would
make a Beast of the Church; we are subject to err, and our posterity that
comes after us may err (it may be feared) worse; It is therefore a mercy to be
freed from the beast, from the paw of the Bear, and the mouth of the Lion: It
is such a mercy that they that got the victory over these, they stood praising
God, as Chap. 15. 1, 2. The Lambs company that stood on mount Si^on they stand
and praise, and wonder at the gracious hand of God in this case; And therefore
we should in the fear of God be unfeignedly thankful to God for our present
liberties, and withal that we may be so, Let him that has an ear to hear,
hear; If you be of Spiritual discerning, and know what these mercies mean,
you will be really thankful; Therefore show this thankfulness, not only in
searching the true meaning of the Text, and the true nature of this beast
described in it, but also in standing fast in these great liberties wherewith
Christ has made us free, Gal. 5. 1.

You shall have many poor creatures that came hither to this Country, and will
be ready to go back again, they look at things as mean and poor here; believe
it, such a man has not an ear, nor an eye open, he knows not whether he goes:
Hagar, Sarahs maid, whether go thou? says the Lord to her: And so may I say
to such, whether will you go? will you be gone back again to Egypt (God
forbid I should count all our Native Country as Egypt) but if you go thither,
you will have much ado to escape the paw of of the Bear: If you be once
incorporated into any of their Parishes, you will find such beastly work in
Church Government (I may speak it without wrong to any, but that I may bear
witness against what is corrupt) that you will then find the blessing of
those that enjoy liberty and piety together, you must worship the beast or the
Image of the beast; A Diocesan, or National Church, it is but an Image of the
great beast, it is a plain pattern of the same; and you will find the body of
the Church rent from you, or you will be rent from the body, if you shall walk
roundly and sincerely in the ways of God; you will find sad work to have your
own officers or others to rise up against you: but we have here cause to praise
God for our present liberties, and therefore you are to be wary what you do.
If this be cause of thankfulness, turn not again to that from which the Lord
by his stretched out arm has delivered you: And this let me say further, as
it may provoke us to thankfulness, so to forego all the Profits of this life,
rather then to be drawn to subjection to such a Spiritual Government; you see
what the holy Ghost counts it, seven heads, ten horns, heads full of names of
blasphemy, horns crowned, and here is a beast like a Leopard, with feet like a
Bear; that all the Government of it looks like rapine and robbery, catching and
snatching, rending and tearing, this is the sum and scope of it: And therefore
be not deceived; if men shall tender you fair terms that may smell sweet, you
shall have liberty in this and that, and protection of a good State, but it is
but the smell of a Leopard; when you have yielded to such Conditions as may be
tendered, you will find such strong hold got of you, that you will never get
out: And then you shall find what ever Conditions are put in at first, the
last Edition will be a mouth like a Lion: They will bring you in with subtilty,
like a Leopard, lay fast hold upon you like a Bear; and before they have done,
there will be a mouth like a Lion: And therefore as we are to be thankful, so
we are to be faithful to God, that has purchased these great liberties for
us, and be no more willing to be entangled with your former state, than you
would be willing to fall into the mouth of a Lion, or come under the paw a
Bear.

Q^. But you will say, what is this to me, I am but a private Christian?

Answ. Private Christians must not live always in a private State, for that
darkens a man's estate, if he knows not the order of Gods house, nor addresseth
himself to it. It is true, if a man either were in the Temple, or looked
toward it, his prayers were accepted; but if a man have no mind to know the
orders of Gods house, his ignorance of Church matters will darken his own
spiritual estate: And therefore whosoever thou be, Son or Daughter; If any
have ears to hear, let them listen to what is here spoken, that so by the
blessing of God, you may be the more able to find the free passage of joy, and
the power of godliness in all your private or public conversation.

Revel. 13. the latter part of the 2d. verse. And the Dragon gave him his
power, and his seat, and great authority.
THe next note is this;

That the Dragon (that is, Doct. 2.
Satan) as he had the government of the Pagan Roman Empire: so being cast out
of it, he gave (or procured and obtained) to the Roman Catholic visible
Church his power, and seat (or Throne) and great authority.

For so it is plainly here said, That the Dragon gave to the Beast his power,
and his seat, and great authority.

The Dragon, who is that? You heard, the Dragon is the old Serpent called the
Devil, and Satan: but the Dragon considered, as he sometimes swayed the Roman
Pagan Empire, as in Rev. 12. 3. There appeared a wonder in heaven, a great red
Dragon, having seven heads and ten horns; they are interpreted by the Angel,
Rev. 17. 3, 4. 9, 10. 12. 18. The seven heads to be the seven hills of Rome,
and the ten horns, so many Kings that arose with the last head of the Beast;
Therefore he means the Dragon, as he sometimes swayed the City of Rome, and so
the Seat and State of the Pagan Roman Empire: And being now cast out, and
seeing he cannot maintain his State and divine honor, as before, to whom does
he give his honor? what, to the Roman Christian Empire? No, his rage is
against them, and the Church amongst them: Neither did he give them his Seat;
they sat not at Rome, but at Constantinople: Neither can he easily fasten upon
the civil State such delusions, as to cause the Christian Emperors to take to
themselves divine honor, though the Pagan Roman Emperors had so done: But now
he does choose to fasten them upon the Ecclesiastical State, and thinks he
shall more prevail with Churchmen (as I may speak) to drink in an inundation
of Heresies in Doctrine, and Tyranny in Government, and Superstition in
Worship, he thinks he shall sooner prevail with the Ecclesiastical State,
then with the Civil; Therefore upon this Beast (which can neither be Roman,
Heathen, nor Christian Empire, but the Roman Church) does he fasten his power,
and seat, and great authority.

His power.] A threefold power did the Devil fasten upon the Roman Catholic
visible Church.

1. The power of signs and lying wonders: He gave him great power to work
great wonders, 2 These. 2. 9. Of which there is more spoken in the sequel of
the Chapter, where some of his miracles are mentioned.

2. He gave him the power of effectual Sophistry, or (as the Scripture calls
it, 2 These. 2 9, 10.) of deceit, of unrighteousness; partly in the Schoolmen,
and partly in their Votaries, or Cloyster-men, and partly in their Canonists.
By the efficacy of Sophistry in Schoolmen, he corrupted all Doctrine. By the
deceit of the Cloyster-men, the Monks, he corrupted all their devotion and
worship: And by the policy of their Canonists, he corrupted all
Church Government; and this was carried with such efficacy of deceit, that
those School-Divines were accounted the most profound, and the Monks most
devout, and the Canonists most judicious, and exquisite Politicians: Now these
three did mightily deceive the Christian world by their power, and all this
power Satan gave to this Beast.

3. He gave him the power also of making war; for in verse. 7. It was given him
to make war with the Saints, and to overcome them; putting into the hearts of
christian Kings to give their power to the Beast, and to wage all their Battles
at their own charges whiles he sat still; this was the power which was given
him by the Dragon.

And for his seat, what was it? It was the City of Rome which ruled over the
Kings of the earth, Rev. 17. 18. And for that end he would not suffer
Constantine, nor other Emperors to dwell at Rome: If they were in Italy, they
should dwell at Ravenna: So that the Dragon granted his own Seat or Throne,
not to the Emperors, for they never cared for it, but he reserved it for this
Beast, to be the center and chief Seat of the Roman Catholic Church.

And he gave him also great authority, transcendently great indeed.

Great Authority.

1. Over the Scriptures.

2. Over the consciences of men.

3. Over the treasury of the church: Over Church-Rulers, and Churches, over the
merits of Christ, over Kingdoms and Commonwealths, over Purgatory, and for
mitigating the pains of Hell: All this he gave to the Roman Catholic visible
Church.

1. He gave him power over the Scriptures.

1. As Judge of them. The Church is the Judge of controversies, and the head of
that Church is the Judge of all places of Scripture, by his authority it is
authentical; This the Catholic Church does challenge. 2. He does prefer the
vulgar Latin before the Original Scripture, a transcendant power. 3. It is in
his power to make Apocrypha Scripture, to be of like power with the canonical
Scripture. 4. It is his power and authority that gives unwritten Traditions
like power with the canonical Scripture. 5. He takes upon him to be the
infallible Interpreter, and Judge of the meaning of Scripture, and that is
Blasphemy. 6. He takes upon him power to dispense with Scripture. He has
power to dispense with the moral Law of God in point of Marriages, even in
incestuous Marriages, this is a power beyond Scripture.
2. He has great authority over the consciences of men, making Laws and Canons
to bind the conscience, and releasing and loosing them from the power of Gods
Laws, either in point of Marriage, or in point of Oaths and Covenants, or in
point of natural relation: He can dispense with children in respect of duty to
Parents, if they come into Monasteries, and with duty which Subjects owe to
Magistrates.

3. They have power over the Church Treasury, by which they mean the
supererogation of the merits of Christ, and of the Saints: They say Christ
merited for a thousand worlds: and because he saved but a few, it is free for
the Pope to take the surplussage of merit; He can take them and apply them by
Indulgences, for the pardoning of them that pay well for them. And thus they
who despise Gods imputation of the righteousness of Christ for justification,
they take upon them to impute it to themselves, and to this and that notorious
wicked man.

4. They have power over Kingdoms and Commonwealths, to depose Kings, and to
dispose of their Kingdoms as they please, and to absolve Subjects from all
Allegiance to civil power, and for that end to nullify their Oath, for that
end you know what the Pope sent to Henry the fourth: Christ (say they) gave
this power to Peter, and Peter to the Pope, and to that end abuse. Jer. 1. 10.
See, I have this day set thee over the Nations, to root cut and pull down, and
to destroy, and to throw down, to build, and to plant.

5. They have power over the estate of the life to come.

1. Over Heaven. He claims transcendent power in that, and does abuse that
place in Mat. 16. 19. To thee will I give the keys of the Kingdom of heaven,
that whatsoever thou shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; whatsoever
thou shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven: Therefore he can open the
gates of Heaven to them that are dead. 2. They have power over Purgatory; Upon
so much done and given, they can help them out of Purgatory: They make account
the torments of Purgatory are equal to the pains of Hell; but that Hell is
for ever, and Purgatory but till the last Judgment. 3. They have power over
Hell: they have not absolute power to deliver out of Hell (only Gregory is said
to have delivered Trajans soul out of Hell;) but though they cannot deliver out
of Hell, yet they can ease the torment. The witnesses of this will hardly own
it, but it is the judgment of the most devout to that Sea.
So that he gave to the Catholic church his power of signs and lying wonders,
of all kinds of efficacy of delusions, and power of making War, and he gave
him great authority over the Scriptures, over men's Consciences, over the
treasures of the Church, over Kingdoms, and Princes, and Powers of the world
to come, and over Purgatory and Hell: And therefore consider, if this be not a
vast power, which is here given, and acknowledged to be given by himself to
the Catholic visible Roman Church: You must not wonder that the Catholic
Church did not claim all this at first, but came to this by degrees, and more
faster grew to this, especially at that time when this second Beast (that
received in spiritualls his power, speaking like a Dragon) had got all this
transcendant power. In the mean time, from the very first you shall find this
power in the representative Catholic Church; They quartered them into several
Jurisdictions, into Bishoprics; and when they had done that, they rested not
till they had set one over the rest, and that was this of Rome: And besides,
this was devilish Authority to make Laws to bind all Christian Congregations,
to take their Government from them. 3ly. In every Council they devised some
new Doctrine, and some new form of worship and Government, which was the seed
out of which this transcendant power was hatched.

For the reason of the point, you may ask how he should give all this power
which he never had himself, how he should give that which never was his to a
Beast, so as to carry all things with that transcendant power, for divine power
he had not himself, he was cast out from it, how then could he give this to
any State in the world?

First, Reason 1.
from Gods divine Justice, and heavy Judgment upon the unthankful world: That
look, as God in former times did give up the Roman Pagan world to be ruled by
Satan as the god of it (and therefore he is called in 2 Cor. 4. 4. the God of
the world) So now God gave up the Roman Christian world, as he did the Pagan
world before; the Scripture tells us so, 2 These. 2. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Because
they received not the love of the truth that they might be saved, he gave them
up to efficacy of delusions to believe lies: That they all might be damned who
believe not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. They loved not the
simplicity of the Apostles Institutions, concerning Churches, and Laws, and
Doctrine, and Apostolic government, but did affect high preferments, and
settled endowments, and carnal excellency. Now the Lord therefore gives Satan
wonderful power, that as of old he was once the God of Pagan Rome, so now in
the Church he gives them Church Power; that what he could not retain in his
own hands, that he substitutes, and gives to the Roman Catholic Church, to
carry it along with great success: and that is the first Reason, the judgment
of God upon the unthankful world.

A second Reason is taken from the effectual means which Satan used to advance
the Roman Church by, Reason 2.
to exalt his Church above all others; what were the means? The means were
these;

First, Ignorance, raising a smoke out of the bottomless Pit, darkning all the
light of the Church, Rev. 9. 2. The Sun and the Air were darkened by reason of
it: There was a mighty dark mist as it were: They regarded not the love of the
truth, they studied it not, and so the Lord left them to palpable gross
ignorance, in so much that at that time when the second beast arose, had we
seen any that lived in the former time of Religion, and that lived now, we
would not have thought they had been the same men, such palpable darkness were
they left unto of ignorance; Now palpable ignorance is the mother of all
Superstition and Idolatry, and the misguidance of all things in the Church.

A second means which he used, was, terror of Conscience which he set on
effectually by the Locusts, Rev. 9. 3, 5. There came out of the smoke Locusts,
and unto them was given power as the scorpions of the Earth have power: They
had such a notable power to sting the Consciences of men, that men would seek
for death, and could not find it, and take desperate courses, drowning, or
hanging, or any thing, rather then to live in that terror. They that shall
read Parsons Resolutions Granatensis, shall find what terrible threats there
are applied to terrify, but never showed them the way to come to Christ, to
bind up such broken souls: Now the Conscience broken and not healed, is fit to
sow any superstition in.

A third means was the superstition and hypocrisy of the votaries, and of all
afflicted, but unsettled consciences. Terror of conscience makes them greatly
devout; They tell them of a state of perfection, and that they shall shroud
themselves in such a Monastery, and there they should live devoutly, and be
kept from the pollutions of the world; Many Princes have been thus taken, and
have given large endowments to pray for their souls, their consciences being
wounded.

A fourth means was the subtilty and sophistry of the Schoolmen, suppressing
the reading of the Scriptures, and mixing Philosophy with Divinity, that they
might as well have studied a point of Aristotle as their divinity, and make as
good use of the one as of the other. They left studying of Scriptures, and read
Peter Lombard, which was mentioned in Latin, and this was a notable means.

A fifth means was the policy of the Canonists, who had gathered together all
those Canons that tended to Christ's powerful Government, and fastened them upon
the Catholic Church, and the Bishop of Rome being head, he had it all
committed to him, a notable means to bring in Tyranny.

Last of all lying miracles, 2 These. 2. 9. Whose coming is after the working of
Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders. Thus you see the means
how the Dragon gave him his power, and Authority, and such Authority that he
exalts himself above all that is called God.

The use is thus much; First it serves to show the vanity of all that
admiration of the Roman Catholic visible Church, and devotion to that Church,
which has so long for many Ages deluded the world, and with which Jesuits and
Seminaries do to this day delude devout, but carnal souls; Here is great
power given to them, and great authority; but whence has the Church all this?
They pretend they have it all from Christ, but they have it from the Dragon of
the bottomless pit; He gave him his power and seat and great authority: It
never came from Christ, he never gave this power to any Church nor State in the
world, it is from the Dragon. And whereas they plead it is the keys of the
kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 16. 19. It is verily (as the Text calls it, Rev. 9.
1.) The key of the Bottomless pit; There fell a star from Heaven to the Earth,
and to him was given the key of the Bottomless pit: It is he that has power
to let out smoke out of the bottomless pit; Not to let out men from thence, as
some have pretended, or from Limbus, which is the suburbs of Hell; But to let
out smoke, damnable doctrine, and false Government; He has power to open it,
but no power to shut it; power to sting men's consciences, but no power to heal
them. And therefore when Bellarmine makes the Roman Catholic visible Church to
be the true Church, he makes this the first note of a true Catholic Church;
whereas our Divines make Preaching of the word, and administration of the
Sacraments, and holy Di^cipline, he refutes them, and sets down three other,
universal, Catholic, visible Church, to be the true Church; And the truth is,
it is the very Beast, to which the Devil gave this great Authority and power:
Wherefore let not men be bewitched with them, but let us know they are all but
efficacies of delusions what ever have been in this kind spoken. If any man
say, shall we disclaim an Article of our Creed, to despise the holy Catholic
Church? God forbid, we do believe the holy Catholic Church spread over all
Nations; But a Church Catholic that shall have one visible head, and be the
Mother Church, verily we look at it as the greatest and ugliest beast, that
ever was raised in the world. Take all other Monarchies that the Scripture
describes, the Leopard of Greece, the Lion of Babell, and the Bear of Persiae,
and they are either of them but a beastly state, but here all these Beasts are
mingled and confounded in one: And besides, It has seven heads, and ten horns.
A Leopard, a Lion, and a Bear, they are orderly creatures, according to some
Institution: But here is a Beast that runs besides all institution, and
description of Scripture, and societies of men that ever was raised. The
Catholic visible Roman Church, is the most monster; God forbid we should
blaspheme any Church, but I do but speak Scripture; Let the world be judge, if
the Scripture can be accommodated to any but to this Roman Catholic mother
Church. It is evident in Scripture, these seven heads, and ten horns, must be
some Roman State, the Roman Pagan State it cannot be, nor yet the Roman
Christian State, and a Roman State it is: but there has been no other Roman
State, but the Roman Catholic visible Church, and that has claimed such great
power and authority, which is doubtless as incompatible to Scripture as may
be, which by the wit of man has not been invented, but by the Dragon; and yet
so goodly in the eyes of the world, which great Princes are deluded and
besotted withal, and happy they that can be reconciled to that State.

Secondly, Use 2.
Learn we to magnify the free rich grace of God that has delivered us from
this great Beast, and the worship of it, and has restored us in a great
measure to the government of primative simplicity, that now we may meet every
Lords day, that all may hear, and all may be edefied, where every one may
brign his offense (if he cannot be satisfied in private) and may be heard, and
the case in due time searched into, and healed according to God. This is
Primative simplicity, and this is direct proceeding without Lordly Prelacy,
which overwhelms all the world like a great Sea; And it i, well called a Sea,
for it swallows up all like a vast Ocean.

And the more thankful ought we to be, that he has delivered us from the
Image of the Beast, as well as from the beast it self; A Catholic Church that
bears sway over so many hundred Churches, and overwhelms them all: Such Laws
they shall make as shall bind all Nations, and whether they give consent or
no, they must subscribe to them in point of government. Were we sensible how
odious this Beast were in the sight of the holy Ghost, and of the Apostle John,
it would affect us with strong thankfulness, and hearty enlargednesse to God,
that has delivered us from so great a beast, and from any image and picture of
it, unto which all the world is subject, unless in some few places.

Thirdly, Use 3.
It may teach all Church Officers not to affect any Lordly pomp and state: For
Officers of a Church to take upon them any great State, or to see a Church
composed in any such form, you see in the eyes of the holy Ghost it is a Beast.
There is nothing more disproportionable to us, then for us to affect Supremacy,
for us to wear the horns that might push Kings; to throw down any, or to
desire Magistrates to execute what we shall think fit, verily it is not
compatible to the simplicity of the Church of Christ. Neither may they give
their power to us, nor may we take it from them: That when an Excommunication
pass in the Church, then to leave it to the Magistrate, that so a man being
excommunicated, is left, Ipso facto, to civil censure, upon the Churches
censure, this will cause the Magistrates to submit their power to the Church
unavoidably; that if a Church censure, the Magistrates must proceed against
them: Now it is good to have these two States so joined together, that the
simplicity of the church may be maintained and upheld, and strengthened by the
civil State according to God, but not by any simplicity further then according
to the word. Beware of all secular power, and Lordly power, of such vast
inspection of one church over another: Take heed of any such usurpation, it
will amount to some monstrous Beast: Leave every church Independent, not
Independent from brotherly counsel; God forbid that we should refuse that; but
when it comes to power, that one Church shall have power over the rest, then
look for a Beast, which the Lord would have all his people to abhor.

Fourthly, Use 4.
let it be in the fear of God an use to beware how we take Satan's offers. This
very offer Christ had once made to him by this Dragon, he came to Christ, and
said (Luke 4. 6, 7.) All this power will I give thee, and the glory of them,
for that is delivered unto me, and to whomsoever I will I give it; if thou
therefore wilt worship me, all shall be thine. He said thus far true, that he
had a great stroke in the Kingdoms of the world (but yet it was limited to
him) for it is true, he was the god of the world, in the time of Heathenish and
Popish apostasy; He offers Christ he will give it all to him, if he will fall
down and worship him; The Lord Jesus rejects him, It is written, thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. When he offers such
baits, and barbarous temptations as these be, we are to rej^ct him. The Devil
comes and offers this to the Vicar of Christ (as they call him) I will give you
government over all the Churches in the world, and Kingdoms, and States; and he
in very deed takes Satan's offer, and does take all the pomp and state of the
world. Time was when Naaman the Assyrian offered large matters to Elisha for
healing him of his Leprosy, but the Prophet would have none of them (though he
was no Pagan) for when he came home, they would ask, what did it cost you? he
might say, it cost me not a groat, but what it cost me in the Innes where I
lay; this is honor to Religion: His servant Gehezi indeed runs after him, As
the Lord lives, he shall not go so away, but he will have a reward; He makes
an excuse, There are two sons of the Prophets come, and he desires a talent
of silver, and two changes of garments; and he very liberally fastens a great
deal more on him then he asks: What, says Elisha, Is this a time to take
money, and to receive garments, and Olive-yards, and Vine-yards, and sheep, and
oxen, and menservants, and maidservants? He meant such money as would buy
all these; The leprosy therefore of Naaman shall cleave unto thee: And so
truly the leprosy of Antichrist, and of the Catholic Church cleave to us, if
we take up any thing that derogates from the simple, and naked, and sheep-like
government of Christ Jesus; It will be a Leprosy that will cleave to us, and
make us grow more and more leprous: And therefore it must teach us not to
regard the profits and pleasures of this world: I speak chiefly to men, as we
are Church Members; Such simple government, though it has horns (for the Lamb
has horns, and can tell how to push) yet meekness and simplicity is best:
Just and faithful Administrations becomes the simplicity of civil government,
but how much more the Church of Christ, that so this great and vast Beast may
be kept away from us.

Lastly, Use 5.
it may teach us all, as ever we desire, not to grow monstrous and ugly in the
sight of the Lord Jesus, to take heed of harkening to any power of National
Churches, you will find that this will grow to such ugly deformity, that God
will turn away his face from you: You will never find him as in times of
ignorance; Though God has pardoned what we did in ignorance, not knowing what
we did (as Christ prayed, Luke 23. 34. Father forgive them, they know not what
they do.) And I doubt not but he does the like for many of our dear brethren,
who in their ignorance do submit to the Beast, and the image of the Beast, and
does vouchsafe his gracious presence with them: But for us here, if we shall in
our hearts turn back again to Egypt, and be content to stoop to these
Superstitions, and be thus ruled, for order, and form of worship (believe it)
then we may look for an end of all our prosperity, and liberty of the Churches
here; Then look we should grow misshapen and monstrous, and look ugly, we shall
then soon see an end of all the comforts of the Churches here. As therefore God
has betrusted us with such a handsome body as he is pleased to own, so
continue in your profession, and in the maintenance of the same even to death.

Revel. 13. 3. And I saw one of his heads as it were wounded to death, and his
deadly wound was healed, and all the world wondered after the Beast.
IN these words is described the variation of the state of the Beast in respect
of one of his heads.

1. John saw it as it were wounded to death, and all men thought it
unrecoverable; that is one State.

2. A State of recovery, His deadly wound was healed.

3. The effects of this healing 1. The worlds admiration after the Beast. 2.
Their worship both of the Dragon and the Beast.


For a little opening of the words.

I saw one of his heads.] You heard before that the Beast had seven heads: Now
as the Scribes asked Christ concerning the woman that had seven Husbands, whose
wife shall she be of the seven? So here is a Beast has seven heads, and one is
wounded, which of the seven must it be? To this the Apostle John tells us,
Chap. 17. That five of them were gone; they had been, but were not now, and
these are the seven governments of the Roman State: These five had been Kings
and Consuls, Decemviers, Dictators, Tribunes. The sixth yet was, and that was
the Caesar's, the Roman Emperors they were the sixth head, whether Christian or
Pagan, it differs not much the state of the Government, for they were all
governed by Roman Laws, under one head or other. Now therefore what is this
that is here spoken of, One of his heads were as it were wounded to death? was
it the Roman Emperor, whether Pagan or Christian? you heard reasons before why
it could not be Pagan, nor indeed Christian Rome.

1. That head was crowned, but this has no Crown; All the seven heads were
crowned, they governed and exercised their Administrations in the world, Rev.
12. ^. But here these heads are not crowned, but the Crowns are upon the Horns.

2. Neither can it be they, because of this wound upon this head, The Roman
Christian Emperors they never challenged to themselves Head-ship over the
Church of Rome. Constantine does utterly abandon it; He professes he ought to
be judged by them, and not they by him. And Theodosius does submit himself to
Ambrose censure, and does not exercise any Head-ship over the Church: It was
not therefore the Emperors, for they were not heads of the Church.

3. It is said, the wound here given, was healed, to the admiration of the
world: Now certain it is, the wound given by the Goths and Vandalls, it was
never healed to this day: but the Eastern part was swallowed up by the Turk.
And for the Emperors of the West, Charles the great, and his Successors, though
they healed a branch of it, yet it was far off from healing the wound of the
Roman Empire, those wounds have decayed, and fall short of that which was the
admiration of the Nations: Nor was it the healing of this wound from the first
time it was given, that was the admiration of the world. Therefore it must be
some head that was so wounded, as all the world wondered at it, and were
captive to it; You heard it was not the Roman Christian Emperors, it must be
him that claims to be head over all the Churches, and who is that but Pontifex
maximus? It was that which Theodosias abhorred, he thought it an unworthy style
for a Christian Emperor to be accounted the great high Priest of the Church;
but what he laid down, they willingly took up, to be accounted the great Pastor
of the Church, and therefore he is the head of the Church: For if it be neither
Pagan nor Christian Emperors, it must be the government that succeeded them,
they were the sixth, and he is the seventh: It is the seventh head that was
thus wounded, and whose wound was afterward healed.

Qu. 2. Now a second Question will be, If he be the seventh head, the head of
the Church of Rome; If he be this head, then when was he wounded?

Answ: When the Goths and Vandalls, and Hunnes, and other barbarous Nations
overwhelmed Italy, and the western parts.

1. Alaricus about the year 415. took Rome; and I remember in a Treatise of
Hierom (says he) The government which then was left of the Church before, was
wholly taken away, as if a man were beheaded, and yet it fell after into worse
calamity.

2. It was after taken again by Adulphus, who thought to change the name of
it, and call it Gothia.

3. It was taken again by Gensericus Vandalus.

4. Odoacer Rugionus reigned in it fourteen years.

5. After him, Theodoricus King of the Goths having slain him, his Successor
Totilas destroyed it, and brought it to such desolation, that there was neither
man, woman, nor child seen in it for forty days. Now this was such a wound,
that all the Bishops in the world that were wont to give homage to him, they
now began to neglect his Head-ship, that was but a servant at home: They
despised him, to be the head of the Church, that was a servant to Barbarians;
Insomuch, that the Bishop of Revenna, he challenges universal Supremacy, he
takes indignation at him, that he will be Lord Paramount: But so great was the
wound, that indeed the Roman Bishop was utterly discouraged, and this continued
for 140. years together; and though he would have used many means for his
cure, and have called in help from the Emperor of Greece, yet he was not
willing to help him, for they had fallen out before about worshipping of
Images; he was constant for Images, the other was against them, and so he might
sink or swim for them; so his wound seemed incurable.

Quest: 3. When was this wound cured, and how?

Answ: By degrees.

1. In the year 555. the Lord stirred up Justinian, who by his Generals,
Belisarius and Morses, drove and destroyed the Goths out of Italy.

2. By Justinians novell Constitutions, we decree according to the Canons of
the holy Councels, the most holy Bishop of old Rome to be the first (or to have
the Primacy) of all Priests.

3. Phocas the Parricide about fifty years after, about the year 606. healed
up the wound, granting to Boniface the third, that he should be universal
Bishop, not only the first in order, but in honor also, and that all the whole
world should be his Diocese: And this was the healing of his Head, which was
so perfectly cured, that all the world wondered at the preservation of the head
of this Church, and began by degrees more and more to adore both the Church,
and the Head of it.

Obj. There is an Objection made against this exposition; That by this means
the Bishop of Rome should be healed before he be a head of Beast, for this was
his headship when he was allowed to be chief Lord over all the Churches, and
all the rest to be under him; and the Pope was not this head till the Act of
Phocas.

Answ. I answer, He had not the peaceable possession of this Headship till this
time, but yet it is evident in story that he did claim this supremacy before,
he sought it ambitiously, and it was given him by the devotion of many Bishops,
and Churches, and Nations, it was usually rendered to him long before that time.
Socrates says, that Ballo the Pope had broken forth into the Government over
the Churches: And Bellarmine himself confesses (when he is put to it) that
the Bishop of Rome would never go to any Consultation in the East, but sent
his Legate; for says he, it is not meet the head should follow the members: A
second reason he gives, the Emperor (says he) is at least Vicegerent of the
East, he well may have the material Seat that was taken up by the Emperors,
where shall the Bishop of Rome sit then? and this he gathers out of some of
their writings: So that it is evident, that he did ambitiously desire it, and
the manner was (being elderly men) all his beloved and dear children they call
him Father, and so he takes in good part all their honorable Titles, and he
destributes to them such parcells of respect, as may stand with his own
Sumpremacy, and their subjection, and therefore they need not say, The wounded
head was healed before he was a head of the Beast, for it was in conception
long before. He did from Constantines time seek Supremacy: They confess,
little respect was had to him in Constantines time; But when order was set in
Churches, he took all advantages for his exaltation, and did take all appeals
from others, that what others did to him in respect of his gravity, and
learning, and understanding, he takes as done to him as sitting in Peter's
Chair, and so did challenge headship in those times, and they thought it was
meet to give it; And after this, he was ratified, and confirmed, and
established in peace, then was his wound healed.

Come we then to gather a note or two from the word; The first note you may
observe is this.

The ambition and arrogance of Church Officers clayming headship over the
Church of Christ, Doctr. 1.
the Lord plagues it with a mortal wound, and crusheth it even to the death.

I gather it out of these words, I saw one of his heads as it were wounded to
death; It was one of the heads of the Catholic Church; As the body was a
Monster, so was the head; to set a head over such a vast body it was a Monster
in Gods sight: The Lord will not suffer him to go on in this ambitious design,
but will meet him as he did Balaam, when he crushed his foot against the wall,
and if he had gone on, he had sleine him, Numb. 22. 32, 33. So does the Lord
here meet the Bishop of Rome; if he will be the head of the visible Church, and
animate such a Body, what will the Lord do? He will wound him to death, and
slay him, and crush his spiritual arrogance, that under pretense of Vicarship
to Christ, will yet be the Lord of the Church.

The Reason of the point is,

From the dishonor put upon Christ, Reason 1.
to take the headship from him to whom it belongs. This honor to be the head
of the Church is the proper right of the Lord Jesus: It is his, First by gui^t
from the Father, Ephesians. 1. 22. To be head ever all things to the Church: and
Col. 1. ^8. He is the head of the body the Church. Secondly, it is his by
Purchase: He gave himself to death, even the death of the Cross; and God has
highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name, Phil. 2. 8,
9. He dyed and rose again, that he might be Lord both of the dead and living,
Romans 14. 9. So that now when the Lord has this headship of the Church granted
him, and also has purchased it by his own death; now for another to claym
headship, it must needs imply, either that the head is a non-resident, or else
thrust out of his headship, he does administer. And though the Lord be not
present in body, yet in his spiritual presence, he is as truly present, and
more effectually then any that can be devised. And therefore in regard of
injury done to Christ, which the Lord will not bear, he will therefore crush,
and wound such heads.

2dly, Reason 2.
From the sacrilegious injury put upon the Church: It is an usurpation of all
power from the Church, that if a Catholic Church be met, they will give power
and Laws to other Churches, and look what the second Beast does, he
administers all the power of the first Beast; Look what power is given to the
Catholic Church, that does the Bishop of Rome incorporate to himself, and he
causes an Image of that Church to be made in Provincial Nations; which when
they have taken hold, like a Bears claws, they will not easily be rooted out:
Now this is such injurous usurpation, that from that day to this, they have
never been free; That where the Pope has had to do, the Churches are spoiled
of the authority that is given to them by Christ; And therefore you must not
wonder if the Lord wound the head of such as go on in their wickedness, Psalm.
68. 20, 21. The jealousy of the Lord rises against such usurpations: For a
visible Catholic Church to be set over the world, who may make Laws to rule
conscience, and make Officers for the ordering of all Churches; It is such a
Monster, and the Government of it is so odious in the sight of God, that he
wounds it to death.

For the use of the point, Use 1.
It may serve to provoke us all to pray heartily, and faithfully, for the
repressing of all such heads as either the Bishop of Rome is, or any Images of
him whatsoever they be. You read of a little horn in Daniel, whose root was
stubbed up; wherever you read of any horns that will usurp power over the
Church, look at it (as it is) abominable to Christ, it provokes the spirit of
Christ, Sovereign Authority is his: If the Lord be set upon the hill of Sion,
he will wound the Bishop of Rome, or any that shall take his Image; He will
give them a deadly blow, especially when they are more arrogant, then his
Indignation arises against them, to execute judgment on such. The headship of
the Church is a singular privilege to the Lord Jesus, and incompitable to any:
They must either take Christ's office out of his hands, or think him negligent,
or non-resident, and that he does not sufficiently discharge his headship, and
therefore they will usurp an office in his name, but that is abominable to
Christ.

Obj. But you will say, So we shall pluck the Crown off from the heads of
Christian Princes, for they challenge that style to be head of the Church.

Answ. I do not know any Christian Prince that chalengeth that style. That
which was sometimes given to Saul, may be given to Princes, 1 Samuel 15. 17. When
thou wast little in thine eyes, wast thou not made the head of the Tribes of
Israel? That is true, and so the King is head of all the Peers, and head of
all the Shires, and the Churches are in some or other of them, that is,

1. They have power over the Church in all civil matters.

2. And I will say thus much, that they have power to redress and reform
inordinate abuses in the Church, provoking Church officers to do it; If they
do not, other Churches are to treat with them; and if their corruptions be
prejudicial either to the doctrine of the Gospel, or if they degenerate to any
Tyranny, they are to look to redress such things, but this gives them not
headship over the Church; over their persons it does, but not over the Church,
that is,

1. They have no power either to call Church Officers, or to depose them.

2. They have no power to dispense Church Censures.

3. They have no power to suspend Church liberties.

4. They have no power to appoint Church-ordinances; nor power to administer
any matter further then any other member of the Church: and this did the Church
of England acknowledge, and no more then this was due: Therefore we allow some
power and authority to Princes, and Magistrates, in the sense spoken of; If
they claim any further, it will so kindle the jealousy of the Lord, that the
Lord will certainly wound it to the cracking of the Crowns of all that take it
upon them: which may be a notable warning to all Churchmen (I mean Church
officers) to beware of cleeking into their hands the power which God has not
given them; the Lord will wound their heads, he will not endure it, it is a
privilege that he has purchased with his own blood. I think there is no need
here to press it; but this let me say, it is a just motive to pray the more
ardently, and faithfully for the crushing of such heads, wherever the Lord
finds any arrogant head, that any Church Officer will undertake to give Laws
to the Churches in their diocese, that they will put Officers upon them, that
they will suspend them at their pleasure, and put in, and put out, whether the
Church will or no; This kind of insolency in such a state, let it look for a
wound, for a wound it shall have. And therefore, we are the more encouraged to
pray for, and to look for deliverance from these Heads; for John tells us, 1
John 5. 14. that if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us; And
this is according to the will of God, that all ambitious heads be wounded: What
he has done he will do, There is no new thing under the Sun; he spares, and
changes, and wounds in every change: Persons are changed, but Gods
administrations are one and the same: If Gods indignation have been ardently
kindled against the Bishop of Rome, he will certainly visit such powers as
take upon them to put doctrine upon the Church; to take away Church liberties;
and sometimes to scater one Church from another, the Lord will certainly visit
it, we may pray for it, and comfortably expect it.

The next note is this;

That though God do wound and crush, Doctr. 2.
and repress the arrogance of Church officers, affecting headship over all
Churches for a time, yet he does sometimes again heal their wounds, and bind
up their breaches, and give free passage to their ambitious designs.

This is evident here, I saw one of his heads, as it were wounded to death (and
you have heard when, and how) and yet, which is wonderful, His deadly wound
was healed, and that to the admiration of all the world; And all the world
wondered after the Beast, to see a wound so really and perfectly healed: when
this Church was wounded, afterward the Pope was perfectly recovered, but the
wound of Caesar's head was left bleeding, both in the East and West. This head
must therefore be the spiritual head of Rome: God though he repress some
insolency, yet he does many times give free passage to their designs at
length. He did so with Balaam, he met with him in the way, and had not the Ass
hindered, certainly he had slain him, Numb. 22. 32. Because thy way was perverse
before me, says God: Balaak had sent him word, that if he would come and curse
the people that were come out of Egypt, that he would give him this, and that;
he saw he had an eye to these outward things; The Lord seeing his way perverse,
he would have killed him; but yet at length in v. 35. The Angel of the Lord
said unto Balaam, if it be thy mind to go, I will give thee leave, go with the
men, but only the word that I shall speak unto thee, that thou shall speak;
And when he comes, he does bless the people to the Indignation of the King of
Moab; but afterward when Balaam saw that he should loose all that he came for;
come, says he to the King, take some course to invite the Gallants of Israel
to a feast (and it was an Idolatrous feast to the honor of Baal Peor) and so
the anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and there were four and
twenty thousand dyed of the Plague, and at length Balaam was slain also: But
yet you see, he gives way to his coveteous designs, to satisfy himself to
the full, though he afterward visited his Sin upon him. So did the Lord here
with the Bishop of Rome; he wounded him as it were to death, and afterward he
heals him, and raises him up again, and sent Justinian to destroy the Goths
out of Italy; and he being a wise man, gives him his Titles, and makes him
Bishop of Bishops, inspector over all the rest, and perfectly cures him; That
whereas before he had lost his Titles, and one or other wrote against him; the
Emperor being loath to make their own Archbishop (that lived in their City
with them) chief, for disturbing their civil Government; They had rather
confer all that honor upon him that had been so admired and worshipped for so
many years, especially having had 32 M^nasteries, and had been more Orthodoxall
then all other Churches: These were great inducements to give all honor to the
Pope, though they saw him desperately wounded; but when they see him recovered,
they wonder at him, and every one submits to him, especially the Western parts;
though they in the East also would consult with him, and be led and guided by
him, and all their decrees in counsel were referred to him; if he did dislike
them, they were antequated; if he did approve them, they were received as
Authentical Laws of the Church.

You may ask, why the Lord would heal such an abominable and ugly Beast, this
visible Catholic Church, and this Beast that was one of the heads of this
Church; for he had a beastly shape; take him alone without the other Beast, and
take them together, here is a great Beast; afterward he is called in Chap. 17.
the great whore, and she sits upon this Beast, and he has all his supportance
from her; he restores the Church, and the head of the Beast to that state they
were in before; The reason why God does this is double.

First, Reason 1.
in regard of his just displeasure against the backsliding apostacies of the
Church in such times: When the Lord sees the spirits of men are bent to
apostasy and backsliding, so as that they reject the simplicity of the Gospel
of Christ, and if they might have it they will not; now it is a righteous thing
with God to plague them with the arrogance and tyranny of Antichrist: If I come
in my Fathers name, you will not receive me; if another come in his own name,
him you will receive; Now it is a just judgment of God, if Christ come and
offer himself in the simplicity of his Ordinances, and they think this is too
mean, and does not reach the state of an Imperial City, but they must have
such and such orders in all Churches, and Churches must be distinguished by
such Patrons, and it is fit that one be Lord Paramount over them all, and none
is so fit as the Bishop of Rome; If people dote upon such (some goodly shape,
but drawn by the inventions of men) well you shall have such Bishops: This head
that sometimes has been thus wounded, that some have had cause of solemn
praise for his wounding, and God has by this means given the Churches liberty
to take some better way of worship, but they would not, well you shall have
enough of him. It is one of Solomon's Proverbs, (Chap. 14. 14.) the Backslider
in heart shall be filled with his own ways; If you dote after inventions of
men, you shall be filled with vain Superstition to the contentment of your own
hearts. God out of his tender faithfulness to his Church he will redeem some,
and does give them fair opportunities to undertake their own liberties out of
the usurpations of men; but if they will rather sit under the shadow of Egypt,
then feed upon Manna, then go you back again says God, none of you shall eat
of that which I have prepared, that is one Reason; Such backsliders that
delight in such communion in such heads over their Churches, it is just with
God to fill them with their own inventions.

The second Reason is taken from the just judgment of God upon such kind of
heads, Reason 2.
that do affect such ambition; the Lord will show them this favor, he will
cross them as he did Balaam; but if their hearts be bent to go on in their
mischevous course, he gives them leave to fulfill their own lusts to their own
perdition; And thus he did Balaam, he gave him leave not only to bless the
people, but to draw them aside from God; for he could not have taken a more
ready course to have cast them out of Gods favor, then to draw them to offer
Sacrafice to Baal, for that was one of the worst dunghill gods. It is out of
Gods righteous judgment, when a man will not be reclaimed, when the Lord
wounds, and crushes him, and brings him to the last gasp, if he have a
licourish affection still; now it is an usual thing with God to pay men to
their own perdition: And therefore in Rev. 17. 11. It is said, the beast that
was and is not, shall go into perdition, that is the head of this Beast; that
is the next news you hear of this second beast here in the Text, and
therefore it is called both the beast, and the head of the beast, where the
first beast is presented in the form of a great whore, who is to be brought to
the last gasp; A whore she was, but he presents her to John as a great beast;
Now he gives him leave to rise again to his own perdition, and of many
thousands more. Thus you see the truth of the point.

Now for the use of it.

First, Use 1.
it may be a just watchword and warning to all the Sons of men, to beware of
Gods checks. When the Lord checks you, crushes your Crowns, and exposes you to
this and that danger in one kind or other, beware of this; whether you be the
children of God or not, yet come home effectually to him; for this you shall
find, if you be in distress, and call, he is ready to hear; He will hear
Ishmael; and he hears the Lions that roar, and seek their meat of him; He will
many times, once, or twice, or thrice do thus: But if the Lord once strike, and
almost crush you, beware now that you lay aside all carnal ends and ambitious
designs; for otherwise, if you shall recover again, and persist in your
former ways without repentance, then the next news is, you go on to
perdition: And therefore when ever the Lord affects us, and afflicts us in any
kind, it is heavenly wisdom to be warned by the least phylip of his finger; be
warned by any sicknesses, crosses, danger by Land or Sea, by any thing
whatsoever the Lord is pleased to exercise you with, this is both childrens
bread, and the bread of strangers: Beware you go not on still, but if the Lord
check you, then turn back again; but if you go forward, be sure you go to
Godward, and according to Gods will, and after Gods ends:

This is that which God calls for, that you walk more exactly, and more
accurately, Ephesians. 5. 15. See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools,
but as wise, redeeming the time; because God has thus and thus taken pains
with you, and has thus and thus been as a Leopard in your paths. It is a
strong speech that in Amos 3. 5. Will a man lay a snare (and the word is a
deadly snare) will a man lay a deadly snare, and take it up, and catch nothing?
The Lord will catch a prey when he lays a trap for us, and he will not leave
till he have girded our loins and our hearts close to him, and made us more
exact in our way, or otherwise if he let us slip, it will be to perdition: And
therefore let all that hear the word, ever be sensible of the least wounds and
checks, especially if they grow to some bulky frame: I saw one of his heads as
it were wounded to death, and this deadly wound was healed, and it was healed
to immortal perdition, and therefore all that wonder after the Beast, they are
such as have no part in the Lambs book of Life, they have no part in Christ.

Secondly, Use 2.
It may teach us the more earnestly to wrestle with God by faithful and
earnest prayer for any of the Churches of Christ in any parts of the world;
that if the Lord give them an opportunity to wound the head of any Image of the
Beast, any of his heads or horns, then it will be necessary that all such
Churches do take the hint and opportunity that God puts into their hands, and
that they do not rather close with such heads whom God wounds, and be loath to
lay hold of those liberties that he procures for them: But let this be the
constant care of Christians to desire that such heads may not be usurping: but
if the Lord gives an opportunity, the Lord looks that all Christians should
improve it, to vindicate themselves, when the Lord gives any hint thereof: When
he gives an opportunity, then is the time; when the iron is hot, then strike;
Entreat God, that when he puts a prize into their hands, that they then may
learn to get wisdom, and not in their hearts turn to tolerate arrogant
designs, and such as are ugly in the sight of God: When God wounds the head of
Enemies, and casts shame upon them, and has rescued his people from them; If
Churches shall again comply with them, then what will the end of that be? It is
a fearful thing, such kind of Heads go to perdition, and those that dote upon
such Heads. It is a check especially for this great beast of Rome, but it will
be dangerous for other States too: This will be the final issue, they shall
have enough of it, they shall be filled with Hirarchicall power, and with their
Agents in Civil States, their feet like a Bear will raven in all, that they
shall all be weary of the burden, and shall be so filled with them, as to spew
them out of their mouths: And therefore how should we help the people of God to
traverse that wounded Head that it never rise up more.

Thirdly, Use 3.
this may serve to teach such whose Heads have at any time been wounded; As
there is none of the servants of God, but sometimes he will have them sacrifice
their Isaac, that which is most dear to them: The Lord will rend away our most
desirable comforts; he will follow us there, where we most of all are affected:
And let this teach the people of God, that if the Lord then bow their hearts to
unfeigned repentance, turning from all evil in their hands and hearts, how
then? If the Lord will restore the wounded head of a beast, a beastly head, of
a beastly shape, will he not much more restore the hearts of his servants that
seek to him for healing of all their corruptions, and scattering all their
temptations, that they may walk before him according to to his will? What
says the holy Ghost, Hos. 6. 1, 2. He puts words into their mouths, come let
us return unto the Lord: He has torn, and he will heal us; he has smitten,
and he will bind us up: after two days will he revive us, and the third day he
will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight. Wherein he shows the means
whereby the Lord will apply this medicine to his own servants, namely by the
death and resurrection of Christ, to which he does allude; that as Christ dyed,
and rose the third day, so shall all that have part and portion in him; They
may lie in danger, but they shall come out in due time: but however, it should
be a warning to the sons of men how they adventure their lives by going into
any danger where God calls them not: But if you be brought into danger when the
Lord does deliver, you have cause to bless him, and to render your selves and
Families back to him, that you may walk with more girt up spirits to God, that
so he may not repent of what deliverances he vouchsafes to you.

Rev. 13. the latter part of the 3. and 4. ver. And all the world wondered
after the Beast.

And they worshipped the Dragon who gave power unto the Beast, and they
worshipped the Beast, saying, who is like unto the Beast? who is able to make
War with him?


I Come now to speak of the sequel of the healing of this wound; upon the
healing of it there is a double effect.

1. The admiration of the world after the Beast.

2. A worship, set forth by a double object, the Dragon, and the Beast.

3. The causes are set forth that made them to worship them both; The Dragon in
that he gave power to the Beast, and the Beast for his unmatchable power. Who
is like unto the Beast? who is able to make war with him? Here might be three
or four Notes justly gathered from hence, but because I affect brevity in
mystical Scriptures, I shall compact them into one: The note is this;

That upon the healing of the Beasts wounded head, Doctrine.
all the world fell into an admiration of the Beast, and of his power, yea into
an adoration of worship, both of the Beast, and of the Dragon.

This contains both the latter end of the third, and part of the fourth verse.

For the causes of this Admiration, they will be just reasons of the point.

To open the Doctrine [upon the healing of this wounded head of the Beast]
Remember the Beast is the Roman Catholic visible Church, whereof Rome was the
mother City, and mother Church, accounted of all the Churches in the world, and
the Pope is the visible head of this Church, in this Chapter called the seventh
head.

Observe 2ly. the healing of this seventh Head, wounded by the captivity and
calamity it fell into by barbarous Nations. Upon the healing of this wounded
Head, by the removal, and scattering, and subduing of these Enemies, as also by
the plaster that was put to him, when such Titles of Sovereign Authority, were
put upon him by the Emperors: Now this was the Original of that wonder, for so
it comes in; His deadly wound was healed, and all the world wondered after the
beast: And so he expresses it, Chap. 17. 8. All that dwell upon the earth
shall wonder when they behold the Beast that was, and is not, and yet is. He
was when he flourished, as that which was the great Authority of the world: He
is not, when he is wounded in his head; but as it were trodden under foot,
wounded to death, as if he had not been: But yet he is again, that is, he is
restored: And they that dwell on the earth, when they saw that, wondered to
behold the Beast that was, and is not, and yet is; A Beast that cannot be
crushed and beaten down with such desperate calamities, so that is the occasion
of their wonderment; now upon this occasion they fell into an admiration of the
Beast, and of his power. An admiration implies some high esteem of some great
happiness betiding this Beast, not only beyond their expectation, but
transcendant, beyond their apprehension and capacity to understand. For a man
does not admire a thing, unless it go not only beyond expectation, but is
transcendant above his reason and understanding. Yea, beyond any means he
could use to bring such a thing to pass: Therefore when they see this great
change, they fall admiring of the Beast, and the head of the Beast, and of the
Dragon that gave power to the Beast, and worship them both. For their
Admiration then, let me speak something of that; and then of their Adoration
both of the Beast, and of the Dragon.

It was in a way of Admiration; I will not say what expressions some have made
of it, some that were called Fathers of the Church, and have left such things
in writing: It would mightily possess one with Admiration of the Sea of Rome,
looking at him as the Lion of the Tribe of Judah; looking at him as by his
Primacy to be like Adam, for his Faith like Abraham, for his government like
Noah, gathering all the world under him; for Order like Melchisedech, for his
function, to be Christ himself, deservedly to be God, after sometimes called
the Vicar of Christ, and of God; mavelous transcendant strains put upon him,
which argues a high esteem of him: But to omit such things as are but
flourishes, these are real.

1. That all the Churches of the world are to receive all their doctrine and
worship from them; Though it were never so superstitious, as worshipping of
Angels, and Saints, and making use of their meditation besides Christ; and they
did receive from them more then all this, which is the life and quintiscence of
all. They looked from the Father of the Catholic visible Church to receive
Indulgences, and pardon of all their sins: If he retained them, then they
were retained; if he remitted them, they were remitted: This they looked for
from him, not only for Doctrine and worship, but for sealing up their Pardon
for so many hundreds and thousands of years, and not sealed with wax, but with
a wap of Lead, and a Seal set on that: And this was the chief comfort of
troubled minds in those ages, these things they received from them, and
admirable honor they put upon that Beast, to receive all such things from them.

2. They made to Rome all their Appeals: What ever government there was in the
Christian world, from thence were their Laws, and thither were their Appeals,
as out of England and many other places, to the great disturbance of Church and
Commonwealth, as also large and bountiful payments were made to them: It were
a vast thing to sum up the total sum of constant payments that were from every
Kingdom repayed to the Sea of Rome: And as their Appeals and Payments went to
Rome, so did their bodies on pilgrimage, and it was thought a great devotion to
kiss the feet of the Pope, and to see those blessed Shrines; Thus was their
admiration of the Beast.

3. They fetched from Rome the Ordination of all their chief Officers: Any
Archbishop, who-ever chose him, yet he was not installed, but he must fetch it
from Rome, and pay well for it. And from thence they fetched all their
Coronation of Kings and Emperors; and sundry fundamental Laws of every
Catholic Kingdom were derived from thence. All their Dispensations were
fetched from thence, that Princes might marry where they would: And
dispensation from Oaths, and from Marriages contracted, all these things they
fetched from Rome: It was an admirable honor they put upon the Church of Rome,
and upon the Head of it; what ever the first Beast did, the second Beast also
did; and so in worshipping the one, they worshipped the other; and in admiring
one, they admired both.

4. They express their admiration in this, that they will undertake
establishing of Laws from the Sea of Rome, and persecution of such godly
persons as did not submit, such as were different in their minds from the
Catholic Church, if they never so little swerve from that, they undertook to
execute the Laws of the Church: And if the Church declared him him to be an
Heretic, there was no more to do, the Commonwealth presently put him to
death: And as they took upon them persecution of their Subjects at home, so the
Subjects took upon them to depose their Princes, and might depose them, if they
would not submit their power to the Pope, so that there was no subsisting
without submitting to them. And which is a branch of this, they undertook a
vast and costly War abroad, against the common Enemy the Turk, whereas in very
deed, whilst the Pope stands, it is not possible any War should prosper against
him; for it was for the sin of Rome that the Turk was advanced, a barbarous
and beastly Enemy, to punish a beastly Religion: This was their admiration.

And all the world wondered after the Beast.] He means as he expounds
himself, ver. 8. Those whose names are not written in the book of the life of
the Lamb. They that were redeemed from the world, they were not of the world,
though they lived in it: but those in the world that were of the world, they
did honor this beast, and were subject to him, and gave all their devotion to
the Catholic Church: And when I say all the world, I mean all the Christian
world, which was the visible face of the world, the reputed world; These
barbarous Nations were not then so owned; but as for the Eastern world, they
were all willing to give way to this transcendant Usurpation of the Bishop of
Rome in a general Council at Asia: They looked at the reigning and Imperial
City of Rome, as the chiefest Seat of the Catholic Church, the highest throne
of that Church, and were content that no Council should be ratified but by
him: If he ratified a Council in so many Canons, it was established; if he
did not, then they were not; and the Emperors were willing it should be so,
because they found insufficiency in themselves to maintain the Royal City of
Rome against barbarous Nations: And therefore they thought it State Policy to
maintain the Bishop of Rome, and let him grow up to as great power as he could;
It was as they thought, the preservation of their State (but it was indeed
their ruin) so they willingly gave their power to the beast: Now the barbarous
Nations that had not forsaken the Country, and had builded them houses, they
that were not driven out (as many rested in some parts of the Empire) they
willingly closed with such a Religion as was pretty savoury to their
apprehensions, they began to comply with it, and put their necks under it.
Charles the Great having received the Kingdom of France from the Pope, he did
his best endeavor to bring the people to yield themselves, but the people were
somewhat sour and rugged that way to be wrought upon: Therefore the Pope had
another sophistry to help himself; He sends three Apostles, Gregory the Great,
he was one Apostle that he sent for England, and he brings great Reformation,
that is, he sways the whole State to the Bishop of Rome, and those that would
not yield were miserably slaughtered. And Bonifacius he did the like in
Genevah, and in France, and Denmark, and Germany; And where ever the world was
Christian, it was now Catholic, all submitted to the Church of Rome; and so by
this means all the world admired him, they received doctrine and worship from
Rome, they will go for pardon of Sin thither: They make Pilgrimages to Rome,
Appeals to Rome; From thence they receive their fundamental Constitutions,
Disp^nsations, Persecutions, deposition of Princes; They receive and undertake
general war from thence for the recovery of the holy Land: And in one word, in
such admiration the Beast of Rome was, that it was a Proverb among them, He
ruled all the world; and therefore he ruled all the Churches, and was esteemed
to be God on Earth: Thus did all the world wonder after the Beast, and admire
him, and so did they also hi^ power: They did exc^^dingly admire his power; Who
is like unto the Beast? who is able to make war with him? It is not clear
adoration, but it is an attributing to the Beast, that which is peculiar to
God; Who is like unto the Lord our God? Exodus 15. 11. It is a style of the high
and mighty God: This admiration of this wonderful power and holiness it is
now added to the Pope: Who is like unto the Beast? who is able to make war
with him? Who is the Lord of hosts but our God? as if he were invincible: For
they had found, that when some of the Grecian Emperors that had given their
power to the Beast did vary in point of judgment (as they did not love to take
up the worship of Images) then the Beast is offended, and excommunicates him,
and deprives him of his Empire, and gives it to Charles the Great; takes away
the Kingdom of France, puts him into a Monastery, removes Frederick, first
and second: And what he did with King John of England, you know; He deprived
him of his Kingdom, and he makes some of them do very hard penance, whiles he
was solacing himself with his Harlot: She being more compassionate then he,
besought his Holiness to have compassion on him, and so he sent him back, yet
afterward they made him away: And his Son, when they came to Crown him, it
must be with the Popes foot; and when he has done, he dasheth it off, to show,
that he has power to take it as easily from him, as to fell it from his head.
Though great men, and greatly beloved of the people, all is nothing, if they be
alienated from the Pope: All men's affections are his; when he turns, the whole
body turns; when the head moves, the whole body does accordingly: So that it
was mavelous admirable power that he had; whom he would he set up, and whom
he would he pulled down. Peter, he said, gave it to him, and he did what he
would to those that were on the earth, this is great power. They profess, if
their holy Father carry many millions of souls to Hell, yet no man must say,
Sir, why do you so: All appeals were from him, so that there is transcendant,
sovereign power, and indeed divine, such as no man can attain; Power to pardon
sin, power to bind Conscience, to dispense with the Law of God, to interpret
and judge of Scripture as he sees cause, and this is such power, as is far above
the reach of man: None of them all have such power as he, not those that are
called Gods: So they admire his power, what he can do to inward or outward man,
to public or private States. And they do not only admire the Catholic
Church, and the head of it, and adore them; but in both these they adore the
Dragon that gave all this power to the Beast. The meaning may be expressed in two
branches.

1. The Dragon is expressed as animating heathen Rome, for that has seven
heads and ten horns, which are the arms, both of heathen Rome, and of this
Beast: Now he is called the Dragon, as he acted heathen Rome, and as he was
Lord of heathen Rome, he gave all this power to the Pope; For they thought it
meet, since it was the Imperial City when it was Pagan, that therefore it
should be the mother of all Churches: And being the Imperial City, it was the
bloud-sucker of many millions of the souls of Gods servants, that caused the
Dragon to put that honor upon Rome.

2. But that is not all, There is another branch comes nearer the full meaning
of the Text; that was for the honoring of the Bishop of Rome, and of the
Catholic Church, viz. taking another doctrine for the Gospel, their Idolatry
for pure worship, their Government for the discipline of Christ, their pardons
for Justification of sin by Christ; In all this they do indeed give true
worship to the Dragon, for what are all these but Images, they are none of Gods
Ordinances; if you refer them to the heads of Scripture, they are but Images
of Christ; In stead of the Ministry of Christ, you have doctrines of men; In
stead of justification by the righteousness of Christ, you have justification
by works; In stead of pardon of Sin from Christ, you have it from the Pope; All
things are in another form, an Image of another form set up, devised,
contrary to what the word establishes: Now you shall find this to be true; if
you do vary from the kingdom of God, and Christ, then you worship the Dragon:
You read in 2 Chronicles. 11. 15. Jeroboam ordained him Priests, for the high
places, and for the Devils, and for the Calves, which he had made: he had no
Priests but for the golden Calves, and what were they? they were but Images,
and his intendment was not to bring in another object of worship, but another
manner of worship; Jeroboam worshipped Jehovah in Images, which God had not
appointed, and so he worshipped the Divill, and not God. And you shall read,
when the Turk was brought in to revenge the Idolatry of Christendom, Rev. 9.
20. It is said, The people that were not cut off with the plague, they repented
not of the work of their hands, that they should not worship Devils, and Idols
of Gold and Silver, and brass, and Stone, and of wood, which neither can see,
nor hear, nor walk: which shows, that when men worship Images, that is, God in
Images; it is not God that is so worshipped, but the Divill, and all such
worship does not advance the kingdom of God, but the kingdom of the Devil,
therefore it is real honor to him: and therefore this their taking all this
vast honor (all Churches receiving all from them) is none of Gods Institution,
but the Devils practice, for it was the Devil that gave him his power and
great authority; Therefore says the holy Ghost, they worshipped the Dragon who
gave power unto the Beast, and they worshipped the beast: This worship of the
beast they gave it all to him that gave this power to him, which was to the
Dragon; and therefore you read that he had the key of the bottomless pit, Rev.
9. 1, 2. And he opened the bottomless pit, and there arose a smoke out of the
pit, as the smoke of a great furnace, and there came out of the smoke locusts
upon the earth: There went out Monks and Friars, and a rabble of all
superstition.

Now if you shall ask the reason why people upon the healing of this wound did
so mightily admire both the visible Catholic Church, and the head of it, and
adore both, and Satan himself in both? The reason was,

First, Reason 1.
from the wrong Interpretation of some Scriptures, which were very frequent
with them in those days, and are still; and that was, that the Catholic Roman
Church was builded upon a rock, and that rock was the Bishop of Rome, and into
his hand the Lord Jesus by Peter had given the keys of the kingdom of Heaven,
and these keys had absolute universal power to bind on Earth, and upon his
binding on earth, Christ would bind in heaven: this was an error in judgment
that did so possess their hearts, that upon the healing of this wounded head,
all the world did admire him: Therefore Bellarmine makes a large discourse;
Behold, I lay in Zion a chief corner stone, and they that trust in him shall
never be confounded; and so never was there any man that was an enemy to the
Catholic Church, but was confounded; nor never did any man stand for the
Catholic Church, but was preserved: and so they did admire him; A great
inundation of barbarous Nations were all driven out by the piety of the Bishop
of Rome; they were able to overturn the Emperors of the East (and it was
overturned) and bring them to his feet, and all to be at his disposing; This
was some confirmation to them, that he was the successor of Peter, that now
whoever is saved, it must be by the power of this key, or else never look for
any saving in this world.

A second reason may be taken from the correspondency and plausablenesse of
such a kind of Religion and Government to carnal reason. Reason 2.
especially when it is subdued by any terrors of consceence: for it was a
season (and that held many years together) wherein the Priests, Friars, and
Monks, had mavelous power to sting the consciences of men with the
loathsomeness of their sin in the sight of God, and they had admirable
dexterity therein: These four things were all the matter of their Sermons,
Virtue and vice, Heaven and Hell; If you be virtuous, then you shall go to
Heaven; If you be vicious, then you must go to Hell: Now they would so convince
men's consciences, and upon conviction bind the conscience under terror, as
eternally shut out of Heaven, for want of virtue, which they had not; that
indeed when these men's consciences are thus perplexed and wounded, here is a
Religion that finds them so many salves and medicines, as ease the power, but
not remove the cause of the disease; that is, they set men a course; well,
though you be vicious, and though Hell be dreadful, yet Purgatory may ease you
by Prayer, and you may be dispensed with from going to Hell, especially by the
Popes pardon, or by your own works, by your confessions, by selfe-whippings
and scourgings, or by going a Pilgrimage, you may be discharged of this burden;
This was very plausable to carnal reason, especially if they gave so much to
such a Monastery, that they may offer so many Sacraments for them (for they
look at the bread in the Lords supper as a propiatory Sacrament:) here were so
many means to satisfy the consciences of those that were superstitious, as
nothing could be devised to give better content to the spirits of men in those
days: any man that knows it, shall find it true, that when the conscience is
terrified with the curse of Gods Law, and never showed the true way of
fellowship with Christ, no man is so tender and conscionable in the performance
of all duties as they: If you will have them kiss the Popes foot, or give so
much to a Monastery; and by this means Hell shall be shut against them, and
Purgatory discharged: But for assurance of Salvation in Christ, they could not
endure that; they that stood for that, they tell them, what, you will not have
men do good works, away with that, faggot and halter for such Heretics.

Thirdly, Reason 2.
there was a third Reason, and that was from the great reverence of all
Counsels, and Synods to the Sea of Rome. The City of Rome had wont to be the
imperial City, now in such a case as this they thought it but reasonable; In
heathenish Rome they gave all worship to them, and so let Christian Rome give
all their worship to the chief Head there, and so to their mother Church, all
Catholics would encourage others so to do; and so by this means there were
such encouragements laid for admiration and adoration, that you may not wonder
at what the holy Ghost says, That when the wound was healed, all the world
wondered after the beast, saying, who is like unto the beast? who is able to
make war with him? Not the Emperors of the East and West, not the King of
England, France, Spain, nor all that have been of greatest force, they were
none of them able to hold up their heads against this great Beast. The use of
this point is thus much;

First, Use 1.
you may observe from hence, that Universality, and Prosperity, though they be
given for two notes of a true Church by the Papists, yet indeed they are but
sopisticall, deceitful delusions; They are not such marks of a Church as are
peculiar to a true Church; here is Universality, All the world wondered after
the beast; and here is Prosperity, all the world adore, and admire the Beast;
Who is like unto the beast? who is able to make war with him? Not all the
Princes of the world: So that here is external prosperity, for so they call
it; here are both these concur, and they do indeed argue a Catholic Church,
as Bellarmine says; but note this, that Catholic Church which is visible,
(which is the Roman visible Catholic Church) the Scripture holds it forth as a
great, and ugly, and monstrous Beast: look not therefore at these as any good
marks and signs, by which Jesuits, and Seminaries are wont to draw to deep
devotion to the Catholic Church, for all the world have run this way, there is
but a handful, a few of such as are otherwise minded; what is Genevah and some
others to Rome? what have they been able to do in comparison of the Church of
Rome, which is the Church of Churches, none have been able to do as they.

Secondly, Use 2.
we may see the danger of this admiration, and adoration, the deadly and
desperate danger of adoring the Catholic visible Church and the Dragon. It is
the cunning of these Priests and Jesuits to draw men by all means to be at
least devoted to the Catholic Church, and to submit their power thereunto; for
they say there is no union with Christ the head, unless you be united to the
visible head on Earth; this is their usual plea: Now mark what the holy Ghost
speaks in this Text; he does say, that all the worship of this mother Church is
but the worship of the Dragon. Men are devoutly adicted to give up their souls
to the Devil, when they give up themselves to the Catholic visible Church,
the Lord professes he is not honored by them; they profess honor to
he-Saints and shee-Saints, and dead Saints, and to all relics and remnants of
them; the honor of them is given unto the Devil, and not to God. That look
what Paul says of heathen Rome, John speaks of christian Rome; This I say,
says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10. 20. That the things which the Gentiles sacrifice,
they sacrifice to Devils, and not to God; and I would not that ye should have
fellowship with Devils; And so this says John the holy Apostle (equal to the
Apostle Paul, or next him, but here guided equally with Paul in the Authentical
word of God) he says, They that worship God according to the prescript of the
Church of Rome, they worship the Devils, and not God; they worship the Dragon,
the old Serpent. So that it is not so light a matter as Gallants at Court, and
great Kings apprehend, they will be reconciled to their mother Church, they
will go a Pilgrimage that is devised by the Pope, and perform duties as their
ghostly Father directs them, and have their bead-prayers; In all this what do
they do? This is a worship to the great beast, but this is the issue, and
substance of it, they do indeed worship the Dragon; It is not the Lord Jesus,
nor God the Father, nor the blessed spirit that is thus worshipped, but this is
indeed the worship of the Devil.

Thirdly, Use 3.
this may serve to teach us, to bless the name of the Lord, that has
delivered us from this admiration and adoration, from this woeful Captivity and
Calamity whereto our Fathers have been enthralled; All those of them whose
names are not written in the Lambs book of life, they were all led this way;
and it is a mavelous deliverance that God has wrought for us in taking our
Religion from universality, and from outward prosperity. It is sometimes a
snare to Christians, this kind of Government that we have, and they are apt to
say what do any of the great Nations of the world for worship and Government;
did you ever know any such thing authorized in any Kingdom? There is an inward
principle in us by nature to do as all the world do: what, are we more wise
then they? It is a great temptation, but we have cause to bless God that has
wrought deliverance for us; But what if all the world did worship the Devil,
as time was when they did? what if all the world worship the Beast, and the
Dragon that gave power to the Beast, must we do so? And as they are not
grounds of our worship, so they are fit grounds of unfeigned thankfulness to
God that has delivered us from that Religion by which all the world was
bewitched to give their Crowns, Honors, Bodies, and States to the devotion of
the visible Catholic Church, and to the head of that Church: It is cause of
everlasting thankfulness and watchfulness, not to be deluded by fine shows
of worldly men, but let us see and know where true worship lies, as the Lord
has declared himself in Christ, and held him forth in the Gospel of truth.

Forthly, Use 4.
let it teach us all where to bestow our admiration, and adoration; It was a
charge that our Savior gave to the Devil, (and which accordingly he himself
practiced, and requires us to do) Mat. 4. 10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy
God, and him only shall thou serve: The Devil asks this of Christ to bow
down to him and worship him; The Lords Indignation is kindled, his holy Zeal
is inflamed against such a Sacriligious request; Get thee hence Satan, for it
is written, thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve. And as we are to worship him alone, and no God but him, so we are to
admire none but him; Who is like unto thee, O Lord amongst the Gods? who is
like unto thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders,
Exodus 15. 11. There is matter of admiration; who is a God like unto the Lord
that forgiveth Iniquity, Transgression and Sin; of which you read, Mic. 7.
18. and which the Church holds forth there upon this very ground: who is a God
like unto thee? why what is there in him that you so magnify him? he is a God
that forgives Iniquity, Transgression, and Sin; here is cause indeed of
admiration. They admire and adore the Pope, why? Because they had satisfaction
to their consciences in their way, and an ungrounded hope of a better state in
another world, and pardon of Sin in this, and now they come to fellowship
with Christ by the worship of the Devil: But who is a God like unto thee that
pardons Iniquity, Transgression, and Sin? So that here is indeed matter of
due admiration, and let it be fastened there. When a man's soul is brought low
with the sense of Sin, and overpoured with the burden that lies upon his
conscience by reason of the guilt of Sin; what is matter of admiration now?
who is a God like unto thee, that passes by Iniquity, transgression, and sin?
It is not the Pope of Rome that can take away sin, it is not all the cunning of
the Dragon that can do it: And therefore to what end are all the admirations,
and worships that are put upon the Bishop of Rome and the Dragon that gave him
his power? They may please themselves in what satisfaction they apprehend they
have, but their own principles possess them, that they can never come to see
the admirable goodness of God in forgiving their Sins. But now when the Lord
sheds abroad a spirit of grace and peace in the conscience, and applies the
goodness of Christ to the discharge of the burden of Sin, and of quickening
the heart in the peace of Christ Jesus, this breeds admiration: Blessed be God
the Father of mercy, and God of all consolation, that of his abundant mercy
has begotten us again to a lively hope: I say this blessing is worthy of
admiration, and not only of wonderment, but of acknowledging all glory and
blessedness to him. When the conscience is not pacified by a sorry duty done
from man, but by a sealed pardon from the spirit of God, witnessed by the
breath of the holy Ghost; this is such a mercy to the soul; as indeed raises
the heart above all admiration of such a Beast, I, to a true detestation of
this Beast, and of the Dragon that has so long bewitched, and carried them
captive to the imaginations of their own hearts, and in the end to their
everlasting perdition. But let it be the care of Gods people, as ever you
desire to be blessed from the admiration of such a worm-eaten Religion, so grow
to an admiration of the God of mercy and grace: and so we shall do that upon
just grounds, which our Fathers did without grounds, to this Beast, and to the
head of it. Upon this ground, this head being wounded, and afterward healed,
all the world wondered after him: Here is an Image of Christ, he was wounded to
death, and his deadly wound was healed: and he rises again, and he proclaims
all power is given him, in Heaven and Earth; Now see how this Vicar of Christ
(as they call him) usurps; as Christ was wounded, and is risen again; so it is
with this Beast, he is wounded to death, and afterward healed and restored,
and now all the world admire and worship him: Have they forgotten that Christ
dyed for our Sins, and was raised again for our Justification? and do they
stand admiring at this Beast as he that was wounded, and healed? Therefore let
it be a ground of true thankfulness to the Lord, for the great change that is
wrought in Christendom, and let us give the Lord the admiration that is due to
him, that we may be preserved from those delusions, wherewith others have been
deceived and may go on in this way constantly which the Lord has established,
and called us unto.

Revel. 13. 5, 6. And there was given unto him a mouth speaking great things,
and blasphemies, and power was given unto him to continue forty and two months.

And he opened his mouth in blasphemies against God, to blaspheme his name, and
his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven.


THE events that followed upon the healing of the Beast; the first was, That
all the world admired him. The second was, Universal worship given both to the
Beast, and to the Dragon that gave power to the Beast, of which we have
already spoken. The third event remains now to be spoken to, and that is, the
deligation of power to this Beast, upon his recovery, and the power given him
is fourfold.

1. There was power given him to speak great things, and in particular, great
blasphemies.

2. There was power given him to continue, that is, as the word signifies, to
be doing, to be active, to be powerful and efficacious in his work 42.
months.

3. There was power given him to make war with the Saints, and to overcome them.

4. Power was given him of dominion over all Kindreds, Tongues, and Nations.

First, There was given him a mouth speaking great things.

Secondly, There was power given him to continue 42. months, and both these
Authorities or Liberties, they are amplified by the effect it wrought in the
Beast: He did effectually take that power which was given him, and employed it
to the utmost. As he had a mouth given him, so he opened his mouth in
blasphemies, and that amplified by the object of his blasphemy against God, and
God distributed, his Name, his Tabernacle, and those that dwell in Heaven. The
note then that the words do afford first, is this.

That after the healing of the wounded head of the Beast, Doctr. 1.
there was given to him power to speak great things, even blasphemies, which
also he did effectually and abundantly exercise, or put forth.

For so it is here said, There was given him a mouth speaking great things and
blasphemies, and he opened his mouth accordingly, abundantly against God, and
against his name, and his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven: Every
thing of God he did with open mouth blaspheme.

Let me a little open the words, and the Doctrine, for the doctrine is in a
manner the words of the Text.

There was given him a mouth.] what mouth had he more then other men? The
meaning is, he had such liberty of speech as no man had; There was given him
liberty, and power, and authority to speak great things.

Given him.] by whom?

1. It was given him by God in his just judgment that gave up men to efficacy
of delusions, 2 These. 2. 11.

2. It was given him by Satan, in the efficacy of whose power Antichrist comes,
with all deceivablenesse of unrighteousness, 2 These. 2. 9, 10.

3. It was given him by the general consent of Princes and States
Ecclesiastical and Civil. In Ecclesiastical Councels, great was the
authority that was given him, none of all them thought themselves equal to
him: And for the Civil State, God put it into their hearts to give their power
and Throne unto the beast, Rev. 17. 17.

What power did they give him to speak great things, and in particular
blasphemies? It is an allusion to the horn in Dan. 2. 8. There came up a little
horn which had a mouth speaking great things; whether it be the same Beast, or
a type of him, I will not now stand to determine, but great things he spoke; as
indeed this was a great thing that the Catholic Church had power to speak, for
he did open his mouth to speak great things, that is, such things, as for other
men to speak, were too great arrogance, and too much affectation of inordinate
Vainglory; but for this Church, or the head of it to speak, they had a mouth
given for the same purpose.

And Blasphemies.] They make many distinctions in Schools of Blasphemies, which
I will not trouble you with: they may be brought to two heads, either in
attributing to God something unworthy of him, things incompatible to his divine
nature, as in Acts 17. 29. It is blasphemy to ascribe to God likeness of
four-footed beasts, or creeping things, and the like. Or otherwise, if you
attribute to the Creature that which properly does belong to God, you hurt the
name of God, and crush it when you so speak. Now what is it for the Beast to
open his mouth, to speak great things and blasphemies? The phrase is very
significant in the Hebrew: It implies three things.

1. That a man speaks upon the meditation: He opens his mouth to speak, that is
to say, he has something to say, and power to deliver it, and he sets himself
of purpose to speak it: I will open my mouth in wisdom, and the meditation of
my heart shall be of understanding, Psalm. 49. 3, 4. He tells you of his
meditation, and then he will open his mouth, and declare it.

2. To open the mouth implies an audable, and full, and bold, and confident
expression of a man's mind, that a man does not whisper, but lift up his voice,
and declare with open mouth what he has to deliver; as in Exodus 3. 23. Open
thy mouth and tell them, that is, speak boldly: Though they be a rebellious
People, and will brow-beate thee, yet open thy mouth, and speak unto them;
speak boldly, and confidently, as one that goes not behind the door, but speaks
plainly: And I put in plainly with boldness, because they are ever
concomitants. If a man speak boldly, he does not extenuate what he has to
deliver, but speaks it plainly.

3. This opening of the mouth does imply that he speaks fully and abundantly,
his heart was full of it, and he does accordingly power out that which he
delivers: As Elihu tells you in Job 32. 18, 19, 20. I am full of matter, the
spirit within me constrains me: Behold my belly is as wine which has no
vent, it is ready to burst like new bottles, etc. So the meaning is this, That
as the Pope saw (which was the head of this Beast) that he had a mouth given
him; that is, uncontrollable liberty to speak what he would: He did not
suddenly or rashly speak, some inconsiderate, or erroneous, or arrogant speech
which he did eat in again; but he spoke advisedly in his grave and
considerate Council, upon advised judgment he did speak great things and
blasphemies: And this he did plainly and boldly, not in ambiguous or obscure
phrases, but plainly in such expressions as could bear no other meaning; and
that with such confidence, that you may see he cared not who heard, nor what
Construction might be made of it. And this he did, not in a word or two that
dropped from him, but as flowing from him; He was full of matter, as 2 Cor. 6.
11. O ye Corinthians, our mouth is open to you, our heart is enlarged. He did
pour forth his matter with no little State; it was stout matter that he did
pour forth to the world. What did he speak? that which was given him to
speak. What was that? Great things. As for instance, to sum up the great
things he speaks: The Catholic Roman Church in Scripture is accounted the
mother of Harlots, and abomination of the earth, Rev. 17. 5. There is not such
an adulterous Church in the world.

1. And yet is not this a great word and a great blasphmy, for the mother of
Harlots to hold forth her self as the only immaculate Spouse of Christ upon
the face of the Earth? Is not this a grand word for a common Harlot, the mother
of Harlots, the lewdest Harlot that ever the earth bore, for her to arrogate
this style as the only Church of Christ? And that which is parallel to this,
that the Pope (who is the head of this Beast) is the head and Husband of this
Church, and is without control: He has a mouth given him, and he is not
ashamed to speak great things, and blasphemies.

2. It is a great word to make himself the infallible Interpreter, and
absolute judge of Scriptures, that cannot err in derision, or determination of
any controversies of Religion; nor may it be for any mortal man to control
his judgment nor practice.

In Judgment he cannot err: in practice, though he may err, yet other men may
be judged; but God has put such an uncontrollable power upon him, as he thinks
that none may meddle with him; Though he should carry millions of souls to
Hell, yet no man must say, Sir, why do you so: Councels may not judge, Princes
may not judge, inferior States may not judge him, all the world may not judge
him; He stands and falls to the Canonists, his own well-studied Canonists have
so determined it: A great word to be infallible judge of Scripture, and to be
uncontrollable; it is a great matter, and greater then any man can reach unto:
Never did any earthly Prince challenge that he could not err, nor that none
must control him if he did: There have been Laws made to control the greatest
Princes: Nebuchadnezzar was taught to be controlled, that in the end Shadrach,
Mesech, and Abednego go away rewarded,

3. The Catholic Church, and the Pope is the head of it, claims a power of
binding and loosing. To bind men's consciences by his Laws, and to loose men's
consciences by his Indulgences, and that not ministerially, as Ministers do
from the Word, but by a Juditiary power, to dissolve the bond of natural
Obedience, incestuous Marriages, Oaths and Covenants in Marriage; Natural
relations between Parents and Children, and moral Relations between Princes
and Subjects: There is not any bond that he cannot loose, nor any liberty which
he cannot restrain: And this not over a few only, but over the vast world so
far as it is Christian. And

4. It is a great thing he speaks (and he speaks it not behind the door) when
he challenges Sovereign dominion (in way of advancement of Religion) over all
Kingdoms, so as to depose their Kings, and dispose of their Kingdoms, leave any
State to choose where he has power: If his Crown be to be fetched from Rome
(as it was in former times when it was most active) He will set it on, but dash
it off again, out of the plentitude of his power, to ^et up and throw down at
his pleasure. He opened his mouth to speak great things; He is never so in his
element as when he does hold forth such vast authority, and divine propriety,
proper to the Father, Son, and holy Ghost.

Now as he speaks great things, so blasphemes against God, and wherein? Against
his Name, and Tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven. Against his name: All
these are blasphemies against Gods name, to attribute all these divine
properties to a beastly man, to a great beast. And it is blasphemy to ascribe
any divine honor, or to put it upon any creature: Images served, the holy
Ghost calls blasphemy. Isa. 65. 7. You have blasphemed me upon every green
hill. And in Ezekiel. 20. 27, 28. he complains of the like blasphemy, that they
blasphemed him by their Idolatires. In Mar. 2. 7. Why does this man speak
blasphemies? who can forgive sins but God only? It were to speak blasphemy in
any but in Christ.

Secondly, It is against his Tabernacle; that may be either meant the body of
Christ, as 1 John 14. He tabernacled amongst us. Or it may be meant the visible
Churches, such as are instituted by him. For the body of Christ, it is
blasphemy to go to every Mass Priest, to make him the body and blood of our
Savior. Or if you understand the Tabernacle to be the Church; that is the
Temple of God, 1 Cor. 3. 16. Now to call the Church of Christ a Conventicle of
Heretics and Schismatics, it is blasphemy, and so they count all the Churches
here: And for the Saints in heaven, to put upon them divine worship, to build
Temples to them, to put up Prayers to them, to keep Holy Days to them, it is
blasphemy to them, it is a great dishonor. Paul and Barnabas, when they saw
men to come and offer sacrifice to them, Men and brethren why do you these
things? you cannot do us a greater injury. And for the Saints in heaven, that
is, pure Churches, he condemns them for Heretics, and Schismatics, and as
unworthy of Christian communion, and Christian burial, these are blasphemies:
So you see the meaning of this Scripture; There was given him a mouth to speak
great things, and to blaspheme God, in his Name, in his Tabernacle, in those
that dwell in Heaven: Thus has he done many years, and thus does he still.

Now for the reason of the point; you see the point stands upon two branches.

1. That such power was given him.

2. That he did effectually and abundantly put it fo^^h, He opened his mouth:
Let me give the reasons of both. 1. Why such power was given him; it was

First, Reason 1.
from God, in his just judgment to punish the unthankful world that received
not the love of the truth, Therefore the Lord gave them over to efficacy of
delusions to believe lies; That they all might be damned who believed not the
truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness, 2 These. 2. 10, 11. This is the
just judgment of God, that since they refused the simplicity of wholesome
Doctrine, and had itching ears, they should have such men as came with the
subduing word of the Law to speak great things, and they should have what they
ask; This is from Gods just jugement.

A second Reason is from Satan; Reason 2.
for God concurred, and Satan concurred, and Christian Princes concurred
herein: Satan concurred for this reason, that he might be avenged of God, and
despite the name of Christ, that had cast him out, and dethroned him from his
divine power: That whereas he was the great God of the world, and the God of
Israel but a puny God of the lesser Nations; now he is to be no God to trust
on, but like a Toad or Serpent; this does so enrage the venom of the old
Devil, that he powrs forth a flood of malice and venom against the Church and
Christ, as much as may be, to testify to the world he would be Lord, and the
Lord Jesus should not prevail: And if he may not be God, he will set up a
Beast that shall be adored as God: And it is a great despite to Christ, to
advance a Beast, that shall carry great State and power, and dare, and will
speak greater things then all the Churches of Christ, I, as great as the Lord
himself shall speak; look what one speaks, the other will speak it all, and
speak it abundantly: As the Devil himself sometimes said to Christ, All these
will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me. The same does he
speak at this day, and he will speak without control.

Another reason that binds Satan so to speak, is not only his old enmity to
Christ, but from his malice against the Church. When he saw that the seed of
the woman had thus dethroned him, and cast him out of divine power, he powrs
forth a flood of malice after her, and he sends forth an ugly Beast, that if he
can, may root out the face of Christianity, and root her out from the face of
the earth, Rev. 12. 15. These are the Devils reasons that moved him to stir
up the Beast, and to give him a mouth to speak so boldly as he did.

But why will Christian Princes be so prodigal, to submit themselves to him?
God had committed to them the care of the Churches, that all Churches should
live peaceably and quietly under them, in all godliness and honesty: why would
they so degenerate, and suffer the Bishop of Rome so to arrogate and speak such
great blasphemies? The reasons were,

1. Because they were ignorantly blind; Reason 1.
It was a time of palpable darkness, darkness that might be felt: From the
ninth Centuary to the tenth, both Protestant and Popish Divines complain, that
had not some lived in the 800. year, and in the thousand year after Christ,
they should not have known what had been done in the nine hundred, a whole
hundred years together: Men were so full of darkness and ignorance, that
scarce any set pen to paper to tell us what was done in those dark times; that
men did not know what were principles of Christianity, much less were able to
discern of Cases of Church Government, or the mystery of godliness which
requires more diligent attendance: And thence it was that they were so taken
with the pretended claymes of the Catholic visible Church, that it would not
err, because it was built upon a Rock, and had the keys of Peter, and he had
the keys of heaven: What he bound on earth was bound in heaven; and what he
loosed on earth was loosed in heaven; that had there not been palpable gross
ignorance, it had not been possible such gross things should have been
suffered to come in.

And a second thing that moved them was the strange success of the Beast in
recovering of his wounded head; Reason 2.
for that made them wonder after the Beast, when they saw such a mortal wound
so thoroughly healed: They thought, had it not been above the power of mortal
men, it had not been possible it should have been healed, but certainly there
was a power above mortal men in it, and that is the reason in the Text to give
him a mouth to speak great things, to speak what he would.

And a third reason why Princes gave this power, Reason 3.
was their devout superstition; many were convinced by Matchivilian policy, of
their great sins, and they had in those days a notable dexterity to apply the
Law of God, and to sting men's consciences like a Cockatrice, Rev. 9. 5. and
then they would do any thing for ease out of the bondage they lay under, and
this was a great means: Then they directed them to give so much to such a
Monastery, or to go a Pilgrimage, or fast such a time, and such devotion which
a man's own unsanctified heart could reach: That when this Beast speaks great
things, that he can pardon sin, and his Shavelings will take a course for
redeeming souls, and preserving them out of hell, this was such satisfaction to
them, that you need not wonder if all Princes gave their Kingdoms to the
Beast: And so having advanced him as supreme over them all, he has a mouth he
may speak what he will; Princes may make Laws on this hand or on that; but if
they do not suite with him, they are disannulled: And they must be reconciled
to the mother Church, and so this Harlot gives them all to her, and has a
mouth speaking great things, and therewithal great blasphemie^.

Thus have you the point, and the reasons of it.

For the use of it, Use 1.
I might from hence first speak to this point; that it were therefore a
necessary counsel to all Roman Catholics, to consider diligently the grounds
of the great privileges of the visible Catholic Church, they stretch their
authority beyond all degrees of Churches, beyond all Temporal States or
particular Churches: Now necessary it were for them to reverse all the great
things which are delivered, and which the Pope has set open his mouth to
speak, though they be delivered with never such fullness, and boldness, and
plentitude of power: It behooves men to consider whether all these great words
be not the words of a Beast, and blasphemies which the head of the Beast had
taken upon him to utter, for it is not enough that they are spoken boldly and
confidently, and with good advisement and grave Counsel, Provincial Decretals
and Decrees, for they are distinct things: It behooves Catholics not to be
gulled with Titles and great things; for it is not always that power which God
in mercy gives to men when they dare speak great things; they think the Pope is
not Antichrist; but when Antichrist comes, will he do greater things then
these? as they said of Christ; when Christ comes will he do greater works
then these? And so when Antichrist comes can he speak grater things then these?
And if I were to speak to Laymen (as they say) in their Religion, I might
advise them to take heed they be not taken with the confidence of their
Priests, that speak with good advisement even to impudency, and with such
resolute courage, that many thousands are carried away with it, and say,
certainly men would never be so bold, if they were not possessed with the
goodness of their cause: Let them not be deluded, the Beast has power to
speak great things, and he opens his mouth with all courage and confidence, and
whispers it not, but speaks with impudency, and abundance of resolution.

Secondly, Use 2.
This may serve to teach us the danger of allowing to any mortal man an
inordinate measure of power to speak great things, to allow to any man
uncontroll^bleness of speech, you see the desperate ^^^ger of it: Let all the
world learn to give mortal men no greater power then they are content they
shall use, for use is they will: and unless they be better taught of God, they
will use it ever and anon, it may be make it the passage of their proceeding to
speak what they will: And they that have liberty to speak great things, you
will find it to be true, they will speak great blasphemies. No man would think
what desperate deceit and wickedness there is in the hearts of men: And that
was the reason why the Beast did speak such great things, he might speak, and
no body might control him: What, says the Lord in Jer. 3. 5. Thou have spoken
and done evil things as thou could. If a Church or head of a Church could
have done worse, he would have done it: This is one of the strains of nature,
it affects boundless liberty, and to run to the utmost extent: What ever
power he has received, he has a corrupt nature that will improve it in one
thing or other; if he have liberty, he will think why may he not use it. Set up
the Pope as Lord Paramount over Kings and Princes, and they shall know that he
has power over them, he will take liberty to depose one, and set up another.
Give him power to make Laws, and he will approve, and disprove as he list; what
he approves is Canonical, what he disproves is rejected: Give him that power,
and he will so order it at length, he will make such a State of Religion, that
he that so lives and dies shall never be saved, and all this springs from the
vast power that is given to him, and from the deep depravation of nature. He
will open his mouth, His tongue is his own, who is Lord over him, Psalm. 12. 3,
4. It is therefore most wholesome for Magistrates and Officers in Church and
Commonwealth, never to affect more liberty and authority then will do them
good, and the People good; for what ever transcendant power is given, will
certainly overrun those that give it, and those that receive it: There is a
strain in a man's heart that will sometime or other run out to excess,
unless the Lord restrain it, but it is not good to venture it: It is
necessary therefore, that all power that is on earth be limited, Church Power
or other: If there be power given to speak great things, then look for great
blasphemies, look for a licentious abuse of it. It is counted a matter of
danger to the State to limit Prerogatives; but it is a further danger, not to
have them limited: They will be like a Tempest, if they be not limited: A
Prince himself cannot tell where he will confine himself, nor can the people
tell: But if he have liberty to speak great things, then he will make and
unmake, say and unsay, and undertake such things as are neither for his own
honor, nor for the safety of the State. Note.
It is therefore fit for every man to be studious of the bounds which the Lord
has set: and for the People, in whom fundamentally all power lies, to give as
much power as God in his word gives to men: And it is meet that Magistrates in
the Commonwealth, and so Officers in Churches should desire to know the utmost
bounds of their own power, and it is safe for both: All intrenchment upon the
bounds which God has not given, they are not enlargements, but burden and
snares; They will certainly lead the spirit of a man out of his way sooner or
later. It is wholesome and safe to be dealt withal as God deals with the vast
Sea; Hitherto shall thou come, but there shall thou stay thy proud waves: and
therefore if they be but banks of simple sand, they will be good enough to
check the vast roaring Sea. And so for Imperial Monarchies, it is safe to know
how far their power extends; and then if it be but banks of sand, which is most
slippery, it will serve, as well as any brazen wall. If you pinch the Sea of
its liberty, though it be walls of stone or brass, it will beat them down:
So it is with Magistrates, stint them where God has not stinted them, and if
they were walls of brass, they would beat them down, and it is meet they
should: but give them the liberty God allows, and if it be but a wall of sand
it will keep them: As this liquid Air in which we breath, God has set it for
the waters of the Clouds to the Earth; It is a Firmament, it is the Clouds, yet
it stands firm enough, because it keeps the Climate where they are, it shall
stand like walls of brass: So let there be due bounds set, and I may apply it
to Families; it is good for the Wife to acknowledge all power and authority to
the Husband, and for the Husband to acknowledge honor to the Wife, but still
give them that which God has given them, and no more nor less: Give them the
full latitude that God has given, else you will find you dig pits, and lay
snares, and cumber their spirits, if you give them less: there is never peace
where full liberty is not given, nor never stable peace where more then full
liberty is granted: Let them be duly observed, and give men no more liberty
then God does, nor women, for they will abuse it: The Devil will draw them,
and Gods providence lead them thereunto, therefore give them no more then God
gives. And so for children; and servants, or any others you are to deal with,
give them the liberty and authority you would have them use, and beyond that
stretch not the tether, it will not tend to their good nor yours: And also from
hence gather, and go home with this meditation; That certainly here is this
distemper in our natures, that we cannot tell how to use liberty, but we shall
very readily corrupt our selves: Oh the bottomless depth of sandy earth! of a
corrupt spirit, that breaks over all bounds, and loves inordinate vastness;
that is it we ought to be careful of.

Thirdly, Use 3.
it may teach us to observe the hand of God in all the vast out-runings of the
Sons of men: when you see men outrageous beyond all power, wonder not at the
matter, for he that is above is higher then the highest, and he regards it,
Eccles. 5. 8. A man would wonder that a Bishop should take upon him to control
all the Churches, and in very deed all the Commonwealths and Nations of the
world, and that in such high things both in nature and measure, that a man
would think it were not possible for a mortal man to undertake such a vast
enterprise, yet they have done it, the Pope has done it, and the Bishop of
Rome has done it, but wonder not at it, for he that is higher then the highest
has given him this power, John 3. 27. not given it him in an Ordinance, but in
his common Providence; This transcendant power that he is able to carry all
before him without control; it is a strange power, he may say what he will,
and do what he will, for so many months, the time indeed is limited. So that
it will be of this use to us, if we see men outrageous, and break bonds beyond
measure is any commonwealth or Church, our way is to see Gods hand in it, and
to look up to him to muzzle that power: He is able to bridle the high King of
Assyria, that whereas he spoke great things, what is the God of Israel that he
shall deliver you out of my hand; the Lord can put a bridle in his nostrills
and bring him back the way that he came. And therefore when men speak great
things against us, from any part of the world, know, that he that is higher
then the highest regards, and our eyes must be to him, that he will muzzle
such, and take order to cut them off. The Lord will cut out the tongue that
speaks proud things, Psalm. 12. 4. He has promised to do it, and he will do
it effectually. You have two places where the Lord uses the word to muzzle,
the one is about the Sea, Mark 4. 39. the other is spoken to the Devil, Mark
1. 25. Hold thy peace, it is translated; but the word in the Original is, be
thou muzzled: Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the
Corn; it is the same word: It shows that the Lord has a muzzle for the great
Sea, and a muzzle for the Devils of hell, when we have to deal with them: If it
be the great King of Assyria, he will put his bridle in his nostrils, and make
him return back the same way he came: the Lord is above all; when they are
above the reach of men, they are not above him; he sits in heaven, and laughs
them to scorn. Those that have been most insolent in blaspheming, all Turkish
or Popish blasphemies, the Lord will muzzle them: In the mean time it it our
part to sanctify his name that gives this vast liberty, that for so long they
shall speak great things, and no longer.

Fourthly, Use 4.
it may teach us that there is a pronenesse in our natures, to abuse all the
providence of God, whether of special mercies, or special judgments; and it
warns us to beware of the same, in the enjoyment of any mercy, or in feeling of
any stroke of God upon us: Here was this Beast, so wounded in one of his heads,
as it seemed to be deadly; he was again healed: The Lord visits this Church
with a deadly blow, by acts of his justice; and he also visits it with great
deliverances, and acts of his merciful providence, and when he has done, see
his great admiration, and adoration, would you not think this should melt the
heart of a Beast? but the Ox knows his owner, says the Lord, and the Ass
his masters crib, but Israel does not know, my people does not consider, Isa.
13. Though this deadly wound be healed, to the admiration of the world, yet
consider what little use he makes of it; when he gives him power to do what he
will, what does he? He opens his mouth to speak great things, and blasphemies,
and he makes war with all the Saints of Heaven: he does much abuse his glory.
He was knocked on the head, because he would affect such vast Authority to be
Pontefex Maximus; the Lord cracked his Crown, breaks the head of this enemy,
and wounds the hairy scalpe of such as go on in wickedness: He heals him again,
and gives him great power; but what does he with it? He abuses it against God,
and against the Church of God, and speaks great things, even blasphemies: So
there is a nature in us that will abuse every mercy of God, to the corrupting
of our hearts, and every judgment of God, and every deliverance from that
judgment; one would not think what woeful distempers there are in our natures.
If a body be stuffed with choler, it will turn the whole body to feed the
humor: So it is with us, we turn all the providence of God into distempers
and outrageous licentiousness.

But you will say, he was a Beast, and the Church a Beast; we hope Christians
shall do better.

See it in Hezekiah, when the Lord had wrought great deliverances for him,
brought the Sun ten degrees back, and avenged him of his Enemies; afterward
he recovered him from sickness, when his soul was brought to the jaws of
death: yet when the Princes of Babylon sent to him to enquire of the wonder,
that was done in the Land, God left him to try him, that he might know what was
in his heart, and then he shows them his great Treasures, and works, and
fortifications, that he had throughout his Kingdom: and it is said, He rendered
not according to the benefits done unto him, for his heart was lifted up, 2 Chronicles. 32. 25. 31. You see good Hezekiah is apt to forget sickness: It argues
the depth of the body of Sin which is not only in wicked men (such as these
proud Prelates be) but in the Godly, in those that are most eminent in Grace,
they are not able to bear great Sails; if God shows us mercy and judgment, it
is a wonder to see what poor work we make.

Many a carnal heart will say, if he be delivered from sickness, or if he be
at Sea in danger, if he get a shore; or if in Prison, if he get but liberty,
God and men shall see what a new man he will be: O the bottomless depth of a
deceitful heart! let the Lord chastise us, and raise us up again, we forget
our humiliation, and grow to exaltation; and if God help us a little, we grow
to such out-runings of spirit as we exceed therein: no gift that a man has, no
ordinance of God, but he will thus abuse. And therefore we have cause to sit
down in dust and ashes, that we should abuse such mercies as we daily partake
in.

Fifthly, Use 5.
since this is the nature of wicked men, let God give them but liberty, and men
give them liberty, and they will take it to the full: let God give a mouth, he
will speak great things; and if he have liberty to speak great things, he will
speak great blasphemies, against God, and his Tabernacle, and the Saints: Then
this will be a shame to Godly men, if the Lord give us great things, a mouth to
speak all the good we can, and liberty to do all the good we can, if we do not
open our mouths and hearts to be speaking and doing all the good we can; It is
not for us to stand snorting out the time which God has carved out for us, but
if a beast have this liberty; if you tether a Beast at night, he knows the
length of his tether before morning; he will go to the end of it before he
have done: And you see this Bishop the head of the Church, if God give him a
mouth, he will open it: wicked men will take the utmost bounds of their
liberty; will wicked men do so? why should not the children of God then, and
all that fear his name take the like care to improve all their liberties, and
power to do all the good we can? does God give a liberty for laying
foundations, for establishing jurisdictions, and liberty for well ordering our
Families and Town-ships; if the Lord give us opportunities, why should we want
a heart to improve them? If the Beast has a heart to improve his wickedness
to the utmost, why should not we improve all our Talents to Gods best
advantage, to make it our whole study to do all which the Lord requires, that
so we may bear plentiful witness in our Generations to all the liberties the
Lord has betrusted us with. It is not for men that have received five Talents,
that is to say, five opportunities, to render to God as those that have
received but one or two; To whom much is given of them will much be required,
Luke 12. 48. And therefore is behooves us all, as to know the liberties of
Church and Commonwealth, so to set hand and affection a work to be doing all
the good we can: If it were the Beast, take a pattern from him (but they must
go fast that the Devils drives) he would improve all his liberty: And why
should they not go fast whom the Spirit of God drives, and improve the liberty
they have of God. And therefore it is for us to do all the good we can, and to
leave nothing to those that shall come after us, but to walk in the righteous
steps of their Forefathers. And therefore let us not leave, nor give rest to
our eyes, till in Family, Church, and Commonwealth we have set a pattern of
holiness to those that shall succeed us.

Lastly, Use 6.
it may teach us a reverend use of the things of God, for all Blasphemy against
the name of God, or h^s Tabernacle, or those that dwell in heaven, it is
blasphemy against God. It is said here, there was power given to the Beast to
speak great things, and blasphemies: wherein did that lie? against Gods name,
and against his Tabernacle, and those that dwell in Heaven: So that blaspheme
any of these, and you blaspheme God: blaspheme the name of God, the Tabernacle
of God, and those that dwell in Heaven, whether Saints above, or Saints on
Earth, and you blaspheme God himself. And therefore it should be far from us
to abuse any ordinance or providence of God, for it is blasphemy against God
himself; they are the name of God; Gods name is called on his providence: If
we speak evil of Gods ordinances or providence, as for a man to say, would to
God I had never known such a woman, it is blasphemy; Gods wisdom and
righteousness has ordained it. If we be in distress, or in any sickness,
and we snarle against God, and mutter at our poverty and sickness, it is to
blaspheme the name of God; all these are providence of God. To speak evil of
Churches, as if they were Congregations of Heriticks, or Schismiticks, or
Congregations of Rebels, or Libertines, and Brownists, and such like, it is
blasphemy against the God of Heaven. Besides, it is blasphemy against the Body
of Christ in the Sacrament, to think every Baker can make it, that is Popish
blasphemy. To speak evil of the Saints of God on earth, to think to take
liberty because they are absent; Our tongues are our own, who is Lord over us:
Little do we know how tender God is of his people: we cannot speak evil of any
in the Church, but we blaspheme God: And so if we speak evil of his
providence, it is as much as if we speak evil of God himself. And therefore
how precious ought the name of God to be to us, to whom our names are precious:
It is but a scandal to a christian brother, but it is blasphemy to God, and
therefore speak not evil, as thinking it shall never come to his ear. If we
speak evil of Authority, of Churches, of Saints, or evil of them that do
evil, unless you may take order to repress it, the Lord himself looks at it
as blasphemy: and therefore we must not look at it as a light matter; our
tongues are our own, and we may have liberty to speak: I, you have liberty, but
not to speak blasphemies, either small or great. There is not the least
blasphemy, but it is a great Sin, and therefore greatly to be avoided.

Rev. 13. latter part of the 5. verse. And power was given him to continue forty
and two months.


THis is the continuance of the description of the former Beast which the
Apostle John saw rising out of the Sea, to be the instrument of the Dragons
power (that is, Satan's rage) against the Woman, and her feed.

Among other parts of the description (which have been opened) this Beast is
described by the change that befell him, in his head, wounded, and healed; the
effect whereof was,

1. The admiration of the world.

2. The worship of the Beast, and of the Dragon.

The third effect or event was the authority or power that the Beast did
receive, and did exercise, and that power was,

1. To speak great things and blasphemies; which accordingly he did exercise,
in blaspheming the name of God, and his Tabernacle, and the Saints.

2. There was a power of continuance (as it is here translated) forty and two
months.

3. There was given to him power to make war with the Saints, and to overcome
them.

Of the first part, to speak blasphemy, we have already spoken. Now come we
unto the second part of the power given him, which is his continuance; There
was power given him to continue forty and two months.

The note from thence is shortly this;

That power and authority was given to this Beast (that is, Doctr. 2.
to the Roman Catholic Church) to continue, that is, to be active and doing,
to be busy forty and two months.

This expresses the sum and sense of the words; they are obscure as any place
in the word, and therefore need your more diligent attention, and the power of
the Lord Jesus to clear his counsel and will in this point, who alone opens
the Seals, and none can shut them.

To open the words.

Power was given to him.] The word in the Original is (...) which properly
signifies the power of Authority or Jurisdiction; a sovereign kind of power (as
it is here described in the seventh verse) over all Kindreds, and Tongues, and
Nations: Such power that all the world wondered at it, and adored, especially
that which they call the Christian world, did exceedingly magnify the power
and authority of this Beast, and he speaks here principally of Spiritual
Authority, though it grew to Temporal Power in making War, in the 7. verse.
for he rises by degrees to further power, but authority was given him: Given
him, by whom?

1. By God, that put it into the heart of the ten Horns (that is, the ten
K^^gs) to give their Kingdoms with one consent to the Beast, Rev 17. 17. So God
by his wise and just providence gave him authority, such as God has ordained
in his word; but he put it in their hearts by his wise and just providence.

2. This authority was given by Satan, who assisted Antichrist in the mystery
of Iniquity, in working signs and lying wonders, with all deceivablenesse of
unrighteousness, till he lift up himself above all that is called God, 2
These. 2. 9, 10. And indeed Satan wrought mightily, what by the sophistry of the
Schoolmen, and by the policy of the Canonists, and what by the devotion of
Cloyster-men and Friars, it was a wonder to see how he gained a mighty power
against Churches all the world over.

3. This power was given him by those States, the ten Horns which gave their
Crowns with one accord to the Beast, that he should rule in their Dominions.
The chief Kingdoms in Europe are in these ten; our Native Country for one,
France, and Spain, and Navarre, Sweden, and Denmark, and the rest, they did
with one accord give their Kingdoms to the Beast, that in point of Religion
they should establish all Ordinances according to the wisdom of his sovereign
power: And in Temporal matters they gave him greater power to depose, and
dispose of their Kings, then the Roman Emperor had in sundry respects; for his
was lim^ed by Laws, but this was without Laws. 2 These. 2. 4. He opposes and
exalts himself above all that is called God. That without all power of Laws
he did outrage out of measure. Given it was by their Devotion and
Superstition, God piercing their hearts much in those times by the Ministry of
their Friars, that did wound their consciences with the sense of their murders
and lusts, that they were willing to do any thing for the peace of their
Consciences, and therefore willingly gave up all their power and Kingdoms into
his hands; so it was given him.

Again further, he is said to continue.] Some Translations do read it, to make
War, but War is not in the best corrected Copies, but making War is spoken
to in the seventh ver. But making War is not spoken to expressly in this fifth
verse; but power was given him to be doing; and as we call it in a general
phrase, to be (a Factotum) the only doer of the world forty two months: That
what he did was done, and what he did not authorize and allow, it was not done.
If the Princes chose an Emperor, if he accepted him, he stood; if he did not
accept of him, he was not received. If any decrees be made, if the Bishop of
Rome establish them (which is the seventh head) then they are authentical; If
he do not, then they are Apocrypha. So it is with Scripture; though it be such
as God never ratified, as the Apocrypha, but what sense he gives it is
Authentical; He has power to be active and doing. This word then (...), which
is here translated to continue, does indeed so signify usually, when it is
joined with words of time; you have many examples of it in Scripture, as in
Acts 15. 33. it is said, After they had tarried there a space, the word is the
same as here, continue. So in Acts 18. 23. it is said, After they had tarried
some time; about three months. So in Acts 20. 3. you have there continuance or
tarrying expressed by the same word: And Paul says, Night and day I was in the
deep, 2 Cor. 11. 25. the same word; he had his business there, there he was
duly, he continued so long. But sometimes the word ever used with this word of
time, signifies to be active and busy: So in James 4. 13. You say you will go
into such a City, and continue there a year, and buy, and sell, and get
gain; the same word here and there; you will be busy and gaining, etc. This
same power therefore to continue and be doing, argues that this authority of
power, absolute Sovereign power over Kindreds, Nations, and Tongues, this is
here said to continue a matter of 42. months.

Now for these 42. months.] I would not busy my self in needless
speculations: but I find not any word of God a neednesse speculation for the
Church to search into, and understand. We have had this number three or four
times before: For it is the same number, of which it is said, The Gentiles
shall tread under foot the holy City forty two months, Rev. 11. 2. And 42.
months, if they be dissolved into days, make up just the sum of a thousand
two hundred and threescore days, allowing thirty days to a month as the old
account was wont to do, which is the same time of the two Witnesses
prophesying, clothed in sackcloth, Rev. 11. 3. And the same time of a
thousand two hundred and threescore days, or forty two months, is just the
computation of three years and an half; that is, a time, and times, and half
a time; which time it is said the woman fled into the wilderness, and was
nourished there, Rev. 12. 6. So that all these are manifest to be contemporary
(as they call it) to begin together in the same period of time, and to end
together; The Beasts rising and continuing in power 42. months: The Gentiles
(which is the Roman Catholic Church) treading down the true Church of God
forty two months: And the two Witnesses prophesying in sackcloth 1260.
days: And the woman's flight into the wilderness, and her continuance and
abode there 1260. days, where she was nourished by the prophesying of those
two Witnesses: So that expound aright one of these, and you clear the right
Interpretation of all. Three questions therefore may be enquired into to open
the durance or continuance of the authority of this Beast.

1. Whether this be a definitive, or indefinitive time?

2. Why it is sometimes reckoned by months, and sometimes by days: And

3. When does this time take his beginning, and where does it expire and take
his ending. These things spoken to, will reach as far as God has revealed to
me.

For the first of these Questions. Quest: 1.


1. There be that think this time is not a definite or determinate time, Answ.
but indefinite; forty two months shows a good space of time, known, and
determined by God, but uncertain to the Church. Now I must confess, that
meaning does not well sink into my heart, to receive it with any faith in Gods
word; for if God would have put a definite time for an indefinite; a certain
time for an uncertain, I think he would rather have chosen (as he is wont to
do) some such phrase as is wont to express illimited time, if it had been
seven months, or ten months: Thou have changed my wages ten times says
Jacob to Laban; that is, many times: How often shall I forgive my brother, till
seven times? I, till seventy times seven times: He does not meanee, to limit
us, but as often as he does offend, forgive, if he repent; or if he profess such
repentance as you have no just exception against, forgive him: But when he
says 42. months, why not 600. months, for that is a definite time for an
indefinite: why should he say 1260. days, it is not a speech used in Greek
and Latin to express an indefinite number: no more is the time, and times, and
half a time, usual in Daniel. Therefore I cannot rest in that Interpretation,
though sundry have gone that way.

2. There be that take it indeed for a definite time, but they would confine it
to three years and an half, for forty two months, or 1260. days, is just
three years and an half, and that is true: But I cannot accept that
Interpretation; and though it be common, yet our Divines do with one accord
reject it: For this Antichrist which they say is their Beast (in which they say
true) that he should come out of Jerusalem three years and an half before the
great Judgment day, and prevail against Rome: But that it cannot be taken for
three years and an half, may appear from the great authority he shall gain
in this time, and the power that he shall exercise over all Kindreds, and
Tongues, and Nations; now for any one in three years and an half to overcome
all Nations, and to rule them by an Ecclesiastical and Civil power, it is
incredible. The Leopard of Greece, which was a swift Beast, and had wings, yet
he did not conquer the world but in twelve years, and it was a great matter to
overcome it then: But this Beast is described to be a Leopard, but not with
wings: now that he should do as much in three years and an half without
wings, as Alexander did in twelve years with wings, is not credible.

3. There is a third Interpretation that make indeed the days, and time, and
months definite; that is, determined and ^et, and do limit them according to
the account of the Prophets that take a day for a year: A like proportion of
42. months, of a time, times, and half a time, and of 1260. days; taking a
day for a year, they will all come to the same period, to the same computation
of 1260. years. Now that the Prophets do sometimes so reckon them, appears
from Ezekiel. 4. 5, 6. where the Lord did direct the Prophet to lie upon his side
390 days, according to the defection of Israel from the house of David, in all
which time the Prophet did bear the burden of the defection of the People; and
to represent that: Son of man (says he) I have given thee to lie so long, I
have appointed each day for a year; thou shall lie so many days, as their
apostasy has continued in years: For from the defection of Jeroboam, to the
captivity of the Land, they continued 390. years. And after that (says he)
thou shall turn thee, and lie upon thy other side forty days, and that was
the time of the renewing of the Covenant by Josiah, in which the Lord was
reconciled with his people: but the people falling into apostasy again, it
proved forty days more.

And so when the twelve Spies had gone forty days, and searched out the Land,
the Lord says, They shall bear the provocation of their Fathers forty years,
after the number of the days in which ye searched the Land, even forty days,
each day for a year, etc. Numb. 14. 34. So that this is a Prophetical phrase
in mystical Scriptures; when Ezekiel is to set out a vision for God to
express his Justice, he sets it down days for years: Then it is not uncouth,
but very agreeable to Scripture, to say 1260. days is so many years, and
forty two months being so many days is all one, and those days being three
years and an half, if you reckon every day for a year, they will be just
1260. years; that therefore I take to be most agreeable to Scripture phrase,
and the sense of the words.

But then here grows a second Question.

Why does he reckon some of these times by days, Quest: 2.
and some by months?

There may be a double reason of that. Answ.


1. When he describes what the Children of God do, he sums up their actions by
days. Children of light, it is meet that their actions should be measured out
by the period of days: The Witnesses prophesying, and the woman's flight into
the wilderness is said to be 1260. days: But as God gave the Sun to rule
the day, so the Moon to rule the night, Psalm. 136. 8, 9. Now therefore when you
are to speak of superstitious devotions, they are works indeed of darkness,
and therefore are best reckoned by months, by that Creature in Heaven which
measures out Night, the Moon: And therefore it may be, and so the holy Ghost
uses it, if he speak of the Gentiles treading under foot the holy City, though
it be by daylight, yet it is a work of darkness; They tread under foot the
holy City forty two months, Rev. 11. 2. And if Antichrist be to continue long,
all his continuance is but a work of darkness, and therefore he is said to
continue 42. months: But what the Church do, and what the Witnesses do, is
reckoned by days, but it is the same time, the one makes day-work of it, and
the other night-work.

There may be also this Reason; That the Apostle in these Prophecyes in the New
Testament, might allude to the like in the old Testament, as to Antiochus whose
dispensation was only a time, and times, and half a time.

Now for the third Quest: Quest: 3.
when this may be said to begin, and when it may be said to end?

There I confess lies the greatest difficulty. Answ.


1. Some of our best interpreters pitch the beginning from the beginning of the
Reign of Constantine, when the Man-child was brought forth, that is, advanced
to Imperial dignity, which some make in the year 304 after Christ; though it
be true, of later times, they will by no means grant his Reign began then,
but two or three years after, and an easy mistake grows there; for when they
come to measure out a Princes Reign, they begin in such a time, and a whole
year is allowed to it, and it may be the next begins in that year, and so they
bring a variation in Chronologies; but you may not wonder in such mistakes, if
there be four or five years variation, that makes no great difference; God
knows certainly; but through reckoning the last year of one, and the first of
another, applying the same to both, may sometimes make a years difference: But
holy Brightman makes the beginning of that time to be in Constantines coming to
the Crown, and thence expires the authority of this Beast in the year 1546.
Now though his pains have been most serviceable to the Church of all that have
written of this Book, and God is to be exceedingly magnified for him, and his
Learning esteemed; that having such a Prophetical spirit, he spoke so homely
and plainly, that without pregnant reason I would not pervericate his judgment:
Yet as it falls out ordinarily, there is something amiss in the best humane
Writers that ever wrote; Therefore let me tell you what does not satisfy me:
The first is this, that neither in the beginning nor end does it punctually
jump and suite with all events described.

First, for the beginning, it is said, the woman fled into the wilderness, and
continued a time, and times, and half a time, after the Dragon was cast out of
heaven, and there was place found for him in heaven; And it is true,
Constantine made war against the Dragon, but I cannot say there was no place
for him in heaven, for this was the failing of the good Emperor, that he still
allowed the Heathens Idols Temples to continue, though he shut the doors; and
his Successor Julian the Apostate opened them again, and restored the Dragon
to spiritual authority, stated him in heaven as before with a great part of the
Empire.

And besides this, certain it is till Gracians time, they all kept the title
of Pontifex maximus which was an honor belonging to the great Priest of
Jupiter, or to the Devil; Only Gracian, and Theodosius after him, being
tender in conscience, refused it, then the Senate of Rome said if he will not
be Pontifex maximus yet they will have him to Rome, and call him to Rome, and
had it not been by a marvelous providence, they had wonderfully prevailed; for
at the same time they did restore all the Temples as Julian had done, and
established all the Revenues belonging to them, restored them all to the
Priests, and the Devil had the place of worship as before; but the Lord
putting them down by a mighty providence of his, through the prosperity of
Theadosius, he utterly overthrew that title, and through the zeal of his spirit
cast down the Temples, would suffer none of them to stand, rooted them out from
East to West; Wherever there was any famous Temples, down he throws them; he
utterly renounceth the Pontifex maximus, and will have no Temples; he does
confiscate the revenues to the Emperors treasury; and from that time forward
indeed, they never recovered, there was no more place found in Heaven: It is
true, Constantine began that war in the Empire: but war, it is not a Skirmish
or a Battle, it is not soon done, but many times continues long, as between
the house of David, and the house of Saul, and that for some scores of years:
So in this case, the war began with Constantine, there holy Brightman takes it
most right; but for the accomplishment of it, for the Devil to be wholly cast
out, and no more place found in Heaven, that was not till Theodosius time; now
from that time the Emperors renouncing the title of Pontifex maximus, the
Popish sort thought it was a mavelous providence for the advancing of the
Roman Catholic Church, that is this Beast; so the next year the Pope took up
that name, and holds it to this day: what ever the Popes name be, it is
Pontifex maximus, that is his ordinary style, not Bishop, or Arch Bishop, or
Primate, or Metropolitan, these are but Images of the Beast, but the head of
this Beast is Pontifex maximus, the chief Bishop of Rome: Now this was to the
best observation that I can find, in the year 395. about 90. years after
Constantines time, or wanting one or two of that: Now that is therefore one
Reason why I do not conceive that these 42. months are only at least to be
reckoned from Constautines beginning of his reign, for they are reckoned from
the time when there was no place found for the Dragon in Heaven, which was
afterward accomplished about 90 years after. Another Reason why I cannot go
so fully with that holy man of God, is, because of the end of it, when he comes
to 1546. It is evident that in that year the Council of Trent did condemn the
Scriptures, and advance the vulgar Latin to be the authentical word of God:
And Charles the fifth did prevail against the Lant-grave of Hesse, and
Prostestant Princes of Germany in the year 1547. So by that reason it cannot
end aright, for the Beast has power given him to continue to make war for 42
months; now he continued longer then so, though it is true, his time was
limited soon after; and therefore I cannot with so full assurance go so clearly
with him in that, as usually I do in his Interpretation, yet still reserving
this liberty, according to the gift of the spirit of Prophecy he had, you may
many times read the context of the word of God, it may be sometimes somewhat
more exactly according to the true meaning then always is expressed; which I
speak not to impeach the faithfulness and learning of the holy man of God, but
would give every man the honor that God has put upon them, make use of their
gifts, and leave them where they may at any time mistake, the like liberty God
forbid but may be left to others that come after us.

2. Therefore if you do a little more narrowly search the Text, and weigh
every circumstance in it, you may observe (as I take it) a double computation
of this time in respect of the beginning and ending of it; for you shall read
which Mr. Brightman rightly observes; that the woman fled into the wilderness
at Constantines coming to the Crown, it is true, for so it is expressly said,
Revel. 12. 6. She fled into the wilderness, where she had a place prepared of
God: and this was before the battle was sought; and then he tells you of the
battle that was fought in verse. 7, 8, 9.; The end of which was, there was no
place for the Dragon in Heaven; and now there is given two wings of an Eagle
unto the woman, that she might flee into the wilderness into her place, where
she is nourished for a time, and times, and half a time from the face of the
Serpent, which is just 42 months. So that take both these places, and it will
appear there is a double beginning of this time; the one from Constantines
Reign, the other 96 or 97 years after, there abouts it was, there is the
beginning of it. Now if you take it by months, and take it not as holy
Brightman does, the Egyptian year, but the Roman year; methinks it is most
probable to take the account of the Roman Affairs to be registered by Roman
computation, not Egyptian, though it is true, Rome is spiritually called
Egypt, but that is in another sense, they did not follow them in computation;
and though the Egyptians count 30 days to a month, which suits well with
this, yet it is not usual in Scripture; for roundnesse of number sake, they
pitch a certain time of the month, 30 days for a month; and therefore if you
count so may years in the Roman Kallender, you shall come somewhat near the
account of the continuance of the Power, and transcendant Authority of this
Beast; and if you so reckon 1260. years, if you add them to 300. and the odd
four years after before Constantines beginning, there-abouts it was; and
computations are not clear, the expiration will fall somewhat after the
beginning of the reign of Queen Elizabeth; And especially if you take the
account from more exact Chronologies, it will come in the year wherein the Pope
sent a Bull, that is, an excommunication against Queen Elizabeth to deliver her
to Satan, which brought forth new treasons against her that followed every
year, and brought her at length the Spanish invasion, hostile invasion; but
from that time it was, that the blast of his power was then broken; that
whereas before if he had excommunicated a Prince, it was fatal, he could never
have stood out, he had been everlastingly blasted with his hopes, but from that
time forward, it has been truly said by some, that have spoken of this time,
that from that time all the Popes Bulls were but baubles; they could not
prevail against her, though they brought the Excommunication, and fastened it
upon the Cathedral Church as they call it, and afterward read it; she going
to prayer, used the words of the Prophet, Psalm. Though they curse, bless thou,
let them be confounded that rise up against me, but let thy servant rejoice:
God heard her prayer, and marvellously broke his power, he had not the power
that the great Bishop of Rome had, who by his power should rend rocks in
pieces, and blast all before him, he never had that power after: God delighting
by weak means to bring mighty things to pass: By her hand the Lord did
maintain the low Countries, that this beast had great power over, his arm was
broken there; and so against the King of Navar by her assisting him; and so in
Scotland, she mightily prevailed to break his power there; and so in Ireland,
where she set her hand, she brake mightily his power, and the power of
Catholic Prin^ though mightier then she. She renounced the Catholic Church,
that is this great beast, and cut off his head to her best understanding, which
was about the sounding of the seventh Trumpet, Rev. 11. 15. When the Kingdoms
of this world became the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ: For then did
begin the seventh Trumpet to sound, which brought the conversion of Kingdoms
and States; that though the beast still continued, yet he still lost his
Authority which he had before; what he did approve before, that stood, and what
he did not, that fell to the ground. Now he has so much power, that if France
be more pravalent, or Spain, he will take with them, as he thinks he may with
his Catholic Sons for his own security: but his power is so blasted, that
though he does continue still, and will continue, yet a great Beast that rules
all the world; that power the Catholic Roman Church has lost, though he
prevail with his superstitious inventions with those that are his in a carnal
way, or from an opinion of their fathers honesty, etc. But yet the power is not
left to the Bishop of Rome to do all things, as in those former times he
might; his word is not a law, nor his decrees so Authentical, they are now
considered of, even among Catholic Princes; It is not now in his power to
take up Controversies between France and Spain, if they will make war: Time
was, they durst as well have eaten a Bears foot, as have ventured upon any war
without his likeing; but that was the time when the arms of his power, and his
jaws were not broken.

Thus if you take this Scripture as Brightman takes it, from Constantines
coming to the Crown, it will expire then about the time when the Bull came
forth against Q^: Eliz. and as they thought would be sufficient to blast her,
and all the Huguenots with her: But yet that makes but one beginning and ending
of this account, whereas the Text makes two; for in Chap. 12. 6. when the child
was caught up to God, and to his throne, and the woman fled into the
wilderness, then there was a great battle; that battle lasted 90 years, and
then was the Devil cast out of Heaven, and his Flamins, and Arch-flamins were
blasted with him, they had no power in Theodosius time: from that time the
Dragon was cast out of Heaven, and persecuted the woman which brought forth the
man child, and there was given to her two wings of a great Eagle, that she
might flee into the wilderness: Now I say according to this, there is another
computation of this time, there was no more place found for him in heaven which
was in the year 395. for two or three years, we must not pinch much; it is hard
to keep exact account by reason of taking up one year from the Predecessor,
which in so many years come to sometimes more, sometimes less: Now if you
shall take the Computation from that time, (it is true from Constantines time,
the Church might fly into the wilderness; for it is true, the Church is made a
wilderness if you set the doors of the Church so wide and pull down the
walls, that whereas before, it was a Garden enclosed, Cant. 4. 12. now you let
in vast territories, bring in the whole world, now you make it Catholic; now
though it had no Catholic power; a Garden is made a wilderness if you pull
down the pales, take down the narrow watch of Officers, and let in all men that
will thrust in ambitiously to gratify them; The Church was full of
covetousness, whoredoms, adulteries, deceivers, haters of God, and the true
power of Godliness, even in his time, and so forward, was almost worn out, and
never was so in all the time of persecution; but after that the Bishop of Rome
had taken the style of Pontifex maximus, and Theodosius slept with his Fathers,
then the Church grew more transcendantly Catholic, and that they thought he
would be Lord Paramount; but yet his transcendant power did spring as he was
chief Bishop, then he was universal Bishop, for his power grew by degrees;)
Now I say, if you take this latter computation, which also the Text does, then
if you reckon from 395. years, and add to that 1260. years, putting these two
together, they will expire in the year, that shall be according to the Roman
account 1655. I will not be two confident, because I am not a Prophet, nor the
Son of a Prophet to foretell things to come, but so far as God helps by
Scripture light, about the time 1655. there will be then such a blow given to
this beast, and to the head of this beast, which is Pontifex maximus, as that
we shall see a further gradual accomplishment and fulfilling of this Prophecy
here. You must not think it strange that some Prophecies receive a graduall
accomplishment; Sometimes you have a Prophecy of the 70. years captivity,
which is accomplished by the redemption of the Church out of Babell; yet a more
full accomplishment shall be when the Church shall be delivered from this whore
of Rome, and the Church of the Jews shall be called again. So it is here,
according to the different computation of time, the wise God has all seasons
in his hand, he does foresee, and foretell to his people when they shall come
to pass: So that though the arm of his glorious power be broken, and his
bones broken, that he is nothing that beast in power that he was, and has not
been since the sending of that dreadful excommunication, which was thought to
be so dangerous to the famous Princess I spoke of; yet a power he has over
many Churches, and the power given him by the ten horns, they are not all
broken; as in Chap. 11. 13. The tenth part of the City fell by reason of the
earthquake: There was such a fall, that a tenth part fell, but yet a great part
stands still to this day in some measure, that will take their Religion from
him as they see cause, but not all in Religion neither, for the King of France
will not yield to the Council of Trent to this day; it falling out that his
Ambassadors did not sit in the chief place, he will not authorize that
Council: Thus is his power broken, but yet it continues in some measure till a
further accomplishment of it, but for two or three years I cannot limit that,
for there may be some uncertainty by reason of the variation of Chronicles that
have sometimes more, sometimes less in the beginning and ending of the Reign
of Princes: But otherwise, about that time will be the expiration of the power
and great authority of this Beast: But already we see, by the blessing of God,
his power weakened, but we look for a further accomplishment.

The matter has required somewhat large opening, but it is a counsel of God,
and given of him for this end, that it may be expounded and explained: And the
Lord has promised blessedness, Chap. 1. to those that read and search this
Book; and therefore he would encourage all to search diligently the meaning of
it, especially as God gives opportunity: It was that which John mourned for,
that he found none worthy to open this book, and to loose the seals thereof,
only the Lion of the Tribe of Judah: I think there is no man shall be
diligently studious on this Book, depending upon the Lion of the Tribe of Judah
for help, but he shall find something more then he did expect. It is true, if
a man go in confidence of his own gifts and knowledge, he may fool himself;
but if in modesty of Christian wisdom, and in the fear of God; the spirit of
any Christian Minister, or other that lays hold of this Book, he shall not be
sent empty away: What light God has given me in this particular, you have
heard opened.

The use in a word is thus much.

First, Use 1.
it is a word of stay to the souls of Gods people: It serves to strengthen our
faith, that the Lord is exact in his Prophetical expressions: Look what he
speaks, though it be many a year or day before, he will not fail to bring it
to accomplishment in his time. It is truly observed, if God tarry long, a
thousand years with God is but as one day, till the appointed time come: But
when his time is come, then one day with God is as a thousand years: God will
as soon fail a thousand years, as one day: Indeed till his time be come, he
thinks it not long, though it tarry 1260. years; but when it is come, then he
will not fail one day. It is a memorable speech that in Exodus 12. 40, 41, 42.
The sojourning of the children of Egypt was four hundred and thirty years:
And it came to pass at the end of the four hundred and thirty years, even
the selfsame day it came to pass, that all the host of the Lord went out from
the Land of Egypt: It is a night much to be observed, etc. He does not say
they dwelt there so long, but were sojourners there: And it came to pass at
the end of the four hundred and thirty years, even the self same day, it
came to pass that all the best of the Lord went out from the Land of Egypt;
as if God would put some Emphasis upon it: The word in the Original is, in the
bones of the day: It is an usual Hebraism, the strength of a thing they call
the bones of it; that is, in the face of all the people, in the strength of the
day, even when it was full day: God kept reckoning to a day; he will as well
fail a thousand years as one day when his time is come; and till his time be
come, we must think it long if he stay a thousand years: It must therefore
strengthen our Faith, that God is the same God in the New Testament, as in the
Old; that if we could know times as exactly as God knows them, we might write,
in the bones of such a year and day, the bones of the Roman Catholic Church
is broken, and lies bedrid; as it is foretold, Jezebel shall be cast into the
bed of affliction, and all that commit adultery with her into great
tribulation. Let it strengthen the faith of Gods people in every time; for if
God be so exact in every circumstance, what time he sets, he will keep, then it
may more strengthen us in substantial promises and threatenings: and what ever
the Lord has spoken, be not discouraged, the Lord will make good what he has
spoken, he will not fail of a minute of time when his period is come.

Secondly, Use 2.
it may serve to encourage us the more to pray to God for a speedy
accomplishment of the power of this great Beast (the Roman Catholic visible
Church) that has bewitched the world for so many ages together, and to grow
this way in our prayers for the destruction of him from year to year: and the
nearer the time of the accomplishment grows, the more earnest should our
expectations be to see the accomplishment, and the more earnest our prayers
should be.

You read of holy Daniel, that when he understood by books, that the Lord had
set the captivity for 70. years, then he set himself by prayer and
supplication to seek the Lord, in Dan. 9. 1, 2, 3. He takes this very occasion;
he found it was written that thereabouts it would be, and he found that time
was at hand, therefore he wrestles with God in fasting and prayer for the
accomplishment of that deliverance: And so ought we to do; and indeed about
that time it is, that in the Exposition of other Scriptures, that holy man of
God that has given light to this Book; somewhat after he encourages to look
for no small changes that may befall the State: So that it may encourage us to
look for such a great mercy: It is a great mercy that the Lord has discovered
the vanity of subjection to the Roman Catholic Church, from day to day the
Lord discovers it more and more to this country, and has given us to see the
true platform of a true Church, from which the Roman Catholic Church is so far
disproportionable (to be governed by a supreme head, instead of a particular
Church ordered by Pastors and Teachers, there is such a vast distance) that
well does the holy Ghost call it a great Beast, a lewd Strumpet, to undertake
such an Institution. Therefore as the thing has been odious in Gods sight
long, so let us pray that he will go on to break the power of this Beast: It
has not been in vain, what a blow he has given to the Image of this Beast, by
the late stirs in Scotland: True it is, before great deliverances, there will
be great afflictions, whether here, or elsewhere: It is an usual providence
to the most faithful ones of God: But what ever bitter cup the Lord may give
us to drink of, yet the day of this great Beast is coming, wherein he is to go
to perdition: He has begun to fall before the Lamb; and if he begin to fall
before him, say the Magicians to the Kings Favorite Haman, Esth. 6. 13. If
Mordecai be of the seed of the Jews before whom thou have begun to fall, thou
shall not prevail against him, but shall surely in falling fall; that is, fall
more and more: It Is true, there may be some pangs, as a Beast when he is going
to his last gasp, he will fling with his tail, and with his horns; but he is
falling, and leaves not falling till he finally fall; though there be pangs, as
dying creatures, to win the horse, or lose the saddle, but otherwise he will
never stand, that there may be a Factotum at that time, and will grow more and
more after that time.

Rev. 13. 7. And it was given unto him to make war with the Saints, and to
overcome them: and power was given him over all Kindreds, and Tongues, and
Nations,


WHen the Devil, that is to say, the Dragon, could not find any longer resting
place in heaven, that is to say, he could no longer enjoy Sovereign and divine
worship as the great God (Constantine and his Successors having brought in
Christ and his worship alone instead of all the gods of the Gentiles;) He
therefore to revenge himself, makes war against the Church, that were the
rooters out of Pagan Idolatry: This war, because he could not manage by
himself, it being very strong, he therefore raises two Beasts out of his
power, the first and second Beasts in this Chapter; the first, from verse. 1. to
the 10. The second, from verse. 10. to the end of the Chapter. It was a third
Roman State, not Rome-Pagan, nor Rome-Christian, but Rome-antichristian, that
is to say, the Roman visible Catholic Church. This is described many ways, by
a wound given him upon one of his heads for a season; that when Rome was
sacked, he was almost in a forlorn estate, and despairing of recovery; but
being healed, the effects were

1. The worlds admiration after the Beast.

2. Their worship both of the Beast, and of the Dragon, which is Satan himself.

The third event is Power, or as the word signifies, Authority (ver. 5, 6, 7.)
And this Power and Authority did stretch forth it self to three employments.

First, He had power given him to speak great things and blasphemies; He might
speak blasphemy by authority.

The second power that was given him, was to continue, or to be doing, to be
acting and working all in all, for the number of 42. months, which in the
former Chapter is described by days, and the days meant years, 1260. years,
which have been at large spoken to.

The third power and authority given him, was, To make war with the Saints;
and that not a vain and loose war, but an effectual prevailing war, a
victorious war: It was given him to make war with the Saints, and to overcome
them.

There was also a fourth power given him, and that was dominion over all the
Kindreds, Tongues, and Nations: All Christian Kingdoms, they did all of them
submit their Crowns and Scepters to this Beast, the Roman Catholic visible
Church, whereof the Pope is the seventh head, for he had seven heads, and ten
horns: Five of them were fallen, the sixth then which was the Caesar's, and the
Pope he was the seventh. Two of these Powers have been opened; Power to
blaspheme; and Power to continue, and be doing.

I come now to the third Power or Authority given to this Beast, and that is,
to make war with the Saints, and to overcome them.

The note then is shortly this;

The Roman visible Catholic Church had power to make war against the
Saints, Doctr. 3.
yea and to overcome them. They are in a manner the words of the Text,
explained in their true meaning.

The war that he speaks of (as I conceive) in this place, is not a spiritual
war (though that also this beast did make, for he caused all that dwelt upon
the Earth to admire and adore him, and that was spiritual war:) But he speaks
of such a war here, the effect whereof is killing with the Sword; He that
kills with the sword must be killed with the sword, verse. 10. As if God would
reward him in his own kind: He that slayes many thousands of Christians with
the sword, that is, by the power of war, he himself shall at length be
destroyed by war also: So that he speaks of a war fought by Arms, by
slaughter and bloodshed, by open expedition of Military persons fighting in
the quarrel of this beast against the Saints of God. There is another war
mentioned in the 17. Chap. of this book, where it is said, this Beast, and the
ten Horns, that is, the Christian Kings, that shall give their power and
authority to this Beast, shall make war with the Lamb; and they which are of
the Lambs side, are called, and chosen, and faithful, and here they are called
Saints: But there you shall see it is not the same kind of war, but
differing there from what is here; for there it is said, They shall make war
with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them; but here it is said, He shall
make war with the Saints, and overcome the Saints: So that one of these
wars he speaks of, when he that has smitten others, he shall be smitten
himself; that is, toward the end of his Authority; then the Lamb shall make
war, and overcome him; but in the mean time he has power to make war, and
overcome them, it is therefore a bloody war: And it is not said that he began
this war as soon as he began to do; for here are sundry acts and passages of
Authority, before he comes to this transcendant power to violent war: He was
admired and adored in the consciences of all Roman Catholics; He had done
many things, spoke great blasphemies many a day, and year together: And in the
end he receives also this power, to make war with the Saints; that he was
able to muster up such an Army of his own, or his Horns, that is, those
Princes that were obedient to him, as he was able to make war. Now this
Scripture (I conceive) was accomplished in his wars against the Waldenses and
Albingenses in the 12. Century after Christ, they held all things conformable
to the Scriptures, and the Fathers, as they called them, and every way
Orthodoxall, only they blasphemed the Church of Rome, this Beast could not tell
what he had against them otherwise; but otherwise he commended them for their
honesty, piety, and good dealing, and there was nothing culpable in their
doing, but that they spoke against the Church of Rome: now against them did the
Pope and the Catholic Church procure many expeditions of sore war for many
years together, and in conclusion rooted them out of the Country, and
scattered them up and down, some to some part of France, some to Bohemia, some
to Germany, some to England, and some to one place, and some to another: though
the Papists did confess that the people were not rooted out, but scattered;
and wherever they came, they propagated their Religion, that it was more and
more spread where they came; but they overcame them, for they slew (as stands
upon Record) about ten hundred thousands of them, and did burn up their Cities,
and Cattle, fel'd their wood, that there might be no more Heretics nestled in
that wilderness; and they did take a course that Midwives, and Mothers, and
Infants in the womb, all should be slaughtered by fire and sword, that there
might be no more continuance of that Generation: So that in this War the Pope
did mightily prevail, and prospered so far, that he spread all Christendom,
and in one battle did overcome a great many of the Saints: Whereupon the
Waldenses being warned by a Religious man sent by the Bishop of Toulouse, to
confess the hand of God against them for Heretical pravity, in blaspheming
the Roman Catholic visible Church, and continuing so long in it, and to turn
to the Catholic Church: For their defense, to answer the Temptation that was
put upon them, said they, it is written, The Beast shall make war with the
Saints and overcome them; therefore it is no argument of Gods being against us,
in respect of our Religion, for he may acknowledge us Saints, though we be slain
to this day; and therefore though there were but a handful left, they would
rather dye, then yield to conformity to the Church of Rome. So you see the
point opened: For the Reasons,

First, how this Beast comes to have this power to make war.

Secondly, how the Saints come thus to be warred upon.

And thirdly, how they come to be overcome (for all these would be opened.)

First, Reason 1.
this beast had power given him to make war by several hands; First, the
devout subjection of the ten Christian Kings to him, that gave their kingdoms
and swords into his hand, Rev. 17. 17. God has put in their hearts to fulfill
his will, and to agree, and give their Kingdoms unto the Beast: The principal
Kings of Christendom in those days came and gave their power to the beast,
and by their power he was able to do wonders against all.

A second reason and cause of his power to war against the Saints, Reason 2.
was, because of the prosperous success which they had in the war against
Christians a hundred years before, and that was in an expedition of Godfrey of
Bulloign in Greece, and Duke Dalbo, that went forth to recover the holy Land
(as they call it) to overcome the Turks and Sarazens, and Godfrey Bullen, a
Christian Prince, as they call him, they made him King at Jerusalem, there he
continued, and prospered mightily in this war, and held it for many years
together: and Christian Princes seeing the prosperous success of this War
which he had raised up to recover the holy Land, and the Sepulcher of Christ;
therefore upon the same terms that he did procure that Expedition against
Infidels, he does procure war against these Heretics, and out of the same
notion there were gathered an innumerable company.

A third Reason was from the zealous Sermons of Friars and Monks, Reason 3.
exciting all Christendom to this War under the Standard of the Cross in
promise of equal pardon, as if the Expedition had been against the Sarazens,
thence came he to make such authority to make War with the Saints, that if he
call for it, it is done: He agrees upon it in his own Council, and he gives
instruction to all Abbots and Friars, and Governors of religious Orders, that
they should send out chief Preachers to call upon all the people, as in Psalm.
94. 16. Who will rise up for me against the evil doers? or who will stand up
for me against the workers of Iniquity? Sometimes complaining of the slacknesse
of men to holy zeal for Gods glory, and maintenance of purity of Religion, and
sometimes a necessity of taking part with those that are Infidels abroad, and
Heretics and Schismatics at home; They found their Explication amounting to
that use, that whereas there had been many Heretics nestled up in this
Country, therefore it pleased him and the Apostle Peter to stir up the
Bishop of Rome to vouchsafe the like plenary pardon to those which would go to
war against these Heretics, as those which had prevailed against Infidels;
and the premise of pardon did so far prevail, that they shortly gathered
together 300000. that in hope of plenary pardon of sin did give up themselves
to go on upon their own charges; they would sell goods and Lands for pardon of
sin, and peace of conscience: And in those days men were wont to be troubled
at the Sermons of the Friars and Monks, and never found settled peace by pardon
from Christ Jesus, and never thought to look for pardon where it was: and they
told them it was to be had by bestowing their goods and lands thus; and those
Friars and Monks did so inculcate and drive the nayl to the head in the hearts
of people, that they were never at rest till they went about this Expedition,
there were raised a matter of ten Captains, Simon Munford was one, a notable
instrument for the Devil and this great Beast.

The last Reason was, Reason 4.
the superstition of those times, the deep devotion and dejection of spirit
that was in the bodies of Christians in those days in regard of their
spiritual estate: They being deeply convinced of sin, and sharply reproved
by the Friars and Monks, who had a notable dexterity to sting the consciences
of men, and wound them by the terror of Gods wrath, sometimes for their great
exactions, sometimes for their incest; sometimes for their whoredom, and
neglect of the Ordinances of the Church; and they had things so full against
them, that it made them strictly devout, and so were taken up in devotion to
this great Beast, and the head of it, that all the world admired and adored him
for his admirable and transcendant power, and keys that he had to heaven (as
they thought^) they all yielded themselves, some their bodies to fight, and
some that had not sufficient to maintain themselves, other good Catholics
were ready to cast in some more, some less, to maintain them, according to
their abilities, and happy he that could make something to make war aginst
these Heretics: So that lay all these together, and you will see how he had
this great power to make war with the Saints. Here was a great and vast change
from the Institution of Christ, who confined all Churches into one
Congregation, that all may hear, and all may be edefied, that one Parish
Church should grow to that vastness, to levy 300000. to the war, and that by
a word of his mouth to have them all mayntained without grudging, for every man
did think the work as pious, a mavelous change: and well does the holy
Ghost say, He had great power, that the power of that Church should reach over
all Churches, and shall have such an influence into Kings, that look what they
shall dictate, all shall be ready, body, and goods, and life, and all to
maintain them; you see the reasons of it, how he comes by this power.

But secondly, how comes he to make War against the Saints?

There is a double reason for that, Reason 1.
one is taken from the profession, and practice, and conversation of these
Saints: This was their practice, They followed the Lamb, as in the next
Chapter; I looked, and lo a lamb stood on the mount Sion, and with him an
hundred forty and four thousand, having his Fathers name written in their
foreheads: These are they which are not defiled with women, for they are
Virgins: These are they which follow the Lamb whether soever he goes: They
kept themselves undefiled of this Antichrist of Rome, were not defiled with the
whoredom of this great beast; in all things they consented with the Doctrine
of the Primitive Church, and their hypocrisies, and whoredoms, and
coveteousnesse, were things that would by no means be borne; therefore the
Pope, who was the great head, discerning he was thus contested against, and (as
they say) blasphemed, he thinks he does nothing, though he destroy Turks, and
Sarazens, and Egyptians, and whoever took the Sepulcher of Christ, as long as
those Heretics at home were not subdued, therefore he thinks it as
meritorious a work to subdue them, as ever to fight for the holy Land. But
there was another thing that made the war, for no war can be made but by
levying of Forces on both part^.

And therefore a second was, Reason 2.
their taking up of Arms, in the just defense of their liberties, both of
conscience and outward man: For if the Catholic Church had raised up all these
Forces, and they had quietly submitted themselves like sheep to the slaughter,
there had been no war then, there had been massacres: It would have amounted
to that as the massacre in Paris, that a man did not lift up his hand, but they
were slaughtered like dogs in the street: Though they come with fire and sword,
yet unless they resist with fire and sword, it cannot be said to be war: Some
set in against them, though their weakness caused them to presume, but it was
to weak a business for flesh and blood; We wrestle not against flesh and
blood, but against Principalities and Powers, and spiritual wickednesses: They
which trust to flesh and blood shall be deceived; as these men, they stood out,
and sometimes prospered, while the Earl of Tone, and some other Princes joined
together, though they were but few, they prospered; but war is not one Battle
or two, and in the end they were overcome, and this Beast prevailed; and that is
the reason of the 2d part, how he came to make war against the Saints.

For the 3d, How came he to overcome them? Truly not by strength, he had very
little that way; but

First, Reason 1.
he overcame them by their a little too much confidence in the arm of flesh:
when they see the King of Aragon set on, they come to be a little set on by the
power of the King, and a great Battle recoyled by trusting to the arm of
flesh. You read in Heb. 11. 34. That by faith the Saints waxed valiant in
Fight, turned to flight the Armies of the Aliens; but when our faith run in
another channel, that we grow confident not in the Lord Jesus, by trusting in
him, but on the arm of flesh; we know what is said in Jer. 17. 5. Cursed be
the man (ye though he be a good man) that trusts in man, and makes flesh his
arm, and whose heart departs from the Lord: It withers, it cannot stand
against the potent Army that rise up against them; though their enemies were
never less in number, nor never less provided, yet they prevailed more then
ever before.

The second Reason was, by their attention to politic and deceitful Treaties
of peace; for when they saw the men were good Soldiers, valient in battle,
and able to fight it out, and they found the 3000. that were to fight for
plenary pardon three years, had served out their time, and they had got as they
thought, their souls saved, they would go home now, and they had got peace by
this carnal confidence of theirs: So they perceived this war would be
troublesome, and the Heretics were like to prosper, therefore they gather in
the chief Leaders to Treaties about peace, and great pity that such blood
should be shed; therefore for the honor of Rome it were needful to cease the
war, and so would draw their chief Leaders to firm leagues of Peace, and
then they kept their best Generals in Prison; and thus when they had got them
to yield to their pretenses, then they had their necks under their girdles,
and their throats under their axes, they might hew them out of measure:
Insomuch that the King of France hearing of such cruel massacre, he sent to
know what their Religion was; and though he sent express charge that none of
his Soldiers should offer violence to them, yet they concealing his Letters,
they went on in massacring the poor Saints, and scattering them up and down, in
so much that they prevailed, partly by the Saints cleaving to the arm of
flesh, and by trusting their false pretenses.

And there is a third Reason mentioned in the 10. verse. says he, Here is the
Faith and Patience of the Saints:

It was Gods pleasure to make it the season of the Patience of the Saints:
Reason 3.
It was the season wherein Antichrist should swell to his height, and the
Saints be brought low, and their Patience be tried to the utmost; and it being
a time of the Saints Patience, it must needs be a time of their suffering; and
suffer they did with much patience: but yet they were not utterly exterpated,
for some fled to France, and some to England, and so propagated Christian
Religion, which after turned to the conversion of many, John Husse, and Jerome
of Pragues Doctrine grew and spread more, till God raised up Luther to set
forward the power of the Gospel. Thus you see the truth of the Doctrine.

For the use then, Use 1.
First it may serve to let us see whence is the power of waging war; for the
Text says, it was given; To him it was given to make war with the Saints: All
men cannot receive this, as our Savior says in another case, but they to whom
it is given. It is not an easy matter for any to be (...) to wage war, it
requires great store of persons, and great store of Treasury, and Fountain to
maintain both; And besides all this, it require^ no small measure of Wisdom
and Policy to undertake such designs: all these you see the Lord gives, and
gives them to those that his soul take no pleasure in, and to those that in his
esteem are men of beastly spirit^, yet he gives them power to make war: He
may bless himself in his rule and bravery that they were able to (...) against
Infidels, and after against Heriticks as they called them, but indeed the
Saints of God: but you see God gave power unto this Beast, which is therefore
no cause of triumph or glorying that he has recived such a power, for you see
it may be given to these that are enemies to the Lord Jesus.

Secondly, Use 2.
observe this much, That the Lord himself does acknowledge even his poor
children on Earth to be that which is commonly by privilege sequestered to the
holy Saints in Heaven; He calls them Saints.

We think Saint-ship is a peculiar privilege to the Saints in Heaven, when
they have ended their days in peace and a good conscience, then they are
accounted Saints and Angels; but the Lord accounts them Saints while they live
upon the Earth, whiles they are the Church Militant, a warfaring Church; while
men undertake war against them, and overcome them by war, even then they
are called Saints. And which is wonderful, Saints when they are overcome, and
that by their own sinfulness; for they loose not the Saintship, when they
loose the victory. The Lord looks at his poorest children here as Saints,
though there be a miserable body of death hang about them, that they cry out, O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this Body of Death, Romans 7.
24. Yea though they complain of their Pride, and Passion, and Lusts, and
Hypocrysie, and many offenses they find against themselves, though they think
themselves more flesh then any, though they think themselves (as Paul did)
Carnal, sold under Sin, (Romans 7. 17.) yet then the Lord accounts them Saints
when they are encompassed about with a body of Sin:

Yea which is worse then that, when they give way to their own Sins for a
time, and do withdraw their confidence from the Lord in this and that act, and
put their trust in the arm of flesh: When they are so childish as to trust
Popish pretenses, when they are warred against, and overcome by enemies, and by
their own folly; as David says in Psalm. 69. 5. O God, thou know my
foolishness, and my Sins are not hid from thee. The Lord knew it, but yet he
did not know it to hurt them, and loath them, and dishearten them: but yet they
are Saints, and such as he account to be his, and not only in regard of
Regeneration, and the holiness of Christ, but in regard of the fruits of
holiness begun in them, as he says, Rev. 14. 4. These are they which are not
defiled with women. They are sincere in their course, and keep faith and a good
conscience in the main, and where they do fail, they judge themselves: Indeed
in darkness of Temptation they may be surprised, but they judge themselves for
it, and God looks at them as though they were without fault before his Throne;
when it comes to the Throne of God, the Lord Jesus covers it with the Robe of
his Righteousness; and in the intentions of their hearts and endeavors they
are according to God; if they be carried aside, it is by humane frailty.

Now this is comfort that the Lord accounts them Saints when they are warred
against, (as here in the Text) and all the world thinks it a matter justly
deserving Salvation to shed their blood like water, then does the Lord bear
witness they are Heriticks. So that let every christian soul carry this home
with him, that it is not every act of unbeleif that makes a man no Saint, for
these trusted too much upon the forces of others, and if they had prevailed,
for God never fails any that put their trust in him; never do the Saints fail
in any expedition to men but when they fail in trust to God, 1 John 5. 4. This
is the victory that overcomes the world, even our Faith: He that believes in
the Son of God for Redemption and Protection, and turns not asside, whether
he go forth with many, or with few, it is all one for that; if it were but
David with a sling and a stone, he shall prevail against Goliath: The Lord is
faithful, never did any faithful soul perish till his faith failed and
shrunk; and then when Peter's faith shrinks, he begins to sinck. But it may be a
ground of much consolation to any Saint of God, the Lord does not dissaint a
man, or cast him out of the Catalogue of Saints for this and that failing, but
still they are Saints, a Saint in peace, and a Saint in war, even when they
are overcome; when they are in calamity, and the plowers plow upon their
backs, and make large furrows, they are the Saints of God, still leaning to
the Voice and Council of the Lord; and when they start asside to Popish
pretenses: Only when they cleave to the Lord, and trust steadfastly upon him,
then they prosper and flourish; but if they begin to shrink in their faith, and
to harken to pretenses and terms of peace, then wonder not if you see them
overcome, yet still faith is invincible, and their cause and Religion is
propagated by their dispertion, it was not destroyed. And therefore if the Lord
accounts us Saints, it behooves us to be ashamed of every passage of our lives
that does not become the Saints of God. When Religion came low, and Antichrist
overspread the world, the Lord accounted his faithful ones to be Saints; in
this battle there was a Generation of Saints whom he owns: and therefore how
much more should we that live in days of peace and liberty, bring forth fruits
of holiness in our conversation, that the Lord may account us his Saints
whoever came to make war against us.

Thirdly, Use 3.
this may serve to teach us the lawfulness of christians waging war in their
own just defense. You see it evident here, the Beast did make war against the
Saints, and did overcome them at length, though at first the Saints overcame
them, and killed diverse of them; they stood upon their own defense, and it it
is not laid to their charge, but still they are accounted Saints while they
make war: It is true, their confidence in the arm of flesh, and listening to
Popish pretenses was an argument of weakness, and timerousnesse, but it was
not their failing to resist: and had they not hearkened to those suggestions
brought to them by those that lie in wait to deceive; had they not leaned to
humane policy, and trusted to humane strength, they had certainly prospered. It
is true indeed, when the Laws of a State are armed against Religion, though
christians be fewer, or more in number, they are to submit, and not take up
arms; and that was the constant practice of the Primitive Church, the Laws of
the Empire being for Idolatry, they willingly suffered, though they were more
then the rest. Or secondly, when the Laws of a State are ordained for Religion,
private christians must lift up their hands, to right the abuse of the Laws,
and therefore David being a private person, he would not lift up his hand
against Saul, the Lords Anointed, though he did against Law. But yet
nevertheless, if the Law be for the maintenance of Peace and Truth, and true
Religion; and Governors and Princes will against Law, and beyond Law, and
consequently against the Oath which themselves have taken to maintain the Laws
and Religion, if they will make war against the Saints, and Religion, and
Truth, or against the way of Justice and happiness, which they are sworn to
maintain; now in such a case as this, It is as lawful to take up arms of
defense, as it was for these men to take up war in their own just defense.

Now they are not private persons, but in the place of the Country: The Lord he
put the power of the sword into the head of their Guides and Leaders where they
lived; and though they were by former Laws engaged by way of Homage, yet now
they may take up the sword of their own defense and maintenance, in witness
bearing to the Truth to the last blood: In such cases the case is much altered,
for their Princes and supreme Governors, they are all subject to the Laws and
Oath of the Kingdom, and they have no power but according to the Laws which
are made: If therefore they take up a power against Law, and contest with the
people of God, then this power which these holy men did exercise to maintain
their peace against all opposition to be raised against them is lawful.

For a fourth use; Use 4.
it may teach all the people of God not to measure a cause by the event, nor
persons by accidents that do befall them, lest they should condemn the
generation of the Just. It was a grievous temptation Asaph lay under, to see
the ungodly prosper, and have what their hearts could desire, and himself
plagued all the day long, and chastned every morning, Psalm. 73. 3. to 13. and
by this means he condemned the generation of Gods children: But no matter
though the Beast prosper, and the Saints are overcome, yet the Beast is a Beast
when he prospers, and the Saints are Saints, though they be overcome; therefore
let us not judge of things according to their appearance.

Fifthly, Use 5.
It may teach all the Saints in this Country, or wherever, not to trust the
pretenses of deceitful men, especially such as are not sound in Religion, and
take heed also how you trust upon your own strength (let me put them both
together for brevity sake): We know not how soon any of us may be tempted in
this kind, what wars may be raised against this Country (though we have
none for the present, nor fear none) yet in time we know not what may come:
what, are we better then our Fathers? The Beast of Rome still lives, his 42.
months is not yet out (though his power he much weakened) but his Agents still
live: He is able to blow a coal to those that look for salvation from him, to
do this great and glorious service to the Catholic Church and cause: And if it
please the Catholic Church, then it grows a great business to root out
Heretics, to blast them by censures of Excommunication, and Civil State; if
it were so, we stand upon our own defense you see. It behooves you therefore,
as you desire to be faithful to God, to Religion, to your Churches and
Commonwealths, to your Wives, Children, Estates, as you desire to be faithful
to his Ordinances, to the Kingly, Priestly, and Prophetical Office of Christ,
to attend to that which these Saints neglected, that is to say, to attend to
the word of Faith, and to the wisdom of God: Trust not upon the experience of
your Captains or Soldiers, to fight by Land or Sea: Trust not upon your
Castles or Vessels by Sea, any thing you have, or may have: Trust not upon the
pieces of Ordnance, they are all vain things to save if you stand in need (and
yet of use.) Be prepared in this kind, that you may be isntrumental to Gods
providence, but trust not in them, they are but the Arm of flesh: And if Wars
come against New England, it will be from Principalities and Powers, and flesh
and blood will not be able to with-stand them: They will be Principalities from
Hell, or the great Beast, the Catholic Church, or from the Image of this
Beast, otherwise there is no fear of any War: but if any War do come, trust
not in those means you have, nor though all the Natives in the Country were on
your side: and if any great Protestant States should offer you help, use them,
but do not trust in them. It was the way of overcoming the Saints of God, they
trusted on the arm of Flesh, and that was their great folly, and that brought
the hand of God against them; therefore see your Faith be sincere, and upright
to him.

Secondly, Lean not to the wisdom of carnal reason, nor trust not to fair
pretenses, you shall have your liberties longer established, only something or
other you must give way to, and some principal ones must be singled out to
treat of peace, but it was the ruin of this State: It behooves the Saints to
sanctify God in their hearts, to trust upon his grace, to cleave to the word
of God; trust what the Lord says, and not what deceitful men say: It was a
grave saying of an ancient Prince in England; Obey according to the Law, and
you obey the King: but if you obey what comes suddenly out of his mouth, or
against Law, you obey not me as King: And that is it which Christian Religion
teaches; no Religion teaches a man more to obey Kings in wholesome Laws; to
obey them, it to obey God in them, for Princes are subordinate to God himself.
The people do concur in making some Laws in every Commonwealth, and Princes
have transcendant power over the People; and God forbid any should spring out
of this Country to plead against their Governors, and weaken their forces,
but keep their Scepters fresh from one Generation to another; yet this is the
best service done to Kings, service according to God: If Laws be made, let a
man yield active obedience to them, if they be good, and passive if they be
evil; but against Law, contrary to the stream of Law, to make a man think
himself bound, in such a case it is to flatter Princes and Powers, and not to
yield professed subjection to them. Therefore it behooves the people of God to
know upon what terms they stand, that we may carry our selves like loyal
Subjects and Christians, that the name of God may not be dishonored by any
weakness of ours, and starting aside on any hand or other.

Rev. 13. latter part of the 7. verse. And power was given him over all
Kindreds, and Tongues, and Nations.
We come now to the fourth thing which these words hold forth, and that is the
power (or as the Greek word has it) the authority which is here said to be
given to the Roman Catholic Church, and that is, over all Kindreds, and
Tongues, and Nations.

The note is this,

To the Roman Catholic visible Church was given very ample jurisdiction and
authority over all the Christian world (if we may so speak) or as in the Text,
Doctr. 4.
over all Kindreds, Tongues, and Nations.

And he means Kindreds, Tongues, and Nations of such Countries which were wont
to be subject to the Empire of Rome, which were then counted all the Civil
Nations of the world.

To open it briefly: It was given him over all kindreds, tongues, and nations.

Here are three words, and one include another: Nation is the largest; for in a
Nation there may be many Tongues, and in one Tongue there may be many Kindreds.
He had dominion and sovereignty over all Nations, or over the ten Kings; that
is to say, the body of Christian Princes, and all the Nations subject to them,
they all gave their power unto the Beast, Rev. 17. 17. No nation professed
Christianity, but professed also subjection to the Sea of Rome, that is, to the
Romon Catholic visible Church: And the Papists are large in this; Bellarmine
makes it a 4th. note of the visible Church, amplitude of power, and he gives
sundry instances: Stories are evident, that all Nations did profess this
Religion (specially after the subduing of the Waldences, though they did
before) setting aside that remnant of the woman's seed that were fled into the
wilderness: Now no Nation in Christendid profess other Religion then Popery,
especially from the time of Charles the Great, to Charles the fifth, which was a
matter of 720. years: There was no visible profession open, unless in some
secret corners of the world: no Nation held forth any other Religion then
Popish, nor professed subjection to any other Church. Now in every Nation there
are, or may be diverse Tongues, as in England, you have the English, and Welsh,
and Cornish Tongues, besides others that are discrepant from English: But he
says not only every Nation, but every Tongue, that is, every Language, they
all gave their power to the Beast: And in every Tongue we have many Kindreds,
and there is no man that could ever say but some of his kindred have been
Popish, or are Popish to this day, if not all, yet some of the ancientest, and
those the greater part, here is the universality of it.

And (I say) further, he had ample and great power; for to have power over all
argues amplitude. It is said in the beginning of the 8 verse. (which I will take
in, and open here) it is said, They shall worship him: That Is a great power
when it does amount to inward worship, not civil, but divine worship. It was
divine worship that he challenged, and all Nations gave him. To give Laws of
faith, and worship, and government to all Churches in Christendom, that was
divine power peculiar to the Lord Jesus. It was divine power to challenge
toihimselfe imposition of Kings, and deposition of Kings without consent of the
people: To provoke the people to do it whether they liked their Prince or no,
this is transcendant above all created power. Besides, it was divine worship
they gave, in giving him power over their Consciences, challenging to himself
(and they also yielding freely) a power to bind Conscience with the Laws he
gave them, to loose their consciences either from the Laws of God, in matter of
Oaths; to loose them from guilt of sin, to loose their consciences from
Contracts, from Confederacies, this is divine power; They all worship him,
whose names are not written in the book of the Lamb, and some of them too for
a season, but they continue not, God opens their eyes to repent of it, and to
rise from under it. It was divine power to challenge infalibility of Judgment,
to judge of Scripture out of the Oracle of his own brains: These were all
divine worship they gave to the Catholic Church, and to the head of it, the
Bishop of Rome. So that marvayl not (as the Text says) there was given,
Exasia, (...) not a lame power, but an unlimited power over all people in
Church and Commonwealth, and over conscience. There is nothing wherein the
Catholic Church had not power throughout all Christendom.

Now further, the Text tells you, All this power was given: He did not wholly
arrogate this power to him (though he did so too) but it was given him, though
he took it, and took all advantages to get it. No man can receive any thing,
except it be given him from above. But he had it given him: Given him, by whom?
by God, by the Devil, and given him by Christian Kings, Churches, and
Commonwealths, and Families.

First, Reason 1.
it was given by God in his just judgment: God gave them up to delusions to
believe lies, 2 These. 2. 11. And he gave two reasons why God gave them up to
those delusions.

1. To avenge their want of entertainment of the truth in love. Because they
received not the love of the truth that they might be saved, verse. 10. 12.
Because they would not receive Christ, nor the simplicity of his government and
worship (in Church State) therefore God gave them up to Satan, and to the man
of sin, and to the Catholic visible Roman Church.

2. That they all might be damned that have pleasure in unrighteousness, in
the same verse. The Lord gave them up therefore to damnable distempers,
damnable usurpations and Ordnances; the Lord gave them up for these two
Reasons, and they are one subordinate to another.

Secondly, Reason 2.
this power was given by Satan also. For it is said, The coming of Antichrist
shall be after the working of Satan, with all powers, and signs, and lying
wonders, and with all deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness, 2 These. 2. 9, 10.
By the efficacy of delusion, which was by the juggling of those great men in
those times, for efficacy of delusion is by miracles, so by deceivablenesse of
unrighteousness, which is threefold; The sophistry of Schoolmen, the policy
of the Canonists that made their Laws out of the Popes decrees, still advancing
the Popish Church, and the head thereof, partly by the devotion of Monks and
Friars: And if you ask why Satan did this, there is a double reason of that.

First, to revenge the injury which the Church did him by bringing forth a
Man-child, a Christian Emperor to depose him from his glory, wherein he was
worshipped as the great God of the world. Now when he sees he is cast off
from the honor he had, and there was no more place left for him in heaven, it
comes to pass that he pours forth a flood of barbarous nations and damnable
Heresies after the woman, and makes war with the remnant of her seed, Rev. 12.
13. 15.

2. A second Reason that stirred up Satan, was out of the ancient enmity
against Christ, and the seed of Christ, Genesis 3. 15. I will put enmity between
thy seed and her seed, which is Christ; and all the seed of Christ, which are
both public and private Christians, he has an inveterate enmity against them
all; and therefore he gives the Church of Rome all the power that Pagan Rome
had.

The third sort of givers of this large power to this Beast, and the head of
it, the Pope was.

The voluntary devotion of Christian Princes and States. Reason 3.
They did voluntarily resign themselves up, and their Kingdoms, and States, and
Churches, and Commonwealth, and Consciences and all, to the obedience of the
Sea of Rome, Rev. 17. 17. They with one accord gave their Kingdoms to the
Beast; God put it into their hearts to do it; that is true, but they were left
of God, and acted by Satan, and so were they brought about to give this power
unto the Beast. Some were brought unto this by the Popes favor, and large
gifts he bestowed upon them.

Charles the Great had his Empire from the Bishop of Rome, and translated it
from Constantinople to France, and Germany, and therefore he had reason to
stand to the Authority that set him up. And the ten Kings of Christendom that
rose upon the demolition of the Grecian Empire, which was then called the
Empire of Rome, their absolute authority did much depend upon the Bishop of
Rome; if the Grecian Empire had not yielded, they had been liable in conscience
to restore these ten Kingdoms: In point of State Policy, they had cause to be
much observant to the Pope: But that is not all, for they could never have done
it, had not the Subjects yielded: And what moved them? Truly they were all
taken with the Religion of the man of sin: That flood of Heresies and
Abominations which the Catholic Church did hold forth (as in a cup of poison
to the world) these earthly sort of Christians swallowed it all up. They were
carnal, and yet superstitious and devout: Carnal, for want of saving grace
and regeneration: And devout, for then generally Christians lay under the
terror of the Law, as in Rev. 9. 5, 6. The locusts came in, which were the
Friars and Monks, and they had this power to sting their Consciences even to
the death, that a man would give all he had for pardon of sin: Now having
power to sting men's Consciences, but not to heal them; to kill, but not to
make alive, they were now fitted to receive the Impression of the Popish
Religion; and that religion to men so qualified and disposed, was fit to heal
them overly, and to skin the wound of Conscience; and there are three things in
that Religion that helped to skin over the Conscience.

1. The suitableness of it to humane and natural senses.

2. To carnal natural reason.

3. To natural Conscience.

For these three concur, and that strongly in this Religion, to carry all
Christendom after it.

First, for natural sense: All that have travayled into Popish Countries know
that their Religion is composed to natural sense.

1. To satisfy the eyes with goodly Images, and Pictures, and gorgeous
Temples, and Vestures, that young and old are taken with these goodly
spectacles.

2. For the ears; you know in their Cathedralls what curious music they
have, both vocal and isntrumental.

3. For the smell, you have Incense and sweet perfumes to entertain you.

4. For the taste, you have double Feasts and solemn Feasts, many Feasts full
of luxury and riot.

5. For the Touch; there is toleration of Stews, to give up their names to
Stews: They will not suffer men to live, unless they give up their names to be
free of such unclean houses: And if you commit any lewdness, then it is easy
to come off with some light penanc^s; and especially the purse, that will do
all. These things marvellously please the sense.

Secondly, for natural Reason, it suits marvellously with natural reason.

1. To hold forth an historical and implicit faith* Historical the Devils may
have: and implicit, for a man to believe as the Church believes, and he
believes this Faith has power to quench all temptations of the Devil.

2. To hold forth such a repentance as consists in Contrition, Confession, and
Satisfaction; Judas reached all this: For contrition, his heart was humbled in
sense of his sin. For confession, I have sinned in betraying innocent blood:
And for satisfaction; He brought again the thirty pieces of silver; He would
not meddle nor make with them.

3. To hold forth such an obedience as a man may be able to perform and keep
the whole Law of God, which he thinks to be easy: And this does please
natural Sense to work our own salvation.

4. To hold forth pardon of sin for money, and for bodily exercises.

5. Uncertainty of Salvation.

6. Such a frame of Church Government as keeps all in a politic order and
unity: That all Popish Churches be subordinate to such a Bishop, as he is to
some Metropolitan, and they to some Primate, and all to the Bishop of Rome. And
why? From one unity ascends, and it is good to keep unity: And so to look at a
man's self as unworthy to come into the presence of God, and to call upon
Christ, and therefore manners would make a man cleave to some he-Saints or
she-Saints, and they shall present their prayers to Christ, and Christ to the
Father, which is very plausable to natural reason: And for our Fathers which
grew zealous of that Religion, we should not damn them to hell, Reason abhors
that.

Thirdly, for natural Conscience; it will counter-work with God, and walk in
equipage with God all the way, that is to say, for a man to look to find
according to his works, natural Conscience has this in Nature, it is ingrafted
in nature from the God of Adam, from his Ordinance in Nature, or the rudements
of it restored.

1. Election of Faith, or works foreseen.

2. Redemption of all men alike.

3. Conversion by the power of free will. This is in the natures of all men, by
the very Law and works of Nature.

4. Justification by works, natural Conscience dictates that; Do this and thou
shall live; do it not, and thou do forfeit the favor of God; but receive it,
and thou have fellowship with God.

5. Perseverance by our own endeavors.

6. Glorification by merits of works.

All these suit with natural Conscience, that Conscience is satisfied if the
work be accomplished; if not, then they make satisfaction: If they fail in
these works by giving way to this o^ that arrogance that the work is not
complete, then Conscience hangs in some dispense and demur: And if they cannot
satisfy all in this world, yet they should do what they can by giving to this
and that good use, and do penance for their sin: And if all fail, they may
make satisfaction in Purgatory, and not sink down to the nether most Hell:
These things be very acceptable to natural Conscience. Thus we see how it
comes to pass, that to this Beast was given authority and power over all
Kindreds, Tongues, and Nations.

Obj. You will say to me, But does not this cross some other Text, in Rev. 5.
9. where it is said, the Lord has redeemed his people out of every Kindred,
and Tongue, and Nation? If the Pope had this power over every Kindred, Tougue,
and Nation, where stands Christ's redemption?

I answer, Answ.
for Christ's Redemption, it is some out of every Kindred, Tongue, and Nation,
whose names are written in the Lambs book of life, but it was but a remnant:
There is at this time a remnant according to the Election of Grace, Romans 11. 5.
But otherwise all Kindreds, Tongues, and Nations have been swallowed up by the
usurpation of this Beast, and by their subjection to him: So that Christ has
his number out of all these; but it is the Beast that carries away the body of
them, for that season especially: He did rule over them by a kind of sacred
Authority, in the consciences of men, because he had this absolute power in
Churches, a great power for 1260. years together: whether you reckon from
Constantines time, or Theodosius his time, he had a mavelous power in
Kingdoms, Nations, and Commonwealths. But notwithstanding he had this power
in those times, yet Christ kept the interest in his own chosen, as in Rev. 14.
1. where he had 144000. that were spotless virgins.

Answ. ^. The Lord Jesus will at length challenge all his own, purchase them
into his own hand, when at the calling of the Jews, all the Kingdoms of the
world shall be given to the Saints of the most high, Dan. 7. 26, 27. The Lord
will take them all into his own hand, and power and jurisdiction, but he must
first throw down this enemy that has usurped over his purchased possession:
But in the mean time this Beast swallows up all for so many Ages together.

For the use of the point.

First, Use 1.
it may be to refute the Papists that give this as a true note of the Church,
namely, amplitude of dominion, as the Catholic Church had: They give this for
an infallible note of the Church; now that note you see is here evidently
ascribed to the people that worship the great Beast, of whom the Lord says
here (ver. 8.) their names are not written in the book of the Lamb. So that
this is a note, not of an Apostolical Church, but it may be a note of an
Apostaticall Church that is fallen away from the Apostles Doctrine: It is a
true description of that State of the Church. You see here Power was given over
to the Beast over all Kindreds, Tongues, and Nations: And therefore amplitude
of dominion is not an inseparable character of the Spouse of Christ; for it may
be given to those that are not the Church of Christ, even to those that are but
a Beast in the sight of God, not his Spouse. I may rather say the contrary,
that amplitude of Dominion was never a note of a Church of Christ since the
world began: For in the old Testament the State of the Church was National,
and they had power over one Nation, and sometimes conquered others, as in
David, and Solomon's time, they conquered the Philistims, and Ammonites, and
Moabites, and Edomites, but it was never over all the whole world, and that
dominion which they had, they did not challenge it by Church power, but left
them still to their own Religion, for the Commonwealth propagated their power
by arms, having first occasion of war given them by their arrogance to them.
In the days of the new Testament, the Church that Christ instituted reaches
no further then to their own members, and their own members reach no further
then to one Congregation, that all might hear, and all might be edefied, 1 Cor.
14. 23. So that if Church power extends no further then the bounds of one
Congregation; then that Church that swells and strecheth forth her power all
the world over, Kindreds, and Tongues, and Nations; what an out-ragious
swelling Beast is that, that reaches such vast dominion beyond the proportion
that the Lord gave to his Church? If you should see a body swell to such a vast
bigness, that his arms shall reach from one end of the world to another,
would it not be counted a monster? So in this case, the Lord has limited the
power of the Church within it self; it is a great power that they have, but
not so great as to bind conscience, unless it be Ministerially, and so they
have power to bind Kings in chains, and Nobles in lincks of Iron; but to have
power, judiciary power over the Scriptures, and over the conscience, over and
above the application of the word; it is such as the Lord never gave to any
Church, but it is arrogated, and usurped by the man of Sin.

Secondly, Use 2.
it may serve to teach you the prouenesse of your natures to that which is
evil, above that which is savingly and spiritually good. This power over all
Kindreds, and Tongues, and Nations, the Lord has purchased by his death, Rev.
^. 9. He dyed and rose again that he might be Lord both of quick and dead,
Romans 14. 9. And upon his resurrection, all power was given him in Heaven and
Earth, Mat. 28. 18. He prayed for this power, and the Lord promised to give him
it. Psalm. ^. 8. Ask of me, and I will give thee the Heathen for thine
Inheritance; and the uttermost parts of the Earth for thy Possession. This has
the Lord bought with his precious blood, and paid for by the power of his
eternal Spirit; and yet never did the Lord Jesus enjoy this power to this day,
which the man of Sin has enjoyed for so many years together. He will enjoy
it at lenght, when he shall call in the Jews, and with them the fullness of the
Gentiles, and reign in Sovereign Authority both in Church and Commonwealth,
according to all the Council of his word and will: But yet it was never known
to this day that so many Nations did submit their thrones to the Dominion and
Government of Christ, and to the Truth of Christ, and to worship him with the
servants of God, notwithstanding the purchase which Christ has made of this
Sovereignty, and notwithstanding the efficacy of his prayer for obtaining this
power, that he might have dominion over all. As soon as Constantine brought
the world to become Christian, the woman she fled into the Wilderness: The
true worshippers of Christ were soon trodden under the hatches, a mountain of
corruption in Church Government overwhelmed them amain, that you cannot set the
time when so many Nations served him, and were as ready to take up arms in his
quarrel, as they have done for the man of Sin.

You will say, did they not for the recovery of the holy Land, many Churches
conspire and lay their heads together, and engaged themselves for this War?
why, when they they undertook that War, was it Christ that commanded any such
thing, that Churches should engage themselves, and their Estates, and Lives,
and Souls, and all for the recovery very of the holy City; was it not merely
undertaken by the Bishop of Rome, and by the motion of the Catholic Church in
a General Council? The Roman Catholic Church met in a General Council, and
they agreed to set about this expedition; They promised pardon of Sin to the
people, and in hope of that, and such like things they went about it. It was
service to the Beast, not to Christ: God never acknowledges it as any service
to Christ's Kingdom: It was for the advancement of the head of the catholic
Church* but as any grew more wise, they grew more afraid of them.

So that it is a wonder to see; never did the the Christian world give that
Authority to Christ, as they have done unto the Pope, and his Institutions,
which are not Ordinances of Christ. Yea let me say another word (which is above
what I said:) It has been a very rare and singular case when any man would
acknowledge a particular visible Church, depending on no power, but Independent
within it self: It is such a rarity that a man may here and there indeed find
it in times of persecution (in 3000. years): But after the Church come to
peace, it is very rare to hear such a matter till you come down to the
Waldences, and Albedences, and those poor Churches that were scattered in the
Wilderness. It is very hard to find the Church of Christ's Institution to
remain in the world, whereas this Roman Catholic Church reigns in the world:
This is a great power, and yet this power the Church of Rome had. The Harlot
reigns over Kindreds, Tongues, and Nations, whereas the true Spouse of Christ
has scarce a subsistence in the world.

So that consider, if it did not smite with our hearts to close with the
Inventions of men, with satanicall power rather then with Christ, it were not
possible there should be such aberations from the Institutions of Christ, were
it not for the impetuous licentiousness of the hearts of the Sons of men.
And therefore when there is such a vast swelling, that many Congregations shall
be but one Church; how shall we go home edefied by such discourse? This
belonges to all the Churches, to take the opportunities that we have, that we
may not run headlong upon the devices of men, or our own wits, to that which
is suitable to sense, and natural reason, and walking according to the light
of natural conscience. Conscience was never so corrupt as in corrupt nature it
is; and reason never so blind as in corrupt nature it is, and sense never so
luxurious. A man is ready to please sense, his pallat, his nostrils, his eye,
and hand, and touch, and natural reason, and conscience, a manis mavelous
free that way; so free, that the less a man discern it, the more he is
captivated to it. And therefore let every man know that we carry about with us
a principle of subjection of our selves to the Ordinances of men rather then to
Christ. If it be to speak to our own honor and applause, we have words at
will, and hearts that run full stream that way; If it were to set out our
selves, or our friends, we are open hearted, and open mouthed that way: but if
it shall be to give glory to God, in the presence of a particular visible
Church of Christ's Institution, there we are mavelous unwilling to submit to
edify our brethren, and glorify God. If it were to an Ordinance of man, it is
a wonder to see how men will run and ride to give satisfaction to this and
that Episcopal Court higher, and lower, and clear all scores there, that we may
not be debarred of Christian burial, or Church Communion, though it may be we
cannot have it with mixture of corruption, and can scarce close with it,
especially those that are enlightened:

But when we come to sanctify God, and his praise, and holding forth our own
shame, there is an inward principle in us to consider whether it stands with
our honor, and credit, with our peace, and safety; a world of carnal reason
and conscience will work together in this case, and inwardly so reply, and
muzzle the hearts and consciences of men, that it is a wonder to see what
shifting and daubing there is, which they willingly give up themselves to, when
they are called about the inventions of the Sons of men.

Thirdly, Use 3.
it may teach us, if the whole world have runthus mad and wild, to give their
Crowns and Scepters, Churches, Commonwealths, and consciences, to have power
put upon all these of their own choice by the man of Sin, every Kindred,
Tongue, and Nation: what a shame will it be if we be not as truly devout in
our Religion? as it is said of Cornelius, Acts 10. 1. He was a devout man, a
Godly man given up to God; So should we give up our selves to the Lord, and
sacrifice our credit, and profit, and whatever we have to the Lord. There have
been men that have been content to forfit all their Kingdoms to the man of
Sin; The Emperors in Germany have given their Crowns; The Kings of England,
King John in his time did as much to the Popes Legate: And it has been frequent
with him, to set the Crowns upon their heads, and dash them down with his feet:
These 42. months it has been frequent with them to give up their Crowns to
him, but much ado to run any hazard for Christ, though a petty jurisdiction:
And yet none did ever truly run hazard for the Lord, but the Lord took up
their Crowns, and maintained their cause and honor, and recoverd what honor
they lost.

David by making known his Adultery, and by his repentance for it, did recover
what Power and Authority he might seem to loose in the hearts of his subjects:
It is true, he had lost his Kingdom, but was it for his Repentance? No, but
for his natural affection to his rebellious Son Absalom, and his incestuous
Son Amnon, that should have been cut off: He lost his Crown, not for his
Repentance, but for want of executing the Law of God upon his own children, as
upon others, there was his Sin: otherwise had he executed judgment upon his
rebellious Son Absalom, as the Lord required (thou shall pluck him from mine
Altar, that Rebel) he had not lost his Kingdom: But if so be his natural
affection overruled him, that he do not execute judgment, then no marvel
though they cast him out of his Kingdom, and cut his throat at length, if God
do not come between, as he did to David: But belive it, no man did ever loose
by sanctifying God in his heart, by giving honor to him, and taking shame to
himself: The Lord has maintained peace in the conscience, and has given it
when it has bin wanting, and the Lord has been pleased to sanctify their
names, as they have sanctified his before men; whoever shall be ashamed of me,
and of my words in this adulterous and sinful Generation, of him also shall
the Son of man be ashamed, when he comes in the Glory of his Father, with
the holy Angels, Mark. 8. 38. And it will shortly be the ruin of those things
they would preserve, the ruin of a man's name and state, the ruin of his body
and soul together, if a man shall dare in the presence of God to give the Glory
do to his Name to a Beast: The Lord will be a swift witness against all the
workers of iniquity. Trust God with your honor and estate; did he ever ^aile
any man to this day? Theodosius did submit himself, and gave glory to God, and
acknowledged his offense to Ambrose the Pastor of his Church, and to the people
of God, because he had sinned against the Lord, to the offense of the Church of
God: did it weaken his esteem? did not all the Churches hear of his repentance?
Though there were some ruffinly Captains that would have had him cut off
Ambroses head; no says he, let him alone, he does it out of love to God and my
soul: Therefore with many tears, and much dejection of soul, he sanctifi^d God
in his heart, and was afterward received again into the Church, not only to
the great comfort of the Church where he lived, but of all others that were
under his Government, and he never lost the honor of his Government. No man
ever lost by submitting to the Authority of Christ, we may trust the Lord for
that: Authority is more worth then our hairs, and yet he numbers our hairs,
and all the comforts of the world are not answerable to it: trust him with it,
as he that is faithful, and he will certainly provide that nothing shall be
lost: commit your souls to him, as to a faithful Creator; and the Lord finding
his name sanctified in it before the people, he will certainly sanctify us and
our names before them as we sanctify his. Let us yield up our selves to the
service of his Kingdom: when men have been contrary minded, the Lord has
pursued them with fearful judgments. You know the case of Nadab and Abihu,
Lev. 10. 1. They came before God with strange fire, and the Lord makes a
strange work, and consumes them with fire. Annanias and Saphira that dealt
deceitfully with the Church, some part they delivered, but kept back part of
their substance: what followed upon that? The Lord struck them dead; you will
say, those were in those days in which God was near to his Church. Believe
it, the Lord is as near to his Church now (though not in miracles as then,
there needs not miracles now:) The Lord will confirm his Truth, Rev. 2. 23.
All the Churches shall know, that I am he which searches the reigns and
hearts, and I will give to every one of you according to your works: As men
deal subtly, he will deal subtly; with the faithful, with plain hearted,
with conscionable men, he will deal faithfully, and all the Churches shall know
it: the Lord will not have his judicature in his Church bafled down with
partial, and Annanias his confession. The Lord will set his face against those
men, and cut them off from the land of the living, that shall dis-regard his
throne and Crown. And therefore it behooves all men whom it may at any time
concern, to sanctify his name; My son give glory to God, and tell me what
thou have done, Josh. 7. 19. And he ingenously tells him from first to last,
which no body ever could tell: but says he, I saw among the spoils a goodly
Babilonish Garment, and two hundred sheckels of Silver, and a wedge of Gold of
fifty sheckels weight, then I coveted them, and took them; well says he, thou
have troubled Israel, and the Lord shall trouble thee: but yet this
acknowledgement was the valley of Achor for a door of hope (Hos. 2. 15.) for
their prosperity, and victory over all their enemies.

So that if all Nations and Languages be thus ready to submit to the inventions
of men, how justly does the Lord challenge due subjection to his will, to
sanctify him in our hearts, to throw down our Crowns (if we have them) at his
feet, and glad we may do so. It is evident, Rev. 4. 10. that all the Church,
(the four Officers, and 24. Elders) they all cast their Crowns down before him:
Though they all did wear Crowns, all had Authority, yet they cast them all
down at his feet, when they came before him that sat upon the throne, and
before the Lamb: There they stooped; In the presence of Christ they threw down
their Sovereignty; and let the name of Christ be magnified, and his Ordinances
have free passage, but for them let their honor fall down.

Lastly, Use 4.
let it learn us thus much, to take to heart in these days the estate of our
Ancestors and Fathers of old in those days: For if every Kindred have
worshipped the Beast, then thy Kindred have done it, or Ancestors. We speak not
in dederision of them, but they have all done it, the body of them (though here
and there some may be left out) and all their power they have given to the
Beast, to rule Families, Churches, and Commonwealths, and all our Kindred, and
especially our Tongues have done it; not only those that speak Dutch and
Spanish, but we have been more devoted then any Christian Nations, in giving
such vast revenues, and Monasteries, and so large devotion to the man of sin,
none have been so devout as English: It is incredible to tell the great
payments they made to the Pope, it is not to be numbered. And if all Tongues
have submitted to the Beast, then they that speak English, as well as those
that speak Scottish, or Welsh, or British, the body of all Kindreds if not to
this day.

It must therefore humble us in regard of this their sin, which will be set
upon our score, unless the Lord humble us for it: the contagion of their sin
reaches to us, and his jealousy will cut off root and branch. Gods jealousy
is kindled by Images and superstitions; I will visit the iniquities of their
Fathers upon their children: men may suffer much for their Ancestors, and for
their Kindred, Tongues, and Nation. And therefore it behoovs us all to be
humbled for the sin of our Ancestors; and they hoped to be saved by the
intercession of Saints, etc.

This provokes the jealousy of God. Therefore if we would not have our teeth
set an edge by these sour Grapes, it behooves us to be humbled, that the
intaile of Gods curse may be cut off from us though it lay heavy upon them that
went before us.

Rev. 13. 8. And all that dwell on earth shall worship him whose names are not
written in the book of life of the Lamb, etc.
YOu have heard that upon the recovery and healing of the wounded head of the
Catholic Church, sundry effects followed; the Dragon gave unto the Beast a
four fold power, Power to speak great things, power to continue and to be
active 42. months, power to make war with the Saints and to overcome them;
Power of sovereignty and Authority over all Kindreds, Tongues, and Nations, and
that even to worship, that all that dwell on the Earth shall worship him,
believing as the Church believes, and neither more nor less, submitting
themselves in conscience to all their decrees, and expecting their salvation in
the fellowship of that Church, which is divine worship peculiar only to the
Lord Jesus. In the words now read, you have these that worship the Beast, that
is, that give this divine honor to the Catholic Church, to believe as they
believe, to submit their consciences to the power of this Beast, taking up all
their observations for worship, for Government from them, not from God, and
looking for their salvation in reconcilement with this Church; I say these men
that do thus worship this Beast, they are described here by their state, by
their spiritual and eternal state; that is to say, they are described by a
denial of their elect estate, and that is expressed in a denial of the proper
adjunct of that state, and that is, the writing of their names in the Lambs
book of life, for that is the proper adjunct of all the elect people of God,
that their names are written in the book of life of the Lamb; these men men
therefore being denied this proper adjunct of an elect state, they are the
refore here described by their damnable condition and state; now this therefore
is here predicated of them all, that their names are not written in the book
of the life of the Lamb, who ever they be that worship this Beast; and he
says, All did worship him, save only they whose names were written in the
Lambs book of life: They that did worship the Beast, had not their names
written in the Lambs book of life. So then this book in which their names are
said not to be written, it is set forth by the end, and by the subject of it.

1. By the end, It is the Book of life: Not that it was a living book, but
because they that are written in that book, are written unto life, that they
may live to eternity to grace and glory.

2. It is described by the subject, It is the Lambs Book of life; either he is
the possessor of it, God giving it to him that he might take notice of all the
names therein, and keep them safe to salvation: or else he is the subject of
it, as being the first and principal person who is written in it; for he of
old has been observed to be the head and chief of the elect of God, in Ephesians.
1. 4. He has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, therefore he
chose him first, and us in him, as he is well pleased, first with Christ, and
in Christ with us, Mat. 3. 17. whether you speak of Gods everlasting
complacency, or of the manifestation of it in effectual vocation, it is in
Christ that he is well pleased; first with Christ, and in his name with us, so
he is said to be foreordained before the foundation of the world, 1 Pet. 1.
20. So therefore it is said to be the book of the Lamb, the Lambs book of
life, because that the book is given to him, and because also that he is the
principal person, that is first, and primarily, and fundamentally written in
this book. I say it is first given to him, as if all the persons that God
intends life unto, he did give them as it were in a scroul or book to the Lord
Jesus, (but of that I shall speak a little more by and by.) In the mean time I
speak now to the Analysis of the Text; but if you shall not tras^^^e it, whose
names are not written in the Lambs Book of life (but as it is here and indeed
so it holds in the Original) the Book of life of the Lamb; Though it be the
like sense, then it may hold out a further notion and meditation, and that is
this.

1. That the Lamb is the subject of that life whereof it is said, it is the
Book of life of the Lamb.

2. He is the Author of it, to the elect people of God, in John 14. 19. that
holds forth both that he is that life to us: Christ as God-man is the subject
of this spiritual and eternal life; and his manhood, so receives it as a
common vessel to all his elect members, and because he lives, we shall live
also, therefore he is the Author both of giving and preserving this life to his
heavenly Kingdom.

Now by this Lamb, I need not tell you is meant Christ the Lamb, without
spot, John 1. 29. We are redeemed by the precious blood of Christ as of a Lamb
without spot, 1 Pet. 1. 19. This Lamb is here described by his suffering which
was slain, was put to death, a violent death: and that suffering of his is
amplified by the ancient vigor and efficacy of it, slain from the beginning of
the world.

Now the note that first offers it self from this verse is this.

That such whose names are written in the lambs book of life, Doctr. 1.
they all and they only are preserved from the worship of the Beast: For here
it is said, That all that dwell upon the Earth shall worship him, saving they
whose names are written in the Lambs Book of life, they shall not worship him;
but all whose names are not written in the book of the life of the Lamb, they
shall worship the Beast: So then they whose names are written in the Lambs
book of life, they do not worship him; (for if their names be written there,
they are expressly exempted;) but they that do worship him, they are said not
to have their names written in the Lambs book of life: So that such whose
names are written in the Lambs book of life, they and all they, and they only
are preserved from the worship of the Beast. It is a speech to the like purpose
that you read in Rev. 17. 8. and upon the like occasion: The Beast that thou
sawes^ was, and is not, and shall ascend out of the bottomless pit and go
into perdition, and they that dwell on the Earth shall wonder (whose names were
not written in the Book of life from the foundation of the world, etc.) They
admire and adore him, where he tells you of an ancient act, he does not tell
here when it was written, there he does, that ancient book wherein from the
foundation of the world they were written, and therefore before the world such
as were written in the Lambs book of life, were locked up to be preserved from
the adoration of the Beast, and all the rest were left to worship the Beast.

For opening this point, here a Question or two may be moved for explication of
the terms of the Doctrine (which have been a little expounded before.) First*

Quest. 1. Then it may be demanded, what is this Book of life?

Answ. You read in Scripture of sundry books according to which our eternal
state stands or falls (if I may so call them) that are said to be opened at the
judgment day, whether at the last judgment, or some representation of the
last judgment, it is all one for the Doctrine: In Rev. 20. 12. it is said,
When the Thrones were set, the Books were opened; and another book, which is
the Book of life: So here is one book, according to which, his Saints were
judged, besides the book of life, but that also was opened. These books are
truly observed by others, to be first the book of Gods Providence, in Psalm.
139. 16. which is also called in Mal. 3. 16. the book of Gods Remembrance,
wherein he takes notice of all persons and actions; that is, keeps as exact
account of them as if they were written before him in a book, which day by day
were fashioned, etc. In the providence of God there was a deliniation of all
creatures and actions that should come to pass. There is truly also the book
of conscience; for also in that God registers all our actions, according to
which we shall be judged, the conscience bearing witness about our persons and
actions, so far as they are enlightened by God. And you read also of another
book; The word that I have spoken, that shall judge them at the last day, John
12. 48. he shall judge all the world by it, Romans 2. 16. In the day when God
shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ according to my Gospel: These
books will be opened; the book of Gods Providence, the book of the Scripture,
and the book of conscience, by which we shall be judged.

But there is also the book of Life, by which we shall be judged, in Rev. 10.
12. Now for the book of life that has a double exception in Scripture, for
sometimes it is put for the Church register, in which all are registered, as
those that were the living in Jerusalem. Isa. 4. ^. It is said, Every one that
remains in Jerusalem shall be called holy, even every one that is written
among the living in Jerusalem: Or as the word is in the margent or bigger
Bibles written, To life in Jerusalem; In the Original it is capable of both
constructions, Every man capable of life is written in Jerusalem:

There is a book written of them that live there, of which it is said, Psalm.
87. 6. the Lord will recount when he writteth up the people, that this or that
man was born there: Of this book also you read in Ezekiel. 13. 9. where the Lord
does threaten the false Prophets, that his hand shall be upon them that see
vanity, and devine lies; they shall not be as members of my people, nor shall
they be written in the writing of the house o^ Israel; they shall neither have
fellowship with Church nor Commonwealth: There is a writing, therefore a
Register, a Record of them, which in the Old Testament were counted
Geneologies, and very carefully did they keep them; that if they could not show
their pedigree from this Geneology, they were as polluted. Ezra 2. 59. as also
verse. 62. where he tells you of sundry that came in among the people of Israel;
but because they could not find their names in the Register, they were left
aside till they could find further proof of their pedigree; they might be
received as other Proselytes, but not as native Israelites, who were counted of
the Church from the line of their Parents, and some of the sons of Barzilli,
some of the Priests, they thought it more honor to fetch their pedigree from
their father Barzilli, whom David had advanced to sit at his Table; and they
thought it more honor to be counted of the house of Barzilli, then of the
order of Aaron: And they, when they would have presented themselves to the
Priests office, they were not received: why? because they were not found in the
Churches Register, and they had no direction from the Word to take Noble men's
sons to be Priests, but only of the sons of Aaron: So this is the book of Life,
it is called The writing of the living in Jerusalem; This is the book of life,
the Church-book, it is nothing but a counterpane of the book of life, but not
exactly agreeing to it; sometimes we put in more then God does, and sometimes
less: There be that belong to life whom we do not receive: Others they do not
present themselves, or we do not receive through some failings in them or us;
but if they belong to life, they are written in the Lambs book of life, they
may not be written in the Church book; but this is not the book here spoken of,
the book of the life o^ the Lamb: The Church is the body of the Lamb, but they
cannot discern who are his: The Lord knows who are his, so do not we, nor the
members of the Church, therefore you hear here of a distinct book of the
Lambs book of life, of which book it is expressly written, Rev. 20. 15. That
whosoever was not found written in the Lambs book of life, was cast into the
lake of fire.

All men therefore that are written in the book of Life, or in the book of the
Lamb, they are written to life. Now this we cannot say of the Church-book; for
as has been observed of ancient time, there are many wolves within, and many
sheep without: Sometimes the Church has cast out her most precious members,
both Officers and Members, sad experience has made it true in our times,
therefore that is not a certain rule, that if a man be left out of the Church,
he is left everlastingly, unless there be such contempt of means of grace, as
in those whom the Lord has branded for such whom he takes no pleasure in to
eternity: For it is said, whoever was not found written in the Lambs book of
life was cast into the lake of fire; Therefore this is some other then that
book of the Church: What book is that? no other but the eternal record and
register of Gods election, that is, the Lambs book, whoever is not found, he is
indeed cast out into the lake of fire, being shut out from salvation by Christ,
and then what hope of salvation is there in himself?

Now of this book it is, of which Moses speaks, Exo. 32. 33. If thou will not
forgive the sin of thy people, then blot me out of the book which thou have
written; not which the Church has written, but which thou have written, which
the Lord has written of life in Christ, in which the Lord has written all the
names of his Elect: This is the book out of which he desires to be blotted out
of; such was the ecstasy, I cannot say of his zeal, but he was filled with
such ardent zeal, that rather then such a reproach should be cast upon God,
that he was not able to bring them to the Land of Canaan, let him be blotted
out of the book which he had written, let damnation it self fall upon him,
rather then the name of the Lord should be reproached by the uncircumcised
Heathens; and in that sense Paul wishes himself separate from Christ, for his
brethren, his kinsmen according to the flesh, Romans 9. 3. He does not say, he
would be cast out of the Church; but he found, that zeal for the whole Church,
and for the Lord Jesus, that rather then the Gospel of Christ should be
hindered, if it may stand with Gods liking, he could rather wish such a wretch
as he should be cut off, then that the whole body of his people should be cast
off: This is the Lambs book of Life, called the book of Life, not because the
Lord stands in need of a book, but because those whom in his eternal purpose
he has decreed to save, his unchangeable purpose does fix them as fast in his
remembrance, as if they were written in a book before him: For that end his
decree has taken such particular notice of them, that if they were written in
a book before him, they could not be more steadfastly and particularly recorded.

It is a phrase borrowed from men, that when they would remember such a man, or
such a friend, they set them down in a book; God stands not in need of books,
but his clear, and everlasting love to them is such, that they are engraven as
on the palms of his hands, as the Shewbread was present before the Lord
continually, which represented the 12. Tribes, that his eye might be upon them
from one end of the week to another, and the word which the Septuagints use for
Shewbread, it is translated as the word which the Apostle uses, Romans 8. 28.
and the Greek Translators and Hebrew express it, it is the bread of Gods
purpose, or of Gods face, and what is his purpose? it is not with him as it is
with us, that whiles we speak of one man, we forget another; but his purpose is
always the same; and these being the bread of Gods purpose, they are ever
before him from one end of the week to another, and from one end of the year to
another, now that is the meaning of the Question, what is the Book of life? It
is the book of Gods eternal election, that is, it is the register or record
of the names of all whom God has chosen to life and salvation in Christ.

Quest. 2. If you shall ask why it is called the Lambs Book of life?

Answ. First, because the Lord has given this book to Christ, and all the
names of his elect by name to be brought to salvation, and kept in a state of
salvation to imortality, and therefore you shall read in Scripture, when God
puts forth an eternal love to his people, wrought eternal salvation for us, I
mean when he did eternally elect us to grace and glory in this eternal
election of his, there was accompanying an eternal donation in giving them to
Christ, Christ knew his fathers counsel from eternity, and the Lord gave them
to Christ by him to be brought, and he undertaking that they shall be brought
to salvation, the Lord requiring that he should keep them to immortality; he
shall work the means and apply the same effectually to the end of the world:
This is evident from those Scriptures that speak of the grant, and of the gift
of them to Christ before their effectual calling, though donation go before
that; for from that love of God by which he gives us to Christ in our
effectual calling, he gives us Christ, and faith to receive Christ; but before
this, there is a giving, a donation of us to Christ, as John 6. 37. All that
the Father gives me, shall come unto me; So this coming to Christ is believing
on Christ, and it is so expressed in ver. 35. He that comes to me shall never
hunger, and he that beliveth on me shall never thirst: To come to Christ, is to
belive on his name; thus much does he express himself; that all that the
Father give him in his eternal counsel, they shall come unto him, to wit, in
effectual calling him: the Father will draw none but whom in his eternal
counsel he has given to Christ; and whom he draws, I will not cast out, in
ver. 37. to 44. So then when this act of Gods eternal election passed on those
whose persons are designed to grace and glory, he gave all by name to the Lord
Jesus, as if they were particularly registered in a book: And he promised, that
in fullness of time, he would draw them to him, and required that the Lord
Jesus should keep them under his wing to imortality; it is called therefore the
Lambs book of life, because he is the subject receptive of it.

Answ. 2. And again, it is called the Lambs book of life, because he is the
head of all Gods elect; they are all elect in him, not besides or out of him,
not as actually believing in him, for it is long before any work of ours, Romans
9. 11. Not of works, but of him that calls, the children being not yet born,
neither having done good or evil, that the purpose of God according to
election might stand. Election i^ before any work of ours, God gives us in his
eternal council to Christ, but we are not then in him by faith; faith is an
effect of our election, not the cause of it: As many as were ordained to
eternal life believed, Acts 13. 46. 48. But this is the thing; It is a true
distinction that some give in that case; we are in Christ, not by actual
existence in beleiving; nor as so considered, but by virtuall comprehension:
the Lord looks at us as in him, we are not in him by faith; but the Lord
comprehending us in his everlasting decree, we are in him by Gods charter, even
children not born, the Lord has wrapped us in his everlasting arms, in his
electing love, promising in time to give us faith to believe on him, and
therefore to come to him, and to give him to us that we may live in his sight;
therefore it is the Lambs book of life, as he is the son of man, the son of
the Virgin Mary, to be united to the second person in Trinity, long before his
humane nature was in being.

Answ. 3. And it is called also the book of the life of the Lamb; if you have
respect of referring to Christ this life, then you take Christ as he is the
subject of this life, in John 14. 19. Because I live, you shall live also; I
live, and then you live: and he is the author, the efficient, the procreant,
and conservant cause of life in us to eternity; the Lord has given us eternal
life, and this life is in his son; He that has the son has life, 1 John 5.
12. So you see the meaning of these words, these persons that are thus given to
Christ, elect vessels to grace and glory that are given to Christ, they are
preserved from the worship of the Beast, and none but they, they only; for
this purpose you read that false Christ's (whereof Antichrist is chief) Mat. 24.
24. They shall deceive many, yea if it were possible the very elect: It implies
thus much, that none of them shall be deceived by all false Christ's, but all
others shall be deceived; earthly minded men, and such whose names are not
written in the Lambs book of life, they shall be deceived, the Beast shall go
into perdition, and they with him, Rev. 17. 8. Not but that for a time they
that are Gods elect may be taken with a fond admiration and adoration of the
Beast, to believe as the Church of Rome believes, and may look for peace of
conscience from the dispensations of the Church of Rome; it may be so as Bilney
and Latimer, that were mavelous devout to that Church; though it pleased God
that Bilney, you may read it in his Epistle to Bishop Tonstall, that being
troubled in conscience, he had taken all the courses that their Religion
enjoined him; had made confession to the Priests, and they enjoined him
penance and whipping of himself, but for all these his wound bled as fresh as
before; till in the end he took an English Testament, as it was translated by
Erasmus, not with any intent to find any thing in it that might ease his
trouble, but because he was a perfect Latinist; but reading that place in 1 Timothy 1. 15. these words did so affect him, that immediately the Lord letting
him see his love in Christ Jesus: The Lord (says he) let me see that I had
taken a wrong course all this while; I have sought for salvation where it was
not to be had, and prayed those to whom he spoke, not to take it ill, for it
was not out of any neglect of them, but out of his faithfulness, having had
experience, that the course they prescribed, that was not the way; but it so
far prevailed, as that he was marvellously esteemed; but he was taken up by
Latimer, he made Bilney hear him Preach a most fearful Sermon against
Lutherans, that were then better then he; yet Bilney saw that he had zeal, but
not according to knowledge, and he knew not how to come within him; but he went
to him in private, and desired to speak with him, and he must not say him nay;
then he up and tells him what a miserable wretch he had been, how he had
wounded his conscience; how he had confessed his sin to this and that Priest; how
unprofitable all those means were to him which they prescribed; and there was
no means in the world to find peace till the Lord applied that everlasting
redemption in the blood of Christ; why says Latimer, he comes to seek for
pardon from me to his soul; and says he, I saw I stood in more need of being
taught by him, and therefore styles him in his Sermon Saint Bilney, that caught
his soul, and revealed that to him which he never heard of. Therefore it is
possible that Latimer and Bilney may be devout Catholics for a time; but now
when this electing love of God puts forth it self in the fruits of it, which
is effectual calling; now they are fully satisfied that all this devotion,
beleiving as the Church beleives, they see they are so far out of the way, as
faith is contrary to sense and reason: So that those whom God reserved and
chosen to life, they are preserved from total and final adoration of the
Beast, they may for a time through ignorance worship the Beast, as the best of
Gods servants in those times did, and many times have been most zealous for the
Catholic cause; and yet when the Lord has called them effectually to his
grace, then, not one that are written in the Lambs book of life do worship
him; so that though they worship him before, yet now they do not, when they
come to see their folly, and have the love of God made known to them.

The Reason is first taken from the experimental knowledge of every child of
God effectually called, Reason 1.
from the evident experience that he has of the vanity of the Roman Catholic
Church, and of the emptiness of calling on any to look from Church power, to
heal or wound the conscience, as of themselves, further then they dispense the
Ordinances of Christ: and then it is not they, but Christ in them, and for them
to look for salvation in the communion of that Church, and in reconcilement to
that Church; They are so experimentally beaten off from that, and possessed of
the contrary by their own experience, that you need not take them from adoring
the Beast; for they see it is a Beast, and they shall as well utterly destroy
their souls, as worship the Beast; and therefore the love of Christ constrains
Bilney, and he draws Latimer, and Latimer draws others, till they have
propogated the truth of God to all ages. But that, though it be one reason, yet
it is the least.

Let me show another reason why the elect of God, Reason 2.
after the electing love of God comes to be dispensed to them in outward
execution: For, before it may come to pass, they may worship the Beast, but
then they will not do it finally: but when the electing love of God is shed
abroad in their hearts, then they will not do it; and the reason of that (you
cannot give a demonstrative reason but from this) to prevent impossibility, it
is not possible that they should: now there are three fundamental reasons of
the impossibility of it; two properties there are in Gods electing love: There
is in Gods election, first, immutability, as God himself is unchangeable, Mal.
3. 6. so are his decrees unchangeable, the foundation of God stands sure, 2 Timothy 2. 19. and what he has purposed, he will bring to pass: The counsel of
the Lord is true for ever, in Psalm. 33. 10, 11. he disappoints all the decrees
of men, but his own counsels they take place for ever in every age, therefore
it is not possible that any of his should perish; and perish they should, if
they should worship the Beast; but it is not possible, his unchangeable decree
keeps them.

Again, there is another property in his electing love, which is the efficacy
of it, for Gods electing love does choose us out of the world, John 15. 19. And
if he choose us out of the world, the efficacy of that is, that it delivers us
from the evil world: God electing us out of the world, has redeemed and
delivered us from this present evil world, Gal. 1. 4. Now if the electing love
of God be of such efficacy, that when he elects men of his grace, he will in
fullness of time deliver them from the world, then they shall not run headlong
to the worship of the Beast, whom their hearts cannot close withal; the Lord
redeemes them from that vain conversation received by tradition from their
Fathers, I, though there be such efficacy in the blood of Ancestors, yet the
electing love of God redeemes them from that: But that will more appear in the
second Reason.

And that is the faithfulness of Christ, and the efficacy of of his redeeming
blood. All that the Father has given me shall come unto me, and those that do
come unto me, I will by no means cast out, John 6. 37. Of those that thou have
given me, I have lost none, but the son of perdition, that (but) is not an
exceptive, but an adversative; he that was never given, was lost, he did not
bring him on to salvation; For this is the will of the Father that sent me,
that of all that he has given me, I should loose nothing, etc. John 6. 37, 38,
39. That is, his faithfulness, and with his faithfulness there is such
efficacy in his blood, that though the blood of Ancestors run very warm, that
a man would choose to live no better life, nor keep a better house then his
Father or Grandfather, but wish their souls might be but as safe as theirs,
when men are once redeemed by the blood of Christ, and that is sprinkled upon
their consciences, then the blood of Christ is warmer then the blood of
Ancestors: though the Religion of our Fathers should be strong in the hearts of
devout Catholics, as in Bilney or Latimer, then alas for our poor Fathers,
what is become of them? they pity them, and see plainly, that unless the Lord
led them a further way then the Religion of those that taught them, they are
gone everlastingly, and then they wonder that God should ever choose such a
dunghill, thee and me, that they see a broad difference between the Religion of
their Ancestors, and that which they see now; but that is the efficacy of the
blood of Christ, there is that efficacy in it, that it washes away all
relations to Fathers, to antiquity, and universality, he is crucified to them
all; God forbid (says the Apostle) that I should glory save in the cross of
our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the
world, Gal. 6. 14. So that though all the world run after the Beast, they
will not; the world looks at them as base unworthy creatures, and so they look
at the world.

And there is a third fundamental Reason, Reason 3.
and that is taken from the power and presence of the Spirit of Gods grace, in
the hearts of his people. We are kept by the power of God, through faith unto
salvation, 1 Pet. 1. 5. That is, by the spirit of God, and by the power of that
spirit, he keeps our faith, and by faith keeps us in the way of his ordinances,
and in the way of sanctification to salvation: Little children, ye are of God,
and you have overcome these Antichrists; why? for greater is he that is in you,
then he that is in the world, 1 John 4. 4. The power of God is in you, they are
of the world, and the world is carried away with them; you are of God, and you
hear them not; for greater is he tha^ is in you, then he that is in the world.
These are three fundamental Reasons which are indeed the demonstrative cause
of the impossibility of them to be finally carried to the worship of the Beast,
the election of God will not suffer it, the unchangeblenesse thereof, the
faithfulness of Christ, the efficacy of the blood of Christ, and the power of
the spirit, and that which flows from it is the experience of Gods love, and
the virtue of their faith in Christ: Their faith is unchangeble, not possible
to be rooted out, in Luke 22. 31, 32. I have prayed for thee that thy faith
fail not: It may be shaken, but it shall not finally fail; I will put my fear
in their hearts that they shall not depart from me, Jer. 32. 40. and that is
the proper act of faith: Be not high minded, but fear; his mercy is sufficient
for us, trust steadfastly on the grace of Christ; and though Peter seemed not
to trust on the grace of Christ, yet in his worst state he knew that all the
courses of Satan were vanity, and he durst not but in his heart believe that
Christ was the Messiah: so all the elect of God know the Beast is a Beast, and
the Catholic Roman Church is a Beast, and the head of that Beast is a beastly
head, and they know that their Doctrine is sensual, and carnal, and that they
all shall go into perdition; and withal, their experience does evidently
convince them, that were it not in a pang of temptation in which they are not
able to abide by it, yet by a renewall of the blood of the Lord Jesus sprinkled
on their souls, they are brought a fresh to see the work of Gods grace stirred
up in them; but otherwise their constant course is, as in Rev. 14. you hear
them coming as on a stage, representing the Lamb in their carriage and
conversation, and follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes: but for the Beast, a
stranger, they will not follow; but both their faith and experience yield them
a third cause, and that is, the spirit of God carrying them an end: My sheep
hear my voice, and they follow me; but they know not the voice of strangers,
they see a difference between good and evil; and therefore if they hear a man
speak, and does not speak of salvation by him, but of the world, or of
himself, they will not follow him, John 10. 45. Thus you see the Reason why
none of them worship the Beast: But on the other side, all the rest of the
world do, meaning where Antichrists power comes, speaking of those times when
there was great power given to him, to speak great things, and no man might
say, Sir, why do you so: in that time when he had power to be active forty and
two months, when he had power to make War with the Saints, and to overcome
them, and when all Nations worshipped him, and did not shake off that Religion;
but in former times, before reformation of Religion, this was an universal
practice; they all, Nations, Kindreds, and Tongues gave their power to the
Beast; and the reason of that was, from Gods just judgment, for their not
receiving the truth in love, therefore he gave them over to strong delusions to
believe lies.

Secondly, from the efficacy of Satan in the power of deceitful sophistry, and
doing wonders.

And thirdly, by the plausiblenesse, trumpery, and bravery of that Religion, so
suitable to carnal reason, that they were carried away thereto, and it could
not be, but they should be carried away by the man of Sin.

The use first may then be thus much; Use 1.
If all that dwell on Earth, whose names are not written in the book of life,
do worship the Beast, and none are excluded but those whose names are written
in the Lambs book of life, then this will unavoidably follow, that a Papist by
his Religion cannot go beyond a Reprobate; what he may, and renounce his
Religion, is another matter, as Bilney and Latimer sometimes did; they were
written in the Lambs book of life: but by his Religion, take them that do
believe, as the Catholic Roman Church believes, and believe no more, but
practice that which that Religion directs them to, and go no further, and they
continue and live and die in that, then I must pronounce it from the Text, they
cannot go beyond a Reprobate, the reason is evident from the Text; for if none
of them whose names are written in the Lambs book of life do worship the
Beast, and only they do worship the Beast, whose names are not written in the
Lambs book of life, then if they be not written in the Lambs book of life,
the Text is very strong and clear in Rev. 20. 15. Whosoever was not found
written in the Lambs Book of life, was cast into the lake of fire and
brimstone: But those that worship the Beast, are not written in the Lambs,
book of life, that is in the Text: Here are two propositions very evident; All
that are written in the Lambs book of life do not worship the Beast: But
those that worship the Beast, are not written in the Lambs baok of life. Then
the conclusion is, They shall be cost into the lake that burns with fire and
brimstone: That if it appear that this Beast is the Roman Catholic Church, and
the head of this Beast is the Pope: The conclusion will be most evident, that
no man living and dying a Papist, can go beyond a Reprobate: I dare not say,
but some that are ignorant, whom devotion has carried to that Religion; it is
possible some of them when they come to death, may see the vanity of that
Religion of worshipping Saints, and of confining their Faith to them, but that
is not by their Religion: but if they dye in that Religion, and if their faith
and worship be thrust upon them from the Roman Catholic Church, and they
worship Saints and Angels, and believe in their own merits for their
justification, I do pronounce to you, that a Papist, living and dying a Papist,
cannot go beyond a Reprobate; I mean such an one was not written in the Lambs
book of life: And they that are not, are cast into the lake that burns with
fire and brimstone, that is the issue: And therefore what a fearful thing is
it in such that do all they can to reconcile Nations to the Church of Rome, and
are mad upon Romish religion? what desperate service do they undertake, to
bring men to such a religion as destroys many millions of souls? It is true,
Those that are written in the Lambs book of life; God loses none of his
sheep: but it is evident they are bloody Butchers of many Christians not
chosen, yet devout Christians, many an one under pang of Conscience, with sense
of many sinful passions and lusts, are not able to get out but by a Priests
absolution; and if they be covered with a Friars coule, they hope they shall do
well enough: Such a conscience as can be opened and healed by such wooden keys
as these, if they know no more, such cannot be saved.

I will not enlarge it, but it were necessary to be pressed and urged in some
places, look not at it as a matter of curiosity and circumstance what Religion
a man dies in, and think as some Statesmen do, that if it were not for
hot-spur'd Jesuits on the one side, and hot-spur'd Puritans (as they call
them) on the other side, Protestants and Papists might be easily reconciled.
These are the whisperings of flesh and blood; but that which is written in the
word, does bear express testimony against such a conclusion: For if Jesuits
were removed, and Puritans too, yet if there were any left that thought they
could worship the Church of Rome, as they require, that you must believe as
they believe, your faith is built upon the Church, and upon the dispensation of
the keys of that Church, such a faith and obedience as falls short of Christ
Jesus, that all salvation is to be expected from him, if both Jesuits, and
those they call Puritans were removed, if there were none, but that take up
their faith and obedience in that worship they hold forth: I say there is not
any one of them that so live, and so dye, knowing what they believe, that can
be saved. Indeed you read in Rev. 3. many know not the depth of Satan, and it
is another matter what God may dispense to them in private; but men that know
what they do, and believe according to the doctrine of that Church, and worship
according to the direction of it: I say, men living, and so dying, there is not
one of them whose names are written in the Lambs book of life, and therefore
shall be cast into the lake that burns with fire and brimstone.

This may teach us a true ground of any man's preservation from the pollutions
of the world, Use 2.
bewitching pollutions; sometimes a Catholic Strumpet carries all the world
after her, as in those times: Sometimes the world swallows up the Church, and
every man thinks him happy, if he may be clad with thick clay; others are
taken up with provisions for their belly, and sensual Epicurean lusts, there
be a world of such people: Now what does preserve the people of God, that they
are not carried away either with the Catholic religion, or with worldly
ambition, they are not taken with these: but see the vanity of them; what, are
any of us better then those that have been bewitched by these? but what puts
the difference? The original difference is, God has written them in the Lambs
book of life, and what he has written, he has written, as Pilate said: He
has written such to life, and his decree is irrecoverable: My counsel shall
stand, and I will do all my pleasure, Isa. 46. 9, 10. Therefore there is the
Original, from thence it flows, the Lord Jesus Christ concurring with the
Fathers counsel, he has given us redemption from the blood of Ancestors, and
redeemed us from the present evil world, and will seek up every straggling
Lamb, and presents us spotless to his heavenly Father, and then the spirit of
God, by which he works all in the hearts of his people that receives us, for
Christ and the spirit; for Christ comes and takes possession of us, and so
thereby girds up our loins to a dependence on him, and his grace, that we are
preserved and saved from those fearful temptations that overcome others, and
all the world are overwhelmed withal.

It may teach us the mavelous freedom of the love of God; Use 3.
and therefore to admire the wonderful love of God, the cause of all this our
preservation from such prevailing evils as swallow up the whole world; how
does it appear? why, I pray you consider, when the Lord wrote down thy name, or
mine, or any man's name, who stood by at his elbow (if I may so speak) to put
him in mind of my name or thine? he thought of us, if our names be there, and
he set us down, and he delivered us to Christ Jesus by name; what ever thy
name is, he took notice of thy name; such a man in such a place, he will live
in this or that Country, he is one, take notice of him, lay down a price for
him; in fullness of time send a spirit into this heart; if he live in a Popish
Country, save him from Popery; If in a worldly Country, save him from the
world: where ever he lives, save him from himself, and bring him to my heavenly
Kingdom; but what was there in us that could commend us to God? or what could
there in us but what he appointed, but what he should put into us; he could not
foresee any thing, but that he must work it, therefore it must certainly be
his undeserved love that must take notice of them, and give them so to come to
Christ, and all that the Father has given him shall come unto him. The Lord
will draw them, and then they shall come; in the mean time he keeps them from
his Fathers eternal donation, in John 17. 17. Those whom thou have given me, I
have kept. He has not lost any, but one that was not given him to keep, he
prays to God to keep them through his own name, he keeps them by his own
spirit, and this was agreed on from the foundation of the world, when this book
was written; and it was not written yesterday, but before the foundation of the
world, Rev. 17. 8. His thoughts were about thee and me; and whoever is written
therein, a matter of much praise and glory to God, that he should have such
mavelous precious thoughts to us. Psalm. 139. 17. How precious are thy
thoughts to me O God. And so in Psalm. 40. 5. we read of the precious thoughts
of God toward us; that he should have such thoughts, when time yet was not,
neither we nor our fathers; and all he did foresee in thee and me, would but
provoke his wrath; what was good he must work, and that was from his counsel:
If you see any vanish away, or fall away from his grace, and from his Saints,
and he has no pleasure in them, they are not given to Christ, you see he is
the giver of them; but if men be not given to Christ, they will fall away: All
that the Father gives me shall come unto me, it is my Fathers will I should not
loose one of them. If men will not hearken to the Bishop of their souls, the
Lord Jesus Christ, see the desperate danger thereof, and the original root,
They are not written in the Lambs book of life.

It may be of singular comfort to all the elect of God, Use 4.
whose names are written in the book of Life: It is a great comfort that a man
is written to life, he might have been written to death, had not the Lord
been pleased so to do: You read in the Epistle of Jude, verse. 4. Of certain
men crept in unawares, who were of old ordained to condemnation: The word in
the Original is, fore-written, written afore-time to destruction: Now I say,
that a man is not written to destruction, but to life, and to life in Christ;
not as Adam, that was to stand by his own strength, and so long as he uses
grace well, he shall live; but if not, he shall dye: and he so used it, that if
God give him not life in Christ, he dyed for ever: This is in Adams covenant,
not in Christ's, that was for a man to live by his own righteousness: Do this
and thou shall live, Levit. 18. 5. How woeful was our condition in this case,
but to be written to life, and to life in Christ; that is, Because he lives,
we shall live also: I am the way, the truth, and the life: And by this being
written in the Lambs book of life, that the Lord should think upon us, when we
had no thoughts of him; nay had no being, that he should then undertake for us;
that when the Father gives us, he will receive us; and by receiving us, keep us
spotless to his heavenly Kingdom, that he will preserve us from possibility of
damnable Errors: They shall seduce if it were possible, the very Elect, Mat.
24. 24. But there is no possibility; what a mavelous matter is it, that it is
not possible that any of those that are given to Christ should be seduced; it
is such a mercy that may swallow up all discouragements, all afflictions, all
blasphemy of a man's good name and state, and wealth, and health, and all
whatsoever; this may support him, that it is not possible he should be seduced:
For the Lord knows who are his, the foundation of God stands sure; the Lord
has written it, and he is more constant then Pilate, or the Kings of Persians
and Medes: The Law is written and established by the Kings Ring, and God is
more steadfast then any of the Kings of the Earth, what he has written shall be
accomplished; the Lord will draw them to Christ, and Christ will keep them, not
one of them shall perish, not one of them shall worship the Beast; or if they
do, they soon see their folly, and are recovered out of all snares, they shall
not prevail against them.

It may be of instruction and exhortation, Use 5.
to provoke you to make your election sure, then you make your salvation sure,
and preservation from Popery and the world, and from the Devil, and from your
own corrupt Nature, sure that you shall not be carried captive with the
polutions of the times and places you live in, though hundreds run from God one
way, and ten thousands another way, and fall off hither and thither, yet you
shall still be preserved: in John 6. 68. where our Savior asked his Disciples,
will ye also go away? when many of those that were his Disciples went away and
fell off from him, being offended from something which he had spoken to them,
and that was that Doctrine that we have now in hand, and some other corolaries
from it, they walked no more with him; then says Christ to the rest, will ye
also go away? Peter answered in the behalf of the rest; Lord, to whom shall we
go, thou have the words of eternal life: As who should say, whether shall a
man go to mend himself? Thou have the words of eternal life? and having the
words of eternal life, how shall they do better else where? so it behooves us
then as we desire, to be preserved from all apostasy and backsliding from God,
notwithstanding all the temptations of the flattering world, or busy world, or
from the destroying world, by persecution, and flattering by prosperity, and
busy world, by the cares of the world, and continual cumber about the world,
and distempers in our hearts on that ground, in such a case as this what shall
preserve us? If our names be written in the Lambs book of life, truly we
shall be preserved, that neither the world, nor our passions and lusts shall
prevail against us. My father (says Christ) is greater then all, and no man is
able to pluck them out of my Fathers hand: and I and my Father are oue, my
Father and I will keep them, Joh. 10. 27, 28.

Obj. You will say, it is a needless exhortation to make our election sure, if
that be not done long ago; for it is not begun in this world, but long before;
it is concluded long before, or else we are not written in the Lambs book of
life; one of these two is concluded in Heaven: Christ knows those that are
given to him by his Father, before he knows them by name, John 10. 14. It is
worthy of memory that Christ knows them all by name, that argues the
particularity and singularity of them, as he knows all the Stars in Heaven, so
does he much more know all his elect; if he know them all by name, he then
particularly observes them, and prevents us with blessings of goodness, and
preserves us from prevailing evils, but if it be recorded of God, is it not in
vain to exhort to make it sure.

Answ. If it were in vain, methinks the Apostle should not have used it, 2 Pet.
1. 10. Then that is it that lies upon all Christians; some think it is not
possible, but then it were a vain exhortation, Make your calling and election
sure; if you do, a wide and open door of entrance shall be minished unto you;
well then though I cannot make sure my election in it self, for it is sure in
it self; but the Question is, whether it it is sure to me, that is my duty,
for he knows who (...), and knows them by name, and keeps them in his name,
and has given his Angels charge over us, and they will all watch over us, and
therefore our Savior in Luke 10. 20. says to his Disciples, Rejoice not in
this that the Devils are subject unto you, but that your names are written in
Heaven. Our election is sure enough in heaven, no storms will alter it there:
But now (in a word) can we make our election sure? the Apostle intimates when
you make your calling sure, you make your election sure: your calling, that is
but the actual execution of this eternal election; but they are so near,
that many the Lord puts them one for another, he tells his Disciples, you have
not chosen me, but I have chosen you, John 15. 16. he means of his selection,
his calling them out of the world, then he does communicate his electing love
to such; it is wrought for us before in Christ's death, in Gods council, and in
his effectual redemption, wrought for us on the Cross: but yet it is not
manifest to our consciences till calling, but make your calling sure, and then
election is sure: When you are called according to his purpose, Romans 8. 28.
that is this book of life, that is his purpose, that we are in Gods purpose
written to life, look to that he has saved us, and called us, Not according to
our works, but according to his own purpose and grace which was given us in
Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 1. 8. that is the book of life and grace; of free grace,
purposing us to life; and you read in Romans 8. 30. Whom he predestined, them
he has called; and whom he called, them he justified: now if a man be
effectually called to grace that does search election, let me briefly touch it,
that which makes sure calling.

1. In our effectual calling, there is a declaration of Gods love to the soul
in Christ Jesus by the spirit of grace, in the doctrine of the Gospel, for
that is Gods call; in our calling, God calls for his part by his grace and
spirit, and we answer that spirit, by that faith, which by the call of God is
wrought in our hearts; I say, God calls effectually to his grace by manifesting
the rich grace of God in Christ, electing freely, calling freely, from the
obedience of sin and Satan, to the liberty of the sons of God, as to those in
Queen Mary's time, when they wandered up and down like Lambs in a large place:
Bilney he fetches in that one word in his lost and forlorn condition; He read
this promise, and the spirit of God applies it; Christ Jesus came into the
world to save sinners, of whom I am chief: This being applied by the spirit,
it falls on him with power, and he sees the goodness of God in Christ, and the
vanity of all things else: and seeing so much glory in Christ, and in
particular to him also, this lets him see the vanity of all other courses; for
this manifestation of Gods spirit does effectually and manifestly open our eyes
to see, and hearts to believe what the Lord offers, for faith is said to
receive what the Lord gives of grace; here is then that which makes calling
sure, for otherwise how can we know it, but by the manifestation, and
declaration, and revelation of the Spirit: The things that eye never saw, nor
ear heard, nor ever entered into the heart of man, but he has revealed them by
his spirit, 1 Cor. 2. 9, 10. As no man knows the things of man, but the spirit
of man, so no man knows the things of God, but the spirit of God: And we have
not received the spirit of this world, but the spirit which is of God, that we
may know the things that are freely given us of God. The spirit of God it is
that searches all things, even the deep things of God, and reveals them to us,
and lets us see the treasures of grace, and lets us see them thus applied, this
is the ground of effectual calling, God calling by his spirit, and we
answering that call, and from both these springs another fruit of our
effectual calling, which is likewise a certain pledge of it that being thus
called: Blessed be God (says the Apostle) that has called us to the
fellowship of his son actually and effectually.

2. Thence it comes to pass, that we choose the Lord for our God: We have
none in heaven but him, nor none on earth that we desire in comparison of him:
Away then with those beautiful Strumpets, and all works of iniquity, and ways
of darkness, ways of ambition, these are all blasted; now I desire to know
nothing but Jesus Christ and him crucified, 1 Cor. 2. 2. and now it is, that he
rejoices in nothing, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, Gal. 6. 14.
Now this electing love in that we elect God, we could never choose God, had not
he chosen us, and in some measure discovered what his electing love was to us,
this brings the heart back again to choose him, and none but him: now that is
another security of our election, and therein it differs from all others; a man
may have a kind of sanctification by common gifts, which will leave him still
to work for himself, but this is to abuse the very gifts of God, which the
spirit has wrought in us, though they be not such as accompany salvation,
still we are not lift up above our selves, but when we are called effectually
to Christ; now no motion swayes us, but as we see the will of God in it, we
cannot believe as the Church beleives: but we believe our brethren and the
Church, as we see the Church follows the footsteps of the will of God; If I
now please men (says the Apostle) I am not the servant of Christ, 1 These. 2.
4. Nor of men sought we glory, when we might have been burden some, as the
Apostles of Christ: If a man be left to fast for himself, or pray for
himself, or work for himself, and all is for himself, that he work^ from a
principal respect unto himself, truly this will darken a man's effectual
calling; and if it be his constant course, doubtless his heart is not right
with God: It is true, in a pang of temptation a man may be wheeled about, as
Peter and David, yet the sight of Gods electing love quickens them to see their
sin, how far they are turned aside from God; but there (...) soul is bent,
as it were, with the point of a compass touched with a Lodestone, it may be
jogged by winds and storms, yet it looks still to the North pole; though you
may shake it from its course, yet let it but stand a while, it will directly
look to the North pole, there it will stand; so it is with all the children of
God, they cannot but work; for Christ in John 16. 14. He shall glorify me,
for he shall receive of mine, and give it unto you: So that the heart that is
sincere, it works from Christ, and for Christ, and with Christ; I labored
more abundantly then they all, yet not I, but the grace of God which was with
me, 1 Cor. 15. 10. So that you see what the manner of Gods people in this case
is, they are from Christ, and for Christ, and with Christ, and it is a seal of
Gods election; the highest seal is, God knows who are his, and that seal he
manifests by his spirit in the Gospel, it is the spirit that seals up our
adoption, and here is another seal we set to our seal, while we cleave to him
with all our heart and soul, and seek after him, and have none in heaven but
him, nor on Earth that we desire in comparison of him.

And thirdly, the last assurance of a man's election and calling (which I shall
name at this time) is that which Peter himself does express, in 2 Pet. 1.
Give all deligence to make your calling and election sure; How shall they do
that? he tells us in ver. 5. Moreover add to your faith virtue, and to virtue
knowledge, etc. He reckons sundry sorts of graces, and he calls upon them to
add grace to grace and one degree of grace to another; and (says he) if these
things dwell in you, and abound, by this means an open entrance shall be
ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, as if men that did not grow in grace, and g^ow from grace
to grace; if they get to heaven at length, they must mend their p^ce, thrust
and crowd for it; but if these things be in you and abound, so an open entrance
shall be ministered unto you; as if the great gates of Heaven were opened to
you: there must be a growing, you are blind else, and cannot see afar off; you
shall not see your state, unless you grow from faith to faith, and from
knowledge to knowledge, then an open entrance shall be ministered to you, that
you shall die in full assurance of faith, and of the love of God: And thus
shall a man make his calling and election sure; and by so doing, he shall make
sure to himself his preserva^ion from this world, and shall be translated to
everlasting rest wi^h the Lord in due time, where there shall be neither false
Prophet, nor Jesuit^, nor worldlings, whose names are not written in the Lambs
book of life.

Rev. 13. 8. latter part of the verse. The Lamb slain from the foundation of
the world.
THere remayns now the latter part of this verse, which is a description of
Jesus Christ: and he is described.

1. By the similitude of a Lamb.

2. By his passion; He is slain: And

3. By the antiquity of it; He is slain from the foundation of the world.

The note is this:

The Lord Jesus Christ was as a Lamb; Doctrine 2.
and though a Lamb, yet was slain: and though slain in fullness of time
(about 4000. years after the world began) yet in effect he was slain from the
foundation of the world.

This is the sum of this latter part of the verse. Not to stay long in any of
these things, and put to stay upon them, because they are principles of our
Christian faith; and principles may not be passed over in have, especially
considering the handling of them is a special branch of our calling. Behold
the Lamb of God (says John) that takes away the sins of the world, John 1.
29. 36. It was his particular office to point at Christ, and he does it under
the notion of a Lamb: So it is said, A Lamb stood upon mount Zion, Rev. 14. 1.

Now why a Lamb? In a double respect (and I speak of no more then what the
Scripture has respect unto:)

First, in respect of his innocence.

2ly. In respect of his meekness and patience.

1. His innocence.

1. In his birth: That holy thing which shall be born of thee, shall be called
the son of God, John 1. 35.

2. Innocent in his life. It behooves us (says Christ to John) to fulfill all
righteousness, Mat. 3. 15. And in 1 Pet. 2. 22. He did no sin, neither was
guile found in his mouth.

3. Innocent also in his death. Pilate bare him that record, Mat. 27. 24. when
he had heard all things that were born witness against him, he took water
and wash^d his hands before the multitude, saying, I am innocent of the blood
of this just person.

And as he was thus innocent as a Lamb: So he was meek and patient as a Lamb:
and the holy Ghost has respect unto it, Acts 8. 32. He was led as a sheep to
the slaughter, and like a Lamb dumb before the shearers, so opened he not his
mouth. And therefore there is something respected in his silence and quiet
subjection to the slaughter knife: And his patience or meekness does express
it self in two things chiefly.

1. In submitting not himself only, but his will to his fathers will. Father,
says Christ (in his agony in the Garden) if it be possible, let this cup pass
from me, nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will. And if this cup may not
pass away from me except I drink it, thy will be done, Mat. 26. 39. 42 And
that is properly after Gods own heart, when a man's heart is subdued to the will
of God; in which respect he did not murmr at his Fathers hand, nor did
expostulate his being delivered into the hands of wicked men, 1 Pet. 2. 23. Who
when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not,
but committed himself to him that judges righteously: And so meek was be in
this very kind, as that be prayed for his very enemies and persecutors. Luke
23. 34. Then said Jesus, Father forgive them, for they know not what they do.

2. His patience and meekness stood in keeping silence in his own just
defense. As a Lamb dumb before the sh^arer, keeping silence before his
Accusers, and Judges, and Condemners. He answered nothing before the high
Priest; any thing that might tend to his crucifying, as he does express: If
they will make it a point to crucify him, because he said, He was the son of
God: Says he, I came into the world to bear witness unto that. When Pilate did
accuse him, he answered nothing, and the Governor wondered at it, knowing that
he could tell what to answer: He marvailed that so just a man, in so just a
case did not answer a word which did so narrowly concern him: But he did not
know what the cause was, that he was as a Lamb dumb before the shearer, and
before the slaughter also.

What might be the reason then of this Lamb lik innocence and meekness of
Christ? (They are principles, and ought to be incultated often:)

The first ground is,

To fulfill the types that went before of him, Reason 1.
Exodus 12. 5. The paschall Lamb was without blemish. And Exodus 29 39. The daily
Sacrifice was to be a Lamb without spot and blemish, therefore Christ must be
such.

The second Reason is taken from his personal union with the second person in
Trinity: Reason 2.
For in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, Col. 2 9. that is
personally: So that Christ must be a sinner, if in any thing Christ had failed
either in doing or suffering (which were blasphemy to say): And hence springs
an utter impossibility of his manhood, acting any thing without the G^d head
acting by him; for the Son can do nothing of himself, but as he sees the
Father do.

Thirdly, Reason 3.
there is a further necessity of his Lamb-like innocence: From our necessity of
such a Sacrifice, and such an high Priest as was holy, and blameless, and
undefiled, Heb. 7. 26, 27, 28. Such an high Priest it behooved us to have: Yea,
it was requisite the Sacrifice should be blameless, Levit. 1. 3. And the
Priest that offered it to be so also, Levit. 21. 18. For otherwise he could not
make atonement for us, nor could his atonement be accepted.

But why was he thus patient, silent, and meek? a double reason of that.

First, Reason 1.
That his Sacrifice might be voluntary, and so accepted of the Father.
Sacrifice and offering for sin thou would not, neither had pleasure
therein, which are offered by the law; Then said he, Lo I come to do thy
will, O God, Heb. 10. 8, 9. Whoever was to offer a Sacrifice, was to bring it
himself, and deliver it up, and himself with it, and it must be offered
willingly: Wheeher it was the Congregation that had committed a sin, or
whether it were any particular person, they were to bring their oblation: Any
Sacrifice that a man would have accepted, he must bring it to the door of the
Tabernacle, Lev. 4. 4. 14. 23. The Priest must not fetch it: If any would bring
their Sacrifice they might; but if they were extorted from them, they were not
accepted: So the Lord Jesus must come and freely offer up himself, as one that
was to be presented in the stead of all the Elect: He offered himself a
Surety of the Covenant; we should have brought it, but we had it not in our
hearts: But he brings himself, and lays down his life of himself, and
takes it up again, John 10. 18.

And 2ly. why did he express his patience in that silence of his? The reason
was from this very cause, even

From the want of sufficient matter to give a just Answer in our behalf by all
things that he could alledg for us. Reason 2.
If he had stood in his own person, and had had nothing to do but to clear
himself, he had had a world to have answered for himself, and this Pilate
saw; for he said that he was a King, but a King of another world, and Pilate
knew that there was no Cesarian Law that did forbid a Kingdom in another
world: but standing in our persons, he knew not what to answer: What could
there be charged upon Christ, but we have been guilty of it? Can it be said
that none of the Elect of God did blaspheme? and that none of them did destroy
the Temple of God? and can it be justified that all the Elect of God have been
freed from commotions? Can any undertake that defense for the elect of God?
What sin can you charge upon him, but some of the servants of God have been
guilty of it? Therefore it is, that the Lord Jesus answers not: He does not
deny, he does not outface them in the business: It is not so with him; He is
not such an Advocate: He pleads with a good conscience when he pleads, and he
is clear, but he cannot clear his Elect ones from Church-censure, and Civil
censure: Nor does he plead with God about any kind of hard-ship, in putting
upon him that extremity, he knew the elect of God had deserved such: And though
he knew that they dealt wickedly, yet standing in our room, he had not a
sufficient plea, let them charge him with what they will: A man cannot charge
him with any sin, but some of his Elect have been guilty of it, and therefore
what can be answered? Therefore he was not willing to excuse himself: He does
neither deny nor extenuate any Crime that can be laid against him; but take it
in its full rigor, and the accusation does stand good: They stand not good
against the Principal, but against the Surety, as he is a Surety, they stand
good against him; for as it is in Job 9. 2, 3. How should man be just with God?
If he will contend with him, he cannot answer him one of a thousand.

Let a man stand before the Tribunal of the justice of God, and he cannot
answer one of a thousand: And if Christ be to stand for all the elect of God,
he cannot answer one of a thousand: And therefore when the King came to see
the man in the room that had not on the wedding Garment, the man was
speechless; which plainly shows us, that if Christ stand in the room of Gods
people, the case stands so, that Christ cannot answer for us, to excuse us. Job
could not answer one of a thousand, though he was the perfectest man in his
Generation (and I know not whether any man after him that was more innocent
then he:) And what shall others of Gods called ones be able to do? and what
they are not able to do, the Lord Jesus Christ he does carry it in the same
manner, as one that cannot excuse them from being guilty of those sins, no
more then himself can.

Thus you see the reasons both of Christ's innocence and patience.

The use of the point is,

First, Use 1.
to convince us of the guilt of all the elect people of God, and their
guiltiness even of violent death, and unexcusablenesse under that death. If so
be we had been innocent, what needed Christ to have been so patient as he was,
so Lamb-like in his innocence? His Lamb-like innocence is an argument of our
guiltiness: The servants of God, especially such as take any more narrow
search of their own waves, they see themselves full of blemishes, spots, and
wrinckles, and many such things, Isa. 64. 6. We are all as unclean things, and
all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags. They are all as the clouts of a
mensteruous woman, even all our best righteousness: This this the condition of
us all, full of uncleanesse, and pollution, and deformity: And which is worse
then that, unexcuable in all: for if we could have told what to say, and to
say justly, Christ would have said it much more fully then we could; for he is
our Advocate, and it were a shame for an Advocate, if the party of the cause
could defend his cause better then his Advocate: Christ is more skilful in the
Law then we; but his silence does profess, that he knows not what to say, to
stand out in our defense. He might have excused some of Gods elect from this or
that actual gross Sin; but he could have excused none from a guilty
pronenesse to all manner of Sin: There is a vicious pronenesse in us to all
sin, and therefore Christ could not tell what to say. And as there is a
pronenesse in us to all sin, so there is an actual commission of many
sins, And in many things we sin all, James 3. 2. And there are few or none
of Gods elect; that if so be a man that is privy to all their dealings, were to
give an account of them, he could not justify them from the guilt, and stain
of all sin. Now this is the case of Christ, he has been acquainted with all
our ways; and if he be examined of what has been done wickedly, before the
Church, and before the Commonwealth, he is not able to deny, but both Church
and Commonwealth might proceed against us all. And this may cast a holy
blushing upon us in the presence of the Lord, and of this Lamb: Christ could
have told what to have answered, if ought had been to be answered; but when he
stands in our room, he stands silent: he could not with truth bear witness
unto any of us touching our guiltiness: knowing what he knew by us, it would
make us unfit for both societies, either of Church or Commonwealth. And it is
a just humiliation for a man to know that he stands in such a state, of which
no good account can be given: A man that is skilful indeed, and knows the Law
as well as Christ did, standing in our room, he has nothing to answer for
himself, and the Lord knows it, and time was when this considered did muzz^
his mouth, he was like a lamb dumb before his shearer: you cannot rake up such
a base accusation against him, but he knows where the dint of it will fall, and
therefore he is very sensible of the truth of all that is laid unto his charge.
Let God come upon us with spiritual dissertions, we must know that it is just
with God to dissert us; and though the Church should spue us out, and the
Commonwealth cut us off from the land of the living, who can plead for us? If
Christ stand in our persons, he has nothing to plead.

Secondly, Use 2.
it does teach us, where to look for all our justification and reconcilement
with the Father. Truly brethren not in our own righteousness, for the Lord
himself that knows it better then we do, he knows that it will not hold out
before the judgment seat of God. He might have pleaded, that David was a man
after Gods own heart; he might have pleaded the wisdom of Solom^n; and the
truth of Josias heart, and the zeal of Phineas, and the patience of Job: but he
knowing the Law well enough, and what they have been, (and we have all been) he
has nothing to plead; and therefore we must not plead our own righteousness:
let no man think that his own pleading will reach his own justification,
whereas Christ himself could not reach it for him. All have sinned, all have
been out of the way, and there is none that does good no not one, Psalm. 14. 1,
2, 3. he speaks of us by nature, and we were natural, before we came to be
spiritual: Therefore says the Apostle, What things soever the Law says it
says to them who are under the Law, that every mouth may (...), and all the
world may become guilty before God, Romans 3. 19. (...) use the Apostle himself
makes of it, Verse. 23, 24, 25* We have all sinned, and come short of the glory
of God, being justified freely by his grace, through the redemp^ion that is in
Jesus Christ; whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his
blood, to declare his righteousness, for the remission of sins that are
past, through the forbearance of God. So that (I say) this (...) of our
justification; the Lord Jesus has borne, and suffe^ed for us when he was
silent in our behalf, and could not tell what to say. Papists can bring you
many argum^^^^ (...) justify themselves; they will bring you many instances of
this Saint, and that Saint, (and of the Virgin Mary above all others) of their
purity, and righteousness, and how able they are to plead for others: They may
be wise for themselves, and do as Procters are wont to do, regard their fees,
and not their Cause: but the Lord Jesus is faithful, and yet he cannot plead as
guiltless: Nor must you think, as sometimes poor christians will do; I cannot
say much for my self, but such a brother, such a sister, they may indeed give
a better account of me then I can do of my self; but truly, nothing to
satisfy Gods justice, can any give account, for Christ himself could not do
it: And indeed so marvellously did God accept this kind of defense that our
Savior makes, that he has crowned this faithfulness of Christ with
everlasting honor unto all ages: he has so fully, so graciously accepted him,
as that he has for ever ratified it in Heaven, that no man shall ever pass
away righteous from the judgment seat of God that can plead any righteousness
of his own: Whoever he be that will not stand righteous before the judgment
seat of God by any righteousness of his own, he must stand mute as Christ
himself stood: and if he be just, he must be just by his righteousness.
Christ could plead nothing for us of our own, not our active obedience, nor any
passive obedience of ours: but he having suffered for us, the punishment that
all the wickedness of the Elect have deserved, Now he does ever live to make
intercession for us, Heb. 7. 25. Now he has arguments enough to plead: If any
man sin now, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, 2
John 2. 1. Why did he not plead before? Truly he could not open his mouth
before, because he had not yet suffered: but now he has suffered, the just for
the unjust, and now that he has borne the censure of Church and Commonwealth,
now he has enough to plead in the behalf of the poorest christian. And if so
be that any plead against his Saints and servants, and say that they are guilty
of these and these sins, God will say, Deliver him from going down to the pit; I
have found a ransom, Job 33. 24. He now pleads satisfaction to the justice of
his Father; and having satisfied for all, there is a sufficient plea in his
mouth for all the Elect of God: whatever our actual transgressions have been,
the Lord has abundant plea for all his people: that so he may both obtain of
the Father, the spirit to bestow good things upon us; and having given us such
things, as faith, and love, and repentance, he may plead our sincerity of
heart, and that argues communion with himself, and says in his blood: But
that which does make us stand righteous before him is this, that he himself
was a Lamb without spot, and yet did not plead his own innocence, but did bear
all for us, and for us all, that we might ever be righteous in the sight of
God. And thus will God have all his servants plead, or else they shall not have
salvation.

First to plead silence; That then thou may remember, and be confounded, and
never open thy mouth any more, because of thy shame, when I am pacified toward
thee, for all that thou have done, says the Lord God, Ezekiel. 16. 63.

Secondly to plead our iniquity, Psalm. 51. 3, 4. I acknowledge my transgression,
and my sin is ever before me: Against thee only have I sinned and done this
evil in thy sight, that thou might be justified when thou speak etc. But
purge me with by soap and I shall be clean.

Look therefore unto this point mainly and principally, that if we come to
plead before the Lord our God, he does require we should examine our selves,
and in the end be so surprised (when we have done) as not to have what to
answer. Christ could not tell what to answer, and we must not wonder, if we
do not find what to answer: For here God magnifieth his love in setting forth
himself unto a believer, to be a God justifying him that cannot justify
himself: He sees there is the way of the grace of God, the Lord has done
this in Christ; and the manifestation and declaration of it does so possess
the hearts of Gods children, that it causes them to cleave unto him for all
their righteousness and peace: And this is of great necessity, and of
continual practice for the Saints of God to attend unto, that we might not be
at a loss in this great question of our souls. Conscience cries out unto us,
and we know not in the world what to say, for we are wicked beyond measure in
the sight of God, our own sincerity will not plead our righteousness before
God: But all it will do, will come to this end, that we shall be convinced, we
have nothing to say: (Nay an Angel, nay the Son himself could not tell what
to say for us) but we look to be justified freely by his grace: And the God of
all grace does so justify Christ's cause, that all the world that are
justified, shall be justified by his plea, who has done all things for us that
concern our everlasting salvation.

For a third use of the point, Use 3.
it may be for reproof to unconscionable Advocates (but I have not I think so
much cause to speak of it here, but in most places of the world I might speak
of it) It might teach all Advocates to take heed of bolstering out a bad Case
by qui^ks of wit, and tricks and quilets of Law, the Lord abhors such things.
If you will have the Lord to smell a savor of rest, plead the cause of the
faithful, and of the widow, but thou shall not accept the person of the poor,
nor of the rich. And for men that profess Religion (as many Lawyers do) to use
their tongues as weapons of unrighteousness unto wickedness, it is a
professed practice against the doctrine of mortification; For a man to give his
tongue (his glory, as David calls it) to become a member of unrighteousness,
to plead in corrupt Causes, and to strain the Law to that purpose, were I to
speak in place where, I should think it meet to speak more. But I shall not be
accounted a good Lawyer, may some say: No, Christ was the best Advocate that
ever was, and yet he could not answer: Let the cause be what it is, where the
tree falls, let it lie: If Christ do keep silence in point of our
righteousness, let us keep silence also in point of our own.

Fourthly, Use 4.
It may be a use of instruction unto all those that profess fellowship with
Christ, and the saving knowledge of Christ Jesus: You see here how Christ is
described, a Lamb slain from the foundation of the world; None more innocent,
and yet none more me^k and pa^ient.

If you speak of Christ as a Minister, the spirit of a Dove does come upon him.
For the Sacrifice, he is a Lamb. The wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the
Leopard shall lie down with the Kid; and the Calfe, and the young Lion, and
the Fa^ling together, and a little child shall lead them. And the Cow and the
Bear shall feed, their young ones shall lie down together; and the Lion shall
eat straw like the Ox, and the sucking child shall play on the hole of the
Aspe, and the weaned child shall put his hand on the Cock-atrice den. They
shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain, Isa. 11. 6. to 9.

Do you see a man boisterous in his spirit, and in his own will and ways, and
will not be willing to see a difference in himself from the spirit of Christ
Jesus (as it is possible that a child of God may be rough in his way, yet he
dare not allow himself long in it, it is a body of death: But) if you see a
man that does allow himself in a passionate frame of spirit, that a man will
have his own will (and will not be crossed in it) whether it be right or
wrong, doubtless this is not the spot of Gods children; It is not the spirit
of those whose names are written in the Lambs b^ok of life. God did not indeed
elect us, because either we are such, or would be such, but he did elect us to
be made such first or last, before we come to enjoy the everlasting Inheritance
which this book has written us down unto. And therefore it must cut off all
our boysterousnes and churlishnes of spirit; all this ruggedness and
churlishness it must be taken off; The wolf shall dwell with the Lamb and the
Leopard shall lie down with the kid, and a little child shall lead them:
Therefore all bitterness of contention, and pangs of passion that prevail,
that are far from the spirit of love, must be removed: But this will prevail
in all Gods people, that God will carry an end your spirits, in conformity to
the spirit of his own. Be of that spirit therefore in all your Transactions,
that is to say, mild, and patient, and innocent: And so it will require all the
children of God in the same kind, to keep Lamb-like silence, when you are
charged with any fault whereof you are guilty.

It is a dangerous sin when men are found in a fault, they have a thousand
excuses for it, and utter denial of such things, so as they will cut you a
Weavers beam unto a very moate: But you see the spirit of Christ Jesus will
not do it, nor will he confess it, for they charged it upon him in his own
person, and so he could not confess it: He could not deny it, because then he
should not have stood in our room as he did. And therefore it behooves those
that are young or old; if you be innocent, then you may excuse it; if you be
guilty, beware of denying, for if you do, you shall leave a difficult travayl
upon Jesus Christ to plead your cause: He that knows the heart, and the truth
of the thing, he is ashamed of such a proud spirit, that so defends himself as
you do.

Lastly, Use 5.
it is a ground of singular comfort to all whose names are written in the Lambs
book of life, and brought on to this Lamb-like frame of heart, in the greatest
horror of spirit, whereas the soul in this or that man is confounded, and he
knows not what to say: Here is comfort for such a soul laid up, for here is a
sufficient plea before Gods Judgment seat, the Lord Jesus Christ has been
silent at it, he has born and suffered for it. It will come unto this pass
with a soul under spiritual confusion: We shall lie down in our shame, with
our confusion upon our faces, as in Jer. 3. 24, 25. We cannot deny it, nor
excuse it, and therefore we are ready to conclude, woe to us that ever we were
born; That is not a just conclusion though, for truly this we must come unto,
if ever we come unto Christ: And therefore it is a way of justification, and of
life for a man to be confounded in himself for his sin, for the Lord does
never justify a sinner, until he has confounded him.

Many a man many times will say, it is true, godly friends have had a good
opinion of me, but they are deceived by my expressions, performances, and
outward carriage; Here the soul is mady times apt to sink, and would sink, if
the Lord Jesus stood not at a nonplus in his room; for Christ could not tell
what to say, till he had made satisfaction; neither could he acknowledge the
faults that were laid to his charge, because himself was guiltless; not deny
them, lest he should falsely justify us.

We cannot tell now what to say to our own estates sometimes; The Church
complains, all our Prophets are gone, and our signs are gone, the case is now
desperate, when we are in a desperate taking: But though we cannot tell
presently what to say, yet the Text and the Gospel tells you, Behold the Lamb of
God that takes away the sins of the world. He himself could make no words
about our justification, it was a case past words, excuses would not heal us,
then there was something to be suffered, and that to the utm^st: This he has
suffered, wherefore he is able to save them to the utmost that come unto God by
him, Heb. 7. 25. He is now able to do it; but when he stood before Pontius
Pilate, he could not tell what to say, but now he has suffered in Family,
C^u^ch and C^mmon-wealth. In his family, they forsook him, and denied him, and
forswore him; therefore now having made perfect satisfaction unto the exact
justice of his heavenly Father, by being condemned to death, crucified upon the
Cross, dead and buried, now his mouth is ever open to make intercession: There
is a stay and staff unto a Christian: Look unto me, and be ye saved all the
ends of the earth, Isa. 45. 22. Now here is the brazen Serpent lifted up, That
whosoever believes in him, shall not perish, but have everlasting life, John
3. 14, 15.

Rest not now in a naked knowledge of this, but look up to Heaven with your
inner man, be confounded because of your shame, and yet see the Lord offering
you Christ, and giving you grace to receive him and to rest there, that
whatever cavils and temptations the Devil may make, and your own consciences
may make, yet there is hope in Israel concerning this: The Lord is righteous,
but I and my house are wicked, may a man say, my ways are corrupt, and my
heart worst of all: But the Lord has laid upon him the iniquities of us all,
and by his stripes we are healed, Isa. 53, 5, 6, 7.

There is nothing that will clear him before God, when he stands in our case,
but he must stand ashamed and confounded for us all: And though we be thus and
thus guilty in our own apprehensions, and culpable in the sight of men, yet
the Lord has made satisfaction for us, and therefore says, Deliver him, for I
have received a ransom: And where there is any seed of God, there will be a
secret quieting of the heart upon this very ground, which the Lord does dart
into the soul, by causing it to rest upon him, and cleave to him, and hang
about him, where only Redemption, Reconciliation, and Atonement for us are to
be found.

Rev. 13. 8. latter part of the verse. The Lamb slain from the foundation of
the world.
CHrist is here described. First by the similitude of a Lamb. 2. By his
passion, a Lamb slain. Thirdly, his passion is amplified by the antitiquity of
it, slain from the foundation of the world.

We showed the last time, that Christ was as a Lamb. Now we come to the next
part of the description of Christ; the next note then concerning Christ's
passion is this.

Christ though a Lamb was slain and slaughtered.

Though a Lamb.] That is to say, though innocent, meek, and patient, yet slain
and slaughtered: So you read in Acts 2. 23. Him being delivered by the
determinate council and foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, and by wicked
hands have crucified and slain; and in Acts 7. 52. You have slain them which
showed before of the coming of the just one, of whom you have been now the
betrayers and murderers. He was a Lamb murdered, slain, and slaughtered; He was
led as a Lamb to the slaughter. Slaughter implies a violent death put upon him,
partly by the justice of God, partly by the wickedness of men, and partly by
the malice of Satan. By the justice of God: the word is very strong in Isa. 53.
10. It pleased the Lord to bruise him, it is translated, but it signifies
properly to grind him: the same word is translated destruction in Psalm. 90. 3.
Thou turnest man to destruction: and so it pleased the Father thus to grind
him to powder that he might have nothing of chafe; he ground him to dust with
grief, and horror, anguish, and agony, and terror, and pain, Isa. 53. 6. The
Lord laid upon him the iniquity of us all: and so he ground him to dust for our
transgressions, I mean to dissolution of soul and body. And so by the
wickedness of men, he was accused, condemned, and accordingly executed. What
think you of him says Caiphas, you have heard his blasphemies; and they
answered and said, he is guilty of death, Mat. 26. 66. And Pilate himself,
though he thought him to be guiltless, yet delivered him to be crucified, Mat.
27* 26. And the people said, We have a Law, and by our Law he ought to dye,
John 19. 7. Thus was he delivered by the wickedness of men: and Pilate knew
they did it of envy, Mat. 27. 18. So that it was a great wickedness in Pilate
to gratify the people, and to suffer such an innocent Lamb to be crucified;
yet rather then he will loose the favor of Caesar, and of the people, he
delivers him to be crucified.

And which is more then so; as he dyed by the justice of God, and the
wickedness of men, so by the malice of Satan: for our Savior says in Luke
22. 52. This is the very hour and power of darkness. The gates of Hell were
opened to power upon him all the vengence they were able. It was fore-tould in
Genesis 3. 15. It shall bruise they head, and thou shall bruise his heel. The
Serpent should bruise his heel, that is Christ, the seed of the woman. His
heel, you will say that falls far short of death; to pinch a man on the heel,
it may make him go lamely, but not kill him: but the holy Ghost intends, that
all the mischief that Satan works against Christ or any of his members, it does
but reach to the bruising of the heel. It bruised his heel, that implies,
that Christ should have a body like ours: and his heel, that is the lower part
of Christ, his humanity, Satan should bruise it. And he shall break thy head;
it is the same word, and therefore you may take them both for breaking, or both
for bruising: therefore Peter expounds it well (in 1 Pet. 3. 18.) when he tells
you Christ suffered for sin, The just for the unjust, that he might bring us
to God, being put to death in the flesh: His heel was bruised, that is, his
flesh. So that though the Lord suffered unsupportable misery, to be forsaken of
his Disciples, betrayed by one, and forsworn by another, to be forsaken of his
Father in regard of any comfortable fellowship he had with him: Though he
suffered all this, in inward and outward man, to such extremity that made him
sweat drops of blood, and in the end to g^ve up the ghost, yet all this was but
the heel, the lower part of Christ as it were; for his personal union is not
in the least measure intercepted: his head and council stands sure, and all his
endeavors will find a blessed accomplishment. Whereas the Lord breaks the
head of Satan, not only cuts him off from all hope of fellowship in grace, but
all his plots shall be disappointed at length, and all execution of his
designs, they shall be bruised: the Son of God comes to d^ssolve the works of
Satan, to undo them. Thus comes the Lamb to be slain. The reason of the point
is double.

First, Reason 1.
to fulfill all the former types of the Legal Sacrifices. The Israelites were
to slay the Paschal lamb in the evening (at the ninth hour of the day) Exodus
12. 6. about the same time he was slain: And all other Sacrifices for
reconciliation were to be killed, necessary therefore he should be slain; The
daily Sacrifice which consisted of a Lamb in the morning, and a Lamb in the
evening, were both slain, though without blemish, and so was Christ. But that
was but a shadow, for Christ's suffering was rather the cause of them: but it is
the Scripture phrase, this was done, that this and that may be fulfilled,
because such a thing in after times was fulfilled.

Secondly, the chief reason why it was requisite Christ should be slain, and
why he would be slain, was

That he might lay down his life for a ransom or price for his people, Reason
2.
Mat. 20. 28. The Son of man came to give his life a ransom for many. A
ransom of what? or price of what? The Scripture holds forth a price of
Redemption, and a price of Purchase.

A price of Redemption; We are not redeemed with Silver and Gold, but with the
precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish and without spot, 1 Pet.
1. 18, 19, 20. He paid a price for our redemption, that so he might discharge
the debt of our sins which lay upon us, Romans 6. 23. Genesis 2. 17. What day
soever thou eatest thereof thou shall surely dye. And partly by this means to
satisfy the justice of God, who had threatened according to the curse of the
Law, that cursed is every one that continues not in all things written in the
Law to do them: Behold, says the Lord, I set before you life and death; obey
it and live, do it not, and dye; This is the sanction and ratification of the
Law of God throughout the books of Moses. And therefore that he might satisfy
the Law, and the wrath of God (Ezekiel. 18. 20. The soul that sins, it shall
dye) that he might discharge the debt we ran into, and satisfy for our
defects, it was necessary to pay this price of redemption, to save us from
death, and all evils that drew on death. And consequently therefore he has
saved us from sin, Rev. 1. 5. He has loved us, and washed us from our sins
in his blood. He has redeemed us also from the world, Gal. 1. 4. Who gave
himself for our sins, that he might deliver us from this present evil
world: and he has also given himself unto the death, that he might destroy
through death, him that had the power of death, that is the Devil, Heb. 2. 14.
So this is one part of the reason, and the sum of the ends why Christ gave
himself to be slaughtered, and his life as a price of redemption to redeem us
from evil, for redemption is from captivity and bondage from sin and Satan,
and the world. This was a principal end of his death; but it was but part of
it. Here is a price to redeem us from evil, from so many captivities wherein we
were overwhelmed. But there is a price given of purchase, to the praise of his
glory, Ephesians. 1. 14. It is a price of purchase of some glorious possession: and
for that end it was also given in a principal manner. Now what is the purchased
possession which the Lord has given his blood as a price to pay? Truly as the
Lord has redeemed us from the three great enemies of our souls, so he has
purchased the three greatest blessings the sons of men are capable of, and
they are the greatest blessings they can reach to.

1. He has purchased reconcilement with the Father. He has reconciled us by
the death of his Son, Romans 5. 10. God loved us indeed from eternity when he
chose us, but we were by nature children of wrath as well as others. How came
we to be restored and reconciled to the Father, from whom we fell as much as we
could, by the blood of the Lamb, that has reconciled us to God.

Secondly, by his death, he has paid a price of purchase for union, and
possession of union with the Son. So does the holy Apostle teach us, Ephesians.
2. 13. to 16. You that were sometimes far off, are made nigh by the blood of
Christ: For he is our peace who has made both one (Jews and Gentiles both
one) and has broken down the middle wall of partition between us: So that he
has made Jews and Gentiles one household of God, and has built us upon Jesus
Christ the chief corner stone.

This is the second purchase which the Lord has given his blood for the price
of. We had never been united to Christ, nor by Christ been brought to the
Father, but by the blood of his cross: his blood has flain all enmity between
God and us.

Thirdly, by the same price he has also purchased us the holy Spirit. These
are the three persons in Trinity, a possession of Christ to be our head: of the
Father to be our God and King, and our Father, as his Father; therefore he tells
his Disciples in John 20. 17. says he, Touch me not, for I go to my Father,
and your Father, to my God, and your God.

As soon as he had by death overcome death, now I go to my Father and your
Father: He has purchased the possession of Gods fatherly love: he has also
purchased union with himself, and therefore he prayed that his passion might
be available to this end, that all that should believe through the Apostles
preaching should be one with them, John 17 21, 23. That they all might be one,
as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us, that
the world may believe that thou have sent me.

And the glory which thou gave me, I have given them, that they may be one,
even as we are one. So that this is the purchase which the Lord by his blood
has purchased, reconciliation with the Father, and union with the Son, and
also the inhabitation of the holy Ghost, as 1 Cor. 3. 16, 17. Know ye not that
ye are the Temple of God, and that the spirit of God dwells in you. And as
he tells us in Ephesians. 2. 18. Through him we have an access by one spirit unto
the Father. So that this is a purchase of unspeakable blessings which the Lord
has given his blood for. It was not meet the blood of the Son of God should
be spilt in vain (it were abomination to God) therefore he gives it to avoid
the greatest evil that can befall us, to cleanse us from sin, and Satan, and
to redeem us from the curse of God; and to free us also from death, and hell,
and the world, and all the enemies of our souls.

He gave his blood for all this, not to redeem us from crosses, but from the
curse in crosses, and that is the part which drives us from God, Matthew. 25. 41.
Depart from me ye cursed. So far as any affliction might separate us from
God, he has redeemed us from it.

Now from thence, as Christ has given his blood for reconciliation with the
Father, and for union with the Son, and for communion with the holy Ghost; so
he has given his blood for the purchase of some blessings that flow from
these. For by communion with the spirit we have.

1. First communion with Christ in his death, mortifying sin, and communion
with him in his resurrection raising us up to righteousness. Whence the
Apostle professes, that he desires to rejoice in nothing but the cross of
Christ, whereby the world is crucified to him, and he unto the world, Gal. 6.
14. And in Romans 6. 6. Our old man is crucified with him, that the body of death
might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin.

So there is the power of the spirit of Christ applying his death, killing and
crucifying sin and the world in us, crushing the head of the Serpent, and
consequently all the power of the Beast, of the Catholic Church of Rome, and
the head of that Beast which is the Pope. He did therefore shed his blood that
he might destroy all the power of the enemy, That we being delivered out of the
hands of our enemies, might serve him without fear all the days of our life,
Luke 1. 74. This is the mighty power of the spirit applying the warm blood of
Christ to our fowls.

2. The second fruit that flows from union with the blessed Trinity, is
ratification of the Covenant of Grace. And Christ laid down his blood for that
end to ratify all the promises that a reconciled God has made; and that is
God in a Covenant of Grace, That he will write his law in our hearts; that he
will forgive our sins, and remember our iniquities no more; that we shall
know him, Jer. 31. 33, 34. Christ gave his blood to ratify this Covenant, Heb.
9. 15, 16, 17. And as the Testament of a Testator stands not in force till the
death of him that made it, so the death of Christ ratifies this Covenant: and
as all the Covenants were confirmed by blood, so has Christ's blood done in a
special manner. And when he speaks of ratifying the Covenant, he does not
only speak of ratifying of it in word, but chiefly in the hearts of Gods
people; and no price could have done that, but the blood of the Son of God,
by which he has ratified all the promises of God to the consciences of Gods
people: That when the heart and conscience of a sinner is overwhelmed with
inward agony, and fear of the wrath of God, and the curse of the Law, the fear
of death and Hell: now what shall satisfy a christian in this, but the death
of Christ? and what shall ratify it? His death has purchased reconciliation
with the Father, union with the Son, and communion with the holy Ghost; now he
has shed his spirit in our hearts, whereby we cry Abba Father, Gal. 3. 14.
This spirit of God works faith in the hearts of Gods people, whereby all these
promises are confirmed: they are all certainly made good, because such is the
value and virtue of the death of this innocent lamb of God, they are now free
from the terror of death. It was not possible the blood of Bulls and Goats
should take away sin, therefore still they had new sacrifices, for the
conscience had lost the copy by which it pleaded reconciliation by the spirit
of God: now he applying the death of Christ to the soul, does fully pacify the
conscience, and ratify the Covenant to the soul, that now all the promises of
Grace belong to this or that servant of Christ: and I pray mark it, because it
is as weighty as any point of Religion: And of all the doctrines of Religion,
there is none sanctified so effectually, and immediately to beget faith in the
soul, as the preaching of the cross of Christ: All the doctrines of the Gospel
are for the begetting of faith, but they have no efficacy this way, further
then they are sprinkled with the blood of Christ: other promises do confirm
faith, and they may also beget it, but it is with reference to the cross of
Christ. That which gives satisfaction to Gods justice, that gives satisfaction
to our consciences, for conscience is convinced, that if God deal in justice
(as he knows no reason but he should) then he of all men is most miserable: the
burden of th^s lies heavy, and is ready to plunge him to hell: what will
satisfy the conscience now? nothing in the world except it see some reason why
Gods justice should be satisfied; and how shall that be done? only by the
death of the lamb of God. So that well does the Apostle make the cross of
Christ the ratification of the Covenant, for that cuts of all sin, and curse,
and the rigor of the Law, hell and death, and devil, and damnation, and all
evil that can befall us in this or another world, and does satisfy the justice
of God that it might remove all these, and bears the whole burden of the desert
of our sins, purchases reconciliation with the Father, union with the Son,
communion with the holy Ghost. But what is all this to me, will the soul say,
unless these be so given that faith be wrought in my heart to discern all
these, and find them? The Lord does indeed all these; the spirit of God comes
and so preaches the Gospel, and so applies the Gospel, as that in preaching
these things, he does beget faith in the heart to believe that all these things
are indeed belonging to such a soul, and to every one whom he is pleased to
accept, to the benefit of the cross of Christ, and to fellowship therein: and
now indeed is the whole Covenant of Grace confirmed when by the death of Christ
the virtue of it is applied by the spirit to the soul: Not that there is a
reconcilement to God before faith, and union with the Son, and communion with
the holy Ghost before faith: It is before in Gods purpose, and Christ's
purchase, but when the spirit comes to apply this (whose work it is to give
accomplishment to the work of the other persons;) he applying this, works
says, and ratifies the Covenant, and thereupon the heart is satisfied, and the
justice of God satisfied, and the spirit at rest from unsupportable anguishes
which did before plow up the tender heart of a christian that he lay sprawling
as it were in his blood.

3. A third benefit that flows from the former in respect of the price paid,
and in regard of the virtue and efficacy of the price when it comes to be
applied: you have not only lawful right unto the creatures to eat and drink,
etc. but some right and title to them by the blood of Christ. And he has also
paid a price for the possession of eternal glory. Until the redemption of the
purchased possession unto the praise of his glory, Ephesians. 1. 14. Until does
argue, that there is a purchase we do not yet receive: and when shall that be
received? when both we our selves, and the creatures shall be redeemed to the
glorious liberty of the sons of God. Then shall we receive the full benefit of
the price which he has paid whiles he suffered upon the Cross. Therefore
wonder not, that though Christ being a lamb yet he was slain, that he being
slain we might be redeemed, and might enjoy the purchased possession,
redemption from all evil in every kind, from sorrow, pain, etc. from the
evil of them. And his blood also was a price for a purchased possession of
reconciliation with the Father, of union with the Son, of communion with the
holy Ghost; dominion over all sin, ratification of the Covenant to our
souls, and at length the possession of everlasting glory. This was the reason
why the lamb was slain, and had it not been for these divine, and
supernatural, and blessed ends, he would not have prostituted his life to such
a bitter and shameful death, as the death of the Cross was. It was not meet
the only begotten Son of God should come down into the world to lead a
miserable life, and to dye an accursed death, but for noble and glorious ends,
and you have the sum in these particulars.

For the use of it.

First, Use 1.
it is a cause of just humiliation to us, whose sins were so out of measure
sinful, as that there is no ransom to be given for them, but such an
invaluable price, as the blood of the Son of God. All the Gold of Ophir; all
that the world can give, what is it, to this invaluable blood of the Son of
God? Yet this was our case, and estate, that if we had had many worlds for our
inheritance, and given them all for the redemption of one soul, it had not
been sufficient. This was our estate, and this is the estate of all such as yet
live in sin to this day. It is a desperate estate that cannot be repaired,
nor themselves rescued from by ransom, but the blood of Christ. If our sins
had been of a less nature, a less price might have made satisfaction: And yet
such is the pride of the hearts of the sons of men; that because we live
civil lives (though yet natural) we have good natures, are so well bred, do so
many good offices, that we think it is not so dreadful a matter, nor that we
are so dangerous for our estate as others: If it go ill with us, what will
become of desperate roaring ruffines? whatever becomes of them, it is a
frivolous matter to you, or to such as are civil, and hinder the free passage
of the grace of God: but if our natures be so good, and our carriage so comely,
I pray you what need such an invaluable price be given? If a small matter would
have saved us from the world, what need such an invaluable price be given to
rescue us from it? You will say, I hope I am not so addicted to the world, I
would drive a bargain home to the head, and would not be cheated. But is that
all you know by your selves? certainly there is more; for if the Lord did not
see that inveglement which the word has of us, and that close combination of
us to it, the Lord would not have thought it needful to send his only Son to
redeem us from this present evil world. Frugality is not a vice in any, but a
virtue; and if there were no more but good husbandry, surely there need not
such a price to be paid to redeem us from the world: But certainly the Lord
sees such power of worldliness, and untemperance in us, and such power of
passions and lusts, that no means would rescue us therefrom but the power of
the blood of his Son: and the world has such hold of us, and we of it, that
if it were not for the blood of the Son of God, we should never be rescued
from that engagement. And therefore let all flesh know, there is that power of
sin, and of the world, in the best natures, and best education, that unless
the Lord come with the blood of his Son, we should be wedded to the world,
and our sins, and lusts, and perish everlastingly.

And for the Devil, you say you defy him, and did renounce him in Baptism,
and promise it, or some other in your stead.

But if there were not a strong power of Satan in us, how comes it that the
blood of Christ must be shed, to destroy him that had the power of death, that
is the Devil, Heb. 2. 14. And therefore consider of it, so strongly did the
cu^se of the Law ^^reaten us, such power has sin over the best nature, that
were it not for the blood of the Son of God, is were not possible we should
be redeemed from them.

Therefore if thou have a good opinion of thy self, that the world has no
hold of thee, nor thy passions and lusts, and the Devil least of all, whatever
the Law of God says: know that there was nothing could redeem us from this,
but the blood of the Son of God; and if thou do not believe this (however
thou art thus naturally born) the truth is, thou tramplest under foot the blood
of Christ, as not worth the spilling: If men be thus exact in their courses, so
equal in their dealings, if the Devil have no power over you, to what end did
he through death destroy the Devil that had the power of death? If sin have
no dominion over you, wherefore did he shed his blood, that the power of sin
should be destroyed? And therefore all the while a man is out of Christ, and
the warm blood of Christ is not applied thee, thy soul is a bleeding to death.

That look as it is with some men when in a consumption, and have little hope
of recovery, then they will kill some lamb, and while it is warm, will take the
warm body of the lamb and fasten it to them that they may be repaired: Truly
thus does the Lord with us, he knows we are far consumed, in a state of
worldliness, and a state of sin, and Satan: how shall the Lord rescue us,
and repair us? No way but this, here is an innocent Lamb, he wraps him about
us, warmes us with his blood, and so he recovers us again from our consuming
condition, consuming with sinful lusts, and passions, and Satanical delusions.
Look as Physicians, they will soon guess what the disease is by the receipt:
If the Lord prescribe such a receipt as this, the blood of the innocent Lamb of
God, then know it for a certain truth, we were in a desperate condition,
consuming and wasting, and dead too, overspread with the world and Satan, and
so had everlastingly perished, had not the Lord provided such a plaster as
this.

And indeed this will yet humble us the more, in case the Lord make it appear
that all this is done for me, and thee; we may say as Mephibosheth, 2 Samuel 19.
28 what are we, but as dead dogs in the sight of God, that the Lord should give
his only Son to recover such dead dogs as we from that woeful estate in
which we and our fathers lived, and many of them dyed in, yet the Lord has
been more merciful to us; but what are we all but that the Lord might have cut
us off? Herein the Lord commends his love to us, that when we were sinners
Christ dyed for us, Romans 5. 8.

Secondly, Use 2.
it may serve to teach us, the wonderful and unspeakable love of God and of his
Christ to us; the one, that was thus willing to send his Son, the other thus
willing to go, that his blood should be thus spilt like water upon the ground,
and himself cast aside of men for the while (but for ever accepted of God)
that we might be saved. Herein the Lord magnifies his mercy to mankind; his
justice, that he will be satisfied; his mercy, that he will have satisfaction
in his Son, and does not require it of our persons. It is rich Grace, that so
we may stand, and wonder that the Lord should ever do it to such as we, to give
his Son (an innocent Lamb) for us.

Thirdly, Use 3.
it may teach us for ever to loath and abhor all sin, as that which so deeply
displeases God, so as no satisfaction might be made for sin, but the blood
of his own Son; and no blood could satisfy but that, and this sin has been
the slaughterer of the innocent Lamb of God. It provokes God greatly, and
slaughters his own Son; this is the power and venom of Sin. And therefore
unless we take delight in the deep displeasure of God, which is unappeasable,
but in the blood of his Son, how shall we that are dead to sin, live any
longer therein? Romans 6. 2. He means dead through Christ; Christ is dead, and we
in him, and with him, all that have fellowship with him.

Can we see the wrath of God rising again, first in our souls, and breaking
forth in fierceness of the Lords indignation? How shall we dare to tread under
foot the blood of the Covenant, as if it were an unholy thing? If there were no
other argument to discourage from sin, this alone might prevail, the nature
of sin, that so deeply displeases God, as there is no satisfaction but by
the blood of Christ; and to consider, that sin has slaughtered Christ Jesus.
And therefore the meditation of the slaughter and death of Christ, should be as
a slaughtering knife to cut asunder all temptations to sin. What is it that
all pleasures and profits can put upon us, to countervaile the loss of the
favor of God, and the blood of the Lamb? can any sin procure the favor of
God, or any thing answerable to the favor of God? or can any allurements of
the world, or temptations that can put upon us, or Satan's suggestions; can they
make the blood of Christ an unworthy thing? or give us greater matters then the
blood of Christ has purchased? And therefore how shall we sin against the
love of God? how shall we commit this great wickedness, and sin against God?
sin against the blood of this immaculate Lamb of God. These very
considerations are enough to cut off all sin.

Fourthly, Use 4.
this may serve therefore to teach us all to give up our selves back again to
Christ, that we may now live to him. That we may now live to the father, and to
the Son; that we may not live to sin, to Satan, to the world, But to him that
has dyed for us, and given himself for us; I live by the faith of the Son
of God, Gal. 2. 20. Christ suffered for sin, he dyed for us, that we might
not now live to our selves, nor to the lusts of men, but to the will of God, 1
Pet. 4. 1, 2, 3. 2 Cor. 5. 15. So that this is that which the Lord now calls us
to, to wit, to live now no longer to those things from which we were redeemed
by an invaluable price.

We are redeemed from the bondage of sin, and Satan, and from the world: and
not only redeemed from these, but purchased to life, as a reconciled people to
God, to be as the friends of God: Abraham was called the friend of God. Though
a man make no bones of breaking out against an enemy; yet now being reconciled
especially to him in whom we live, or move, and have our being, it is for us to
walk as those that are reconciled to God, as those that are united to Christ,
as those that are sanctified by his Spirit, as those that have the grace of
Christ applied to our souls, as those that are dead to sin, and alive to
righteousness; It is for us to walk as those that look for a purchased
possession to the glory of Gods grace when this life shall be no more. If we be
dead with Christ, why are we not free from all that which is evil, and free to
all that is good? Col. 2. 20. It is a stain and blemish to the blood of
Christ, to see a child of God live in any durty corruption, to see a child of
God a worldling, to yield to any temptation, it is a stain to the blood of
Christ: To see a child of God set loose from the Father, or the Son, or the
Spirit, it is a stain to the blood of Christ; for the blood of Christ is a
purchase to redeem us from all evil, and to purchase to us all good.

For a fifth use, Use 5.
it may teach us to apply effectually the blood of Christ: as we for our parts
in our Ministry, so you in your meditations, and repititions; there is the
ground of your peace. No conscience that has been troubled with sense of
sin, but there lies his grief, the wrath of God that is upon his unbeleiving
soul. He is condemned; the wrath of God abides on him. If you ransack it to
the bottom, there is it that crusheth the spirit: all other will be cast off in
case we be clear in this principle, about the satisfaction of Gods justice
provoked against us by our many and great transgressions: what shall satisfy
the soul now? There is nothing in the world so fit to beget faith, as the
preaching of the cross of Christ: If I be lift up from the earth, I will draw
all men unto me, John 12. 32. If Christ be drawn up on the Cross, held forth
for his drawing of people that are troubled about the wrath of God, and the
removing thereof, and about satisfaction to God about all our iniquities, this
will draw souls unto him: For how will you uphold any man to bear his burden
of the apprehension of Gods wrath with any tolerable ease? No way but by
holding forth Christ the innocent Lamb of God, crucified upon the cross, and
his blood spilt as a price of satisfaction to Gods justice, as a price of
redemption from all evil, and purchase of all good: then says the soul,
methinks there is some hope, even for me; For who shall hinder the power of
the blood of Christ? and who shall hinder the free passage of Gods grace? if
the Lord Jesus has undertaken it, and hold it forth especially to men that are
sick, and oppressed, and cast down, and ready to perish for want of succor:
In such a case, while this is held forth, there is the blood of Christ held
forth, which was shed to purchase the spirit of grace; as it is written in Gal.
3. 13, 14. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a
cu^se for us, that we might receive the promise of the spirit. The same blood
of Christ, that has redeemed us from the curse, and has purchased the
communion of the spirit, he is wont in the preaching of the cross of Christ,
to open Heaven to the soul, to open the doors of the heart to believe on this
blood, thus h^ld forth, and so by this means you shall find a support, some
satisfaction to all turmoils, and agonies of consciende. It is a wonder to see
how this blood of Christ is mighty through God to make our peace, while the
spirit does conveigh the efficacy thereof to the quieting, and establishing the
soul, In fellowship with Christ, and reconcilement with the Father; that the
soul sees, Christ has not dyed in vain, that he has not heard the word in
vain, nor waited upon Christ in vain, but sees there is life, and peace, and
all in the blood of Christ. And therefore wonder not now that the Apostles were
so careful in preaching the cross of Christ, there is the ground of all our
reconciliation: That satisfies the justice of God, and that satisfies the
soul, the spirit applying it begets faith to receive it; and there is they
stay of the soul.

So this is the principal duty, as for us to teach, so for the people of God
continually to attend unto, to ponder upon this: especially those whose hearts
are at a loss about satisfaction of Gods wrath, and pardon of their sin; It
is that which in a special manner they stand in need to attend unto.

For a sixth use: Use 6.
If any man shall ask, how shall I know that all this belongs to me? what it
is for thee we cannot yet tell, in case a man have had no impression upon his
soul yet it may be to thee for ought thou can tell, because all the Elect
are not yet called home, but are to be called: Therefore it is not the thing,
to say they have no hope in it, because they are not yet washed by it, for they
may be before they dye.

But if for the present you would know whether you have part in it or no: you
see what the nature of it is, where the blood of Christ comes, where it is
sprinkled, you see what it does; it has a redeeming power in it, and a
purchasing power: It does redeem thee from all evil, from the power of sin,
and Satan, and of this world, and of thine own heart, and withal from the
wrath of God, and the curse of the Law, so that the Conscience is more pure and
peaceable then before, and both these go together.

But mind what I say further, if this blood has had this free passage in thine
heart, it has purchased reconcilement with the Father, union with the Son,
communion with the Spirit, conformity to Christ, and comforting thee in Christ:
Conforming thee to Christ in his death, and comforthing thee in Christ and the
fruits of his death, the favor of God, and the pardon of sin, and the
blessed privileges that his death has purchased. I say this is the efficacy
of the blood of Christ where it is received in power: If these fruits be in us,
they are lively pledges of the love of God in our hearts: If these things be
smothered and d^ubed, and overwhelmed with many Temptations, and worldly
businesses, distracting cares, and temptations; though it is true, the children
of God may be at many losses, yet mark what I say, the blood of Christ is a
living Spring, and a running Fountain; though it may be troubled, yet it will
run clear again; if it do not, it is a sign it was not from the blood of
Christ, but from a delusion: But if it were from the blood of Christ, thou
shall find he will purify and pacify thy conscience, for he will not loose
the value and efficacy of that rich blood; great is the power of it, and he
will not loose the virtue of it.

I know there may be many pangs to Temptations, and Christians in this new
world may meet with new Temptations, and Christians are at a loss because
passions break in, we have lost all our peace, and comfort of our union, and
the power of it; it may be so, it is not unusual; but (mind what I say) truly
if the blood of Christ have any efficacy in us, or power upon us, you will find
that the fountain of the blood of Christ is higher then any other fountain

A fountain that springs from a low place may be stopped, but if it comes from
a high place, higher then the highest, no creature here below can hinder it,
nor created thing below it can intercept the flowing of it: The Lord will
redeem thee from the world, and from these passions and lusts, and from the
Satanicall, and malignant distempers, and the Lords blood will restore thee to
reconcilement with the Father, and bring thee to union with the Son, and the
comfort of the Spirit, and the sense of it. And therefore know, if he have left
thee to live in such distempers, and thou do bless thy self in them, and
can not look further, and there is nothing in the blood of Christ that much
takes up thy heart, for redemption from evil, or purchasing good, it is much
to be feared thou have not yet tasted of the blood of Christ: what there may be
in heaven we know not, but no man on earth can give thee a comfortable sign
of a good estate.

If a man bless himself in these engagements, and in these imbondagements to
the enemies of his soul, and thinks his captivity is his liberty, he does not
know what the Lord Jesus has purchased, there is little hope such a man has
redemption from the blood of Christ. This is the condition of all the people of
God in the greatest temptations, unless it be in some extreme hurry of
passion, it is a captivity to him, and a burden to him that he wants Christ
Jesus, and that is a good sign of a man's liberty purchased by Christ: This
Christ who has reconciled others to God, and done great things for them in a
way of greece, and has also reconciled him to God, and delivered him from death
to see this captivity, and to groan under it, it is a sign this man has had
some other liberty in times past: For otherwise there is no man naturally but
he thinks this is his freedom to have his own mind not crossed, to have his
full liberty in the world, to have good bargains, and not to be pinched in this
and that, and not for conscience to fly in his face; it is a sign a man is yet
a natural born captive. But when a man feels his captivity, and looks at it as
his burden, that he feels not the favor of God, and union with Christ, and
communion with the Spirit: It is a sign God has called him to liberty, but he
has sold himself for a captive again; and now he cries as the Apostle, Romans 7.
24. O miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death:
There he is carried captive. I see another law in my members warring against
the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin which
is in my memebers, verse. 23. Here is a sign of redeeming love by the blood of
the Lamb.

O the woeful captivity that natural corruption is to a redeemed soul, and
the great liberty it is to a carnal heart, that he thinks it a liberty to
have his thoughts free, and none to tell him: But to a good conscience that
has been washed and redeemed by the blood of the Lamb, the body of death is a
woeful bondage to him.

This body of death it is not actual transgressions, but a powerful body of
carnal corruption that hangs about us; that though we do not break out into
actual sins as other men do, yet we see a body of death in us, and this is
our captivity. So then, if the Lord has redeemed a soul, and purchased these
comfortable blessings as brings us to the sense of our woeful condition by
reason of the loss of this liberty, all these are witnesses of the redeeming
love of Christ.

Lastly, Use 7.
it may be a use of consolation to every such soul thus far (even so far
as there is no bounds and limits to it) it is a mavelous satisfaction to a
soul in temptation, nothing more then this I now speak of. One would think it
were a great misery to live in horror of conscience continually, and so it is:
but if a man be redeemed by the blood of this Lamb, then it is not terror of
conscience that can separate thee from God; for Christ himself was under
terror of conscience as much, and more then thou art without sin, that he
sweat drops of blood, and cries out and bemoans it in a holy manner. Why will
you say, but will you have me set such things at my heel? the desertions of
God at my heel? Is the favor of God to be set a^ the heel? it will not
hinder your union with your head, though you have lost the sense of it.

All that Christ suffered, all his desertions, it did not hinder his fellowship
with the second person in Trinity, neither will it hinder yours. The Serpent
bruiseth our heel, makes us go heavily and lamely. Psalm. 43. 2. Thou art the
God of my strength, why do thou cast me off? why go I mourning because of
the oppression of the enemy? It makes us go heavily while God forsakes us, as a
man goes that is crushed by an enemy, but yet it will not break his head. And
what great consolation is this, it is not terror of conscience that can
separate a man from Christ: Nay I may speak a greater thing then that, it is
not the power of your corruptions that can break your head, though they will
make you go more lamely and heavily, yet pride and passions, etc. do not
separate union. It must therefore raise up the heart of a Christian above his
temptations, above corruptions, above the world, above all the enemies of his
soul, what can they all do? If the Lord be with us, who can be against us? He
that delivered up his own son to death for us, how shall he not with him
freely give us all things? Romans 8. 31, 32. So that we are freed from all
annoyance from the curse of the Law, the rigor of the law, free from desertion
and corruption, and the Lord has given us himself, and his Son, and his
Spirit, and his C^venant, and Kingdom, and his Church and people, and
Ordinance, and all is yours, 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23. And how comes all to be ours? By
the blood of the Lamb that has purchased all good things, and the removal of
all evil, therefore how comfortable may the souls of Gods people be, if they
did attend to the blood of the Lamb.

And therefore let not those that have any part and portion in the blood of
Christ Jesus be discouraged; let them in Gods fear meditate more of this
blood, and of the power and virtue of it: As you desire your lives may be more
comfortable and serviceable to God and man, and your death more peaceable, so
be much in meditation of this blood: And if you be doubtful of your spiritual
estate, then more seriously meditate of it, who has suffered, and what, and
for what end he laid down his life, and lay all together, and see if all will
not amount at length to the begetting of Faith where it is wanting, and to the
reviving of it where it is, that we may live fruitfully, and holily, and dye
comfortably.

Rev. 13. 8. latter part of the verse. The Lamb slain from the foundation of
the world.
HERE is something yet to be handled in this Verse, and that is the antiquity
of the sufferings of Christ. He does not only say that Christ was a Lamb, and
slaughtered, but his death is described by the antiquity of it, From the
beginning of the world: Or as it is here translated (and very fitly) from the
foundation of the world; though I would not put any great weight in the very
nick of the foundation, for the foundation of the world was laid the first day
of the creation, when the Lord made the highest heavens, and the lowest earth:
the highest heaven, the kingdom of the blessed Saints and Angels, of whom it is
said, Come ye blessed of my Father inherit the kingdom prepared for you from
the beginning of the world: There was a kingdom in the foundation of the
world, and therefore the Angels were created the first day: and it is true
Christ was slain even then also, else those Angels had not been in that
kingdom: But whether you take it for the foundation in the creation, or in the
nick of the creation, it is not greatly material, for the death of Christ
reached both to the fall of Adam, and in some respect before it, and the
explication of that will show the truth thereof, and I would not be exquisite
nor curious in opening of it.

The Note is this.

The slaughter of Christ was from the foundation of the world. Doct. 4.


So it is said here, The Lamb (that is Christ, The Lamb of God) slain from the
foundation of the world: the Lamb is Christ, evident it is that in fullness of
time he was slaughtered about 4000. years after the world was made, but yet the
holy Ghost says, He was slain from the foundation of the world; so that
though it was actually accomplished and performed in fullness of time, yet as
time began, the suffering of Christ began also; slain he was therefore from
the foundation of the world.

First, In respect of Gods eternal purpose, who from the foundation of the
world, and before the foundation of the world appointed Christ to this
slaughter. We are redeemed, (says Peter) not with silver and gold, but with
the precious blood of Christ as of a Lamb without spot, who verily was
fore-ordayned before the foundation of the world, but was manifest in these
last times, etc. 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19, 20. Before the foundation of the world, and
from the foundation of the world, many times in Scripture are both one in
meaning; before the foundation of the world he was ordained to be slaughtered,
the Apostles words are expre^sly so, as of a lamb slain he was ordained, and
from the foundation of the world implies long before the time he was
slaughtered, and then you know not where to put the period, but some reference
it has to the foundation of the world.

Secondly, He is truly said to be slaughtered from the foundation of the world,
in regard of the promise of God made to Adam since the world began; the same
day that Adam was created he fell, or certainly soon after, but most probable
the same day: the same day that he fell, it is clear the Lord gave him a
promise of the death of Christ, in Genesis 3. 15. for that is the meaning of the
promise: He shall break thine head, speaking to the Serpent, he shall crush the
head of the Serpent: For the seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head;
Thou shall bruise his heel. Heel implies the humanity of Christ, which was to
be tr^d^n upon, and indeed it was all that the tempter could do, but that
bruising the heel was the crushing of his humanity, his soul and body was rent
asunder, that was promised from the foundation of the world.

Thirdly, From the foundation of the world, Christ was slain in the foreruning
types of him; for it is said, that Abel brought of the firstlings of his flock,
and of the fat thereof, and that was a type of this Lamb, Genesis 4. 4. the
sacrifice of Abel was a type of Christ suffering: now because offering that
sacrifice was by faith, Heb. 11. 4. And faith has ground from the word of God,
though there was no written word, yet there was from the mouth of God to Adam,
that taught Adam, he and his sons to offer sacrifice in type of Christ that
was to be slain, who should break the head of the Serpent, and therefore as a
type of the bruising of the heel of the promised seed which God had set before
them, they were to offer sacrifice, to shadow forth that great work of Christ:
Abel believed on Christ, how far expressly or distinctly I do not know; but had
he not believed, he had not sacrificed by faith, nor had not been accepted.

Fourthly, He was slain from the foundation of the world, in regard of the
virtue and efficacy of his death: from thence, the lively virtue and efficacy
of the death of Christ did express it self from the very foundation of the
world, that Abel did offer a more acceptable sacrifice then Cain, it was from
his faith; what was his faith fastened on, by which his sacrifice was accepted?
(for it is said, the Lord had respect to him, and to his offering) it is Christ
alone, it implies he looked not for acceptance by his sacrifice; it is
impossible that the blood of bulls should take away sin, but he looked to be
accepted in Christ Jesus: so Enoch is said to have walked with God, Gen 5. 24.
and no man can walk with God except he be reconciled with God, Amos 3 3. And
is there any reconciliation but in the blood of the Son of God? We are
reconciled to God by the death of his Son, Romans 5. 10. It is said of Abraham,
that by faith he left his country and his fathers house, and his kindred, and
went out, not knowing whether he went, Heb. 11. 8. Genesis 12. 1. How comes
Abraham to be redeemed and rescued from the blood of his Ancestors and from his
fathers house? We are redeemed from our vain conversation received by
tradition from our fathers, not with silver and gold, but with the precious
blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot, 1 Pet. 1. 18,
19. Which argues plainly and evidently that Abraham himself, if he had not been
washed in the blood of this Lamb, he could not have been saved from hankering
after the blood of his Ancestors; if the blood of Ancestors had been more warm
in him then the blood of Christ, he would not have been redeemed from his
fathers house: but now in his old age he leaves his country and goes to seek
that seed in whom they all should be blessed in that country. It is said in
Genesis 15. 6. That he believed in the Lord, and it was counted to him for
righteousness: and all justiffication is by faith (says the Apostle) in the
blood of Christ, Romans 3. 23, 24, 25. We all have sinned, and are deprived of
the glory of God, being justified freely by his grace through the redemption
that is in Christ Jesus, etc. For all the sins that have passed us from the
beginning of the world, the Lord received atonement for them in the blood of
his son: and our father Abraham, if he were justified, it was by faith in the
son of God. How came it to pass that Joseph was able to overcome the strong
and subtle temptations of his Mistress, in Genesis 39. 9. How shall I do this
great wickedness, and sin against God? Can he mortify a lust by any power
of his own? No, let the Apostle answer it, in Gal. 5. 29. They that are Christ's
have crucified the flesh with the passions and lusts; for so it is, it is not
affections, but all the sinful passions that hang about the souls of men, the
Lord frees us from them all by the blood of his Son: So that if you see
Joseph crucified to his lust, and Abraham (...) from his fathers house and
justified; if you see Abel offering a more acceptable sacrifice then Cain: Look
at all these as lively fruits of the blood of the Lamb slain from the
beginning of the world, whence also springs their faith? heavenly mindedness,
their sanctification? their power of godliness was as great (and in many
things greater) as in those that have lived since his crucifying on the cross.

Now if it had not been as effectual and real before his coming, as when he
did come, doubtless the efficacy of his death would have been less powerful
and more weak in them that lived before his coming; but when you see such
liveliness spring from the virtue and power of it, then you see the efficacy
of it from the foundation of the world, only the manifestation of it was not
so clear as afterward, whence it comes to pass that the generality of
Christians now are, or ought to be, more clear and more pure then the
generality of Christians then; but in some men, you have had them that exceeded
those that lived in Christ's own time, and since.

5. There is a fifth respect in which Christ is said to be slain from the
beginning of the world, and that is in respect of the faith of Gods elect who
lived from the beginning of the world: As soon as there was a man on the earth,
the same day the Lord put emnity between the seed of the woman and the Serpent;
now the seed of the woman looks for salvation in the seed of the woman, and
they did even then look to the Lord Jesus the Messiah as much as we do since in
John 8. 56. Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day, he saw it and was glad:
that was the day of the coming of Christ into the world to be an atonement for
the sins of his people: If Abraham saw it, then Enoch, Noah, Abel, and Adam,
and Eve; and who ever lived by Jesus Christ, they all saw Christ afar off, yet
they saw him notwithstanding, they saw his day, the day of his Incarnation, and
Passion, and Resurrection: and it is said in Heb. 11. 1. That faith is the
subsistence of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen; that is,
it did give the Fathers before Christ, as clearly to see Christ already present
to them, as if he had been actually come in the flesh, and so it is with all
the Saints at this day; look as we do, as really believe the Resurrection of
the body, that by faith gives it substance as verily as if it were present, and
as we believe the salvation of our souls, as verily as if it were
accomplished; and it is as clear, I mean, as certain as if it were already
done, and in some measure as evident; for so he says, It is the evidence of
things not seen; he speaks in the Apostle words, The confidence and evidence of
things not seen. Hence it comes, That the fathers saw the promises and embraced
them, but did not receive them, Heb. 11. 39. That is, did not receive them
accomplished (for they never saw Christ in his death) but they were persuaded
of them, and embraced them, and did verily look for them in expectation, as if
they had been present with them; that is, if Christ had been come, they would
not have done nor suffered more then they did; which argues that faith gives a
basis and subsistence to what it lays hold on; and makes it so real, that we
shall neither do more, nor suffer more, if it were present; They did believe
that the time would come, when the Messiah being bruised himself, he would
break the Serpents head.

These are the several respects in which Christ is said to be the Lamb slain
from the foundation of the world; In regard of the purpose of God, in regard of
his promise, in regard of the types of him, in the Sacrifices that were
shadows of Christ, and did really hold him forth; in regard of the virtue of
it, and in regard of the faith of Gods people that lived from the beginning of
the world; in regard of all these Christ was slain from the beginning of the
world,

For the Reasons of the point;

All the ways and respects I have spoken to, Reason 1.
are as so many Reasons; yet if a man should stand upon a Reason, I would first
say this; the first may be from the eternity of that which is infinite; what
ever is infinite, is eternal: Now the value and virtue of the death of Christ
is infinite, as being the blood of the son of God, Acts 20. 28. Now that
which is infinite, as well reaches that which is before, as after it; infinite
it is, or else it cannot be eternal: and infinite it had need to be, or else
the infinite wrath of God could not be satisfied thereby; but being infinite,
it was of eternal efficacy, and therefore he was a Lamb slain, and slain from
the foundation of the world: So that all that are elect were in Christ before
the foundation of the world. Ephesians. 1. 4. He has chosen us in Christ before
the foundation of the world; in Christ, and in Christ crucified before the
foundation of the world; for being of infinite value, it must of necessity be
eternal; there is nothing infinite, but is eternal, they are co-incident;
that which is finite will end, it began in time, and will end in time: But that
which is infinite must needs have respect to eternity; and therefore says our
Savior, John 8. 38. Before Abraham was I am: So that take him whether as God,
or in point of the virtue and efficacy of his mediation, he was before Abraham;
it could not be eternal, if it be not infinite; and if it be infinite, it must
needs be eternal.

From the presence of all future things to Christ, Reason 2.
I speak in proper speech, it is truly said, there is nothing future to Christ:
I confess the point is unconceivable to finite capacities, but to God all
things to come are present, as if they were in actual being: All things are
naked and open unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do, Heb. 4. 13. It is
an ancient speech, Eternity is like a circumference about a Center that
compasses it round about, that if you fit on the Center, you see all the
lines: Suppose a great tower as high as the clouds, and one sitting thereupon,
he sees one man coming this way, and another another way, he sees they will
meet in one place; they know nothing of it, it is future to them, but present
to him: So the Lord that sits upon the clouds of eternity (if I may use such a
word) he sees all things as if they were present to him: and certain it is,
God is not one day older then he was from the beginning; the Angels are older,
and Satan, but God is not older, nor is capable of being older; time adds
nothing to him, his eternity swallows up all; that which has been, is, and
shall be, it is fresh still to him; that which is past, and that which is to
come, whence it is said, Before Abraham was I am, he does not say I was; but
his past time is not lost to him, no time is past with God; Before Abraham was
I am: a thousand years are but as yesterday; when it is past, all are one time
to God, Psalm. 90. 4. So then, if you look at Gods account of things that has
entered into such a Covenant from eternity, has written so many in the book of
life to be brought on to God by the death, and resurrection, and ascension of
Christ, he knew the person of the Godhead would certainly take the humane
nature of Christ; it was present to him, and therefore he does so elect, and
govern, and dispose of creatures as he that had received a ransom before the
world began: And therefore Elihu his speech is weighty, in Job 33. 23. That if
an interpreter, one of a thousand come to a sick man, and show to a man his
righteousness, and that then God is gracious to him, and says, deliver him,
for I have found a ransom (to wit, in the blood of the Lamb) then will he say,
deliver him: What, had he received a ransom in Jobs time? Job lived before
Abraham? truly then he has a ransom, as a man has a bond from a good surety:
but so it was in his apprehension, not only because Christ was a good surety,
and would make good payment in time, but the thing was as present with God, and
really performed; All times with God are but as now, past, present, and to
come; all times with God are one and the same, Jesus Christ yesterday, and to
day, and for ever; Yesterday before the Law, and to day, both under the Law,
and especially under the Gospel, and for ever the same, of the same virtue and
efficacy, and power: So you see the truth of the Point.

The use is shortly thus much.

First, Use 1.
it shows you the dangerous and damnable estate of the world from the
foundation of the world; the deep depravation and corruption of the world from
the foundation of it; it is said by John, 1 John 5. 19. We know we are of God,
and all the world lies in wickedness: Did it lie so in John's time, when all
the great Nations of the world worshipped the Devil, Apollo, Hercules, and
Jupiter, and such dunghill gods? Did it not then lie in wickedness? Truly it
was so since the world began, it was never better from Abraham to Moses, from
Moses to Christ's time, and from Christ's time to this, the whole world lies in
wickedness; for otherwise to what end should Christ be slain from the
foundation of the world, if there were no need of a Redeemer, else there had
been no need of his sacrificing from the foundation of the world There were all
errors in the world, not as God made it, but they suddenly corrupted
themselves. Man being in honor abides not, but is like the beast that
perishes, Psalm. 49. 20. The word in the Original is, he shall not sleep in it,
nor lodge in it, meaning that he shall not take one nights rest, but become
like a beast, and clad with the skin of a beast: So this is the condition of
civil men that are like bruit beasts from the foundation of the world: The
Lord looked down from heaven, and beheld the children of men: And the Apostle
interprets it of all men; He looked down and beheld all the children of men,
to see if there were any that did understand and seek God: They are all gone
aside, they are all become filthy, etc. Psalm. 14. 2, 3, 4, 5. This is the case
of all men by nature. The Apostle expounds it of all, Jews and Gentiles by
nature, in Romans 3. 10. to 16. And in Genesis 6. 5. The Lord looked upon the earth,
and beh^ld it was corrupt. And in Genesis 11. v. 12. The earth also was corrupt
before God, etc. And God saw that all the imaginations of man's heart were
evil, only evil, and that continually. The word translated, Imaginations, in
the Original is, The frame and bent of his thoughts is evil, and only evil,
and that continually; bent to backsliding from God, not a good thought in any
man's heart since the world began; take him as he is by nature, not a good
thought rises in any man's heart, not a good word from his lips, nor a good
action from his hands; Take him without the virtue of Christ since the world
began, there never rose a good thought in all men's hearts; if there did, it was
by the virtue of this Lamb of God that was slain from the foundation of the
world. The heart of man, (Jeremiah complained long before Christ's time) is
deceitful above measure, and desperately wicked, who can know it, Jer. 17. 9*
Who can know the bottomless depth of it. This is the very state of all the
world since the world began; the whole frame and state of the world is enmity
against God, Romans 8* 7. It is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can
be, and that in such a deep measure, you may see by the medicine that the Lord
prepares for it; it shows the depth of the depravation of the world from the
beginning, it has been corrupt and incurable, unless it were by the virtue of
the death of Christ, by the son of God made man, taking upon him man's nature;
and the greatness and infiniteness of the virtue of this remedy does
evidently argue the bottomless depth of the corruption of the world since the
world began: No man would bespeak a Smiths great hammer to break an egg-shell,
a man would think it a mavelous vanity if he should. Truly the Lord has
prepared the strongest iron hammer to break the Serpents head; and which is
wonderful, this iron hammer, the Lord Jesus, that breaks all before it; The
stone cut out of the mountain, that breaks the iron mountain of Rome, Dan. 2.
34. It is the same it was: it makes men many times wonder how they came to be
well conceited of the old Religion, when Antichrist re^gned; then were golden
days (as they say) then there was nothing, but every man regarded other men's
good as their own; precious golden seasons in the old world, then an easy
matter would have persuaded them all: but to what end was Christ slain from the
beginning of the world, if it were not full of wickedness? if it were not so
tough that this hammer of hammers must come to break it in pieces? If men were
so tractable, children to Parents, servants to Masters, and yoke-fellows so
abundantly in sweetness and amiablenesse, what needed Christ to be crushed in
pieces? Say not, says Solomon, Eccles. 7. 10. what is the cause that the
former days were better then these, for thou do not enquire wisely
concerning this: It is not a wise question; for the truth is, thou art deceived
to think the elder times were better; it is true, it is possible men by the
policy of Satan may grow worse; But take them at the best, had there not been a
Lamb slain to rescue the same from the corruption of it, no flesh had been
saved. It is true, in some ages, when the Gospel found free passage, there was
some difference. It was so in David's time, better then in Saul's and Solomon's,
for a time better then in David's; and so in Hezekiah's time, better then in
Zedekiah's, and so it has been up and down: but take it the best, all flesh
have corrupted their ways, there is not a good thought, not a good word, nor a
good practice since the world began. Sometimes in moral virtues men have more
exceeded, when the Devil knew they were far off from spiritual grace; he
tempted them not when he knew he had them fast in a golden and silken chain,
or cord of moral virtues (so I may call them) he led the prisoners of those
days in a golden chain. The strong man armed kept the house all the time of
the Grecian and Persian Monarchy long before Christ: and if any were delivered,
it was by the death of Christ as well as now. It is true, we read in ancient
Poets, I think it was fetched out of Daniel from Nebuchadnezzars dream; there
was a golden world, and then a silver world, and then a brass, and sometimes
iron, there was all. The Babylonian Monarch was gold: but when it was gold, it
was but golden fetters of sin, and a land of wickedness that held men close
to the Devil; and the silver Monarch of Persia was but silver fetters; and the
brass Monarch of Greece it was but brazen fetters.

It is true, when Religion brake forth, then he put upon them more chains,
strong beastly lusts, men with men committing filthiness, Romans 1. 17. These
were iron chains to carry men captive to Satan: He sees Learning break forth,
and therefore he lays stronger chains and bands upon them: Be no more
stiff-necked, lest your bands increase, says the Lord: and so from golden
bands you have silver, and from silver, brass, and from brass, iron, and all
to lead you captive to your last execution: And what is the difference? if a
man be pynion'd with a golden cord, or a silver, or a brazen and iron cord, the
one is more glittering then the other, but all bring to destruction: Therefore
look at all the world living in wickedness since the world began, or else in
vain was the Lamb slain: The very frame of man's transgression brought in a
necessity of a like remedy, and therefore a like need of the blood of Christ.

And it is a vain Question, as Solomon says, why the former times should be
better then these: so it is a vain apprehension that men have of themselves as
good, to say, I thank God I have a good heart, and you shall find me
tractable, and reasonable, (though they be but natural) and so their children
are very tractable, you may lead them with a twinde theerd, and need not use
violence, you may soon break them; what then are you but eggshels? what need
then a iron hammer to crush all the power of the enemy? do not you and your
children stand in need of the virtue of the blood of the Lamb as much as others
have since the world began? That men have stood in need of the blood of the
Lamb from the foundation of the world to rescue them from the power of the
strong man, if they were so tractable, young or old? I know there is a great
difference between spirits. God forbid we should defame the work of God in
nature, but take the best spirit, there is unconceivable enmity in the best
natured man against Christ; there is an inbred emnity against him ever since
the world began, as is impossible to be healed, but by the blood of Christ;
Christ came to crush them whiles they are in the shell, and unless he heal
them, verily children of a span long cannot be saved: Therefore let no man
flatter themselves in their good inclination; there is that in us since the
world began, that Christ must be broken and crushed to break the league between
us and the Devil: Christ himself in his soul and body must be stricken, he
kills himself by the stroke he gives to the enemy.

Folly is bound up in the heart of a child, and it is no^ goodness of nature,
or what ever else you can talk of, that will root it out; nor the rod of
correction, unless the blood of the Lamb be sprinkled upon it, and then it may
be of great use, and any other ordinance to bring them to the ways of Christ
Jesus. Now if this were well stamped and revetted into the spirits of men, it
would humble proud flesh, and not only take them off from the free will of
Popery, and Arminianisme, and a pack of such; but I hope there is less need of
speaking against such heresies, but to set it home upon our own hearts;
whatever our fathers have been, we their children are not better: Some
accidental difference there may be, but setting aside such accidental
differences for the substance of prevailing corruptions, they have ruled and
reigned in the hearts of men, since the world began, by invincible power unable
to be subdued, but only by the blood of the Lamb: And therefore you that are
children of godly Parents, hear this word and know it; you bring such
engagements into the world with you to the strong man, and now are so engaged,
that unless Christ be broken for you, and his death suffered for you, and his
blood shed for you; you see how it is with younger and elder people, and let
all Parents tell it to their children, and Masters to their servants, and all
that have to do with the world; be not deluded with a good affection to your
own nature you are in, this is the state of all since the world began; they are
all sprauling in wickedness, and there is such a league between the Devil and
them, that unless the Lamb be slaughtered, we cannot be saved.

Secondly, Use 2.
Let all the sons of nature, and all other sons of grace, know, that if
Christ was slaughtered from the beginning of the world, and only to break the
Serpents head, which had plotted our destruction from the foundation of the
world, then certainly it is not possible we should live in those sins by
which we have slaughtered Christ; can any man that knows the difference between
the right hand and left, commit sin that slaughters Christ Jesus, and live
and die in it well enough? and think with himself, that notwithstanding the
lewd lusts that hurry me, I shall do well enough with it? an oath is not such a
great matter, or to sit ^ippling till we be drunk, or gaining too much in
bargains, it is no such great matter: I tell thee, if it be breach of the law
of God, thou can not live in it; Christ himself could not, it cost his
breaking.

I speak nothing to the difference between mortal and venial sins; was it a
venial sin, think ye, that slaughtered the Son of God? they have been breaking
him since the world began; and is it possible that if he lie a bleeding for
sin, is it possible that this or that sin should be venial and ought to be
passed over? be not deceived, look what slaughter it has brought of the
chiefest of the world, even the God of the world, it slaughtered him; and there
are none of all his people that shall be saved by him, but must be slaughtered
in his lusts and passions, they must be crucified with Christ, if they have any
part in him; he was slain from the beginning, and so from first to last, they
must be crucified from the power of sin, or else they cannot be saved. And
therefore let no man bless himself, and think he shall do well enough though
he continue in sin; for the truth is, there is no sin but cost Christ's breaking
and crushing, and either thou must lay hold on his death, and be conformable
unto him, or else thou shall never have part in him; it is tough work to
slaughter sin; let this slaughter of Christ cut off all out-runnings of sin,
whether in thoughts, words, and deeds; let it be as a slaughtering knife to all
our lusts, considering there is no taking leave in this and that; for the truth
is, it cost the very blood of Christ.

Thirdly, Use 3.
It may teach us the unity of our Religion with the Religion of the ancient
Patriarks since the world began; how did they look to be saved? In Acts 15. 11.
they all looked to be saved by grace, and by the blood of the Lord Jesus, as we
do in doing and suffering all for them, and we know no other way: There is no
name under heaven whereby we must be saved, but only the name of Christ, and
by that we are saved from the guilt and filth of sin, and supplied with grace
to conform^ us to Christ Jesus, and to make us like to him our head and
husband; there is the old way of salvation, and it is the same now; there is
unity and true antiquity. The Papists speak much of antiquities, but let them
bring no other way of salvation but the blood of the Lamb, and we will look at
them as Churches for point of salvation; we will grant them the right hand of
fellowship if they will look for no salvation neither from free will, nor from
merits of their own, nor from the intercession of Saints and Angels, nor from
dispensations of the Pope, nor from the going on pilgrimage, nor from the
satisfaction of Saints, but that they look for salvation only from the blood
of the Lamb; truly we will give them the right hand of fellowship; let them
have errors, there may be many errors otherwise: but let them hold there, and
look for all salvation there, and rest not upon any other hopes of salvation,
but what they receive from the blood of the Lamb by faith in him (for so alone
it is received) faith in the blood of the Lamb, breeds and sheds abroad every
grace in some measure and makes fruitful. No man has washed his roabs in the
blood of the Lamb, but is fit to walk with Christ in white to justification to
his sanctification, Rev. 7. 14. And so you shall have a true and perfect
agreement in Religion, if that we agreed upon looking there for salvation, and
put not salvation elsewhere: but when men magnify nature, and pinch upon, and
extenuate the blood of Christ, and in their deep devotion you shall have
pictured, here is the blood of Christ, and the blood of the son of the
Virgin; when he looks upon the son of the Virgin, he thinks there is perfect
salvation; but when he looks upon other things, to the mi^k of his mother; oh
there is more sweetness in milk then in blood! when he looks again to the
passion of Christ, then he priseth that; but when he looks to the tenderness
of his m^^her, he thinks there is more in that: And thus does their
blasphemous devotion hang between the milk of the mother, and the blood of the
Lamb, which argues their religion is transported to a notion of the blood of
the Lamb, and they are captive hither and thither, and any whether, rather then
to the blood of Christ.

Fourthly, Use 4.
It may be of instruction to us, that never any evil can befall us, but there
is a remedy prepared before it come upon us: The Lamb was slain from the
beginning of the world.

Though we lived before Christ's time, and much more, if after it: there is no
sin that Adam nor his wife committed, but there was a remedy prepared for it
before the foundation of the world; it was of infinite value, it was provided
from eternity, and promised from the foundation of the world; it was shadowed
in types, and exhibited in sundry representations, and in the lively efficacy
of it in the hearts and lives of his people since the world began: All that we
read of Noah, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, of David, and Solomon, of Kings,
Priests, and Prophets, and Apostles, what have they all been, but lively
representations and footsteps of the power of the blood of the Lamb: the Lord
provided his slaughter of the Lamb, for the redemption of all his people, out
of the world, before the world began.

It is many a conceit that Christians have; this and that might have fallen out
better, if such means had been taken in time, such a man's life had been saved;
according as Martha said unto our blessed Savior in John 11. 21. Lord if thou
had been here, my brother had not dyed; why so? Christ had been able to heal
him; By what virtue shall he raise a man from death to life? Is it not by the
virtue of his death and resurrection? If it be, was not his death and
resurrection before the world began? For it is of infinite value; and therefore
though he came four days after Lazarus death was past, yet he came timely
enough, for he brought virtue with him; and so let no man say, if I had known
as much now as before, I should not have done thus: By what virtue should you
have been preserved? if there be any saving benefit, it must be by the blood of
the Lamb, for it is from that, that we look for all our redemption from all
afflictions and temptations from his blood, then there was remedy enough
before, but it was not applied, because God has some other work more heavenly
and spiritual and useful to us then the accomplishment of our hearts desire,
then the repairing of our losses and crosses.

So then this is of special use to us, that if his blood be shed from the
founda^ion of the world, then the remedy is never too late: If we think if we
had not known many things, we might have saved a world of sorrow: why did we
not? was it because there was no balm in Gilead, or no vettue in the blood of
the Lamb, or that the virtue of it is dried up? No, God forbid; but the Lord
has some other exercise for us to make us conformable to Christ, he would have
us more weaned from the world, and more Christ-like, and more Lamb-like; more
spiritual, and every way more conformable to Christ, and for that his blood
was sufficient, for he came not to save us from crosses, but from curses from
any thing that might hurt our souls, as might break our heads, as might hurt
our union with Christ, and communion with his spirit, for that it may be of
value; it was of value 4000. years before his coming in the flesh; and do you
think it is not of value 4000. years after? it is not yet 2000. years since
his coming, but 1600. and some odd: then be persuaded that the blood of Christ
is still lively and fresh to remove all sin and crosses, and to leave a
gracious Tincture on all crosses, to do us more good then if we were without
them; This is the efficacy of this blood which is a stay to Christians that are
troubled with the power of their corruptions and temptations, they are not able
to overcome and resist such temptations; why not able? If all the powers of
hell come against you, verily there was a remedy provided long ago, and it was
abundantly efficacious four thousand years before, and it is of more efficacy
now, though they had the Gospel before, yet not in that clear manifestation:
and therefore if you read that Abraham sacrificed, and he pleased God; but I
doubt my prayers and my prophecying^ please not God; why do they not? Abraham
knew of the means whereby he should please God. (...) walked with God, but I
shall never keep ^uch fellowship with him; he was reconciled to God, and there
was no means of reconciliation but by the blood of the Lamb, it is able to put
strength (...) faith. Abraham (...) Country and his Fathers he use, only
because (...) blood of the Lamb: and if he prevailed so far, why not we? ^f he
was fully satisfied in the (...) of his (...) by believing him that had
promised, what (...) it that his death i^ not of infinite value (...) as well
as before? If Joseph was able to withstand his wanton (...), doubtless there is
the like power now; how shall I crucify the Son of God, and put him to open
(...)? Thus poor Christians work upon this infinite virtue, and lively power of
the death of Christ; it wonde^fully calmes and purifies the heart, it mightily
strengthens against all corruption: and what ever rises in the hearts of Gods
people that prevails against them, it is because the blood of the Lamb is not
applied, otherwise it could not be they should be dead-hearted and
blind-spirited, and many times at a loss in this and that practice, and
wrestling with this and that temptation, it springs only from want of applying
the efficacy of this blood which has been of such infinite virtue from the
beginning of the world.

Rev. 13. 9, 10. If any man have an ear let him hear.

He that leads into captivity shall go into captivity: He that kills with
the sword must be killed with the sword, here is the patience and the faith of
the Saints.


IF any man have an ear, let him hear: What should he hear? For when he does
often use this phrase in the second and third Chapter, he tells you what they
shall hear: Hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches.

Now he does not put in that object of hearing; but yet taking his meaning, he
means that which the Spirit has said unto you in the former description of
the Beast, especially that which he said to them in the words before going, to
wit, the universality of the worshippers of the Beast, and the certain
destruction of those that do worship him, and the preservation of the elect
children of God from that contagion.

It is meet to be heard that such a Beast would come into the world as the
Roman visible Church, and that he has in him the resemblance of all the old
Empires, of the Lion of Babell, of the Bear of Persia, of the Leopard of
Greece, and of other Beasts, and of that other Beast the old Roman Pagan
Empire: And it is not unworthy to be heard, the wound that should be given gim
by the Goths and Vandalls, and the time of his greatness, and that those that
worship him shall not be saved, only Reprobates shall worship him: And those
whose names are written in the book of life, they shall either not be
worshippers of him, (but bear witness against him) or else they shall be
rescued from it, and not live and dye in that worship. So these two verses are
Corolaries, or uses, which the holy Ghost makes (in the former verses) of the
description of the Beast.

The first is a word of attention, and due consideration to every intelligent
reader of this Prophecy: If any man have an ear, let him hear.

The second is a word of consolation to all the Church and people of God, and
that is double.

1. From the violent destruction of this great Beast, a double destruction.

1. Captivity.

2. Slaughter; and both amplified by the equity of both, the Lord rendering the
like vengeance unto this Beast, which has rendered unto the Saints: He that
leads into captivity shall go into captivity. And again, He that kills
with the sword (as this Beast had done by his War, some millions of Saints)
must be killed with the sword.

The second Consolation is a word of acknowledgment of the Patience, and Faith
of the Saints that have, or shall suffer from this Beast: Here is the patience
and the faith of the Saints; not only of the Saints acknowledged as Sufferers
in the time of the Pagan, Roman Empire, but even such as suffer under his
Holiness (as they call it) and that suffer under this Catholic visible
Church: These sufferings are here acknowledged for witness bearing, against
the Heresies, Idolatries, and Tyrannies of that State. The Lord does
acknowledge their Sufferings to be the patience and faith of the Saints: As he
did acknowledge it when the Saints were put to death in the ten Persecutions,
so likewise does he acknowledge these. And this is some part of the meaning of
the words: That which more concerns it may be further opened in handling the
notes that arise from them.

If any man have an ear to hear.]

That is, an intelligent, understanding ear: If any man be taught of God to
hear; if any man have learned of the Father to hear; if any man have a
spiritual understanding (for that is the meaning of it) let him hear what God
has said: For it was a great word he said, that all the Reprobates in
Christendom should worship this great Beast, and none of all the Saints of God
should do it. This none can hear, but those that have ears given them to
hear.

The note arising first from thence is this:

It is a point worthy of due and deep Attention and Consideration, Doct. 1.
and yet such as none but intelligent Christians (^aught of God) will or can
understand; That a Roman Catholic by his Religion cannot go beyond a
Reprobate: and that an elect child of God cannot live and dye a Roman
Catholic.

This is the sum and true meaning of the words: These two points were the sum
of the former verses which the holy Ghost had delivered with much evidence and
strength; and yet lest it should be slighted over by some careless Readers, he
does therefore set it on as he is wont to do the weightiest matters that
concern a State: If any man have an ear let him hear: If he have the ear of
a Christian, that discernes the voice of Christ the Shepherd of his soul, let
him hear it, and mind it well, worthy it is therefore of due and deep
attention, and he does never use the phrase but in matters of singular
importance; and it does imply, That every man has not an ear to hear, but
only those to whom God has given ears. What shall they hear? They shall
hear this, That none of all the devou^ Catholics have their names written in
the Lambs book of life, but their devout worship in the end will leave them in
no better estate then a reprobate state. If they go no further then their
Religion, it leads them to the worship of this Catholic Church, but never
leads them further then a reprobate condition: But for such, whose names are
written in the Lambs book, he excepts them from this generality of worship,
they are not of this number: It does expressly hold forth, That a sincere
hearted Christian, an elect Christian brought home to God, and brought to
fellowship with Christ, and the fruits of his Election are expressed in his
Justification, and Sanctification, he cannot live and dye a Roman Catholic. He
may for a time worship the Beast in his ignorance, and do as the rest of the
world do, and show no difference between himself and the rest of the world:
but when this electing love of God does shed it self abroad into his heart, it
does make him see the counsel of God more; and it does discover the delosions
of the man of Sin, that he cannot, nor dare not worship him: He sees that
God requires more to Salvation, then the subjection unto the injunctions of
this Beast of Rome. And this is the point which the Holy Ghost tells you as of
so great, and necessary, and due attention and censideration, which none but
understanding ears can or will understand, but all the world will run admiring
after the Beast.

The Lord did foresee that Doctrine would be thought a harsh, and peremptory,
and sensorious sentence, that mortal men, and they sometimes but an handful
too, should dare to bid defiance to the whole Catholic Church to look at them
as Reprobates: and to look at those whom they condemn for Heretics, as the
elect servants of God.

This the Holy Ghost did see would be accounted great arrogance, and almost
scurrility, and therefore the Holy Ghost does put it on with a watchword, Let
him that has an ear hear: And he puts it on with strength, that all
Christendom should worship the Beast, and yet none should worship him whose
names were written in the Lambs book of life.

It might be of singular use in some places, nor here of so much: Yet it being
a part of the counsel of God, I may not lightly pass it over, because we know
not what times may come, nor whether some of us may have occasion to travel,
it is meet therefore that Christians should know something of it, more briefly,
and plainly.

If you should desire any further testimony to confirm it, consider what the
Holy Ghost says, in Rev 11. 2. where he tells you of the Court that is without
the Temple: Measure it not (says he) for it is given to the Gentiles and to
the holy City, they shall tread under foot forty and two months. Where you
shall see that he speaks of the same persons, and of the same distance of time:
He would have a Temple of God measured, even in the darkest times of Popery:
But for the Court (alluding to the outward Court of Solomon's Temple where a^l
the people came in) do not measure that: Look at them ^ not capable of
measuring b^ the rule of the word of God, count them as given to the Gentiles:
And the holy City shall they tread under foot forty and two months, the same
time that here the Beast is to rule: Now Gentiles are accounted without Christ,
and without God in the world, Ephesians. 2. 12. He means Pagan Gentiles, nor
Christian Gentiles, for such are we. And in Rev. 11. 8. The dead bodies of the
witnesses, they shall lie in the street of the great City; and he does account
it spiritually Sodom and Egypt: Sodom for lewednesse, and beastly lusts: and
Egypt for barbarous and base idolatry, and oppression of Gods people; This is
the esteem the holy Ghost has of him.

And in Rev. 17. 5. He calls her a great whore, and the mother of harlots: And
the Text is plain, and holds forth this doctrine plainly, and the Holy Ghost
would have all the Churches of Christ to know it, That none do worship this
Roman Catholic Church (that is, are reconciled to it, and give up themselves
to the fidelity of it) that go beyond the state of a Reprobate: And all the
Churches of God cannot do thus, and therefore cannot live and dye Roman
Catholics.

Let me name you some popular reasons: I will not make any subtle discourse of
it, though it would require strong Judgment, and sinews of Reason: but take
popular Reasons, and yet such as will bear some wait.

The first is from their want of Christ Jesus, Reason 1.
in whom all our life and salvation is laid up. He that has not the Son,
has not life; it is a plain and peremptory principle of the Gospel, 1 John
5. 12. No Christ, no salvation. There is no other name under heaven given among
men, whereby we must be saved, Acts 4. 12. Now this Roman Catholic Church, and
they that worship the same, they have not Christ: How prove you that? For
Christ is not had, nor received, but by faith in the Gospel, in a free promise
of Grace unto the soul. As many as received him, to them gave he power, to
become the sons of God, even to them that bel^ive on his name, John 1* 12.
Christ dwells in our hearts by Faith, Ephesians. 3. 17. The faith therefore by which
we receive Christ whether have they that faith or no, let themselves be Judge?
They do profess that the Catholic Faith is no more but a persuasion of the
truth of all the doctrines of the Gospel, and of the whole word of God: but
for a particular application of Christ unto the soul, they do not acknowledge
it as that which is the means of receiving of Christ. So that the Faith which
they do in this case hold forth, is in very truth no other, but that which
James says of the faith of D^vils; they have received as much. James 2* 19.
Thou beleivest that there is one God, thou do wed, the Devils also believe
and tremble. A Roman Catholic beleives the whole doctrine of the world; He
does well; the Devils know as much, and believe as much as they do, yet no man
will say that the Devils faith receives Christ. Now where there is no Christ,
there is no salvation. Where there is no Faith, there is no Christ: And where
there is no Faith but that which the Devils may reach unto, there is no true
Faith at all.

It would be endless to run into all the objections that they make: but let
any that know Faith aright, judge whether the Faith of theirs is such a Faith
whereby a man can receive the Lord Jesus.

Secondly, Reason 2.
Without Grace there is no salvation. For says the Apostle, By Grace are ye
saved through Faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God. Not of
works, least any man should boast, Ephesians. 2. 8, 9. If therefore the Roman
Catholics say that they are saved by works, and they say so, if we take
works in the worst tenor of works, that is by the meri^ of works: The
Apostle says, Not of works, least any man should boast, and say, that he has
wrought his own salvation,: And the Apostle tells you, If it be of works, it is
not of Grace, Romans 11. 6. For works cannot be joined with grace in the merit of
salvation; they are only the way of salvation. And in that sense it is said,
Work out your salvation with fear and trembling: For it is God that works in
you both to will and to do, of his good pleasure, Phil. 2. 12, 13. But if a man
look for salvation out of the merit of works, he has it not from grace.
Papists reply, they have it from works and grace also; for they have it not
from works of nature, but from works of grace, and they are not opposite, but
subordinate. But what says the Apostle? He says, works and grace are not
subordinate, but opposite one to another: and if it be of grace, it is not of
works: and if of works, then not of grace. And the Apostle tells you, Gal. 5.
4. If ye be justified by the works of the Law, you are fallen from grace: you
have no part nor portion of the grace of Christ: And therefore they are fallen
from grace; and if from Grace, then from salvation.

These are principles of Religion; and he that has any understanding to hear
what the holy Ghost says in this case, may easily perceive the truth of what
we speak. In very truth you will find that all which they hold, is but in a
tenor of the Covenant of works. Their election they hold is from works and
faith foreseen: Some of them indeed are afraid of it, as the Dominicans; but
the most prevailing are those that think Gods electing love, is but out of
faith and works foreseen. They look as the grace of effectual calling to be
founded upon the good inclination of a man's will, and cooperation of it with
the grace of Gods calling. They profess that Simon Peter had no more grace
given him then Simon Magus to become a christian. And what cut the scantling
between the one, and the other? Peter had received so much grace, that if he
would, he might be saved; and so they say, Simon Magus did receive the same,
but God did not bow and change his will, or reason, but left them both so far
suffered, as they might believe if they would. How comes it then, that Simon
Peter did believe, and was saved? and Simon Magus did not believe (with a
lively faith) and was damned? They will confess it really (the body of them)
that it did spring from Peter's will; he did out of the freeness of his will
choose it. This is vocation from the working of a man's will: whereas the
Covenant of Grace does confess, that it is not of our will, but of the Lords,
that takes away our strong heart, and gives us a soft heart before any
preparation.

Justification they look for none, but by works: nor perseverance in a state of
grace but by their works: and everlasting salvation, from the merit of their
works: And this is the very doctrine of a Covenant of works. And this is all
the doctrine of the Arminians: only they do acknowledge justification by
faith, and differ in point of Faith, and the merit of works.

A third Reason may be this: Reason 3.
The worship of creatures is a going a whoring from God, and so of destruction
unto such as go a whoring from the Lord in that way. All worship of creatures
with divine worship is called going a whoring from God, Hos. 4. 12. They have
gone a whoring from under their God: so in Psalm. 73. 27. Thou have destroyed
all them that go a whoring from thee. And the Church of Rome is known to go a
whoring after the worship of Saints, and Angels, and I^ages, and thi^ great
Beast mentioned in the Text, and the Pope the head of it. They place their
salvation in beleiving as the Catholic Church beleives: They place their
salvation in reconcilement to the Catholic Church* and are more solicitous of
it, then of reconcilement unto God by Christ. Col. 2. 18, 19. You read of some
there that do not hold the head, but lay hold upon Angels, and that is
Idolatry: now that is spoken of the Church of Rome. For a fourth reason of the
point.

Without unfeigned repentance and lively faith there is no hope of salvation,
Reason 4.
Luke 13* 5. Except ye repent ye shall all likewise perish. And without faith
it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11. 6. Now the repentance which the Roman
Catholic Church holds forth, what is it but such as Judas did perform? They
require contrition: Judas he was deeply wounded and broken, Mat. 27. 3. And
they require confession: He came unto them before whom he had done evil, and
said, I have sinned in betraying innocent blood. And they require satisfaction:
He came and brought the money, and threw it into the Temple, and would by no
means meddle with it. Here is the repentance of the Church of Rome, and all
(for ought I know) that they require. I find no rule of repentance in this
Catholic Catechize, but I find it in Judas, which will end in despair (which
is the common end of an hypocritical repentance) as Stephen Gardner came unto
it: and so they will do, or else dye in Nabals stoninesse.

And for their faith: The faith of the Elect is described to be a confidence,
and evidence, Heb. 11. 1. So expound Heb. 3. 14. If we hold fast the
confidence, the word is all one with subsistence, it is such a confidence as
does give a being, and subsistence unto the thing believed: it does as truly
make them to be as if they were actually extent: But what say they to this?
They look at is as presumption, and an abomination: yea it will cost a man his
life to hold forth such a Faith. And for evidence, they do profess it to be
incompatible to a christian; and their Faith is some conjecture but no
certainty. Now gather up these things; If the Roman Catholics have no better
Faith, no better repentance then their Religion holds forth, if they receive
Christ no otherwise, and worship God no better, and have no more interest in
God then their Religion leads them to; let all the world look to it, for there
is none of all the elect of God can live and dye so.

But why is this a point of so serious and deep consideration and attention?
that is taken

First, Reason 1.
from the weight of the point, as most concerning our salvation.

Secondly, Reason 2.
it is a point that generally men are deaf to hear, and sl^w to understand, and
believe: And therefore he does cry out, and make a solemn proclamation; If any
man have an ear to hear, let him hear. Why are they so unable and unwilling to
understand? They look at it as a monstrous blasphemy, to speak thus of the
Roman visible Catholic Church.

Then the Reason why men are so slow of heart to believe it, and none believe
but them which are taught of God, is taken

First, Reason 1.
from the spirituallnesse of the things themselves. They are spiritual
matters, and cannot be discerned but by spiritual understanding, 1 Cor. 2. 14.
A natural man does not discern the spiritual mysteries of iniquity, nor the
spiritual mysteries of discerning Grace; nor can they, because they are
spiritually discerned.

The second Reason why none but faithful intelligent christians do understand
it, (...) taken

From Gods gift of Grace unto them to understand it. Reason 2.
To you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 13.
11. But being not given unto the world, the world does not understand it.

For the use of the point.

First it may serve to refute the damnable principle of the Use 1.
Roman Catholic Religion which is this: That for every Nation and Kingdom to
be reconciled to the Church of Rome i. is of necessity to salvation. Whoever he
be that has ears to hear let him hear says the holy Ghost, that to be
reconciled to the Catholic Church, and subject to that Church and the head
thereof, it is of necessity the way to damnation, if a soul so live and so dye.
For this purpose the Text is as plain as possible, Rev. 20. 15. Whoever is not
found written in the book of life is cast into the lake of fire. This Roman
Catholic Church has not his name written in that book of life, and therefore
of necessity, they must be cast into the lake of fire. Let all Noble men, and
Gentlemen hear this, that they may not listen unto the whisperings, and
croakings of the Locusts of the bottomless pit. Much God has borne with men
in their ignorance; but if ever men have belonged unto God, they have known the
way of a better faith and repentance, then ever Popish Religion have taught
them, and the holy Ghost has helped them in their private prayers, and
reading, or in conference with others, to understand the same.

Obj. 1. You will say unto me, but this is a very uncharitable censure.

Answ. Whether do you think it more charity to forewarn men of a desperate
danger, or to be indulgent to men, and to tell them they may be saved in both
Religions, when the word of God is plain against it? What charity count you
that to gull men in a charitable, but a foolish conceit of their own good
estate? It is cruel charity, and most uncharitable, when the Holy Ghost does
profess^* Their names are not written in the Lambs book of life, whosoever
worship the Beast.

Obj. 2. But you will say, Are not all the Catholics in the world persuaded of
it, that the devotion to the Catholic Roman Church is a way of salvation?
Catholics are confident of it, and you Protestants dare not deny it: And then
I pray you whether is it not safer to be devoted to that Church, wherein all
confess there is a possibility of salvation, then unto that Church in which
one say there is salvation, the other not?

Answ. We answer: So far as there is any charity, it is in God, but God has
no such charity: And if any Protestants be so charitable, they are more
charitable then the word of God allows them: If they say that a man may live
and dye in that Religion, and be saved; The holy Ghost does profess the
contrary, and would have all the world to know and believe it.

Therefore let no man build upon the policy of State Protestants. Let God be
true, and every man be a liar. If that the voice of the Lord speak, let it be
heard, and let the voice of John be heard, That if any man be devoted to that
Church, he cannot live and dye a child of God.

Obj. 3. But what an opinion is this, to cast away our forefathers, that kept
such good houses, and such good Christmasses, and Festivalls, and double
Festivalls, to damn them all to hell: Is it not a cruel, and barbarous
opinion?

Answ. I answer, for our Forefathers, their souls are in Gods hand: They
lived in those times; but how far they were devoted unto the Catholic
Religion, we know not: This we know, that there was a Temple of God; a company
of Gods people in the darkest times of Popery that did see their vanity, and
did bear witness against them, otherwise we must not out of natural
affections destroy divine Revelation. A man must in this case forsake father
and mother, Luke 14. 26. I speak of it the more, because I know not whether
some of you may have occasion to travel where you shall find some that will
tell you a quite contrary tail to these that you have now heard out of the
word of God.

For a second Use.

It may serve to teach us the darkness of our hearts, Use 2.
which is in us generally to believe this: and indeed the impossibility that
any natural man should hear it, that is to say, so to hear it as to believe
it.

He that has an ear to hear let him hear; That is, let him know and
understand it: And this does argue evidently, that all that have not hearing
ears do not believe this, else would they see the truth of these things. And
let this take away all admiration from poor Christians, who do often admire;
why do not such great Doctors and Bishops believe these things, and see them as
well as some poor despicable Puritans? and why does not the Catholic Church
see it? The reason is plain why they do not see it, they want ears to hear,
and how should they hear it? Now the Text tells you, They that worship the
idols are like unto them, Psalm. 115. 6, 7, 8. They have mouths, but they
speak not: Eyes have they, but they see not. They have ears but they hear
not, etc They that make them are like unto them, so is every one that trusts
in them.

If they that worship the Beast be like unto the Beast, then it is not great
Learning in the Tongues that can give men ears to hear. And let not any man
be offended, if so be they see the world of another opinion, if they be but
natural men; the natural man receives not these spiritual mysteries, 1 Cor.
2. 14.

Thirdly, Use 3.
how much will it lie upon the people of God, what a weight will it lay upon us
all (whether in Church Fellowship, or out of Church Fellowship) to bless God
who has delivered us from the fellowship of this Religion: And to be
everlastingly thankful, that our next Fathers (though not our Grandfathers)
have been separated from the worship of the Church of Rome? And how are we
bound to stand for ever steadfast from communion with them, what ever pretenses
are put upon us? Be not deceived, you forsake your own salvation if you
hearken to their whisperings. If you think your souls precious, then know it,
you cannot be reconciled unto Rome, but your names are blotted out of the Lambs
book of life.

Verse. 10. He that leads into captivity, shall go into captivity: he that
kills with the sword must be killed with the sword.
The next note is this.

THat as the Roman Catholic Church have led the Churches and people of God
into captivity, Doctrine 2.
and have slaughtered many of them with persecution, and war: So that state
at length shall go into captivity, and finally be destroyed with war and
slaughter.

You heard before, she made war with the Saints, and overcame them, and
slaughtered many thousands of them, and showed no mercy neither to man, woman,
nor child: No more will the Lord show compassion upon her. In Psalm. 137. 8, 9.
O daughter of Babylon who art to be destroyed! Happy shall he be that rewards
thee, as thou have served us. Happy shall he be that takes and dasheth thy
little ones against the stones. It was spoken of old Babylon in Caldea, and is
verified also in this Babylon. Happy shall he be that rewards her as she has
served us: and that takes her young children and dasheth them against the
stones. Rev. 17. 11. The beast that was, and is not, shall go into perdition.
And verse. 16. They shall hate the whore, and make her desolate and naked, and
shall eat her flesh, and shall burn her with fire. They shall drink of war
and slaughter.

Obj. But how is it said, that Christ shall consume him with the breath of his
mouth there? 2 These. 2. 8.

Answ. I answer, these things are subordinate, but not opposite, for ever since
Luther they have been wasting: But after his coming in the brightness of the
Gospel, men shall be clearly convinced, that this is the great whore and Beast
that destroys all the world: The Lord will then mightily discover her unto
Princes, that have been darkened, and veiled in their judgments about her, they
shall see the state of her, and grow to hate her with utter detestation.

The reason is from the wisdom and equity of Gods justice, Reason.
expressly mentioned in the Text: For, he that leads into captivity, must go
into captivity; he that kills with the sword, must be killed with the sword.
What measure a man meets, it shall be measured to him again, Mat. 7. 2. Who so
sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, Genesis 9. 6. Woe to thee
that spoilest, and thou wast not spoiled, and dealest treacherously, and they
dealt not treacherously with thee: when thou shall cease to spoil, thou shall
be spoiled: and when thou shall make an end to deal treacherously, they shall
deal treacherously with thee, Isa. 33. 1. All that take the sword, shall
perish with the sword, Mat. 26. 52. Meaning in an unlawful way, and for
unlawful ends.

The use is, Use 1.
first of terror to all Roman Catholics; what ever their devotion may be, let
them know, and understand, the issue of it will be utter desolation, and blood
and slaughter will be their portion one day: And when Gods appointed is come,
it will be measured unto them, as they have measured unto the Church of God.

Secondly, Use 2.
It may be a great comfort unto the Churches and Saints of Christ, that have
been overcome, or have suffered any hard-ship from any of these. Those that
have been troublesome to Gods Churches and people, the Lord will one day visit
them all, and he will one day root them out of the land of the living. They
shall one day know what pillars and scourges, and fire and faggot means, what
torments mean, what bloody inquisitions mean: They shall be recompensed
sevenfold into their bosoms.

Here is the patience and faith of the Saints.

The third note is this.

The Lord does as much acknowledge and accept the patience and faith of his
Saints that have suffered under the Roman Catholic Church, Doct. 3.
as he did the faith and patience of the Primitive Saints, that suffered under
the Roman Pagan Emperors, against Heathenish idolatry.

The Papists themselves are full of acknowledgment of the Primitive Martyrs,
and will write many Legends of them; as the Pharisees, they did build the
Sepulchers of the Prophets, and yet killed their Successors: Fulfill (says
Christ) the measure of your fathers: You garnish the sepulchers of the dead
bodies, and yet you kill their Successors. They will acknowledge them the
Primitive Martyrs; but what are those that suffered in Switzerland, in France,
in England, in Germany? They look at those as Lolards, and Heretics: But what
says the Lord of them? Even of them as well as of those that suffered in
former times; the Lord does accept their sufferings, and says of them, Here is
the patience and faith of the Saints. Wherein the Lord does acknowledge the
faith by which they overcome this Beast, and patience, to be the patience and
faith of the Saints. The world says otherwise: but the Lord says of those
that suffered under this Beast, Here is the patience and faith of the Saints.
So in Rev. 12. 13. Here is the patience of the Saints: Write, blessed are the
dead which dye in the Lord from henceforth, as well as in ancient times:
Blessed are they that dye in the faith of Christ Jesus, in the hottest and
highest times of Popery.

The Reason is evident,

First, Reason 1.
because the faith of such Christians, and their patience, was the faith and
patience of Christ: That is to say, that which both fastened upon Christ, and
bore witnsse unto Christ, and suffered patiently for Christ as did the
Primitive Christians in the ten Persecutions: And it was such a faith, as by
which they overcame the world, 1 John 5. 4. It was faith in Christ Jesus, even
that faith by which they chose rather to suffer affliction with the people of
God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, Heb. 11. 24, 25. It was
that faith by which they despised honor. Even the same case of Christ in Moses
hand, and in their hands, and the point is of like nature: Roman Idolatry is
but another Edition, and their Errors are as fundamental subvertions to that
which should be the faith of Gods elect: And their Government is directly
contrary unto the Gospel-government of Christ Jesus as light is to darkness.
When their faith in the cause of Christ do carry them along in suffering for
him, it is then the patience of Christ. It was the like faith and patience of
Christ to suffer under Annas and Caiaphas, as under Herod. It is true, in the
one he suffered as an enemy to Caesar, in the other as a blasphemer, but the
case is all one. No matter what the persons (...) Christian in profession; I^
the cause be the (...) of Christ, it is the patience and faith of Christ which
is in his (...) whomsoever they suffer.

(...) Reason is from the greater exercise of says and (...) to discern,
Reason 2.
and suffer under Christians, against Christians, (...) Pagans (...) Heathen
persecutors.

For the use of the point.

First, Use 1.
it cries down all the scandalous sentences that Courts have given against the
Saints of God; they say here are the suffering of Lolards and Heretics: Jesus
Christ from heaven says, Here is the faith and patience of the Saints. Do not
therefore count it obstinacy, and contumacy in heresy, nor pravity: It is the
faith and patience of the Saints; if Christ calls it so, his word must carry
it. When they shall all appear before his Judgment-seate, whose word shall
stand then, his or theirs? He will say, here is the cruelty and outrage of the
persecution of Antichrist that puts the Lambs of Christ to death.

Secondly, Use 2.
It may serve to teach us, how much the Lord delights to honor his patient and
faithful servants: He writes upon their Toomb-stones as it were, so many
Saints, or faithful Martyrs of Christ, are those who have thus suffered: This
does the Lord Jesus Christ write upon their stakes where they are burned (in
Smithfield or elsewhere) and upon the chains wherewith they are bound.

A great encouragement it is unto Christians to be constant in the profession
of the Gospel, and to contend earnestly for the faith once given to the Saints.
We must not therefore be afraid to stand fast in the profession of the Truth,
and to hold it to the death: If we should dye in his Cause in a way of
persecution to be slaughtered by the outrage of ungodly men; what ever the
world say of it, the Lord will from heaven bear this witness to it, That it
is the patience and faith of the Saints.

Thirdly, Use 3.
it must teach all who would suffer for the name of Christ to be well assured
of their cause, and then to add constancy to their suffering in their cause.
Otherwise, unless it be the cause of Christ, it is no patience, but obstinacy,
blindness, and ignorance: But see that your cause be the cause of Christ, and
then cleave unto it by the invincible ^aith of Gods elect, to overcome the
world, and look Lions and Dragons in the fac^, without fear and astonishment;
and look at punishment and tortour, as not worthy of the glory that shall be
revealed: It looks at them as things that Christ has endured greater, and
other of the Saints of God have gone before u^ in the like, or a greater
martyrdom.

Therefore, first, look to the cause, and then believe in the truth of the
cause, and the faithfulness of Christ that will maintain his servants stable
and firm, and cause them to hold out unto the end. But do not take up your
reformation upon custom, nor side with any thing for custom of the country
where you are, because your Magistrates and Elders do commend it to you; for it
behooves every christian man to know well, what he beleives, and practice, and
to know the doctrine of Christ, and the Government and the worship of Christ;
and that not because men say so, but because you see light for it from the word
of the Son of God.

Then your next care is, to look that you depend upon Christ for strength, that
as he suffered for you, you may be able to suffer for him; there is the faith of
Gods children: And for patience (I pray consider it) I do not enter into a
common place of faith, and patience; but let me say thus much of it, Patience
is a virtue, mortifying and moderating greifs, and fears, or afflictions, and
subduing our wills to the will of God, not only in contentment, but comfort. My
brethren (says James) count it all joy when you fall into diverse temptations,
James 1. 2. That whereas other men, or our selves in time of prosperity, when
as God applies his will to our wills, are joyful (and this is no great matter.)
This is the joy of Gods people when God shall apply our wills unto his. As
Christ did comforme his will unto his Fathers will, and say, O my God, I
delight to do thy will: It is written in thy book* I came to do thy will, Psalm.
40. 8. This indeed does make us complete christians.

A man is a happy man that has his will and Gods will together in all that his
heart does desire: If God would have me suffer, then certain it is best it
should be (...). And (...) should christians come armed with faith and
patience, and with wills subdued to the will of the most high; not only to be
contented, but comfortable in suffering all things for Christ: And let your
faith fasten upon it, and let your patience moderate your greifs, and make your
hearts comfortable also, and this is that which God delights in; Here is the
patience and faith of the Saints.

And so I will end with that speech of the Apostle; My brethren, be ye
followers of them, who through faith and patience inherit the promises, Heb. 6.
12. Both by faith of well doing, and of suffering evil by faith and patience.
Ye have need of patience, that after ye have done the will of God, ye might
receive the promise, Heb. 10. 36. You have need of patience, that ye may be
faithful: and you have need of faith, that you may be patient: When a man is
confident in Christ above all creatures, this works patience. So we shall
follow the steps of our blessed Ancestors; we shall still go on in maintayning
the same faith, and worship, and Government, wherein our Fathers were taught of
God to walk, and whereby they did inherit promises both in life and death.

Rev. 13. 11. to the end of the 17. And I beheld another beast coming up out of
the earth, and he had horns like a Lamb, and he spoke as a Dragon, etc.
We come now to the description of the second Beast; I beheld another Beast,
etc. I do not love to be large in those Scriptures that do not so narrowly
concern us, as knowing how far, and what a vast distance by the grace of God
we stand in here from them: but yet because it is a part of Gods counsel, and
somewhat largely described, give me leave to declare the meaning of the words,
and gather such notes from them as they hold forth.

Observe then, here is a description from the 11th. verse to the end of the
Chapter, of the second Beast; I saw another Beast. The Original sets him forth
by his nature; they that know the language, knows it signifies only a wild
beast, and in proper speech it signifies such a wild beast as was venomous;
and therefore the remedy for the venom of this beast, they call it Therion, a
proper preservative against venom or poison.

This beast is described by four arguments.

1. By his original; He comes out of the earth.

2. By his similitude (or resemblance) in three things.

First, to a Lamb in his horns; He has two horns like a Lamb.

Secondly, he is resembled to a Dragon in his speech; He spoke like a Dragon.

Thirdly, he is resembled to the former beast in the exercising of his power;
He exercises all the power of the first beast.

3. This beast is described by the particular exercises (...) power, or the
effects of his power which are these:

1. He causes the earth and them that dwell therein to worship the first
beast, whose deadly wound was healed; he procures adoration to the first Beast.

2. He does great wonders, making fire come down from heaven in the sight of
men, verse. 13.

3. He deceives them that dwell on the earth by the means of those miracles.

4. He does prevail with them that are on earth to make an Image to the Beast,
which had the wound by the sword, and did live, verse. 14.

5. He does animate and give life to this image of the Beast, that this image
of the Beast should have both power to speak, and to cause as many as would not
worship the image of the Beast to be killed.

A sixth effect is, he causes all sorts of men, rich and poor, free and bond,
to receive a mark in their hand, etc. or at least his name, or the number of
his name, or otherwise he excludes them not only from spiritual, but civil
commerce, verse. 16, 17.

For the Notes that these words afford, I will handle them all in two: They
will not need much enlargement, the Explication and Application of them will
reach the meaning, and scope of the words. Remember what the first Beast was,
and then you will more easily know what this Beast must be. You know this first
Beast being described to have seven heads, and ten horns, was taken by all for
the Roman Empire; and this being not that, but another that comes in his room
after him: Is is evident then that this Beast must either be the Roman-Heathen
Empire, or the Roman-Christian Empire, or the Roman Catholic visible Church;
one of these three Roman States it must be.

Not the first, for this rose after that was cast down; after the Dragon was
cast out of Heaven, and had no more to rule that State. Also you heard in Chap.
12. that Beast had ten crowns on the heads; this has not Crowns on the heads,
but on the horns; the Princes and heads of that State were crowned: This does
not wear the temporal Crown, but those Princes that mayntaine him, they wear
the Crowns.

Again, that Beast, Pagan Rome, did not begin his time of prosperity, and
flourishing, with the woman's flight into the wilderness, and the two witnesses
prophesying in sackcloath, a thousand two hundred and sixty days; for their
government ended, when the Christian State began, and therefore it could not be
Pagan-heathen Rome; Nor could it be the Christian Imperial Roman State: For

1. It is said in the second verse. That the Dragon gave him his power, and his
seat, and great authority; but that he did not to the Christian Emperors, for
they would not live at Rome, but at Constantinople.

2. It was never made a sign of reprobation to worship the Roman Christian
Emperors, but it is made a sign of reprobation to worship this Beast.

It remayns therefore, that this Beast described in the former pare of the
Chapter, is the third Roman State; which being not Rome-Pagan, nor
Rome-Christian, it must needs be the Roman Papal State, under the government
of the Pope, and that is no other but the Roman Catholic visible Church, to
which all the description you have heard opened does naturally belong.

Now that being the first beast, what is this second beast? This is apparently
distinct from it; and it is not so proper to say, that the first beast was the
Pope, as he had sovereign authority in Temporalls; and that he is the second
Beast as he has supreme power in Spiritualls, for he had his Temporal power
l^st: and therefore that would not agree to the P^p^ll State; he first had
supreme power in Spirituals, before he had supreme power in Temporals. Now the
beast here being not the Roman Catholic Church, what is it then? It is the
head of that Church; and what is that? It is no other but the Pope of Rome; The
heads of the Roman Catholic visible Church, from one succession to another,
they are this second be^st; and that will appear in a double note, which will
both clear that, and the rest of the Text.

First then, take this note;

That the Bishop or Pope of Rome is in the sight of God, Doctrine 1.
and of his Saints, no better then a wild beast, for his Original, arising
out of the earth; for his resemblance, like to a Lamb in his borns; like to a
Dragon in his speech; like to the whole Roman Catholic Church in his power.

This is the former part of the description by his Adjunct, by his Similitude,
and by his Original: However he seems to Catholics a holy Father, and a god
on earth; yet in the sight of God, and of his Saints, he is no better the^ a
wild Beast, whose offspring is from the earth; who though he have horns like
a Lamb, yet speaks like a Dragon, and thus John guided by the holy Ghost, saw
him. Let me shortly open these points.

1. He is here described to be a wild beast*] The word so signifies; that is
to say, not so tame a beast as those in Isa* 11, 6. to 9. that a child may lead
them: Wolves, or Leopards, or Lions that can sleep with Kids, and Calves, and
little children, and they may play on the hole of the Aspe, and put their hand
on the Cockatrice den: He is not so tame, that he can be tamed by the word of
Truth, or by the censures of the Church, no nor by the power of Princes; he is
above them all, and beyond them all; a wild beast he is therefore.

For his Original, He arises out of the earth.] That implies, he has it not
from Heaven, but from below; not from Christ, but from Satan; You are from
beneath (says Christ) I am from above, John 8. 23. He springs from the earth,
especially from earthly and carnal policy; that for keeping of good agreement
in the Churches, they must be folded up into certain Metropolitans or
Patriarchs; and to keep unity, you must have one over them all, and that was
the Bishop of Rome, for all unity they say springs from ^nits; if you have more
then one Governor, you will have no peace: Now this being a carnal principle,
some carnal reason being the ground for the preservation of the Church of
Rome; for that the Emperors thought, if the Bishop of Rome were advanced, it
would be a means to strengthen them against the barbarous Nations that come
against them; this carnal reason brought him to be exalted: And though his
Original was earthly for the cause, yet he ascended above the earth to
Ecclesiastical power. And

2. He arose out of the Earth, because he rose up insensibly by degrees, he
makes no great noise; As any thing that comes out of the earth, it makes no
great noise in its growing, but at length comes to a vast height: So it was
with the Bishop of Rome, this is his descent out of the Earth.

For his resemblance, He has horns like a Lamb.]

Horns express his power: Like a Lamb; that is, like the Lamb of God.
Church Power he claims directly, no other at least for a long time; The power
of binding and loosing were his two horns, to bind all, and loose all, and that
lay in the closet of his own breast when to put it forth; this is but the power
of the Lamb.

But he spoke like a Dragon.]

You have two or three several speeches of the Dragon. In Rev. 12. 9. The old
Serpent is called the Dragon: What did he speak?

1. Venomous words to our first Parents; You shall not dye at all, Genesis 3. 4.
And so the Pope he draws the hearts of men from conscience of the word.

2. The speech of the Dragon, it is imperious and arrogant: All the kingdoms
of the earth will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me, Luke 4.
6, 7.

And that is the speech of the Pope in Jer. 1. 10. I have set the^ this day
over the Nations, and over the kingdoms, to root out, and to pull down, and
to destroy, and to throw down, and to build, and to plant: And the Pope sends
a Crown with this inscription to Frederick the Emperor; Christ gave this power
to Peter, and Peter gave it to the Pope, this is Imperial State. And

3. The Dragon has a devouring and ravenous mouth, whereby he speaks ^avenous
words: Whoever will not worship the Image that I have set up, shall be cast
into a hot fiery furnace, and who is that God that is able to deliver you? Dan.
3. 15. And you have heard what worship the Pope claymes, and what he threatens
if it be neglected. Thus you see in Gods account, and in the sight of John, the
Pope is a wild Beast: and the holy Ghost as he insp^red John, he directs him
what to say; The holy Apostle he stood upon the sand of the Sea, and few two
beasts; one arisi^g out of the Sea of corruption in doctrine, etc. And another
out of the earth, out of earthly pretenses; He sees no holiness in this Beast,
nothing but beastly cruelty, and beastly blasphemy, nothing but argues a wild
beast that will not be tamed, neither by the Church of God, nor by the word of
God, nor by Princes and States: He sees him rising out of ^^ire pretenses,
pretending nothing but Lamb-like power; but ^ee speaks like a Dragon, venomous
and devou^ing words: Damnable heresies, as being spewed out of the Dragons
mouth, such a volume of false worship, and doctrine, and government, as
destroys the faith of the Church, and subverts the foundation of the Church:
This is the very state of the Pope as John beheld it, as he was wrapped up in a
vision by the Spirit, and he judged of it as he saw it.

Now because I cannot so well make use of this, before I have spoken of the
rest, because they are co-incident, take this for a second Note, and so make
use of both together. The note is long, but it is but the collection of the sum
of these verses, the words of the Text will bring the Doctrine easily to
remembrance; This then is the note.

The Bishop of Rome exercises all the Authority of the first Beast, Doct. 2.
that is, of the Roman visible Catholic Church, he causes all that dwell on
the Earth to worship that Church, he does work wonders, even to the fetching
of fire from Heaven, and by his wonders procures all christian States to make
an Image to the first Beast, and gives such life and power to the Image of the
Beast that it is able to speak, and it shall cause such as do not worship it to
be put to death, and finally he leaves an impression, or imprints a character
upon all sorts of christians, and will suffer none to enjoy spiritual or
civil communion with them, unless such as will receive either his mark, or
his name, or the number of his name.

I put them into a doctrinall frame, because they are the sum of the words of
the Text. Let me briefly open them all.

First, He does exercise all the Authority of the first Beast. Let all that are
acquainted either with the writings of the Romanists, or of our Divines that
bear witness against Rome, be testimonies in this case; what is there that the
Catholic Church claims, but the Pope can do it all: There are six or seven
trascendant ^cts of power, which that Church claymes, and the Pope familiarly
exercises them all.

1. The Pope has power to convent general Councels; or if the Emperors will
call a general Council, it shall not stand in ^o^ce unless the Catholic
Church and the Bishops meet in a representative Synod, it concludes with their
determination; this he pleads for to this day, it belongs not to the Emperors,
nor to Christian Princes, but to the Bishop of Rome: It is one of Bellarmines
affirmations, that one Church shall have power to call all Churches, be it to
Florence, or Basseil, thither they must go whether he will.

2. As the Catholic Roman Church did usurp power to make Laws and Canons to
bind all Churches; So the Pope does challenge the same power to make Laws to
bind all Churches; he pleads for it, and will not be content without it.

3. Look as the Catholic visible Roman Church does claim Authority of
ratifying Scriptures; if they put in the Apocrypha, it shall be good Scripture;
and if the Church do not approve the Gospel of Matthew in Greek, but in Hebrew,
it shall be that; or if they refuse both them, and take the vulgar Latin, that
shall stand: This power the Catholic Church challenges power to do, and the
same does the Pope.

4. If the Roman Catholic visible Church challenge a power of interpreting
Scripture, and judging of controversies with infalibility of judgment: The
Pope challenges that to himself when he interprets Scripture, or decides
controversies about Religion, he cannot err, and so they make account he is a
fit Judge therein.

5. Look as you see the Roman Catholic visible Church had power of binding and
loosing, challenges all appleal^ and great things they will do by that
priveledge, excommunicate some of many Churches that are absent, some they
excommunicate for seven years, some to their death, that the shall not be
reconciled: All this the Pope challenges in a larger measure then the old
Roman visible Church did challenge. This the Roman Bishop challenges to bind
conscience, to loose oaths and covenants between Prince and people, between
man and wife, to loose vows, and oaths, and natural relations, between parents
and children, if they will shroud themselves in a Monastery, and will dispense
against the Apostle Paul in case of incest: this is such a power to loose the
bonds of Gods commandments, and Gods oaths, and relations to God and his
servants, it is such Transcendant power, the Roman visible Catholic Church
never challenged greater.

6. The Roman visible Catholic Church never challenged so great power till it
was animated and acknowledged by the Pope, to take upon them to set up one
King, and to take down another; King John in England, Frederick the first, and
Frederick the second, Henery the fourth, and Henery the fifth; he crowns and
discrowns whom he will, and this out of the plentitude of his power.

And lastly, he does challenge this beyond the Church it self, Immunity, and
Impunity from all Civil and Ecclesiastical power, and judicature. The Church
is above all j^dicial power, and the Pope the head of it is above it, and
therefore may not be brought into order by any censure of any Church, nor by
the civil sword: And therefore he (...) well called one that exercises all the
power of the first Beast, and rather puts more power to it; whatever the
Catholic Church may do, that he can do; where they can dispense and make Laws,
where they can bind or loose, etc. So far as they may go, he can go, and he
does all in the name, and sight of the Church.

And he causes all that dwell on the Earth.] That is, carnal christians, whose
conversation is not in Heaven.

To worship the first Beast.] How to worship? He speaks of divine worship not
civil adoration: This is an aberation from a Church; but a beastly Church, it
is a monster; The Church of the first institution was of one particular
congregation; and for all the Churches of the world to be subject to one
Cathedral, it is far beyond all comprehension of rule: Now he causes all that
dwell on the Earth to worship that Beast. Wherein are they to worship him?

1. It is made a matter of necessity to salvation to be reconciled to that
Church; and more care is had of being reconciled to that Church, then of being
reconciled to God in Christ: All pleas of being reconciled to Christ will not
stand in their judgment, unless you be reconciled to them.

2. Except you be bound in conscience to that state, he will allow you no
communion; he will have all the decrees of the Church as binding the conscience.

3. This is divine worship, you shall take no doctrine but that is of his
stamp, nor worship, nor Government but of his acknowledgment, nor no
dispensation of them but according to his Canons: And all that dwell on the
Earth must worship him, all run upon the Beast; the Pope does not so much
challenge it to himself as to the Church, and that which is given to the
Church he takes to himself.

Thirdly, He does great wonders, so that he makes fire come from Heaven on the
Earth in the sight of men: And it is said, Antichrist shall come in all power
of signs and lying wonders, 2 These. 2. 8, 9. Their Legions are full of these
wonders: And in particular, for this point, of causing fire to come down from
Heaven: It is an allusion sure to the fire that the old Prophet fetched from
Heaven: As Eliah fetched fire from Heaven to consume the sacrifice, 1 Kings 18.
38, 39. And that was a fire that expressed Gods gracious acceptance, that made
all the people cry, the Lord he is God: But this the Pope did not fetch sure,
he never fetched any acceptance from Heaven. But you read of another fire
fetched from Heaven by Eliah, and that was, to destroy those that mocked him, 2
Kings 1. 10. 12. Which practice when James and John would have followed in Luke
9. 54, 55, 56. You shall read, that they being offended with the Samaritans
because they would not receive them; Master say they, shall we call for fire
from Heaven to consume them as Eliah did? Our Savior utterly rejects that; You
know not, says he, of what spirit ye are: Now mind you, that fetching fire
from Heaven, which is to destroy men's lives, and not save them, that James and
John are taught to refus^, as being incompatible to the Gospel: But that which
they refuse, the Successor of Peter, as they call him, takes up; if any
Scribe, or Pharisee, or Samaritan refuse him, then fire comes down from Heaven,
consuming fire, and vengance, and wrath, and bloodshed, and extremity of
outraged evils he causes to come down upon them; and in pretense from Heaven,
to destroy the Church and people of God, that I take to be the chief part of
the meaning of that. But if any man will urge the letters of the Text (which
you need not in mystical Scriptures) yet it is not without truth therein.

Gregory the seventh he declares this, that he had strange power, when he had
much people about him, he would have shaked the sleeve of his gound, and caused
fire to come down; Now it is evident it might be, for he was a Conjurer, and
22. Popes together (as their own stories do record) they were wi^ches, and gave
their souls to the Devil, that they might obtain the Popedom, but they were
but lying wonders; for miracles require divine power, but the Devil cannot go
beyond the power of nature; so that you may take it in the proper meaning;
their own men do much magnify it, and make it one of the marks of their
Church, whereas Protestants that want miracles are not Churches: So that those
censures by which they thundered against christian Emperors, they did follow
with such success, that they made all wonder, that none could stand against
them, not Henery the fourth, nor Henery the fifth, not Leo the Emperor, nor
the King of France, none of them all were able to take up arms against him;
they did all admire him; Who is able to stand against him, end to make War
with him? And that gave such free passage to his Laws, that all christian
States presently took up what injunctions he put upon them.

Fourthly, by these miracles, and the mighty success of them, he had power to
cause them that dwell on the earth to make an Image to the Beast, that had the
deadly wound, and was healed; that is, the Roman Catholic visible Church: What
is this Image of the Beast? he causes all the earth, that is, all earthly
States to receive it; he will suffer none to be without it: what is this Image?
an Image not of their own making, they must make an Image by his appointment:
It is an Image of the first beast, not of the second directly, and consequently
the officers of that Beast must represent this second Beast, but be an Image of
the first: if the first Beast was the Roman Catholic visible Church; then if
he causes all the Earth to make an Image to that Beast, then he causes all
Churches and Commonwealths, to frame their State and platform, according to
the Image of the Roman Catholic visible Church, and therefore he causes all
Christian Princes to erect all their Churches in a Roman Catholic way: what is
that? Metropolitan, National, Provnciall, Diocesan, Cathedral, and Provincial
Churches; These are all lively characters of the Roman Catholic Church,
reserving still pre-emenency to their mother Catholic Church of Rome; but
otherwise they are the lively Image of such a Church, even as daughters are of
their mothers: and being overcome with the power of his miracles, and deceits,
and delusions (as you heard) by the Policy of Canonists, by carnal Policy, and
by their Votaries, and by working miracles, signs, and lying wonders; it is a
wonder to see what power he had, that all the power of the Popedom, and of the
Catholic Church was in a model and representation drawn in all Churches in
Christendom during the time of 42. months, which is 1260. years, and then a
great part of his Image was marred in a great part of Christendom, but yet he
still continues; so then there is a lively Image of the Roman Catholic Church,
though it may be, some are drawn from subjection thereunto; and yet though they
be drawn off from subjection to it, yet still the Image, and representation is
written in the very foreheads of such Churches; that is a fourth thing.

Fifthly, He had power to give life to the Image of the Beast; what life? that
it should both speak, and cause, That as many as would not worship the Image of
the Beast should be killed: How does he put this life into the Image of this
Beast to speak? It is, to speak with authorty, as in verse 5. A mouth speaking
great things; He would speak, and speak with authority; that now these
Diocesan, Metropolitan, and Provincial Churches, they can speak with
authority, as the Roman Catholic Church does, and their words must take place,
and he puts that life into it by his own canons and laws which they take up;
the canons and laws made by the Church of Rome, do so animate Provincial, and
Diocesan Churches, that they speak the same language, not altogether so
corrupt, but with like authority, and require like subjection of all persons;
and by your leave, they grow to it for very conscience sake; that those things
which were indifferent before, yet being laws of the Church, now they must
bind conscience; this is to speak great things. Now they have power likewise
to cause as many as will not worship the Image of the Beast, they shall be
killed; a sign none of them took that power like the beast; but yet though
they have not power to kill them, yet to deliver them to the Secular power, and
they must kill them ^ whatever the Diocesan Church does agree on against her
Heretics, that will not obey the Government or doctrine of the Church; what
then? The deliver him to the Secular power, then they cause him to be put to
death, and they deliver him to fire and faggot, so you see the mighty power of
this Beast.

There is one thing remaining of his power, and that is the sixth and last
effect, He causes all, both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to
receive a mark in their right hand, or in their foreheads: Kings, and Princes,
Ministers and Clergy men (as they call them) high and low, whatever they be, he
causes them all to receive a character, or mark, either in their right hand,
or in their foreheads.

A mark in the hand; that character themselves call an indelible character,
and they receive that who receive any orders from the Pope, and are reconciled
to the Roman Catholic visible Church; This Beast causes all to receive a
mark, that is, they shall swear fidelity, and loyalty to the Roman Catholic
visible Church, this they make indelible; wherever they come, they are Priests
for ever after the order of Melchesidech.

Or on their foreheads; they have a mark answerable to their name; their name,
what is that but Roman Catholics? or else there is no fellowship with them;
and all must at length have that name, and go under the number of that name,
Roman Catholics; there is the number of that name: but I leave that to the
next time (as being too large to enter into at present.) In the mean time, you
see these things thus opened, touching the nature and character of this second
Beast.

Now to make some use of all.

First, Use 1.
it may be an evident conviction, and demonstration, and designation of this
Beast who it is: Is has been much disputed, but all the parts of this
description does directly fall upon the Bishop of Rome; that if John had lived
in these days, he would have seen all this with his eyes, which he saw in a
vision: No man can tell where to bestow all this description for 1260. years,
but upon the Bishop of Rome, that is of such a wild nature, that no Church, no
law of God, no society of men, no Kings, nor Princes can rule; and all the
world that knows this Beast, knows this to be true of the Pope, whose Original
(all Christians know) springs from the Earth, to keep men in unity, and to
preserve the Empire from inundations of Barbarians, to keep Christian Princes
closer together, and in better order, all carnal policy out of which he
springs, yet incensibly, and slowly, that he is not discerned for many years
together.

And he has horns like a Lamb, that he pretends nothing but (Saint Peter as
they call it) the Keys of the kingdom of Heaven; But he speaks like a Dragon,
as if he had the Keys of the bottomless pit; he thunders such sentences, gives
dispensations both against the laws of Paul and Moses, to dissolve oaths, and
covenants, and relations, they shall marry whom they will, their own sisters:
he will venom with such noisome doctrine, as the breath of them will stink: he
will speak so terrible, that time was, when Princes were to tremble; he has
spoken as a Dragon: The Devil himself as he ruled the Roman Pagan Empire, has
not spoken greater words then he: Those that spoke, Whoever will not worship an
Image set up, shall be cast in a fiery furnace, it is not a greater word then
he speaks.

Secondly, V;se 2.
this does justly reprove all the Popish admiring and adoring of the man of
Sin; They look at him as their holy Father, and Bishop of Christ, and Vicar
of God, as one that has an infallible judgment, that cannot err, that he is
above all power of censure: If he should draw missions of souls to hell, no
man must say, Sir, why do you so? they have this opinion of him: No matter what
they conceive, he must be judged by the King of Kings, and by the God of Gods,
and by the Saints of that God that judges according to the word; and they look
at this Father as a Monster, as a wild beast, whom no Scripture, no Church can
keep in awe, but he is Lord paramount above them all; they look at him as the
Dragon of the bottomless pit, as he that destroys the Christian world: and
however he may pretend, as if he had nothing but Lamb-like power, yet he
speaks like a Dragon; thus John saw him.

Thirdly, Use 3.
Observe from hence a reason of a note that troubles many Interpreters; That if
this beast have such power, why does he not cause the earth to worship himself?
why does he not provide for his own honor, but for the first beast? The reason
is plain; the first Beast being the Roman Catholic Church, and the head of
that Beast, all the honor that redounds to the beast, falls upon the head of
the beast, and it is upon himself; He exercises all that power that the first
beast has, and therefore no marvel if he labor to draw all men what he can
to worship, not himself, but the Roman Catholic Church, to be reconciled to
it, and receive decrees from it, and submit in conscience thereunto, and
receive no worship nor doctrine but from them, nor government, but established
by them; no Laws to be enjoined and transacted but by them, for he knows that
this honor will redound to him; He knows all this power does rest in his own
breast, and it is he that acts the Roman Catholic Church, and he can do with a
Council, and without a Council what the Church can do, and he fails not to
do it from time to time. Wonder not therefore that he puts off the honor to
the first beast, the old Roman Church, there he lays all his devotion, but in
conclusion it is all for himself.

Fourthly, Use 4.
you may see the corrupt Original, and dangerous State of corrupt religion,
and of such kind of Churches as are drawn out by the model of the Roman
Catholic visible Church, any image of that beast: I do not trouble you with
what others think to be the image of the Beast (I should but weary my self in
so doing) but if the first beast be the Roman Catholic Church, as it must
needs be, then the image must be according to it, though not of equal
authority, yet of the like frame; whereas the Lord has instituted no other but
particular Congregations to bring in a whole Nation (that may contain a
thousand Congregations) into one Church, what an image is this of the Roman
visible Catholic Church: It is not Catholic indeed, it is short of that, but
so large as it carries a Nation, it exceeds Diocesan, and Diocesan exceeds
particular Congregations: Now see the danger of this; you see the first rise
was from the power of this beast, He causes all the earth to make an Image of
this Beast: He did not bring them to make one in number, but one in England,
and one in Scotland, and one in France, and one in Germany, and in every
Country according to their divisions, and Princely Potentates; that all that
dwell in the limits of that Jurisdiction, they have one Cathedral Church, to
which all other Parochial Churches do belong; this he causes them to do: and
when he has done it, gives it the very like breath of the Roman Order; though
not in so vast a measure, yet in a fair model, that they are like the image
of this holy Father, and so by this means it comes to pass, by his Laws and
Canons which he persuades all to receive, and which is a wonder, since they
have cut him off from being head of the Church, yet still they reteyn the life
of Papacy, in the State of such Chancellors, and Parators, and such kind of
Civil, and Ecclesiastical power mingled together; that a Cathedral Church
forty or fifty miles off, shall send terrible censures to cut off the poor
Saints of God, and they must obey it; and if they stand in an Heretical course
(as they call it) there is no living for them, they will kill their
Prophetical life, as they did the two Witnesses; or if they do in any
effectual manner work, they will not stick to call them to account, and cast
them out, and deliver them to the Secular power, and they shall deliver them to
fire and sword.

So then, see the danger of such Constitutions, it was wrought by the Bishop of
Rome, and lives by life from him, the life of the Law of God breaths not in the
pulses of it; any that know them, know how far they be from the pattern of the
Scripture, how ridiculous they be to such as discern the state of them; You see
also what mighty power they have, that all civil States have been contented to
deliver such to fire and sword, whom they have delivered up as Heretics: They
soon loose the protection of the Civil State, if they loose the favor of
imaginary Churches; well does he call them images, they are images of the Pope,
and images which God forbids, and the inventions of the sons of men; Thou
shall not make to thy self any graven Image, in the second Commandment: You
shall make no Images of Officers, nor Government, nor worship, but that which
Christ himself has set up.

Fifthly, Use 5.
it lets us see how dangerous it is, to annex civil penalties, ipso facto,
upon such as are cast out of the Church; an usual thing in Popish Churches, or
in the Images of such. First, they suspend them from the Sacrament, but then it
comes with an Excommunication, no man must buy nor sell, he has refused to
honor the image of the Beast: It is dangerous to bring in civil Authority
immediately upon Church-censure: A warning to us here, that if men be
excommunicated, not to deny them civil Commerce, or to say such as stand out
excommunicated so long, shall no longer enjoy the privileges of the State: The
Church may cut them off from fellowship with it self, there may be just reason
so to do; they may discover such hypocrifie as may make them unfit for the
Church, but yet they may not altogether be unfit for the Commonwealth.

Sixthly, Use 6.
It may serve to humble us so far, as in times past we had any thing to do
with this Beast, either in the loins of our Fathers with this first Beast, the
Roman Catholic visible Church, or as in our own time we have had any communion
(I mean Ecclesiastical communion) with the image of this first Beast, that
is, with Provincial, Diocesan, Cathedral, National Churches.

You know it is not my manner to fall into speeches of Christ's in other parts,
it is best for us to look to our own; but when the Text is just so fit, now to
be silent, were to deny the children of God the bread of their portion: If it
be such a Church as is of the Popes devising, as has provoked the jealousy of
God, and has not been derived from the primitive institution that Christ has
established; then so far as we have had to deal with them, either in office,
or out of office, receiving their Sacraments, and their Censures, or have
published their Censures, though God (it may be) mercifully kept us from
publishing such as we did conceive unjust; yet forasmuch as there has been any
submittance in this kind, any Church Communion, whereby we have been admitted
into Church-office by the Image of this beast, or installed by the ordination
of the first beast, or so far as we have submitted to the first or second
Beast; so far as we have partaked in the holy things of God, which flow from
Church Communion, as Sacraments and Censures do, verily so far we have cause
to be humbled; though the Lord kept any of us from thinking it any necessity to
be reconciled to the Church of Rome, or kept us from sundry things in our
practice, which the Image of the Beast required; and though he kept us also
from receiving all their Dictates without control; yet for our practice in
entering into our calling, and our dispensations which have been but images of
the first beast: and so far as our fellowship in Ordinances with them have
cleaved to that Church, verily the guilt of that will lie upon such souls as
have not unfeignedly bewailed it before the Lord.

What think you might be the cause that Christians do complayn of so much
deadness, under such plenty, and (as some say) power of Ordinances? I might as
justly blame the world for as great part, that men think they are forced to
lanch out in building and planting; an evil haunt and custom has been
rivetred into men's spirits, that they have much ado to be content any where;
but this is not all: Nor can I lay it wholly upon overmuch confidence in
Ordinances; we have heretofore thought men happy that had liberty of
Ordinances, though out in a duty of humiliation; God will let you see the
emptiness of all Ordinances, and that there is no life in them further then he
puts in them; but I will not put in neither of both these, though both these
may challenge a part of the deadness of the Countrrey, and may because of
humiliation: But give me leave to say, I fear this chiefly, that men thought
it enough that they were got out of the reach of Summoners, and Pariters, and
such like, whose offices have been by the power of the beast, the remnants
whereof hang in those places where they should not stand; I fear men have
rested in turning their backs upon such troubles as they were put unto, when
they have not been serious in judging themselves for these Images of jealousy,
when they are so loft to be rent from them, I fear the Lord has not humbled
them for their old contagion, and therefore they are not so dead, for what is
an Image but deadness? truly because we are rather in bodily presence, then in
heart departed from them, therefore there is such deadness: what is the reason,
that upon the least motion, men are ready to remove to a new Plantation, as if
they removed from old England to New in a pang: If men had a calling upon just
grounds to come hither, then when we come where the Ordinances of God are, we
should sit down under the Ordinances, under the shadow of the Almighty, and
never look for more: But when that does not satisfy that we enjoy Ordinances,
all that liberty we did desire, we do enjoy, and yet it does not satisfy;
certainly there is some sin lies in the breast still, for which the Lord
pursues men with a restless frame, they are not yet purged from the image of
Romish pollution, and therefore the Lord sees it not meet to give us rest, no
not in Sion, because in heart we are not returned from Babell, but every new
occasion puts us to a new plantation, and when we are there we cannot rest: And
therefore I fear, because we have not judged our selves for our inordinate
walking in polluted Churches, but have rather sought for our own peace, then
purity from these pollutions, which there have defiled us, or do not see any
great need of judging our selves in that kind; thence it is, that to this day
the Lord has much ado to quiet our hearts in his peace and purity, and in
power, but still we are much destitute of inward purity and power of
godliness, and therefore dead heartedness hangs about us to this day. And
therefore as we desire the power, and purity, and peace of Ordinances stamped
upon our hearts, so we are to bewail the contagions we have had in this Image
of the beast with Officers or people, that so the Lord may give a reviving
according to the desire of our hearts.

Lastly, Use 7.
let it be of much praise and thanksgiving to God, that has delivered us and
ours, from these Contagions and pollutions, in which you see all that dwell on
the earth have been entangled and polluted in time past: That he has delivered
us from the power of this Beast (the Roman Catholic Church) that he has freed
us from making an Image to that Beast; we own none of his Ordinances, and that
God has removed us from the mark of this Beast, that we desire not to be
accounted Catholics, nor Hirarchies, nor stand members of a Diocesan, or
Provincial, or Cathedral, or National Church, but bear witness against
them all: And also that he has freed us in some measure from the number of his
name; that many things that are of number and account with them, are not of any
number with us, if there be any thing of the Beast in it. And therefore it is
matter of great praise to God; You shall read of the hundred and forty four
thousand, that God had gotten victory over the Image, and mark of the Beast,
and over his name, and the number of his name, or had not left them in any
bondage, they sung as it were a new song before the Throne; It is great matter
of praise that here we may enjoy no head but the Lord Jesus. (Saul indeed was
head of the Tribes of Israel, but not of the Church, 1 Samuel 15. 17.) That the
Lord has given us to enjoy Churches, and Congregational Assemblies by his
Covenant, to worship him in all his holy Ordinances; that he (...) given us to
look for no Laws but his word, no rules nor forms of worship, but such as he
has set down in his word; no platforms of Doctrine, but such as are held
forth in the word of the Prophets and Apostles: It is such a privilege, that
for 1260. years, the Christian world knew not the meaning of it, unless it
were here and there a few whom God had sealed (this was the privilege of a few
sealed ones) but this the Lord vouchsafes to us this day, above all Nations
that have power of the civil sword: It is true, there is a great deal of
these things in sundry other Churches, but yet there is a tang of the image of
the Beast, that a company of Elders and Ministers, they shall have power to
impose Officers upon Churches, and to excommunicate Officers and Members; It is
too much the image of the first Beast, and too much of the power of both
Beasts, and therefore it is to be lamented: but that the Lord should give us
such liberty, that all our Churches are not subordinate one to another, and
none arrogate nor plead Supremacy, but are preserved and kept from all
contagion of the first and second beast, this calls us to abundant
thankfulness, and we are to desire that the Lord would keep us at such a
distance, that we may never return to the image of either of the beasts.

Rev. 13. the last verse. Here is wisdom, Let him that has understanding count
the number of the beast, for it is the number of a man, and his number is six
hundred threescore and six.
THese words are some part of the description of the second Beast which arose
after the former, continued from the 11th. verse of this Chap. unto the end of
it. The former beast (as you have often heard) is the Roman Catholic visible
Church, described at large from the first verse to the end of the 10th. The
latter Beast is the head of the Catholic Church, the Bishop, or Antichrist of
Rome, and he is here described,

1. By his Original; He came out of the earth.

2. By his resemblance; which is threefold; To the Lamb in his horns; To the
Dragon in his tongue and speech, and to the first beast in his power; He
exercises all the power of the first beast.

3. As he is described thus by his Original, and by his resemblance, so he is
described by his great power, and his power exercises it self in diverse acts.
First, He exercises all the power of the first beast. Now the first beast
being the Roman Catholic Church, he exercises all the power of the Roman
Catholic Church, that look what the Roman Catholic Church can do, the Pope
can do with them, or without them: He can call Councels, and make their Canons
authentical; He can make Laws to bind Conscience, he can make Laws to bind
whole Churches, as well as the Aecumenicall power of the whole Council: He can
forbid any other doctrine, or worship, or government, but what himself
establishes: He can add to the Scriptures the Ap^crypha, and he has
infallible power to judge Controversies: He can bind and loose Conscience; he
can depose Kings, and dispose of their Kingdoms, and he can absolve Subjects
from the oath of Fidelity: He has power to pardon sin, and to sell out
pardons to them that buy them. All that the first beast can do, he will do, and
more; but yet he does it (as the Text says) in the sight of the first beast;
that is, in the face and countenance of the first b^ast; He is so modest, that
he will not take all that honor to the head, but the whole body, and derives
all that honor expressly to himself.

The second act of his power, He causes all that dwell on the earth to worship
the first beast.

The third act of his power; He does great wonders, even to call down fire
from Heaven in the sight of men. Not the fire of Acceptance, which Eliah
brought to consume the Sacrifice; but the fire of Vengeance upon the
Rebellious, as the Prophet called for fire upon the Captains that came to
attach him.

4. He does by his miracles deceive all that dwell upon the earth.

5. He causes them all to make an Image like unto the first beast. The first
beast (as you heard) was the Roman visible Catholic Church, then the image of
the beast are all such like models and forms of Churches as are Diocesan
Churches, National Churches, and Provincial Churches.

6. He causes all men to worship that Image, that if any will not worship that
Image (Churches of that mold) they shall be delivered to the secular power, and
so they shall be killed.

Lastly, He will not suffer any Commerce, nor civil Commerce, much less
Ecclesiastical communion, but to them that have the mark of the beast, or the
name of the beast, or the number of his name, verse. 16, 17.

They must swear, or perform some loyalty to the Church of Rome. The mark of
the beast, the carriage of the beast in the Original: All that have received
Religious Orders, have received the mark of the beast, all their religious
Orders leave an indelible Character upon them, so that all that are entered into
religious Orders, are sworn Catholics. The name of the beast, what is it?
Though they be not of the religious Order, yet they profess themselves to be
Roman Catholics, and profess subjection to the head of that Church, and so
to his doctrine and worship, though it be be to Saints and Angels, and to his
government, as that which binds the conscience, the name of the Beast is a
Roman Catholic, submitting himself both to the Church, and to the head of
that Church, and that for conscience sake.

But for the number of his name, it was reserved to this days exercise: Whereas
the holy Ghost having said that he would permit no man to buy or sell, but such
as had received the mark, or his name, or the number of his name; he does in
this last Verse declare what this number of his name is, which at least they
must have, or else they cannot have commerce: Now this number he first does
amplify or illustrate, and then express it.

He does illustrate or amplify it,

First, by the adjunct of wisdom needful for the understanding of it; Here is
wisdom.

Secondly, the duty of men that have understanding to count it.

And thirdly, He does amplify it by the subject, or by the efficient of it, It
is the number of a man: This is his illustration: It requires wisdom to count
it: It is the duty (though) of them that have understanding to search it out.
And when they do count it, they find it the number of a man.

In the Second place he does expressly design or discipher out the number, and
that is in the last word, his number is six hundred threescore and six.

The place is very obscure as any in the word, and therefore the holy Ghost
tells us, here is wisdom to find it out: but withal, here is a command that
every one that has received the least measure or talent of wisdom should
endeavor it, and he does encourage men to find it out.

But were it not that the Lord has said, If any man want wisdom let him ask
it of God, and it shall be given him, James 1. 5. And were it not that God has
given Christ to be our wisdom to declare to us the whole council of his
Father, 1 Cor. 1. 30. And were it not that the providence of God in the
invitation of sundry brethren, has put me upon the handling of this book, and
now it falls in order to be opened; for my own part, I think I should never have
chosen this Text to have spoken to whilst I had lived: But now since we are
come to it, in our interpretation of this book, and the wisdom of God is
perfected in the weakness of his servants, I shall therefore endeavor by the
help of God, and by the light of his wisdom, to express such meditations as
God has suggested to men, and leave them to your further consideration, and
spiritual discerning and judgment.

The note then is shortly thus much.

To find out the number of the Beast requires heavenly wisdom, Doctrine.
and yet such as have received any wisdom ought to count that number, and upon
the acount shall find it to be the number of a man, in sum six hundred
threescore and six.

This is the sum, I wrap up all in one Doctrine, that handling the Doctrine in
the parcels, all the parts of the verse may be opened therewith.

First, I say to find out this number is wisdom, it requires heavenly
wisdom; Here is wisdom: And God accounts not the wisdom of this world
wisdom, but foolishness; he speaks therefore of that which in Scripture
language is wisdom, not Mathematical, nor Airthmetical wisdom; for what great
wisdom would it require to count this number, it arises out of six, and is
multiplied by ten, this is such wisdom as any mean Arithmetition might count,
six times ten is 60. and ten times 60. is 600. and six times one is six, the
wisdom therefore lies not there. But to see how this count disciphers the
Beast, and by that means to give more perfect intelligence of the Beast, and of
his nature, then by his mark and name alone could be gathered, that requires
heavenly wisdom, but wisdom therefore it does require* It requires a man's
best understanding to enquire what the holy Ghost has said of this number: and
though it require much wisdom, yet the counting of this number is both
possible, and necessary: if it were not possible, the holy Ghost would not say,
Let him that has understanding, count the number of the Beast: He is wont to
say, Let him that has an ear, hear what the spirit says: but here he says,
Let him tha^ has understanding count the number of the Beast. And it is also
necessary for him, not of necessity to salvation, without which a man cannot be
saved, but (necessitate precepti) necessary in regard of Gods command: Now
because there are none of Gods commandments that are vain things, but
weighty, therefore they are either very necessary to salvation, or very
expedient: so that a man shall be much weakened in his spiritual progress,
(especially in Popish times, or in such times where men live in the Image of
Popish Churches, National or Diocesan,) if he be ignorant thereof, he shall
find it to be much expedient to count the number of the Beast.

And further I add, it will be found to be but the number of a man: What is
the meaning of that? I will not trouble you with variety of interpretations,
briefly the number of a man: I suppose it is here opposed to that which ye read
of in Rev. 21. 17. where he tells us, The new Jerusalem was measured, an hundred
and forty and four cubits, according to the measure of a man, that is of the
Angel: here he does not say so, the number of a man, that is of the Angel: but
it is the number of a mere man, a carnal man, and therefote in sum this number
will prove but an humane invention, it is therefore called the number of a man.

And finally, he says this number is six hundred threescore and six. Six
hundred sixty six is not in the Original in so many words, only three greek
letters are put for these three numbers, (...). Now it is true in the Greek
account they do reckon numbers by the letters of the Alphabet, and from the
first letter Alpha to Iota, they are for singular units, for Alpha is one, and
Beta is two, etc. and they put in Sigma and make that six, Iota is the tenth
letter, and so is ten in number; and from Iota to Rho, they are reckoned by
tens, as Cappa is twenty, Lambda thirty, Mu forty, etc. and so till you come
to Rho and that is one hundred, and then the rest that follow are so many
multiplied, as Sigma is two hundred, Tau three hundred, etc. and (...) six
hundred. So that if these be understood as holding out the numbers, as here the
words express, then (...) is six hundred, (...) is sixty, (...) is six; which
being summed together they make up six hundred sixty six.

Now a man would wonder that the holy Ghost should delight in such Arithmetical
riddles; but since it pleases him thus to express himself, we must not look
at it as a cabalistical curiosity, nor as an unsearchable mystery: but they
that labor herein, shall find that which may solace themselves and others:
For though by the arm of flesh no man shall be strong, yet by the wisdom of
God the servants of Christ shall see light, and babes shall see the mystery of
it. Therefore to clear up this point, so far as God shall give light, consider
with me I pray you six or seven several observable passages of the holy story
of the Revel^t^on, that may h^lp us in some measure in enquiring and counting
this sum of six hundred three score and six, what it may point at. Let it not
be wearisome to you; for though to us that are Ministers, we think we are most
properly in our element when we preack Christ, and the need of Christ; yet
forasmuch as Antichrist is opposed to Christ, and is an enemy to Christ, the
one contrary may be the better known by the other, and no part of Scripture but
is worthy our consideration, we may not be so squemish as to neglect to seek
what may be the council of the holy Ghost in this point. Observe therefore what
the Scripture does observe about this number.

First, you shall observe this, to find out the meaning; that such as have
this number they all have liberty of commerce, either in the Catholic Roman
Church or in the Image of that Church; they may trade with them, whether in
spiritual or temporal businesses, they will not grudge you; you are a current
market man among them; you are a vendable commodity, and you may pass with
them, and your money is good silver, as in Verse 16, 17. But if you be not a
Priest of their order, nor a Roman Catholic, nor have his number, you may not
buy, nor sell; that is something then.

Secondly, Mark this, that this number of the name is the degree of commerce
with the Roman Catholic Church, for so he does descend, Verse 17. No man may
buy or sell but those that have the mark, or the name of the Beast, or the
number of his name: As who should say, they were of the lowest, they were the
least sort of them, yet to them it did pertain that had the number of the
name: yet there is so much real difference between them, that he says plainly,
They that receive the mark or his name, they shall drink of the wine of the
wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture into the cup of his
indignation: And they shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the
presence of the holy Angels, and in presence of the Lamb: And the smoke of
their torment shall ascend up for ever and ever, and they shall have no rest
day nor night, Rev. 14. 9, 10, 11. Which shows if they continue in it, they
cannot be saved: There was a cry of the Angel with a loud voice, If any man
worship the Beast and his Image, and receive his mark in his forehead, or in
his hand, etc. It shows the danger is very great to receive the mark of the
Beast or the name of the Beast: But the number of his name I do not read of any
such judgment pronounced to be inflicted upon them: though it be great wisdom
to avoid it, and it will wonderfully advance their heavenly good to get free
from it: For wherein lies wisdom but in attaining our chief good, and to know
the best means that leads to that good, and that is in communion with God in
his Ordinances purely dispensed; that is a second thing.

Thirdly, there is this recorded of this number of the name, that the choicest
christians and the best christians, they gave God thanks for victory over the
number as well as over the Beast, Rev. 15. 2. They got victory over the Beast,
and over his Image, and over his mark, and over the number of his name, so
that they sung the song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb,
saying, great and mavelous are thy works Lord God almighty, etc. They had got
the victory over the number of the name of the Beast, and they are more
abundant in thanksgiving for deliverance, then they that had only victory over
the mark, and that is their Preistly order or profession of Roman Catholic
Religion; so that this will come near some Churches, conformed to the Image of
the Beast, that is, National, Diocesan, or Cathedral Churches; but these have
got victory over that, not only over the Beast and his Image, and his mark,
and his name, but also the number of his name.

The fourth observable thing in Scripture is (I am occasioned to gather up
little bea^s of wisdom which the holy Ghost has scattred that so we may
gather up this account) that this number of his name is not said to be the
number of his years; It is neither the number of his years when he began, nor
the number of his years when he shall end: They cannot make it the beginning of
his years; for though there be some that thought that Antichrist did first
arise to a name in the year 606. yet they cannot clear it by story. It is
(...), in 606. or rather 604. Boniface took upon him the title of chief Bishop,
that is, spiritual advancing, which was a part of Antichrist, yet Antichrist
was begun; and 606 is not 666. there is 60. years difference; and it is like
the holy Ghost would not have varied so much in such an express number,
therefore this number is not for the time of the beginning of this beast.
Neither is it the end of his years, for the beast continues still to this time,
which has been almost a thousand years since 666. But some say in this round
number, something is omitted, as when we say 88. we mean 1588. yet in Scripture
phrase such small numbers are not regarded, we speak to those that know what we
speak.

But the Scripture requires us to use wisdom in finding out this number: but
what wisdom were it for the holy Ghost to leave out a thousand, as we leave
out when we say 88. for 1500. the holy Ghost does not so here. And besides, I
would feign learn of any man of that judgment, what victory the Saints got,
either the year when Antichrist began, or when he shall end. What victory have
we got? or shall no body conflict with this number of the beast but those that
lived in the year 666? or that shall live in the year 1666? In Rev. 15. 2. They
got victory over the Beast and his Image, and over his name and number of his
name, before the pouring out of the seven vials; So that I cannot say this is
the number of the period of the beast, that those are the number of his name.

And for a fifth thing, there is this further to be observed in it, that it is
not the number of the followers of the beast, but the number of the beast: If
it were the number of his followers, then it would be less then the number
that followed the Lamb; for they are said to be an hundred forty and four
thousand, in Chap 14. 1. And had the beast had no more but 666. then he had a
less number to fight for him, then the Lamb had to fight for him: but in Verse
8. of this chapter, he tells you, All that dwell upon the earth shall worship
him, whose names are not written in the Lambs book of life: And the world was
never so hapy, as to leave but 666. reprobates in it in any generation,
therefore that cannot be the meaning.

Sixthly, whereas he says, this number is the number of a man, and the number
is six hundred threescore and six, he does apparently put a difference between
that and the name of the beast; for he does expressly distinguish them in the
former verse, for he says, The mark of the Beast, and the name, and the
number of his name, Verse 17. They are three distinct things: So in Chap. 15.
2. where he says, They got victory over the beast and his Image, and over his
mark, and over the number of his name: And more yet, expressly in Chap. 14. 9,
10, 11. He denouceth vengence to them that receive his mark or name, and yet
not damnation to all that receive his number; so that the number is not his
name, it is a distinct thing from the name, as the adjunct is from the subject.
Then it will follow, me thinks (but I refer it to men of better judgment) it
cannot be that either Latinus should be the number of the name, or (Ecclesia
Catholica) the Roman Catholic Church; yet upon these points do our chief and
late Expositers run: But (leaving them their due honor) it does not satisfy
me, because Ecclesia Catholica is the name of the first beast; and the name is
one thing, and the number is another thing. And Latinus is one of the names of
the second beast, of Latinus Episcopus, the name of the Bishop of Rome;
therefore it being his name, it is not the number of his name: So then all
these things be considered, these observations being laid down, attend to a
seventh observation for the clearing of the meaning of the text, and for
opening the true (...) of it;

Observe this,

7. That this number is expressly opposite to the number of the Lamb in the next
verse, in the following Chapter: The number of the Beast is one thing, and the
number of the Lamb is another thing: For enough this be not the number of the
Beasts followers, six hundred threescore and six, yet it is the number of the
Beast; and the number of the Lambs followers is an hundred forty and four
thousand, what will that hold forth? You shall find what the Holy Ghost intends
expressly in that number in some other parts of this book, that this hundred
forty and four thousand has his original and rise from 12. And 12.
multiplied by 12. will arise from so many scores to so many hundreds, and 12.
times twelve-thousand is an hundred forty and four thousand. So that that is
the number of an hundred forty and four thousand, the basis of the number is
12. and multiplied by 12. it will still be derived into the same 12. Now thus
does the Holy Ghost lead us by the hand to consider of more distinctly; In Rev
12. 14. 16. He tells us, The walls of the City had twelve foundations, and in
them the names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb, and the City lies
foure-square, and the length is as broad as the breadth, etc. He measured the
City with the read, 12000. furlongs, the length, and the breadth, and the
height of it are equal. There he lays the number according to the number of
the 12. Apostles, the foundation of the Church of the living God: And further,
ma^k how he multiplies on that 12. says he, They are all equal, twelve
thousand furlongs in breadth, twelve thousand furlongs in length, twelve
thousand furlongs in height: Which argues still, that as the City of the new
Jerusalem is built upon them, so it is multiplied from them: And when he comes
to measure the wall, he tells you in verse. 17. that it was an hundred forty and
four: Just the Lambs company; Still the whole Fabric of Jerusalem is 12. the
foundation of the number is Apostolical, it is numbered by 12. and multiplied
by 12. It arises still but to Apostolical simplicity, their number, and their
measure, and their order, in all their dementions; when you have summed it up
to the highest, their Laws and Orders that they set up, you shall find 12.
there, and you shall find no more. Now then what is the number of the Beast?
You see what the Lambs number is, An hundred forty and four thousand: what is
the Beasts number? It is six hundred threescore and six, it falls short in
the beginning, six of the first 12. There is nothing Apostolical in it from
the first rise: And as the rise is not the Apostolical number, and
constitution, so neither is the multiplication of it, for six is not multiplied
by 12. but by ten; for six unites being multiplied by ten, make 60. and ten
times sixty is 600. So all the multiplications is by ten, not by 12. the
Apostolic number is not here. It is true, 666. runs roundly, and has a comely
proportion in it; where ever ye look, ye have six, and it is p^etty pleasing
to the fancy, and easy to remember; 144. is not so round a number, neither for
apprehension, nor for memory. But yet we are not at the bottom: What should
be the reason that the Holy Ghost should fingle out the number six, and
multiply it by ten? why does the Holy Ghost put it upon six? Seven had bin no
Apostolical number, nor 10. multiplied by 20. But why does the H. Ghost pitch
upon six, and the multiplication of six by ten? Why you that are conversant
in the Latin Bible look Junius his notes, and he tells you; whereas all the
Catholic Church was formerly governed by five books of Decretalls, Boniface
he did compile a sixth book of Decretalls, and called it Sextus (you that have
the book of Canons may find it) which being (said the Pope) a perfect number,
and therefore being added to the former books of Decretalls, it makes up a
certain platform of direction for all matters of practice and manners in the
discipline of the Church, and so it is a perfect number of all things to be
done in the Church, both for doctrine, worship, and government: so the Popes
Canons are summed up in his Sextus, there is the reason why he makes six the
foundation; all their Administrations are founded and measured out from their
Canon^Lawes, which are all wrapped up in six volumes, and the sixth is the most
complete of them all.

Now if you will ask why this six comes to be multiplied by ten? If ye
observe it, all the government and maintenance of the Roman State is by tenths,
by tithes; all the people must give the tenth to the Priest, and the Priest to
the Bishop for the mayntenance of the Catholic Church, and so the whole
Government comes to be multiplied, maintained, and established.

Thus you see what the number is, and the reason why the Holy Ghost calls it
so, and how he does oppose it to the contrary number of that which is delivered
by the blessed Apostles, and followed by the holy Saints of God from one
generation to another. Put then all these together, and all will amount to
this; That whereas the number of Christ upon which both his followers are
built, and his Church, and all the Dimentions and Administrations of it: Their
foundation, their gates, their length, height, and breadth, all of them are
founded in the Apostolical doctrine: For Christ prayed for his twelve
Apostles, and all that should believe in his name through their word, John 17.
20. It is the comprehension of all Saints to the end of the world, whereas they
are built upon Apostolical simplicity, both for their State and
Church-administrations, they are all built upon twelve, and multiplied and
enlarged by 12.

On the contrary, all the Roman Catholics they are built upon the Popish
Laws and Decrees, all which require subjection to the Popish Church, and
submission to that Church, and to the Pope as the head of that Church,
receiving doctrine, and worship, and discipline from that Church, and that was
founded in six, on the six books of their Decrees, and it is multiplied
according to the same books, to mayntayn all the Clergy, from the Pope to the
lowest Parish priest: And it is wisdom to find this out, and it requires
heavenly wisdom to see the dangerous state of this, and yet they that have
wisdom may find this out; and when they search it out, They will find it but
the number of a man, not of the Angel, or of the Apostles, or of any messenger
of God.

I remember the speech of one of the Saints of God, Parker.
That it is a most unworthy thing that the Church of Christ should be governed
by the Laws of Antichrist (and such were all their six books) and it is most
unworthy, that both the Church it self, and all the Images of it, that they
are all governed by these six books; and it is most unworthy that Antichrist
should govern all the Administrations of the Church; that if a man be cited, it
shall be by a Latin writ; and if he appear, he shall be proceeded against
according to Canon Laws; and if he be censured, it shall be a Canon Law, and
in Latin, and so shall his Absolution be; and what pertayns to their whole
government, it is but founded in these six books of Decretals, and count them,
and you shall find them but the number of a man; nothing but merely the wit and
policy of men, either to keep unity as they say (but tyranny in government) or
to enrich men with fees, or maintain the honor of some Cathedral person, it
is all but mere humane invention. Now for a man to see not only the Roman
Catholic visible Church to be a Beast, but that the Pope the head of it is a
beast, and the image of that Church is a beast; Diocesan, Provincial,
National, and Metropolitan Churches are but images of this great beast, and to
see all the numbers and rights they thrust upon the Church by Canons, they are
but the number of the beast, the number of a man, humane inventions; what is
appointed by the Church, whether Cross or Surplice, or kneeling at the
Sacrament, they are but the multiplication of Canons, Canon multiplied on
Canon, but it is still but the power of the Canon, this is great wisdom to
find it out: And it behooves those that have wisdom to consider it; and they
that consider it, shall find it but a mere humane device, one as well as
another; and they will consider which way the State goes, and which way the
State leanes: Though some poor hearts think they are bound to obey the Laws of
the Kingdom, and some good souls many times will be tampering with them too
much; but he that shall observe it, shall find it but the number of a man when
he does find it: He shall find thus much, that if he do believe as God is wont
to teach to his people, they shall not have the liberty of Commerce in buying
and selling, nor leave in spiritual or temporal occurrances and dealings with
them.

For the use of it: Use 1.
First, let it be some word of encouragement and comfort unto all the servants
of God, that have got the victory over this number, though with their loss,
not to look at their losses as an unexpected thing, or new matter, but
prophesied of above 1500. years agone. John wro^e of it in his time, what you
lost in your liberties in the Church wherein you lived, it is no more then what
the Lord foretold you, that you should not have liberty to buy and sell if you
did bear witness against the beast, and his mark, and name, and number of his
name; then there is no abiding for you in any Church in Christendom, which is
either Catholic, or framed after the image of it, as National, Diocesan, or
Cathedral, or Provincial, it is not possible you should get the vict^over these
things, and have liberty of commerce. It is not enough that we have cast off
the Pope: and what is an image of Popery (which we sometimes have submitted
unto) and have born against it, and it is not enough to abhor the name of a
Papist so far as we have been corrupted: It is well that ye have born witness
against the Hierarchy and the papal government; but may we not hearken to the
Canon of the Church maintained by a whole National Council? and may we not
yield to the orders of these Canons, and bear witness to the number of the
Name? Suppose the Cross, or Surplice, or kneeling at the the Sacrament, many
Christians have strong reasonings about this, that they may keep their liberty
of Commerce, their buying and selling, and will not God have mercy and not
sacrifice?

Though such Godly christians in their weakness have such reasonings, yet
believe it we are to bless God that has given us to see that there is no
correspondency to be kept with Rome: If you have the number of his name, this
is not that which the holy Ghost speaks of as damnable heresy, you may live
and dye in that judgment, and be saved, therefore he does not pronounce fire
and brimstone to such; they think in conscience they may yield to this and
that, as being the command of Caesar, or of the Church; the Lord spare you as
the Apostle says; But if a man will adore the Roman Catholic Church or the
Pope the head of it, and submit in conscience to be guided by their Laws, he
renounces his salvation in such a case; that a man shall pin his faith upon the
Churches sleeve, and his hope, and Government, and course of life on the
Churches sleeve, this is the way to everlasting damnation: And therefore in
those Churches that are even Images of Antichrist, it pleases God to keep his
servants so far, that they dare not take all their Laws for doctrine without
question, nor all the ways of their Government as the Government of Christ,
that God opens all the hearts of his faithful servants to see: But yet for the
number of his name; It is (say they) but a few trifling things, they are made a
matter of six, as Cross, and Surplice, and kneeling at the Sacrament, and
bowing to Altars, and the name of Jesus, and ye will have six in the end, and
what will be multiplied on that six, the Lord knows: But for you here, look at
it as a special mercy, that you see the vanity of receiving the number of his
name, and that you have this deliverance from it; that though you have lost
your buying and selling, that if you were there, you might hardly be seen in
the Market, and in many of those Churches you will hardly be allowed, yet you
have lost no more then ought to be forsaken.

There are that have sometimes put X for the cross, and (...) a long letter in
wrinkles for the Surplice, and (...) for the proportion of a man bowing, but I
would not limit the counsel of the holy Ghost so strictly: But take all that
is numbered by their Canon Law, and it will come all to one reckoning; they are
but the number of the beast, whether the Pope dictate them, or they receive
them; and though they cut of his head for says, yet for discipline, and order,
and circumstances they still retain him, and these are the number of the
Beast; therefore bless the Lord that has showed you these to be evils, and
saved you from such prevailing evils.

Secondly, Use 2.
for your present condition, learn thus much, It will not be safe for ye to
receive the Image of any other Church, then that which Christ has established,
and this is grounded upon 12. upon the Apostles doctrine, and multiplied by 12.
increased with the increasings of God, blessed be his name, therefore it being
so, hold fast this form, and be not removed from it: If you fall to adore
National, or Diocessan, or Provincial, or Cathedral Church Government, then you
will fall to number by 6. and multiply 6. by 10. in the end it will come to
pass all this shall be maintained by tenths, such settled endowments and
preserments, and then it may be you shall have liberty of buying and selling,
of traffic and trading; the Beast of Rome will allow you some liberty that
way; yet believe it, it is a special part of your wisdom to know this, and the
danger of it. If a man in his ignorance shall yield to these things, God will
pardon it; but if a man know these things, and willingly give way to them, the
Lord will require it at his hands: Consider therefore this number, and avoid
it, though it cost you all your liberties, the Lord will say, this only is a
wise people, that renounce not only the Beast, but the Images of him, and his
mark, and the name Catholic, and Roman Catholic, and conformity to all the
number of his name; If ye establish your hearts in these spiritual resolutions,
here is wisdom; and thereof how should it provoke the hearts of Gods people to
be settled in conscience about such points as these, though it may be your
contrymen will count you fools in running such desperate ventures, that you
would hazard your fortunes, and at length bring a noble to nine pence; you
shall bring your six hundreds to sixties, and your sixties to six: No matter
what they think of it, so long as ye shall keep the Apostolical number, and
multiply by their rule; the holy Ghost says, Here is wisdom, and he that has
understanding, let him so esteem that here is wisdom; and it was wisdom to
come hither: and he that came for this end, never made a better bargain in his
life, then to come over for this, because he would have no more to do with the
Beast, and his Image, and his name, and the number of his name; I say thou have
made a wise bargain, if thou will take the word of the holy Ghost for thy
security; he says, here is wisdom.

Thirdly, Use 3.
it may teach us that are come hither to see that the Lord acknowledges our
wisdom in the abrenuntiation which we have made from these inventions of the
sons of men: The Lord did foretell us what should be our case, we should not
have liberty to buy nor sell, neither be seen in Church nor Market, and he
counts it wisdom to remoove on these terms: but if we shall have flittering
minds to go back again, the Lord will write upon it, here is a fool, this
their way is their folly, Psalm. 49 13. When men in their hearts wax weary of
the Churches of Christ, and of the discipline of Christ, and look at them as
fulsome and empty things for want of feeling the life of Christ, and wisdom of
Christ, run on foolishly and preposterously, and truly take a course to
overthrow their communion they have with Christ, and make shipwreck as much as
in them lies of all that which they have undergone, of all our sufferings and
trials: Says the Apostle to the elect Lady and her children, in 2 John 8. Look
to your selves, that ye loose not those things which ye have wrought but that
ye receive a full reward. That as you have made a wise bargain and a safe, and
bin at so much charge, and have been freed from the image of Antichrist, and
the remnant of his image, and the remnant of his number (we have cause to
bless God for it.)

And though we may think of mending our selves here or there, yet you will
find it a difficult thing to find 12. multiplied by 12. in any place under
Heaven, that is, either your foundation shall not be Apostolical institution,
or your administration apostolic doctrine: That christians should be the
foundation of Churches, as the Apostles require, Saints by calling, and to
build on such, and to administer such according to the word of God: Yea though
the Lord should be pleased to give our Contrymen free passage of a
Parliament, (as now we have speech of it) and though they be a wise Nation, yet
such is the very frame of the State, and of the Sons of men, that if the Lord
give free passage of a Parliament, you will find it a very difficult thing, to
have the State ruled by Apostolical judgment, to reject all devices of men, to
shut out the greatest part of a kingdom from the Lords Table, you would find
rebellions multiplied exceedingly, if they were of the spirit that they were of
in Edward the sixths time. And when you are gone out of the Country (not that
I would flatter the Country, the Lord knows we our selves here, have need to
grow more spiritual daily; but yet in respect of the Churches of God, and
administration of things here, though we fail and go aside, we have the rule
to show us the way back again:) I say when you are gone, go whether you will,
you will have much ado to find materials, and more ado to find form and
administration: as that it may be in cold blood, you will fit and mourn by the
waters of Babylon, and hang your Harpes upon the willowes, and say, how shall
we sing the Lords song, the song of Zion in a strange La^d? Therefore let it
provoke us to hold fast what we have received and not to be taken off with
fair pretenses, to turn aside to one hand or the other; if we be in a state
of wisdom, let us keep in it, and believe it, whatever takes you to a contrary
course to things as they stand; if the holy Ghost say this is wisdom, then I
am sure the contrary of it must needs be folly.

Fourthly, Use 4.
it may teach us (in the fear of God) to have an eye to our brethren in our
native Country, to consider those defects that those which reformed religion
before us did leave in the recovery of the Country out of the jaws of
Antichrist; (you see what the Lord requires of us, that we should have nothing
to do with the number of the Beast) Though they cut off the head of the Beast,
from being of any sovereign power to them, yet they took too much liberty for
form of worship, and for the number of the Popes name, and of Government by
Canon Laws, yea the whole Church discipline by the Popish Canon Law, only with
this destinction, that whereas the Pope enjoyed it before, now the King he
claims headship over the Church as well as the civil State, and he deriveth the
Church Power to the chief Bishops, and they work upon it more and more; and
though it be true, both Henery the eighth, and much more Edward the sixth, and
Queen Elizabeth, all these did set so many Counselors, so many Divines, and so
many common and civil Lawyers to cull out of the Popes Decretals such Canons as
were most fit for Government, and most of such as cut off Popish supremacy, yet
they could never agree of it, and so they admit them as the Popes Canons only;
yet so that whereas reference of Ecclesiastical matters was to the Pope, now it
is to the King as supreme head and Governor, but the Popes Canons are the
government of the Church. Now what was the reason? There was an unsafe
principle in their hearts, that they thought it lawful to take the Laws of the
Roman Church, and that any King might have power to make Laws to govern the
Church, as well as the Pope had. It is true, he has power to make Laws as
well as the Pope had, and better; but the truth is, neither the Pope, nor King
has power to make Laws to rule the Church, but it must be by the Laws of
Christ.

Whatsoever is not of the number of 12. is superadded, and will never prosper;
but this principle making them willing to admit such things, though they were
the chiefest of the Kingdom, that were appointed for that work, yet they
could never agree: But had they received a little more light and wisdom to cut
off the number of the Beast as well as his head, it would have prevailed for the
liberty of Gods Ordinances and purity of Doctrine: I say this being wanting to
them, let it not be wanting to us; but through the mercy of God, the servants
of God have taken no small pains to clear up such things; what the Laws are in
the Church of Christ by which Magistrates and others are to be guided, how far
civil Government may reach, and how far it may not go, still reserving this
fundamental principle, to hold them close to the direction of the holy Ghost by
the 12. Apostles; and this being the pious care of our Magistrates, and of the
Churches, this wisdom will by the blessing of God be established; that that
which other Nations have not attained to this day, may by the blessing of God
be reached by us: and yet though the Elders are to enquire and to commend to
them such rules as may establish it, it pleases God not to give as yet passage
to our purposes; appoint one day, a storm of rain hinders; appoint the second
day fortnight, then a storm of snow prevents, that it is tough work to
establish things of this nature; it is difficult, as if the Lord would have
them established in a spiritual way, as Moses the Law by 40. days fasting, he
had the spirit of God and larger measure by much then we, yet the Lord requires
serious humiliation of him. And therefore since I heard that there has been a
seasonable motion to commend such a thing to the State that the whole country
do in special manner seek God at such a time against the consultation of the
general Court; and this weighty point falling in for ripening of men's thoughts
for the Laws of the Country and limitation of jurisdictions both of Church and
Commonwealth, the Lord says, he will be sought unto by the house of Israel.
Therefore I think the motion is seasonable and was glad to hear of it; and
thought to commend it to our honored Governors that sit at Stern, and all
other Churches (but we that are present have no power but in our own Church,
nor that but with the consent of the Church) that if it be thought convenient
this day seven-night might be set apart to seek the face of God, that we may
take time both to ripen our consultations, and to prevail with the Lord to
prosper our consultations and administrations, that this matter which so much
concerns posterity may be established; for my own part, while we live I am not
greatly solicitous thereabout, yet for future we know not what Governors may
arise, and what may be put upon our posterity; needful therefore that things
were put in a right frame, that whatever men say, yet the Lord may say here is
wisdom, and here is neither mark, nor name, nor number of name, but all
carried according to the laws of the 12. Apostles, and this will require some
humiliation, and if Moses stood in need of 40. days, we much more of one day.
And for our native country, we do not know what conflicts there may be there
about the number of the name of the Beast; we are come from them in bodily
presence, and therefore cannot help them by a word of advice; but this we may
do, put up supplications to heaven, and we may entreat the God of wisdom, and
the Prince of peace, that he would put in amongst them that they may see the
whole fabric, root and branch of the man of sin, that so there may be a
perfect combination of the two great Nations, that the Parliament may be for
the better, not for the worse, but purity of ordinances (if it be the blessed
will of God) may be established; however we shall find a blessing, and some of
our brethren shall fare the better: and if things wax clearer and zeal warmer*
they will begin to suspect the number as well as the name, and as the head of
the beast; otherwise the three innocent ceremonies (as they call them) they are
grown to six; and being multiplied by ten, they may grow to 60. yea to 600. for
ought I know: Let us help them what we can by Prayer.

FINIS.
A TABLE of the principal Heads contained in this Book.
A*
THe amplitude of the Popes power, page 113 Amplitude of dominion, not an
inseparable character of the Church, 121 Angels created the first day of the
week, 188 Antichrist described, 243 It is Antichristian to assume Gods titles,
52 Transcendant authority dangerous to be admitted, 72 Albingenses and
Waldenses slain, to the number of 1000000. 100
B.
Backsliders punished, page 43 The first Beast what it is, page 7. Described,
p. 2. Not the Pagan Empire, p. 4. Not the Christian Empire, page 5. Whence it
did arise, p. 9 The Beast and the head of the beast is one and the same, 44 The
Beasts head, when wounded and cured, p. 35. his great words p. 62. the Beasts
time how long, p. 80. Why counted by months, p. 86. When it did begin, p. 86
The Beasts power, p. 98. From whence, p. 115. Why Saints worship not the Beast,
139 The second Beast described, 223 Bishoply power to be prayed against, 38
Blasphemy what, 67 Blessed are the sufferers for Christ, page 219 Body of
death what, 185 Book of Providence, and book of Conscience, and the book of
life, what, 132 The Popes Bulls are but baubles, 90
C.
IT is a Character of the second Beast to be without control, p. 236 Christ's
Government over all Nations, 12^ Christ both the subject and the author of
life, 130 Why Christ answered not Pilate, 157 Christ the Lamb slain, p. 154.
Christ slain from the beginning of the world, how? 189 Christ the stone cut
out of the mountain without hands, p. 196. the head of the Church, 37
Christians may make a defensive war, 108 The Church Catholic is not visible,
13 The power of the Church, 13 The Roman Catholic visible Church a beast, p.
14. They receive their power from the Devil, 22 National and Diocesan
Churches an Image of the beast, 16 Christ's Church is such as meet in one
Congregation, 15 No Communion to be held with Antichristian Churches, 239
Scripture Computations most exact, 95
D.
THe Popes Decretals the number of the Beast, page 253 Dwellers on the earth,
who? 230 Defensive war of Prorestants, p. 104. Defensive war lawful, 108
Denmark one of the ten horns, 81 Devil cast out of heaven when and where, 88.
92
E.
Ear to hear, what it means, 206 Election, a book of life, p* 135. in what
sense it is said to be sure, p. 150. How we are said to make it sure, 150. 153
England one of the ten horns, p. 10. 81.
F.
FAith the victory whereby we overcome the world, page 108 The Faith of
Romanists is the says of the Devil, 210 No Falling from grace, 149 France one
of the ten horns, 81 Friars are Incendiaries, 101 Fundamental power is in
the people, 72
G.
GRace and works opposite, page 210 God most exact in his computations, 94
Christ's Government over the world, p. 122. It is hard to be set up in England,
12 Governors are subject to law, p. 109. they may be resisted, and when, 109
Gregory sent for England, 51
H.
HEadship of the Church is Christ's privilege, page 39 Hints of Providence
should be taken, 45 To keep Holy Days is blasphemy, 67 Ten Horns of the
Beast, 81
I.
IMmunity and impunity from all censures is the Beasts claim, page 230 Image
of the Beast, what? p. 223. that all Officers, Governments, and worship (not
instituted by Christ) are but Images, 238 Diocesan, Cathedral, and National
Churches are Images of the Beast, 239 It is impossible for Saints to fall
finally, 148 The Judgment upon persecutors, 217 Justification is from free
grace. 163
K.
THe Kingly power of Christ, page 122
L.
CHrist the Lamb slain, p. 154. 168. Why called a Lam p. 155. Why slain? p.
170. What the book of the Lamb? p. 135 Lex (...), unto persecuting Tyrants, 98
Boundless Liberty dangerous, 71 The Lion of Babels language, 12 The Love of
God most free, 146
M.
MAgistrates power should be limited, page 73 Magistrates subject to the
Churches censures, 126 The fifth Monarchy, 120. 122 The 42. Months, the same
with 1260. days, 83 Why the Beasts time is numbered by Months, 86 When these
Months began, 93 Opening of the Mouth, what it means, 64 Moral virtue is but
a silken or golden chain, 197
N.
NAva^^ one of the ten Horns, page 81 No Name whereby to be saved but Christ,
201 Number of the Beasts name, 247
O.
What Obedience Subjects owe to Princes, page 111 Opening the mouth what it
means? 64 Opportunity to wound the Beast ought not to be neglected, 45
P.
PArishes a part of the beasts Image, page 20 A Papist by his Religion cannot
go beyond a reprobate, 143 The People can give no power, but what the word of
God allows, 72 Peace with Idolaters dangerous, 105 Persecutors rewarded in
their kind, 98 Gods judgment on Persecutors, 217 Pontifex Maximus, the Popes
style, 88 Pope, the head of the Beast that was wounded, p. 34. When wounded, p.
35. When cured, 35 Pope is the seventh head, p. 47. He rules the world, p. 52.
He assumes divine power, 53 Pope is the head of the second Beast, p. 215. Why
compared to a wild beast, p. 226 what power he challenges, 229 Popes have been
Conjurers, 232 Popery a worm-eaten Religion, p. 60 why pleasing to the flesh,
117 Power of the Beast whence it i^, p. 22. 115. and what it is, 23 What Power
Princes have over the Church, what not? 39 Princes Power ought to be limited,
73 We should pray for the Beasts ruin, 95 Christ's Purchase for his people, 171
R.
THe blood of Christ a Ransom for sin, page 176 Popish repentance no better
then Judas repentance, 212 Reconciliation with God, the purchase of Christ's
blood, 171 Roman Catholic visible Church described, p. 2. 7. And whence this
first Beast did arise, 9 When Rome-Pagan ended, and Rome-Christian began, 5
S.
SAints always victorious, page 106 No Salvation in the Romish Church, 215
What is meant by Sea, 8 Christ slain, p. 168 and wherefore, p. 170. and how
slain from the beginning of the world? 189 The Spirit is purchased by Christ's
death, 172 Sufferers for Christ and his cause are blessed, 219 Sweden is one of
the ten Horns, 50
T.
TEnths is the number of the beasts name, page 253. 257 Th^odosius over^hrew
the Temples, 88 The Turk invincible whilst the Pope stands, 50
V.
UNiversality and prosperity no notes of a true Church, page 57 Union purchased
by Christ's death, 172
W.
Waldensis and Albingenses slain, to the number of 1000000. page 100 Saints
are Saints in War as well as in Peace, 108 Such as War against Antichrist are
called Saints, 106 A warning from checks of Providence, 44 The Beast makes War
with the Saints, 98 The great words of the Beast, 65 Works and grace opposite,
210 Popish worship is the worship of the Devil, 58
ERRATA.
PAge 2. l. 2. r. a part. l 17. r. they are. p 4. l. 17. r. Pagan. p 8. l. 19.
r. partions. p. 9. l. 26. r. Decemviri. l. 28. r. was. p. 14. l. 34. r is it.
p. 16. l. 17. r. is it. l. ult. r. edefied. p. 18. l. 3. r. examination. p. 29.
l. 34. r. edefied. and l. 35. r. bring. p. 30. l. 25. r. passes p 31. l. 37.
r. Church will p. 32. l. 3. r. they. p. 33. l. 24. r. Decemviries, p. 34. l.
23. r. some such. l. 35. r. must therefore. p. 43. l. 32. r. sacrifice. p. 62.
r. delegation. p. 6^ l. 27. r. Dan. 7. 8. p. 64. l. 16. r. audible. p. 82. l.
28. r. (...). l. 38. r. there. p. 37. l. 17 r. prevaricate p. 90. l. 14. r.
many. p. 91. l. 22. r. talk. p. 123. l. 21, r. Albigenses. l. 29. r. sui^^. p.
124. l. 24. r. without. p. 129. l. 29 r. men. p. 132. l 24. r. acceptance. p.
145 l. ult. r. irrevocable. p. 159. l. 6. r. unexcusable. p. 157. l. 31. r.
many. p. 160. l. 6. r. antiquity p. 178. l. 23. r. applied to p. 181. l. 19. r.
repetitions. p. 182. 29. r. the. p. 184. 36. r. grace. p 211. l. 28. r. stony,
p. 229. l. 36. r. appeals.

FINIS.
The Analysis of this 13. Chapter of the Revelation.
This Chapter contains the War which the Dragon or Devil made against the
Woman or Church (mentioned in the last verse of the foregoing Chapter) which is
managed by two Beasts as his Instruments.
First beast is described, v. 1. to 11 by his 1 Original, or Fountain whence
he springs, viz. the Sea, verse. 1. 2. Sh^pe or Figure, having 7. Heads, with
the Title of blasphemy upon them, ib. 10. Horns with Crowns upon them, ibid. A
Body like unto a Leopard, or Panther, v. 2. Feet, as of a Bear, ibid. A mouth,
as of a Lion, ibid.
3. State, which is set forth by 1. The efficient Cause, viz. the Dragon, he
gave his power and authority, ibid. 2. The variable change of it. 1. 'Twas
great, being called Power. Seat. Authority.
2. One head was wounded as it were to death, v. 3. 3. That Head was healed,
ib. and the effects thereof. 1. The worlds wondering, ibid. 2. The worshipping
of the Beast and Dragon, v. 4. 3. Liberty to blaspheme, v. 5. 6. 4. Power to
continue 42. months. overcom the Saints, v. 7.
5. The amplitude or largeness of his Dominion, v. 7, 8.

3. A Conclusion containing a word of Attenttors and Consolation v. 9, 10.


1. His Original, He comes ont of the earth, verse. 11. 2. A Similitude or
Resemblance in 3. things. viz. to 1. A Lamb in his horns, ibid. 2. A Dragon in
his speech, ibid. 3. The first Beast, in the exercise of his Power v. 12.

3. The particular Exercises of his Power, or eff^cts of it, viz. He 1.
Procures Adoration to the first beast, ibid. 2. Does great wonders, making fire
come down from heaven in the sight of men, ver. 13. 3. Deceives them that dwell
on the earth by those miracles, v. 14. 4. Does prevail with them that are on
earth, to make an Image to the Beast, which had a wound by the sword, and did
live, ibid. 5. Animates, and gives life to the Image of the Beast, that it
should have both power to speak, and to cause as many as would not worship the
Image of the Beast, to be killed, v. 15. 6. Causes all sorts of men (small and
great, rich and poor, free and bond) to receive a mark in their right hand or
forehead, or at least the Name of the Beast, or the number of his name, or
otherwise he excludes them not only from spiritual but also civil Commerce,
v. 16, 17. The number of his Name is also, ver. 18. illustrated, 1. By the
wisdom needful to the understanding of it. 2. By an exhortation to search out
and count it. 3. To be the number of a man expressly decyphered to be 666.


The Reader is desired to correct with his pen these faults (amongst others)
which through precipitance of the Press have fallen to the prejudice of the
sense.
Page. Line. Read. 2 2 a part. 6 31 give. 9 26 Decemvirs. 11 30 much. 34 whole.
last lasted long. 13 34 persumed. 14 36 is it not. 16 17 is it not. 29
Metropolitan. last edefied. 29 35 bring. 37 primitive. 36 11 head of the. 37
Supremacy. 37 6 incompatible. 64 10 premeditation. 16 audible. 65 29 derision.
66 10 Pope that is the 69 6 Cantury. 20 could not for would. 73 11 clouds to
keep them from the earth. ib. Firmament to the clouds. 31 blot out a. 75 27
Pontifex. 82 2 limited. 28 (...). blot out ever. 83 35 a definite, or
indefinite time. 87 17 prevaricate. 25 there was no place. 88 8 Theodosius. 20
for scores of, r. number. 90 13 time for the month. 14 many for may. 95 1 the
children of Israel in the land of Egypt. 101 36 readiness for necessity. 102
2 even for him and 107 32 they are not heretics. 35 if not, they 109 13 not
lift up. 22 holiness. 28 hand for head. 115 6 blot out Exasia. 116 24 the
Pope; was. 117 10 Abominations. 123 21 Waldenses and Alb^ngenses. 29 suite for
smite. 124 24 Without mixture. 129 penult. of life for of the life. 134 1 else
they may not. 3 the book of life of. 25 Wherein whoever is not. 33 blot out
out of. 141 34, 35 the world it carries away them. 145 l^st irrevocable. 146 8
receive him. 31 there be in us. 148 13 blasting. 150 10 how for now. 13 many
times. 30 seal for search. 32 after work for Christ make; 155 34 that for as.
159 4 This is for this this. 6 unexcusable. 165 31 many times 23 applied to
thee. 178 29 the stay. 182 1 of temptations. 184 36 way of grace. 19 in Saul's,
and Solomon's. 197 ^^ take it at the best. 198 ^9 And (...) 201 2 blot out in
doing and suffering all for them. 206 12 which be ha^h. 208 21 not for nor. 29
tells you of the. 30 blot out to in that sentence [and to the holy City they]
209 4 not for nor. 210 19 subtle. 211 7 word for world. 215 28 ^^ony for
strong. 218 27 tale for tail. 229 15 appointed time is come. 231 36 appeals.
236 12 the Church. 237 23 the head of this beast. 239 10 Congregations to. 4, 5
speech of the sins of Christians in, etc. 35 blot out as. 36 for a great 240 16
loath for loft. 241 28 given for gotten. 246 9 me for men. 2 account. 247 27
(...). 249 25 as well. 251 31 then let all. 252 14 of it more. 253 8 pretty.
256 6 victory. 10 born witness against. 11 a Papist; so far. 257 6 six more
in. 259 17 in the foundation.


