The Explanation of the Frontispiece.
BIlliards from Spain at first derived its name,
Both an ingenious, and a cleanly Game.
One Gamester leads (the Table green as grass)
And each like Warriers strive to gain the Pass.
But in the contest, e're the Pass be won,
Hazzards are many into which they run.
Thus whilst we play on this Terrestrial Stage,
Nothing but Hazard does attend each age.
Next here are Hazzards played another way,
By Box and Dice; it is Hazard is the Play.
The Bully-Rock with mangy fist, and Pox,
Iustles some out, and then takes up the Box.
He throws the Main, and cries, Who comes at Seven?
Thus with a dry fist nicks it with Eleven.
If out, he raps out Oaths I dare not tell,
Hot, piping out, and newly come from Hell.
Old-Nick o're-hearing, by a Palming-trick
Secures the Gamester; thus the Nickers nickt.
Now to Irish, or Back-Gammoners we come,
Who wish their money, with their men safe home;
But as in War, so in this subtle Play,
The straggling men are taken up by the way.
By entering then, one reinforceth more,
It may be to be lost, as those before.
By Topping, Knapping, and foul play some win;
But those are losers, who so gain by sin.
After these three the Cockpit claims a name;
A sport gentile, and called a Royal Game.
Now see the Gallants crowd about the Pit,
And most are stockt with Money more than Wit;
Else-sure they would not, with so great a stir,
Lay ten to one on a Cocks faithless Spur.
Lastly, observe the Women with what grace
They sit, and look their Partners in the face.
Who from their eyes shoot Cupids fiery Darts;
Thus make them lose at once their Game and Hearts.
Their white soft hands, (when e're the Cards they cut)
Make the men wish to change the Game to Putt.
The Women knew their thoughts, then cried, Enough,
Lets leave off Whist, and go to Putt, or Ruff.
Ladies don't trust your secrets in that hand,
Who cannot their own (to their great grief) command.
For this I will assure you, if you do,
In time you will lose your Ruff and Honor too.
THE COMPLETE GAMESTER:


THE COMPLETE Gamester: OR, INSTRUCTIONS How to play at BILLIARDS, TRUCKS,
BOWLS, and CHESS.

Together with all manner of usual and most Gentile Games either on CARDS or
DICE.

To which is added, The ARTS and MYSTERIES OF RIDING, RACING, ARCHERY, and
COCK-FIGHTING.

LONDON: Printed by A. M. for R. Cutler, and to be sold by Henry Brom at the
Gun at the West End of St. Paul's. 1674.

The Epistle to the Reader.
READER,
I Was once resolved to have let this ensuing Treatise to have stepped naked into
the World, without so much as the least rag of an Epistle to defend it a little
from the cold welcome it may meet with in its travails; but knowing that not
only custom expects but necessity requires it, give me leave to show you the
motives inducing to this present publication.

It is not (I Will assure you) any private interest of my own that caused me to
adventure on this subject, but the delight and benefit of every individual
person; Delight to such who will pass away their spare minutes in harmless
recreation if not abused; and Profit to all, who by inspecting all manner of
Games may observe the cheats and abuses, and so be armed against the injuries
may accrue thereby.

Certainly there is no man so severe to deny the lawfulness of Recreation;
There was never any Stoic found so cruel, either to himself, or nature, but at
some time or other he would unbend his mind, and give it liberty to stray into
some more pleasant walks, than the miry heavy ways of his own sour, willful
resolutions. You may observe the Heathen Sages of the first world founded with
their Laws their Feasts, with their Labors their Olympicks, with their Warfare
their Triumphs. Nay* at this day the severest Dionysian-Pedagogue will give his
Scholars their Play-days, and Breakings up with a Horum miserere laborum*
fessum quies plurimum juvat. And the most covetous Masters will tie their
servants but to certain hours; every toil exacting as ex officio, or out of
duty some time for Recreation. I my self have observed in the course of many
men of exceeding strict lives and conversation, to whom although severity of
profession, infirmity of body, extremity of age, or such like, have taken away
all actual recreation, yet have their minds begot unto themselves some habits
or customs of delight, which have in as large measure given them contentment
whether they were their own, or borrowed, as if they had been the sole actors
of the same. Furthermore, Recreation is not only lawful but necessary:
Interpone tuis inter dum ga^dia curis,
Vt possis animo quemvis sufferre laborem.
So intermix your care with joy, you may
Lighten your labor by a little play.
Now what Recreation this should be I cannot prescribe, nor is it requisite to
confine any to one sort of pleasure, since herein Nature takes to her self an
especial Prerogative, for what to one is most pleasant, to another is most
offensive; Some seeking to satisfy the Mind, some the Body, and others both in
a joint motion. To this end I have laid before you what variety of Pastimes I
could collect for the present, leaving the rest (as you like these) to be
supplied hereafter. Mistake me not, it is not my intention to make Gamesters by
this Collection, but to inform all in part how to avoid being cheated by them:
If I am imperfect in my discoveries, imp^te it to my being no professed Gamester,
and the hatred (...) bear that Hellish society; by whom I know I shall be
^aught at, and with whom if ^ should converse, I might sooner by my study come
to ^e Nature's Secretary, and ^nriddle all her Arcana's, ^han collect from them
any new unpractised secret, by which they bubble ignorant credulity, and
purchase money and good apparel with everlasting shame and infamy.

To conclude, let me advise you, if you play (when your business will permit)
let not a covetous desire of winning another's money engage you to the losing
your own; which will not only disturb your mind, but by the disreputation of
being a Gamester, if you lose not your estate, you will certainly lose your
credit and good name, than which there is nothing more valuable. Thus hoping
you will be thus advised, and will withal excuse my Errors, I shall ever study
how to serve you, and subscribe my self a well-willer to all men.

The Contents.
OF Gaming in general; or an Ordinary described. page 1. Chapter 1. Of Billiards.
p. 23. Chapter 3. Of Trucks. p. 39. Chapter 4. Of Bowling. p. 47. Chapter 5. Of a Game at
Chess. p. 51.
Principal Games at Cards.
Chapter 6. Of Picket. p. 81. Chapter 7. The Game at Gleek. p. 90. Chapter 8. L'Ombre, a
Spanish Game. p. 97. Chapter 9. The Game at Cribbidge. p. 106. Chapter 10. A Game at
All-Fours. p. 111. Chapter 11. English Ruff and Honors, and Whist. p. 114. Chapter 12.
French-Ruff. p. 121. Chapter 13. Five-Cards. p. 123. Chapter 14. Of a Game called
Costly-Colours. p. 125. Chapter 15. Bone-Ace. p. 129. Chapter 16. Of Put and the
High-Game. p. 131. Chapter 17. Wit and Reason, a Game so called. p. 138. Chapter 18. A
Pastime called, The Art of Memory. p. 141. Chapter 19. A Game called Plain-dealing.
p. 142. Chapter 20. A Game called Queen Nazareen. p. 143. Chapter 21. Lanterloo. p.
144. Chapter 22. A Game called Penneech. p. 148. Chapter 23. Post and Pair. p. 150. Chapter
24. Bankasalet. p. 152. Chapter 25. Beast. p. 153.
Games within the Tables.
Chapter 26. Of Irish. p. 154. Chapter 27. Of Back-Gammon. p. 156. Chapter 28. Of
Tick-tack. p. 158. Chapter 29. Dubblets. p. 161. Chapter 30. Sice-Ace. p. 162. Chapter 31.
Ketch-Dolt. p. 163.
Games without the Tables.
Chapter 32. Of Inn and Inn. p. 164. Chapter 33. Of Passage. p. 167. Chapter 34. Of
Hazard. p. 168. Chapter 35. The Art and Mystery of Riding, Whether the great Horse
or any other. p. 174. Chapter 36. Of Racing. p. 194. Chapter 37. Of Archery. p. 203.
Chapter 38. Of Cock-fighting. p. 205.
Of Gaming in General, or an Ordinary described.
GAming is an enchanting witchery, gotten betwixt Idleness and Avarice: An
itching Disease, that makes some scratch the head, whilst others, as if they
were bitten by a Tarantula, are laughing themselves to death: Or lastly, it is
a paralytical distemper, which seizing the arm the man cannot choose but shake
his elbow. It has this ill property above all other Vices, that it renders a
man incapable of prosecuting any serious action, and makes him always
unsatisfied with his own condition; he is either lifted up to the top of mad
joy with success, or plunged to the bottom of despair by misfortune, always in
extremes, always in a storm; this minute the Gamester's countenance is so
serene and calm, that one would think nothing could disturb it, and the next
minute so stormy and tempestuous that it threatens destruction to it self and
others; and as he is transported with joy when he wins, so losing he is tossed
upon the billows of a high swelling passion, till he has lost sight both of
sense and reason.

I have seen some Dogs bite the stones which boys have thrown at them, not
regarding whence they were flung; so I have seen a losing Gamester greedily
gnawing the innocent Box, and sometimes tearing it to pieces as an accessory to
his throwing out; nor must the Dice go unpunished for not running his chance,
and therefore in rage are thrown on the ground to be kicked to and fro by every
body; and at last looked upon no other than the fit companions of every saucy
Skip-jack.

Then fresh Dice are called for, as thinking they will prove more kind than the
former, or as if they believed that some were good natured, others bad, and
that every Bale produced a different disposition. If these run cross too, the
Box-keeper shall not go without a horrid execration, if for nothing else but
that he looked strictly to the cast, it may be conceiving that his very eyes
were capable of making them turn to his disadvantage. This restless man (the
miserable Gamester) is the proper subject of every man's pity. Restless I call
him, because (such is the itch of play) either winning or losing he can never
rest satisfied, if he wins he thinks to win more, if he loses he hopes to
recover: To this man's condition the saying of Hannibal to Marcellus may be
fitly applied, that nec bonam, nec malam fortunam far potest, he could not be
quiet either Conqueror or Conquered. Thus have I heard of some who with five
pounds have won four hundred pounds in one night, and the next night have lost
it to a sum not half so much; others who have lost their estates and won them
again with addition, yet could not be quiet till they lost them irrecoverably.

And therefore fitly was that question propounded, Whether men in Ships at Sea
were to be accounted among the living or the dead, because there were but few
inches betwixt them and drowning. The same quaere may be made of great
Gamesters, though their estates be never so considerable, Whether they are to
be esteemed poor or rich, since there are but few Casts at Dice betwixt a rich
man (in that circumstance) and a beggar.

Now since speculation will not be convincing, unless we show somewhat of the
modern practice; we must therefore lay our Scene at an Ordinary, and proceed to
action: Where note, an Ordinary is a handsome house, where every day, about the
hour of twelve, a good Dinner is prepared by way of Ordinary, composed of
variety of dishes, in season, well-drest, with all other accommodations fit for
that purpose, whereby many Gentlemen of great Estates and good repute, make
this place their resort, who after Dinner play a while for recreation, both
moderately and commonly, without deserving reproof: But here is the mischief,
the best Wheat will have Tares growing amongst it, Rooks and Daws will
sometimes be in the company of Pigeons; nor can r^al Gentlemen now adays so
seclude themselves from the society of such as are pr^tendedly so, but that
they oftentim^s mix company, being much of the same color and feather, and by
the eye undistinguishable.

(...)

Th^se Rooks can do little harm in the day time at an Ordin^ry, being forced to
play upon the S^uare, although now and then they m^ke an advantage, when the
Box-keeper goes with him, and then the Knave and Rascal will violate his trust
for profit, and lend him (when he sees good) a Tickler shall do his business;
but if discovered, the Box-keeper ought to be soundly kicked for his pains: Such
practices, and sometimes the Box-keepers connivances, are so much used of late,
that there is nothing near that fair play in an Ordinary, as formerly.

The day being shut in, you may properly compare this place to those Countries
which lie far in the North, where it is as clear at midnight as at noonday: And
though it is a house of Sin, yet you cannot call it a house of Darkness, for
the Candles never go out till morning, unless the sudden fury of a losing
Gamester make them extinct.

This is the time (when ravenous beasts usually seek their prey) wherein comes
shoals of Huffs, Hectors, Setters, Gilts, Pads, Biters, Diverse, Lifters,
Filers, Budgies, Droppers, Crossbyters, etc. and these may all pass under the
general and common appellation of Rooks. And in this particular, an Ordinary
serves as a Nursery for Tyburn; for if any one will put himself to the trouble
of observation, he shall find, that there is seldom a year wherein there are
not some of this Gang hang as precious Jewels in the ear of Tyburn: Look back
and you will find a great many gone already, God knows how many are to follow.

These Rooks are in continual motion, walking from one Table to another, till
they can discover some unexperienced young Gentleman, Casheer or Apprentice,
that is come to this School of Virtue, being unskilled in the quibbles and
devices there practiced; these they call Lambs, or Colls: Then do the Rooks
(more properly called Wolves) strive who shall fasten on him first, following
him close, and engaging him in some advantageous Bets, and at length worries
him, that is, gets all his money, and then the Rooks (Rogues I should have
said) laugh and grin, saying, the Lamb is bitten.

Some of these Rooks will be very importunate to borrow money of you without
any intention to pay you; or to go with you seven to twelve half a Crown or
more, whereby without a very great chance (ten to one or more) he is sure to
win: If you are sensible hereof, and refuse his proposition, they will take it
so ill, that if you have not an especially care they will pick your pocket, nim
your gold or silver buttons off your Cloak or Coat; or it may be draw your
silver-hilted Sword out of your belt without discovery, especially if you are
eager upon your Cast, which is done thus; the silver buttons are strung, or run
upon Cats guts fastened at the upper and nether end; now by ripping both ends
very ingeniously (as they call it) give it the gentile pull, and so rub off
with the buttons; and if your Cloak be loose it is ten to one they have it.

But that which will most provoke (in my opinion) any man's rage to a just
satisfaction, is their throwing many times at a good Sum with a dry fist (as
they call it,) that is; if they nick you, it is theirs; if they lose, they owe
you so much with many other quillets: some I have known so abominably impudent,
that they would snatch up the Stakes, and thereupon instantly draw, saying, if
you will have your money you must fight for it; for he is a Gentleman and will
not want: however, if you will be patient, he will pay you another time; if you
are so tame to take this, go no more to the Ordinary; for then the whole Gang
will be ever and anon watching an opportunity to make a Mouth of you in the
like nature. If you nick them, it is odds, if they wait not your coming out at
night and beat you: I could produce you an hundred examples in this kind, but
they will ^arely adventure on the attempt unless they are backed with some
Bully-Huffs, and Bully-Rocks, with others whose for^unes are as desperate as
their own. We need no other testimony to confirm the danger of associating with
these Anthropo-phagi or Man-Eaters, than Lincolns -Inn-Fields whilst Speerings
Ordinary was kept in Bell-yard, and that you need not want a pair of Witnesses
for the proof thereof, take in also Covent Garden.

Neither is the House it self to be exempted, every night almost some one or
other, who either heated with Wine, or made choleric with the loss of his
Money, raises a quarrel, swords are drawn, box and candlesticks thrown at one
another head, Tables overthrown, and all the House in such a Garboyl, that it
is the perfect Type of Hell. Happy is the man now that can make the frame of a
Table or Chimney-corner his Sanctuary; and if any are so fortunate to get to
the Stair-head, they will rather hazard the breaking of their own necks than
have their Souls pusht out of their bodies in the dark by they know not whom.

I once observed one of the Desperadoes of the Town (being half drunk) to press
a Gentleman very much (at play) to lend him a Crown, the Gentleman refused him
several times, yet still the Borrower persisted, and holding his head somewhat
too near the Casters elbow, it chanced to hit his nose, the other thinking it
to be affront enough to be denied the loan of Money without this slight touch
of the nose, drew, and stepping back (unawares to the Gentleman) made a full
pass at him, intending to have run him through the body; but his drunkenness
^i^guided his hand, so that he ra^ him ^nly through the arm: this put the house
into so great a confusion and fright, that some fled thinking the Gentleman
slain. This wicked Miscreant thought not this sufficient, but tripping up his
heels, pinned him as he thought to the floor; and after this, takes the
Gentleman's silver sword, leaving his in the wound, and with a Grand-Iury of
Dammees (which may hereafter find him guilty at the Great Tribunal) bid all
stand off if they loved their lives, and so went clear off with sword and
liberty; but was notwithstanding (the Gentleman recovering) compelled to make
what satisfaction he was capable of making, besides a long imprisonment; and
was not long abroad hefore he was apprehended for Burglary committed,
condemned, and justly executed.

-- Fatebere tandem
Nec Surdum, nec Tiressam quenquam esse Deorum.
But to proceed on as to play: late at night when the Company grows thin, and
your eyes dim with watching, false Dice are frequently put upon the ignorant,
or they are otherwise cheated by Topping, Slurring, Stabbing, etc. and if you
be not careful and vigilant, the Box-keeper shall score you up double or treble
Boxes, and though you have lost your money, dun you as severely for it, as if
it were the justest debt in the World.

The more subtle and gentiler ^ort of Rooks (as aforesaid) you shall not
distinguish by their outward demeanor from persons of condition; these will sit
by a whole evening, and observe who wins; if the Winner be bubbleable, they
will insinuate themselves into his company by applauding his success, advising
him to leave off whilst he is well; and lastly, by civilly inviting him to
drink a glass of Wine, where having well warmed themselves to make him more
than half drunk they-wheadle him in to play; to which if he condescend he shall
quickly have no money left him in his Pocket, unless perchance a Crown the
Rooking-winner lent him in courtesy to bear his charges homewards.

This they do by false Dice, as High-Fullams 4, 5, 6. Low-Fullams 1, 2, 3. By
Bristle-Dice, which are fitted for their purpose by sticking a Hogs-bristle so
in the corners, or otherwise in the Dice, that they shall run high or low as
they please; this bristle must be strong and short, by which means the bristle
bending, it will not lie on that side, but will be tript over; and this is the
newest way of making a high or low Fullam: the old ways are by drilling them
and loading them with Quicksilver; but that cheat may be easily discovered by
their weight, or holding two corners between your forefinger and thumb, if
holding them so gently between your fingers they turn, you may then conclude
them false; or you may try their falsehood otherwise by breaking or splitting
them: others have made them by filing and rounding; but all these ways fall
short of the Art of those who make them: some whereof are so admirably skilful
in making a Bale of Dice to run what you would have them, that your Gamesters
think they never give enough for their purchase if they prove right. They are
sold in many places about the Town; price current (by the help of a friend)
eight shillings, whereas an ordinary Bale is sold for six pence; for my part I
shall tell you plainly, I would have those Bales of false Dice to be sold a^^
the price of the ears of such destructiv^ Knaves that made them.

Another way the Rook has to cheat, is first by Palming, that is, he puts one
Dye into the Box, and keep^ the other in the hollow of his little finger, which
noting what is uppermost when he takes him up, the same shall be when he throws
the other Dye, which runs doubtfully any cast. Observe this, that the bottom
and top of all Dice are seven, so that if it be 4 above, it must be a 3 at
bottom; so 5 and 2. 6 and 1. Secondly, by Topping, and that is when they take
up both Dice and seem to put them in the Box, and shaking the Box you would
think them both there, by reason of the rattling occasioned with the screwing of
the Box, whereas one of them is at the top of the Box between his two
forefingers, or secured by thrusting a forefinger into the Box. Thirdly, by
slurring, that is by taking up your Dice as you will have them advantageously
lie in your hand, placing the one a top the other, not caring if the ^ppermost
run a Millstone (as they use ^o say) if the undermost run without ^urning, and
therefore a smooth-table is ^ltogether requisite for this purpose; on a rugged
rough board it is a hard ^atter to be done, whereas on a smoothable (the best
are rubbed over with ^ees wax to fill up all chinks and cre^ises) it is usual
for some to slur a Dye ^wo yards or more without turning. Fourthly, by
knapping, that is when you strike a Dye dead that it shall not stir, this is
best done within the Tables; where note there is no securing but of o^e Dye,
although there are some who boast of securing both: I have seen some so
dexterous at Knapping, that they have done it through the handle of a quart
Pot, or over a Candle and Candlestick: but that which I most admired, was
throwing through the same less than Ames Ace with two Dice upon a Groat held in
the left hand on the one side of the handle a foot distance, and the Dice
thrown with the right hand on the other.

Lastly, by stabbing, that is having a Smooth Box, and small in the bottom, you
drop in both your Dice in such manner as you would have them sticking therein
by reason of its narrowness, the Dice lying one upon another; so that turning
up the Box, the Dice never tumble; if a smooth Box, if true, but little; by
which means you have bottoms according to the tops you put in; For example, if
you put in your Dice so that two fives or two fours lie a top, you have in the
bottom turned up two two's, or two treys; so if six and an Ace a top, a Six and
an Ace at bottom.

Now if the Gentleman be past that Classis of Ignoramusses, then they effect
their purpose by Cross-byting, or some other dexterity, of which they have
variety imaginable. A friend of mine wondering at the many slights a noted
Gamster had to deceive, and how neatly and undiscoverably he managed his
tricks, wondering withal he could not do the like himself, since he had the
same Theory of them all, and knew how they were done; O young man, replied the
Gamester, there is nothing to be attained without pains; wherefore had you been
as laborious as my self in the practice hereof, and had sweated at it as many
cold winter mornings in your shirt as I have done in mine, undoubtedly you
would have arrived at the same perfection.

Here you must observe, that if these Rooks think they have met with a sure
Bubble, they will purposely lose some small sum at first, that they may engage
him the more freely to bleed (as they call it) which may be at the second, if
not beware of the third meeting, which under the notion of being very merry
with wine and good cheer, they will make him pay for the roast.

Consider the further inconveniences of Gaming as they are ranked under these
heads.

First, if the House find you free to the Box and a constant Caster, you shall
be treated with Suppers at night, and a Cawdle in the morning, and have the
honor to be styled a Lover of the House, whilst your money lasts, which
certainly cannot be long; for here you shall be quickly destroyed under
pretense of kindness as men were by the Lamiae of old; which you may easily
gather if from no other consideration than this; that I have seen three persons
sit down at twelve penny In and In, and each draw forty shillings a piece in
less than three hours, the Box has had three pound, and all the three
Gamesters have been losers.

Secondly, consider how many persons have been ruined by play, I could nominate
a great many, some who have had great estates have lost them, others having
good employments have been forced to desert them and hide themselves from their
Creditors in some foreign Plantation by reason of those great debts they had
contracted through Play.

Thirdly, this course of life shall make you liable to so many affronts and
manifold vexations, as in time may breed destraction. Thus a young fellow not
many years since, had by strange fortune run up a very small sum to a thousand
pounds, and thereupon put himself into a garb accordingly; but not knowing when
he was well fell to play again, fortune turned, he lost all, ran mad and so
died.

Fourthly, is it not extreme folly for a man that has a competent estate to
play whether he or another man shall enjoy it; and if his estate be small, then
to hazard even the loss of that, and reduce himself to absolute beggary; I
think is madness in the highest degree. Besides, it has been generally
observed that the loss of one hundred pounds shall do you more prejudice in
disquieting your mind, than the gain of two hundred pounds shall do you good
were you sure to keep it.

Lastly, consider not only your loss of time which is invaluable, Nulla major
est jactura quam temporis omissio, but the damage also the very watching brings
to your health, and in particular to the eyes, confirmed by this Distick.

Allia, Vina, Venus, Fumus, Faba, Lumen and Ignis,
Ista nocent oculis, sed vigilare magis.
Garlic, Wine, Women, Smoke, Beans, Fire and Light
Do hurt the eyes, but watching more the sight.
I shall conclude this Character with a penitential Sonnet, written by a Lord
(a great Gamester a little before his death) which was in the year 1580.

By loss in play men often forget
The duty they do owe
To him that did bestow the same,
And thousand Millions more.
I l^ath to hear them swear and stare
When they the Main have lost;
Forgetting all the Byes that were
With God and Holy Ghost:
By wounds and nails they think to win,
But truly it is not so;
For all their ^rets and fumes in sin
They moniless must go.
There is no Wight that used it more
Than he who wrote this Verse,
Who cries peccavi n^w therefore,
His Oaths his heart do pierce;
Therefore example take by me
That curse the luckless time,
That ever Dice mine eyes did see,
Which bred in me this crime.
Lord pardon me for what is past,
I will offend no more,
In this most vile and sinful cast
Which I will still abhor.
The Character of a Gamester.
SOme say he was born with Cards in his hands, others that he will die so; but
certainly it is all his life, and whether he sleeps or wakes he thinks of
nothing else. He speaks the language of the Game he ^lays at, better than the
language of hi^ Country; and can less in^ure a sol^cism in that than this: he
knows no Judge but the Groom-porter, no Law but that of the Game at which he is
so ex^ert all appeal to him, as subordinate Judges to the supreme ones. He
loves Winter more than Summer, because it affords more Gamesters, and Christmas
more th^n any other time, because there is more gaming then. He gives more
willingly to the Butler than to the Poors-box, and is never more religious than
when he prays he may win. He imagines he is at play when he is at Church; he
takes his Prayer Book for a Pack of Cards, and thinks he is shuffling when he
turns over the leaves. This man will play like Nero when the City is on fire,
or like Archimedes when it is sacking, rather than interrupt his Game. If play
has reduced him to poverty, then he is like one a drowning, who fastens upon
any thing next at hand. Amongst other of his shipwracks, he has happily lost
shame, and this want supplies him. No man puts his brain to more use than he;
for his life is a daily invention, and each meal a new stratagem, and like a
fly will boldly sup at every man's cup. He will offer you a quart of Sack out
of his joy to see you, and in requital of this courtesy you can do no less
than pay for it. His borrowings are like Subsidies, each man a shilling or two,
as he can well dispend, which they lend him not with the hope to be repaid, but
that he will come no more. Men shun him at length as they do an Infection, and
having done with the Aye as his clothes to him, hung on as long as he could, at
last drops off.

CHAP. I.
Of BILLIARDS.
THe Gentile, cleanly and most ingenious Came at Billiards had its first
original from Italy, and for the excellency of the Recreation is much approved
of and played by most Nations in Europe especially in England there being few
Towns of note therein which has not a public Billiard-Table, neither are they
wanting in many Noble and private Fam^^^es in the Country, for the recreation
of the mind and exercise of the body.

The form of a Billiard-Table is oblong, that is something longer than it is
broad; it is railed round, which rail or ledge ought to be a little swelled or
stuffed with fine flox or cotton: the superficies of the Table must be covered
with green-cloth, the finer and more freed from knots the better it is: the
Board must be levelled as exactly as may be, so that a Ball may run true upon
any part of the Table without leaning to any side thereof; but what by reason
of ill-season'd boards which are subject to warp, or the floar on which it
stands being uneven, or in time by the weight of the Table, and the Gamesters
yielding and giving way, there are very few Billiard-Tables which are found
true; and therefore such which are exactly levelled are highly valuable by a
good Player; for at a false Table it is impossible for him to show the
excellency of his Art and Skill, whereby Bunglers many times by knowing the
windings and tricks of the Table have shamefully beaten a very good Gamester,
who at a true Table would have given him three in five.

But to proceed in the description thereof; at the four corners of the Table
there are holes, and at each side exactly in the middle one, which are called
Hazards, and have hanging at the bottoms nets to receive the Balls and keep
them from falling to the ground when they are hazarded. I have seen at some
Tables Wooden Boxes for the hazards, six of them as aforesaid, but they are
nothing near so commendable as the former, because a Ball struck hard is more
apt to fly out of them when struck in.

There is to the Table belonging an Ivory Port, which stands at one end of the
Table, and an Ivory King at the other, two small Ivory Balls and two Sticks;
where note if your Balls are not completely round you can never expect good
proof in your play: your Sticks ought to be heavy, made of Brasile, Lignum
vitae or some other weighty wood, which at the broad end must be tipped with
Ivory; where note, if the heads happen to be loose, you will never strike a
smart stroke, you will easily perceive that defect by the hollow deadness of
your stroke and faint running of your Ball.

The Game is five by day light, or seven if odds be given, and three by
Candlelight or more according to odds in houses that make a livelihood
thereof; but in Gentlemen's houses there is no such restriction; for the Game
may justly admit of as many as the Gamesters please to make.

For the Lead you are to stand on the one side of the Table opposite to the
King, with your Ball laid near the Cushon, and your Adversary on the other in
like posture; and he that with his Stick makes his Ball come nearest the King
leads first.

The Leader must have a care that at the first stroke his Ball touch not the
end of the Table leading from the King to the Port, but after the first stroke
he need not fear to do it, and let him so lead that he may either be in a
possibility of passing the next stroke, or so cunningly lie that he may be in a
very fair probability of hazarding his Adversaries Ball, that very stroke he
played after him.

The first contest is who shall pass first, and in that strife there are
frequent opportunitities of hazarding one another; and it is very pleasant to
observe what policies are used in hindering one another from the pass, as by
turng the Port with a strong clever stroke; for if you turn it with your Stick
it must be set right again; but indeed more properly he that does it should
lose one; sometimes it is done (when you see it is impossible to pass) by
laying your Ball in the Port, or before your Adversaries, and then all he can
do is to pass after you; if he has past and you dare not adventure to pass
after him, for fear he should in the interim touch the King and so win the end,
you must wait upon him and watch all opportunities to hazard him, or King him;
that is, when his Ball lies in such manner that when you strike his Ball may
hit down the King, and then you win one.

Here note, that if you should King him, and your Ball fly over the Table, or
else run into a hazard, that then you lose one notwithstanding.

The Player ought to have a curious eye, and very good judgment when he either
intends to King his Adversary's Ball, or hazard, in taking or quartering out
just so much of the Ball as will accomplish either; which observation must be
noted in passing on your Adversary's Ball, or corner of the Port. Some I have
observed so skilful at this Recreation, that if they have had less than a fifth
part of a Ball they would rarely miss King or Hazard.

As this is a cleanly pastime, ^o there are Laws or Orders made against lolling
slovingly Players, that by their forfeitures they may be reduced to regularity
and decency; wherefore be careful you lay not your hand on the Table when you
strike or let your sleeve drag upon it, if you do it is a loss; if you smoke
and let the ashes of your Pipe fall on the Table, whereby oftentimes the Cloth
is burned, it is a forfeiture, but that should not so much deter you from it as
the hindrance piping is to your play.

When you strike a long stroke, hold your stick neatly between your two fore
fingers and your thumb, then strike smartly, and by aiming rightly you may when
you please either fetch back your Adversary's Ball when he lies fair for a
pass, or many times when he lies behind the King, and you at the other end of
the Table you may King him backward.

If you lie close you may use the small end of your stick, or the flat of the
big end, raising up one end over your shoulder, which you shall think most
convenient for your purpose.

Have a care of raking, for if it be not a forfeiture it is a fault hardly
excusable, but if you touch your Ball twice it is a loss.

Beware when you jobb your Ball through the Port with the great end of your
Stick that you throw it not down, if you do it is a loss, but do it so
handsomely that at one stroke without turning the Port with your Stick you
effect your purpose; it is good play to turn the Port with your Ball, and so
hinder your Adversary from passing; neither is it amiss if you can to make your
Adversary a Fornicator, that is having past your self a little way, and the
others Ball being hardly through the Port you put him back again, and it may be
quite out of pass.

It argues policy to lay a long Hazard sometimes for your Antagonist, whereby
he is often entrapped for rashly adventuring at that distance, thinking to
strike your Ball into the Hazard, which lies very near it, he frequently runs
in himself by reason of that great distance.

There is great art in lying abscond, that is, to lie at bo-peep with your
Adversary, either subtlely to gain a pass or hazard.

Here note, if your Adversary has not past and lies up by the King, you may
endeavor to pass again, which if you do, and touch the King, it is two, but if
thrown down you lose: Some instead of a King use a string and a bell, and then
you need not fear to have the end, if you can pass first; this is in my
judgment bungling play, there being not that curious art of finely touching at
a great distance a King that stands very ticklishly.

For your better understanding of the Game* read the ensuing Orders. But there
is no better way than practice to make you perfect therein.

Orders to be observed by such who will play at Billiards.
1. IF the Leader touch the end of the Table with his Ball at the first stroke
he loses one.

2. If the Follower intend to hit his Adversaries Ball, or pass at one stroke
he must string his Ball, that is, lay it even with the King, or he loses one.

3. He that passes through the Port has the advantage of touching the King
which is one if not thrown down.

4. He that passes twice, his Adversary having not past at all, and touches
the King without throwing him down wins two ends.

5. He that passes not has no other advantage than the Hazards.

6. He that is a Fornicator (that is, has past through the back of the Port)
he must pass twice through the fore part, or he cannot have the advantage of
passing that end.

7. He that hits down the Port or King, or hazards his own Ball, or strikes
either Ball over the Table loses one.

8. He that hazards his Adversary's Ball, or makes it hit down the King wins
the end.

9. If four play, two against two, he that mistakes his stroke loses one to
that side he is of.

10. He that after both Balls played, removes the Port without consent, or
strikes his Ball twice together, or that his Adversaries Ball touch his
Stickhand, Clothes, or plays his Adversaries Balls, loses one.

11. He that sets not one foot upon the ground when he strikes his Ball shall
lose an end, or if he lay his hand or sleeve on the Cloth.

12. A stander by though he betts shall not instruct, direct or speak in in the
Game without consent, or being first asked; if after he is advertised hereof he
offend in this nature, for every fault he shall instantly forfeit Two pence for
the good of the Company, or not be suffered to stay in the Room.

13 He that plays a Ball, while the other runs, or takes up a Ball before it
lie still loses an end.

14. He that removes the Port with his Stick when he strikes his Ball, and
thereby prevents his Adversaries Ball from passing loses an end.

15. All controversies are to be decided by the Standers by, upon asking
judgment. Here note, that whosoever breaks the King forfeits a shilling, for
the Port ten shillings, and each Stick five shillings.

16. Five ends make a Game by Daylight, and three by Candlelight.

The Orders in Verse as I found them framed for a very ancient Billiard-Table.
1.
THe Leading ball the upper end may not hit;
For if it does it loses one by it.
2.
The Follower with the King lie even shall
If he does pass or hit the others ball;
Or else lose one, the like if either lay
Their arm or hand on board when they do play.
3.
That man wins one who with the others ball
So strikes the King that he does make him fall.
4.
If striking at a hazard both run in,
The ball struck at thereby an end shall win.
5.
He loses one that down the Port does ^ling;
The like does he that justles down the King.
6.
He that in play the adverse ball shall touch
With stick, hand, or clothes forfeits just as much.
7.
And he that twice has past shall touch the King,
The other not past at all shall two ends win.
8.
If both the balls over the Table fly,
The striker of them loses one thereby.
And if but one upon the board attend,
The striker still the loser of the end.
9.
One foot upon the ground must still be set,
Or one end's lost if you do that forget:
And if you twice shall touch a ball e're He
Has struck between an end for him is free.
10.
If any Stander by shall chance to bet,
And will instruct, he then must pay the set.
11.
The Port or King being set, who moves the same
With hand or stick shall lose that end or Game.
12.
He that can touch being past, or strike the other
Into the Hazard is allowed another.
13.
If any Stander by shall stop a ball,
The Game being lost thereby he pays for all.
14.
If any past be stricken back again,
His pass before shall be accounted vain.
15.
He that breaks any thing with violence,
King, Port, or Stick is to make good the offense.
16.
If any not the Game does fully know
May ask another whether it be so,
Remember also when the Game you win,
To set it up for fear of wrangling.
17.
He that does make his ball the King light hit,
And holes the other scores two ends for it.
There are several other Orders which only concern the house which I omit, as
impertinent to the Rules of playing at Billiards.

Since Recreation is a thing lawful in it self if not abused, I cannot but
commend this as the most gentile and innocent of any I know, if rightly used;
there being none of those cheats to be played at this as at several other Games
I shall hereafter mention. There is nothing here to be used but pure art; and
therefore I shall only caution you to go to play, that you suffer not your self
to be over-matcht, and do not when you meet with a better Gamester than your
self condemn the Table, and do not swear as one did playing at Nine-Pins, this
L. N. has put false Pins upon me.

To conclude, I believe this Pastime is not so much used of late as formerly,
by reason of those spunging Caterpillars which swarm where any Billiard-Tables
are set up, who making that single room their Shop, Kitching and Bedchamber;
their Shop, for this is the place where they wait for ignorant Cullies to be
their Customers; their Kitching, for from hence comes the Major part of their
provision, drinking and smoking being their common sustenance; and when they
can persuade no more persons to play at the Table, they make it their
dormitory, and sleep under it; the Floor is their Feather-bed, the legs of the
Table their Bed-posts, and the Table the Tester; they dream of nothing but
Hazards, being never out of them, of passing and repassing, which may be fitly
applied to their lewd lives, which makes them continually pass from one prison
to another till their lives are ended; and there is an end of the Game.

Chap. III.
Of TRVCKS.
Trucks is an Italian Game, and is much used in Spain and Ireland; it is not
very unlike Billiards, but more boisterous, and in my opinion less gentile.

It is a pastime less noted in England, wherefore the Tables are rarely met
withal; one I have seen at Tower Hill, but so bunglingly composed, and so
irregularly form^d and framed, that it was fit for none to play at but such who
never saw or played at any other than that.

A right Truck-table ought to be somewhat larger than a Billiard-table, being
at least three foot longer than it is broad and covered with Green Cloth, but
it need not be every whit so fine as the former.

It has three holes at each end, besides the corner holes; the middle-most at
one end stands directly against the Sprigg which stands for the King at
Billiards, and the other end, middle-most hole, stands exactly against the
Argolio, which is in the nature of a Port at Billiards. Of each side there are
ten holes, none of these have nets to receive the Balls, and therefore it is a
sport more troublesome than Billiards.

The Argolio stands as the Port at Billiards as aforesaid, and is made of a
strong hoop of Iron fastened to the Table, that it cannot stir, having a wider
passage than a Port, and in its bending is higher from the Board.

The Sprigg is another piece of Iron, about the thickness of a Man's little
finger, and is taller than the Billiard King, and driven into the Board, so
that it is immovable.

The Tacks with which they play, are much bigger than Billiard Sticks, and are
headed at each end with Iron; the small end is round from the middle, or
farther running taperwise, but the great end is flat beneath, though rounding a
top; good Gamesters play for the most part with the small end.

The Balls are made of Ivory, and are in bigness like Tennis-balls, and require
much art in their rounding, for otherwise they will never run true.

You may lead as you do at Billiards, but that is looked upon as bungling play;
the best Artist at this Game usually bank at the fourth Cushon from the end
where the Argolio stands, and is commonly marked for distinction whith a little
chalk.

The Game because it is sooner up than Billiards, is Nine, and sometimes
Fifteen, or indeed as many, or as few as you please.

He that leads must have a care he hit not the end, for that is a loss, but he
may bank if he please; if the Leader lie in pass, the Follower must hit him
away if he can, for if he pass it is ten to one but he wins the end, because he
may boldly strike at the Sprigg. If the Leader lies not in pass, he may either
strike at him, or lie as well to pass as the former, and then all the strife
lies in trucking one another, or striving who shall pass first.

In passing here is this subtlety to be observed, if your Adversary's Ball lie
strait before the Argolio, and yours lies a little behind it, and it is your
stroke, you would think it impossible to pass by reason of that obstruction;
whereas it is easily done thus, take the small end of your Tack, and set it
sloaping behind your Ball, but touch it not, for if you do, you lose the end;
then bend your fist, and give your Stick a smart cuff, and it will raise you
Ball over your Adversary's through the Port with much facility, this is called
by Artists, falkating; all that the follower can do to save the end, is (lying
as he does just against the Sprigg) to pass and touch the Sprigg at one stroke,
and that is two; if he touch not the end, is the others; if in striking the
Sprigg too hard, he run not out of one hole or other, and then he loses.

For the advantage of striking you may lay one hand on the Table, arm, etc.
without forfeiture; but you must not touch your Ball with your sleeve or hand
without leave first obtained under the loss of the end. As thus, you may not
know which is your Ball, upon this you cry, By your leave, Sir, and then you
may take it up and see by the mark whether it be yours or not.

If you truck your Adversary's Ball it is one, but if you do it and run out, or
fly over the Table, you lose one, so if you strike at your Adversary's Ball,
and one or both fly over the Table it is a loss to you.

If after you have past you truck your Adversary's Ball and hit the Sprigg it
is three; if you pass at one stroke truck your Adversary's Ball and hit the
Sprigg you win four; this is very rarely done, as you may well imagine, yet I
have seen it done, but never done by design, but casually; there is much art in
holding your Tack rightly, the best way I can inform you is to hold the great
end in your right hand, and level the small end over your forefinger and
thumb, leaning your left arm on the Table, for the more steady and direct
guidance of your Tack to transmit the Ball to what part of the Table you shall
think most requisite, and when you intend a smart stroke let your shove be
brisk.

In short I must leave this as all other Games to your observation and
practice; only this let me advise you, if any difference arise leave it to the
judgment of the Table, to decide the Controversy, but end it not with your
lives, by using two such clubbing Arbitrators as you play with, for with one
stroke (they are so strong and heavy) they are sufficient to dash out a man's
brains, and by the several great mischiefs have been done thereby be advised
not to fall into the like dangerous rashness.

One thing I had almost forgot, and that is, if you fulkate over hand be very
careful how you strike your Ball, for by carelessness or missing your Ball you
frequently wound the Table. Now fulkating over hand, is, when you lie near the
Cushon for a pass, and your Adversary's Ball lies directly before yours, to
make yours to jump over his through the Argolio, you must strike a strong
stroke,sloaping downwards, which will make your Ball mount aloft.

Orders for a Truck-Table.
1. IF the Leader touch the end, it is the loss of one.

2. If the Follower intend to hit his Adversary's Ball from the pass at the
first stroke he must string his Ball even with the Sprigg, or loses one.

3. He that passes and first hits the Sprigg wins one.

4. He that passes twice and hits the Sprigg wins two.

5. He that passes backward (and is called a Fornicator) he must pass twice
through the forepart, or he cannot have the advantage of passing that end.

6. He that trucks his own Ball, or strikes it, or his Adversary's over the
Table, loses one.

7. He that trucks his Adversary's Ball wins two.

8. He that touches his Adversary's Ball with Hand, Stick, or Clothes, or
strikes it for his own, loses one.

9. He that passes and touches at a stroke, wins two.

10. He that having past trucks his Adversaries Ball and hits the Sprigg with
his own, wins three.

11. Lastly, he that passes, trucketh his Adversary's Ball and hits with his
own the Sprigg, wins four.

There are other trivial Orders which for brevity sake I here omit.

CHAP. IV.
Of BOWLING.
BOwling is a Game or Recreation, which if moderately used is very healthy for
the body, and would be much more commendable than it is were it not for those
swarms of Rooks which so pester Bowling-Greens, Bares, and Bowling-Alleys where
any such places are to be found, some making so small a spot of gound yield
them more annually then fifty Acres of Land shall do elsewhere about the City,
and this done cunning, betting, crafty matching, and basely playing booty.

In Bowling there is a great art in choosing out his ground, and preventing the
windings, hanging, and many turning advantages of the same, whether it be in
open wide places, as Bares and Bowling-greens, or in close Bowling-Alleys.
Where note that in Bowling the choosing of the Bowl is the greatest cunning.
Flat Bowls are best for close Alleys; round biased Bowls for open grounds of
advantage, and Bowls round as a Ball for green swarths that are plain and level.

There is no advising by writing how to bowl, practice must be your best tutor,
which must advise you the risings, fallings, and all the several advantages
that are to be had in diverse Greens, and Bowling-Alleys; all that I shall say,
have a care you are not in the first place rookt out of your money, and in the
next place you go not to these places of pleasure unseasonably, that is when
your more weighty business and concerns require your being at home, or some
where else.

The Character of a Bowling-Ally, and Bowling-Green.
A Bowling-Green, or Bowling-Ally is a place where three things are thrown away
besides the Bowls, viz. Time, Money and Curses, and the last ten for one. The
best sport in it, is the Gamesters, and he enjoys it that looks on and betts
nothing. It is a School of wrangling, and worse than the Schools.; for here men
will wrangle for a hairs breadth, and make a stir where a straw would end the
controversy. Never did Mimmick screw his body into half the forms these men do
theirs; and it is an Article of their Creed, that the bending back of the body
or screwing in of their shoulders is sufficient to hinder the over-speed of the
Bowl, and that the running after it adds to its speed. Though they are skilful
in ground, I know not what grounds they have for loud lying, crying sometimes
the Bowl is gone a mile, a mile, etc. when it comes short of the Jack by six
yards; and on the contrary crying short, short, when he has overbowled as far.
How senseless these men appear when they are speaking sense to their Bowls,
putting considence in their entreaties for a good cast. It is the best
discovery of humors, especially in the losers, where you may observe fine
variety of impatience, whilst some fret, rail, swear, and cavel at every thing,
others rejoice and laugh, as if that was the sole design of their creation.

To give you the Moral of it, it is the Emblem of the World, or the worlds
ambition, where most are short, over, wide or wrong biased, and some few
justle in to the Mistress, Fortune! And here it is as in the Court, where the
nearest are the most spighted, and all Bowls aim at the other.

CHAP. V.
Of a Game at Chess.
CHess is a Royal Game and more difficult to be understood than any other Game
whatever, and will take up sometimes in the playing so long a time that I have
known two play a fortnight at times before the Game has been ended: and indeed
I believe the tediousness of the Game has caused the practice thereof to be so
little used; however since this pastime is so highly ingenious that there is
none can parallel it, I shall here lay down some brief instructions tending to
the knowledge thereof.

The first and highest is a King, the next in height is a Queen, the cloven
heads are Bishops; they who have heads cut aslaunt like a feather in a Helmet
are called Knights, the last are called Rooks, with a round buttoned cap on his
head, and these signify the Country and Peasantry, the Pawns are all alike,
and each Nobleman has one of them to wait upon him*

The Chess-men standing on the board, you must place the White King in the
fourth house being black from the corner of the field in the first and lower
rank, and the black King in the white house, being the fourth on the other side
in your adversaries first rank opposite to the white King; then place the white
Queen next to the white King in a white house, which is the fourth on that side
of the field; likewise the black Queen in a black house next to a black King in
the same rank.

Then place on the other side of the King in the same rank, first a Bishop,
because he being a man of counsel is placed before the Knight, who is a man of
action or execution; the Knight after the Bishop, and after the Knight place
the Rook (who is the Peasant or Countryman) in the last place or corner of the
field: place also on the Queens side and next to her a Bishop, next a Knight
and then a Rook; the Pawns take up the last place; one of which you must place
before each Nobleman as Attendants, so that these great or Nobleman fill up the
first rank and the Pawns the second from one corner of the field to the other,
and as many great men and Pawns as belong to the King so many has the Queen,
viz. three great men and four Pawns apiece, that is, one Bishop, one Knight,
and one Rook with their Pawns.

Having thus placed and ordered your men, you must in the next place consider
their march how they advance and take guard and check.

The Pawns do commonly begin first the onset, and their march is forward in
their own file, one house at once only and never backward; for the Pawns alone
never retreat, the manner of his taking men is side-ways in the next house
forward of the next file to him on either side, where when he has captivated
his enemy, and placed himself in his seat, he proceeds and removes forward one
house at once in that file, until he find an opportunity to take again.

The Pawn guards a Piece of his side which stands in that place, where if it
were one of the contrary party he might take it. In like manner the Pawn checks
the King, viz. as he takes not as he goes, which Check if the adverse King
cannot shun either by taking up the Pawn himself (if the Pawn be unguarded, or
occasion his taking by some of his Pieces, he must of necessity remove himself
out of the Pawns Check) or if it lie not in his power it is Pawn-Mate, and so
the Game is ended, and lost by him whose King is so Mate.

The Rook goes backward and forward in any file and cross-ways to and fro in
any rank as far as he will, so that there stands no piece between him and the
place he would go to. Thus he does guard his own and check the King also, which
check if the King can neither cover by the interposition of some piece of his
between the checking Rook and himself, nor take the Rook, nor be the cause of
his taking, he must remove himself out of that check or it is Mate, and the
Game is up.

The Knight skips forward, backward and on either side from the place he stands
in to the next save one of a different color, with a sideling march or a
sloap, thus he kills his enemies, guards his friends, and checks the King of
the adverse party, which because (like the Pawns check) it cannot be covered,
the King must either remove or course the Knight to be taken (for he himself
cannot take the Knight that checks him) or its Mate, and the Game is up.

The Bishop walks always in the same color of the field that he is first
placed in, forward and backward asloap every way as far as he lists; provided,
that the way be clear between him and the place he intends to go to: thus he
rebukes the adversary, guards his consorts, and checks the adverse King, which
not being avoided as aforesaid, is Mate to him and the Game is ended.

The Queens walk is more universal; for she goes the draughts of all the
aforenamed pieces, (the Knights only excepted, for her march is not from one
color to the other asloap) so far as she lists finding the way obstructed by
any piece, and thus she disturbs her adversaries, protects her subjects, and
mates the King, unless (as aforesaid) he removes, covers, takes, or causes her
to be taken, otherwise it is his Mate and the Game is concluded.

The Kings draught is from his own to the next to him any way, that either is
empty of his own subjects or where he may surprise any unguarded enemy, or
where he may stand free from the check of any of the adverse party. Thus he
confounds his foes, defends his friends, but checks not the King his enemy, who
never check one another; for there must ever be one house or place at least
between the two Kings, though unpossest of any other piece; and if one King be
compelled to fly for refuge to the King of the adverse party then it is Mate or
a Stale, and so he that gives the first wins the Game. Let this suffice for the
various draughts and several walks of the Chess-men* but this is not all, I
shall give you some other instructions as brief as I may, and refer the rest to
your own observation.

Kings and Queens have seven a piece to attend them. The King whether white or
black guards five persons before he goes forth, and being once advanced into
the field, though it be but into the second house, he then and afterward in
his March guards eight houses till he come again to one side or other of the
field.

The five the King guards before his March, are the Queen, the Bishop, his own,
his Queens, and his Bishops Pawn.

The Queen protects her King, and Bishop her Kings, her Bishops, and her own
Pawn. Thus the Queen guards as many as the King before she goes forth, and
after till the Game be won or lost.

The Kings Bishop guards the Kings Pawn, and his Knights, the Queens Bishop
guards, the Queens Pawn and her Knights guard but three houses apiece before
they go forth; but after they are marched off from the side of the field, they
guard as many houses as the King and Queen do. Those houses which the Knights
guard ere they go out are the Kings. The Knight guards the Kings Pawn, and the
third house in the front of the Kings Bishops Pawn, and the third house in the
front of the Kings Rooks Pawn.

The Queens Knight guards her Pawn, and the third house in the front of her
Bishops Pawn, also the third house in the front of her Rooks Pawn. The Kings
Rook guards his own Pawn, and the Kings Knight and no more till he be off of
the side of the field, and then he guards four houses, and the same does the
Queens Rook. The Pawns likewise guard these places before they be advanced into
the field, viz. The Kings Pawn guards the third house before the Queen, and the
third before the Kings Bishop, the Queens Pawn guards the third house before
the King, and the third before her Bishop. The Kings Bishop's Pawn guards the
third house before the King, and the third before the Kings Knight. The Queens
Bishop's Pawn guards the third house before the Queen, and the third before the
Queens Knight. The Kings Knights Pawn guards the third house before the Kings
Bishop, and the third before the Kings Rook. The Queens Knight's Pawn guards
the third house before the Queens Bishop, and the third before the Queens Rook.
The Kings Rooks Pawns, and the Queens Rooks Pawn guard but one house apiece,
that is to say, the third houses before the Knight, because they stand on the
side of the field.

Next consider the value of the great men. The King exposes not himself to
danger upon every occasion, but the Queen is under him as General, and does
more sevice than any two great men besides; and when it happens that she is
lost, her King most certainly loses the field, unless the Adversary knows not
how to make use of so great an advantage. Wherefore if a King lose two or three
of his best men in taking the opponents Queen, yet he has the best of it if he
can but manage his Game rightly.

Next to the Queen in value is the Rook, and is as much in worth above the
Bishop and Knight as the Queen is above him; so that a Rook is more worth than
two Bishops or two Knights because he can give a Mate by the help of the King,
which no other piece can do, unless played with excellent skill.

Bishops are accounted better than Knights, because they can give a Mate with a
King when no other men are left to help them, with more ease than the Knights
can; for they seldom or never do it: yet it is more dangerous to lose a Knight
than a Bishop, because the Knights check is more dangerous than the Bishops;
for the Bishop is tied to one color of the field out of which he cannot pass,
but the Knight passes through all the houses of the field; the Bishops check
may be covered, the Knights cannot; besides if it fall out that one of the
Kings has no other men left but his Bishops, and the other King none but his
Knights, the Knights with their checks can take the Bishops one after another,
because the Bishops cannot guard each other which the Knights can do; so that
at the beginning of the Game it is better to lose Bishops for the adversaries
Knights than the contrary.

The difference of the worth of Pawns is not so great as that Noblemen, because
there is not such variety in their walks, only thus much, the Kings Bishop's
Pawn is the best in the field among the Pawns, and therefore the Gamester ought
to be very careful of him; for if it should happen that the black King lose his
Bishop's Pawn to gain the white Kings Pawn, the black Kings loss is the
greater, because he cannot after this accident make a rank of Pawns of three of
a rank on that side of the field for his own security, which is a great
disadvantage, so that it is better for either of the Kings to lose his own Pawn
than his Bishops.

But if you should object that the King which loses his Bishops Pawn may
relieve himself on the other side of the field, turning to his Queens Rooks
quarters, where he shall have Pawns to succor him, I answer, it is true, he may
do so, but he will be a longer time in effecting his business, because there
are more pieces between him and his Queens Rooks by one draught than between
his own Rook and himself; so that in playing that draught he indangers the
whole Game if his adversary know how to make use of advantages. The Kings Pawn
is next in worth which oftentimes keeps the King from check by discovery; then
the Queens Pawn is next, and after that the Knights, and last of all the Rooks
Pawns, because they guard but one house apiece in the field.

The King and the Pawn have certain privileges granted them, which none of the
other Chess-men have; as for instance, The King whose remove (as has been
already mentioned) is from the place of his standing at any time to the next
house in file or rank of any side (that is one only step at once,) yet if at
any time his rank be empty of his men, so that no one stands between the King
and the Rook of either corner, the King may then shift or change with what Rook
he pleases, between whom and himself the way stands clear from other men; and
that for his better security, provided, that neither the King nor the Rook he
intends to change with, has not as yet been removed from the place of their
first standing; now the manner of the Kings shifting or changing with a Rook is
thus:

The rank cleared as aforesaid, and neither King nor Rook having yet stirred,
he may go two draughts at once to his own Rook, and so toward his Queens Rook,
causing the Rook he changes with to change his place, and come and stand by
him on the other side; that is, his own Rook in the Bishops place, and the
Queens Rook in the Queens place, and either of these changes but for one
draught. This is the Kings first prerogative.

The second is, that whereas any man may be taken by any adversary, if he be
brought so near as to come within the compass, the King cannot, but he is only
to be saluted by his adversary with the word check, advising him thereby to
look about him the more warily, and provide for his own safety: now if that
adversary do this unguarded so near the King, he may step thither by his true
draught, and the King may stay him with his own hand if he judge it convenient.

As for the Pawn, the first privilege he has, is, that whereas his walk is but
to the next house forward in his own file at once when he marches, and to the
next house side-long forward of the next file of either side, when he takes, I
say, his privilege is, that he may remove to the second house forward, which is
the fourth rank in his own file for his first draught, and ever after but one
forward at once.

The second privilege is greater, and that is, when any Pawn is come so far as
to the first rank of the adversary, and seats himself in any of his Noble
houses, he is dignified for this fact with the name and power of a Queen, and
so becomes chief of his own Kings forces if the first Queen were slain before,
and if the first Queen be yet standing in the field, the Pawn coming to the
rank aforesaid in any house whatsoever, may there make what piece you please
which you have already lost.

Some are of opinion that Chess as well as Draughts may be played by a certain
Rule, indeed I am partly inclined to believe it notwithstanding that most are
of a contrary opinion.

The first remove is an advantage, and therefore you must draw for who shall
have the first draught, which may be done with a black and white man
distributed in to either hand, and offered the Opponent which he will choose; if
he choose his own man the first draught is his; but when a Game is ended, and a
Mate given, he is to have the first Draught next Game who gave the former Mate.

The first remove is diverse according to the judgment of the Gamester, as some
will first remove their Kings Knights Pawn one single remove, that is to the
third House in his own file, others play the Kings Rooks Pawn first a double
draught; but the best way is to play the Kings Pawn first a double remove, that
so if they are not prevented by their adversaries playing the like, they may
still move that Pawn forward with good guard; for he will prove very injurious
to the adverse King.

This Pawn I shall advise you to remove first, but not so venturously as a
double remove, because if you cannot guard him cunningly, then are you like to
lose him with a check to your King, by the Queens. coming forth upon him to the
great hazard of your Kings Rook; therefore play your Kings Rook one single
remove, that there may be way made for the coming forth of Queen one way two
houses asloap, and to your Kings Bishop the other way three houses asloap, and
so upon the neglect of your adversary he may be put to a Scholars check, at
least in danger of it: here note it is ill to play the Bishops Pawn first, and
worse to play the Queens.

He that would be an Artist in this noble Game, must be so careful to second
his pieces, that if any man advanced be taken, the enemy may be likewise taken
by that piece that guards or seconds it; so shall he not clearly lose any man,
which should it fall out contrarily might lose the Game; he must also make his
passages free for retreat, as occasion shall serve, lest he be worsted.

In defending you must also be very careful that you are as able to assault as
your enemy; for you must not only answer your adversaries assault by foreseeing
his design by his play, and preventing it, but you must likewise devise plots,
how to pester and grieve your assailant, and chiefly how to entrap such pieces
as are advanced by him, preventing their retreat, amongst which a Pawn is the
soonest ensnared, because he cannot go back for succor or relief; but Bishops
and Rooks are harder to be surprised, because they can march from one side of
the field to the other to avoid the ensuing danger, but the Knights and Queens
of all are most difficulty betrayed, because they have so many places of
refuge, and the Queen more especially; where note as a great piece of policy,
that if possible you constantly have as many guards upon any one piece of yours
as you see your enemy has when he advances to take it, and be sure withal
that your guards be of less value than the pieces he encountreth you with; for
then if he fall to taking you will reap advantage thereby; but if you see you
cannot guard yours but must of necessity lose it, then be very circumspect and
see whether you can take a far better piece of his in case he takes yours, by
advancing some other piece of yours in guard; for so (as it often falls out)
that yours which you had given over for lost may be saved, whereas no other way
could have done it.

When an adverse piece comes in your way, so that by it all may be taken,
consider with your self first whether it be equal in worth to yours; next
whether it can do you any damage in the next Draught, if not let it alone; for
as it is best to play first, so it is to take last; unless as was said you
might take the piece clear, or get a better than that you lose to take it, or
at least disorder him one Pawn in his taking your man that took his; but when
you have the advantage be it but of one good piece for a worse, or of a Pawn
clear, then it is your best way to take man for man as often as you can;
besides you are to note, that whatsoever piece your adversary plays most or
best withal, be sure if it lie in your power to deprive him thereof though it
be done with loss of the like, or of one somewhat better, as a Bishop for a
Knight; for by this means you may frustrate your adversaries design and become
as cunning as himself.

Now the chief aim at Chess is to give the Mate, which is when you so check the
King of the adverse party, that he can neither take the checking piece (because
it is guarded) nor cover the check, nor yet remove out of it.

Your care ought to be in the interim how to deprive him of some of his best
pieces, as his Queen or Rook; and the way to entrap a Queen is twofold, First
by confining her to her King, so that she may not remove from him for leaving
him in check of an adverse piece; Secondly, by bringing her to or espying her
in such a place as a Knight of yours may check her King, and the next draught
take her. In the same manner you may serve a Bishop if the adverse Queen covers
her slope-wise; but if she stand not in such a posture she may be brought to
it; entice her thither with some unguarded man, which she out of eagerness of
taking for nothing, may indiscreetly bring her self into trouble.

But if you intend to cath the Queen with a Knight, imagine that the adverse
King stands in his own place unremoved, and that the Queen has brought her
self to stand in that place where the Kings Rooks Pawn stood; first, she
standing in this posture bring if you can one of your Knights to check her King
in the third house before his own Bishop; and if there be no man ready to take
up your Knight, immediately he will take up the Queen at the next draught.

The Rooks are also to be surprised two ways; first, by playing your Bishop
into your Knights Pawns first place of standing, which Bishop shall march
aslope toward the adverse Rook of the opposite corner, which if you can make
uncovered of the Knights Pawn, your Bishop will then undoubtedly take clear for
nothing; the other way is like that of surprising the Queen with a Bishop or a
Knight; where you must take notice ^^at your adversaries Queens Rook is so much
the easier to be taken with your Queens Knight, that that Knight at his third
draught may check the King and take the same Rook at his fourth draught. There
are several other ways to take a Rook, which practice must inform you.

There is an ingenious way of taking a great man for a Pawn; when you espy two
great men of your adversaries standing in one and the same rank, and but one
house between them, then prepare a Guard (if you have it not ready to your
hand) for a Pawn, which bring up to the rank next to them in the middle or
front of both of them, and without doubt, if he save the one your Pawn will
take the other; this way of taking is called a Fork or Dilemma.

The neatest and most prejudicial trick you can put upon your adversary at
Chess is a Check by discovery, which may be thus effected; observe when you
find your adversaries King any way weakly guarded, or perhaps not all, that is,
easy to be checked then before you bring that piece that can check him there
to provide some other man in that course that checks him not; afterward bring
that piece of yours which will check him (your brought-piece being away) and
then with all possible speed remove away for that former piece where it may
most annoy him, saying withal, Check by discovery of your last brought a
piece: which he being compelled to cover or remove, you may do him a greater
prejudice with that piece you removed from between the check at the next
draught thus demonstrated.

Suppose you play with the Whitemen, he removes first his Kings Pawn a double
draught forward, you answer him with the like play; he then plays out his Kings
Knight in front of his Kings Bishop's Pawn, you do the like with yours: that
Knight of his takes your Kings Pawn, and your Knight takes his likewise; he
advances the Queens Pawn, and removes to chase away or to take your Knight; you
play up your white Queen one remove before your King to frighten his Knight
also: he thinks it better to save his Knight from your Queen, than take yours
with his Queens Pa^n; and therefore conveys him away into a more secure place;
you play your Kings Knight in front of his Queens Bishop's Pawn, and there
withal say, Check by discovery of your Queen; now let him cover this check by
Discovery as well as he can, your Knight at the next draught will assuredly
take his Queen. There are several other ways to make a discovery, and a Mate
given with it, which is the noblest Mate of all.

A Queen if lost indangers much the Game; but if there be Pawns left on either
side, there is possibility of making a new Queen, and so by consequence the
renovation of the Game, which ten to one was lost before: There are several
ways to Mate this Queen and estate her in as great power as the former, for
brevity sake, two Pawns in files next one to the other, and played first one
forward and the other backward close together is a good way to make a new
Queen, especially if any one of them be guarded underneath with a Rook, for so
they will force their way before them, nor can any of them be taken without
great difficulty and danger.

As to short Mates take these observations: having both placed your men and
yours the first draught; suppose you advance your Kings Pawn forward one single
remove, your adversary plays his Kings Pawn forward a double remove in his own
file; you at your second draught come out with your Queen upon that Pawn,
placing her in the house forward of your Kings Rooks file, your enemy to guard
his Kings Pawn plays forth his Queens Knight into the third House of the Queens
Bishops file, you (hoping that he will not spy the attempt) bring out for your
third draught your Kings Bishop, which you place in the fourth house of your
Queens Bishops file, he not perceiving your intention judging all secure makes
for your Queen with his Kings Knight, playing it in the front of his Kings
Bishops Pawn, either to chase her away or take her; you immediately upon this
take up that Bishops Pawn with your Queen, and for your fourth draught give him
a Mate, which is called a Scholars Mate; because any but young beginners may
prevent it.

You may also give a Mate at two draughts if you encounter with a raw Gamester,
playing after this manner; first remove his Kings Bishops Pawn a single draught
(which is ill play at first) you your Kings Pawn a single remove, he his Kings
Knights Pawn advanced a double remove for his second draught, you bringing out
your Queen into the fifth house of your Kings Rooks file give him a Mate at
your second draught.

There is another called a Blind-Mate, and that is when your Adversary gives
you a check that you cannot avoid by any means, and is indeed a Mate absolute;
but he not seeing it to be a Mate, says only to you check, and it is therefore
called a Blind-Mate; this should be both loss of Game and stake if you before
agree not to the contrary.

A Stale may be termed a Mate and no Mate, an end of the Play but no end of the
Game, because it properly should be ended with a Check-Mate. The Stale is thus
when his King has the worst of the Game, and brought to such a strait, that he
has but one place to fly unto, and the pursuing King is so unadvised as to
bar him of that place or stop it without checking him, the distressed King
being no way able to remove but in Check, and having no other piece of his own
that he can play, then it is a Stale and a lost Game to him that gives it.
Therefore he that follows the flying King gives him check as long as he has
any place to fly to; but when he has none left to avoid his check, let him
then say check-Mate, and both Game and Stake are won.

Lastly, there is another term used in Chess-playing, and that is called a
Dead-Game, which makes (if I may say improperly) an endless end of the Game,
both Gamesters saving their Stakes: and thus it is, when the Assailant falls to
take all that comes near, carelessly giving man for man, so that it happens that
either King has but one man apiece left him, the Assailant following his eager
pursuit takes his Adversaries man, not minding that his King can take his also,
so that the Kings losing all their men and they being so unable to come so near
as to grapple the Game is ended, but the Stakes on both sides are saved.

I shall conclude this Game with the Laws of Chess, which are these following.

1. What Piece soever of your own you touch or lift from the point whereon it
stands, you must play it for that draught if you can, and into what house you
set your Man there it must stand for that draught, according to the saying at
this Game, Touch and take, out of hand and stand.

2. If you take up your Adversaries man, and after think best to let it stand
untaken, before you set your piece in place thereof, you must cry him mercy or
lose the Game.

3. If your Adversary play a false draught, and you see it not till you play
your next draught 'twill then be too late to challenge him for it.

4. If you play a false draught through mistake, and your Adversary take no
notice for his advantage, and plays his next draught, you cannot recall it.

5. If you misplace your men, and so play a while, and then discover it, it
lies in your Adversaries power to continue or begin the Game.

6. Pawns may be played a double remove forward for their first draught, but no
Pawn has that privilege without permission, on whose next file on either side
a Pawn of your Adversaries is already advanced as far as your fourth rank.

7. The standing of the King ought to be certain in his shifting and not as you
please to place him as some men play.

8. If your King standing in the check of any adverse piece, and you have played
one draught or more without avoiding the check, your Adversary may say, check
to you when he lists, and for your draught then make you avoid that check you
stood in, though it may be to your great peril.

9. If any one condition by wager, that he will give Mate or win the Game, and
the Adversary brings it to a Dead-Game, though he save the first Stake yet he
loses the Wager.

10. He that gives over the Game before it is finished, without the consent of
his Adversary, loses his Stake.

Many more observations might be here inserted for the understanding of this
noble Game, which I am forced to wave to avoid prolixity.

Principal Games on CARDS.
CHAP. VI.
PICKET.
BEfore you begin the Game at Picket, you must throw out of the Pack the
Deuces, Treys, Fours and Fives, and play with the rest of the Cards, which are
in number thirty and six.

The usual Set is an hundred, not but that you may make it more or less; the
last Card deals and the worst is the Dealers.

The Cards are all valued according to the number of the spots they bear, the
Ace only excepted, which wins all other Cards, and goes for eleven.

The Dealer shuffles, and the other cuts, delivering what number he pleases at
a time, so that he exceed not four nor deal under two, leaving twelve on the
table between them.

He that is the elder, having looked over his Cards, and finding never a
Court-Card among them, says I have a blanck, and I intend to discard such a
number of Cards, and that you may see mine, discard you as many as you intend;
this done, the Eldest shows his Cards and reckons ten for the blanck, then
taking up his Cards again he discards those which he judges most fit: here
note he is always bound to that number which he first propounded. This being
done, he takes in as many from the Stock as he laid out; and if it should
chance to fall out that the other has a Blank too, the youngers Blank shall
bar the former and hinder his Picy and Repicy, though the eldest hands Blank
consists of the biggest Cards.

It is no small advantage to the eldest to have the benefit of discarding,
because he may take in eight of the twelve in the Stock discarding as many of
his own for them, not but that if he find it more advantageous he may take in a
less number; after this the Antagonist may take in what he thinks fit,
acquitting his hand of the like number. Here note, that let the Game be never
so good the Gamesters are both obliged to discard one Card at least. After the
discarding you must consider the R^ff, that is how much you can make of one
suit; the eldest speaks first, and if the youngest makes no more the Ruff is
good, and sets up one for every ten he can produce; as for example, for thirty
reckon three, for forty four, and so onward, withal take notice you are to
count as many for thirty five as for forty, and as much for forty five as
fifty, and so of the rest; but from thirty five to thirty nine you must count
no more than for thirty five, and so (...) thirty to thirty four count no more
than for thirty; and this Rule is to be observed in all other higher ^^^bers.

As for Sequences and their val^^ after the Ruff is played, the Elder acquaints
you with his Sequences (if he have them) and they are Tie^^es, Quarts, Quints,
Sixiesms, Sep^^^sms, Huictiesms and Neu^^esms, as thus; six, seven, and eight;
nine, ten, and Knave; Queen, King, and Ace; which last is calleh a Tierce
Major, because it is the highest. A Quart is a sequence of four Cards, a Quint
of five, a Sixism of six, etc. These Sequences take their denomination from the
highest Card in the Sequence. It is a Tierce Major or a Tierce of an Ace when
there is Queen, King and Ace, a Tierce of a King when the King is the best
Card; a Tierce of a Queen when there is neither King nor Ace, and so till you
come to the lowest Tierce, which is a Tierce of an eight. You must reckon for
every Tierce three, for a Quart four, but for a Quint fifteen, for a Sixiesm
sixteen, and so upward; now what ever you can make of all you must add to your
Blank, and count the whole together.

Here note that the biggest Tierce, Quart, or other Sequence, although there be
but one of them makes all the others less Sequences useless unto him be they
never so many; and he that has the biggest Sequence by virtue thereof reckons
all his less Sequences, though his Adversaries Sequences be greater, and
otherwise would have drowned them.

Farther observe, that a Quart drowns a Tierce, and a Quint a Quart, and so of
the rest, so that he who has a Sixiesm may reckon his Tierces, Quarts, or
Quints, though the other may happen to have Tierce, Quart, etc. of higher value
than the others are that has the Sixiesm; trace the same method in all the
other like Sequences.

After you have manifested your Sequences, you come to reckon your three Aces,
three Kings, three Queens, three Knaves, or three Tens, as for Nines, Eights,
Sevens, and Sixes, they have no place in this account; for every Ternary you
count three, and they are in value as it is in Sequences; Aces the highest and
best, Kings next, after these Queens, then Knaves, and last of all Tens. The
higher drowns the lower here as in the Sequences. He that has three Aces may
reckon his three Queens, Knaves, or Tens, if he have them, though the other
has three Kings; and this is done by reason of his higher Ternary. Now he that
has four Aces, four Kings, four Queens, four Knaves, or four Tens, for each
reckons fourteen, which is the reason they are called Quatorzes.

Now they b^gin to play the Cards, the elder begins and younger follows in suit
as at Whisk, and for every Ace, King, Queen, Knave, or Ten, he reckons one.

A Card once played must not be recalled, unless he have a Card of the same
suit in his hand, if the elder hand plays an Ace, King, Queen, or Ten, for
every such Card he is to reckon one, which he adds to the number of his Game
before; and if the other be able to play upon it a higher Card of the same
suit, he wins the Trick, and reckons one for his Card as well as the other.
Whosoever wins the last Trick reckons two for it, if he win it with a Ten, but
if with any Cards, under, he reckons but one; then they tell their Cards, and
he that has the most is to reckon Ten for them.

After this, each person sets up his Game with Counters, and if the set be not
up, deal again; now a set is won after this manner, admit that each party is so
forward in his Game that he wants but four or five to be up, if it so happens
that any of the two have a Blank, he wins the set, because the Blanks are
always first reckoned; but if no Blanks, then comes the Ruff, next your
Sequences, then your Aces, Kings, Queens, Knaves, and Tens, next what Cards are
reckoned in play, and last of all the Cards you have won. If any of the
Gamesters can reckon, either in Blanks, Ruffs, Sequences, Aces, etc. up to
thirty in his own hand, without playing a Card, and before the other can reckon
any thing, instead of thirty he shall reckon ninety, and as many as he reckons
after above his thirty, adding them to his ninety; this is known by the name of
a Repicy.

Moreover, he that can make in like manner, what by Blank, Ruff, Sequences,
etc. up to the said number, before the other has played a Card, or reckoned
any thing, instead of thirty he reckons sixty, and this is called a Picy. Here
note, that if you can but remember to call for your Picy, or Repicy, before you
deal again, you shall lose neither of them, otherwise you must.

He that wins more than his own Cards reckons Ten, but he that wins all the
Cards reckons Forty, and this is called a Capet.

The Rules belonging to this Game are these. If the Dealer give more Cards than
his due, whether through mistake or otherwise, it lies in the choice of the
elder hand whether he shall deal again or no, or whether it shall be played out.

He that forgets to reckon his Blank, Ruff, Sequences, Aces, Kings, or the
like, and has begun to play his Cards cannot recall them. So it is with him
that shows not his Ruff before he play his first Card, losing absolutely all
the advantage thereof.

He that misreckons any thing, and has played one of his Cards, and his
adversary finds at the beginning, middle, or end of the Game, that he had not
what he reckoned, for his punishment he shall be debarred from reckoning any
thing he really has, and his adversary shall reckon all he has, yet the other
shall make all he can in play. He that takes in more Cards than he discardeth
is liable to the same penalty.

He that throws up his Cards imagining he has lost the Game, mingling them
with other Cards on the Table though afterward he perceive his mistake, yet he
is not allowed to take up his Cards and play them out.

No man is permitted to discard twice in one dealing.

He that has a Blank, his Blank shall hinder the other Picy and Repicy,
although he has nothing to show but his Blank.

He that has four Aces, Kings, Queens, etc. dealt him and after he has
discarded one of the four reckons the other three, and the other say to him it
is good; he is bound to tell the other, if he ask him what Ace, King, Queen,
etc. he wants.

If after the Cards are cleanly cut, either of the Gamesters know the upper
Card by the backside, notwithstanding this the Cards must not be shuffled
again. In like manner, if the Dealer perceive the other has cut himself an
Ace, and would therefore shuffle again, this is not permitted; and if a Card be
found faced, it shall be no argument to deal again, but must deal on; but if
two be found faced, then may he shuffle again.

Lastly, Whosoever is found changing or taking back again any of his Cards, he
shall lose the Game, and be accounted a foul Player.

CHAP. VII.
The Game at GLEEK.
DEuces and Treys must be cast out as useless in this Game, then listing for
dealing the least Card deals: The number of persons playing must be three,
neither more nor less, and most frequently they play at Farthing, Halfpenny, or
Penny-Gleek, which in play will amount considerably.

The Dealer delivers the Cards by four till every one has twelve, and the rest
are laid on the Table, for the Stock, being in number eight, seven whereof are
bought and the Ace is turned up; the turned up Card is the Dealers; and if it
be Tiddy turned up is four apiece from each to the Dealer.

The Ace is called Tib, the Knave Tom, the four of Trumps Tiddy, Tib the Ace is
fifteen in hand and eighteen in play, because it wins a Trick, Tom the Knave is
nine, and Tiddy is four, the fifth Towser, the sixth Tumbler, which if in hand
Towser is five and Tumbler six, and so double if turned up, and the King and
Queen of Trumps is three.

The eldest hand bids for the stock in hopes of bettering his Game, though
sometimes it makes it worse: the first penny you bid is twelve, thirteen, and
so on; if at sixteen they say take it, and none will venture more for it, he is
bound to take it, that is taking in seven Cards, and putting out seven in their
stead, and must pay besides eight to one and eight to the other of the
Gamesters for buying, if any odd money be given, as 15, 17. or the like, the
eldest hand usually claims it, or else it is given to the box; but if he have
Mournival, Gleek or Tiddy in his hand after he has taken in the Stock he bates
for them all, and so possibly may gain by it, if he have a good hand and pay
for his buying two.

Here you must note that if Tib be turned up it is fifteen to the Dealer in
reckoning after play, but he must not make use of it in play being the
Trump-Card, for then 'twould make him eighteen, because it would win a Trick
which is three more.

Next you speak for the Ruff, and he that has most of a suit in his hand wins
it, unless some of the Gamesters have four Aces and then he gains the Ruff,
though you have never so many of a suit in your hand. If any wins a Ruff, and
forgets to show it before a Card played loses it, and he that shows any for a
Ruff after shall have it.

The first or eldest says, I Will vye the Ruff, the next says, I Will see it, and
the third, I Will see it and revie it: I Will see your revie, says the first;
because he has as many in his hand as another: the middle probably says, I Will
not meddle with it; then they show their Cards, and he that has most of a suit
wins six pence or farthings according to the Game of him that holds out
longest, and four of the other that said he would see it, but after refused to
meddle with it; but if any of the three Gamesters says he has nothing to say
as to the Ruff he pays but a farthing, halfpence, penny, according as the Game
is aforesaid; and if the eldest and second hand pass the Ruff the youngest has
power to double it, and then it is to be played for the next deal, and if any
forgets to call for the double Ruff, it is to be played for the next deal after
that.

Sometimes one of the Gamesters having all of a suit in his hand bids high for
the Ruff, and the other having four Aces is resolved to bid higher, so that it
sometimes amounts to sixteen and more, then I Will see it and revie, says one;
I Will see it and revie, says another, that is, eight to the winner, and all
above is but two a time, as it may be they will say, I Will see it and revie it
again, and I Will see that and revie it again, says another, for which seeing
and revying they reckon but two, after that it is once come to eight; but he
that has the four Aces carries it clearly, etc. as aforesaid.

Buying or bidding for the Ruff is when you are in likelihood to go in for
Mournival, Gleek, or increase of Trumps, that so if you have bad Cards, you may
save your buyings and your Cards too, whereas otherwise? you may lose all.

If you call for either Mournival or Gleek, and have laid them out in the
stock, if you be taken in it, for forfeit double what you receive.

Sometimes out of policy or a vapor they will v^e when they have not above
thirty in their hands, and the rest may have forty or fifty, and being afraid
to see it, the first many times wins out of a mere bravado, and this is good
play though he acquaint you with it hereafter.

A Mournival of Aces is eight, of Kings six, of Queens four, and a Mournival of
Knaves two a piece.

A Gleek of Aces is four, of Kings three, of Queens two, and of Knaves one a
piece from the other two Gamesters.

A Mournival is either all the Aces, the four Kings, Queens, or Knaves, and a
Gleek is three of any of the aforesaid.

Here note, that twenty two are your Cards; if you win nothing but the Cards
that were dealt you, you lose ten; if you have neither Tib, Tom, Tiddy, King,
Queen, Mournival, nor Gleek, you lose because you count as many Cards as you
had in tricks, which must be few by reason of the badness of your hand; if you
have Tib, Tom, King, and Queen of Trumps in your hand, you have thirty by
honors, that is, eight above your own Cards, besides the Cards you win by them
in play. If you have Tom only, which is Nine and the King of Trumps, which is
three, then you reckon from twelve, thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, till you come
to two and twenty, and then every Card wins so many halfpence, pence, etc. as
you played for; if you are under two and twenty you lose as many.

Here note, that before the Cards are dealt, it is requisite to demand, whether
the Gamesters will play at Tiddy, or leave it out, it being a Card that is apt
to be forgotten; and know, that it is looked upon as very foul play to call for
a Gleek of Kings, Aces, Queens, or Knaves, when the person has but two in his
hands. If yo discard wrong, i. e. lay out but 5 or 6 Cards, if you call for any
Gleek or Mournivals, you lose them all if it be found out that you so discard.
Let this suffice for this noble and delightful Game or Recreation.

CHAP. VIII.
L'OMBRE a Spanish Game.
THere are several sorts of this Game called L'Ombre, but that which is the
chief is called Renegado, at which three only can play, to whom are dealt nine
Cards apiece, so that by discarding the eights, nines and tens, there will
remain thirteen Cards in the Stock; there is no Trump but what the player
pleases; the first hand has always the liberty. to play or pass, after him
the second, etc.

There are two sorts of Counters for Stakes, the greater and the lesser, which
last have the same proportion to the other as a penny to a shilling: of the
great Conters each man Stakes one for the Game, and one of the lesser for
passing, and for the hand when eldest, and for every Card taken in one Counter.

There are two suits, Black and Red; of the Black there is first the Spadillo,
or Ace of Spades; the Mallillio or black Deuce, the Basto or Ace of Clubs; the
King, the Queen, the Knave, the seven, the fix, the five, four, and three. Of
the Red Suit there is the Spadillo, punto, Mallillio, etc.

The Spadillo or Ace of Spades, is always the first Card, and always Trump, and
the Basto or Ace of Clubs is always third; of the Black there is 11 Trumps, of
the Red 12. The Red Ace enters into the fourth place when it is Trump and it is
called Punto then, otherwise only called an Ace.

The least small Cards of the Red are always best, and the most of the Black;
except the Deuce and Red Seven, which are called the Mallillio's and always
second when Trump. The Matadors (or Killing Cards) which are the Spadillo,
Mallillio, and Basto are the chief Cards, and when they are all in hand the
Others pay for them three of the greater Counters apiece; and with these three
for foundation you may count as many Matadors as you have Cards in an
interrupted series of Trumps; for all which the others are to pay you one
Kounter apiece.

He who has the first hand has his choice (as aforesaid) of playing the game,
of naming the Trump, and of taking in as many and as few Cards as he list, and
after him the second, etc. having demanded whether any one will play without
taking in, you oblige your self to take in though your Game be never so good,
wherefore you do well to consider it before.

If you name not the Trump before you look on the Cards which you have taken
in, any other may prevent you (...) ^ame what Trump they please; if (...) know
not of two suits which to (...) Trump first, the black suit is to be preferred
before the Red, because there are fewer Trumps of it. Secondly, you were best
to choose that suit of which have not the King, because besides your three
Trumps you have a King which is as good as a fourth. When you have the choice
of going in three Matadors, or the two black Aees with three o^ ^our other
Trumps, if the Stakes be great you are to choose this last, as most like to win
most Tricks; if it be but a simple Stake you are to choose the first, because
the six Counters you are to receive for the three Matadors more than
countervail the four or five you lose for the Game.

He that has the first hand is never to take in nor play, unless he have three
sure Tricks in his hand at least; to understand which the better, know the end
of the Game is to win most Tricks, whence he that can win five Tricks of the
nine has a sure Game; or if he win four and can so divide the Tricks as one
may win two, the other three, if not it is either Codillio, or Repuesto, so the
P^^^er loses and makes good the Stake^*

It is called Codillio when the P^yer is beasted, and another wins more Tricks
than he, when this takes up the Stakes and the Other makes it good.

Here note, although the other two always combine to make him lose, yet they
all do their best (for the common good) to hinder any one from winning, only
striving to make it Repuesto, which is when the Player wins no more Tricks than
another, in which case the Player doubles the Stake without any ones winning
it, and remains so for the advantage of the next Player.

Here note that Kings of any suit are accounted as good Trumps, mean while all
other Cards but Kings and Trumps are to be discarded.

The Player having taken in, the next is to consider the goodness of the Game,
and to take in more or less for the best advantage of his Game; neither is any
for the saving a Counter or two to neglect the taking in, that the other may
commodiously make up his Game with what Cards he has left, and that no good
Cards may lie dormant in the Stock, except the Player plays without taking
in, when they may refuse to take in, if they imagine he has all the Game.

When one has a sure Game in his hand, he is to play without taking in, then
the others are to give him each one of the great Counters as he is to give
them, if he play without taking in a Game that is not sure and loses it; if
you win all the Tricks in your hand or the Voll, they likewise are to give you
one Counter apiece, but then you are to declare before the fifth Trick that you
intend to play for the Voll, that so they keep their best Cards, which else,
seeing you win five Tricks (or the Game) they may carelessly cast away.

If you renounce you are to double the Stake, as also if you have more or fewer
Cards than nine, to which end you must carefully count your Cards in dealing
and taking in before you look on them; besides according to the rigor of the
Game if you speak any thing tending to the discovery there of, either in your
own hand or another (excepting Gagno) or play so, to hinder the making of
Repuesto or Codillio, you are not fit to play.

Observe, that in playing Trumps, if any plays an ordinary one, and you have
only the three best Cards or Matadors singly or jointly in your hands, you may
resuse to play them without renouncing, because of the privilege which these
Cards have, that none but commanding Cards can force them out of your hand.

You are to say nothing when you play your Card, but I pass or play, or gagno,
or gagno del Re when you play your Queen to hinder them from taking it with the
King.

Now since it is impossible to provide against all accidents in the Game, only
take notice of these general Rules.

First, never win more than one Trick if you cannot win more than two, because
of the advantage you give the Player by ^t, in dividing the Tricks.

Secondly, you are to win the Trick always from the Player if you can, unless
you let it pass for mere advantage, where the second is to let pass to the
third if he have the likelier Game to beast the Player, or if he be likelier to
win it. There may be diverse advantages in refusing to take the Players Trick;
but the chief is, if you have the Tenaces in your hand, that is two Cards, and
if you have the leading, you are sure to lose one of them; if the Player lead
to you, you are sure to win them both; For example, if you have Spadillio and
Basto in your hand, and he have the Mallillio and another Trump, if you lead
you lose one of them; for either you play your Spadillio, and he plays the
lesser Trump upon it and wins your Basto the next Trick with his Mallillio, and
so the contrary; whereas if he leads he loses; for if he leads his Mallillio
you win it with your Spadillio, and with your Basto win the other Trump, etc.

If you are not sure to win five Tricks, having only three Matadors, and Kings
your auxiliary Cards; if you have the leading, play first a Matador or two
before you play your Kings to fetch out his Trumps which might have trumped
them, and if you have three Matadors with two other Trumps, your best way is to
play your Matadors first to see where the Trumps lie; if both follow, you are
sure if the Trump be red there remains only one Trump in their hands, if black
none at all.

Lastly, if the Players have but a weak Game, they are to imitate cunning
Beast-players in dividing the Tricks, and consulting to play their Cards. To
conclude, lay your Tri^ks angle-wife, that you may the more facilely compute
them.

CHAP. IX.
The Game at CRIBBIDGE.
AT Cribbidge there are no Cards to be thrown out, but all are made use of; and
the number of the Set is sixty one.

It is an advantage to deal, by reason of the Crib, and therefore you must lift
for it, and he that has the least Card deals.

There are but two Players at this Game, the one shuffles and the other cuts,
the Dealer delivers out the Cards one by one, to his Antagonist first and
himself last, till five apiece be dealt to one another; the rest being set down
in view on the Table, each looks on his Game, and orders his Cards for the
best advantage.

He that deals makes out the best Cards he can for his Crib, and the other the
worst, because he will do him as little good as he can, being his Crib; which
Crib is four Cards, two a piece, which they lay out upon the Table, not knowing
nor seeing one another Cards, and then they turn up a Card from the parcel
that was left of dealing, and each of them may make use of that Card to help
them on in their Game in hand, and when they have played out their three Cards,
and set up with Counters their Games in their hands, the Crib is the others the
next deal, and so they take it by turns.

The value of the Cards is thus: Any fifteen upon the Cards is two, whether
nine and six, ten and five, King and five, seven and eight, etc.

A Pair is two, a Pair-Royal six, a double Pair-Royal twelve, Sequences of
three is two, Sequences of four is four, of five five, etc. and so is a Flush
of three, three; of four, four, etc. Knave Noddy is one in hand and two to the
Dealer; that is, if you have a Knave of that suit which is turned up, it is
Knave Noddy. A Pair of Aces, Kings, Queens, Knaves, Tens, etc. is two; Three
Aces, Kings, Queens, etc. is a Pair-Royal; a double Pair-Royal is four Aces,
four Kings, four Queens, etc. and is twelve Games to him that has them.

Having looked on your Cards, you count your Game after this manner: Suppose you
have in your hand a Nine and two Sixes, after you have laid out two Cards for
the Crib, that makes you six Games, because there is two fifteens and a pair,
by adding your Nine to the two Sixes, and if a Six chance to be turned up, then
you have twelve Games in your hand; for though you must not take the turned up
Card into your hand, yet you may make what use you can of it in counting, so
that the three Sixes makes you six, being a Pair-Royal, and the Nine added to
every Six makes three fifteens, which six more added to the former, make
twelve, which you must set up with Counters or otherwise, that your Opponent
may know what you are, though you must not see his Cards, nor he yours; if you
think he plays foul by reckoning too much, you may count them after the hand is
played.

Thus you have set up your twelve, your Opposite it may be has four, five, and
six in his hand; that is two, because of Sequences of three; then it is two
more because it is four, five, and six; again, taking in the counting six that
is turned up, that is in all four, then there is fifteen and fifteen, four and
five is nine, and six is fifteen, and then with the six turned up it is fifteen
more, which makes eight Games, this he likewise sets up, keeping his Cards
undiscovered. Here note, he that deals not sets up three in lieu thereof.

Having thus done, he that dealt not plays first, suppose it a six, if you have
a nine play it, that makes fifteen, for which set up two, the next may play a
four which makes nineteen, you a six twenty five, and he a five that is thirty*
you being not able to come in, having a six in your hand, he sets up one, (for
it is one and thirty you aim at in playing the Cards), because he is most, and
two for Sequences four, five, and six, which were his four after the fifteen,
your five and his six; and that does not hinder them from being Sequences,
though the six was played between the four and the five; but if an Ace, Nine,
King, Queen, or thelike, had been played between, ^hey had been no Sequences;
so the two for the Sequences, and the one for thirty being most (as at one and
thirty) makes him three, which he must set up to the rest of his Game* and in
this playing of the Cards you may make Pairs, Sequences, Flush, Fifteens,
Pair-Royals, and double Pair-Royals, if you can, though that is rarely seen.

Lastly, you look upon you Crib, that is the two Cards apiece laid out at
first, which is the Dealers; if he find no Games in them, nor help by the Card
that was turned up, which he takes into his hand, then he is bilkt, and
sometimes it so happens that he is both bilkt in hand and crib. Thus they play
and deal by turns till the Game of sixty one be up.

Here note, if you get the Game before your Adversary is forty five (forty four
will not do it) you must then say, I have lurkt you, and that is a double Game
for whatever you played with six shilling, or a greater sum.

CHAP. X.
A Game at ALL-FOVRS.
ALL-Fours is a Game very much played in Kent, and very well it may, since from
thence it drew its first original; and although the Game may be looked upon as
trivial and inconsiderable, yet I have known Kentish Gentlemen and others of
very considerable note, who have played great sums of money at it, yet that
adds not much to the worth of the Game, for a man may play away an estate at
One and Thirty; as I knew one lose a considerable sum at most at three throws.

This Game I conceive is called Allfours from Highest, Lowest, Jack, and Game,
which is the Set as some play it, but you may make from seven to fifteen, or
more if you please, but commonly eleven.

There are but two can play at it at a time, and they must lift for dealing,
the highest Put-card deals, who delivers to his adversary three Cards, and to
himself the like, and the like again, and having six apiece, he turns up a Card
which is Trump; if Jack (and that is any Knave) it is one to the Dealer.

If he to whom the Cards were dealt after perusal of his Game like them not, he
has the liberty of beging one; if the Dealer refuse to give him one, then he
deals three apiece more, but if he then turns up a Card of the same suit, he
deals further till he turns up a Card of another suit.

Here note, That an Ace is four, a King is three, a Queen is two, a Knave one,
and a Ten is ten.

Now you must play down your Cards, but to what advantage I cannot here
prescribe, it must be according to the Cards you have in your hand managed by
your judgment to the best advantage.

Having played your Cards you reckon, if you are highest and lowest of what is
Trumps, you reckon two; if you are only highest but one, and the like of Jack
and Game; sometimes you are highest, lowest, Jack, and Game, and then you must
reckon four; the Game is he that tells most after the Cards are played, and
therefore a Ten is a very significant Card, which crafty Gamesters know so well
that they will frequently take out of a Pack two Tens, and hide them contrary
to the knowledge of the other, which is a great advantage to this foul player,
if he play of the same suit of these Tens he has absconded, for it must of
necessity secure him from losing the Game.

Here note, That he that wins Jack wins one also; and furthermore observe that
for advantage reneging is allowable if you have Trumps in your hand to trump it.

There is another sort of All-fours called Running-All-fours, at which they
play One and Thirty up, and in this Game the Dealer has a great advantage, for
if he turn up an Ace it is four, a King three, a Queen two, and a Knave one,
and these are the same also in play. A Ten is the best Card for making up.

CHAP. XI.
English Ruff and Honors, and Whist.
RUff and Honors (alias Slamm) and Whist, are Games so commonly Known in
England in all parts thereof, that every Child almost of Eight years old has a
competent knowledge in that recreation, and therefore I am unwilling to speak
any thing more of them than this, that there may be a great deal of art used in
Dealing and playing at these Games which differ very little one from the other.

In playing your Cards you must have recourse altogether to your own judgment
or discretion, still making the best of a bad market; and though you have but
mean Cards in your own hand, yet you may play them so suitable to those in your
Partners hand, that he may either trump them, or play the best of that suit on
the Board.

You ought to have a special eye to what Cards are played out, that you may
know by that means either what to play if you lead, or how to trump securely
and advantagiously. Reneging or renouncing, that is, not following suit when
you have it in your hand, is very fowl play, and he that does it ought to
forfeit one, or the Game upon a Game, and he that loses dealing loses one, or
a trick as you make it.

At Ruff and Honors, by some called Slamm, you have in the Pack all the
Deuces, and the reason is, because four playing having dealt twelve a piece,
there are four left for the Stock, the uppermost whereof is turned up, and that
is Trumps, he that has the Ace of that, Ruffs; that is, he takes in those four
Cards, and lays out four others in their lieu; the four Honors are the Ace,
King, Queen, and Knave; he that has three Honors in his own hand, his part
not having the fourth sets up Eight by Cards, that is t^o tricks; if he has
all four, then Sixteen, that is four tricks; it is all one if the two Partners
make them three or four between them, as if one had them. If the Honors are
equally divided among the Gamesters of each side, then they say Honors are
split. If either side are at eight Groats he has the benefit of calling
Can-ye, if he has two Honors in his hand, and if the other answers one, the
Game is up, which is nine in all, but if he has more than two he shows them,
and then it is one and the same thing; but if he forgets to call after playing
a trick, he loses the advantage of Can-ye for that deal.

All Cards are of value as they are superior one to another, as a Ten wins a
Nine if not Trumps, so a Queen, a Knave in like manner; but the least Trump
will win the highest Card of any other Card; where note the Ace is the highest.

Whist is a Game not much differing from this, only they put out the Deuces and
take in no stock; and is called Whist from the silence that is to be observed
in the play; they deal as before, playing four, two of a side, (some play at
two handed, or three handed Whist; if three handed, always two strive to
suppress and keep down the rising-man), I say they deal to each Twelve a piece
and the Trump is the bottom Card. The manner of crafty playing* the number of
the Game Nine Honors and dignity of other Cards are all alike, and he that
wins most tricks is most forward to win the set.

He that can by craft overlook his adversaries Game has a great advantage,
for by that means he may partly know what to play securely; or if he can have
some petty glimpse of his Partners hand. There is a way by winking, or the
fingers to discover to their Partners what Honors they have, as by the wink of
one eye, or putting one finger on the nose or table, it signifies one Honor,
shutting both the eyes, two; placing three fingers or four on the Table, three
or four Honors. They have several ways of securing an Honor or more in the
bottom when they deal, either to their Partners or selves; if to their Partner
they place in the second lift next the top, 1, 2, 3, or four Aces, or Court
cards all of a suit, according as they could get them together in the former
deal, and place a Card of the same suit in the bottom, when the Cards are cut
they must use their hand so dexterously as not to put the top in the bottom,
but nimbly place where it was before.

If they would secure Honors to themselves when dealing, they then place so
many as they can get upon their lap or other place undiscerned, and after the
Cards are cut, then clap them very neatly under. But the cleanliest rooking way
is by the breef, that is take a pack of Cards and open them, then take out all
the Honors, that is as aforesaid, the four Aces, the four Kings, etc. then
take the rest and cut a little from the edges of them all alike, by which means
the Honors will be broader than the rest, so that when your Adversary cuts to
you, you are certain of an Honor, when you cut to your Adversary cut at the
ends, and then it is a chance if you cut him an Honor, because the Cards at
the ends are all of a length, thus you may make breefs end-ways as well as
side-ways.

There are a sort of cunning fellows about this City, who before they go to
play will plant half a dozen of these Packs (nay sometimes half a score) in the
hands of a Drawer, who to avoid being suspected will call to their confederate
Drawer for a fresh pack of Cards, who brings them as from a shop new, and some
of these Packs shall be so finely marked, whereby the Gamester shall plainly and
certainly know every Card therein contained by the outside, although the best
of other eyes shall not discern where any mark was made at all; and this done
with that variety that every ^ard of every suit shall have a different
distinguishable mark.

Some have a way to slick with a slick-stone all the Honors very smooth, by
which means he will be sure to cut his Partner an Honor, and so his Partner to
him again, and that is done by lying a forefinger on the top indifferent hard,
and giving a slurring jerk to the rest which will slip off from the slickt Card.

It is impossible to show you all the Cheats of this Game, since your cunning
Gamester is always studying new inventions to deceive the ignorant.

CHAP. XII.
FRENCH-RVFF.
AT French-Ruff you must lift for deal, most or least carries it according to
the agreement of the Gamesters.

You may play either two, four or six of a side, dealing to each five a piece,
either two first at a time, or three, according to pleasure, and he that deals
turns up Trump; the King is the highest Card at Trumps, and so it is highest in
all other Cards that are not Trumps, the Queen is next, the Knave next, and
next to that the Ace, and all other Cards follow in preheminency according to
the number of the Pips, but all small Trumps win the highest of any other suit.

Having turned up Trumps, he that has the Ace must take the Ace turned up, and
all other Trumps which immediately follow that, if so agreed among the
Gamesters, laying out so many Cards as he took up in lieu thereof.

After this they play, to win two tricks signifies nothing, to win three or
four wins but one, but to win five is the winning of five.

If you play at forsat (that is the rigor of the play) he that deals wrong
loses one and his Deal. You are bound to follow suit, and if you renounce or
renege you lose the whole Game, if you so make it, otherwise but one or two
according to agreement.

He that plays a Card that is trumped by the follower, if the next player has
none of the former suit he must trump it again, although he has never a trump
in his hand that can win the former trump, and so it must pass to the last
player.

All the Players round are bound to win the highest trump played if they can.
Here note, that he who plays before his turn loses one, unless it be the
last Card of all.

CHAP. XIII.
Five-CARDS.
FIve-Cards is an Irish Game, and is as much played in that Kingdom, and that
for considerable sums of money, as All-fours is played in Kent, but there is
little analogy between them.

There are but two can play at it, and there are dealt five Cards a piece. The
least of the black, and the most of the red wins. The Ace of Diamonds is the
worst of the whole pack, unless it prove to be trump.

The five fingers ( alias, five of trumps) is the best Card in the pack; the
Ace of Hearts is next to that and the next is the Ace of Trumps, then the
Knave, and the rest of Cards are best according to their value in pips, or as
they are trumps.

Before you play ask whether he will five it, if he speaks affirmatively turn
up the next Card of the Pack under that first turned up, and that must be
trumps; if not play, it out: he that wins most Cards wins five, but he that
wins all, wins ten.

Observe, that the Ace of Hearts wins the Ace of Trumps, and the Fivefingers
not only wins the Ace of Trumps, but also all other Cards whatever.

CHAP. XIV.
Of a Game called Costly-Colours.
THis Game is to be played out only by two persons, of which the eldest is to
play first as in other Games. You must deal off three apiece, and turn up the
next Card following; then the Eldest is to take his choice whether he will
Mogg. (that is change a Card or no) and whosoever refuses is to give the other
one chalk or hole, of which generally Threescore and one makes the Game. Then
must the Eldest play, and the other if he can must make it up fifteen, for
which she shall set up as many holes or chalks as there are Cards upon the
Table; so likewise for five and twenty, and also as many Cards as are played to
make up thirty, no more nor less, so many chalks may be set up who played last,
to make up one and thirty, and if one and thirty be not made, then he that
played last and is nearest one and thirty without making out must set up one,
which is called setting up one for the latter.

This being done, the eldest must show how many Chalks he has in his hand to
set up, and after him the youngest, which they must reckon in this manner,
taking notice both of the color and number of pips upon the Card turned up as
those in their hands still, reckoning as many for all the fifteen and five and
twenty as there go Cards to make the number; and if you have it by chance in
your hand, and with the Card turned up one and thirty, then you must set up
four for that: you must also set up if you have them in your hands or can make
them so in the Card turned up as follows; two for a pair, be they either
Coat-cards, or others; two for a Knave, and if a Knave of the same color and
suit of the Card turned up, then you must set up four; and so for a Deuce four,
if it be of the same color turned up: if you have three of a sort, either
three fours, five sixes, or Coat-cards, you must set up nine, and this is
called a Pair-Royal; now if they are all either Hearts, Diamonds, or the like,
then you must set up six for costlycolours. If you have three of a color you
can reckon but two for Colors.

Whosoever dealt, if he turned up either Deuce or Knave, he must set up four
for it; as for example, imagine you had dealt your Adversary three Cards, viz.
the five of Hearts, four of Hearts, and eight of Hearts; to your self the Deuce
of Hearts, seven of Clubs, and nine of Hearts. Lastly, you turn up a Card,
which is the Knave of Hearts, for which you must set up four; then because he
will not ask you to change one, he gives you one, which you must set up, and
then he plays, suppose it be his five of Hearts, you then play your seven of
Clubs, which makes twelve, then he plays his eight of Hearts, which makes
twenty ^ then you play your nine of (...) makes twenty nine, and because ^
cannot come in with his five of Hearts, you must play your Deuce of Hearts,
which makes you one and thirty. For your five you must set up five, then he
must set up what he has in his hand, which you will find to be but six, for he
has nothing in his hand but Costly-Colours. Then must you set up your Games,
which first are two, for your nine of Clubs and nine of Hearts which make
fifteen, then that fifteen and the Knave turned up makes five and twenty, for
which set up three; then for your Deuce of Hearts which is the right, set up
four, and three for Colors, because you have three of a sort in your hand with
that turned up, now these with the five you got in playing for thirty one makes
you this Deal with the Knave turned up and the Cards in your hand just twenty.
Many other examples I might give you, but that it is needless since this one is
sufficient to direct you in all others. And thus much for Costly-Colours.

CHAP. XV.
BONE-ACE.
THis Game you may look on as trivial and very inconsiderable, and so it is by
reason of the little variety therein contained, but because I have seen Ladies
and Persons of quality have played at it for their diversion, I will briefly
describe it, and the rather because it is a licking Game for Money.

There are seven, or eight (or as many as the Cards will permit) play at it at
one time. In the lifting for dealing the least deals, which is a great
disadvantage; for that makes the Dealer youngest hand.

The Dealer deals out two to the first hand, and turns up the third, and so
goes on to the next, to the third, fourth, fifth, etc. He that has the biggest
Card carries the Bone, that is one half of the Stake, the other remaining for
the Game; now if there be thre^ (...), three Queens, three Tens, andc. turned
up, the eldest hand wins it. Here note that the Ace of Diamonds is Bone-Ace,
and wins all other Cards whatever: thus much for the Bone; afterward the
nearest to one and thirty wins the Game, and he that turns up or draws to one
and thirty wins it immediately.

CHAP. XVI.
Of PVTT and the High-Game.
PVtt is the ordinary rooking Game of every place, and seems by the few Cards
that are dealt to have no great difficulty in the play, but I am sure there is
much craft and cunning in it; of which I shall show as much as I understand.

If you play at two-handed Putt (or if you please you may play at three hands)
the best Putt-Card deals. Having shuffled the Cards, the Adversary cuts them,
then the Dealer deals one to his Antagonist, and another to himself till they
have three apiece: five up or a Putt is commonly the Game. The eldest if he
has a good Game, and thinks it better than his Adversaries, puts to him, if
the other will not or dare not see him, he then wins one, but if he will see
him they play it ^ut, and he that wins two tricks or all three wins the whole
set; but if each win a trick and the third tied, neither win, because it is
trick and tie.

Sometimes they play without putting, and then the Winner is he that wins most
tricks. Here note that in your playing keep up your Cards very close; for the
least discovery of any oue of them is a great advantage to him that sees it.

This Game consists very much in daring; for a right Gamester will put boldly
upon very bad Cards sometimes, as upon a five, seven and a nine; the other
thinking he has good Cards in his Adversaries hand, having very indifferent
ones in his own dares not see him, and so by going to stock loses one. Here
note that he that once has the confidence to put on bad Cards cannot recall his
putting, by which means he frequently pays for his bravado.

The best Putt-Cards are first the Trey, next the Deuce, then the Ace, the rest
follow in pre-eminence thus; the King, the Queen, the Knave, the Ten, and so
onwards to the four, which is the meanest Card at Putt.

Some of the Cheats at Putt are done after this manner:

First, for cutting to be sure of a good Putt-Card, they use the Bent, the
Slick, and the Breef; the bent is a Card bended in play which you cut, the
slick is when beforehand the Gamester takes a Pack of Cards, and with a
slick-stone smooths all the PuttCards, that when he comes to cut to his
Adversary with his forefinger above and his thumb about the middle, he slides
the rest of the Cards off that which was slickt, which is done infallibly with
much facility; but in this there is required neatness and dexterity for fear of
discovery, and then your confidence in this contrivance will be vain and of no
effect.

Lastly, the Breef in cutting is very advantageous to him that cuts, and it is
thus done: the Cheat provides beforehand a Pack of Cards, whereof some are
broader than others; under some of which he plants in play some good
Putt-Cards, which though they shuffle never so much they shall rarely separate
them; by which means he that cuts (laying his fingers on the broad Card) has
surely dealt him a Putt-Card.

In dealing these Rooks have a trick they call the Spurr, and that is, as good
Cards come into their hand that they may know them again by the outside (and so
discover the strength or weakness of their Adversaries Game) I say some where
on the outside they give them a gentle touch with their nail.

Now when they intend to bleed a Col to some purpose whom they have set before,
they always fix half a score Packs of Cards before (as I have related in Whist)
by slicking them or spurring them, that is, giving them such marks that they
shall certainly know every Card in the Pack, and consequently every Card that
is in his Adversaries hand, an advantage that cannot well be greater.

But if they are not furnished with such Cards, and cannot accomplish their
ends by the former indirect means without palpable discovery, then they have
accomplices who standing by the i^nocent Col look over his Game, and discover
what it is to his Adversary: and to strengthen their interest by cheating, they
frequently carry about them Treys, Deuces, Aces, etc. in their pockets, which
they use as need requires, or if not, they will steal them out of the Pack
whilst they are playing, which is the securest way and freest from discovery.

Lastly, they have one most egregious piece of Roguery more, and that is
playing the High-game at Putt; and this is to be done but once at a Setmeeting;
and therefore on this depends the absolute overthrow of the Col that plays, or
the Col that is a stander by.

This High-game at Putt is thus performed: the Rook whilst playing singles out
the Deuces and Treys for the last Game, and places them thus in order, hiding
them in his lap or other covert, first a Deuce, then a Trey, next a Deuce, then
a Trey, then a Trey and a Trey; now stooping letting fall a Card or some other
way as he shall think fit, he claps these Cards fa^'d at the bottom, having
shuf^led the Cards before, and bids his Adversary cut, which he nimbly and
neatly with both his hands joins the divided Cards, and then the bottom faced
Cards are upwards, and then he deals, and lest there should be a discovery made
of the facing, he palms them as much as he can, nimbly passing the last Card.

Now do the Gamesters smile at the goodness of each others Game, one shows his
to one, the other his to another; and cries who would not put at such Cards?
the other in as brisk a tone, says, Come if you dare. What will you lay of the
Game, says the Rook? what you dare, says the col; then pausing a while the Rook
seems to consult with his friends, who cry, they know not what to think on it;
five pound cries a rooking Confederate on this Gentleman's side, the col
encouraged hereby, cries ten pound more: and thus the Rook holds him in ^lay
till there be a good Sum of Money ^n the Board; then an^wers the Putt of the
now ruined cully. They now ^lay; the col begins with a Deuce, the Rook wins
that with a Trey; the Rook then plays a Deuce, and the col wins it with his
Trey; then he plays his Deuce which is won with a Trey; thus the Rook wins the
day. This Game may be played otherways according to fancy: let these and the
former cheats be a sufficient warning.

CHAP. XVII.
WIT and REASON, a Game so called.
WIT and Reason is a Game which seems very easy at first to the Learner, but
in his practice and observation shall find it otherwise. It is a Game something
like one and thirty, and is played after this manner.

Two playing together, the one has all the red Cards, and the other has the
black: then they turn up cross or pile who shall lead; for the Leader has a
great advantage over the other, as shall be demonstrated.

You are not to play a ten first; for if you do you shall certainly lose; for
one and thirty being the Game he that first comes to it wins; now should the
Leader play a ten the follower will play another ten, that makes twenty; let
the Leader then play any thing next the Follower will be sure to make it up one
and thirty.

He that has the Lead if he play a nine may certainly win the Game, if he look
about him; ever remembering to get first to twenty, without spending two of one
sort, as two Deuces, two Treys, two Quaters, etc. otherwise you will lose: As
for example, you play a nine first, your Adversary plays a Deuce that makes
eleven, you then play a nine again, and that makes twenty; thus you have played
out both your nines, wherefore your Antagonist plays a Deuce, now you can play
no Card but he wins; for if you play an eight (for you cannot come in with your
ten) and you have never a nine, then he has an Ace for one and thirty; so if
you play a seven, which makes nine and twenty, he has a Deuce remaining to
make up one and thirty, and so you may observe in the rest of the Cards.

Take this for a general rule, that you have a very great advantage in fetching
out by play any two of a number, as aforesaid; as two fives, two sixes, two
sevens, etc. wherefore you must not play rashly, but with due consideration
arithmetically grounded to make up a certain Game of one and thirty. To
conclude, he that has the art of playing well at one and thirty without Cards,
that is by naming such a number at first, and prosecuting it by such addition
of others, that your Adversary cannot think of any number but what shall be
your Game; I say such a man is fittest to play at this Game called Wit and
Reason.

CHAP. XVIII.
A Pastime called The Art of Memory.
THis Art of Memory is a Sport at which men may play for Money, but it is most
commonly the way to play the Drunkard. It is best when many play at it; for
with few it is no sport at all: For example, as many persons as do play so many
Cards trebled must be thrown down on the Table with their faces upwards; which
every one must take notice of and endeavor to register them in his Memory.
Then the Dealer must take them all up, and shuffling them after cutting deals
to every one three apiece.

The first it may be calls for a King, which must be laid on the Table with his
face downwards by him that has it in his hands; the next it may be calls for a
ten of the Spades, which must be laid down in like manner, and so it goes
round; now if any one calls for what is already laid down, if they play for
liquor, he must then drink a Glass; if for money, he must then pay a farthing,
halfpenny, or the like.

This sport wholly depends on the Memory; for want of which a man may lose at
this sport his money or his understanding.

CHAP. XIX.
A Game called PLAIN-DEALING.
HE that deals has the advantage of this Game; for if he turn up the Ace of
Diamonds he cannot lose: to his Adversary he delivers out nine and but three to
himself; then are the Cards played as at Whist, the best of Trumps or other
Cards wins, and but one to be gotten at a deal. I cannot commend this Pastime
for its ingenuity, and therefore only name it, because we treat of Games in
general.

CHAP. XX.
A Game called Queen Nazareen.
THere may as many play at it as the Cards will allow of, five Cards are dealt
to every Player. The Queen of Diamonds is Queen Nazareen, and he that has it
demands three apiece of every Player. The Knave of Clubs is called Knave
Knocher, and he that has it challenges two apiece. If women play among men,
it is customary for Knave Knocher to kiss Queen Nazareen.

Lastly, he that lays down a King the last Card that is played challenges one;
and begins again; and he that has first played away his Cards demands as many
Counters as there are Cards in the hands of the rest.

CHAP. XXI.
LANTERLOO.
LAnterloo is a Game may be played several ways, but I shall insist on none but
two; the first way is thus.

Lift for dealing, and the best Putcard carries it; as many may play as the
Cards will permit, to whom must be dealt five apiece, and then turn up Trump.
Now if three, four, five or six play, they may lay out the threes, fours,
fives, sixes and sevens to the intent they may not be quickly lood; but if they
would have the loos come fast about then play with the whole Pack.

Having dealt set up five scores or chalks; and then proceed forwards in your
Game.

He that is Eldest hand has the privilege of passing by the benefit thereof,
that is, he h^th the advantage of hearing what every one will say, and at last
may play or not play according as he finds his Game good or bad. If the Eldest
faith he passes, the rest may choose whether they will play or no.

You may play upon every Card what you please, from a penny to a pound. Trumps
as at Whist are the best Cards, all others in like manner take their precedence
from the highest to the lowest.

You must not revoke, if you do you pay all on the Table. If you play and are
loo'd (that is, win never a trick) you must lay down to the stock so much for
your five Cards as you played upon every one of them.

Every deal rub off a score, and for every trick you win set up a score by you
till the first scores are out, to remember you how many tricks you have won in
the several deals in the Game.

All the Chalks for the Game being rubbed out, tell your own scores, and for so
many scores or tricks which you have won, so much as they were valued at in the
Game so much you must take from the Stock; thus must every one do according to
the number of tricks he has won.

Here note, that he who has five Cards of a suit in his hand loos all the
Gamesters then playing, be they never so many, and sweeps the board; if there
be two loos he that is eldest hand has the advantage.

As there is cheating (as they say) in all trades, so more particularly
intolerable in Gaming; as in this for example, if one of the Gamesters have
four of a suit and he want a fifth, he may for that fifth make an exchange out
of his own Pocket if he be skilled in the cleanly art of conveiance; if that
fail, some make use of a friend, who never fails to do him that kind office and
favor. There are other Cheats to be performed, which I shall omit, since it is
not my business to teach you how to cheat, but so to play as not to be cheated.

Lanterloo another way played.
LIft for dealing as aforesaid, and the best Put-card deals five to every one
apiece. The Dealer for his five Cards must lay down so many sixpences,
Shillings, and so forth, as they conclude upon and agree for every Card, or so
many Counters being valued at either Sixpence or Twelvepence, more or less.
After this all must play; if any be lood he must lay down so much for his loo
as his five Cards amount to. If any next dealing be lood he must lay down as
much for his dealing, and as much more for his loo.

If after this the eldest hand pass, the rest may refuse to play, or play if
they think they can win a Card.

Here note, If there be never a loo the money may be divided by the Gamesters
according to the number of their Tricks, if there be a loo the winners must
take up the money, and he that is loo'd must lay down as much money on the
board as every one had laid down before, be it never so great a sum, besides
the like quantity for dealing, if he that was loo'd dealt.

CHAP. XXII.
A Game called PENNEECH.
HAving dealt seven Cards apiece, turn up a Card, and that is Trumps. The Ace
and Coat-Cards of Trumps are thus reckoned, the Ace is five, the King four, the
Queen three, and the Knave two.

Having played, he that wins the first trick turns up another Card, and that is
Trumps; and so every trick produces a fresh Trump, till all the seve^ be
played. Now if it so happen, that what is turned up proves an Ace or Coat-Card,
that is a great advantage to him who won the last trick; for if it be an Ace
turned up then he reckons five, if a King four, if a Queen three, as aforesaid.

After all the seven Cards be played, (which at first are dealt one by one) he
that won the last trick turns up a Card, and if it prove Ace, King, Queen, or
Knave, he reckons for it accordingly as aforesaid.

If the Seven of Diamonds be turned up, that is Penneech, and is reckoned
fourteen turned up, but it is but seven in hand, and not that neither unless
Diamonds be Trumps; if it be Trump it is the highest Card and wins all others;
if it be not Trump it wins all Diamonds.

Lastly, Having played out all the fourteen Cards betwixt ye, count how many
Cards you have more than your own seven at first dealt you, and for every Card
reckon one, and so you must reckon on with the value of your Coat-Card Trumps,
with Penneech turned up or in hand, till you come to sixty one, which is the
Game.

Here note, if you have neither Ace nor Face, you may throw up your Game and
deal again.

CHAP. XXIII.
POST and PAIR.
POst and Pair is a Game on the Cards very much played in the West of England,
as All-Fours is played in Kent, and Fives in Ireland.

This Play depends much upon daring; so that some may win very considerably,
who have the boldness to adventure much upon the Vye, although their Cards are
very indifferent.

You must first stake at Post then at Pair; after this deal two Cards apiece,
then stake at the Seat, and then deal the third Card about. The eldest hand may
pass and come in again, if any of the Gamesters vye it; if not, the Dealer may
play it out, or double it.

The Ace of Trumps, as at Ruff and Honors, is the best Card of all, and so of
the rest in order. At Post the best Cards are one and twenty, viz. two Tens and
an Ace, but a Pair-royal wins all, both Post, Pair, and Seat. Here note, that
he who has the best Pair or the best Post is the winner. A Pair is a pair of
any two, as two Kings, two Queens, etc. A Pair-Royal is of three, as three
Kings, three Queens, etc. The Vye is what you please to adventure upon the
goodness of your own hand; or if it be bad, and you imagine your Adversaries is
so likewise, then bid high courageously, by which means you daunt your
Antagonist, and so bring him to submission. If all the Gamesters keep in till
all have done, and by consent show their Cards, the best Cards carry the Game.
Now according to agreement those that keep in till last, may divide the stakes,
or show the best Card for it.

Observe, where the Cards fall in several hands of the same sort, as a Pair or
Pair-Royal, and so forth, the eldest hand carries it.

CHAP. XXIV.
BANKAFALET, a Game on the Cards so called.
THe Cards must be cut into as many heaps as there are Players, or more if you
please, and every man lays as much money on his own Card as he thinks fit, or
on the supernumerary heaps. So many as the Dealers Card is inferior to, so many
he pays; so many as his Card is superior to, so many he wins from.

The best Card is the Ace of Diamonds, the next to that the Ace of Hearts,
thirdly the Ace of Clubs, and lastly the Ace of Spades, and so the rest of
these suits in order, according to their degree. The Cheat lies in securing an
Ace or any other good sure winning Card; and if you mark the Cards aforehand,
so as to know them by the backside, you know how to make your advantage.

CHAP. XXV.
BEAST.
IT is called by the French, La Bett, and is played by them after this manner.
The best Cards are King, Queen, and so forwards. They make three heaps, the
King, the Play, and the Triolet.

To every one is dealt five Cards, (there may play three, four, five, or more)
as at French Ruff, with the same rigor; before the Cards are dealt, every one
stakes to the three heaps. He that wins most tricks takes up the heap that is
called the Play; he that has the King takes up the heap so called; and he that
has three of any sort, that is, three fours, three fives, three sixes, and so
forth takes up the Triolet.

Games within the Tables.
CHAP. XXVI.
Of IRISH.
IRish is an ingenious Game, and requires a great deal of skill to play it
well, especially the After-game. It is not to be learned otherwise than by
observation and practice, however I shall lightly touch hereon.

The men which are thirty in number are equally divided between you and your
Adversary, and are thus places, two on the Ace point, and five on the sice of
your left hand Table, and three on the cinque, and five on the Ace point of
your right hand Table, answered on the like points by your Adversaries men with
the same number; or thus, two of your men on the Ace point, five on the double
sice, or sice Cinque point, three on the Cinque point in your own Tables, and
five on the sice point at home, and all these pointed alike by your Adversary.

In your play have a care of being too forwards, and be not too rash in hitting
every blot, but with discretion and consideration move slowly but securely; by
which means though your Adversary have filled his Tables, but withal blots, and
you by hitting him enter, you may win the Game; nay sometimes though he has
born his men all to a very few.

It Is the part of a prudent commander as he leads out his men to bring them
home as safe as he may; so must you have a care of your men as you are bringing
them home that they are not picked up by the way.

Have a special care that your Adversary double not the Trey, Ace-point with
his men, and so make what convenient haste you can to fill up your own Tables,
and beware of blotting; that done, bear as fast as you can.

For an After-game I know not what instructions to give you, you must herein
trust to your own judgment and the chance of the Dice, and if they run low for
some time it will be so much the better.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of Back-Gammon.
YOur men are placed as at Irish, and Back-Gammon differs but very little from
it, but in Doublets which at this Game is played fourfold, which makes a quicker
dispatch of the Game than Irish.

Be sure to make good your Trey, Ace-points, hit boldly and come away as fast
as you can, to which end if your Dice run high, you will make the quicker
dispatch.

When you come to bearing have a care of making when you need not, and Doublets
now will stand you most in stead.

If both bear together he that is first off without Doublets wins one.

If both bear and one goes off with Doublets he wins two.

If your Tables be clear before your Adversaries men be come in, that is a
Back-Gammon, which is three; but if you thus go off with Doublets it is four.

False Dice are much used at Irish and Back-Gammon for the benefit of entering,
wherefore have a special care that you have not Cinque-Deuces, and Quater-Treys
put upon you, you may quickly perceive it by the running of the Dice.

The person that is cunning at play has great advantage of a novice or innocent
man; which is commonly by toping or knaping, which by its often practice may be
suspected by his Adversary; then he has recourse to Dice, which runs particular
chances for his purpose, which the other being ignorant of, is almost an equal
advantage with the former. For example, he provides Dice that runs 6, 5, 4,
it is his business to secure those points, so that if he happens to surprise any
of your men coming home, as it is two to one but he does, he does without a kind
of Miracle win the set.

It Is possible sometimes they may make use of 3, 2, which are the low Chances;
but that they seldom do for this reason, the high or forward points being
supplied, you must enter if at all upon the low points which keeps you
backwards and gives him advantage. The advantage of this Game is to be forward
if possible upon safe terms, and to point his men, at that rate that it shall
not be possible for you to pass, though you have entered your men, till he gives
you liberty, having two to one the advantage of the Game.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of TICK-TACK.
ALL your men must stand on the Ace-point, and from thence play forward, but
have a care of being too forward, or so at leastwise that Doublets reach you
not.

Secure your Sice and Cinque-point whatever you do, and break them not unless
it be when you have the advantage of going in, which is the greatest advantage
you can have next to a hit; for your Adversaries eleventh point standing open
you have it may be the opportunity of going in with two of your men, and then
you win a double Game. A hit is but one, and that is, when you throw such a
cast that some one of your men will reach your Adversaries unbound, but
sometimes though it hits it will not pass by reason of a stop in the way, and
then it is nothing. Sometimes it is good going over into your Adversaries
Tables, but it is best for an After-game.

Playing close at home is the securest way, playing at length is both rash and
unsafe, and be careful of binding your men when you lie in danger of the enemy.
Moreover, if you see you are in danger of losing a double Game give your
Adversary one; if you can it is better doing so than losing two.

Here note, if you fill up all the points of your second Table with your own
men you win two, and that you may prevent your Adversary from doing so (if you
are in danger thereof) if you can, make a vacant point in his Tables, and it is
impossible for him to do it.

This is the plain Game of Tick-Tack, which is called so from Touch, and take,
for if you touch a man you must play him though to your loss; and if you hit
your Adversary and neglect the advantage, you are taken with a Why not, which
is the loss of one: likewise if you are in, and your cast is such that you may
also go into your Adversaries eleventh point by two other men, and you see it
not, either by carelessness or eager prosecution of a hit which is apparent
before your eyes, you lose two irrecoverably. Besides, it is a very great
oversight as your men may stand not to take a point when you may do it.

Now some play this Game with Toots, Boveries, and Flyers; Toots is, when you
fill up your Table at home and then there is required small throws; for if you
get over with a Sice you have no benefit of Toots.

Boveries is when you have a man in the eleventh point of your own Tables, and
another in the same point of your Adversaries directly answering.

Flyers is, when you bring a man round the Tables before your Adversary has
got over his first Table, to the effecting of which there is required very high
throwing of your side, and very low throwing of his.

Much more might be said as to the craft of the play, which cannot be so well
discovered as from observation in your own or others playing.

There are several foolish pastims to be played in the Tables which are
ridiculous to treat of, wherefore I shall only mention these three. Viz.

CHAP. XXIX.
DVBBLETS.
AT Dubblets the fifteen men are thus placed; upon sice, Cinque and Quater
there are three men apiece, upon Trey, Deuce, Ace, but two apiece.

He that throws most has the benefit of throwing first, and what he throws he
lays down; and so does the other what the one throws and has not the other
lays down for him to his own advantage; and thus they do till all the men are
down, and then they bear, but not till they are down; he that is down first
bears first, and will doubtlesly win the Game if the other throws not Dubblets
to overtake him; now he that throws Dubblets apace is certain to win, for as
many as the Dubblets are, so many he lays down, or bears; for example, if two
fours, he lays down, or bears eight, and so for the other Dubblets; and
therefore he that can either nap, top, or has high runners about him has a
great advantage herein.

CHAP. XXX.
SICE-ACE.
FIve may play at Sice-Ace with six men apiece, they one load another with
Aces, sixes bears only, and Dubbl^^s drinks and throws again, so often some I
have seen that for the lucre of a little money have resolved rather to lose
themselves than a penny. It is commonly agreed the last two, or the last out
shall lose, and the rest go free.

CHAP. XXXI.
KETCH-DOLT.
AT Ketch-Dolt the first throws and lays down from the heap of men without the
Tables, what is thrown at it may be Sice Deuce, if the other throw either Sice
or Deuce, and draw them not from his Adversaries Tables to the same point in
his own, but takes them from the heap, and lays the Ace down, he is dolted and
loses the Game, or if he but touch a man of the heap and then recall himself,
the loss is the same. Some by frequent practice will never be Dolted, and then
they strive who shall fill up their Tables first; which done, he that bears
them off first has won the game. And so much for play within the Tables.

Games without the Tables.
CHAP. XXXII.
Of Inn and Inn.
INn and Inn is a Game very much used in an Ordinary, and may be played by two
or three, each having a Box in his hand. It is played with four Dice. You may
drop what you will, Six-pences, Shillings* or Guinneys; every Inn you drop, and
every Inn and Inn you sweep all; but if you throw out, if but two plays, your
Adversary wins all; if three play, that Out is a Bye between the two other
Gamesters, which they may either divide or throw out for it. Here you are to
observe that Out is when you have thrown no Dubbl^ts on the four Dice; Inn is
when you have thrown (...) Dubblets of any sort, as two Aces, two Deuces, two
Kings* etc. Inn and Inn is, when you throw all D^bb^^^s, whither all of a sort
or otherwise, viz. four Aces, four Deuces, or four Cinques, or two Aces, two
Deuces, two Treys, two Quaters, or two Cinques, two Sixes, and so forth.

Your Battle may be as much and as little as you will, from twenty Shillings
to twenty Pounds, and so onward to a thousand, which Battle is not ended till
every penny of that money agreed upon for the Battle be won; and it is but
requisite, for it is frequently seen that in a Battle of ten pound (...)
Gentleman has been reduced to five Shillings, and yet has won at last the
Battle.

For a Gamester that would win without hazarding much his money, Dice that will
run very seldom otherwise but Sixes, Cinques, Quaters, etc. are very necessary;
If those instruments are not to be had, a Taper-box will not be amiss, that as
the Dice are thrown in may stick by the way, and so thrown in may stick by the
way, and so thrown to advantage. I have heard of one, who having spent the
major part of his Patrimony in good fellowship, and such pastims as the heat of
blood with vigorous youth most prosecute; at length considered how he should
live hereafter, and finding but small encouragements at home, and lesser
abroad, thought if he could contrive a way to win a considerable sum at play
(having been a great loser himself) that should be the basis of his future
settlement; after various consultations within himself he at length contrived
this stratagem; He caused a Box to be made, not as they are usual screwed
within, but smooth, and procured it to be so well painted and shadowed within
that it looked like a screwed Box; now this Box was but half board wide at top,
and narrow at bottom, that the Dice as aforesaid might stick, and the Box being
smooth would come out without tumbling. With this Box he went and played at Inn
and Inn, by virtue whereof and his art of taking up and throwing in his Dice
into the Box, he got the first night a Thousand pound, and the next night Two
hundred a year, with a Coach and six Horses, which Coach and Horses (being very
valuable) he sold, but the Estate he lives on to this day with great
improvements, and never would handle a Dye since, well knowing how many worthy
Families it has ruined.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of PASSAGE.
PAssage is a Game at Dice to be played at but by two, and it is performed with
three Dice. The Caster throws continually till he has thrown Doublets under
ten, and then he is out and loses, or doublets above ten, and then he passes
and wins; high runners are most requisite for this Game, such as will rarely
run any other chance than four, five, or six, by which means if the Caster
throws Doublets he scarcely can throw out. There is the same advantage of the
Smooth-taper-box aforesaid in this Game, as at Inn and Inn; with the like
benefit of the D^ce, whether by palming, topping, slurring, or knapping.

CHAP. XXX.
Of HAZARD.
Hazard is a proper name for this Game; for it speedily makes a man or undoes
him; in the twinkling of an eye either a Man or a Mouse.

This Game is played but with two Dice, but there may play at it as many as can
stand round the largest round Table.

There are two things chiefly to be observed, that is, Main and Chance; the
Chance is the Casters, and the Main theirs who are concerned in play with him.
There can be no Main thrown above nine and under five; so that five, six,
seven, eight and nine are the only Mains and no more which are flung at
Hazard; Chances and Nicks are from four to ten, thus four is a chance to nine,
five to eight, six to seven, seven to six, eight to five; and nine and ten a
chance to five, six, seven and eight: in short, four, five, six, seven, eight,
nine and ten are chances to any Main, if any of these Nick it not: now Nicks
are either when the chance is the same with the Main, as five and five, six and
six, seven and seven, and so on, or six and twelve, seven and eleven, eight and
twelve; where note, that twelve is out to nine, seven, and five; and eleven is
out to nine, eight, six, and five; Ames-Ace, and Deuce-Ace, are out to all
Mains what ever.

That I may the better illustrate this Game, it will not be amiss to give one
example for your better information; Seven's the Main, the Caster throws five,
and that is his chance, and so has five to seven; if the Caster throw his own
chance he wins all the money-was set him, but if he throw Seven which was the
Main, he must pay as much money as is on the Board; if again Seven be the Main,
and the Caster throws eleven, that is a Nick, and sweeps away all the money on
the Table; but if he throw a chance, he must wait which will come first;
Lastly, if Seven be the Main, and the Caster throws Ames-Ace, Deuce-Ace or
twelve, he is out, but if he throw from four to ten he has a chance, though
they are accounted the worst chances on the Dice, as seven is reputed the best
and easiest Main to be flung; thus it is in eight or six, if either of them be
the Main, and the Caster throw either four, five, seven, nine, or ten, this is
his chance, which if he throw first, he wins, otherwise loses; if he throw
twelve to eight, or six or the same Cast with the Main, he wins; but if
Ames-Ace or Deuce-Ace to all he loses; or if twelve when the Main is either
five or nine. Here note, that nothing Nicks five but five, nor nothing nine but
nine.

Four and Five to Seven is judged to have the worst on it, because Four (called
by the Tribe of Nickers little Dick-Fisher) and Five have but two chances, Trey
Ace and two Deuces, or Trey Deuce and Quater Ace, whereas Seven has three
Chances, Cinque Deuce, Six Ace, and Quater Trey; in like condition is nine and
ten, having but two chances, six trey, cinque and quater, or six quater and two
cinques.

Now six and eight one would think should admit of no difference in advantage
with seven, but if you will rightly consider the case, and be so vain to make
trial thereof, you will find a great advantage in seven over six and eight. How
can that be you will say, has not six, seven and eight eight equal chances?
For example, in six, quater deuce, cinque Ace, and two Treys; in eight, six
deuce, cinque trey, and two quaters, and has not seven three as aforesaid? It
is confessed; but pray consider the disadvantage in the doublets, two treys and
two quaters, and you will find that six deuce is sooner thrown than two
quaters, and so consequently cinque Ace or quater deuce sooner than two treys:
I saw an old Rook once take up a young fellow in a Tavern, upon this very
score: the bargain was made that the Rook should have seven always and the
young Gentleman six, and throw continually; agreed to play they went, the Rook
got the first day ten pound, the next day the like sum; and so for six days
together losing in all threescore pounds; notwithstanding the Gentleman, I am
confident, had square Dice, and threw them always himself. And farther to
confirm what I alleged before, not only this Rook, but many more have told me
that they desired no greater advantage than to have seven always and the Caster
to have six. Here note, it is the opinion of most that at the first throw the
Gaster has the worst on it.

Certainly Hazard is the most bewitching Game that is played on the Dice; for
when a man begins to play he knows not when to leave off; and having once
accustomed himself to play at Hazard he hardly ever after minds any thing
else. I have seen an old man about the Age of Seventy play at an Ordinary when
his own eyes were so defective, that he was forced to help them with a pair of
Spectacles; and having an opportunity one day to speak to him, How a man of his
years could be so vain and boyish still to mind play; insisting withal upon
the folly of that action to hazard his money when he had not sight enough
remaining to discern whether he had won or lost; besides Sir, said I, you
cannot but hear how you are derided every time you come to the Ordinary; one
says, here comes he that cannot rest quiet, but will cry without the rattle of
the Dice; another cries, certainly such a one plays by the ear; for he cannot
see to play. Let them talk what they will, said the Gentleman, I cannot help
it, I have been for above forty years so used to play, that should I leave it
off now, I were as good stop those Issues about me, which have been
instrumental in the preservation of my life to this length of time.

To conclude, happy is he that having been much inclined to this time-spending
-money-wasting Game, has took up in time, and resolved for the future never to
be concerned with it more; but more happy is he that has never heard the name
thereof.

CHAP. XXXII.
The Art and Mystery of RIDING, Whether the Great-Horse or any other.
AS an Introduction to the Art of Riding, I think it requisite to treat of the
taming of a young Colt: In order thereunto, observe, that after your Colt has
been eight or ten days at home, and is reduced to that familiarity that he will
endure currying without showing aversion thereunto, and will suffer his Keeper
to handle and stroke him in what part of the body he thinks best, then it is
time to offer him the Saddle; first laying it in the Manger that he may smell
to it, and thereby grow acquainted with it, using all other means that he may
not be afraid either at the sight thereof or at the noise of the Stirrops.
Having gently put on the Saddle, take a sweet watring Trench washed and anointed
with Honey and Salt, and so place it in his mouth, that it may hang directly
about his Tush, somewhat leaning thereon: having so done, which must be in a
morning after dressing, then lead him out in your hand and water him abroad,
then bring him in, and after he has stood rein'd a little upon his Trench an
hour or thereabout, then unbridle and unsaddle him, and give him liberty to
feed till Evening, and then do as before; having cherished him, dress and
cloth him for the night.

The next day do as you did before, and after that put on him a strong Musrole,
or sharp Cavezan and Martingal, which you must buckle at that length, that he
may only feel it when he jerketh up his head; then lead him forth into some new
plowed land or soft ground, and there having made him trot a good while about
in your hand to take him off from wantonness and wild tricks, offer to mount,
which if he refuse, then trot him again in your hand, then put your foot in the
Stirrup, and mount half way and dismount again; if he seem distasted at it,
about with him again, and let him not want correction; but if he take it
patiently, cherish him, and place your self in the Saddle, but stay there a
very little while, then cherish him again and give him bread or grass to feed
on; then having seen all things fit and strong without offense to your self and
Horse, remount him, placing your self even in the Saddle, carrying your Rod
inoffensively to his eye, then let some person having in his hand the
Chaff-halter, lead him a little way, then make him stand, and having cherisht
him, let him forward again, do this seven or eight times, or so often till you
have brought him of his own accord to go forward, then must you stay and
cherish him, and having brought him home, alight gently, then dress and feed
him well.

Observe this course every day till you have brought him to trot, which will be
but three at the most, if you observe to make him follow some other Horsman,
stopping him now and then gently, and then making him go forward, remembering
his seasonable cherishings, and not forgetting his due corrections as often as
you find him froward and rebellious; and when you ride him abroad, return not
the same way home, that you may make him take all ways indifferently: and by
these observations you will bring him to understand your will and purpose in
less than a fortnights time.

Having brought your Horse to receive you to his back, trot foreright, stop and
tetire with patience and obedience, be never unmindful of your Helps,
corrections and cherishings, which consist in the Voice, Bridle, Rod, Calves of
the Legs, and Spurs; the last of which is chief for correction, which must not
be done faintly but sharply when occasion shall require it.

Cherishings may be comprehended within three heads, the Voice delivered
smoothly and lovingly, as so, so boy, so; then the hand by clapping him gently
on the neck or buttock: lastly the Rod by rubbing him therewith upon the
Withers or the Main, in which he very much delights.

The next that you are to regard, is the Musrole or Cavezan and Martingale;
this is an excellent Guide to a well-disposed Horse for setting of his head in
due place, forming of his Rein, and making him appear lovely to the eye of the
Spectator; and withal this is a sharp correction when a Horse yerketh out his
Nose, disorders his head, or endeavors to run away with his Rider.

The manner of placing it, is thus: let it hang somewhat low, and rest upon the
tender grissel of the Horses nose, that he may be the more sensible of
correction; and let it not be strait, but loose, whereby the Horse may feel,
upon the yielding in of his head, how the offense goes; from and by that means
be made sensible, that his own disorder was his only punishment.

You must carefully observe how you win your Horses head, and by those degrees
bring his Martingale straighter and straighter, so as the horse may ever have a
gentle feeling of the same, and no more, till his head be brought to its true
perfection, and there stay.

When you have brought your horse to some certainty of Rein, and will Trot
forth-right, then bring him to the treading forth of the large rings. If your
horses nature be sloathful and dull, yet strong-trot him first in some new
plowed field; but if agil, and of a fiery spirit, then trot him in some sandy
ground, and there mark out a spacious large ring, about a hundred paces in
circumference. Having walked him about it on the right seven or eight times, you
must then by a little straitning of your right Rein, and laying the calf of
your left leg to his side, making a half circle within your ring, upon your
right hand down to the center thereof, and then by straitning a little your
left Rein, and laying the calf of your right leg to his side, making another
semicircle to your left hand from the center to the outmost verge; which two
Semicircles contrary turned, will make a perfect Roman S within the ring; then
keeping your first large circumference, walk your horse about in your left
hand, as often as you did on your right; and then change within your ring as you
did before, to your right hand again; and then trot him first on the right
hand, then on the left, as long as you shall think convenient, either one, two,
or three hours, to perfect him in this lesson; and this must be done every
morning and evening too, if you and your horse sloathful and dull; other^ise
you need not take so much pains with him.

Having taught him to trot the large rings perfectly, which will not require
above four or five days; then in the same manner and changes make him gallop
the same rings, making him take up his feet so truly and loftily, that no
falsehood may be perceived in his stroke, but that his inward feet play before
his outward, and each of a side follow the other so exactly, that his gallop
may appear the best grace of all his motions.

Here note: You must not enter him all at once to gallop this great ring, but
by degrees; first a quarter, then a half quarter, etc. ever remembering, not to
force him into it with the spur, but by the lightness and cheerfulness of your
body let him pass of his own accord into a gallop.

Helps, corrections, and cherishings in the ring-turn, are as aforesaid, the
elevation of the voice, and the threatening of the rod, and straitning of the
bridle, are good helps, which you must use as you must the spur, rod and leg,
for timely due corrections: neither must you ever cherish without desert.

Having made your horse gallop as well as trot the large ring, then teach him
to stop fair, comely, and without danger, after this manner: First, having
cherisht him, bring him into a swift trot forward about fifty paces* then draw
in your bridle-hand straightly and suddenly, which will make him gather up his
hinder and forelegs together, and thereby stand still: then ease your hand a
little, that he may give backward: which if he does, give him more liberty, and
cherish him: having given a little respit, draw in your bridle-hand, and make
him go back three or four paces, at which if he strike, instantly ease your
hand, and draw it up again, letting him come and go till he yield and go
backward: but if he refuse it, let some person standing by, put him back, and
then cherish him, that he may know your intention. Thus every time you stop,
make him retire, till you have perfected him in these two lessons at one time.

Have a care that the ground be not slippery where you stop* but firm and hard,
lest the horse apprehensive of the danger of falling, refuse to stop as you
would have him.

When your horse can stop well, and retire, you must then teach him to advance
before, when he stops; a lesson that carries much grace and comeliness
therein; it is performed in this manner: After you have stopped your horse
without giving your hand any ease, lay the calves of both your legs hard to his
sides, shaking your Rod, and crying, Up, up; which though he understand not at
first, yet by frequent practice, with helps, cherishings, and corrections as
aforesaid, he will come to understand your meaning. But be sure you look
narrowly to the comeliness of the advancing, which consists in taking up his
legs both even together, bending them inward to his body; next, his advance
must not be too high, for fear of his coming over upon you; but let him couch
his hinder-loins close to the ground, but by no means suffer him to sprawl or
paw with his feet forward. Lastly, he must not advance for his own pleasure
(for that is a great fault) but for yours, according to your will and command.

If in advancing he rise too high, ready to come over, or sprawl, or paw; give
him not only your spurrs both together, but lash him twice or thrice with your
Rod between his ears, and if he advances of his own accord, then jerk him over
the knees, doing so as often as he commits those faults.

Now the use of advancing is this; it not only graceth all his other lessons,
but makes his body agil and nimble, and fits him for ready turning; it is most
used at stopping, and then very gracefully.

In the next place you must teach your horse to yerk out behind, after this
manner: As soon as you have made him stop, ^presently give him a good jerk
under his belly, near his flank, which will make him understand you in time,
though not presently. At first doing, cherish him much, and having let him
pawse, make him do it again, till he will do it as often as you will have him:
but withal, look to the comeliness of his yerking, for it is not graceful for
him to yerk out his hinder-legs till his forelegs be above the ground; and see
that he yerk not one leg farther out than the other, but both even together,
and not too high, or one leg out whilst the other is on the ground.

Helps in yerking, are the constant staying of his mouth on the bridle, the
stroke of the Rod under his belly, or a gentle touch thereof on his Rump.

If he refuse to yerk, or does it disorderly, then a single spur on that side
that is faulty; and lastly, continual diseasing him till he has done it.

Now to teach him to turn readily on both hands, is first to bring his large
rings into a narrower compass, that is about four yards in circumference,
walking your horse therein with all gentleness, and at his own pleasure, till
he is acquainted therewith: After this, carry your bridlehand constant, and
somewhat straight, the outmost Rein straighter than the inmost, making the
horse rather look from the ring, than into it; and thus trot him about, first
on the one side, than on the other, making your changes as aforesaid. Thus
exercise him an hour and half, then stop and make him advance three or four
times together, then retire in an even line, afterward stand still and cherish
him: Having pawsed a while to recover breath, exercise him as aforesaid, still
endeavoring to bring his trot to all the swiftness and loftiness possible,
making him do his changes roundly and readily, and causing him to lap his
outmost leg so much over his inmost leg, that he may cover it more than a foot
over: and thus exercise him seven or eight days, every morning at least three
hours, and suffer him only to practice his former lessons once in a morning; in
this manner you teach your horse three lessons together, the Terra a Terra, the
Incavalere, and the Chambletta.

The turn Terra a Terra in the outmost circle of the straight ring, and the
Incavalere and Chambletta in the changes, wherein he is forced to lap one leg
over another, or else to lift up the inmost leg from the ground, whilst he
brings the outmost over it: This lesson is so difficult, that a complete
Horseman should think his horse has never perfectly learned it; and therefore
he must continually practice his horse in trading, trotting, and galloping
these narrow rings; and from thence to pass them about in groundsalts, as from
taking up his forelegs from the ground both together, and bringing his hinder
feet in their place, and so passing the Ring as often as the strength of your
horse and your own reason will allow of.

Thus you see the perfecting your horse in the large Ring will easily introduce
him into the knowledge of the straight Ring, and that brings him to turn
perfectly, and stopping begets retiring, and retiring advancing.

Having brought your horse to this perfection, take off his Musrole and Trench,
and in their stead put on his head a gentle Cavezan, in such manner that it lie
on the tender grissel of his nose somewhat near the upper part of his nostrils;
put in his mouth a sweet smooth cannon-bit, with a plain watering chain, the
cheek being of a large size, let the Kirble be thick, round and large, hanging
loosly upon his nether lip, so that it may entice him to play therewith.

Having so done, mount, casting the left rein of your Cavezan over the horses
right shoulder, and bear it with your thumb with the reins of the Bit in your
left hand; let the right reins of the Cavezan be cast over his left shoulder,
and bear it with your Rod in your hand, and so trot him forth the first morning
about two miles in the highway, making him now and then stop and retire, and
gather up his head in its due place; the next day bring him to his former large
Rings, and perfect him therein with the Bit as you did with the Sanffle in all
the foregoing lessons, which is more easily done by reason the Bit is of better
command and of sharper correction.

The next thing we shall speak of (to avoid every thing that is not very
pertinent to our purpose) is the Turning-Post, which must be smooth and strong,
and very well fixed in the center of the straight Ring, then causing some person
to stand at the Post, give him the right rein of your Cavezan to hold about the
Post, and so walk or trot your horse about the same as often as you think fit on
your right hand; then change your right rein for your left, and do as before;
continue thus doing till your horse be perfect in every turn. Having so done,
teach him to manage (the proper posture for a sword) which is thus performed:
Cause two Rods to be pricked in the earth, at what distance as you shall think
fit from one another; then walk your horse in a straight ring about the first
on your right hand, passing him in an even furrow down to the other Rod, and
walk about that also in a narrow Ring on your left hand, then thrust him into a
gentle gallop down the even furrow, till you come to the first Rod, and there
make him stop (as it were) and advance without pawse or intermission of time;
thrust him forward again, beat the turn Terra a Terra about on your right hand;
then gallop forth right to the other Rod, and in the same manner beat the turn
about on the left hand; do this as often as you shall think convenient: Though
there are many sorts of Manages, yet I hold but two necessary and useful, and
that is this already described, called Terra a Terra, and Incavalere or
Chambletta, discoursed afore-going. As for the Career, I need not speak much
thereof; only this, when you run him forth-right at full speed, stop him
quickly, suddenly, firm and close on his buttock, and mark that you make not
your Career too long, nor too short; the one weakens, and the other hinders the
discovery of his true wind and courage; therefore let not the length of your
Career extend above six-score yards; and be sure you give him some little
warning by your bridle-hand, before you start him, and then stop him firmly and
strongly.

Thus much for the War-Horse or great Saddle.

Of the Horse of Pleasure.
IF you will make your Horse to bound aloft, you must first trot him about
sixteen yards, then stop him, and when he has advanced twice, streigthen a
little your Bridle-hand, and then give him the even stroke of both your spurs
together hard, which at first will only amaze him, but if he have good mettle
and courage, he will at length rise from the ground by often doing it; if he
does it, though but little, cherish him very much, then let him pause and give
him your spurs again, and if he acts according to your desire, cherish him
again, make him do thus three or four times a day, till he is so perfect that
he will do it at any time at your spurs command.

Next, teach him to corvet thus; hollow the ground a Horse's length, where two
walls join together, then place a strong smooth Post by the side of the
hollowness of a Horse's length likewise from the wall, then over against the
Post fasten an iron ring at the wall; this done, ride your Horse into the
hollow place, and fasten one of the Reins of the Cavezan to the Ring, and the
other about the Post; then having first cherished your Horse) make him advance
by the help of the calves of your legs, twice or thrice together, then let him
pause; after this (cherisning him again) advance him half a score times
together, and daily increase his advancings, till you perceive he has got such
a habit therein, that he will by no means go forward, but keeping his ground
certain, advance both before and behind of an equal height, and keep just and
certian time with the motions of your legs; and if he raise his hinder legs not
high enough, you must have some body behind, who having a rod, must gently jerk
him on the fillets, to make him raise his hinder parts. By taking this course,
in a few days you will so teach your Horse to corvet, that without any helps at
any time and place, you may make him corvet at your pleasure.

I need not speak of the Capriole, since it is the same manner of motion as the
Corvet, only it is done forward, gaining ground in the salt, raising his hinder
parts as high or higher then the foremost.

If you would have your Horse go side-long on any hand, you must draw up your
bridle-hand straight, and if you would have him go on the right hand, lay your
left rein close to his neck, and the calf of your leg close to his side, making
him put his left leg over his right, then turning your rod back ward, gently
jerking him on the left hinder thigh, make him bring his hinder parts to the
right side also, and stand in an even line as at the first, then make him
remove his fore-parts more than before, so that he may as it were cross over
the even line, and then make him bring his hinder part after, and ^tand in an
even line again, and this do till by practice he will move his fore-parts an^
hinder parts both together, and go ^idelong as far as you please; and if you
would have him go on the left hand, do as before.

To conclude, these are the most material Lessons requisite to be taught any
Horse whatever, either for service or pleasure, which if taught your Horse with
care and patience, you may conclude your Horse perfect and complete. But be
sure you observe this, that whatsoever Lesson your Horse is most imperfect in,
with that Lesson ever when you ride begin and end with it; repeating every one
over, more or less, lest want of use breed forgetfulness, and forgetfulness
absolute ignorance.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Of RACING.
FOR the completing a Gentleman's delight in the Art of Racing, he is to take
special cognizance of these subsequent Rules and Orders.

First, He is to consider what is the most convenient time to take his Horse
from grass, which is about Bartholomew-tide, the day being dry, fair, and
pleasant; as soon as he is taken up, let him let him stand all that night in
some convenient dry place to empty his body; the next day put him into a
stable, and feed him with wheat-straw, but no longer; for though the Rule be
good in taking up Horses bellies after this manner, yet if you exceed your time
in so doing, this straw will straigthen his guts, heat his liver, and hurt his
blood; therefore what you want in straw let it be supplied by riding him forth
to water morning and evening, airings, and other moderate exercise. And for his
food, let it be good old sweet Hay, and clothe him according to the weather and
temper of his body; for as the year grows colder, and thereby you find his hair
rise and stare about his neck, flanks, or other parts, then add a woollen
cloth, or more if need require, till his hair fall smooth. Where note, That a
rough coat shows want of cloth, and a smooth coat cloth enough.

A Race-horse ought to be dressed in his resting days twice a day, before his
morning and evening waterings; and must be done after this manner: Curry him
from the tips of his ears to the setting on of his tail, all his body entirely
over with an Iron-Comb, his legs under the knees and gambrels excepted; then
dust him and curry him high again all over with a round brush of bristles, then
dust him the second time, and rub all the loose hair off with your hands dipped
in fair water, and continue rubbing till he is as dry as at first, then rub
every part of him with a hair-cloth, and lastly rub him all over with a white
Iinnen cloth; then pick his eyes, nostrils, sheath, cods, tuel, and feet very
clean, then cloa^h him and stop him round with wisps.

There is no better water for a Race-horse, then a running River or clear
Spring, about a mile and half from the stable, near some level ground, where
you may gallop him afterward, having scop'd him a little, bring him to the
water again, then scope him and bring him again, so often till he refuse to
drink more for that time; after this, walk him home, clothe and stop him up
round with great so^t wisps, and having stood an hour upon the bridle, feed him
with sweet sound Oats, either dried by age or art: If your horse be low of
flesh, or has a bad stomach, add one third of (...) to two parts of Oats, and
that will recover both.

The next food you shall give him shall be better and stronger, and it is
bread, which you must make after this manner: take two bushels of beans, and
one of wheat, and grind them together, then boult through a fine Range the
quantity of half a bushel of pure meal, and bake it in three loaves, and the
rest sift through a Meal-sieve, and knead it with water and good store of barm,
and bake it in great loaves; with the courser bread feed your Runner in his
resting days, and with the finer against the days of his exercise and greatest
labor.

The times of his feeding, upon the days of his rest, must be after his coming
from water in the morning, an hour after midday, after his evening watering,
and at ten a clock at night; but upon his laboring days, two hours after he is
thoroughly cold, outwardly and inwardly, afterward as aforesaid.

Let his Hay be dry and short; if it be sweet no matter how course it is, for
if it be rough it will scowre his teeth. As for the proportion of his food, I
need not prescribe a quantity, since you must allow him according to the
goodness and badness of his stomach.

His exercise ought to be thrice a week, and it must be more or less according
to the condition of his body; for if it be foul, exercise him moderately to
break his grease; if clean, you may do as you think fit, having a care that you
discourage him not, nor abate his mettle; and after every exercise give him
that night, or the next morning, a scouring; the best I know to purge a Horse
from all grease, glut, or filth whatever, is this, take three ounces of
Anniseeds, six drams of Cumminseeds, a dram and half of Cathamus, two drams of
Fen-greek-seed, and of Brimstone an ounce and half; beat all these to a fine
powder, and searse them, then take of Sallet-oyl somewhat more than a pint, a
pound an^ half of Honey, and a pottle of white Wine, then with fine white Meal
knead it well into a strong paste, and keep it by you, it will last a long
time; when you use it, dissolve a ball thereof in a Pail of fair water, and
give it him to drink after exercise, in the dark, lest discoloring the water,
the Horse refuse to drink. This is an excellent scouring, and a remedy for all
internal distempers.

Now after exercise, cool him a little abroad before you bring him home, then
house him and litter him well, rubbing him with dry clothes till there be never
a wet hair about him, then clothe and wisp him round.

Here note, before you air your Horse, it will be requisite, to break a raw Egg
into his mouth, for it will add to his wind. If he be fat, air him before
Sunrise and after Sunset; but if lean, let him have as much comfort of the
Sun as you can, Coursing in his clothes sometimes to make him sweat is not
irrequisite, so it be moderately done; but when without his clothes, let it be
sharp and swift. Let his body be empty before he course; and to wash his tongue
and nostrils with Vinegar, or to piss in his mouth e're you back him, is
wholesome; having courst him, clothe him, after he has taken breath, and ride
him home gently.

To be short, what is here defective in the right ordering of a Race-horse,
your own judgments may easily supply. All that you have to do, is to be careful
when to take him up, how to clothe him and dress him, when and how to feed and
water, what and how much exercise is requisite either by airing or by coursing,
and his ordering after exercise, and what scowrings are most requisite; and
that I may add a little more to your knowledge, and conclude this subject, take
these general Rules and Instructions.

1. Course not your Horse hard at least four or five days before you run your
match, lest the soarness of his li^bs abate his speed.

2. Except your Horse be a foul feeder muzzle him not above two or three (...)
before his match, and the night (...) his bloody courses.

3. As you give your Horse gentle courses, give him sharp ones too, that h^ may
as well find comfort as displesure thereon.

4. Upon the* match-day let your Horse be empty, and that he take his rest
undisturbed till you lead him out.

5. Shoo your Horse ever a day before you run him, then the pain of the Hammers
knocks may be out of his feet.

6. Saddle your Horse on the Race-day in the stable before you lead him forth,
and fix both the Panel and the Girths to his back and sides with Shoo-makers
wax, to prevent all dangers.

7. Lead your horse to his course with all gentleness, and give him leave to
smell to other horses dung, that thereby he may be enticed to stole and empty
his body as he goes.

8. Lastly, When you come to the place where you must start, first rub his
limbs well, then uncloath him, then take his back, and the word given, start
him with all gentleness and quietness that may, lest doing any thing rashly,
you choke him in his own wind.

A Race-horse ought to have all the finest shapes that may be, but above all
things he must be nimble, quick, and fiery, apt to fly with the least motion.
Long shapes are tolerably good, for though they show weakness, yet they assure
sudden speed. The best horse for this use is the Arabian Barbary, or his
Bastard; not but Gennets are good, but the Turks much better.

Having laid you down all these advantages for ordering your Racer, from his
taking up, to the day of his running, I hope you will make such good use of
them, that if upon an equal match you should lay your money on the heels of
your horse thus ordered, he shall be so far from kicking away his masters
stake, that the nimbleness of his feet shall make it double.

I might here insert the many subtilties and tricks there are used in making a
Match, the craft of the Betters, with the knavery of the Riders, but that they
are now too generally known by the woeful experience of too many Racing-losers.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Of ARCHERY.
ARchery, as it is a recreation, so it has been heretofore, and is still in
some parts of the world very useful in military affairs, but now quite laid
aside by English men for fighting, there being found out more dextrous and
speedy ways to kill and destroy one another.

Yet it is not so laid aside, but that it is used by some for pastime, either
at Buts or Rovers, and should not be forgotten by Citizens, as appears by the
continuance of that ancient custom for every Lord Mayor to see the prize
performed by shooting annually with the pound Arrow.

Certainly this shooting in the long Bow is very healthful for the body, by
extending the limbs, and making them pliant; and it has been necessary for a
Commonwealth, in the defense and preservation of the Conntry; but since it is
so little used now adays, I shall abreviate my discourse.

There are these Rules to be observed for shooting in the Long-bow.

First, He must have a good eye to behold and discern his mark; and
knowing-judgment to understand the distance of ground, to take the true
advantage of a side-wind, and to know in what compass his Arrow must fly; and a
quick dexterity, to give his shaft a strong, sharp, and sudden loose.

Secondly, He must in the action it self stand fair and upright with his body;
his left foot a convenient stride before his right, both his hams stiff, his
left arm holding his bow in the midst, stretched strait out, and his right arm
with his first three fingers and his thumb drawing the string to his right ear,
the notch of his Arrow resting between his forefinger and middle-finger of his
right hand, and the steel of his Arrow below the feathers upon the middle
knuckle of his forefinger on his left hand; he shall draw his Arrow close up
to the head, and deliver on the instant, without hanging on the string.

The best Bow is either Spanish or English Yew; the best Shaft is of Burch,
Suger-chest, or Brazel, and the best feathers gray or white.

There are three Marks to shoot at, Buts, Pricks, or Rovers.

The first is a level mark, and therefore you must have strong Arrow with a
broad feather.

The second is a mark of some compass, yet most certain in the distance,
therefore you must have nimble strong Arrows, with a middle feather, all of one
weight and flying.

The last, which is the Rover, is uncertain, sometimes longer, sometimes
sharper, and therefore requires Arrows lighter or heavier, according to the
distance of shooting.

If you want strength, by debilitation in the Arm or Back, you may reap the
same pleasure by using the Cross-bow, with which you may shoot at Buts, Pricks,
or Rovers.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Of Cock-Fighting.
COcking is a sport or pastime so full of delight and pleasure, that I know not
any Game in that respect is to be preferred before it, and since the
Fighting-Cock has gained so great an estimation among the Gentry, in respect
to this noble recreation I shall here propose it before all the other Games of
which I have before succinctly discoursed; that therefore I may methodically
give instructions to such as are unexperienced, and add more knowledge to such
who have already gained a competent proficiency in this pleasing Art, I shall
as briefly as I can give you information how you shall choose, breed, and diet
the Fighting-Cock, with what choice secrets are thereunto belonging, in order
thus.

Of the Choice of the Fighting-Cock.
IN the election of a Fighting-Cock there are four things principally to be
considered, and they are Shape, Color, Courage, and Sharp-heel.

First, as to his shape, you must not choose him neither too small, nor too
large; the first is weak and tedious in his fighting, and the other unweildy
and not active, and both very difficult to be matched; wherefore the
middlesiz'd Cock is the proper choice for your purpose, being easily matched,
and is both strong and nimble.

His head ought to be small, with a quick large eye, and a strong back, and (as
Mr. Markham observes) must be crookt and big at the setting on, and in color
suitable to the plume of his Feathers, whether black, yellow or reddish, etc.
The beam of his leg must be very strong, and according to his plume, blew,
gray, or yellow, his Spurs rough, long, and sharp, a little bending and looking
inward.

Secondly, his Color ought to be either gray, yellow, or red, with a black
breast; not but that there are many other colored pyles very excellent good,
which you must find out by practice and observation, but the three former by
the experience of most found ever the best, the pide pyle may pass
indifferently, but the white and dun are rarely found good for any thing.

Here note, That if your Cocks neck be invested with a scarlet complexion it is
a sign he is strong, lusty and courageous; but on the contrary, if pale and
wan, it denotes the Cock to be faint, and in health defective.

Thirdly, you may know his courage by his proud upright standing, and stately
tread in walking, and if he croweth very frequently in the Pen, it is a
courageous demonstration.

Fourthly and lastly, his narrow-heel or sharpness of heel is known no
otherways than by observation in fighting, and that is, when upon every rising
he so hits that he extracts blood from his opponent, gilding his Spurs
continually and every blow threatening immediate death to his adversary.

Here note, That it is the opinion of the best Cock-Masters, that a
sharp-heel'd Cock though he be somewhat false, is better than a true Cock with
a dull heel; and the reason is this, the one fights long but seldom wounds, the
other carries a heel so fatal that every moment produces an expectation of
the Battails conclusion; and though he is not so hardy as to endure the utmost
hewing, so commonly there is little occasion for it, being a quick dispatcher
of his business; now should your Cock prove both hardy and narrow-heel'd, he is
then the best Cock you can make choice of.

To conclude, make your choice of such a one that is of Shape strong, of Color
good, of Valor true, and of Heel sharp and ready.

How to breed a Cock of the Game.
Whatever you do, let your Hen be of a good complexion, that is to say,
rightly plumed, as black, brown, speckt, gray, grissel, or yellowish; these are
the right and proper colors for a Hen of the Game;and if she be tufted on the
crown it is so much the better, for that argues courage and resolution, and if
she have the addition of weapons they conduce very much to her excellency.

Let her body be large and well poked behind for the production of large Eggs;
you will do well to observe how she behaveth her self to her Chickens, whether
friendly or frowardly, and take especial notice of her carriage and deportment
among other Hens, if she will receive abuses from them without revenge, or show
any thing of Cowardice, value her not, for you may assure your self her
Chickens will be good for nothing.

By the way take this observation, confirmed by the opinions of the best
Cock-Masters both ancient and modern, that a right Hen of the Game from a
Dunghill-Cock will bring forth very good Chickens, but the best Cock from a
Dunghill-Hen will never get a bird that is fit for the Game, where if you intend
to have a good breed get perfect Cocks for your perfect Hens.

The best season for breeding is from the increase of the Moon in February, to
the increase of the same in March. Let her nest be so placed that she may not
be disturbed by the sight of any other fowl, which frequently so raises her
choler that the Eggs are in greater danger; let the composure of her nest be
made of soft sweet straw, and let it stand in some warm place, for she is a
Bird that is very tender.

The next thing that you are to observe is, whether she turn her Eggs often or
not, if she is remiss therein, you must supply her duty, but if she save you
the labor, prize her more than ordinary. And that she may not straggle too far
from her Eggs being necessitated to seek abroad for food, and so cool her Eggs,
it will be altogether necessary for you to set by her such necessary food as
you shall think fit with some fair water; and that she may bathe and trim her
self at her pleasure: in the place where she siteth let there be sand, gravel
and ashes finely sifted.

The Hen hatcheth her Chickens commonly after one and twenty days; observe in
the hatching to take those newly hatched, and wrapping them in wool keep them
warm by a fire side till the rest are disclosed; being all hatched put them
under the Hen, and be sure to keep her warm, and suffer not your Hen and
Chickens to straggle abroad till they are above three weeks old; and let the
room wherein they walk be boarded, for all other Flours are either too moist or
too cold.

Let their Walk be in some Grasscourt or Green-place, after they are a month
old, that they may have the benefit of feeding on Worms, and now and then to
scowre themselves with Grass and Chick-weed, but be careful they come not near
Puddles or filthy places, for they engender in birds of this nature venomous
distempers, which commonly prove fatal; for the prevention of such maladies by
way of antidote give them every morning before they range abroad, the blades of
Leeks chopped or minced small and mingled among their usual diet; also it will be
requisite to perfume their room with burnt Penyroyal or Rosemary.

Observe to take this course till their Sexes are distinguishable; as soon as
the Comb or Wattels are discernable, or plainly visible to the eye, cut them
away, and anoint the sore place with sweet butter, till it be whole. The
reasons why their Combs or Wattles should be cut so soon, are these, First if
you let them grow till they arrive to their full bigness, and then cut them,
there will follow a great flux of blood, and the least loss of blood in
feathered fowl is very dangerous; if much, frequently mortal; moreover to let
them grow thus causes gouty thick heads, with great lumps; whereas if you take
them off betime as aforesaid, they will have heads finely small, smooth and
slender.

The time of the separation of the Cock-Chickens is when they begin to fight
with and peck one another, till which time you may let them walk with the Hen
promiscuously together, but afterward let their Walks be apart, and that Walk
is best where he may securely and privately enjoy his Hens without the
disturbance and annoyance of other Cocks, for which purpose walks at
Wind-mills, Water-mills, Grange-houses, Lodges in Parks, and Coney-Warrens, are
very good Walks, but that the later is somewhat dangerous, being too frequently
haunted with Polecats, and other vermin.

Let the place of feeding be as near as you can on soft dry ground, or on
boards if the place be harder, as on paved earth, or floors plastered, it will
so weaken and blunt their beaks, that they will be unable to hold fast.

Here note, That any white Corn is good for a Cock in his Walk, and so are
white-bread tosts steeped in drink, or man's urine, which will both scowre and
cool them inwardly.

Let not above three Hens walk with your Cock, for should you suffer more they
will tread too much by reason of the heat of their nature, and by often
treading they will cons^me their strength, and become so debilitated, that
though they have courage enough, yet they have not strength to perform their
parts as they ought to do in a battle.

Observe the crowing of your Chickens; if you find them crow too soon, that is
before six months old, or unseasonably, and that their crowing is clear and
loud, fit them as soon as you can for the Pot or Spit, for they are infallible
signs of cowardice and falsehood; on the contrary the true and perfect Cock is
long before he obtains his voice, and when he has got it observes his hours
with the best judgment.

Suffer not your Cock to fight a battle till he is complete and perfect in
every member, and that is when he is two years old; for to fight him when his
Spurs are but warts comparatively, is no sign of discretion, for you may then
probably know his valor and courage, but you cannot know his worth and
goodness.

In especial manner take care that your Cocks roosting-Perch be not too small
in the gripe, or so ill placed that he cannot sit without stradling, or if it
be crooked it is bad, for by these means, a Cock will be uneven heel'd, and
consequently no good striker; and know that a Perch either makes or marreth a
Cock; to remedy or prevent such faults, is to have in your roost a row of
little Perches about eight inches in length, and ten inches from the ground,
that the Cock may with more facility ascend, and being up, is forced to keep
his legs near together; and here take notice of this maxim amongst the best
Cockbreeders, That the Cock which is a close sitter, is ever a narrow striker.

Let the footstool of the Perch be round and smooth about the thickness of a
man's arm, or if you will have the best form for a Perch, go visit the houses of
the most skilful Cock-masters, and from them all gather what is most necessary
for your purpose by making inspection into their feeding-pens and other places;
and let the ground underneath the Perch be soft, for otherwise when he leaps
down, he will be apt on a rough and hard ground to hurt his feet, insomuch that
they will grow knotty and gouty.

Of dieting and ordering a Cock for Battle.
IN the dieting and ordering of a Cock for Battle confisteth all the substance
of profit and pleasure; and therefore your cunning Cock-merchants are very
cautious of divulging the secrets (as they call them) of dieting, for on that
depends the winning or losing of the Battle, they knowing very well that the
best Cock undieted is unable to encounter the worst that is dyeted; let others
be as niggardly as they please of their experience and observations, for my
part I shall be free and scorn to conceal any thing that may tend to the
propagation of the art and mystery of Cock-fighting; wherefore as to the
dyeting and ordering of fighting Cocks take these instructions following.

The time of taking up your Cocks is about the latter end of August, for from
that time till the latter end of May Cocking is seasonable and in request, the
Summer season being improper by reason of its great heat.

Having taken them up, view them well, and see that they are sound, hard
feathered, and full summed, that is having all their feathers complete, then
put them into several pens, having a moving Perch therein, to set it at which
corner of the Perch you think most convenient; the fashion and form of these
pens you may have at the house of any Cocker, and therefore I shall give you no
directions how to make them; only be advised to keep your Pens clean, and let
not your Cocks want either meat or water.

For the first four days after your Cock is pend feed him with the crumb of old
Manchet cut into square bits about a handful at a time, and feed him thrice a
day therewith, that is at Sunrising, when the Sun is in his Meridian, and at
Sunsetting, and let his water be from the coldest spring you can get it.

Having fed your Cock thus four days, or so long till you think he has purged
himself of his corn, worms, gravel, and other coarse feeding, then in the
morning take him out of the Pen and let him Sparr a while with another Cock.
Sparring is after this manner: Cover each of your Cocks heels with a pair of
Hots made of bombasted rolls of Leather, so covering the Spurs that they cannot
bruise or wound one another, and so setting them down on straw in a room, or
green-grass abroad, let them fight a good while, but by no means suffer them to
draw blood of one another; the benefit that accrues hereby is this, it heateth
and chafeth their bodies, and it breaks the fat and the glut that is within
them, and adapts it for purgation.

Having sparred as much as is sufficient, which you may know when you see them
pant and grow weary, then take them up, and taking off their Hots give them a
Diaphoretick or sweating after this manner: You must put them in deep
straw-baskets made for the purpose, or for want of them take a couple of
Cocking-bags and fill these with straw half ways, then put in your Cokcs
severally, and cover them over with straw to the top, then shut down the lids
and let them sweat; but do not forget to give them first some white
Suger-candy, chopped Rosemary, and Butter mingled and incorporated together, let
the quantity be about the bigness of a Walnut, by so doing you will cleanse him
of his grease, increase his strength, and prolong his breath.

Toward four or five a clock in the evening take them out of their Stoves, and
having lickt their eyes and head with your tongue, put them into their Pens,
and having filled their Troughs with square-cut-manchet, piss therein, and let
them feed whilst the Urine is hot; for this will cause their scouring to work,
and will wonderfully cleanse both head and body.

After this, diet your Cocks with a Bread made after this manner: Of
Wheat-meal, and Oat-meal Flower, take of each a Gallon, and knead them into a
stiff paste, with Ale, the whites of half a score Eggs, and some Butter; having
wrought the Dow very well, make it into broad thick Cakes, and when they are
four days old, cut them into square pieces; I will not advise you to use (as
some imprudently do) Liquorish, Anniseeds, or rather hot Spices among your
foresaid Ingredients; for they will make a Cork so hot at the heart, that upon
the concluding of the Battle, he will be suffocated and overcome with his own
heat. In short, that food is best which is most consentaneous to his own
natural feeding.

The second day after his sparring, take your Cock into a fair green close, and
having a Dunghil-Cock in your arms, show it him, and then run from him, that
thereby you may entice him to follow, you permitting him to have now and then a
blow, and thus chase him up and down abont half an honr; when he begins to
pant, being well heated, take him up and carry him home, and give him this
scouring; take half a pound of fresh Butter, and beat it in a Mortar with the
leaves of Herb of Grace, Hysop and Rosemary, till they all look like a green
Salve, give him thereof a piece as big as a Walnut, and then stove him as
aforesaid till evening, and then feed him according to former prescription.

The next day let him feed and rest, and spar him the next day after; thus do
every other day for the first fortnight, either sparring or chasing, and after
every heat a scowring, which will keep him from being faint and pursie.

Feed him the second fortnight as you did the first, but you must not spar him
or chase him above twice a week, observing still, that if you heat him much,
you must stove him long and give him a greater quantity of scowring. When well
in breath, slight heats, small scowrings, and little stoving will serve the
turn.

The third fortnight (which is a time sufficient for ordering a Cock for the
Battle) you must feed him as aforesaid, but you must not spar him at all for
fear of making his head sore, but you may moderately chase him twice or thrice
in that time as aforesaid, then give him his scowring rolled well in brown
Sugar Candy which will prevent the scowring from making the Cock sick; now may
you let him fight, having first let him rest four days, observing that he come
empty into the Pit.

The right way of Cock-matching.
OF all things have a special care how you match your Cock; for should you feed
your Cock with ever so much circumspect care and prudence, it will avail
nothing if your Cock be over-matcht.

In matching, take notice of these two things; first, the length of Cocks,
secondly, the strength of Cocks; for the length, if your Adversaries Cock be
too long, yours shall hardly catch his head, and so be incapable of indangering
eye or life; and if he be the stronger, he will overbear your Cock, and not
suffer him to rise or strike with any advantage.

The length you may judge of by the eye, when you gripe the Cock by the waste,
and make him shoot out his legs, in which posture you shall see the utmost of
his height, and so compare them together, being herein governed by your
judgment, his strength is known by the thickness of his body. Take this for a
Rule, That a Cock is ever held the strongest, which is the largest in the garth.

You shall know the dimension of the garth by the measure of your hands,
griping the Cock about from the points of your great finger to the joints of
your thumbs, and either of these advantages by no means give your Adversary; if
you doubt loss in the one, be sure to gain in the other: for the week long Cock
will rise at more ease, and the short strong Cock will give the surer blow.

How to prepare Cocks for Fight.
SInce all Cocks are not cast in one mould, the advantages on either side must
be reconciled by matching; and having made an equal Match as near as you can,
you must thus prepare him to fight:

First, with a pair of fine Cock-shears cut all his main off close unto his
neck, from the head to the setting on of the shoulders; Secondly, clip off all
the feathers from the tail close to his rump, the redder it appears the better
is the Cock in condition. Thirdly, take his wings and spread them forth by the
length of the first rising feather, and clip the rest slope-wise with sharp
points, that in his rising he may therewith endanger an eye of his adversary.
Fourthly, scrape, smooth, and sharpen his Spurs with a Penknife. Fifthly and
lastly, see that there be no feathers on the Crown of his head for his
adversary to take hold of; then with your spittle, moistning his head all over,
turn him into the pit to move his fortune.

How to order Cocks after battle, and how to cure wounds.
THe battle being ended, immediately search your Cocks wounds, as many as you
can find, suck the blood out of them, then wash them well with warm urine, and
that will keep them from ranckling; after this give him a roll or two of your
best scowring, and so stove him up as hot as you can for that night; in the
morning, if you find his head swelled, you must suck his wounds again, and
bathe them again with warm urine, then take the powder of herb Robert, and put
it into a fine bag, and pounce his wounds therewith; after this give him a good
handful of bread to eat out of warm urine, and so put him into the stove again,
and let him not feel the air till the swelling be fallen.

If he has received any hurt in his eye, then take a leaf or two of right
ground Ivy, that which grows in little tufts in the bottom of Hedges, and has
a little rough leaf; I say, take this Ivy and chew it in your mouth, and spit
the juice into the eye of the Cock, and this will not only cure the present
Malady, but prevent the growth of Films, Haws, Warts, or the like, destructive
to the eyesight.

If after you have put out your wounded Cocks to their Walks, and visiting them
a month or two after, if you find about their head any swollen bunches hard and
blackish at one end, you may then conclude in such bunches there are unsound
cores, which must be opened and crushed out with your thumbs; and after this,
you must suck out the corruption, and filling the holes full of fresh Butter,
you need not doubt a Cure.

Cures for some distempers in a Cock, Chick, or Hen of the Game.
THE Pip is a white thin scale growing on the tip of the tongue, by which means
Poultry in general cannot feed, it is very visible to the eye, and proceeds
from foul feeding or want of water; it is cured by pulling off the scales with
your nail, and rubbing the tongue with salt.

The Roup is a filthy byle or swelling on the rump of the Cock, Hen, etc. and
will corrupt the whole body. It is known by the staring and turning back of the
feathers. For the cure, you must pull away the feathers, and open the sore to
thrust out the core, then wash the place with water and salt, the Cure is
effected.

If your Cock or Hen have the flux which happens by eating too much moist meat,
you may cure them by giving them scalded Pease-bran; but if they cannot mute,
anoint their vents, and give them corn steept in man's Urine.

Lice is a common infirmity among them, proceeding from corrupt food, or for
wanting of hathing in Sand-Ashes or the like; this Malady you must cure by
taking Pepper beaten to powder, and mixing it with warm water, wash them
therewith. If they are troubled with sore eyes, take a leaf or two of
Ground Ivy, and chawing it well in your mouth, spit the juice thereof into
their eyes, and it will presently heal. What other infirmities are incident to
these Birds of Game I shall leave, and their Cures, to your own practice and
observation.

An excellent and elegant Copy of Verses upon two Cock's-fighting, by Dr. R.
Wild.
GO you tame Gallants, you that have a name,
And would be accounted Cocks of the Game;
That have brave Spurs to show for it, and can crow,
And count all Dunghill breed, that cannot show
Such painted plumes as yours, which think on it vice
With Cock-like lust to tread your Cockatrice;
Though Peacocks, Woodcocks* Weathercocks you be
If y' are not fighting-Cocks, you are not for me.
I of two feather Combatants will write,
And he that means to the life to express their fight,
Must make his ink the blood which they did spill.
And from their dying wings must take his quill,
No sooner were the doubtful people set,
The match made up, and all that would had bet,
But straight the skilful Judges of the Play
Brought forth their sharp heel' d Warriors; and they
Were both in linen bags, as if 'twere meet,
Before they died to have their winding-sh^et.
Into the Pit th^y're brought, and being there
Upon the St^ge, the Norfolk Chanticleer
Looks stoutly at his never before seen foe,
And like a Challenger began to crew,
And clap his wings as if he would display
His warlike colors, which were black and gray.
Mean time the wary Wisbich walks and breathes
His active body, and in f^ry wreathes
His comely crest; and often looking down,
He beats his angry beak upon the ground.
This done, they meet, not like that coward-breed,
Of Aesop's; these can better fight than feed.
They scorn the Dunghill; it is their only prize,
To dig for Pearls within each others eyes.
They fought so nimbly that 'twas hard to know
To the skilful whether they did fight or no,
If that the blood which died the fatal floar
Had not born witness of 't. Yet fought they more,
As if each wound were but a spur to prick
Their fury forward. Lightning's not more quick
Or red, than were their eyes; 'twas hard to know
Whether 'twas blood or anger made them so.
I Am sure they had been out, had they not stood
More safe, being walled in each others blood
Thus they vy'd blows; but yet, alas at length,
Although their courage were full tried, their strength
And blood began to ebb. You that have seen
A watery combat on the Sea, between
Two angry roaring boiling billows, how
They ^arch and meet, and dash their curled brow,
Swelling like graves, as though they did intend
TO intomb each other, ere the quarrel end;
But when the wind is down, and blustering weather,
They are made friends, and sweetly run together,
May think these Champions such; their blood grows low,
And they which l^apt but now, now scarce can go,
For having left the advantage of the heel,
Drunk with each others blood, they only reel;
And yet they would fain fight; they came so near
Methought they meant into each others ear
To whisper wounds; and when they could not rise,
They lay and looked blows int' each others eyes.
But now the Tragic part! After this fit
When Norfolk Cock had got the best of it,
And Wisbich lay a dying, so that none,
Though sober, but might venture seven to one*
Contracting, like a dying Taper, all
His strength, intending with the blow to fall,
He struggles up, and having taken wind,
Ventures a blow, and strikes the other blind.
And now poor Norfolk having lost his eyes,
Fights, guided only by antipathies.
With him, alas, the proverb is not true,
The blows his eyes never saw, his heart must rue.
At last by chance he stumbling on his foe,
Not having any strength to give a blow,
He falls upon him with his wounded head,
And makes his Conquerors wings his featherbed.
His friends ran in, and being very chary,
Sent in all haste to call a Pothecary;
But all in vain, his body did so blister,
That 'twas not capable of any clister.
Physick's in vain, and 'twill not him restore.
Alas poor Cock he was let blood before.
Then finding himself weak, opening his bill*
He calls a Scrivener, and thus makes his Will:
Imp. first of all, let never be forgot.
My body freely I bequeath to the pot.
Decently to be boiled, and for its Tomb
Let it be buried in some hungry Womb.
Item, For Executors I'^e have none,
But he that on my side laid seven to one,
And, like a Gentleman that he may live,
To him and to his heirs, my Comb I give,
(...) with my brains, that all may know,
(...) oftentim^s his br^ins did use to crow.
Item. For comfort of those weaker ones,
Whose wives complain of let them have my stones.
For Ladies that are ^ight, it is my will,
My Feathers make a Fa^. And for my Bill
I Will give a Tailor: (...) faith it is so short
I am afraid he will rather curse me for it.
And for that worthy Doctors sake, who meant
To give me a Clister, le^ my Rump ^e sent.
Lastly, Because I find my self decay,
I yield and give to Wisbich Cock the Day.
FINIS.

