Praxis Catholica: OR, THE COUNTRYMAN'S Universal Remedy: WHEREIN plainly and
briefly laid down the Nature, Matter, Manner, Place and Cure of most DISEASES,
Incident to the Body of Man; Not hitherto discovered.

Whereby any one of an ordinary Capacity may apprehend the true Cause of his
Distempers, wherein his Cure consists, and the Means to effect it; together
with Rules how to order Children in that most violent Disease of vomiting and
Looseness, etc. useful likewise for Seamen and Travelers.

^^so an Account of an Incomparable Powder for Wounds or Hurts which cure any
ordinary ones at once dressing.

^ritten by Robert Couch, sometimes Practitioner in Physic and Chyrurgery, at
Boston in New England.

^ow published with diverse useful Additions (for public benefit) by Chr. Pack,
Operator in Chemistry.

^enim si dare vitam proprius Dei munus est, certe datam tueri, jamque
fugientem retineri, Deo proximum fateamur oportet. Erasm. ^^^don, Printed for
Robert Harford, at the Angel in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1680.

TO HIS Highly Honored AND MUCH Esteemed FRIEND, COLONEL ^RANCIS WILLIS, ^his
Little TRACT humbly offers and submits it self.
Worthy Sir:
Seeing it has been your generous Care, and Love to your Native Country, to
transplant this Exotic from Transmarine Parts to us; I think it highly
reasonable that you should have the Oversight of its Culture and Growth: That
as it has here received its First Being from your Charity to the Public, it
may also under your Name continue to grow and increase.

Sir, your Knowledge in true Medicine, and intimate Acquaintance you had with
Mr. Couch the Author, has rendered you as able to Judge, as fit to Patronize.
His Judgments of Diseases are sound and accurate, and deduced from such
Principles as Heathens and their Followers never yet understood, or were able
to refute; as for the Medicines be advises, you know, Sir, they are not Toys or
Trifles to gull an unwary World, but such whose virtues and power of healing
are undeniable, both from what they have done, and are always ready to perform.
What I have added is only a farther Confirmation of Matter of Fact, the which
with the whole I humbly present to you as it is (except Errors, if any, which
I reserve to my self) desiring your Favorable Acceptance of those small
Endeavors of

Your most Humble Servant, CHR. PACK.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
I Once having the Fortune to see this Little Book of Mr. Couch's in the hand
of a Gentleman living in Carolina (who did me the favor to lend it me to
peruse) I was so pleased with his Sentiments of Diseases, and manner of
describing them, that I heartily wished it were here made Public; but the
Gentleman's sudden departure out of England recalled the Book out of my hands
before I could half transcribe it. Not withstanding at length I attained my
desire through the Assista^^e of the Worthy Colonel Francis Willis (a Candid
Lover and Promoter of true Medicine) who procured me this Book in Manuscript
from Virginia (where Mr. Couch died) from whom also I had long before received
the Knowledge of those most Excellent Remedies used by Mr. Couch for curing the
Distempers treated of in this Book. But seeing that all Medicines now adays (of
which there are too many) published as Arcanums, and bearing the names of
Universal Remedies, come so far short of their specious pretenses, they being
indeed only Engines employed for gain, that I could not reasonably expect that
those Worthy Medicaments should be beheld with any other Aspect, if the curing
of Diseases should be here restrained to them only. Wherefore I have here added
other Medicines for the cure of each Disease, and such as are good and
effectual, in which I have heartily dealt with all persons, and left every one
to his liberty what to use. Moreover because many Persons (into whose hands
this Book may come) who live remote in the Country, upon sudden occasion
cannot have time enough to send to me for the Powder and Pill, I have also
directed the use of such as they may be served withal nearer home, by which I
hope I may justly avoid the censure of publishing this Book solely for my own
advantage. Truly I abhor such private ends which are not to be attained without
hypocrisy, and the prejudices and ruins of Lives and Families: but so fast
are most people tied to the Heathens precepts of healing, and to the modes and
fashions of times and persons, that they know not truth when they meet her, but
obstinately persist in error (for its age sake) and so voluntarily come short
of the benefits of Gods healing mercies, falling short of true knowledge,
because they think themselves to be already sufficiently informed, according to
the saying of Seneca, Multi ad virtatem pervenire potuissent nisi se putassent
pervenisse: So that it may be as truly affirmed in relation as well to the body
as the soul, that many perish through unbelief: neither will it be otherwise
till the time comes when the groans of the Creation to be delivered from this
vanity shall cease, and the Elias of Arts shall appear to restore all things.

This little Treatise may be useful for every considerate Reader, enabling him
in diverse Maladies to get help at a cheaper and more certain rate than usual.
Neither will it be unwelcome to the Tyro's in the Helmontian Philosophy, and
Medicine whom it may accommodate in many cases; others no doubt at first sight
will not freely receive it, because (to them) the Doctrine may be altogether
novel, but if they will rightly weigh the discourses of Diseases and compare
them with the common precepts and notions of healing (out of desire to find out
the truth) they shall certainly apprehend them to be more agreeable to the
frame and simplicity of nature than the other. But as for such Subscribers to
Heathenism, as have taken a Leaf of their Opinions for life, I do not question
but to them it will be disgustful, they will contend about the shell till they
lose the Kernel, but be it as it will, I design nothing but well in it, what I
have said being only out of love to truth, not reflecting upon any man's person
or interest. To conclude, I shall still make it my business to loose the bonds
of Animals, Vegitables and Minerals; endeavoring with Chimical Keys to unlock
the choycest. Cabinets of Nature, and whatever I from time to time (by the
Divine Bounty) shall be able to take from thence, shall readily be communicated
to the use of the sick; more especially into the hands of honest and
conscientious Artists, who may use them to the honor of God the giver, their
own credit, and the relief of many a miserable person. In the mean time I
remain,

Your servant in the fire, Chr. Pack.
From my Laboratory, at the Sign of the Globe and Chemical Furnaces in the
Postern near Moor-gate.
To all Ingenious Students and Practitioners in Physic and Chyrurgery.
Courteous Brethren:
WE read of Renowned Dr. Harvey our Countryman, who tells us he opened an
Imposthume in a Gentleman's left side, where he beheld the Dyastole and Systole
of the heart, and he touched it, and found it insensible, though it gives life
unto every part.

It Is an Argument he is of eminent and public conducement, useful to derive
good to others, who it least sensible of private Injuries offered himself. As
for Injuries I have had a double share, and I have not only forgiven them, but
forgotten them; I should gladly do them good that did me hurt.

There is a saving in Germany, poor Luther made many a Rich man; I could be
contented to be poor, so I might be instrumental to enrich Artists in the
Knowledge of Healing, whereby it might tend to the peoples greater good, and
God's greater Glory.

The Laws of Charity oblige a man that has gone in a dangerous way to
preadmonish him that intends the same.

Satis Eloquentiae: Sapientiae parum: abunde fabularum audivintus.
So that I stand bound to advise you that you consult not so much with that
learned Theory of the Schools; which is good for nothing but to dispute and
contend.

Learned Dr. Charlton in the end of his Epistle to his Translation of Helmont
upon the Magnetic Cure of Wounds. I remember has a saying to this effect:
There are many things (faith be) that have been disputed in the Schools and
Colleges, that have been received for truths among them; and they have seemed
to have Reason for their Foundation, and Learning for their Defense or Walls:
but when they have come to be experienced, they have fallen to the ground, and
nothing of truth has appeared in them etc. They can inform you nothing of
truth, neither in the knowledge of a Disease; nor a good method in curing, nor
a laudable Medicine to effect a Cure.

Practice is the best part of Physic, Observation the surest, and the Theory
of the Ancients, the uncertainest and emptiest. This we are taught by the
example of many Eminent Physicians both Chemical and Gallenical; Paracelsus,
Helmont, Crollius.
who could with their Arcanum's cure those Diseases that were termed opprobria
Medicorum: And we see likewise those Riverius, Forestus, Johnstonus, and many
more Modern Physicians.
Renowned Physicians that were trained up in the Doctrine of the Schools; yet
when they were to encounter any stubborn Disease, they would not trust to their
Weapons, (having often been foiled with them) but ran to their Arcanum's, as
their Observations witness.

Not that I think all their Secrets were Chemical Preparations; for I have
abundance of reason to believe that there are singular specifical virtues in
Sensitive and Vegitive Simples, and of a far greater power than some of our
large Compositions.

I am not so credulous, as to believe all to be true that the Chemists boast
of, neither am I so diffident, as to think all the Schools have treated of to
be false. Comede dactylos and projice for as duritiem.
Read them as our Modern Divines read the Schoolmen.

Let not any one think (qui forsan Latin, aut Graece intelligere potest) that
because he is a good Scholar, he can presently be a good Physician: if he does,
Non quaerit aeger Medicum eloquentem, sed Sanitatem, Seneca.
be sure he will be mistaken; for he will find the Art of healing to consist in
another kind of Learning. Novi nuper quendam, says Dr. Primrose, qui cum se
Medicum profiteretur; quamvis levissime ea disciplina tinctus foret; talis
tamen habitus est ob quandam Latinae Linguae cognitionem: but there is a great
difference betwixt such men and sound Physicians; Garrulosum Medicum alterum
morbum aegro esse.
it is one thing to give a Patient a long and learned discourse of his Disease;
but it is another thing to give him a present remedy.

I have but only hinted at Diseases, (because I intended this but for an
Enchyridion) yet you may perceive by it, that we have been blinded in the true
knowledge of the Causes, Places, and Cures of Diseases; I must confess I owe
much of it unto Vir magno judicio, and praestante doctrina, clarissimus.
Helmont, the Standard Bearer of Physic; yet I speak not his Judgment, but
mine own, having enforced a belief from experience; I have not written any
thing in this Tract, but what I am persuaded of the truth of, though it may in
most places seem (to some) at the first view to be Paradoxes* yet upon a more
accurate inspection i^ may become received Truths. And if this crude labor of
mine finds acceptance with young Practitioners; I shall spend some time to
enlarge upon it to their satisfaction.

As for my Arcanums you will all conclude, it is not fit to put them to public
view: if any of you should desire the knowledge of them, male docuit. And to
cast them at the feet of all Pretenders to Physic, they may be abused by their
ignorance i^ the preparing, dose, time or manner, etc. for one may have as good
Medicine^ for a Disease as can be by the Art of man invented, Morborum remedia,
si ab indoctis usurpentur venena, si vero a doctis and exercitatis deorum
auxilia sunt.
yet if he know^ not the time when, no^ the form in what manner, nor the dose
how much; he may instead of curing kill the Patient: Besides, there are some
idle and careless Artists, who may not deserve it, that never inquire into
Diseases, nor yet Medicine; but expect every thing to be popt into their
mouths: Dii laboribus, omnia vendunt.
the Gods sold all by sweats; night unto night shows knowledge, etc. the gift
of healing is a great gift, which comes from above, from which you are to fetch
the knowledge of Medicine: And I doubt whether it be safe to divulge Secrets:
we have no such precedent from any Author: we see Riverius in all the four
Centuries of his observations; there was hardly a Disease but he cured with his
Febrifugium and Calomanenas, and who knows what they were; (I have a very
strong faith, that my Powder which I call my Arcanum Universale, was his
Febrifugium, for the dose and operation is alike; and if mine were not the same
I am confident it is not inferior to it, nor any extant) they bid us seek and
we may find; for they have told us nothing, but a Story, how Actaeon was
Metamorphos'd for presenting Diana naked to the People, etc. All their Secrets
died with them; or at least communicated to such Friends as kept them from a
public view; then let us do as they did, and we may attain unto that they had;
we must not content our selves in the knowledge of a little Mithridate or
Diascordium; or to give a Purge or a Clyster; but let every day repent us of
yesterdays Ignorance.

Let us drive to perfection, Ars longa, vita brevis, experientia difficilis,
etc.
though the Age of a man is too short to obtain it: It is much against my
temper, to conceal any thing from any Ingenious and honest Artist; but I have
been much mistaken, and I am sorry to speak it; that if I had told less, it
would have been more for my credit and profit: I can say with the Poet Ovid:
Hos ego versiculos feci tulit alter honores. Nevertheless, the unworthiness of
some, shall not detract from the worth of any Civil and Ingenious Brother: I
shall always be civil to all, but especially to those that I find are so: Ars
praeclarissima Artifex sordissimus.
I am sorry to see so many shabby and course spirited Fellows, that practice in
so high and honorable a Calling: There is such a vast disproportion between
the Art and the Artist; that well may the Art be ashamed to own them: There are
not only ignorant Jack-daws that are intruders upon this worthy Art, which
square out all things by their crooked and indirect Rules; but likewise there
are Pompeys and Caesar's too, who scorn to admit of Equals, and be Caesar's or no
bodies, etc. who think it much below their Greatness to advise with any. If
they are at any time petitioned unto it, they grant it with this reservation to
themselves, to deny every thing others say, though it be never so undeniable
and clear a truth; they would rather twenty should die under their hands, than
part with one to be cured by another, that is a great affront to their Ambition
whereunto they sacrifice many a man's life, and dissemble their Pride under the
cloak of Humility, and so blind the poor Countryman; that they think such a
one to be Aesculapius himself, and that his Medicines were extracted from the
balm of Gilead; when he may be but some Imposter; and his Medicines, it may be,
no better than a little Cow Dung, or some thing worse; and as the Papists are
kept in blindness, by praying in a Language they understand not, to the hazard
of their souls; so are many amongst us led away (by such deceivers) in harkning
unto the false Doctrine of the Heathens, to the hazard of our bodies: for they
thunder out Art in Quarto, and Conscience in Folio, and shower down such
Heavenly Apologies for their deceit and ignorance, with such clashes of
Lightning, that frights the simple into such a belief, as to mistrust, were a
crime unpardonable; whereby they are canonized on Earth, and written in the
Rubric, in the Calendar of the World. I believe there have been many such
Saints on Earth, that never found any room in Heaven.

Brethren; have a care none of you be ever found akin to any such Homicide;
though you may with such juggles and indirect means deceive the people, you
cannot deceive the all-seeing God; he will make you smart for it in the end,
when the popular applause of the World shall but torment you the more. The life
of man is more worth than all the Creation: And as it is precious to the
Creature; so it is to the Creator; and he will not suffer it to be trampled
upon (by the pride of any) without revenge; and yet those sad fellows may be
much cried up and in great esteem amongst the vulgar, when a far more knowing
and worthy Practitioner may not be regarded. Let not this be any discouragement
to any young Practitioner; for if there be anything of worth in him, and he
acts like an Artist, let him expect to be undervalued by the ignorant, and let
him not admire why it is so; for we find that it has been the unhappiness of
all Ages, that Falsehood has been preferred before Truth, and persons of no
worth or value, have had the precedence of persons of true worth and esteem:
Scientia non habet inimicum praeter ignorantem.
as for the vulgar, whom Nature huddl'd up in have; that Act merely by the
prerogative of depraved Nature, speak against every thing but what is naught;
whatsoever is of Worth and Art, be sure they will dislike; and exclaim against
all Persons, but such as comply with their ignorance, whose Malice and Fury is
like the Waves of the Sea, driven by the fury of enraged Boreas.

I have read of Cato that he was forty four times brought (by the vulgar sort
of people) to the Judgment Seat, and every time came off acquitted; what a
great happiness it is, when a man has many malicious Enemies, to find
impartial and upright Judges.

Every Country has its Diana, as well as Ephesus: And he that will not
sacrifice with the people, shall be crucified by them; but he that does keep a
pure and undefiled Conscience toward God, and acts like an honest and
ingenious Artist toward his Neighbor may extract a Cordial from the World's
poison, and live above the reach of Envy.

The most splendent Creature is sometime clouded, and the most virtuous Lady
suffers an Eclipse in her innocence by some malevolent Neighbor when a
Strumpet goes unsuspected.

It is not every Artist's fortune to arrive at Corinth; but I could wish every
ingenious Artist could practice what he knows, and that he knew more, to
practice better: so I desire to be understood, when I say that Practice is the
best part of Physic; that there must be first a knowledge of the Disease, and
likewise of the Remedy, and so to proportion the Remedy to the Disease; and not
to try practices on men's bodies; Care at successibus opto, Quisquis ab eventu
facta notanda putat.
that the Poet cursed; but first you must know, before you practice, and so
your practice will confirm your knowledge: So I conclude with this advice;
first, let God go before you, to counsel and direct you unto the direct means;
let him go with you to crown it with a good Success, and let him follow you, to
take all the glory unto whom all glory is due.

Caepta faveat Deus, ac vota nostra secundet.

So wishes, Robert Couch.

TO MY Candid and Cordial COUNTRYMEN.
Friends and Countrymen:
SInce Death and Diseases (which are Diametrically opposite unto life) are
entailed unto us through the Transgression of our first Parents, the Creator
and sole Author of life, foreseeing the weakness of our Natures, to withstand
the strength of such mortal Enemies, created Medicine from the beginning out of
the Earth, to correct the fury and tyranny of Diseases (whereof Death is the
Daughter) whereby each should be at his good pleasure; and so governs it at his
will, that he permits and suffers this man to die, and that to be sick by
secondary Causes, which happen as well directly as irregularly,

And whereas the Nature of Diseases are various; so he has endued the Earth
with various and sundry Medicinal Virtues; and he has likewise called and
ordained some to administer and apply such suitable and fit means, as the
nature of Diseases do require. But the great difficulties by reason of the
invisibility of the Disease, and the great obscurity in the knowledge of
Medicine have frustrated many in their expectation. All Arts and Sciences
(except Physic) have grown to some pitch; but that has rather gone backward,
till within some late years, famous Helmont (to whom the Art it self stands
much obliged) and some Renowned Physicians of our Native Country, have begun
to cast off that black vail of deceit with which it was clothed by the
Theorems of the Heathens.

Indeed the gate of healing has remained shut from the Cradle of the World;
and the Schools of the Greeks, instead of opening it shut it closer, and made
it more mysterious than ever was intended by the first Creator.

The natures, causes and places of Diseases were not rightly understood by
them, whereby they failed in their Remedies; they had so much regard unto the
effects, that they neglected the causes, which pernicious and destructive
course is practiced still, by such who are wholly led by their Rules.

Wherefore the whole intent of this small Tract is to undeceive you, that you
be not deceived of your lives by such erroneous preservers, and that you give
not your money for what is not bread, nor buy a Snake instead of an Eele. I know
it is not Artist-like to build so great a Porch to so small a Fabric: but if
it tend to the Owners more convenience, it is to be dispensed withal. Indulge
me therefore Reader, to give thee some cautions; (it may be for thy Good)
First, touching the Disease: Secondly, touching the Physician. Inasmuch as we
were poisoned from the Tree of Knowledge; so no other Tree could we fetch an
Antidote from; but the Tree of Life, which was for healing of the Nations: So
Diseases are only cured by fit and suitable means; for thou may be killed by
a bad means as well as restored by a good. Wherefore be an earnest Suitor to
Heaven, that thou may have the right means from Earth, and a benediction with
it, which will make it operate the better.

And as it must be a true and proper means that must cure thy Disease, so have
a special care the Remedy come not too late. How many have been robbed of their
lives upon that score? Opportunity is the soul and perfection of Physic, you
may lose that opportunity to day, Post est occasio calva.
that the price of the World cannot procure thee to morrow: take time by the
fore top lest it be bald behind.

There are two great Obstacles which commonly make many disadvantages; the
first is, from the persuasion of Friends; the second, from the flattery of
Diseases.

First, when any one is taken sick, one Friend advises him to such a thing,
another persuades another, and a third another; telling him if it does him no
good it will do him no hurt: But there is no such Medium will stand; for if it
do not exasperate the Disease; yet it does retard the Cure; and so by trying
uncertain means, you loose the advantage of a sure Remedy.

Secondly, The Deceit and Flattery of the Disease; when Diseases assault you
very strongly in the Quanmvis non nunquam morbi in eorum principiis absque
periculo tibi videntur: vires and in mores tamen sensim dejicientur and
corrampentur ut postea nulla salutis spes super fit, at morbus qui primo
curabiis fuerat, malignitam neglecta incurabili^ (...).
beginning, they may have such Intervals and Respites, that you apprehend your
selves better to day than you was yesterday, and that while the Disease does
insensibly: undermine your lives, and then assaults with greater fury than he
did at first.

Others are very mild and gentle in the beginning, yet they may be very malign:
parvae febres quando qui valde malignae; whereby you do not so much mistrust
them, much less understand their danger.

And sometimes those that labor under sharp Diseases, the Symptoms have been
so remiss and dark, that it has been a very difficult thing for an able
Physician to presage either life or death, and when he has passed his
Judgment, within few hours there has been such a change, that he has been
fooled in his Prognostic.

In others again, Diseases have layen so hid and obscure, that they have died
before they were perceived to be sick, of which we have had many sad Examples,
of some that have died suddenly, who have carried those Diseases undiscovered
about them, that wanted nothing but the word, immediately to run them to the
heart.

Now I have showed you the Deceit and Flattery of Diseases, which have couzened
thousands of their lives; of whom you will do well to learn to beware, and act
prudently, to prevent by mistrust, what you would not have come suddenly and
unexpected.

And as I have told you the deceit of Diseases, so I shall tell you the deceit
of Physicians; I mean such who have built more upon the sandy Foundation of the
As if it were for their sake God created Medicine, and Christians should be
beholden to them for it.
Pagans and Heathens then upon a sure and rocky Foundation, who have studie^
more to get money than to cure their Diseases.

It has pitied me many a time, (...) see that Old Saying too often verified;
viz. Saepe plus mali a Medico quam a Morbo.
That many times there is more danger from the Physician, than from the
Disease, such a Physician as practices by Old Authors. And that yo^ may the
better know them, and understand some of their juggles, I shall recite some of
their Practices.

First, when such a Deceiver is called unto a Patient, if his Diseas^ should be
grown to a great height which has made him dangerously ^ill: (which was the
end God ordained Physic and Physicians for, to relieve such distressed
Natures) he stands at a distance, fearing to come near (like a low spirited
fellow) lest he receive such a kick from the Disease in his rotten reputation,
as he may not easily recover: but he resolves rather to hazard the loss of a
poor Patient, then venture the loss of his small credit; wherefore he is
resolved to look on, and see which will get the Victory: in the mean while he
excuses his juggle, telling, the Disease is not yet come to an height; and by
such a time he hopes to find a Crisis, and then he may safely take something,
in the interim advises an Ale-brew, or Herb-Candle, many more such juggles
they have to send people to their Graves: Just as if your house were on fire,
And one comes and counsels you to let it alone till it burn to the top of the
House, and then is the surest quenching it, you take his counsel. Now it is
possible that the Heavens may pour down such a shower of rain as may extinguish
it; but whether they do or not, does not this man well advise you, think you;
or as if an Enemy has entered a Garrison, it is not safe to resist him, till
he come to the heart of the Town: But good Soldiers will tell you otherwise,
that what their Enemy gets they shall get it by Inches, etc.

And this Crisis they so much talk of, is nothing but an effect of Nature: As
Helmont has well observed.
Nature has opposite Virtues and Faculties, which hold a great harmony with
the Moon's Motion, whereby there is, it may be, some small change a little
while through her Motions; but they are not caused by the Moon, but by Nature
harmoning with her Motion: But what of this? what is it to the taking away thy
Disease? indeed it may help a little a bad Medicine, but a good Medicine will
make a Laudable Crisis, let the Moon be where she will; in staying thus for the
Moon, many have lost the Sun.

Now this Deceiver finding Nature to have cast the Disease, runs in and
congratulates her Victory with a dram of his Bottle; and instead of helping her
up, many times keeps her the longer down: But if the Disease has cast Nature,
then he gives his Relation this Cordial: That all the men in the World could do
no more, and that he did consult with forty Learned Authors, etc. But if this
will not operate then he gives them this A Medicine to cause Rest or Sleep.
Opiate in a dram of Aqua Coelestis, viz. It was the will of God it should be
so, and that his time was come, etc. and so his decets are buried with his poor
Patient: But how does he make you believe it was the will of God, and that his
time was come? we all know, God does permit that which he does not will: God
may permit this Impostor to give a destructive means, or not to use the right;
for it is almost all one: If thou have not something to take off the poison of
the Disease, the poison of the Disease will take off thee.

In vain had the Creator created Medicines out of the Earth from the
beginning, unless the natural terms and bounds of things might be prolonged by
healing and Medicines: And likewise the Tree of Life had been in vain in
Paradise; if he that has bounded the life of man had not together by the same
endeavor appointed all means requisite for the bounds of life: then, if I use
no means, or not the right means, my bound is set, which I shall not pass over,
according to that saying; woe is me that my Pilgrimage is prolonged; thy Youth
shall be renewed like the Eagle, etc.

There Is a second sort of such Juglers, and they are altogether ignorant of any
Knowledge, either from Ancients or Moderns; only know how to let blood, give a
Purge or Clyster; when any such is called to a Patient, he never stands to
enquire into the Disease, but presently determines this to be done, and that to
be taken upon pain of life, and if it succeed well, then he is a very skilful
man; but if ill, then there was no other course to save his life; and plead the
former excuses. These I do as much pity for their ignorance, as blame for their
too rash confidence; it is probable if they knew better they would act wiser.

There Is another sort, much akin with the former, but carry things more
modestly, and bring this fetch to excuse their ignorance; they tell the sick,
they saw the same Disease cured (in some remarkable place, and by some eminent
persons, it is like they tell them) and they have the means wherewithal it was
effected, and several times since have tried it, etc. I shall say by these and
the former, as Diogenes did when he saw some Rodians gorgeously apparel'd:
Tush, said he, that is nothing but pride, and seeing some poor Spartans stand by
in their thread bare Caps; said, that is but another sort of pride. There are
many other such Jugglers that thousands have been decoyed by, which are
palliated with heavenly excuses to blind your eyes; I shall speak but of one
more, which is the greatest and most dangerous of all; and that is, in
procrastinating and retarding Cures. They will undertake any thing, though they
know nothing (as to a Cure) yet in keeping them in hand so long by their
delusions, in promising this time, and that time, and tell them of Spring and
Fall so long, till the Patient is fallen: if any such Hocus be asked either by
the Patient or some other Friend, what he thinks of his Disease, or Ulcer; he
tells them, there is no danger, and that by such a time he may be well, and
when that fails, then puts it to another time, etc. Now if any ingenious
Patient begins to smell this Juggler, and apply himself to some able and honest
Artist, to mend what he marred; but whether it may be accomplished by Art, or
not; This Quack-salver has this fetch to excuse his deceitful ignorance, if
the Patient be recovered, then says this Impostor, why I knew and told him so,
that there was no danger at all, and that he would be well, etc. but if it
cannot be restored by Art, then says this deceiver, if he had continued with
me, I could have cured him (I should not question it) long before this time and
there was no danger in it, when he went from me, etc. This is the Devil's
Hocust Pocust, that he teaches such Artists to persuade people, the nearest way
to Heaven, is by way of Hell; that gross Impiety and grand Hypocrisy, that
such Juglers are guilty of, they commonly lay on the shoulders of the Innocent.

I am sorry to speak it, that I have seen too many such deluding souls in this
Country; I shall forbear to speak any more lest some should think I speak in
prejudice: I protest the contrary, but wish them really such, as they would
have the World understand them to be: I expect such as I have touched the
guilty conscience of, to snarle against me; who will endeavor to corrupt your
Judgment, and persuade you into an ill opinion of this small Piece (for whose
good it was designed by the Author) raising, it may be, curious and malicious
Questions amongst you, as the Rabbis and Doctors did amongst the Jews, viz.
Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth? and that he eats and drinks with
the Publicans; etc. But I tell such, it is better be a Publican amongst the
Pharisees, than a Judas amongst the Apostles.

My last advice unto you is this, whatsoever good this, or any other may bring
unto you, return all your praises unto that God from whom you receive all your
Mercies.

-- Foelix quicunque dolor
Alterius discet, posse carere suo.
R, C.
From my House at the Sign of the Globe and Chemical Furnaces in the Postern
near Moorgate. Febr. 4 1679/80. Chr. Pack.

Advertisement.
JAmes Pemberton (Son in law to Mr. Rowland Pippin, so famous for curing of all
curable Ruptures, or Broken Bellies) lives at the Sign of the three Naked Boys
on Ludgate Hill, where he undertaketh the Cure of all curable Ruptures, and
makes all sorts of Trusses fit for the accommodation of any. His Wife treats
with Women; they give Advice for nothing.

A TABLE of the several Diseases and Distempers treated of (amongst other
things) in the ensuing TRACT.
FEvers in general. Malignant Fevers in Children. Directions. Heat in Fevers.
Cold in Fevers. Thirst in Fevers. Agues. Dropsies. Falling Sickness Griping of
the Guts. Surfeits. Fluxes. Stone or Gravel in the Reins or Kidneys.
Windy-Melancholy. Wind in the Small Guts. Colic. Wind-Dropsie. Gouts.
Pleurisy. Yellow Jaundice. Stone in the Bladder. Consumption without a Cough.
A Consumption with a Cough. The Rickets. Apoplexy. Vertigo. Palsy. Convulsion.
Cramp. Worms. The breaking of a Vein. Coughs, Catarrhs, Rheums and shortness of
Breath. Strangury. Fits of the Mother.
Praxis Catholica: OR, THE COUNTRY-MAN'S Universal REMEDY.
IT was the custom amongst the ancient Greeks, that if a sure Cure was found
for any Disease, the party was bound to write it on a Table, and hang it up in
the Temple of Diana at Ephesus; that every one laboring with that Disease,
might afterward repair thither, and receive their Remedy.

Soon after did they digest the Art of Healing into a fatal Method, as a
Directory to the true knowledge of Curing; whereby a further enquiry into
Medicines came to be neglected, and so this false Doctrine of the Greeks spread
it self amongst the Arabians, Romans, and then amongst the Christians, and is
still in use amongst us to this day, to blind us from the knowledge of true and
perfect Remedies for curing our Diseases; whereby we see many yearly swept away
from us, through some accustomed Diseases, as well as new ones, and especially
that amongst Children, of a Griping, Vomiting and Scouring, which gives me
great cause to mistrust, that either the true cause of this is not understood
as well as the rest, or a fit Remedy not yet found out.

Nor is it Children alone, that this Fever, the Prince of Diseases, does appear
unto in those bloody manners, but to some of full Growth and Strength. It does
assault us in various Shapes and Habits. This Disease is a grand Enemy to man;
for there is hardly a Distemper but is accompanied with a Fever, either going
before, or following after it.

Wherefore I shall a little anatomize it unto you, and show you its Rise, the
place where it commonly abides, and what it feeds on, and so describe it as you
may know it at a distance, and not only this, but most of our Serpentine
Enemies.

I shall observe that method in treating of them, as I do in curing of them;
which is, to have respect unto that first which does most press; amonst which,
I think that peracute Disease of Children is most urgent, so my method leads me
to begin with a child, whom I shall trace unto his old age, where I shall leave
him to that great Physician, whose Servant I am not worthy to be.

First it will be necessary that I give a preparative (to your understanding,
in unfolding the right use of two or three principal parts, whose proper uses
have not yet been discovered) before you enter upon the main Body; viz. The
Spleen. Liver: and Gaul.


From these three comes Life and Death, Health and Diseases, as they are
disposed, either well or ill. These are the Pillars that do support the Fabric
of the Microcosm.

The two first do principally respect the preservation of Health; the last is
of a more Balsamical Nature, which does as well prevent Diseases, as restore
health when it is wanting.

Understand by a Ferment

A Specifical Virtue or Power which every part is endued withal, that
whatsoever is transferred through them is transmuted into their fermental
quality, Omnis facultas quando praevalet ea est natura ut mutet sibique simile
faciat id quod ad ipsam est victum.
as the Aliment in digesting in the Stomach is sow'r; then, when the Chyle
passes through the Guts, Duodenum and Ileon, it is saltish, and being more
elaborated in the Meseraick and Milky Veins, becomes more salt, which is a
preparation for Sanguification, which is perfected in the Liver, and so
assimilated by every part.

The whole Body is seasoned and tinctured with the Ferments of those three
principal parts, viz. sharp from the Spleen, Whitmore de Febre anomala.
Salt from the Liver, and bitter from the Gaul. To begin with the first.

The Spleen.
This part has been hardly censured by many to be the receptacle of the Faeces
of the Blood, the mother of black Choler, or Melancholy, the Sink and Fountain
of many stubborn and rebellious Diseases, and to be a Bowel of no great use;
only to elaborate this more feculent Blood, and give a small nourishment to
some of the natural parts: likewise the efficient cause of Madness and Dotage,
etc. Some have not stuck to say, that if ever nature made any thing to hurt her
self, it was this, and if she had found out some other way for discharging of
this Excrement, as she has done the rest, she had eased her self of abundance
of trouble, etc. but I rather think the contrary, there is not any part within
us, nature has been so liberal unto, as to this, nor has bestowed such
special favor on: Vide Dr. Highmore de affectione Hypochon. fol. 132.
it is enriched with ten times, at least, as many Arteries as any other part.

There is life peculiarly due unto it more than sensitive; for it is extant
long before quickening. Helmont. de Author. duum virut.
It has a double Ferment; there is a Vital from the Arteries, and the
digestive faculty of the Stomach which is made by an acid juice sent from it;
and for that great concernment which is committed unto its charge, it is termed
the President of the Stomach. I cannot think that any excrementitious matter
can reside, where it has so worthy a place for its Emunctory, as the Stomach;
the Arteries fetch from the Stomach of their purest Chyle, and sanguifie it for
their pleasure; and it may be by their too liberal attraction, may debilitate
their Ferment, that so they may require an assistance from the main Body,
whereby the Stomach may be neglected, with a due quantity of this juice; whence
lack of appetite and crudities do arise, and so this Ferment may be exorbitant
in the Spleen; from whence comes bloody and black spitting into the stomach
(which some have judged black Choler) which is nothing but an expurging and
renewing of nourishable blood from the Spleen it self; the Humor, Melancholy
and black Choler was never yet found in nature, nor indeed is there any such
thing extant: wherefore whatsoever distemper may arise from the Spleen, it is
from a vitiated or debilitated Ferment: not from a peccant matter, which does
offend only in quality, not in quantity.

Again, if the distemper of the Spleen be the cause of Madness, then in its
right order, there is a sound and judicious understanding due to the same
place: according to that Maxim of the Ancients, Ejusdem partis atque potestatis
sit functio sana, cujus est vitiata ac vicissim, i. e. There is a sound
function of the same part and power, whereof there is a vicious one, and on the
contrary.

I could speak much in defense of the Dignity of this noble part, but at
present shall conclude with this: the great Offices that proceed from it, and
that rich and noble Retinue that attends it, speaks it no less than the palace
where the sensitive soul keeps her Residence.

Of the Liver.
I shall but only hint at this because I shall speak more largely of it when I
come to treat about Dropsies, and other Diseases that are falsely fathered on
it: what a common complaint is there about a hot Liver, and a cold Stomach:
when as I shall demonstrate, that the Liver is never hotter than is necessary,
nor the Stomach never colder: though it may seem so by imperfect or weak
digestion.

And although Sanguification is not begun in it, yet it is the perfecter and
rectifier of it: whereby the Blood is assimilated and conveyed into every part
through the Veins. In a word, the Liver is the Administrator to all the natural
parts in man.

Of the Gaul.
In the first Disease that I shall speak unto, I shall be enforced to anatomize
this Bowel, only by the way take notice, that this Gall is the great Balsom of
Nature, as well for preventing and destroying of Diseases, as the curing our
Wounds.

Understand, that whatsoever is done by nature (in any thing of this kind) is
performed by this great Balsom: nor has this as well as the rest been free
from the Calumniations of the ignorant, in making it guilty of causing several
sharp Diseases, etc. But more of this in the next.

Of Fevers.
I Shall speak a word in general, then come to particulars, all Fevers are of
the same essence and name: and differ not so much in the matter as place.

Place.
The Place it acts in, is the Stomach mostly.

The Cause is from the error and estranging of the Faculties; or from things
undigested and untransmuted; or else from Excrements not being rightly subdued,
or separated, and orderly evacuated.

Division: there are two sorts, continual and intermitting.

From the first there are several Species, viz. some very malign; others
accompanied with less Malignity: others with none at all.

Intermitting ones, are of three sorts (Legitimate) Quotidian, Tertian and
Quartan.

Not to trouble you to treat of any contagious and pestilential Fevers: none
has yet been amongst us, God still keep them from us, and remedy them where
they are.

I shall therefore begin with malignant Fevers, which are very rife in this
Country, especially amongst Children.

A malignant Fever differs from a Synochus, or Burning, or any other Fever in
this, that it draws its putrefaction immediately from its own matter: for
indeed putrefaction is joined with it.

A burning Fever, and other Fevers do not derive their putrefaction immediately
from their matter, but gradually and casually either from the peccancy of the
matter, or debility of the Ferment where it resides, those are of a less
malignity, and bound in a less quantity of the matter offending.

Ephemera, or an one days Fever is more from a disposition or inclination to a
Disease; for that morbifick matter in the stomach is soon cast up by Vomit, or
digested, I rather call it a Distemper than a Disease.

But more particularly.

A Malignant Fever in Children.
AS I have showed that a Malignant Fever is from the present putrefaction of
its own matter; Parvae Febres quandoque valde malignae, Hipp. Diagnost.
so this violent Disease in Children is of that nature, which is clearly
demonstrated from the Symptoms in the first assault; that within forty eight
hours putrefaction has been nigh perfected, as is perceived by a coldness in
the extreme parts, and cold sweats, etc.

Cause.
It is from some thing received which may contain some vicious quality, or
abounding in quantity; or from an ill disposition of the digestive Ferment; for
it often happens, that when the season is most hot, then the digestion is
weakest, and then crude Fruits, and things hard to digest take advantage of the
stomach:

But above all, I look at Milk and Sugar to be the greatest cause; for Milk is
the general Food of Children, and there is such a propensity in its own nature
to curdle, that if it be not quickly digested, it obeys the acid Ferment of
the place, which soon is coagulated, and a Curd made like new tough Cheese,
which does strongly resist digestion, especially in a weak and tender stomach,
and if it be not speedily vomited up, it soon begets a putrefactive Ferment,
and then soon after those terrible Symptoms are produced, as Vomiting,
Scouring, Griping, etc.

Natura morborum est medicus medicus naturae minister.
Now Nature, which is the Physician to Diseases, unites her force, and takes
with her a quantity of this Gaul-balsom to rectify this Malignity, and
eradicate the Morbifick Matter; and whatsoever this Balsom does incorporate
with, it hinders its putrefaction (as Salt does in Flesh or Fish) and seasons
it with its taste, and colors it with its tincture, as a little Wormwood does
any thing it is commixt with, and a little Saffron does Milk, etc. and what
part of it is separated for its putrefactive Body, nature endeavors to cast
forth, and by reason it still retains its acquired sharpness from the
putrefactive Ferment falling down upon the Pylorus, or lower mouth of the
stomach, stirs up those violent motions; and what part of it passes through
the Intestines, it abstergeth and scoureth away that mucous or phlegmatic
matter which nature has lined the Guts withal; for a twofold end: first, to
hinder Obstructions, that the Chyle may have a more speedy and slippery
passage: Secondly, to defend them from any sharp or corrosive quality that may
be in the Chyle, which is transferred through them.

Which slimy matter is commonly seen to scour from them in this Disease, and
this being gone, this excrementitious matter does easily corrode by its
sharpness, which is the cause of those Tortures and Gripings.

And in regard that this peccant matter which is cast forth, is tinctured by
this Balsom, it has deceived many, who have taken it to be the Gaul itself.

It Is true, there are Excrements in Children, from eating Milk, not perfectly
digested, which are of this Tincture, but of no bitterish Taste, it is brownish
in the stomach, yellow in the Ilion, and green in the blind Gut, yet they may
not be sick.

And no marvel, that there is little or none of this Balsom found in its
Receptacle or Bladder in dead Children; for if this be spent, Death immediately
follows, according to that Proverb:

When the Gaul is broken, the drowned Carcass rises to the top of the Water,
when it can no longer withstand putrefaction.

Those Sacrilegious Jews knew that this Gaul was a great Cordial for the
preserving and continuing life; wherefore they gave our Savior Vinegar and
Gaul: Vinegar to excite the faculties of the stomach, for the Gauls quicker
passage into the vital spirits to prolong his life, that they might the longer
torment him under his pains before death.

But to stay no longer here, it follows in the next place to treat about the
great Heat and Cold which happens by Intervals, as well in most other Fevers as
in this; and likewise of that inordinate Thirst.

Of Heat.
THough Heat and Fever are counted Synonyma's of one and the same name,
individual companions, etc. yet I say, this Heat is not of the Quiddity or
Essence of the Disease, neither is it the cause of any Disease, but is caused
by the stirring up of that vital aerie spirit, the directoress of life; which
spirit it is that makes the assault: Archaeus Paracels. (...). Hippoc.
now this spirit being provoked by the Disease, allarms all the Faculties,
Virtues and Powers both Vital and Natural, which it does unite unto it self,
and so furiously assault his mortal Enemy, as many Coals of Fire raked
together, and blown up, make a great heat, so does this heat proceed from this
inflamed Spirit.

EXAMPLE.
A Thorn or Splinter being got into the Finger or Hand, presently a heat, pain
and pulsation is felt, which this spirit or Archaeus stirs up, for the
expelling of that extraneous Body: now this heat is not a product of the Thorn,
but casually from this spirit, and occasionally only from the Thorn: therefore
heat is a latter accident, and subsequent upon the essence of a Fever.

Cold.
COld is the Diseases Colors, or Banner, under which it fights, but it is not
either the Disease, nor Cause, but a product and effect of the Disease, Calorem
and frigus non esse morbus ut neque borum causas. Hipp.
putrefaction brings in coldness, the Ferment of Putrefaction is sharp and
cold: as we have an ocular Demonstration in Gangrenes and Mortifications,
whilst it is but in fieri a Gangrene, what a hard task it is to revive it by
the hottest and most penetrating Medicines we can get; nay, and fain to
scarrifie deeply too, lest it should hinder their operation; or if it fouls a
bone, no less than a Medicine that is hot in the highest degree can effect it,
and when a Sphacelus, or Mortification is confirmed, without natures Second
comes in speedily to her rescue, A Chyrurgion, Chyrurg. naturae minister.
and dismember it, it would soon run her to the heart; and did not putrefaction
work by a cold, a Body would be hotter after it was dead, than it was before;
but we see the contrary, when putrefaction grows stronger, the Body grows
colder: I could evidence by many demonstrations more, that the Heat is not of
the essence, neither the cause, nor occasion of a Fever, and likewise, that
Cold is merely the effect of the Disease: but I think this sufficient.

Thirst.
This great Thirst in Fevers does not proceed from Heat and dryness, as in a
true and natural Thirst; for this will not be allayed by drinking, as that
will; but this Thirst is deceitful, and is produced by some excrementitious
matter, which adheres to that sensitive faculty, and deludes the Organ, Nec
sitis est extincta prius quam vita bib^ndo.
as if a great dryness had suddenly come unto it, as I have observed in a very
malignant Fever, which the Army in Flanders was infected with, being always
cold, and very thirsty; as likewise in the cold Fit of an Ague, etc. and so
this is evident, that heat in Fevers is not the cause of that inordinate
Thirst; besides I have extinguished this Thirst by those things which have been
virtually hot; Contraria contrariis curantur.
which, if heat had been the cause, would rather have exasperated.

Thus you have the matter, manner, and Concomitants of this Disease.

The Schools have observed some Heads, from whence they have derived many
Species of Fevers, (which I shall not insist on, because they depend upon one
and the same way and means of Cure) without mention of an Hectic, or
intermitting Fever, which differ only in the place they reside, which I shall
speak to in their proper places.

It is my chief design to do good unto my Countrymen, who (I know) would rather
have something to ease them, and be rid of their Diseases, than to hear curious
and learned Discourses, or quaint Distinctions; and in pleasing them, I care
not whom I displease.

As I have put the knowledge of the cause into your Heads, so I shall put a
remedy into your Hands.

Cure.
You may clearly see what first is to be done, and wherein the Cure does
consist, which is, in removing the cause or matter offending; the neglect
whereof has suffered such an infinite Slaughter, which gives me reason to
think, that either the cause is not known, or a fit Remedy not yet found; for
unless there be a proportion between the Remedy and the Disease, It will do but
little good.

Diseases which come suddenly, if they are rightly understood, they are soon
gone, Extrema non permanent.
though they may be extreme sharp whilst they continue.

I know it is the practice here to look more unto the Effect than the Cause, in
correcting the Symptoms than the matter whereof they are produced; Si ta
tollantur quae convenient aeger melius se habet and facile sert: Sublata causa
tolletur effectus.
which is a very pernicious course, and contrary unto reason, and all
principles in Healing.

And that you may the better understand your error, I shall recite your
practice.

When first any one is taken with this, or the like Distemper, either Child, or
those of full Growth, first you run and fetch Mint Water, and a little Syrup to
stay the Vomiting.

Secondly, then Cinnamon Water and Syrup of Quinces, or Myrtle Berries to stay
the scouring.

Then, it may be, you give a Carmi^tive, or Clyster to expel Wind, and correct
the Griping.

That done, you give some cooling Julep to allay its Heat, and to quench in
Thirst.

And when it is cold, you give a little Mithridate, or Theriack of Andronica,
o^ London Treacle, and lay a Plaster of it to his Stomach.

And then lay a Spell against the Fever to the Wrists, etc.

And so you keep doing, till you can do no more; just as a man who has lost
himself in a Wood, he keeps going, but whither he knows not.

You see all those things do but respect the effect, here is nothing has any
regard at all unto the Cause.

And should things answer the intention for which they were given the party,
either Child or Man would presently die.

To hinder the evacuating of this morbifick matter, is directly against the
intention of nature; Quo natura verget ad locum conferentem ^eo ducere oportet.
Hippoc.
for the evacuation of this matter is to be looked at as the Crisis of Nature,
and whosoever shall recover, all this matter is to be brought out, and whoever
goes about to stop it in the beginning, works against nature. What a vain thing
therefore is it to think to take away the Gripings, before the matter be gone
that causes it; and to corroborate the stomach, or to refresh its Spirits, so
long as the Enemy bears sway.

To give the Child Mithridate, or lay a plaster of it to the stomach, which is
worse, becomes another Disease; or any thing else that is nauseous, whilst
Nature and the Disease are struggling: and to give cooling things to correct
the hear, is to weaken nature and strengthen the Disease.

Obj. But you will tell me many have recovered by the use of those means.

Answ. And many more had been, had they never been used (with submission to
providence) but (quoad homines) after the manner of men, I admire that any
should recover that ever was affected with this Disease, for they are ever
giving, and all to hurt it; seeing the best Friends become the worst Enemies,
which makes good that old Saying, When God cuts off man's thread of life,
His dearest Friends do bring the knife.


But many things are wrought by accident, as we have known many have been
recovered from a Fever by drinking cold water.

Obj. From whence some have asserted, that this Heat is of the Essence of the
Disease.

Answ. But this Cure is not wrought by the Water, as it is cold and moist, for
Sack or strong Beer would have performed it, and a great deal better; but it is
from the great quantity of it, which does so replete the stomach, that some of
the peccant matter which does adhere unto the Fibers thereof, the Water has
loosened, and so its brought away with it.

I suppose whosoever has been cured by Water, it has been when the Disease
has been on him some considerable time, and not in the beginning. I have
prescribed Water several times in the end of a Fever, to this intent, and I
ever found it very successful; but I suppose the parties that have taken it
upon their own sensual inclination, it was hap-hazard with them, for to take
Water in the beginning of a Fever, either kills them, or strikes them into an
Ague, or some other long Sickness.

To drink it in a contagious, pestilential Fever, or any Fever that tends much
to putrefaction, hastens death.

I do not speak this as not approving of the use of Water; but I declare the
contrary, for I have found as strange events by drinking Water, as ever I saw
by any Physic. I have known a man cured very soon of an Atrophia, or
Consumption, only by the drinking of pure Rock Watar: and in many other cases
have I used it: but great consideration is to be had in the giving of it.

But to return, by applying a nauseous or foetid Medicine to the Stomach,
whilst the morbifick matter resides there; nature thinking she is assaulted by
another Distemper, unites all her strength and force, and desperately attempts
both her Enemies with this resolution, to extirpate them, or sink her self,
whereby she may, by exasperating of her new Enemy, cast forth the old, and then
this amongst the ignorant is cried up for a laudable Medicine, when as such
things are done by chance, for where one has recovered by this means, twenty
have died.

Thus you see what a blind course has been taken for the curing this, or any
other Disease. The mere pity that I bear to poor Infants, has extorted this
from me, to whom I have often been sent for, to see them die, when their
spirits have been so far spent, that I have not dared to give them any thing to
take off the Disease, to the great grief of my spirit, for without the Disease
be taken away, to small purpose do we use Cordial Means to refresh their
Spirits.

DIRECTIONS.
I shall now direct you to a better way, viz.

1. When you are assured this Disease is on them (which is known first by a
scouring away of a slimy matter, then a discoloring of the Excremenrs, as
yellow, green, etc. and a griping in the Belly, being very hot and cold by
Intervals: press not any manner of Meat upon them, Impura corporae quo plus
nutrieris eo majus laeseris.
as you tender their lives; this very thing has destroyed thousands. For to
give Meat whilst the Disease is on them, when the stomach is not fit to receive
it, nor has strength to digest it, without it be speedily vomited up again, it
becomes a Recruit, or supply to the Disease.

2. Neither administer, nor apply any thing external, or internal, that is any
way nauseous or ungrateful to the stomach, for nature hates and abhors such
things; for though it be laid upon the stomach, yet the taste of it is in the
stomach, as though it were contained there, especially in young and tender
Skins; for to have a thing that is nauseous to the stomach, and ungrateful to
the smell, constantly to lie on, would be troublesome to one that is in health,
much more to him that is sick. Give not the Child any Milk, and if it suck,
wean it; for Milk is the first matter and foundation this Disease is raised on,
and it bears still an affinity with it, and is presently converted into its
poisonous nature, and likewise let it forbear Water and Beer, either cold or
warm: keep the sick party (either Child or otherwise) in a breathing sweat,
which is done by drinking warm Posset Drink, the Milk being turned with White
Wine, or Sack, or Beer sharpened with Vinegar; let the party drink of it as
warm as he can take it: this is far better than any Cordial or Julip whatsoever
in a putrid Disease, between whiles the Child may drink a good draught of Sack,
raw, and without Sugar is best; and if it tends to coldness, either in Face,
Nose, Hands or Feet, you may safely give it a liberal draught of Brandy, with a
little white Sugar, though the Child be not two months old, and likewise make a
Toast of old stale Bread, or a piece of Rose-Cake, and soak it in warm Brandy,
wherein a little white Sugar has been dissolved, and put it to the Child's
Stomach, and let it lie on for twenty four hours, and if the coldness is not
removed, you may reiterate it. I have a specific Water for that end, which
does much revive and cherrish nature.

What though it exasperateth and makes more hot? That is well recompensed; for
it mightily strengthens and refreshes nature.

Observe, that a hot and feverish temper, is the most laudable and best temper
the Child can be in, whilst the Disease remains.

When the morbifick matter is gone, you may give a little salt of Pearls;
Corral, Amber, or Wormwood, which are very good in a Cordial Electuary, to kill
that putrefactive Ferment in the place where the Disease lay, that may lie
behind lurking; which is the cause of most Relapses, and long and tedious
Sicknesses and Consumptions.

It Is not enough to remove the effect, or matter produced, nor the cause
producing, but the principal producer must be rectified before health be
perfectly restored.

Thus I have directed you in the best course you can take; and be sure you will
do nothing that will hurt, but rather to strengthen and refresh nature.

Obj. But you will ask me, what shall we do to remove the cause?

Answ. That is the principal Verb indeed, I know a more proper and safe
Medicine to effect it, than I can direct you unto, in all the Dispensitory.
It Is true, there are a great many good Medicines, though good for little,
without it be the Laudanum of Paracelsus, and some few Chemical Preparations:
the rest are hardly worth a man's knowledge.

That Physician that has not found out better and more specifical means than
what are there, is like to make but a sad practice.

But I shall speak it to your comfort, God has given me the knowledge of such
a Medicine as will effect it; and not only this, but it does also eradicate and
extirpate the cause of most Diseases incident unto our frail Bodies, as you
will hereafter perceive.

It is a Powder without either smell or taste, and the highest dose or quantity
is but five or six Grains to the most robustive or strong Body, and so downward
to half a Grain, which a Child of two days old may safely take, its operations
are various, according to the nature and place where the peccant matter
resides. How you shall take it, and what is to be done and observed in the
taking of it, I shall give directions in the latter end of this Book.

And as it is an effectual, so it is a safe Medicine; for I have given it unto
three or fourscore several Children in and about the Town of Boston, and indeed
I know not of any one that died, that ever took it, except one: the spirits of
which were quite spent before I gave it, that it was not able to retain it in
its stomach, but immediately brought it up again.

There is an eminent person in this Country, whose knowledge is great in the
most curious and best Arcanums, or secret Medicines that are used, he could
tell you, it is as safe as good, who was an eyewitness unto a wonderful
operation it had in a most contagious and malign Disease, which was the Small
Pox, which struck in among the Passengers in Captain Lord's Ship, coming from
England two years since, that not one died that took it, two only died, and
neither of them took it, as the Chyrurgion, Mr. Whiting can testify, I gave
him some of this Powder, and bade him give to every one that was infected with
that Disease, which he did accordingly; though he gave it to some that was
blind, to others after they appeared twenty four hours, and very ready to be
suffocated, and very soon made them all perfectly well, which was well known
unto all the Passengers in the Ship, as well as unto themselves that took it,
which are dissipated through this Country; and I question not but this Paper
will find out some of them, who can well witness this truth.

By this you may judge of its efficacy in any other Disease of a malignant
nature.

I shall tell you what I have observed from it in some other Maladies.

I have cured all sorts of Fevers with this Arcanum universale, in all Ages and
Sexes; for continual burning Fevers, whether putrid or not, are frequently
taken off by it with one Dose, in the beginning, or at the most by two, so that
the Patient may be well before the time of the expected Crisis. The same
Benefit I have often observed when given in the state of the Disease, that it
has been presently taken off, although then nature is obliged to take a longer
time to renew the strength, than she would have needed, if she had been
assisted with this Medicine in the beginning. How common a thing it is to make
a Month or six weeks work in curing a Fever, although peradventure nature it
self has overcome the Disease in twelve or fourteen days, but the diseasie
matter formed, and some symptoms of effects must entertain the Physician a
great while longer. For if the Fever were putrid, then the Stomach and Lungs
remain laden with much pituitous matter, to carry off which, the common
practice is to follow the Patient close with Expectoraters, such are their
Pectoral Electuaries, Decoctions, Syrups, Lohochs, etc. the which are so far
from answering that end, as really to add to the matter they are designed to
expel, for they not being Agents empowered to alter or rectify any Ferment, as
soon as they come into the Stomach, either nauseate it with their Load, and so
are cast up, or if they stay, submit to the depraved digestion of the Stomach,
and there make an increase of the diseasie matter, whence an extraordinary
spitting continues till nature it self, by degrees retrieves the natural
Ferment, and frees her self from the disease matter, and the pretended remedy
together. But if this seem too long a doing, (that no piece of Art may be
wanting) there is another way at hand, and that is to exhibit purging Medicines
to carry it downwards, the which is more pernicious than the former, for the
Purge drawing a great quantity of sordid matter from the Thorax to the Guts,
and nature not having yet recovered her right Regiment may admit some of this
matter (by the Meseraick or Milky Veins) again into the Blood, whence may
succeed again a Fever de novo, called a Relapse, or (if the lately tired spirit
take not the present Assault) then the occasional cause of a Dropsy, Hectic,
Consumption or some other Cronick Diseases: All which is easily prevented by
taking a Dose or two of this Arcanum, which evacuates the present matter by
vomit, and rectifies the vitiated Ferment of the Stomach, and other parts,
whence the power of making such matter is quite taken away. This I have had
very large experience of. But a few days before the writing of this, I was sent
for to a lusty young man, who had labored under a Synochus, about a week
having, for during that time been treated by an Apothecary, first with cooling
Juleps, which were continued all the while, then strongly sweat by a
Sudorifick, and the next day blooded; but the Disease notwithstanding
increasing (as being newly changed from a non putrida to a putrid, when I came)
made the Apothecary, it seems, weary or doubtful of his work; for he desired
the Man's Wife to send for a Physician, or a Second, (who was a Friend of his,
it is like for the Bills sake) but the Woman having formerly had some experience
of my Medicines, sent to me about five or six that Afternoon, I presently
ordered him four Grains of this Powder, which wrought once only by Vomit, and
discharged the stomach of that Diseasie matter, which before felt to him like a
great weight, the pain in his Head presently abated, and that night he rested
pretty well (for he had no sleep worth mention since he was ill) the next
morning I sent him four Grains more of the Powder, which gave him three Vomits
and two Stools: about six in the Afternoon I went to visit him, and found him
about his Chamber, saying, he thought he was as well as ever, his Stomach being
returned, and he very hungry. Thus you see a Fever cured in eighteen hours, or
less, which in all probability would have been at the least three or four weeks
(if recovered at all) before nature by such enfeebled helpers, or rather,
hinderers (as are the common Medicines) could have freed her self from the
Disease. I could instance many the like cases were it needful. This Medicine
has (besides its other gifts) such a general tendency for the curing of all
Fevers, that upon the first knowledge of it in practice, I called it my Species
Febrifuga, by which name I published it in my Catalogue of Medicines, Printed
in the year 1676, although I had then seen this little Book of the Authors. I
shall here subjoyn a short Discourse of intermitting Fevers or Agues, in which
Mr. Couch is silent, except in the name, yet I cannot doubt but he must be well
acquainted with the power of this Medicine in curing them.

Of Agues.
GReat Diversity has been, and yet is among Authors concerning this Disease,
some holding one thing, and some another concerning its Seat and Causes: but I
without reciting their differences or contending with any man's opinion (either
of which is no way profitable) shall briefly endeavor to give you my own
sentiment. It needs no Definition, being sufficiently known here; neither
Division, seeing all the sorts thereof proceed from one cause, and may be cured
by the same Medicines.

Seat.
The Place or Seat of Agues is the Pancreas, or Sweetbread; for all the parts
of Man's Body being considered, which only by intervals may transmit the cause
of intermitting Fevers to the Heart, none is found to which not only the Focus
or source of those Fevers, but also the causes of all their Symptoms may be
ascribed, besides the Pancreas or Sweetbread.

Cause.
The Cause is an Obstruction of one or more of the Lateral Ducts or Branches of
the Pancreas, by reason of Phlegmatic Matter carried thither in too large a
quantity, and there detained, the which being separated from the Blood
(together with the Pancreatick Juice) by the Glandules of the Pancreas, and
sent to the main Duct or Pipe thereof causes an Obstruction there, and
detaineth the juice of the Pancreas (contrary to nature) which ought
continually to flow into the thin Gut, called the Duodenum. This Juice being
thus stagnated, quickly grows acrimonious, or sharp, and acquires a
putrefactive Ferment, whence at length it makes way through the obstructing
Phlegm, and is effused into the Duodenum, where meeting with the Bile or Gall,
it stirs up a vicious and preternatural Ferment, from whence comes the Ague Fit
with all its Symptoms, as in the beginning, horror, chilness, cold, shaking,
etc. then presently reachings, yawnings and vomiting of bitter or four relish,
and afterward burning heat, the causes of Heat, Cold, Thirst, etc. you have in
the foregoing Chapter of Fevers: but if any desire further satisfaction,
concerning the reasons of the differences of Agues, and the constant or various
access of their Fits with the particular causes of Symptoms, they may read it
at large in Regnerus de Graaf, in his Book entitled, de succo Pancreatico,
published by me in the year 1676, to which I refer the Reader, not having room
here to be any larger.

Cure.
The Cure consists in opening the Obstructions, changing the diseasie Ferment,
and expelling such matter as the Disease has rendered incapable of being
redintegrated and taken into the communion of life. All which intentions are
truly and radically performed by this Powder; for an Ague being removed by the
due use of this Medicine, returns not again, neither leaves any danger of its
degeneration into another Disease, both of which too frequently happen after
the use of some Medicines which take off the Fit only by a kind of soporiferous
quieting the present fury of the Archaeus. If it be taken before the Ague has
exceeded three Fits, one only Dose is usually sufficient to carry it away; if
fix or seven Fits, two Doses or three at the most; yea, I have cured diverse at
twice or thrice giving it that have had it six or eight weeks; but if it be a
year old or more, the continuance of its use but a reasonable time (with the
help of the Balsamic Pill) will not fail to cure it. I have also known it to
cure Agues when it has had no other sensible operation than Breaking of Wind.

A person living in Greenwich who had a Tertian Ague, and sometimes a Quotidian
all the last Winter, was cured this Spring by three Doses of the Powder which
never had any sensible operation, and two Doses of the Balsamic Pill, so that
in eight or ten days he was abroad about his Affairs, and never had any Fit
since, although he was before so low brought, that he could not sit up any
longer than while his Bed was made, notwithstanding the constant advice of an
eminent Physician of that Town, which he had used.

It is to be taken in a Spoonful of Drink, or Posset drink about an hour before
the Fit comes, for two or three Fits together, according as the Ague is in
continuance. If the Patient be weak, or of a tender habit of Body, let him take
a Dose of the Balsamic Pill the same night after the Powder has been given,
when he goes to Bed, with a draught of warm Ale, or a Glass of good generous
Wine, which Pill will mightily corroborate and refresh his Spirits, and also
tends much to the Cure, if the Ague have been of a long continuance, or be a
Quartan, or fourth Ague, then after the Patient has taken the Powder three
times, if the Fit still remain, then let him take a full dose of the Balsamic
Pill, two or three hours before the coming of the next Fit, and go to Bed, and
dispose himself to sweat before the Fit comes, the which if he do, its ten to
one but the Fit comes no more; but if there should be a failure of sweating
timely enough, then let him take the powder before one Fit, and the Pill before
the next, till it be gone; but not one Ague in twenty will need to be thus
treated.

A general Direction in Fevers.
TO drink liberally of such Liquor as is most convenient, is good: I like not
Beer of any Liquor in a Fever, before the peccant matter (wherein the Disease
does subsist) be evacuated, because it has a nutriment from the Grain it is
made withal, which does add unto the matter of the Disease, whereby Thirst is
exasperated, as is commonly seen.

I rather advise to drink Wine and Water, two parts Water, and one Wine,
sharpened a little with the Spirit of Vitriol, or Sulphur, if it be per
campanam, which is drawn from a Bell Still, it is the better, which is a
singular Medicine to allay and correct the inordinate Thirst and Heat in
Fevers. Medera, Fial, French, or Sherry Wines, you may use, Malaga or any Sweet
Wine is not so good, neither Syrups, or any Sugared or Honeyed Meat, or Drink*
And when they begin to recover, (...) plainest Broths and Gruels are the best;
till then a little is too much, and if you did use Salt and Vinegar instead of
Spices and Sugar, the sick would like it the better; and it would be better for
them; a few Prunes and Currants, if the sick like them, may be used.

But some may say, How shall we do that live far up the Country, where we have
no Wines, nor can get neither of those Spirits? the best that I can advise you
to, is Milk boiled, and turned with some Vinegar or Verjuice, the Curd being
taken away, whereof he may drink freely, but he is to take it always hot, and
the hotter the better.

This course is to be taken after the cause is removed by my powder, or
something else (but I know not what) otherwise this, or any other, is like to
do but little good.

Bleeding, Purging, Clysters, Cordials, Juleps, etc. are but Trifles in curing
a Fever, they do at best but correct the Symptoms or Effects; I will do more
good with one dose of my Powder, and one of my Pills, than they with all those
in a Month.

If the Fever be continual, and come by a Surfeit, or otherwise, so that the
Patient feel a Load or Weight at his Stomach, or has a propensity to vomit,
the first thing to be done is to give a Vomit, whereby the Stomach and first
passages may be freed of the grossest of the Diseasie Matter wherein the Fever
sits, or has taken up its Inn, to which purpose you may give half an ounce of
the Infusion of Crocus Metallorum, or six Drams, or a whole Ounce (according to
the age and strength of the Patient) in a small Draught of warm Posset Drink;
but if you know any better Antimonial Preparation, then give it. That being
done, Tartar. Vitriolat six Grains, Volatile Salt of Amber and Hartshorn, each
seven or eight Grains, mix them, and give the mixture twice a day in a little
thin Broth, or Water Gruel. This is abstersive and Diuretic, and will cleanse
the Stomach and Intestines of the remaining Sordes, and expel them by Urine.
For the Feverish Thirst give the dulcified Spirit of Nitre, or of Salt, in
Posset drink, and all the Liquids they take, from five or six to ten or twelve
drops at a time. Keep the Patient in a small breathing Sweat, either with the
Posset Drink, beforementioned by Mr. Couch, or with Treacle-water and Powder,
or rather the Tincture of Virginia Snake-root, or which is most excellent (if
you can get it) the Aqua Prophylactica of Sylvius de le Boe, of which Take
three Ounces, Water of Carduus and Borrage, each one Ounce, Syrrup of Citron
Peels an ounce and an half, mix them, and take it often by a spoonful or two at
a time. But instead of this, if the Fever be malignant, give Bezoardicum
minerale to eight or ten Grains every third or fourth hour in a spoonful or two
of good Canary.

But because the Aqua Prophylactica mentioned is rarely to be had at any shop,
I will here describe the making thereof for the sakes of those who are willing
to make it. Roots of Angelica, Zedoary, of each an ounce, Butterbur two ounces,
the leaves of Rue four ounces, of Balm, Scabious and Marygold Flowers, each two
ounces, unripe Walnuts, cut two pounds, fresh Citrons cut one pound. Let them
be all beaten together, and pour upon them six quarts of the best distilled
Wine-Vinegar, let them stand in digestion all night, and then distill them by a
very easy fire (without burning) till they be dry, and keep the distilled
liquor for use. It is very profitable in all Fevers, especially in those which
are malignant and the Plague.

In the declining of the Fever, if sleep be wanting, this following mixture
will much avail, both to cause rest, and refresh the Spirits, of Treacle water
an ounce, the thin Syrup of Corn Poppies, an ounce, or an ounce and a half,
Laudanum Londinens. or rather that of Paracelsus two grains, mix them, and let
the Patient drink it at the hour of Sleep. But give nothing wherein there is
Opium or Poppies in the beginning of a Fever, because they tie up the Archaeus
of the Stomach and first passages, thereby hindering him from separating and
expelling the occasional cause of the Disease.

For Agues, or intermitting Fevers, whether they be Quotidians, Tertians or
Quartans, proceed as follows:

Of Salt of Amber twenty grains, Tartarum Vitriolatum six grains, Diagridium
seven, eight, nine or ten grains, according to the strength of the Patient; mix
them into a Powder, and give it in a little Posset Drink, or thin Broth, four
or five hours before the time of the Fit.

Repeat it two or three times, if need be; but if the Ague be not then gone,
give the following mixture about an hour, or an hour and an half before the Fit
comes; the Patient being in Bed, and disposing himself to sweat.

of Carduus Water two ounces, Treacle Water two drams, Salt of Wormwood half a
dram, Spirit of Salt Ammoniac ten grains, Syrup of Corn Poppies half on ounce,
mix. This, if the Patient sweat well with it, frequently removes the Ague.

This following also has cured many without any other Medicine.

of the Salt of Wormwood and Carduus each fifteen grains, Tartar Vitriolat. six
grains, Sugar of Pearls half a dram; powder and mix them, and give it half an
hour, or an hour before the Fits access.

The Juice of Featherfew being drank (about half an ounce) in a glass of
Wormwood Wine, is profitable against the Quartan or fourth Ague.

These Remedies I have used with good success, but never found any thing so
certain and effectual in Fevers, as my Species Febrifuga, and Pillula Balsamica.

A Dropsy.
There are three sorts of Dropsies, viz. Anasarca, Ascites and Timpanites the
two first are most from Water. The last, Timpany is more from Wind.

Anasarca, is when the extreme parts swell; but when the Belly, then it is
Ascites.

The Cause, I do not believe, (as has generally been received) that it
proceeds from a Distemper of the Liver, and that to be the principal part
affected; but I have more reason to think it to proceed from an obstruction or
impediment in one of the Kidneys: for commonly they that are troubled with
Gravel and Stone in the Kidneys are Hydropical; and seldom any that have been
affected with either Anasarca or Ascites, but they have observed a Dolor in
their Reins to precede it; and so that Water which should be transferred
through the Kidneys, to be evacuated by the Bladder is forced out at the
Abdomen. And it has lately appeared by dissection, that those who have died of
those Distempers, the fault has been through the Kidney, which is most
agreeable to reason.

And undoubtedly that operation in an Ascites, in making a hole to let out the
Water, does but only respect the effect not taken away, (and yet not
inconsistent to that Maxim, Take away the cause, and the effect cease: which
is to be understood of that which is to come, and not of what is past, as
Helmont well observes) and so that operation might happily perfect a Cure in
taking the effect for the Cause.

I have cured a man of an Anasarca, (whose Thigh has been near as big as his
middle) with one Dose of this Powder he was presently made perfectly well; that
in the operation of this Medicine, his Legs and Thighs fell, and never swelled
after, you would have admired (had you seen) what abundance of Water came from
him, both by Urine, and Vomiting; and at night I gave him a Pill (which I
usually do after this Powder) to refresh his Spirits, and seetle his Body in a
right temper.

This was all the Physic he took from me, though he had spent many pounds
before in fruitless endeavors. And I know not any thing to the contrary, but
it may do as well in an Ascites, or Timpanites, if it has not continued too
long.

First it is necessary to begin the Cure with gentle purging; for strong
Purges, (especially in weak and tender Bodies) do far more harm than good, by
resolving and expelling the Blood, and good juices with the peccant matter,
thereby dejecting the strength, and depauperating the vital spirit.

of the Roots of Orris an ounce and a half, Parsley Roots half an ounce, Leaves
of Agrimony a handful, clean Senna an ounce, best Rhubarb half an ounce,
Agarick three drams, Cinnamon two drams, Cloves one dram, cut the Roots, with
the Rhubarb and Agarick into thin slices, bruise the Spices, and put them all
into a little Bag, infuse them twenty four hours in two quarts of the best
White or Rhenish Wine, then let the Patient drink every morning five or six
ounces, or as much as will give four or five Stools. It is pleasant to take;
but if you please, you may also add Sugar to it.

For such as had rather take Pills, those following are good.

Rosin of Scammony and Jallap, of each half a dram, Tartar Vitriolat, Mercurius
dulcis of each two scruples, Oil of Juniper Berries twenty drops, of the purest
Venice Turpentine a sufficient quantity to make the powder into a Mass for
Pills: the which make into thirty small Pills, and give three, four or five of
them, according to the Patients Age and Strength every morning. After purging,

The Salt of Broom or Amber, of Bean-stalks, or of Pigeons dung are
profitable, either of them being taken twice a day in warm Broth, or which is
better, the Spirit or Volatile Salt of humane Urine. In a Tympany the dulcified
Spirit of Nitre is excellent, being taken in Broth or Sack three or four times
a day, from six to twelve drops at a time.

A Gentleman, a Friend of mine, living in Greenwich, cured a man of the Dropsy
with the Pill alone. This man had an Ague first, which either went off it self,
or were moved by some common Remedy; about seven weeks after which, he began to
swell, and also was sorely afflicted with Gripings and Flux for a great while,
which had brought him so low, that he had not been out of his Bed for three
weeks. The first Dose of the Pill that was given him took away the Gripes, and
in a great measure stayed the Flux; but then he swelled so much in his Breast,
that he could not lie down in his Bed, but his Breath would be gone, the second
Dose freed him from that, and made him able to rise and dress himself, and by a
short continuance of it was cured.

Epilepsie, or Falling Sickness.
I Had a Maid since I came to this Town, that was turned over from one to
another, no one cared to have her, by reason she was violently troubled with
the Falling Sickness: at length I bought her, to whom I gave only one dose of
this Powder, which freed her from her Fits, though she had them before almost
continually, day and night, that whosoever had her, kept one to watch her, for
she would be ready to destroy her self; I kept her about a quarter of a year,
and she never had a Fit that I know of. I persuaded her to take another Dose
two or three days after, but she would not; she told me she needed not, for she
was confident she was perfectly cured. Since I hear she is married some where
in the Country, and whether she had them since, I know not

By the operation of this Medicine I judged by what came from her, that the
primary cause was not in the Brain, but in the Stomach, or some place near
adjacent thereunto; and that the Brain suffered only by consent.

Purging in this Disease (when it is simple) seldom or never does any good, as
also Blood-letting, but both are very injurious, as many have found to their
great prejudice. But when it proceeds from the Stomach (as may be known by the
Patient, perceiving in himself a pain, soreness, and distention about the
mouth, or pit of the Stomach and Heart Strings, especially when they are
fasting) before the Fit they have a disposition to vomit, with pain and
palpitation of the Heart, and the Fit ends with vomiting, in such, I say, a
Vomit may be available, either with the infusion of Crocus Mettallorum, or the
Salt of Vitriol; but they are warily to be administered, and not without the
direction of a Physician. All sour and sharp things are hurtful in this
Disease, as Oranges, Lemons, Vinegar, etc. In the time of the Fit you may use
the following Liniment to anoint and chafe the Temples, Nostrils, Wrists and
Coronal Suture, or Seam of the Skull upon the top of the Head.

Vnguentum Nervinum two ounces, melt it gently in a Gally pot, then put to it
Oil of Amber and Rosemary of each two drams, Spirit of Sal Armoniack, one dram,
stir them well together, and use it warm.

Take of Oil of Tartar per deliquium an ounce, Salt of Hartshorn and Amber
each a scruple, mix them, and let the Patient take from ten to twenty drops in
Broth, or Black-cherry Wine four times a day.

The dung of a Peacock, or Liver of a Raven being gently dried, and powdered,
and given twice a day to two Scruples, or a dram at a time are very good, but
it were better, if their Volatile Salts were extracted.

But the Flowers of Sal Armoniack excel all the rest, being given three times a
day, from ten to fifteen or sixteen grains at a time in Broth or Sherry Wine.

Tortura Ventris, or a great Griping.
THere was a poor Fisherman that lay down by the New Meeting House in this
Town, that had undergone most terrible Gripings and Torture in his Guts, with a
great Flux and Vomiting for several days, till at length his Spirit was almost
spent, his Belly was so inflated, that he could hardly breath. About ten or
eleven of the Clock at night I was sent for; I knew there was not any Medicine
I had would do him good, or preserve his life, but this Powder; I being not
very well, and much disposed to Sleep, told them, I would come and see him
again as soon as it was day, and then I would give him something. When I
returned home, I considered he could not live till that time, and if not quite
dead, yet could not be in a capacity to take any thing, I presently went to him
again, and gave him five grains of this Powder: within half an hour after he
took it, he broke wind upward and downward, to the admiration of all those that
were there. A little after he had a stool, in which came away abundance of
obdurate and hard excrements that a long time adhered unto his Guts, (and was
the cause of his sickness) and presently he went to sleep (which he had not
before for several nights) and slept very soundly till the morning. The next
day when I came up to see him, I found him up, and at Breakfast, and was
preparing for his going to Sea: he told me he was as well as ever he was in his
life.

A Surfeit is a praeludium to at Fever, which does not always proceed from the
quantity of Meats or Drinks, but it may be from a vicious quality of Meats, as
crude Fruits, Pulse, etc. or from an antipathy or loathing of Meats, that the
stomach abhorrs; and they are such things as commonly the eating of them has
made them sick before; and sometimes it comes by lying with their Stomachs bare
when they sleep, especially in the Summer: I have known many that have beeen
surfeited, and could not tell how they got it. I never knew this Powder fail to
make them well in six or eight hours.

In the Month of May this present year 1679, a Gentlewoman was taken with a
Vomiting and Looseness, which exercised her two days, and then of its own
accord in a great measure ceased; but she using no means to rectify the ill
Ferment of the Stomach and Bowels, and otherwise neglecting her self, within
two or three days was seized with an intolerable Tortura Ventriculi, or
tearing pain in her Stomach, accompanied with Hypochondriack Vapors, and an
almost total dejection of Spirits. About four in the Afternoon she sent for me,
and being come, I truly found her in a very deplorable condition, having cried
out so much by reason of the insufferable pain she felt, that she had very
little Breath or Voice left to cry out any longer, besides almost her whole
Body was cold, and bedewed with a clammy sweat, her Pulse very little, and
sometimes wholly cessant, so that at first sight I did not think it possible
that she should escape death; but I with all expedition got some of the
Balsamic Pill dissolved in a good Cordial Vehicle, to which (for the Vapors
sake) I added a little of my Elixir Hystericum, and so gave her the mixture by
two spoonfuls at a time, about twice in a quarter of an hour, continuing half
an hour, in which time she was twice or thrice seemingly dead for about a
minute at a time, at the end of the last she vomited up the Medicine with much
slimy matter, upon which her Pulse began to return, but her pain being still
intolerable, she dispaired of help, but I being encouraged by some second
considerations, and confident of the certainty of my Medicine in such dolorous
Affects turned up an Hourglass, and promised her (God assisting) that she
should have ease before the Sand was run, the which (to the praise of the
Almighty) I effectually performed within the time, for I plied her quick with
the Medicine, and in half an hour she began to grow warm in the extreme parts,
and (as her self expressed it) felt the pain go down out of her Stomach into
her Belly, and to lessen, and that she could fetch her Breath from the bottom
of her Belly, in an hour she was in a fine transpiring heat all over her Body,
and the pain quite gone, notwithstanding I was still forced now and then to
repeat the Medicine; for otherwise she would feel some twitchings and girdings
in her Stomach, threatening a return. I stayed with her till near twelve at
night, at which time she was disposed to sleep, the which she did but two
hours, and then was called up to lay a woman (she being a Midwife by practice)
the which she went over the water to do, and came home again to Bed about eight
in the morning, and has remained very well ever since.

For the Griping of the Guts I do not think this Balsamic Pill has its equal
in nature. How many grown People as well as Children expire yearly in this City
of London, by this tormenting Disease, for want of a good Remedy. I do
seriously profess, I do not think that any person need perish by that Enemy,
had they but this Medicine in time; for it commonly takes it away at one Dose,
but with a second I never failed in my life; for it will certainly give ease in
the most violent Gripings in two hours time, given in a large Dose; and if the
pain return, it may be repeated after eight hours; but where there is strong
Vomitings also, it is best to give it dissolved in warm Ale, or Sack, and so
give it by a spoonful or two at a time, and very often, that so the stomach may
not cast it up before it comes to operate, for it will stay the Vomiting and
Looseness as well as ease the Pain, the which ought to be done with all
expedition (unless the Disease proceed from a Surfeit, then first give a Dose
of the Powder) let ignorant people think what they will, who often out of a
foolish timerosity suffer them so long, till the strength is so exhausted, that
it cannot be again restored; and so they as miserably as foolishly shake hands
with their lives.

FLUXES.
THere are three sorts of Fluxes, viz. Lienteria, Diarrhoea and Dysenteria: and
Authors have very confusedly treated of their Causes, and their Places; and
because they would be sure to hit right, they have named almost every place.
But the cause of the first, Lienteria, is from a defect of the Spleen, which
does not send a sufficiency of that acid juice into the Stomach, which makes
the digestive Faculty, whereupon it is, that the meat comes away with little
alteration.

The second, Diarrhaea, is from a defect of the Mesaraick Veins, that do not
attract the Chyle, whereby it is evacuated as Excrements.

The last, Dysenteria, is from Excrements that adhere to the Intestines, and by
their Acrimony corrode, etc.

You see that they proceed from several Causes, and yet to be cured by one
Remedy. Every one may judge it to be an Arcanum Catholicum, or an universal
Remedy, which I know this Powder I tell you of has perfectly effected, as I
have well experienced. And in this last I commonly give my Balsamical Pills the
next night, to consolidate the Excoriations which the morbifick matter has
caused.

In all Fluxes of the Belly, whether bloody, or not, you may do as follows.
First give half a dram, or two scruples, or a dram of the Powder of Toasted
Rhubarb, mixed with a little Conserve of Red Roses, and made into a Bolus. Then
of the Conserve of Red Roses and Mint of each an ounce, Orange Pill candied six
drams, Red Coral in fine Powder a dram, Diascordium two drams, Syrup of Myrtles
sufficient to make a soft Electuary, let the Patient take it often about a dram
at once. Or this: of Mint Water, and Cinnamon Water, each an Ounce, Plantane
Water two ounces, Syrup of Comfrey an ounce and an half, Laudanum two grains,
mix them, and let the sick take it by a spoonful every half hour.

In the Flux with the Griping of Guts, as also in others, this following is
very good. of the best Cinnamon Water three ounce, of Diascordium three drams,
let them be well mixed, and give it by two spoonfuls at a time pretty often.
Either this or the former will both stay the Vomiting, and bridle the Flux.

The following Clyster is also good to alleviate the sharpness of the matter,
and ease the excoriated Guts. of new Milk half a pint or better, in which
quench a piece of red hot steel once or twice, to which add half an ounce of
Venice Turpentine dissolved in the yolk of an Egg, Honey of Roses an ounce,
common Balsam of Sulphur ten or twelve drops mix and make a Clyster.

The Pill alone will cure any Flux or Looseness whatsoever presently, yea the
Bloody Flux in two, three, or four days, according to its magnitude, but in
that case it is good to continue the use of it a day or two after the Flux is
stayed, lest the Acrimonious Ferment (not being quite destroyed) should
reassume its force, and cause the Disease to return. Therefore in such
Countries where this Malady is in a manner Epidemical (as Ireland, and perhaps
some other places) did they but know the worth of this Pill, they would
undoubtedly prize it at a high rate, and rescue many a miserable person from
the devouring jaws of death.

Calculus Renum; or, Stone or Gravel in the Reins or Kidneys.
THe Stone or Gravel in the Reins or Kidneys, as it is the sharpest of
Diseases, so it has been the longest in curing, though the present Fit or Pain
is soon remedied. I never knew any Man or Woman that was past forty five, or
forty six years of age that was ever perfectly cured, but once or twice a year
after, they have been troubled with it more or less; though I knew a
Gentlewoman that was free from any Fit nigh two years, and then assaulted her
again as violently as at first.

Cause.
Those Paroxysms or Fits that come by Intervals, which are so dolorous, do not
proceed from the Gravel or Stone generated, but from the Kidney generating,
which may be affected either primarily, from a debility or vitiousness of its
own Ferment, or casually, from an excess in quantity, or being too sharp or
salt in quality: and in regard it is so sensible a part, must needs stir up an
inflammation, which makes those cruel Tortures. And should all the Gravel and
Stone come away, the pain would not be the less, until the Kidney it self be
reduced to its right temper. For we see how vain and useless all those things
have proved, that have been given to absterge, and force away the Gravel and
Stone, nay, they have much more exasperated the pain, and made it more.

And besides that, the Gravel and Stone are not the cause of those Tortures, I
find by this Powder, which has perfectly freed them from all their pain in two
or three hours, and no Gravel or Stone has come from them, neither that day,
nor the next.

Again, how many have I seen in perfect health, that have voided a great
quantity of Gravel at a time, without the least pain, it would be in one as
well as in another.

By any Weakness, Consumption, Inflammation, or any Distemper of the Kidney,
Gravel may be caused, so that Gravel is the product, not the producer or
primitive cause of this pain.

In this Disease the Belly is to be kept loose; which may be well performed by
this following. of the Pulp of Cassia, newly drawn four ounces, Tartar
Vitriolated, two drams, powder it, and mix; to the mixture, add ten or twelve
drops of oil of Juniper. Take of it once in three or four days at night going
to Bed, at each time six drams, or an ounce, which will give two or three
Stools the next day.

Then give the following Powder. Take of Tartar Vitriolated a dram and a half,
Crab's-eyes, Salt of Bean-stalks, of Broom, of Restharra, and Pigeons dung each
two scruples, mix and make a Powder. The Dose is a scruple or more twice a day
in Parsley or Saxifrage Water. When the pain is very great, and the Urine
stopped, the following potion may be given to the comfort of the sick. Take of
fine Venice Turpentine washed a scruple, dissolve it in the yolk of a new laid
Egg, by beating them well together, then put them to a quarter of a pint, or
half a pint of new Milk, and let the patient drink it off at once.

Wild Carrot Seed being boiled in Ale, and the Ale drank two or three times a
day, is good both to hinder the increase of the Stone (by resisting the
putrefactive stonyfying odor or Ferment,) and also to diminish it being grown,
but its use must be continued a Month together at the least. The German Academ.
Curios. in their first Volumn published in the Year 1670 observat. 107. highly
commend the Decoction of Paul's Bettony for expelling the Stone, being drank in
a large quantity, and continued for some time; an example of which is there set
down at large, of a certain Woman who was freed from a Stone in the left
Kidney, by the use of the said Decoction, after it had been her miserable
Companion for sixteen years.

The Pill being taken in a full Dose, and dissolved in a Glass of well warmed
White or Rhenish Wine (or where that cannot be had, Ale) and so drank, gives
present ease in the most grievous pains, occasioned by Stone or Gravel in the
Kidneys, when all other Remedies fail; and I remember once a Gentlewoman that I
gave it to, either at the first or second Dose voided three Stones of an
untoward Figure, with much pain, and remained free from that tormenting dolor
(with which she was wont to be often exercised) for the space of three years.
But for the Stone in the Bladder, I do not know that either the Powder or Pill
will do any thing, as to the Cure, only give some present ease.

Flatus Hypochond. or Windy Melancholy.
ANd likewise there is the Windy Melancholy, that many, both Men and Women in
this Country are troubled with, (especially those that live near the Sea) I
will not say, that if the party has been troubled with it above a year, it is
not to be cured; but I never knew it cured: Though this Powder of mine is the
best thing that ever I used for it, it gives them speedy ease, and much
corrects the sharpness of the Malady. And one that has not been above a year
troubled with it, it cures them at once taking. And because this Distemper
bears an affinity with some other flatuous and windy Distempers, I shall treat
of their causes together; as Coliack and Illiack Passion with a windy Pleurisy
and Tympany.

These are called windy Distempers (though very improperly) neither Air or Wind
are the cause of any of them.

Cause.
Negatively, not Air or Wind that is breathed into us, nor from any windiness
that is in Meat or Drink, that is the cause of those Distempers; but positively
from some malign or putrefactive or dungy quality that is contained in them, or
from a vicious quality or debility of the digestive Ferment, or from Excrements
detained beyond their due order.

There is in every Vegetive an aerie spirit [or Gas] which does defend and
preserve it from putrefaction, and endeavors its subsistence in its primitive
essence and figure, which suffering a Fermentation is evaporated and exhaled.

EXAMPLE.
As in New Wine, after it comes into the Cellars, it passes another
Fermentation.

Likewise a Raisin of the Sun, when the aerie spirit which was in the Grape is
separated from its concrete Body, the Grape contracts it self, and takes a new
Ferment of Raisin.

Also we see in an Apple, when it is roasted at the Fire, this aerie Gas is
exhaled, which was co-fermented with the Apple.

In like manner all things that begin to putrefie, this aerie Spirit parts from
them, and then they take another Ferment. As in poisons, when their venomous
sharp quality seiseth on the Muscles, this aerie Blas flies from them, whence
the Body tumifies and swells so: as we see in Bodies that die through
putrefaction, a little before they die, how they are oppressed with this Wind,
which does puff up their Bodies after they are dead.

The windy Blast is made chiefly in those three places, the Stomach, Ilion and
Colon.

From the Stomach proceeds this windy Melancholy (as they call it) and most of
those Flatulent Distempers, for whenever any thing is not well digested in
the Stomach, this Blast is presently made, as we see in this Distemper;
whatsoever they eat or drink, how they belch for it, and are worse commonly
after they have eaten, than they were before; which does clearly demonstrate,
that the principal defect is in the Stomach, and therefore not from the meat
they eat, but from the viciousness or defective Ferment; for let another eat
and drink of the same, it does not disturb them at all. And to talk of windy
Meats, is but a mere Chymera: there are no Meats or Drinks windy to good and
healthful stomachs; too great repletion does likewise stir up, and cause this
windyness in the stomach.

By the favor of belchings you may understand the temper of the Stomach.

Sour Belchings betokens a weak stomach.

Unsavory shows a weaker.

Burntish, bitter and sharp ones, proceed from a vicious stomach.

There are some Specifical, which give their own savor, as Garlic, Onions,
Radishes, etc.

I could say much more to vindicate the Spleen from having a hand in those
flatulent Distempers, If you would be better satisfied, read Doctor Highmore,
de affectione Hypochond. fol. 105.
as also that air or wind that we received from without, is not the cause
whereof they are made. But lest I should make my Book outswell an Enchyridion.
I do pass it in silence: and desiring to be ingenious and faithful to all, and
not willing to write the least thing that I were not convinced of the truth of,
nor give you the least occasion to say that I extol this incomparable Medicine
beyond its merit; wherefore I must confess what is truth; I never knew them
really cured in my life, if they were habitual, and of a long continuance; Quo
diuturnus eo difficilis.
nor indeed is there any Disease, if once it be familiar to nature, that is of
easy curation. I could wish, for the sakes of those that are troubled with
these Maladies, that I had such a sure Remedy to cure them after long
continuance, as this powder is to prevent them when they are in the beginning,
and the surest to bring the greatest help at last.

I would not willingly be mistaken by any one, nor have him to abuse his
judgment, as to think he may be as soon well of an old and chronical Distemper,
as of one that has newly taken possession of the body. To proceed,

This Disease has great affinity with the Scurvy, and therefore the same
Medicines are proper for both.

of Crab's-eyes prepared two drams, Tartar Vitriolated a Scruple, Flowers of Sal
Armoniack a dram, Confection of Alkermes without Musk three drams, Conserve of
Garden Scurvy Grass three ounces, mix them into an Electuary, of which let the
patient take every morning and evening a dram and a half, or two drams upon an
empty stomach, that is, let him fast an hour after it in the morning, and take
it three hours after supper.

Strong Purges are injurious in this Disease; but after the use of the
aforesaid Electuary, you may purge with the following Powder: Cream of Tartar
fifteen Grains, Salt of Wormwood and Scurvy Grass each ten Grains, Rosin of
Scammony eight, nine, or ten grains, powder and mix them, and give it in the
morning in a little warm Posset drink.

The Elixir Proprietatis of Paracelsus is highly profitable in this Disease,
being taken three times a day in a Glass of Sherry Wine fifteen, sixteen or
twenty drops at a time. So is also the Volatile Salt of Amber, being taken to
fifteen grains twice a day in warm Broth. But amongst all the Remedies I know,
I assure you I never found any of that efficacy in this Disease as my Balsamic
Pill, for that destroys the sharp putrefactive Ferment discusseth all
windyness, refreshes the spirits, and takes away melancholy.

Illiaca Passio: or, the Wind in the Small Gut.
IT has been an old received opinion, that this Disease comes from the
twisting of that long and small Gut: but I have reason to believe the contrary.

This great Torture is not from the wind contained there, but from an
excrementitious matter that does adhere unto the Illion; it is as it were glued
unto it by its slimy matter, which it is lined withal, and in time is
coagulated into a very obdurate and hard substance.

I remember when I was in Dunkirk, there was a Soldier which was miserably
troubled with this Disease for some days: after general Evacuation, Vomiting,
Clyster, then carminative and fumous Clysters, and abundance of other means, he
found not the least ease: there was given him three or four ounces of
Quicksilver, and that came soon through him, yet no ease: at last I gave him
four of the biggest Musket Bullets I could get; about six or eight hours after
I came to him, and he was discharged of pain, and was fallen asleep, which he
had not before for several nights; after he awaked he had a Stool, wherein was
two of the Bullets, and about eight or nine great round pieces of excrement,
greater than the Bullets, and they did seem to be as hard.

Besides, it could not be wind, for it is always repleted with wind, to hinder
such accidents, by making the more clearer and more slippery way for the Chyle,
and when there is a redundancy of it, it is easily forced forth behind, without
any Griping or Torture.

So you see it is not from Wind, or knotting of the Gut, but from some
excrement that does adhere unto the same.

COLIC.
THe Colic is commonly from Excrements contained beyond their course, which
vitiates the Ferment of the place, whence comes those windy Blasts, which are
not wind, but far more subtle and rare than the most rarefied air, being of an
incoagulate nature; whereupon those retained excrements adhere so firmly to the
Gut, that it contracts it, which is the cause of that violent dolor. I had a
man that was shot (at the Siege of Iper in Flanders) in the lower Belly;
Hypogastrium.
which penetrated the Colon: all his Excrements came out at his wound for about
six days, so that the Intestinum Rectum, or Arse-gut became useless: this wound
lay twenty four hours exposed to the wind before he was dressed. I made a
Suture to the external Orifice, and cured him by vulnerary Clysters, etc.

Besides, how many wounds have I seen that have penetrated the Breast and
Belly, and yet never troubled with those windy Pains or Tortures; and yet we
see there is hardly a Distemper amongst us, but we accuse wind, troubled with
wind, etc. but the small benefit those discussors of wind have brought, is able
to convince any, that wind is not the cause.

But indeed this aerie Blast, which is made by a bad digestion of things, that
seems to be wind, (which is perceived to move between the Muscles of the sides,
and causes those Ructations and Belchings) has never been thought on by the
Schools, and but of very late years treated of.

To confirm Mr. Couch's opinion concerning the Illiaca Passio, I shall here add
another experiment, which is this; About a year ago a certain man was sorely
tormented with the excruciating pains of this Disease, commonly called the
twisting of the Guts, his Physician treated him with (I suppose) all the usual
Remedies, and some other Devices, one of which was I remember to blow wind into
the Intestinum Rectum, or Arse-gut with a pair of Bellows, but nothing taking
effect to give the miserable man any ease, the last Remedy was instituted,
which was three pound weight of Quicksilver, which the Patient poured down his
Throat on Friday about ten or eleven in the Forenoon, and presently (as
advised) rode a little way for the better agitating of his Body, but yet to no
purpose; for on the Sunday Morning following I was at his House by accident,
with another person, who was a Physician, and then none of the Quicksilver had
made any passage; he had the very aspect of death, and complained of an
intolerable cold and weight in his Belly, went not to bed in three nights, and
if he fell into the least sleep, nothing but dotage and distraction appeared,
His Physician was at a ne plus ultra, thinking him a dead man, as all that saw
him. Upon enquiry we understood that he was not forbid the taking of any thing,
nor yet directed to any thing besides Canary, wherefore we advised that he
should abstain from the use of all acids and others that might have any power
to coagulate any of the Quicksilver in his Body, and to drink sweet Oil
plentifully, the which he presently put in execution, and the next day being
Monday, the Quicksilver began to come away like Small Shot, and the use of the
Oil being still continued, by Tuesday night he had parted with it all, or most;
for what they had collected wanted but four ounces of the three pounds, after
which somebody well advised him to swallow Golden Bullets, which he did diverse
times, and so to a wonder recovered, and is well to this day. Now had this
Torture been occasioned only by wind, such a quantity of Quicksilver could not
possibly have been thereby detained in the Body one quarter of an hour: or
again, that it should be the twisting of the Gut, as is commonly believed, is
impossible; for it cannot be, that the Gut should be so closely twisted up by
any accident that may happen either within or without the Body, that three
pound weight of this active ponderous Mineral should not in three days time
find a passage; besides (which I had almost forgot to tell you) his Excrements
came away with the Quicksilver in small hard Bits, like dried Sheeps Dung,
which plainly proves that the occasional cause of this Disease is the
Excrements grown to a preternatural hardness. I will here set down (for the
sake of the poor) a cheap and easy remedy against this cruel Enemy.

of the Seeds of Annise, Fennel, Carraway and Coriander, each half an ounce,
let them be all bruised, put them into a quart of Ale, or somewhat more, boil
them gently in a Vessel close covered for about three quarters of an hour, then
take it from the fire, and strain it, and let the Patient drink half a pint at
a time warm. And by God's blessing he shall soon have ease.

This is also good in the Wind Chollick. But the Balsamic Pill is the most
immediate Remedy for the Wind Chollick that I ever yet knew; but it is not to
be given in the Illiaca Passio; therefore I will here, for the sake of the
ignorant, show how they may distinguish those Diseases from one another. The
pain called the Twisting of the Guts lies about the Navel, and higher, and is
felt only before, not extended to the Right and Left Sides: that of the
Chollick is about the Navel and lower, going cross the Belly to both Sides,
even to the Back, the pain generally pressing to the bottom of the Belly, with
a stoppage of the Urine, which never is in the former; there are some Symptoms
which are common to both, as Burning, Chilness, Reaching, Vomiting, etc. but
what I have said before is sufficient for any to know them asunder.

A Gentlewoman living in Greenwich was lately seized with a pain in all her
Bones. and a violent Looseness, for which she took a Dose of the Balsamic Pill,
and in two hours time was at perfect ease, and the Looseness stopped. The next
morning she took a Dose of the Powder, and at night a Dose of the Pill, but
sleeping very soundly, with the Clothes off of her, got cold, which turned to
an Ague; after she had had two Fits, she took a Dose of the Powder an hour
before the access of the third, and so was cured of her Ague, the next day she
fell into a Fit of the Cholick and Stone, for which she took a Dose of the
Pill, which gave her ease, and by another Dose the night following was quite
freed. Thus you see diverse Diseases (and those not trivial ones neither) to be
cured by the same Medicine. This was performed by a Gentleman in that Town that
buys those Medicines of me.

This Disease having its Inn in the thick Guts (particularly the Colon, from
whence it has its denomination) may be eased by Clysters, for which purpose
the following is good.

of the Seeds of Coriander, Annise, Fennel, Carraway, each a quarter of an
ounce, let them be all well bruised in a Mortar, then boil them in a pint of
Posset Drink gently for a quarter of an hour in a Vessel close covered, then
strain it, and add thereto two ounces of Oil of Cammomile (and if you will, a
little Canary, and let it be administered conveniently hot. If you put to it six
or seven drops of the Oil of Hartshorn it will be then stronger and better.

The Fume or Smoke of Tobacco is a present remedy for ease, being blown up into
the Guts by a Pipe put into the Fundament. The forementioned Drink with Seeds
is also good in this Disease. And forasmuch as the Chollick is many times wont
to be accompanied with a grievous Symptomatical Vomiting, it is necessary that
it should speedily be stopped, not only in regard of its own molestation, but
also because it hinders the retention of any Medicine in the Stomach, to which
end use the following mixture.

of Simple Mint Water three ounces, Aqua Mirabilis an ounce, Tincture of
Cinnamon two drams, Laudanum Opiatum three grains, Syrup of Myrtles and Mint of
each half an ounce, mix, and let it be taken often by a spoonful at a time.

After the violence of pain is over, purge the Body gently with this following.

of fine Manna an ounce and a half, Cream of Tartar half a dram in powder, mix
them, and lot them be dissolved in a draught of warm Ale, or rather
Posset Drink, and give it in the morning fasting.

Timpanites: or, the Windy Dropsy.
THis Timpany arises from a stercorous or dungy Ferment in the Sacculus, or
blind Gut, from Meats that are not perfectly freed from their stomachical
sharpness; and there being obstructed, ferments and putrefies; from whence this
foetid aerie blast proceeds, (indeed the worst of all sorts) which is breathed
forth to the Peritoneum, and so inflates the whole Abdomen.

That it is produced of such a stinking Air, proceeding from some putrefied
matter, I am very certain; but whether it takes its Rise from the blind Gut (as
a worthy Author affirms) or from the Mesenterium, as I rather think, is
controverted: and that this dungy matter might be sucked up by the Mesariack
Veins with the Chyle: but what I am not sure of, I shall not speak unto.

I never had one under my consideration of this Distemper, since I had the
knowledge of this powder; and therefore I cannot speak any thing by experience
in this Disease: but undoubtedly since it does unobstruct the Kidneys, and
absterge what is vicious in them, it must needs be good for this. And I
persuade my self, whosoever shall try it in the beginning of this Disease, I
question not but (with God's blessing) they will find a happy success.

This sort of Dropsy is easily distinguished from others; for in this the
Belly only swells, and is hard, not yielding to the pressure of the Fingers,
but being struck upon, sounds, after the manner of a Drum. The Cure consists in
changing the putrefactive Ferment of the Chyle, whether it be in the Gut, or
the Veins of the Mesentery it matters not; the which being done, the inflated
Abdomen soon falls of its own accord, for that is but the effect of the
Disease, the which necessarily cease, when its propagator and nourisher is
taken away. Purging is always pernicious in this Disease (I mean with direct
Laxatives) and therefore not to be used: This following is very profitable.

of the Seeds of sweet Fennel, Annise, Carraway and Coriander each an ounce,
Juniper Berries an ounce and a half, let them be all bruised well, and put into
a Glass with half a dram of Salt of Tartar in powder, upon which pour a quart
of the best Sherry Wine, stop it close, and let it stand two or three days,
then begin to drink of it three times a day, viz. in the morning, half an hour
after dinner, and at night, at each time a small Glass, it will be much better
if you add to it a dram of the Volatile Salt of Amber in powder, which will
dissolve. When that is drank out you may put to the Ingredients a pint of Wine
more, with half a dram of Salt of Amber, and it will be good. The Oily Volatile
Salt of Sylvius is excellent in this Disease, as also in the Scurvy, Flatus
Hypochondriacus and others. But the Powder and Balsamic Pill are more certain
and quick in the Cure than any other that I know of.

In the next place I shall speak of Gouts.

Arthritick, or Gouty Disease.
THey take their names from the places they frequent, viz. Hands, Feet, Knee,
or Hip, or Recurrent, Arthriticus, Chyragra, Podagra, Gonagra, Siatica.
and then it is called by the vulgar, the Running Gout: the Gout differs from
other Diseases, for its Idaea or Character consists in the vital spirit, and
is transferred through the Seed, (which makes it Hereditary) where it makes a
fermental sharpness, which when it is exorbitant, is sent forth into the
extreme Parts, and there meeting that Callous or Synovia.
seedy Glue, which is conjoined between the Ligaments and the Bones it does
affect it with its fermental sharpness, and is the cause of that great dolor or
pain, and inflammation.

It is not from humors, excrements, or blood, but a morbifick Idaea seminally
implanted in the vital spirit, and that is the reason it is so hard to cure;
for there is not any Arcanum extant will reach it.

Yet I believe there has been a Horizontal Gold of Paracelsus.
Remedy found for it, and hope there will be again, when it will be more
divulged.

To take off a Toe or Foot does not cure the Gout; for this pain that is
exasperated, is but the fruit or product of it, for it is virtually contained
in the Seed implanted by the vital spirit.

I dare not promise this Arcanum, or secret of mine to effect this Cure: yet in
extremity of pain I may boldly tell you, there is not any thing will give you
ease sooner; and for any thing I know, it may cure it, for it will strongly
repel from the place.

The Sciatica and Knee-Gout I never yet failed to cure, with a water I make to
embrocate, or wash the part withal, though I have had some that one Leg was a
great deal shorter than the other, so that they went with Crutches, having an
Atrophia, or Consumption in that Leg and Thigh.

There is another Disease, much like, which is the Rhumatismus, or Running
Gout, but this possesses the musculous part as well as the Joints, and
exulcerateth or breaks out, wherefore some have thought it to be that Disease
they call Scrophula.
the King's Evil: I have seen several that have labored with it in this
Country; and without they have a Cure for it in the beginning, it brings them
into a Consumption, yet I have cured one that had it twelve or fourteen years.

Place.
The Place that this Disease does commonly possess, are the Legs, Thighs and
Hip-bones; sometimes the lower Region of the Belly, and then it is very
dangerous; for it is of a very sharp and malign nature, and fouls a Bone
presently, if not prevented.

Cause.
From some excrementitious matter that the Mesaraick Veins have attracted, of a
faetid savor, not fit to be transferred with the Blood, therefore the Liver
discharges it into the emulgent Veins, to be carried to the Reins, and so to
be evacuated through the Bladder; but the Archeus, or vital spirit of the
Reins, raised up with indignation against such a fordid matter, passing through
them, forces it to the Legs and Thighs, (as in an Anasarca) and seating it
self, by its vicious quality corrupts the place.

Cure.
If this Powder be given before it has too much defiled the place, either by
fouling the Bone, or becoming exulcerate, it brings it away by the Root, if
not at once taking, in twice or thrice be sure; but if it has had too firm a
footing, then it requires the assistance of some other things.

This Disease being so intimately joined to the very Archeus it self, has its
Inn in the most private Recesses, or innermost Chambers of Life, into which
admittance is denied to all common Remedies, and allowed to none but the most
powerful Arcanums, which none but the Adeptists have known. Therefore since I
know not what internal Remedy to direct you (that may be had in all places)
that has power to obliterate the Character of this Enemy out of the spirit of
life, I shall be content to set down an outward application, the which
(respecting the effect only) does frequently give ease to the pained part.

Common Oil of Roses two ounces, Oil of Guaicum and Bricks of each one ounce,
mix them, and put them into a clean Pipkin, and set them over the fire, into
which cut in thin slices four ounces of Castile Soap, stir it well, till it all
dissolve in the Oils, then have in readiness half an ounce of Opium dissolved
in spirit of Sal Armoniack, which add to the other, taking it presently from
the fire, and keep it stirring till it be cold.

Which use as an Ointment; but if you would have it for a Plaster, you may add
so much Virgins Wax when it is hot, as will give it a sufficient consistency.

The bathing or fomenting the pained part with hot Urine wherein Castile Soap
is dissolved does often give ease; that Urine is best that is kept till it
putrefieth and stinketh.

But the Arcanum and Pill does certainly resolve and expel the occasional
matter, although I do not know them to be able to cure this Disease radically,
but some I have cured therewith, having it in the beginning.

In the Month of December 1676, a Gentleman desired my assistance, who was
sorely afflicted with the Gout, great pain and tumor in both Knees, insomuch
that he could not stir from his Bed to the fire side without Crutches for some
weeks before, during which time he had been under the dispensation of a
Physician, but in no part thereof ever found any comfort, except in his
promises: but he being dismissed, I first gave him a dose of the Arcanum, or
Powder, and at night after a dose of the ^alsamick Pill, after which he could
go cross the Room without his Crutches: I continued the use of the Pill five or
six ti^^, and repeated the Arcanum once, and he was freed both from the pain
and tumor, notwithstanding the extremity of the Weather, being a severe Frost
and Snow. But about ten days after he having urgent business abroad, the
Weather then breaking, being wet, yet cold, got a Relapse, the Disease then
returning with great pain and tumor in one foot, by the repetition of the
Arcanum once, and the Pill three or four times was perfectly restored, and has
so remained to this day, without any other Remedy, except two Doses of the
Arcanum, which he took the Spring following to prevent a return.

Pluritis: or, Plurisie.
THis Disease is accompanied with a Fever, it derives its name from the place
where it is seated, which is the inner skin of the Ribs, which we call Pleura.

The matter has been generally received to be blood; but it is v^^^ doubtful
unto me.

There are two reasons from whence some have concluded it is blood.

First, By derivation, in opening a Vein on the same side, which has
immediately brought ease; I have done it several times.

Secondly, that intention not being timely performed, then an Empyema, or
Imposthume arises, through the blood there suppurated.

But on the contrary:

1. If it be from the pecculancy of the Blood that has made an Eruption in the
Veins, and extend the Pleura, whether this Blood does re-enter the Veins, and
is evacuated by Phlebotomy? which is contrary to that principle, What once
nature has cast forth, never more is received into favor.

2. If not out of the Veins, how comes an Empyema, or Imposthume, which is
never caused in the Veins?

3. How comes this Sanies, or bloody matter, which is often seen in a Plurisie,
though not yet come to an Empyema?

4. If it be blood, how comes it to be cured by a Diaphoretick, or Medicine
causing Sweat, which has been often done?

To treat accurately upon this Disease, would make a bigger Tract than I intend
this.

In a word:

I have cured this Disease both ways.

There is an aerie Blas contained in the Blood, which does stir up and actuate
it, and makes it more fluid, and so likewise there is incorporated with the
Blood a Serum, or watery matter, to contemper its Ebullition and Inflammation.

But when there is a redundancy, or too much of it, or else when it may be too
sharp or salt, then this aerie spirit conveys it to the Pleura, to be evacuated
by transpiration through it, whereby those Veins are so repleted with this
Water, that it extorts and dilates the Pleura, which causes the pain in the
place; and unless it be repelled by bleeding, or dissipated by a sweat; it
makes an eruption of the Veins, and the Blood issuing forth with it, soon
suppurates, which makes an Imposthume, or Empyema; and although an eruption by
those means may be prevented, yet there may be some of that aqueous matter
transpired through the Pleura, which may be tinctured with a sanguine
complexion, and cause that color which is seen in expectoration; so that I
conceive, the essence of this Malady is not blood, with submission to sounder
Judgments.

Now you may ask me, which of those two ways I think the surest: for
Hippocrates says, a Plurisie not perfectly cured before the fourth day, the
party becomes consumptive.

Answ. I judge the morbisick matter to be evacuated by transpiration through
the Cutis, or Skin, to be the directest Course.

REASONS.
1. For so there is nothing exhausted but the matter offending.

2. Those that are cured by Phlebotomy, or Blood-letting, are more liable to
that Distemper again.

3. The Blood is not so depurated from this offensive matter, as by a powerful
Sweat.

4. The party affected may be in that condition, that letting Blood may prove
prejudicial; as women with child, young women obstructed, etc.

I am not averse to Blood-letting; but I had rather make use of my Balsamical
Pill, which effects it singularly, and not hurtful in any condition.

Now I am speaking of letting out blood, I shall give my judgment in that great
question, (which has been, and is to this day controverted amongst our great
Doctors) whether it be proper in Fevers.

Hollerius, Forrestus, Sennertus, Galen, Avicen, with the rest of the
Schoolmen, press it of a necessity to be done in the beginning.

Paracelsus, Helmont, with the rest of the Quicksilver Wits, condemn it, as not
convenient at any time.

Betwixt Scylla and Charybdis there is a safe Channel, but he must be an
experienced Mariner that can sail through.

As Practice is the best part of Physic, so observation is the surest.

Errors being sometimes admitted, do instruct judicious erring persons, as good
Remedies do confirm good Operators.

From my observation I shall speak something to those two extremes.

If I could think the School definition of a Fever true, that it is heat
besides nature, being kindled in the heart first, and throughout the whole
Body, I should think nothing could more clearly indicate Phlebotomy; but I hold
the contrary, and no necessity for it in the beginning, but rather prejudicial.

I have been an observer in this Intention about twenty two years, and have had
many hundreds under my consideration at once, and almost some of all Diseases;
and those in Fevers, some have been let Blood, and others not; and for the most
part, those that were not let blood, were well before those that were.

In any contagious pestilential malignant Fever, to let blood is very
destructive, Detracto sanguine licet impuro, impurior multo, succedit, Fernel.
as experience well teaches.

In a continual Fever, as Synochus, or burning, etc. it prolongs their
sickness, and commonly strikes them into an intermitting Ague, or some other
Disease.

In a Fever intermitting, or determinated into Paroxysms, or Fits, it strongly
confirms them.

In a word, to let blood in any Fever in the beginning, I have found to do much
hurt several times, good hardly at any time: so that I am enforced to show my
dislike of letting blood in the beginning of this Disease. Neither do I consent
with great Helmont, the Calciner of Physic, and laudable Paracelsus, that
Blood-letting does exhaust the spirit of life, because the life is seated in
the blood; nor that it may be convenient at any time; but I have reason to
believe the contrary.

It Is true, Letting-blood does never cure a Disease properly, but it does
mightily refresh and cherish a weak nature that has almost spent her self,
through freeing her from her mortal Enemy,

As we see often after a tedious sickness, nature her self stirs it up as a
Crisis, Quo natura verget ad locum conferentem to ducere oportet.
and then to take a little blood from her, does much revive and strengthen her.

I have cured a man that had a Quartan Ague above a year and four months, only
by once letting blood, who never had a Fit after.

The drawing blood was but the occasion, nature was the efficient cause; for
she was much more elevated and strengthened by it, whereby she expunged the
morbifick Relics with a greater facility.

I have cured a man that had labored with an Atrophia or Consumption for a
long time (wholly become a mere Skelleton) only by letting blood three times,
about six ounces at a time, in the space of ten days, without the use of any
other means, he became perfectly well to the admiration of all his Neighbors.

I have several times since experienced it in an Hectic Fever; and although
this, nor any thing else that I know of will cure it, yet they have been more
refreshed by it, than by all the things took; and whosoever practices it, will
find it so.

I could instance in several more, but let this suffice to evidence the truth
(though a Paradox) that Phlebotomy is very disgustful to nature in the
beginning of a Disease, but very grateful in the latter end.

The Pleurisy is cured by Diaphoreticks and Diuretics, being mixed with such
things as have power to concentrate acidity, as this following mixture.

of the Syrup of Marshmallows an ounce, Syrup of Corn-Poppies an ounce and an
half, Crab's-eyes prepared and Mineral Bezoar of each a dram, mix them, and make
a Linctus, of which let the Patient lick very often till he come to sweat.

Or if he had rather have it in a liquid form, add to this Mixture Triacle and
Carduus-Water of each two ounces, shake them well in a Glass, and take it by
spoonfuls till sweat proceed. For an outward application this following is
excellent.

of the compound ointment of Marshmallows an ounce, oil of sweet Almonds and
Roses of each a quarter of an ounce, oil of white Lillies, Poppies, and Henbane
strained each a dram and a half, Chemical Oil of Cammomile, Cummin-Seeds and
Bricks of each a scruple, Camphire half a dram, mix them, and make a Liniment.
With which anoint the pained side as hot as it may be suffered.

It would grieve any pitiful heart to see how many persons lives in this
Disease, as well as some others, expire with their Blood, some being blooded
five or six times over, and yet receiving no ease while they live, as I have
diverse times known. About three or four years since I was sent for to a
Gentlewoman, lying under this Disease, she had been let blood three times, but
yet had no ease, and was plied with Lohochs and Linctus's, and such like broken
Reeds; and while I was in her Chamber the Apothecary came in with a Commission
to draw more blood, if he found her not eased. She was Patient to one of the
oldest Doctors in London, upon which, and the consideration of her weakness, I
wholly declined to meddle with her, not without much reluctance and regret of
mind since, for my timerosity: because I then thought I might have saved life
by the Balsamic Pill; and on the other hand, was confident, that she would be
certainly lost by that usage she had, which accordingly came to pass the next
day, at the fifth or sixth bloody Bout, dying under the Lancet. But I never
failed to cure any Pleurisy with the Pill, by repeating it, if need be, in ten
or twelve hours; I have sometimes wholly removed the pain in two hours time,
although they have been twice let blood before without ease, although I do not
deny but blood-letting may sometimes cure it without injury in such as are
lusty and strong, or those that have a Plethora of Blood. But for a common
easy Remedy, there is none exceeds the infusion of Horsedung in Ale, for it is
rich in Volatile Salt, whereby it has power to slay any acidity in the blood,
as also to transpire any other peccant matter.

Ictoritia: or Yellow Jaundice.
THe Schools have told us, That this Disease proceeds from an obstruction of
the Gaul-Bladder, whereby Choler is diffused through the whole Body.

Helmont judges it to be a poisonous Ferment besides nature, which so badly
affects the Pylorus, or lower Mouth of the Stomach, that the digestive and
distributive faculty is alienated, and the Seat of this poison to be either in
the Duodenum or Ileon. And he proves it to be poisonous from the instance of
one that was bit by a Serpent, who presently turned yellow.

But my judgment does not suit with either; Helmont is very near it, only I
think it not to be of so poisonous a nature as he takes it to be.

This Distemper is often the sequel of some antecedent sickness, and therefore
is not any primary Disease, but rather the effect or relic of some foregoing
one.

If you look back into that Disease of Children, there I tell you how the
peccant matter comes to be tinctured with Choler; some of this matter which was
morbifical in some precedent Disease, did adhere unto the Duodenum or Pylorus,
which tinctures the Chyle, and so the body becomes yellow, and a bitterness
perceived in the mouth, I say, it is from the morbifick matter of some
precedent Disease, that this Balsome of the Gaul has colored and seasoned
with its bitterness, to prevent its putrefaction, and adhering to the Pylorus
or Duodenum, stains and imbitters the Chyle, which is transferred through the
whole Body, whereby the superficial parts are discolored.

As to the biting of the Serpent, this yellowness is not essential from the
poison of the Serpent, but from this Balsom that is sent thither to antidote
it, and so the Body becomes yellow: as I have instanced in a little Wormwood
and Saffron.

CVRE.
I have often cured it with a little Turmerick roasted in an Apple with a
little Saffron.

Likewise the middle Rind of a Barbary Tree, steeped in a little White Wind,
and a little Saffron, Flowers of Marygold, Rhubarb. etc. The yellowness of
those means show their ordination to be for the scouring of this Relic; Vide
Helmont:
for Signatures bewray the internal Crasis, or temperature of a thing; but the
Crasis it self does not discover the thing.

Things of this nature have happily cured several; but if those should chance
to fail, my Powder does it presently.

Calculus Vesicae: or the Stone in the Bladder.
THe Stone in the Bladder (that Monster in nature) which well may be reckoned
with those Diseases, that are the shame of Physicians. The cause and manner of
its generation has not rightly been understood by the Ancients: and our Modern
Physicians having made no latter search into it, there is yet no Remedy found
out for the Cure, but the poor miserable creature is left to the tyranny of
this Monster, or delivered up unto the tortorous way of cutting, which is such
a Remedy as was never instituted by God or nature.

All men are liable to this Disease, though some more than others; but
especially Children.

You may observe, that in most Men's water there is this stonyfying matter,
though it may not be discerned when it is hot and new; but after it has stood
some while exposed to the cold, it is separated from the Urine, and remains in
the bottom of the Pot, or cleaves unto its sides.

CAUSE.
Men of ripe years are not so inclinable unto it as Children, because they have
a better digestion, and have not so much of that crude matter out of which it
is made.

Old men are not incident unto it, though their Digestion be weak, because they
want quantity of the matter; but when the Ferment of the Bladder is weak in
them, they are liable to the Strangury, which I shall speak a word unto
presently.

But Children are most inclinable unto it, because they have weak Digestions,
which breeds abundance of Crudities, the Mother of this Disease.

It is more from the weakness of the Ferment of the Bladder where it is
produced, than from the matter producing; neither is this matter coagulated and
hardened as Clay is by the heat of the Sun; but condensed as Ice is, by the
frigidity of the Air, And what inordinate heat is perceived, it is only
accidental; as by that example before of a Thorn in the hand.

I could produce several instances to illustrate this truth; but I shall omit
them at present.

The intention curative will show it, according to that Maxim; the truest
Indication is from the benefit or hurt of things formerly used: and that hot
and warm things do mitigate and correct the pain, and cold things do exasperate
it.

PROGNOST.
If it has been of a long growth, and confirmed, I am sorry to tell you, I
know not what will dissolve it. Such a Remedy has been, if we will credit
Paracelsus, which I believe to be true; and I hope God will discover it to some
of us, for the comfort of those miserable creatures which are affected with it,
and keep them from that torturing course of cutting, which very often proves a
Remedy worse than the Disease.

But when it is in doing, and of no long continuance, it may easily be
prevented and reduced.

CVRE.
Now the Cure consists principally in those three things, viz. Evacuation,
Alteration and Corroboration.

1. In evacuating the matter contained.

2. In altering the Ferment of the Bladder, if it be vicious, or

3. In corroborating of it, if it be weak, which is commonly the cause.

And you can hardly evacuate the matter, before you corroborate the parts,;
which is done by this course.

Victus Ratio.
Let most of his Liquor that he drinks be Sack; let most of his Meat be roasted
well, whereof let him eat but little at a time, though he eat the oftener; let
his Bread be Biscuit, or the Crust of Bread well baked; let him eat Salt with
his Meat; Salt Beef boiled is good for him, if he loves it, and does well
digest with him.

Let him avoid Milk, Cheese, let little Butter serve him, and fruits: an Apple
he may eat if he desires it, Raisins of the Sun he may freely eat.

You must foment or bath the Region of his Bladder often with Decoctions of
some comfortable herb boiled in Sack, and some good Ointment to embrocate it
afterward, and so bound up warm.

After ten or twelve days that you have kept the Child in this order, you may
give him a Dose of my Powder, which will bring forth the matter contained.

I shall direct any one further that shall desire it.

But above all things, let him avoid all old women's Medicines to void or break
the Stone; for I verily believe that has made many a Stone where there would
be none; for if the Bladder be any way defective, whereby he does not make
water freely, they conclude presently the Stone; and then take such a thing,
says one, and such a thing, says another; and so keep giving till it come to a
Stone indeed; for all those things they give to force the Stone away, or break
it, are inimical to the Bladder, and the more debilitates the Ferment, which is
the efficient cause in generating the Stone.

I dare affirm it possible to generate a Stone in any Body, though never so
free from it, only by those things they commonly give to cure it.

I have been somewhat larger in this than I intended.

I shall only name two or three Diseases more, and conclude; for I intend it
only for a small thing to carry in a man's hand for a Memorandum. Enchyridion.


So potent an Enemy is this Disease of the Stone to mankind, that it is very
seldom vanquished or cured, except sometimes by the affrightful way of cutting,
under which many also die, and some others which recover, lose the use and
office of the Bladder for ever; some there are again who generate the Stone
afresh, after cutting, as Helmont notes, a young man who was twice cut, but the
Stone growing again, the third time he died under the Knife. For indeed the
cutting takes not away the power of making, although it may free a man from the
matter made. Many Remedies have been invented to dissolve the Stone; but
experience has found them but feeble helpers. First, those which have promised
help by being injected into the Bladder by a Syringe, as juice of Citrons,
Spirit of Salt and others, because they have been observed to dissolve a Stone
in a Glass, taken from a humane Body; but alas their promises are vain, for a
small quantity being cast into the Bladder immediately stirs up an intolerable
Strangury, as being wholly foreign to the ferment of the part: Again, the
powers of all common Remedies taken at the mouth are altered, transmuted, and
perish before they get to the Bladder, for they must first pass three
digestions, so that little more than their excrements can arrive at the
Bladder; for acid or sharp things, from whence so much has been hoped, as soon
as they are past the Stomach, lose their acidity, and are converted into a
saline nature, whereby the sharpness is either wholly transmuted, or at least
so sealed up, that it is devoid of an acid act before it gets to the Bladder.
It Is true there are some things (as Turpentine, Asparagus, Raddishes, etc.)
which have their odours so fast tied to the middle life of their Concretes,
that they are not wholly overcome by the Ferment of the Stomach, but retain
them even to the expelling of the Urine, but those are too eeble resolvers; and
besides persevere not long in that estate, but quickly submit to any dungy
Ferment of putrefaction. Therefore a true Resolver of the Stone ought to have
the following powers and properties, viz.

1. It must have a sufficient power to dissolve the Stone, being put with it
into a Glass in a heat not exceeding the heat of our Bodies; and that not after
the manner of Corrosives, which make a forcible dissolution with an ebullition
and noise, but by the action are much weakened in their own force: but a true
solvent acts without noise or ebullition, dissolving the Stone insensibly, as
warm water dissolveth Ice, neither is its own power infringed, or depauperated
by the action.

2. The Solvent of the Stone ought to be so homogenious and singular, that it
submit not to any digestions or fermental powers through which it passes in
its way to the Bladder, that coming thither in its own integrity and might, it
may work upon the Stone as often as it passes by it.

3. It ought to be so amicable and agreeable to the Bladder, that being cast
into it with a Syringe, it may not be painful thereto after the manner of sharp
injections. Such a Remedy I have a near prospect of, but no more of that in
this place: but I have a Medicine that will give ease in the most racking pains
of the Stone, within the space of an hour.

Atrophia or Marasmuss: or, a Consumption without a Cough.
A Consumption without a Cough proceeds from the loss of the Ferment of some
principal part, whereby it decays and withers, and some other part does too
much abound and increase: I shall speak a word of this in the Rickets of
Children.

Febris Hectica: or, a Consumption with a Cough.
A Consumption with a Cough of ehe Lungs, is from the decaying and putrefying
of them, either in part, or in the whole, nature sending a more than ordinary
proportion of nourishment to that part, which by that putrefactive Ferment is
converted into Excrement, and is expectorated, or coughed up.

This Disease has been seldom cured, if it has been long on the party,
whereby his Body is much emaciated and consumed,

Paracelsus had a Remedy for it: but I think it was buried with him: Riverius
cent. 4. of observe. by the fumy Troch Auripigm.
others have cured it likewise, after a great loss of their Substance.

Whilst it is in fieri, or in the beginning, I am very confident this Arcanum,
or Powder of mine will cure it.

This Disease is usually the consequent of a Surfeit or Fever, or else it is
Hereditary, being transmitted by the Parents to their posterity, which admits
of no cure, that I know of by Medicine: the former may be cured, if good
Medicines be administered in time, that is before the Stomach and Lungs be too
much vitiated, and the Lungs exulcerated. But it is in vain attempted by the
usual Methods of Sugared Milk, nourishing Broths, Jellies, Lohochs,
Electuaries, pectoral Syrups, and Apozems, etc. for they all add to the heap of
Excrements, Milk and Broth of Flesh being subject to putrefie speedily by the
very heat of the Stomach, not meeting with the digestive Ferment thereof (which
is almost lost) submit to a vicious Fermentation, and so form a vile and
degenerate Chyle, which is in no wise fit for the nourishment of the Body,
whence all the parts languish and waste; the which also enrageth the Archeus,
from whence that burning in all the solid parts proceeds, the which is
evidently proved by being increased, always an hour or two after eating. Then
as for Electuaries, Lohochs, Powders, etc. Some of them are designed to relieve
the Lungs, by sliding down the Windpipe insensibly, and so going immediately
to the part affected, but others are appointed to go about, till by the Laws of
Circulation they may at length come with their assistance to the Lungs, but
both to no purpose: as for the first nature derideth the offer, in as much as
she plainly shows an abhorrency but of the least crum or drop that through
any inadvertency passes the Larynx, and gets into the Windpipe, and will not
be at rest till by coughing it be driven back again: therefore who sees not
that if those licking Medicines should go that way their appointers would have
them, that instead of curing or easing a Cough, how mightily they would
increase it.

As for the latter, they are forced to submit to the fate of the Food, only
they prove more troublesome to the Body, because more crude. But the cure of
this Disease ought to be instituted after another manner, viz. by cleansing
away of ^lth, and altering the putrefactive Fer^ent of the Lungs, the first
makes room for ^n equal distribution of the nourishable ^ices: and the second
restrains the exor^itant Governor of the Lungs from con^erting their proper
nutriment into purulent excrements. But when I speak of cleansing away of
Filth, I do not mean either by direct purges, or by those things called
Expectoraters: for the first are indeed poisons, and resolve the good juice
themselves, and expel them with the Excrements, and the latter promote
corruption faster than they cause spitting But true cleansers resolve all filth
in the Stomach, Guts and Veins, and in their passage carry them to the common
Emunctories of nature, as those of the first passage to be expelled by stool,
and they of the Veins by Urine. To which purpose you may take Tartarum
Vitriolatum every morning for three or four days together, from ten to twenty
grains in a little warm Broth, increasing the dose every morning, or instead
thereof for those who affect no^ sharp things, you may give half a dra^ or two
scruples of the Cream of Tarta^ dissolved in hot Broth: after which gi^^ Salt
of Hartshorn and Amber, of each eight, nine, or ten grains twice a day (...)
Broth, or Sherry Wine, continue it for some time, these will cleanse away Filt^
and Excrements, as Soap cleanses Clot^ and likewise resist putrefaction; but
(...) the farther pacifying the Archeus of t^ Lungs, those who have Mineral
Sulphurs well prepared, or Opium divested of its Narcotick or Stupefactive
Power (which sleepifying force is not its virtue, but its vice) such I say may
be able to cure this Disease safely and pleasantly. But seeing those Remedies
are known but to few, therefore after (the forementioned Salt) I advise the
Balsam of Sulphur of Antimony, or good Balsom of common Sulphur, to be taken
twice or thrice a day to six or seven drops, or more at a time mixed with a
little white Sugar, and taken upon the point of a Knife. But the Arcanum and
Balsamic Pill do not miss the cure, if nature be not too far spent.

The Rickets.
THe Rickets is a Disease amongst Children, that has been but of late years:
but ingenious Coke tells us, it has been known among the Ancients, who have
excellently treated of them: so likewise have the Learned Doctors Glysson and
Bates, and Mr. Culpepper. They differ but little, and conclude, that it is
mostly from an obstruction either in the Liver or Spleen.

I rather think it to be from a debilitation, or viciousness of their Ferment,
and so there is no assimilation, whereby the part becomes atrophied, or
decayed, and some other part increased: for the Consumption of one part is the
growing, or greatning of another part: as I have often observed.

An Atrophia, or Consumption, and this, are Cousin-Germans, there is little
difference between them. Children do abound more with a crude phlegmatic
matter, which makes the Head bigger, and the Joints knotty, etc.

PROGNOST.
If they have continued long, they are not to be cured, but if taken in the
beginning, my Arcanum, or Powder does cure it presently, and two or three of my
Balsamical Pills to be taken after, to rectify the Ferment; for the Arcanum
opens the Obstructions, and sweeps off all the peccant matter.

If the Child's Head begin to grow big, let it blood in both ears. I have known
it very effectual, and sometimes it has made a perfect Cure, without the help
of any other thing.

Take of the Bark of Ash and Tamarisk each three drams, to which add a scruple
of Salt of Tartar, put them into a Glass Bottle, with a quart of good Beer, let
it stand twenty four hours, and afterward let the Child drink it for common
drink.

When it is out, you may put to the Bark another quart of Beer, and it will be
good. If you will make it pleasanter, you may add to it two or three ounces of
Syrup of Hart's-tongue. Continue the use for some considerable time. Ens Veneris
is also excellent, being given twice a day to three or four grains, or more, in
warm Broth.

Apoplexy, Paralisis, Catalepsie, Epilepsie, Vertigo, etc.
THere are several Diseases that have been thought to have their Rise
immediately from the Brain, as Apoplexy, Epilepsie, or Falling Sickness,
Catalepsie, or the sleepy Disease, Palsy, Giddiness of the Head, etc. but it
is not my judgment that the Brain is primarily affected in any of them.

Apoplexy.
An Apoplexy proceeds from a vapor of some poisonous matter that has for some
time lain either in the Pylorus, or about the Diaphragma, or Midriff, or
Hypochondria, fermenting and corrupting.

Vertigo.
It is not of so poisonous and malignant a nature as the Apoplexy is; it is
somewhat narcotical, or stupefactive, as Tobacco is to them thac cannot well
take it. It is the Forerunner of an Apoplexy.

PALSY.
AS Giddiness is the Forerunner to an Apoplexy; so a Palsy is the Subsequent,
or Follower.

CAUSE.
It is caused by the horror or great fear (in the vital and animal spirit of
the Brain) by those terrible assaults that are given them by that dreadful
Enemy the Apoplexy. As we may see sometimes many persons do tremble and shake
for fear.

I know some Palsies have been occasioned by hurts and colds in some great
Joints, as Shoulder and Hips, and in progress of time that whole side has
become paralytick. How vain has been the received opinion of the Schools,
about Palsies, that they should proceed from Obstructions in the Head, or
Conjugation, etc.

A Lethargy does proceed from a more mild poison than the Apoplexy; as from
Opium. Epilepsie, or Falling Sickness, I have spoken of before.

They all affect the Brain by consent of the parts where the peccant matter
lies.

CVRE.
All these (besides the Palsy) are cured by my Arcanum universale, if ever
they be cured at all; which is to be hastened, for if not remedied in the
beginning, hardly find any cure.

The Palsy is an accident, or product, or the effect, and this may remain,
though the cause be removed, it is rather Intemperies than Morbus; an
affrighted Distemper in the Spirits, than a Disease; and the Cure may be
performed by my Balsamical Pills, which do refocillate, comfort, and cherish
the spirit, as also by Salt of Pearls, or Corral, or my Aurum vitae, either of
them taken alone, with a little sharp Wine drank after does excellently.

From a weakness and decaying, of the spirits, this may be occasioned, My
spirit shall be diminished, and my days shall be shortened.
as well as by terror in them: therefore this is one of the Diseases of old
age. And to go about to cure it in old persons, if it has continued any time,
is to swim against the stream, and write in the Sand.

In the Apoplexy, the Ointment for the Head and Neck described in the Cure of
the Falling Sickness is good; as also the following mixture, the mouth being
first opened by art.

Aqua Langii, Water of Sage and Lavender of each an ounce, Tincture of Castor
half a dram, Spirit of Sal Armoniack a scruple, Oil of Amber nine or ten drops,
Syrup of Staechas an ounce, mix them, and give a spoonful very often.

The Palsy, Vertigo, Catalepsie, etc. are all of the essence of an Apoplexy,
and differ only in degree, therefore they are to be cured with the like
Medicines. In the Palsy, Lethargy, and Swimming, or Giddiness of the Head,
those following Pills are effectual.

of Pill. Aloephangina a scruple, Rosin of Jallap six grains, Salt of Amber as
much, Oil of Marjoram two drops, mix them, and make four Pills to be taken in
the morning early, and repeated once in three or four duys.

In the Palsy sweat betwixt purgings with spirit of Sal Armoniack given in
Sack. You may also use the Ointment above mentioned to the Backbone and
paralytical parts.

In October 1667, a certain Manservant to one of the Arts-Masters of Bridewel,
London, was suddenly stricken with a Disease in the Evening, as he was at
Supper, he fell from his seat senseless and speechless, his eyes were staring
open, as in a Catalepsie or Congelation, but totally deprived both of sense and
motion, as in an Apoplexy. When I first saw him he had remained in this
condition about a week, during which time means had been used to help him, but
proved altogether ineffectual, so that he was given over for dead.
Notwithstanding which, I observed that he yet retained a good degree of heat,
as also an indifferent Pulse, the which with some other considerations made me
to believe he might still recover, the which I told his Master and Mistress,
when they demanded what I thought of his condition, who then desired I would
take him into my care, which I did. The first thing I gave him was a Dose of
the Powder, which wrought very well upwards and downwards, toward the end of
which he began to speak some odd words, and came to be somewhat sensible; the
next day I repeated the Powder which wrought again as before, upon which he
came to perfect sensation, and also to increase in speech, and one side
returned again to the exercise of all Functions, but the other remained
paralytical and insensible from Head to Foot, not being able so much as to stir
one Finger on that hand; but by the use of the Balsamic Pill, and repeating
the Powder once or twice more (by the blessing of the Almighty) I restored him,
and in a months time was again at work, using those useless Fingers, without
which he could have done nothing, being a Glover by Trade.

In the time that I had this person in cure, the Wife of another of the
Arts-masters in Bridewel, having lain in Childbed about a Fortnight, was also
one Evening suddenly deprived of her speech, and taken somewhat Paralytical on
one side, she sent to me about eleven or twelve of the clock that night; as
soon as I came, I gave her four grains of the Powder, which wrought both upward
and downwards, but most upward, the which being once or twice repeated, and the
Balsamic Pill for some time taken at nights, she was also happily recovered. I
could give diverse other notable instances of Cures of this nature performed by
these Medicines, (having had many fallen under my care) but these I think may
suffice.

However, I will in this place add another strange Cure (which comes fresh in
my mind) done with the Pill alone, by a Physician, who buys Medicines of me,
and lives near Highworth in Wiltshire. At a certain time he being abroad about
six miles from his dwelling, was much solicited by a Friend to go a little out
of the way to look upon a poor man that had lain bedrid for three months, being
grievously pained all over his Body, and not able to turn himself, but as he
was helped; he had used Purgations, Phlebotomy, Fomentations, Unctions, etc.
but all to no purpose. The Physician having some of the Balsamic Pill about
him, dissolved a full Dose in a Glass of Ale, and gave him, and so left him,
within two or three days the poor man came that six miles on foot to give him
thanks, and told him, that within two hours after he had taken the Pill, he was
perfectly free from pain, and so remained, with the due use of all the parts,
only weak; the Physician gave him another Dose home with him, which he took,
and became very well, and had been so many months when the Physician told me of
it.

Spasmus: or, Convulsion.
A Convulsion is caused by some malignant matter contained in the Guts, as is
oftentimes seen after the taking of some Hellebore or Stibium, or any Medicine
that has a poisonous quality.

The Sting or biting of any venomous or poisonous creature produces Convulsion.

CAUSE.
That vital Blas or Spirit in the Muscle being assaulted by some poisonous
quality, contracteth it, the better to defend it from that poison.

SPASMVS.
The Cramp is from a sharp aerie Blas, that does meet with a Nerve or Sinew.

The Worms in Children brings Convulsions in them many times.

That it is caused through fullness or emptiness, and the primary place affected
to be the Brain, I do not consent unto, though it has been received for a
truth.

CVRE.
If it be caused by some poisonous matter that has been received, or through
the biting or stinging of some Snake, etc. my Aurum vitae is admirable: but if
it comes by excrementitious matter contained in the Body, as the matter of
Worms, etc. the Arcanum or Powder eradicates it, or takes it away by the root.
They are generated from corrupted Chyle, and they differ according to the place
where they are made.

If in the Stomach little small Worms.

In the Ilion long and slender like earthworms.

In the Colon, little short thick worms, much like the Bots in Horses. This
Powder does not only take away Diseases when they are on, but likewise prevent
them, if it be given in health; for this violent Disease in Children, I verily
think there is not a better remedy under the Heaven, if it be timely given; for
it carries off all that may be the occasion of the Disease or Worms, one Grain
is sufficient, and that is but six pence.

The last are the worst, and sometimes the longest in curing.

If these continue long, they encompass themselves into a Cistis or Bladder,
which they run out and into, as a Coney into her Borough, whereby they defend
themselves from the injury of any thing that is sent into the place to kill
them.

For the two former the Powder cures them perfectly, not only in killing, or
bringing away the worms there made, but in taking away the cause.

The last, if they have made this shelter, it is very hard to kill and destroy
them.

I have known a young Gentlewoman that was troubled with them from seven years
till she was nineteen, and never could get remedy: they constantly came from
her day and night, without any excrement, to her great grief and sorrow, though
the pain was not intolerable. Now because I do desire to be found ingenious to
my Countrymen, I shall freely tell in what my two or three Arcanums, or secret
Medicines will not avail them, and direct them unto that which will do it.

Many Physicians were befooled in this Disease of this Gentlewoman, she took
the advice of all within that Country where she lived: many were the Clysters
that she took of salt, sharp, and bitter things, with the like ointment, and
plasters to her Belly, etc. but all to little purpose; as well as abundance of
Mercurial Preparations which she took.

She was cured by this following.

The same Worm dried (which is the best thing to destroy them that is) and
powdered and given in a Clyster with Milk and a little Honey.

But first let the Belly be well anointed and chafed with this Ointment.

Take some of the same Powder of the Worms, the Gaul of an Ox, a little Vinegar
and Bay Salt, three or four Cloves of Garlic, the juice of Worwood, You may
have it at the Apothecaries.
and the Powder of Coloquintida; if you have not the art to bring them into an
Ointment with Honey, beat the Garlic, and mix them, and so rub the Region of
the great Gut, and dip a Cloth in it, and lay to the Navel, do it warm.

In the Month of December, 1677, being extreme cold Weather, great Frost and
Snow, a young Woman being with Child, and living near me, labored under a very
strange Convulsion, joined with a Palsy; for besides the Fits which were
strange and long, she had continually night and day, in Bed, and out of Bed,
incessant Convulsive Motions throughout her whole Body, for she had not the
command of any part, neither could she ever sit or lie still, without drawing
and writhing her Legs, Arms, and whole Body after a strange exorbitant manner;
sometimes she could speak a little, and sometimes nothing for many hours: but
that which was most strange was this, that when she had some liberty of speech,
and would endeavor to relate her own apprehensions of her evil, her Tongue
would be all on a sudden retracted, or drawn back into her Throat, that she
could never proceed, so that most people that saw her thought her to be
bewitched, or under an evil Tongue, as they commonly phrase it, but (by the
mercy of Almighty God) I perfectly cured her with this Powder and Pill, in
about ten days time; she went out her time with Child, which Child and her self
have been ever since in good health. She had been almost as bad the year
before, and was cured then by a Physician of Hartford, who buys Medicines of
me. Before every Fit she could manifestly perceive her great disturber to arise
from about the Stomach and Midriff, and ascend to her Head, which is a plain
demonstration that the primary Seat of this Disease is not in the Head as is
commonly believed, the which also is not a little confirmed by thos^ Children
who are suddenly cut off by Convulsions, whose Bellies I have seen immediately
after death to turn yellow, green, or black, and cold before the extreme parts,
which plainly indicates the seat of this putrefactive deadly Ferment, to be the
Stomach, or thin Guts.

Amongst these Diseases, I shall insert a Disaster, (though out of its place)
and give my judgment thereupon, viz.

Eruptio Venarum: or, the Breaking of a Vein.
THe Breaking of Veins in any place, are not without some danger. The place
where the eruption is, ought principally to be known; for unless that be
rightly understood in vain does any one think to do any good, as to a Cure.

The Schools have left it very obscure to their Scholars, because it was never
understood. by them; for indeed it does come merely under the consideration of
an experienced Chyrurgion: to lay a plaster to the Heel for a hurt in the
Head, is like to do but little good.

Wherefore I shall give you some signs, that you may know the place, and some
directions for its Cure.

If it be below the Diaphragma, or Midriff, this Blood is evacuated mostly by
Urine. If in the Mesaraick Veins (which are annexed to the Guts) by Stool.

If from the upper Region of the Thorax, or Breast, it must come through a
Thrust of some sharp Instrument that has penetrated the Pleura, or inner skin
of the Ribs; for without that there cannot be any Blood come into the Breast;
for the Lungs or Heart, which are the two principal parts contained, cannot be
injured by any Blows, Strains, Bruises, etc. without this Pleura be pierced or
broken: and besides, there are no Veins in them, they are nourished by
Arteries; the Lungs by the Arterialis, which does bestow many small Twigs into
its Body, whereby the^ are nourished.

There has been many great mistakes about this part in this Disaster; for a
Ve^ having been broken in the Intercos^ Muscles, or Muscles of the Sides or
Breast, Blood many times is evacuated at the Mouth; and likewise in the Head or
Throat, Blood falling down upon the Epyglottis, or Lap that covers the
Windpipe, causes a tickling, which does stir up a Cough, with which this
Blood is evacuated out of the Mouth, and thereby the Throat and Tonsils, and
Glandules, or spungy places which do receive the humidity of the Brain, are
inflamed. Also the Spittle may become more crass or frothy; and being
discolored by the Blood falling there, many have presently concluded it to
have come from the Lungs.

Without it were a Vein in the Head, the party himself may very well tell where
the eruption is; for he can as perfectly perceive it to flow, as if he saw it.
But in the Head he cannot, for he only finds a distilling and tickling in his
Throat, with some pain in his Head. If this distilling be from the Dura, or Pia
Matter, it is very dangerous, if from some branch about the Throat, not so
dangerous, without it be the Jugular, which pours out so violently, without any
intermission, that in few hours life will expire.

If it be in those Panicles, Dura, or Pia Matter, which cover the Brain, the
pain of his Head.

And especially that side where the hurt was, will increase, and likewise his
Fever.

The Cure does solely consist in opening the Skull, and that place where he
feels his pain most, to stop and cleanse away the congealed Blood.

If it be in the Throat, in applying strong Defensitives round the Throat, and
next repellers to the Head and Shoulders, opening a Vein in the Foot, and
strong Ligatures or Boundages to his Thighs, a little above his Knees, with
vulnary and specifical means.

If it should be in the containing parts of the breast, as in the Muscles, etc.
letting blood, with discussive means to the place, giving him some proper thing
to stir up a gentle sweat, cures him.

But if there should be a Laceration, or renting of the Pleura, with an
Eruption of a Vein in the sides, (which is a thing hardly ever heard of)
whereby the Blood does fall into the concavity of the Breast, the Cure is thus:

Make incision upon, or as near the place as you can, where the Eruption is,
then to tie the mouth of the Vessel is the practice of some, but I would rather
restrain the Blood by some fit means, whereof my Powder for Wounds is
admirable, used as in the Directions; and so it is for Haemorrhagia, or
bleeding at the Nose, a Tent of Tow or Lint, and armed with the Powder, stays
it presently; or any where else, if it does but touch the mouth of the Vessel,
immediately stops the blood. Remove it not presently, but let it unite and heal
the Vessel first, which it will not be long in effecting.

But if there should be any Blood fallen down upon the Diaphragma, or Midriff,
which should not be presently evacuated, but there lies coagulating, (which is
perceived by some weight in the place, and likewise a Fever to assault him,
with constant increase;) In that case, if the Orifice where you cut to stop the
Vein, may be so high, whereby you cannot make it depending enough for the
evacuating this blood, there must be another Orifice made more lower for that
purpose. But this operation does belong to an experienced Chyrurgion.

Those internal Wounds are very dangerous, and a great deal of circumspection
is to be had about them; and are not to be cured but by a skilful Chyrurgion,
that is well acquainted with those operations, which are the highest practice
in the Art.

Wherefore have a care you are not deceived with any old Wifes Stories of Tom
Thumb, and Jack of Newberry, etc. to tell you of a Vein broken in the Lungs, or
Heart, or Liver, etc. ('it is just as they tell you about Diseases) it is a great
absurdity to speak it; and should an Artist speak it, he would be laughed at by
those that understood the nature of such things: for, the two Roots of Veins in
the Liver, either of them hurt, death presently ensues.

If it should be asked, what Veins should be broken in the Lungs and Heart,
whether the Vena Arteriosa, or the Arteria Venosa? There is not any Vein in the
Lungs: only some small Twigs of the A^terialis, or Artery, which are dispersed
through them, by which they are nourished: and for what use are the Ribs, but
to defend them from such injuries? and it is impossible they should be hurt by
such accidents.

And in case what they say were granted to be true, there is no other way under
Heaven to save his life, but immediately to perform that operation of a
Paracentysis, which is, to make an orifice in the same side, whereof there is
no more danger in performing, (by him that has done it, and knows what belongs
to it) then in opening a Vein in the Arm, though probably there may be some
professors of Art, that what they never saw, neither understand, they speak
against, and tell of danger in letting in Air, and letting out spirits, and a
great many more nonsensical Stories.

Pray be advised, that you take but little notice of it: for although they may
be old practitioners, yet look on them but as young Artists.

Fluxes of Blood, without sudden help will soon flux out life; and to expect a
Cure from those that know not a Remedy, nor the place where to apply it, seems
very strange to me.

And besides, without it be well cured in the beginning, it will break out
again upon certain times, which at last will kill him; whereof I have known
many such examples. Wherefore get the best advice you can from Chyrurgions.
Without it be from the Head, (as I have before told you) the party can very
well tell you himself where the hurt is; for he will not only perceive the
Blood to flow, but he will find some pain there: if it be from the Head, he
will perceive a great dullness and heaviness, and pain in his Head, with a
tickling, as it flows down into his Throat, sometimes ready to choke him, which
stirs up a Cough, whereby this Blood is cast forth from the Amygdales, or
Glandules, which are of each side the Windpipe, and those spungy places about
the Throat; and so some have thought them to be from the Lungs, when alas it is
from the Head.

I did presage this in a Gentleman of this Town. Mr. Bishop, only by his
Brothers Relation (which he can well tell) of his pain, which was in the fore
part of his Head: I advised him, by all means, immediately to be let blood, and
to be repeated, if occasion served; for I told him, Which that night happened
unto him, and he died in the morning.
if he did bleed at the mouth, before he was let blood, he would presently die,
for he would be beyond all means, in regard he was ancient, etc. the place
difficult to apply the Trepan, or Trefine, without which, I look on it as
impossible (quoad arts) for any to recover, unless the blood be discharged,
which falls between the Skull and the Panicles, which cannot be done by any
other way.

For what happens in the lower Belly, it is to be cured as wounds, by vulnary
Drinks and Clysters.

I have been a little longer on this than I intended; but those internal wounds
are of high concernment, and I fear not rightly understood by all pretenders to
Art.

Coryza, Catarrbus, Tussis, Asthma.
COughs and Catarrhs, Rheums in the Head, Eyes, Nose, etc. proceed from the
Evening cold, sharp wind beating upon the spungy Bone of the Head. Ethmoides os
cribriformae.


Asthma, or shortness of Breath, comes through a vicious matter contained in
the Windpipe, or Lungs. I have not time to enlarge upon them.

The three first are commonly cured in one night, by one of my Balsamical Pills.

The last by the Arcanum. I have strong reason from experience to believe,
there is not another such Medicine found for it in any place that ever I was
in: this is a Disease that old age is liable unto; and for old persons that
have had it long, it is folly for them to think to receive a perfect Cure from
it, or from any thing else, but I know not any thing will ease them more than
this.

There is another Disease that follows old age, which I shall likewise hint at,
and so end, viz.

Stranguria: or, the Strangury.
THe Strangury is from the defect and weakness of nature in the second
Digestion.

CVRE.
Let him forbear all sharp meats and drinks, and observe the same course I have
directed for the Stone, in which he will find great comfort.

For any Venereal Distemper, or French Disease, there is not a better Medicine
that ever was prepared for it, than this Arcanum; for it cures any, of what
nature soever (that is curable) without Salivation or Fluxing.

There are some Distempers belonging to the Female Sex, that are not here
necessary to express, for which this Arcanum is singular.

Hystericus: or, Fits of the Mother.
IN Hysterical Fits, or Fits of the Mother, there has been a great mistake, as
to the true cause, a well as of the rest. With one dose of my Arcanum
universale, and one of my Balsamical Pills: I have cured some in twenty four
hours.

The Seeds of White Nettles bruised, and drank in White Wine are a very good
remedy against these Fits. So is also the Tincture of Castor, Spirit of Sal
Armoniack, and Elixir Proprietatis, being given in Rhenish Wine. But I have a
Medicine which I call Elixir Hystericum, with Which I never yet failed to cure
those Fits.

I have also that Remedy mentioned by Mr. Couch for the speedy delivering Women
with Child.

And likewise in barrenness, in all the Authors that ever I read, I never met
but with one that ever came near the Bush; and it is very unlike that any of
those should start the Hare.

I am confident there are many that are married who are childless, that should
they be divorced, the Husband would beget Children by another Woman, and his
Wife conceive by another man.

Now if one should demand the reason why could they not procreate when they
were together. I doubt it would puzzle an old Physician to resolve it.

It may be he might tell them of Antipathies in their Natures: as the Stomach
does abhor some kind of Meats, etc. but I suppose those Meats had first injured
the Stomach. It may be if the Mother love not Cheese, she may cry pah unto it,
to her little Daughter, and thereby the Child may loath it as much as the
Mother.

But I never knew a Pica in the Mother to beget a Crapula in the Daughter,
though she may labor cum furore matricis.

But no more of this.

This Discourse deserves more to be whispered in a private Room, than to be
treated of here.

And no marvel that there are so many incurable Diseases, in regard their true
causes were never hitherto found out.

Thus you may perceive what a Lethargy and blind ignorance has benighted
Medicine, and obscured the Inquiry into the right Remedies for Diseases, by a
sad Theory, and miserable method of the Heathens, (which is still in force
amongst Christians) as if Medicine was made only for them, and the true
knowledge God should discover unto them, and Christians were to receive it from
them. And well may healing fail us, who make no further inquiry after it, than
the tradition of such Teachers.

I have some other Arcanums, or Secrets, for some Distempers of the Female Sex,
especially for Women in Travel, which commonly delivers them in a very short
time; (I have known several within half an hour) after the taking of it; and
without the tenth part of that pain which they would have without it.

There are some weak or aged persons that digest very badly, whereby they are
troubled with crudities, lack of appetite, pains in the Head, etc. my Arcanum
universale may be a little too quick for them; wherefore I make up a Pill,
which I call my Stomach Pill. There is a Dispensatory called by that name,
which most Apothecaries sell; but alas, one Pill of mine is worth twenty of
them for goodness, and whosoever shall try them shall say so. I give but one at
a time, and that is at night going to Bed, though you have supped freely
before; in the morning it gives two or three Stools, without the least griping
or pain at all, it does not only digest those Crudities, and take away the pain
of the Head, but it does likewise strengthen both the Head and the Stomach. I
am confident whosoever shall once try them will never take any other Pills.

As I have recommended two principal Medicines for the curing of your Diseases,
which proceed from within, so I shall commend another unto you, for the healing
the Wounds and Hurts from without.

I have seen Cuts, or Hurts, or Bruises, that have been very inconsiderable in
the beginning, which afterward for want of some proper Remedies became matter
of great moment and danger.

Therefore to prevent the like, I will accommodate you with such a Remedy as
the world does not yield a better. It is of far more worth than all the Balsoms
Oils, Ointments and Plasters that ever was yet made for that intent.

There has been a great talk about the weapon-Salve, and Sympathetical Powder;
they are not worthy to be her Chamber-maids.

Any wound, if it can, but reach the bot^om of it, it cures at the first
dressing, and within half an hour after you have ^ppli'd it, it takes away the
pain and ^welling, and draws out any Thorn or ^plinter got into it, let it lie
on, till it be ^eady to come off of it self.

I verily believe it will cure an ampu^tion, (that is, a Leg or Arm cut off)
(...) one dressing, you need not fear, though ^e Bone appear, there shall not
be any exfoliation nor discolouration, which I have well experienced several
times.

I want words to praise it to its merit; only this I shall tell you, that
whosoever shall use it, will bless God for it, and admire it with me.

As for an Ulcer it is not proper, because a Wound and an Ulcer are of
different Natures, and this is specifical to a wound, or Laceration, or
Rending, or tearing the flesh and skin.

But whosoever shall desire it for an Ulcer, I shall but change an Ingredient
or two and make it as effectual in any curable Ulcer, as in a Wound, but then
you must not expect to have so speedy a cure a^ in a wound.

I have recommended three or four Arcanums, or secret Medicines unto you; (...)
protest unto you, I would rather lose the knowledge of all things in the
dispensatory than the worst of those.

And as they are the best Medicines, they are the cheapest.

My Arcanum universale or Powder, t^ dose or quantity taken at a time, is from
half a grain to six, which is the highes^ I will sell it for six pence a grain.

My balsamical Pill, twelve pence: whi^ is as well worth it, as any six Pills
in the dispensatory are worth six pence.

My Aurum vitae two pence a grain.

As for my specifical Powder for Wounds, Bruises and Hurts, you shall have
enough for your money: you shall have an ounce for five shillings, which may be
enough to cure a dozen ordinary hurts or wounds; How it is to be used I shall
direct you.

I have omitted to speak of several diseases this Arcanum or Powder is a Remedy
for, I am very confident, there is not any disease that any Country does infect
men withal, but it is a singular Remedy for.

Last year I had a Patient that went to Virginia, And he took a Dose of the
Powder here, and carried a Dose of it with him; but he proved very healthy
himself, and gave it to one that was Sick of that Country Disease, and it
presently cured him.

If any Master of a Vessel, that carries not a Surgeon with him, please to
take ^ome of this Powder in case of Sickness, and some of my Balsom for Cuts or
Wounds; I engage, if once he carries it ^ith him he will not go without it at
any ^me, if he can get it. And what he does not ^ake use of, I will take again,
and return him his money as he paid me for it. Because there are many ready to
speak evil of what they know not, and some whose judgment may be defiled
through prejudice, may say, that this is more to benefit my self than you, and
that you may not be deceived. I declare, that whosoever shall use any of these
things according to direction, and if he do not find me faithful in my
relation, and himself bettered by it, the loss shall not be his, but mine, I
will return him his money again.

Accept it with such an affection as it is proffered, or the good it brings may
merit, and the God of health make it succesful, for from him comes healing.

Unto whom give all the Glory.
Courteous READER
LEt those great Intervals that I had whilst I was writing this small Tract
plead my excuse; for not digesting it into a more Methodical way of treating of
Diseases.

You have every thing as then I thought on it. I must confess it is hic and
ubique. Occasions did then follow me that I was so far from having time to new
write it and set it in order, that I hardly took a superficial view of it. If
thou think the Meat good, reject it not because it was not so neatly Cooked,
nor presented to the Table in its due and proper Season. I minded not Oration,
but Ratio, for I think it Eloquent enough, so it be understood by those I
principally intend it for: wherefore thou may excuse me, and do not carp at
words, but take thy Pen, and correct with me, which is no more than I would do
for thee upon the like occasion. Vale.

I thought to have severed the Directions how to take the Powder, from the
Book, but I am advised to annex it; which I have done.
Directions.
YOu may take the Powder in any thing, or without any thing: I commonly give it
in the pap of an Apple, or Conserve, or a little bit of Bread, to the bigness
of a Pill, it matters not what it is, being without either taste or smell, so
that the most nauseous Stomach may freely take it. It will not dissolve in any
Liquor, therefore you may leave some of it behind, if you give it in any
Liquor: I have given it in a little beer in a spoon, to Children that would not
take any thing else, then be sure to give it all. Its operations are various,
according to the nature of the matter offending, and the place where it
resides; that way which nature thinks most convenient for her, for the
discharging that matter which she is willing to be rid of.

Sometimes by Stool, by Urine, by Vomit, and sometimes by Sweat, I have known
it work effectually, and yet by neither of those ways, but by breaking wind
upward and downwards, as I have showed in the cure of the Fisherman, for it
draws wind out of any part of the body effectually. If the matter be in the
Stomach, which commonly it is in Fevers, etc. then it often works by Vomit and
Stool: If the matter be more in the Guts, it works by Stool alone. In Dropsies,
and such Diseases as water does abound, it works by Vomit and Urine. What of
such aqueous matter is contained in the parts containing, it drives forth by
Sweat plentifully.

The time; in Winter, and when the weather is cold, I give it in the morning,
with a benefit of a fire in the room, but in Summer I give it at night: but let
them not eat any solid meat that day, but if the party be very sick, never
stand upon any time, whether day or night give it him; the sooner the better:
but it is best when the Stomach is empty from meat.

It commonly works about half an hour after, take nothing before it works of it
self, and then if you please to drink a little warm posset drink, or beer, you
may. And if it should work by Vomit more then you would have it, take a little
thin Gruel or Broth, so seasoned with Salt that it tastes well of it; and that
makes it work downward, but I have given it to Children and others that never
took any thing in the working of it; for what matter it has wrought upon, it
will bring away, whether you take any thing or not.

If you are disposed to sleep, you may freely do it, without the least
prejudice unto you, for nothing can hinder the working of it, nor the bringing
it away.

I never knew it fail to work in my life (where it has been retained in the
Stomach) But in case it should not, you need not fear; it will do you no more
hurt, then if you had taken so much Nutmeg, or Cinnamon, and if you please you
may take a glass of Sack, or a dram of the Bottle, without any damage at all.

As for my specifical Powder for wounds, or hurts, of that nature, take the
white of an Egg and beat it well, then take so much of it as may well wet a
pledget, and so much lint scraped from an old rag, or so much tow as will cover
the hurt, then mix so much Powder with the white of the Egg, as you think will
make it to the consistence of honey, stir them well together, and the lint, or
fine flax, or tow in it, and lay it to the place, bind it on very gently, only
so hard as will keep it from falling off. And although it does presently cure
it, yet you had not best take it off in forty eight hours, I never knew it
fail. And in case it should not be perfectly well, you may take a little more,
but it is not one Hurt or Cut in a thousand that you will use it twice, without
it be a deep thrust, or shot in the Thigh, where it may not reach the bottom,
but for any ordinary hurt though it be never so broad, or torn, it cures it at
the first dressing, and takes away all pain and swelling in half an hour, and
immediately stops the bleeding; Remember, the sooner you apply it the better.

But if you are at Sea, where the white of an Egg is not to be had; then take
the powder and cast it upon the hurt or wound, and take a fine linen cloth or
ragg, dip it in salt water, and then wring out the water well, and lay the
cloth several times double upon the place hurt, and bind it on gently (as
before) and it will prove as effectual as the other way.

If any shall desire it for an Ulcer, I shall so make it, that it shall cure
any cureable Ulcer, in a very short time.

This is to be kept in some dry place, or carried about one; for against moist
and rainy weather, it will be a little moist, wherefore keep it near the fire,
and if it should be moist at any time, dry it at the fire, and it will be as
good as at the first.

It will not decay, you may keep all the Powder twenty years, and be as good as
at first. The Stomachical Pills you may keep seven years.

I am fully persuaded, and I have reason to think, that there is not any
Disease (either in the West or East Indies, nor any where in the World, but
this Powder will take off. I should not question to cure the Plague, with my
Arcanum Universal, and my Aurum Vitae.

If any Practitioner shall desire any of those Arcanums, I shall accommodate
him with them upon reasonable terms, I will engage, that any Chyrurgion that
has once found the worth of them, he would rather have one Dragme, than a
Chest of ten pounds worth of the laudablest Cathartical Medicines he can choose.

My Pillula Balsamica, or Balsamic Pill, is to settle the Body, and to restore
it into a good temper, (for a House that has been fired; though the fire be
out, yet there may be a great heat and smoke) which I give the next Night after
my Powder. If you take the Powder in the Morning, take the Pill at Night, if
there be occasion; that is, if he find his Body much disordered, or out of
temper, or feels any pain, then it is good to take one of those Pills,
otherwise not. If you please you may drink after it: In the Summer give after
it a Glass of White Wine, Cider, or Ale; in the Winter a draught of warm
Posset Drink, or warm Ale, or a Glass of Sack.

My Aurum Vitae, is when the Malignity of the Disease has tainted the Spirits;
and that is known by this, though the Cause be gone, and the Effect removed,
yet the Party does not become well, but continues in a lingering condition, then
give him a Dose of this in the Morning in his Bed, let him drink it in a glass
of Sack, or warm Posset Drink, and it will drive it out by sweating, and let
him continue sweating for three or four hours, never fear it, it will not
weaken, but make stronger.

My Pill. Stomachica, or Stomach Pill, is to be taken at Night, as any other
Pill, without taking any thing after it.

Thus I have directed you as plain as I could: And a good success shall be ever
prayed for unto that God that alone can give it, by

Thy Friend R. C.

POSTSCRIPT.
THe Dose of the Balsamic Pill for one of full years is twelve, fourteen, or
fifteen grains, yea sometimes twenty, in robust bodies and extreme pains; a
Child new born may take a grain of it dissolved in breast milk, or other. A
Child of my own being born with the gripes, began to take it the next day, it
was likely to die all the Month, and very weakly for the first quarter; so
that if the Pill were omitted but one Night, it were even at deaths door, so
that the use thereof was continued with happy success till it was a year and a
quarter old, for the Teeth sake: at which time it was weaned from the Breast
and Pill both together, without the least inconveniency, or alteration when it
left it, and blessed be God, of a poor weakly Child, became lusty, strong, and
forward, as any Child of its Age whatsoever, and so remains being now in its
third year of Age.

The Powder for Old Sores or Ulcers mentioned by Mr. Couch, I also prepare and
sell by the name of Species Phagadenica, at the same price with that for wounds
and blood-stopping, and is to be used thus. Take a full pint or better of fair
water, set it over the fire in an Earthen Pipkin till it be scalding hot, then
put in an ounce of this Powder by degrees, stirring it with a wooden Spatula,
then cover the pipkin and let it stand half a quarter of an hour, over the fire
without boiling, then take it off, and let it stand till the water be clear,
the which keep in a Glass or Earthen bottle; when you use it to any Old Ulcer
or Fistula, put a little into an Earthen Sawcer, warm it as hot as it may be
endured, then wash the Sore by dipping a fine rag in it, and at length double
the rag three or four times, and let it be well wet with the warm Liquor, and
apply it to the Sore; if the Ulcer be hollow or fistulous, so that you cannot
come at it to wash it, then inject the Liquor warm with a Syringe; let it be
dressed twice a day, and I dare assure you that there is no curable Ulcer
whatsoever that this will not cure; if you desire to have the water yet
stronger, in stead of fair water infuse the Powder in Limewater. This water is
not only a Cure for Old Sores, but for Ringworms, Tetters, Manginess, Itch,
Scabs, and such like Curaneous Distempers, they being washed therewith, and
linen clothes wet therein laid upon the place. The way of using the Powder or
Balsom for Wounds and Blood-stopping is sufficiently taught by Mr. Couch; that
I call by the name of Species Vidneraria.

The Dose of the Aurum Vitae for one of full years is ten or twelve grains, and
sometimes more, it may be taken in a little Sack, Ale, or Posset drink, or made
into a Rolus, with a little Conserve of Roses, or any Cordial Syrup; it may as
well be taken at Night going to Bed, as in the Morning, provided the Patient
has eat but a light Supper, and that two or three hours before.

This is a powerful Remedy in any Malignant Fever, Smallpox, or Measels,
Surfeit, Scurvy, French Pox, etc. It mightily purifies the Blood, and
refreshes the Spirits.

All those Medicines mentioned in this Book may be had at my House (except the
Water mentioned for Embrocation in the Gout, which I know not) at the same
prices that Mr. Couch sold them; but Physicians, Chyrurgions, etc. shall have
them at my Catalogue price. I have also some other Medicaments of singular use
and efficacy, viz.

The Oily Volatile Salt of Sylvius de le Boe.
Whose virtue and use is at large described in his new Idea of Physic, the
first Part, in English.

This was some time since sold in diverse places in London, I mean somewhat
having the same name stamped upon it, but nothing of this Famous Sylvian
Medicine were to be found in it. I had it from a Gentleman who was diverse years
a Student under Sylvius, and was also Brother and Executor to De Graaf, from
whom Sylvius would hide nothing, in whose Study he found it after De Graaf's
Death Price 6 s. per ounce.

Elixir Hystericum.
This is an Excellent Remedy against the Fits of the Mother, the which I never
y^ knew it fail to help, it is also very profitable in the Epilepsie,
Convulsion, Vertigo, etc. It is to be taken three times a day, the quantity of
twelve, fourteen, or fifteen drops at a time in a Glass of Sack, or Ale where
Sack is not to be had, as also in the time, or rather upon the approach of any
Fit, it may be taken to thirty or forty drops, for there is no danger of
exceeding the Dose. Price 5 s. per ounce.

Manna Mercurii.
This preparation of Mercury is so well divested of its Malignant Volatile
Salt, that it never causes Vomiting or Salivation, (as the best of the Common
Preparations, especially if they be sometimes repeated) whereby, it is made so
innocent, that it may be as safely introsumed as Man^a. It is a great Specific
in the French ^ox, Leprosy, Scurvy, and Itch, against all ^enereal Nocturnal
Pains; as also Pocky ^lcers and Pustules: it causes the Scabs ^resently to
fall off, and disposes the Ul^ers to heal. I assure you I have known a
^ontumacious Pox cured by this Medicine ^one; and which is more, a Physician
^ce told me that he had cured one with three Doses of it only, with the help of
a little Bezoardicum Minerale, which he used some time in stead of a Sudorifick
Diet drink, and which is a hundred times better. The Dose is from six Grains to
twenty made up into Pills with Rosin of Scammony or Extractum Rudii. The best
way is to begin with a small Dose at first, and increase every time as occasion
requires: If it should work two or three days together (as it may do where it
meets with a Plethora of sordid Matter) there is no danger, but on the contrary
the Cure will the sooner succeed. Price 12 s. per ounce.

Aqua Venerea.
This Water or Liquor cures the most stubborn Venereal Ulcers or Sores in a few
days time, they being washed with it twice a day, and rags three or four times
double wetted in the same, and laid upon them Price 5 s. per pint.

Moreover all Chemical Preparations i^ use may be had at my House, a Catalog^
of which with the prizes any may ha^ gratis: Or any Person that desires to ha^
any Curious Process wrought, may be served faithfully therein, by

CHR. PACK.
From my House at the Sign of the Globe and Chemical Furnaces, in the Postern
near Moorgate, 1680.
FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books Printed for Robert Harford at the Angel in Cornhill,
near the Royal Exchange.
GEll's Remains, being sundry Pious, and Learned Notes and Observations on the
New Testament, opening and explaining it, wherein Jesus Christ, as yesterday,
to day, and the same for ever, is Illustrated, by that Learned and Judicious
man, Dr. R. Gell, late Rector of St. Mary Aldermary, London, in two Vollums,
Folio price 30 s.

Christian Religion's Appeal from the Groundless Prejudice of the Scepticks to
the Bar of Common Reason; Wherein is proved, 1. That the Apostles did not
delude the World: 2. Nor were themselves deluded. 3. Scripture Matters of Faith
have the best Evidence. 4. The Divinity of Scriptures is as Demonstrable as the
Being of a Deity, by John Smith Rector of St. Mary's in Colchester, Folio price
12 s.

The Admired Piece of Physiognomy and Chyromancy, Metoposcopy, the Symmetrical
Proportions, and Signal Moles of the Body, fully explained, with their Natural
Predictive Significations, being delightful and profitable, with the Subject of
Dreams made plain; whereunto is added the Art of Memory, by Rich. Saunders,
Illustrated with Cuts and Figures, Folio price bound 12 s.

The New World of Words, or a general English Dictionary, containing^ the
Proper Significations, and Etymologies of all Words derived from other
Languages, the Fourth Edition, containing besides an Addition of several
Thousand Words, A brief View of the most Eminent Persons of the Ancients in
each Art or Science, Collected and Published by E. P. Folio.

The Longitude not found, or an Answer to a Treatise written by Henry Bond
Senior, showing a way to find the Longitude by the Magnetical inclinatous
Needle, wherein is proved that the Longitude is not, nor cannot be found by the
Magnetical inclinatous Needle, by Peter Blackborrow, Gent. Quarto, price 2 s.

A Treatise of Taxes and Contributions, very requisite for Statesmen, Quarto.

The Jesuits Catechism according to St. Ignatius Loyola, for the instructing
and strengthening of all those which are weak in that Faith, wherein the
Impiety of their Principles, Perniciousness of their Doctrines, and Iniquity of
their Practices are declared, Quarto, price 1 s.

De succo Pancreatico, or a Physical and Anatomical Treatise, of the Nature and
Office of the Pancreatick Juice, showing its Generation in the Body, what
Diseases arise by its Visitation, from whence in particular, by plain and
familiar Examples, is accuratly demonstrated the Cause and Cures of Agues, or
Intermitting Fevers, hitherto so difficult and uncertain, with sundry other
things worthy of Note, written by that Famous Physician, D. Reg. de Graaf of
Delph, and Translated by Chr. Pack Med. Land. Illustrated with diverse Copper
Plates, Octavo, price 2 s. 6 d.

Judiculus Universalis, or the Universe in Epitome; wherein the Names of almost
all the Works of Nature, of all Arts and Sciences, with their most necessary
Terms, are in English, Latin, and French, methodically and distinctly
digested, being of singular use to Persons of all Ages, who are desirous to
attain to the Knowledge of the said Tongues, Composed at first in French and
Latin, for the use of the Dolphin of France, by the Learned T. Pomey and now
enlarged with the Addition of the English Language, and some other Supplements,
by A. Love^ M. A. Octavo.

English Military Discipline, or the way and method of exercising Horse and
Foot, according to the Practice of this Present Time, with a Treatis^ of all
sorts of Arms and Engines of War, of Fire works, Ensigns, and other Military
Instrument both Ancient and Modern, Octavo.

The Count of Gabalis, or Conferences about secret Sciences; Bendered out of
French into Englis^ with an Advice to the Reader, by A. L. M. (...) Twelves,
price 1 s.

A Mathematical Compendium, or useful Practice in Arithmetic, Geometry,
Astronomy, Geograph^ and Navigation, Embattelling and Quartering (...) Armies,
Fortification and Gunnery, Gauging a^ Dialling, explaining the Logarithms with
new (...) dices, Napar^s Rods or Bones, making of Mov^ments, and application of
Pendulums, with t^ Projection of the Sphere for an Universal Dial, and
Collected out of the Notes and Papers of Sir Jo^ More, by Nicholas Stephenson,
the Second Editio^ with many Additions, Twelve.

FINIS.

