VERA EFFIGIES CEARISSMI VIRI DOMNI GUALTHERI RALEGH EQV AUR. etc

WARS WITH Forregin PRINCES Dangerous to our Commonwealth: OR, Reasons for
Foreign Wars ANSWERED.

WITH A List of all the Confederates from Henry the firsts Reign to the end of
Queen ELIZABETH.

PROVING, That the Kings of England always preferred Unjust PEACE, before the
Justest WAR.

LONDON, Printed for William Shears in Westminster Hall, 1657.

PROPOSITIONS OF WAR and PEACE Delivered to his Highness PRINCE HENRY by some
of his Military servants.
Arguments for War.
FRames of Policy, as well as works of Nature, Pausae et Hirtii consilium
Caesari.
are best preserved from the same grounds they were first founded on. By Arms
was laid the foundation of this State, whether we respect the Saxon or the
Norman. It was War that of seven Crowns in the Heptarchy made one fit for
that Monarchy, that since by many glorious exploits has made good in foreign
parts the renown of her own greatness, and crowned thereby this State with an
eternal peace. Times nor our own virtues are not changed: Necessity, Benefit,
and Facility of War being the same that they were before to our forefathers.

Reasons of foreign War drawn from 1. Necessity, for 1 Preservation of our own
peace. 2 Venting of factious spirits. 3 Instructing in arms our people:
2 Benefits. 1 Wealth, by 1 Spoil of the Enemy. 2 Addition of Revenue by
subjected territories.
2 Honor, by addition of 1 Title. 2 Dominion.
3 A more facility to effect then heretofore, by 1 Addition of new strength. 2
Substraction of diversions.



We never were so near peril by shipwreck in any tempest abroad, as at home by
the calm government of Henry the sixth. For France by the awful hand of his
father reduced, it fared with us as with the mistress of the world, Velleius
Paterculus.
Remoto Carthaginis metu, et Imperii aemula, when the fear of Carthage her
competitour for the Empire was removed, that fell not by degrees, but
Praecipiti cursu ab Armis ad voluptates, a negotio ad otiu^, rushed headlong
from arms to pleasures, from employment to idleness. And from hence as greatest
Nations, cu^ ab externis causis tutae videntur, ipsae suis viribus onerantur,
when there is no longer fear of foreign enemies, their own strength becomes a
burden to them: so after many conquests abroad, we were at home pressed down with
the unnatural weight of civil arms: For cum foris non habent hostem, domi
inveniunt, when people have no enemies abroad, they will find some at home; as all
warlike and fruitful Nations will, not otherwise delivered either of their
humors or people. To add to this necessity, the sending away of our fatious
spirits, it will remove the seat of blood from our own doors, and prove the
cheapest school to train up in arms the better dispositions, whose military
skill may after serve to defend the State; and by the late accession of another
Nation will be now more needful, Taci* An. 10.
Ne novus populus otio et nimia pecunia lasciviret, lest that other people
should grow wanton through too much wealth and idleness, and we in the end be
enforced with the Satyrist Iuvenat.
to confess Nunc patimur longae pacis mala, savior armis
Luxuria incubuit. --
We suffer now the harm of a long peace,
Whilst Riot, worse then war, does thus increase.
The benefis arise from Profit and Honor. The Spoils we have brought away in
our French and Spanish attempts exceeding ever the charge in getting; and the
Revenues of the subjected Signiories, as Normandy, Aquitain, etc. supporting
with much advantage the expense in keeping: Our Honor, as the Style of our
Kings, by confluence of so many Titles increased; and by accession of so many
territories as we held in France, our dominions and liberties so far unlarged,
The facility to effect this being now more then ever by the addition of
strength, and substraction of diversions, in this happy union of the Britain
Empire.

AN ANSWER TO THE FORMER Arguments made by the command OF HIS HIGHNESS.
AS he can give best Rules to preserve the health of a body natural, that by
observing the diverse humors, accidents and dispositions thereof, finds at
length the cause from whence it is or well or ill-affected, and so by mixture
of Art and Observation sets to his Patient rules of exercise and diet: so is it
in a Kingdom or Commonwealth. If then out of the Registers of Record and
Story, the true Remembrancers of Art and Error in passages of State, it shall
appear that those times which have been Answers to the former Arguments. 1
Affections of our wisest Princes ever to peace. 2 Foreign expeditions 1
Rebellions at home. 2 Cause of 1 Endless taxations 2 Vassalage. 3 Danger to the
State.

3 Confederacy and alliance the means of former victories, no ways to be
restored as heretofore.

glorified with the mightiest Princes and wisest Counsels, would ever
acknowledge that Sil. Ital. lib. 11.
Pax una triumphis Innumeris potior; one Peace outgoes for worth Innumerable
triumphs; That Combustions at home were like Meteors, ever kindled in another
Region, but spent themselves there; That our men instead of Laurel and Olive
garlands to adorn with victory and peace our gates and Temples, have ever
brought home fireballs to burn our Cities; That foreign spoils have been
summed up with Taxes and Penury; That this addition of Revenue has tied us to
a perpetual issue of our own Treasure; That by these titles of Honor we have
bought Slavery, and by extenture of Territories, Danger; And that difficulty
either to undertake or pursue any foreign enterprise now is much more then in
any age before; I think that no Englishman will either love his own error so
much, or his Country so little, as to advise a course so far estranged either
from judgment or security.

IT is manifest by warrant of our own examples, Examples of the affection of
our Kings successively to Peace.
that the kings of England, (except in some heat of Youth, which is not the
best directour of Counsel) preferred unjust Peace before the justest War: none
inthralling their minds with ambitious desires of extending Territories, or
imaginary humors of licentious Sovereignty; every one willing to pass his
time with content of his private fortunes. Upon this ground Henry the second
gave 20000. marks Benedictus Monachus in vita H. 2.
Expensarum nomine, under the notion of expenses, to the French king, ut
firmior Pax haberetur, that he might have a firm and settled Peace. His
succeeding son pro quieta clamatione de sorore sua ducenda, for a peaceable
claim to the marriage of his sister, which was like to make a fraction, gave to
the French King Ex Matthew: Paris page 214
december millia librarum, ten thousand pounds. Three hundred thousand marks John
gave to the French king, to match his calm entrance to secure peace. Until the
confederacy with Rog. Hoveden.
Scotland, and invading of the land by Charles de Valoys the French king
provoked Edward the first, he never disquieted France with noise of war, as
after he did by the Ex additam. Prosperi Aquitaniae Episc.
Earls of Richmond and Lancaster, although Boniface the Pope incited him
thereunto. His Son, the second Edward, anno 20. requires the Bishops and
Clergy to pray and offer alms for him, and the people of this Stae; the words
are, Rot. Claus. anno secundo E. 3 m. 11.
ut Deus nos regat et dirigat in mundi hujus turbinibus, that God would rule
and direct us in the troubles of this world; for that having sought all means
with France he could for Peace, ut Guerrarum discrimina vitaret, that he might
avoid the dangers of war, he reaped nothing but bitterness, and detention of
his Messengers, Son, and part of his Duchy of Gascoigne, his Rebels enjoying
all Protection, and his Merchants all Inhospitality, whose ships his enemy
hostiliter cepit, et Mercatores interfecit, took in a hostile sort, and slew
the Merchants. The Parliament quinto of Edward 3. Ex Rot. Par. anno 5. E. 3. n.
r.
was especially called to a consult how Pace might be procured. In his 17 year
Ex Rotul. Parl. anno 17. E. 3.
the Peers and Commons petition him to labor a peace with France, and to
solicit the Pope for mediation. The truce from hence effected he would by no
means violate, but in the 20th. year moves peace by all the offers he Ex
Rotul. Franciae an. 19. m. 10.
can, as Contracts, Intermarriage, and to take up the Cross with France, in
succursum Terrae Sanctae, for succor of the Holy Land. But all he could do
could abate no whit of the French fury, Ex Rot. Claus. in derso 20. E. 3. m.
16. part. i. a*
who invaded by themselves Aquitain, England by the Scots, surprising in breach
of Truce his Nobility of Britain, whom at Paris ignominiosae morti tradidit, he
put to shameful deaths; there and in Gascoign murdering the rest of his
Subjects, and rasing his Castles, nor would upon a second mediation admit any
way of peace. War then was left his last refuge; Live. lib. 9.
Et pia Arma quibus nulla nisi in Armis spes est, War is to that man just and
lawful, who has no hope of help but by war. And this his Clergy was enjoined
to open in sermons, that he might eschew the infamy of Christian bloodshed. In
his two and twentieth year finding war to have brought to his people Rot.
Claus. ann. 2. Ed. 3.
gravia onera et multa mala, heavy burdens and many mischiefs, as the Record
says, and that the fortune of war cum splendet frangitur, when it shines
clearest is then nearest breaking; he passed over into France to seek peace
diverse times; and to strengthen his affections with the best hopes, he
injoyneth all the Bishops of England to offer Dors. Claus. an. 22. E. 3. m. 11.
Siriliter 8. R. 2. Claus. m. 34.
devotas preces suppliciter ad Deum, humble and devout prayers to God, to
direct his actions to Gods glory and the peace of his Country, nec non ad
totius Christianitatis commodum, and the advantage of the whole Christian
world; which he believed could not follow but by a firm amity with his
neighbors. This is the dislike of war he opens himself in the five and
twentieth year Rot. Parl. anno 25. E. 3.
in Parliament, declaring the great means he had wrought by the Pope, but could
not effect it: And in the third year after Rot. Parl. anno 28. E. 3.
calls again the body of the State, to devise with him the means to obtain
it; for that he saw his Subjects by war so greatly wasted. But Rot. Paul. anno
29. E. 3.
when anno 29. to redeem himself and subjects from the hard tasks they had
undertaken, and to avoid effusionem sanguinis Christiani, quantum potuit, vel
decuit, pacem quaesivit, the shedding of Christian blood, he sought peace as
much as in him lay, and as far as was fitting, sending the Duke of Lancaster to
Avignon in intercession, but all in vain; he stood upon his own strength. By
which his confident adversary (the year following captive) that was before
obdurate, justly found, that one hour can overthrow simul parta et sperata
decora, at once both the honors we enjoy and those we hope for. And we may
truly conclude of this Kings success, as Livy Live. l. 5. Dec. 5.
of the Roman fortune, Propterea bella felicia gessisse, quia justa, that
therefore his wars were prosperous, because they were just.

To obtain his desire and Subjects quiet, he was contented to disclaim Ex
Chart. origin. de renunciat. in Thesaur.
the interest that Right and Fortune had cast upon him. And after, though often
again incited, yet never would be drawn to the hazard of war; for improbe
Neptunum accusat qui iterum naufragium facit, he blames Neptune very unjustly
who suffers shipwreck the second time: until the French King Claus. anno 45. E.
3.
contra juramentum and formam pacis, contrary to his oath and the form of
peace, had vexillis explicatis with banners displayed, invaded his dominions in
France, and with a Fleet intended to attempt England, ad ipsum Regem viribus
subvertendum, utterly to undo the King by force of Arms.

Richard the second, whom as well he left Successor to his troubles as to his
kingdom, entered in the decline of his Grandsires fortune, and after many years
of war and much loss, had in the end an expectation of peace; which opened to
his Commons and Council in Parliament, Rot. Parl. anno 7. R. 2. n. 17.
their longing affection was so much inclined thereto, that they advised the
King, though it were in doing homage for Guien, Callis and the rest, he should
not let slip that opportunity.

Until Charles of France had received Ex contract. origin. inter Owinum
Glendowr et Regem Franciae.
that dangerous Rebel Owen Glendowr, by the name of Metu^ndissimi Principis
Walliae, the most dread Prince of Wales, into a strict confederacy against his
Master (whom he vouchsafed no other title then Henricus de Lancastria) by
contract, and had harrowed the Isle of Wight by the Duke of Orleans and Earl of
Saint Paul, entered into Gascoign himself, and prepared a Fleet and an Army to
invade this land, Henry the fourth did never disquiet his peace; and after many
prorogued Truces, would not break out again, until Burgundy Rot. Earl. anno
11. Hen. 4. n. 2.
(that had wrested into his hand the Government of France) meant with all his
force to besiege Callis, and annoy this Realm.

The uncle and Chancellor to Henry the fifth declared in Rot. Parl. an. ^ Hen.
5.
Parliament the desire his Master had to procure Peace, and how the French King
had refused all reason, denying to render his prisoners, or ransom those (...)
Agin-Court battle: so that the King was driven to his last hope, which was by
dint of sword to seek his peace, concluding thus his speech; Bella faciamus ut
Pacem habeamus, quia finis Belli Pax est: Let us fight, that we may obtain
peace; for the end of war is peace.

Henry the sixth, to save the expense of his people and treasure, offered Rot.
Parl. anno 14. H. 6. ^. 2.
many large and liberal conditions, but received in exchange nothing but
scoffs: he was contented to part with the Duchy of Main, to make up a peace
with his uncle of France.

Against the Duke of Somerset it was objected Ex Artic. in Confilio contra D.
Somerset.
by the Duke of York, that he (contrary to the Oath and Council, by breaking
the Amity between the two Princes) was the only ground of the loss of Normandy.

There is extant in the Treasury Int. Record. These. Westminster.
a petition of 9. of Hen. 7. from the Captains and military men, pro pace
habenda, that they might have peace.

Neither interest of right, not jealousy of increasing power, could draw Henry
the 8. unto the quarrel of France; until the Church complained against Lewis
the 12. ( Ex Bulla Pap. H. 8.
who neither esteeming of God, good fame, nor conscience, detained the revenues
of the Clergy, supported the Cardinal William to aspire to the Papacy, aided
in the siege of Boucy Alfonso of Ferrara, and the Bentivogli, both Traitors to
the Papal Sea, where he intended to lay the foundation of his Empire to usurp
all Italy,) and besought him for the pity of our Savior, and by the virtue of
his famous Ancestors (for I use the words of the Popes Brief) Ex tractatu
origin. in. l. B. 266.
that never forsook the Church of God in distress, and by his filial
obedience, (the strongest bond) to enter into that holy League, they having
elected him against Lewis, Caput foederis Italici, Head of the Italian League.

Edward the sixth, Ex procla: E. 6. de expeditione contrae Scotos.
until urged with the touch of his honor, being by his neighbors neglected in
the marriage of their Mistress, never attempted any war against them.

The quarrels of France in the time of his succeeding sister, after the
marriage with Spain, were neither properly ours, nor begun by us, although in
the end we only went away with the loss.

Her Sister of holy memory, to effect the peace with France, forbore Ex tract.
Cambrens* 1569.
the demand of Callis for 8. years, and neglected to urge a just debt of four
millions from that Crown. Ex (...)am. anno. 3. (...).
And the labors she spent to confirm amity with Spain, by many friendly
offices of mediation, are apparent to the whole world; though in the end of her
desires she failed: whether happily in prevention of the Spanish Monarchy
eternizing her memory, or that this work of peace was by divine providence
reserved for him that could and has best effected it, I know not. Only I
conclude, that as the first Monarch in Rome, so the first in Britain might
justly write, Pace Populo Britanno terra marique parta, Ianum clausi, having
settled Britain in peace by land and sea, I have shut up the doors of Ianus
Temple.

Foreign arms the ground of trouble at home, by the Enemy, who to divert will
attempt. Subjects wearied with Toil. Taxation.
Feared with the effect of tyranny. Inured to wars can never suit after to a
quiet life.


It is evident by our own examples, that for the most part, the Civil or
Foreign Armies that have oppressed this State, have been either bred out of
our first attempting of others, or out of the grievance of the Nobility and
people, either wearied with the toil and charge, or feared with the effect of
Tyranny, which might corrupt the good fortune of their King, or else (a plague
no less of war) that the better sort inured to command abroad, have forgotten
to obey at home, and the inferior by living there upon rapine and purchase,
unwilling here to tie themselves again to order and industry.

There is in the Register of State no time that so well expresses either the
danger or damage we underwent in waking an adversary, Examples of Invasion
drawn from the attempts of others.
as that of Edward the third. Out of many examples I will select some few,
beginning with the tenth of his reign; at what time his intention was to
attempt somewhat in France, but diverted by Philip, who, mustring in partibus
Britanniae ad invadendum Regnum Angliae, in the parts of Britany to invade the
Kingdom of England, a puissant Army, Ex Rot. Scotiae anno 10. E. 3. m. 14.
enforced Edward the third to fall from his first purpose, and insist upon his
own guard: for which cause, to the infinite charge of himself and people, he
levied 80000. men out of the Shires of this Kingdom. To withdraw his forces
from France, in the thirteenth of his reign, they invaded the Realm, and
burned the Towns of Plymouth and Southampton, places that suffered from the
same motive the like calamity.

In the first of Richard the second, after the Battle of Cressy, when they
feared our too much footing, and we too much believed our own fortune, for she
cito reposcit quod dedit, quickly calls for back what she gave us; the a Duke
of Rot. Parl.
Normandy, to draw home our forces levieth an Army of forty thousand men at
arms, and forty thousand foot, sharing by idle contracts beforehand with his
confederates not the spoils only, but the Kingdom it self: the Honor and some
other portion of benefits he reserved as his own meed; the possessions of many
English Subjects in pure alms he voweth to the Church of Normandy, and to the
French King an yearly tributary Fee of twenty thousand pound. In these terms
this Realm stood almost all the time of Edward the third.

The Coast-dwellers were so frighted from their habitation, as in the
thirteenth year the king commanded the Earl of Richmond Rot Franc. in dorso.
22. E. 3. m. 6.
and other Peers to reside at their border houses; and was enforced in the two
and twentieth to enjoin by Ordinance, that none should remove that dwelt within
sex leucas a mari, six leagues of the sea.

It was no whit altered under his successor Richard the second; for in is
entrance the French burnt the Town of Rye, and in the third year after
Gravesend. And in the tenth year of his reign, to change his intended journey
for France in person, the French King prepares an Army to invade this land.
This quarrel led us almost into an eternal charge at sea, and in the Northern
limits, they and our neighbors there being tied of old in strict assurance of
mutual aid: by whose desperate and perpetual incursion (for nescit Plebs jejuna
timere, an half-starved rabble fear nothing,) the fattest parts of our borders
were left wast, the men and cattle of England (as 16. Edw. 2.) impetus Scotorum
fugientes, being fled for safety to the Forests and desert places. The like I
find in the first of Edward the third: they ever thus interrupting us in our
expeditions into France; as in 20. Ed. 3. in the first and second of Richard
the second, in the fifth of Henry the fifth, and in the fourth of Henry the
eighth, when he undertook his holy voyage against Lewis the twelfth.

And either being no less ready to nourish the least spark of rebellion in
this State, as that of the French King to counterpoize King John; or work out
Henry the third from his Duchy of Normandy, as France did; or moving underhand
by the Duke of Britain, the Earl of Hartford to reach the Crown of Richard the
second, and when he had got the garland, suborning Owen Glendowr (with whom he
contracted as Prince of Wales) to busy the same King at home, that he might
divert his intended purpose from France or Scotland.

WHen Henry the third had devoured in his mind the kingdom of Sicily,
Nobility in dislike of foreign expeditions have rebelled.
the Nobility finding the expense of Treasure, and fearing the exposing of
their own persons, grew so unwilling, that by the bent and course of the record
it apappeareth Ex Rot. pat. and claus. de annis 40, 41, 42. Hen. 3.
appears not the least ground of that rebellion which after drew the King and
his Son to so foul conditions.

A judgment there must be between powers and undertakings, that though
affections may carry a man to great things, they make him not attempt
impossible: for where great minds are not accompanied with great judgments,
they overthrow themselves. As in this Prince, who by the Popes incitement
simplicitatem Regis circumveniens, circumventing the King in his honest
meaning, (they are the words of the Author Cominei censura de com. char. cap.
8.
) intending to rifle the fortunes of others, was in the end enforced to play at
dice for his own stake.

The Earls of Hartford, Bohun and Bigot, made the grounds of their commotions
the distaste they took at Edward the first for exacting their Service in the
quarrel of Gascoign, Burden of personal service grievous.
a foreign Country. And they might seem to have some color to refuse, but in a
more mannerly fashion, either attendance or charge in recovery or defense of
Provinces in France, since so many consents in Parliament, as Ex Rot. Parl. de
anni* 20. R. 2. 6. et 9. He. 4. 1. et 7. H. 5.
20. of Rich. 2. 6. and 9. of Henry the fourth, the first and seventh of Henry
the fifth affirm the Commons not to be bound pour supporter ses Guerres en la
terre de France ou Normandy, to support his wars either in France or Normandy;
declaring no less by public protestation, then they did by undutifull denial.

For the burden of Charge, Burden of charge grievous, ground of much trouble
and oppression.
it was no less distasteful then the former of Service, this kingdom being
(as it is said Cicero Epist. ad. At. lib. 5.
of the Roman Provinces occasioned by war) made desert, and the people
desperate by Exactions. In the Conquerours time the Bishop of Durham was killed
by the tumultuous people, opposing an imposition levied by him. There was Ex
Radulpho Cogeshal. de anno 8. 10. annis.
murmuratio et imprecatio Praelatorum in Regem Ioannem, mutterings and curses
from the Prelates against King John, for demanding in the eighth of his reign
a relief of them and the Layety for his wars. In the 16th. year Cives
Londinenses Ioannem odio habuerunt pro injustis Exactionibus quibus Regnum
fatigaverat, the Londoners detested King John for his timing out the Kingdom
with unjust taxations. Ex Matthew. Weston.
The sink of his expense in war was so bottomless, that (as the story says)
he was constrained desaevire quotidie cum incremento, to grow every day more
unreasonable in his carriage toward the Church and Commonwealth, eas bonis
suis variis modis spoliando, by despoiling them several ways of their goods.
Ex Matthew. Paris hist. minori.
Hinc secutum est Bellum inter Regem et Barons quod cum morte Ioannis solum
finem habuit: This was it which kindled that war betwixt the King and his
Barons, which nothing could quench but the death of John himself.

In the 26th. of Henry the third, ob exactionum frequentiam est Regi cum
Baronibus contentio, by reason of the continual exactions there arose a
contention betwixt the King and his Barons Ex Matthew. Paris hist. ma. page 780.
At the Parlee of peace with them being demanded a reason of that their action,
they answer that since he came to the Crown, being not twelve years, multoties
ei auxilium dederunt, they had many times supplied him; and expressing the
particulars besides in the same place, he had received tot Escaetas, so many
Escheats, by the vacancy of rich Bishoprics, death of so many Barons and
others that held of him, that those alone would have made him rich if they had
been well employed. That the Itinerant Justices had by amercing the defaults
gleaned them so near, that per illa Amerciamenta et alia Auxilia prius
dataomnes de Regno ita gravarentur and depauperarentur, ut parum aut nihil
habeant in Bonis, by those Amercements and the Subsidies they had formerly
given him, all the Kingdom was so crushed and impoverished, that they had
little or nothing left them. And that was the ground of their resistance. Ex
Joanne Eversden.
Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis et alii Praelati resistunt Regi, the Archbishop
of Canterbury and other Prelates resist the King, when in his fifteenth year
he demanded Scutage. And although he laid open to the Parliament his great debt
causa bellicae expeditionis in partibus transmarinis, occasioned by his foreign
expeditions, was answered by Ranulph Earl of Chester, the mouth of the Layety,
That in the former Aides Pecuniam suam effuderunt, quod inde paupers omnes
recesserunt, unde Regi de jure auxilium non debebant, they had powered out their
money so liberally, as that being all impoverished by it, they were not obliged
to assist him any farther. And thus Ex hist. Matthew. Paris page 32.
dissolved the Parliament.

The Clergy of the Realm in the 24. of Edward the first denied the demand of
Contribution Ex Matthew. Westminster. Walt. Gisborn.
in expeditionem Regis contra Gallos et ad reprimendos Scotos, toward the
Kings expedition against the French, and the repressing of the Scots. And ob
has crebras exactiones magnus fit tumultus inter Regem et Barons, by reason of
these frequent extorsions, there arose a great difference betwixt the King and
the Barons.

One of the Articles of treason objected against Mortimer Rot. Claus. anno 5.
E. 3.
in Parliament 4. of Edward 3. was the offense he bred in the Commonwealth, by
causing a Subsidy to be exacted. This humor of the people did somewhat suit
with that of the Inhabitants of Trevers, Cassiodori Var.
who stoned to death Proclerus for persuading Theodoret the Goth to crave a
Subsidy.

The Clergy in the 12. of Edw. 3. Rot. Alm. m. 22.
deny such a grant of their Wools as the Laiety had yielded to, for supplying
the King in his affairs of France. The like answer they make 44. of the same
King, when he Tho. Walsingham. Rot. Parl. anno 44. E. 3.
demanded in Parliament a Subsidy of them and the Commons of 100000l. And the
same King grown doubtful of his people pressed down with Impositions, requires
the Archbishop, Rot. Alm. 12. E. 3. m. 22
Quod cum Populus Regni sui variis Oneribus, Tallagiis and Imposittionibus
praegravetur, ut idem Archiepisc. Indulgentiarum muneribus, piis
Exhortationibus, and aliis modis, eundem Populum placare studeat, and ipsum
Regem excuset, that since the Subjects of his Kingdom were overcharged with
many Burdens, Tallages, and other Impositions, the said Archbishop would by
grant of Indulgences, seasonable Exhortations, and otherways endeavor to
pacify the people, and excuse the King.

By reason of the Census per Capita, Polmony imposed by Parliament 3. of
Richard the second to defray the wars in France, there were Ex Rot. Par. de
an. 2. 3. 5. 7. 8. and 9. R. 2. and Claus. anno 8. E. 2.
dirae imprecationes in Regem, and magnae post perturbationes in Regno ex
Plebis insurrectione, heavy and bitter imprecations against the King, which
were followed with great troubles in the nation by the insurrection of the
Commons. And as well in the reign of this King, as some other of his
Predecessors and Successors, the Parliament was so tender in grant of Subsidy
and other Taxes, that they added into their Act, Ex chron. S. Albani.
quod non trahatur in consequentia^, that it should be no example for the
future, appointing peculiar Treasurers of their own to give account upon Oath
the next Parliament: and such Grants, which they professed to proceed Rot.
Parl. anno I. H. 4.
ex libera and spontanea voluntate Dominorum and Comitatuum, from the free and
voluntary grant of the Lords and respective Counties, to be void if Conditions
on the Kings part were not performed. And this unfortunate King had cast upon
him as an argument of his unworthiness to govern, the exacting of so great
Subsidies, and extorting so much money from the Shires that submitted their
Fortunes unto his mercy.

And when Henry the 6. in anno 20. would have had a Relief from his Subjects In
Bundel Inquisitionum, anno 20. and anno 24. Hen. 6.
de aliqua summa notabili, of some considerable sum; he had in answer,
Propter inopiam, etc. populi illud non posse obtineri, that in regard of the
poverty, etc. of the people it could not be granted. The like 24. of the same
King. Great men have been disposed sometimes to humor the waste of Treasure in
their Princes, either to subject Power by Need to their devotion and awe, (for
Princes dare most offend them whom they have least cause to use;) or to force
Necessity to extend Praerogative so far, until by putting all into Combustion,
some may attain unto the end of their Ambition, others the redress of supposed
Injuries. Ex lib. Abbat. de Ramsey.
Thus did the Faction of Hen. the fourth in the one, and the Nobility under
Hen. the third in the other; who hereby quitted the State oppressed (as they
thought) with the Kings Half-brothers, the Poictovins and other Strangers.

Subjects fear to have the enemies of their Soveragins too much weakened, least
themselves become Tyrants. And it is in the farthest respect in the Mat. Paris
Hist. min.
Baronage under John, Henry his son, and Ex Adam Merimouth in vita Ed. 2.
Edward the second, to fear as much the absolute Greatness of their Sovereign,
as they did the Diminution of their own estates. And therefore when they found
their King to grow too fast upon any neighbor Adversary, then would they lend
their best aid to diminish his power or fortune; least by enlarging himself
upon the other that poized his greatness, he might forget and become a Tyrant;
as one says of Henry the first, Mat. Paris Hist. min.
Assumpserat cornua audacia tam contra Ecclesiam quam Regni universalitatem,
Roberto fratre and aliis inimicis edomitis, having once overcome his brother
Robert and other enemies, with audacious and presumptuous horns he goared as
well the Church, as the rest of the Kingdom, breaking his Seal, his Charter,
and his Oath.

The memory of this caused the Nobility Mat. Paris Hist. majori.
to call in the French Kings Son, when John their Sovereign began to know his
own authority (as they thought) too much. And the French Subjects aided on the
other side Henry the third against their Mr. when he was almost cooped up in
his Britain journey. This (as the Stories report) being a practice usual in
those days.

THe last mischief is the disposition that Military education leaves in the
minds of many; Military Education cause of trouble in the state.
For it is not born with them that they so much distaste peace, but proceeds
from that custom that has made in them another nature.

It is rarely found that ever Civil troubles of this State were dangerously
undertaken, Heads of dangerous Rebellions hae been only such as by Command in
War have forgot to obey in Peace.
but where the plot and pursuit was made by a spirit so infused.

King John had been after Mat. Paris anno 5. Joan.
sine Regno without a Kingdom, as he was at first sans terre without land, if
his rebenediction had not wrought more upon the disloyal designs of Fitzwalter
and Marshall, (whom his own elective love had made great in opinion by the
Norman Services) then either his rebated Sword or blasted Scepter could.

Willielm. de Rishanger in Historia
If Simon Montfort had not been too much improved in Experience and his own
Opinion by the many services he underwent in the government of Gasco^gn, he had
never so much dared against Duty, as to come over at the first call to make
head against his Master, and pursue him with that fury of Ambition, untilt he
had forced him to redeem the liberty of his person by the blasting of so many
flowers of his Imperial Crown: and to set himself so far below the seat of
Majesty, as to capitulate with them upon even conditions, which not performed
(I use his own words) Ex Charta concess. Baronibus anno 49. Hen. 3.
Liceat omnibus de Regno nostro contra nos insurgere, it shall be lawful for
all persons in our Kingdom to rise up against us, and to do omnia quae
gravamen nostrum respiciant, ac si Nobis in nullo tenerentur, so to act all
things in reference to the grievances from us upon them, as if they were by no
ty obliged to us.

If Richard Duke of York had never learned to be so great a Soldier at the
cost of his Master Henry the sixth in another State, he had never disquieted
the calm of his Times, or given just occasion to his Opposite Somerset to say,
Verba Ducis Somerset. contra Ducem Eborac. coram Rege.
That if he had never learned to play the King by his Regencie in France, he
had never forgot to obey as a Subject when he returned into England.

Our own times can afford some, whose spirit improved by Military employment,
and made wanton with popular applause, might have given instance of these
dangers, if good success had been a relative to bad intentions. And every age
breeds some exorbitant spirits, who turn the edge of their own sufficiency upon
whatsoever they can devour in their ambitious apprehensions, seeking rather a
great then a good Fame; and holding it the chiefest Honor to be thought the
Wonder of their times: which if they attain to, it is but the condition of
Monsters, that are generally much admired, but more abhorred.

But war some may say mouldeth not all men thus: for virtuous men will use
their weapons for ornament amongst their Friends, against Enemies for defense.
And to those men their own goodness is not safe, nam Regibus boni quam mali
suspectiores sunt, for Kings suspect good men sooner then bad. Kings must have
their Ministers pares negotiis fit for their business, and not supra above it,
or too able for it. For another man's too-much sufficiency (as they take it) is
a diminution of their respectiveness, Many disorders in the State by return of
the common Soldier.
and therefore dangerous.

THe meaner sort having forgot the toil of their first life by inuring
themselves to the liberty of War, which leaves for the most part the lives
of men to their own looseness, and the means of getting to their own justice,
can never again endure either order or labor; and so return but to corrupt the
Commonwealth with their lawless manners. For living more riotously then the
rapine of foreign victory could warrant, (as for the most they do) in contempt
of their own private Want and Fortune, they desire a change of the public
Quiet. In Tumults and Uproars they take least care for their livings, howere
the world goes they can be no loosers: for like Silla's Army, making no
difference between sacred and profane Robberies, (for the vitors Sword seldom
teaches either mean or modesty) they will be ready upon every advantage to
pillage their Countrymen at home. For who can expect men dissolutely
disciplined can ever use their arms with moderation?

Against the fury of such seditious Outrages many Parliaments, as Parl. ann.
22. Hen. 6.
in the 22. of Hen. the 6. have been solicited for redress. And that example
in Froisard.
Champaign after the Peace at Callis 1360, where this licentious Rout at the
close of those wars slew the Duke of Bourbon, and besieged the Pope at
Avignon, may suffice to express this mischief.

It has no less weakened the bond of mutual Trade; since our Merchants, whom
the necessity of late times left to recover by force the losses they pretended,
do now teach, as a Maxim of their Mystery and our State, That the directest
way either to wealth or security is by Rapine and Spoil: and to cloak their
own ends pretend the common good; as if the State stood by their affections,
when in truth they themselves cannot fish but in aqua turbida in troubled
waters; and therefore would have Incendium Patriae a bonefire of their Country,
if it be but to keep warm and a wake their own humors.

THe last motive from Necessity is, Exhausting of the people no Necessity but
Danger.
the ease War brings to a surcharged State. Intending it seems War but
as the Sinck, and Soldiers but as the Corruptions of Commonweals; whereas
besides the inevitable use of the one, and the noble condition of the other,
(an Error in the argument) Nature does never oppress further by increase,
them she again discharges. The breast of the Mother she enableth to nourish up
as many as the Womb shall uno partu at one birth ever bring forth;
proportioning to the number of the children the condition of their Strength and
Appetites. It is then accession of our own that may surcharge; for Parents by
such indulgent admission may soon famish whom in Motherly affection they intend
to cherish.

But admitting the former ground, whether by this way of waste we be ever able
and at pleasure to gage the Issue (when such elective power is left to him
only qui suis stat viribus, non alieno pendet arbitrio, who stands by his own
strength, and not at the pleasure of another) is considerable; since to begin
cuivis licet, deponere cum victores volunt, is easy for any man, but the laying
down will be at the conquerous pleasure. For the wasting of our people in
ambitious Enterprises (as that for an Empire by Constsantine in France) left
this land as a prey to the barbarous Frontiers, Bed 2 Hist. Eccl. lib. 1.
omni milite and floridae Iuventuts alacritatespoliata, being left naked of
Soldiery, and robbed of the choicest flower of youth. And when we were tied to
make good our undertaking in France, the waste of our people was so great, that
to supply extremity we took purgamenta urbium, the dreggs of towns, (as
Curtius says of Alexander;) Ex Rot. Franciae an. 22. E. I.
Need hiring the Bankrupts by protection, as in 22. of Edward the first; and
enforcing, against the rule of justice, the Judges to put Placita eorum in
respectu qui in obsequium Regis profecturi sunt, Pleas in the behalf of such as
were to go in the Kings service. And as Tacitus of a declined Majesty says,
emunt militem, non legunt, they buy their Soldiers rather then make choice of
them; we made purchase of general Pardons of all that were Utlegati, Banniti,
aut de Feloniis indictati, si cum Rege transitare voluerint, outlawed,
excommunicated, or indicted of Felony, in case they would go over with the
King. As in the same year of the former King and in the year after were
discharged out of all Prisons in the Realm to the number of 97 notorious
Malefactors. Ex Rot. Original. in Arch. Thesaur.
And in the 18. of Edward the second, and 8. of Edw. the third, and 12. of Edw.
fourth we did the like. An army better apted by Necessity then Election to live
upon the Enemy, Quibus ob Egestatem and Flagitia maxima peccandi necessitudo
est, whose indigency and former ill way of life must needs make them ready for
any mischief. In the end of this King last remembered, and entrance of his Heir
Richard the second, the State began to be sensible of consuming Issue; which
not lying in the Kings power (now as the strength of France, set on Revenge,
stood) to stay at pleasure, (for -- arma tenenti Omnia dat qui justa negat --
Deny the Soldiers due, You give him all you have) it was urged to him in
Parliament Ex Rot. Par. anno 7. R. 2.
7. of his reign, as an error in his Government: whereto he answered, that
they ought not to lay the cause upon him, for that together with the Crown the
Wars descended unto him. And the Chauncellor 4. of Henry the 4. declared
publicly in the Higher House, that by the mischance of War and want of
reasonable Peace, (for I use the words of the Roll) occasioned by dissension
and private desire, the flower of Chivalry and Rock of Nobless within the Realm
was in a manner consumed. Nobilitas cum Plebe perit, Lucan.
lateque vagatur
Ensis, and a multo revocatu^ est pectore ferrum.
The Peer and Peasant falls, and hating rest
Bloody the Sword returns from many a breast.
And the whole State by war had been thus subverted, had not God as a mean
raised that King.

But since the end of man's creation is not for the Slaughter, Better to
disburden the state by Colony then War.
nor education of Arms to make men Castawayes; the course most answerable
either to Charity, or Example, (for Rome did by Colonies enlarge and confirm
her Empire) is to transplant that we may best spare. In Ireland we may increase
the King many Subjects, and in the Indies God many servants: a world from our
Forefathers looked up by divine Providence, as only best to glorify and purify
these Times. And as in war conquirendus potius miles quam dimittendus,
Soldiers are rather to be listed then disbanded; so post bellum vires
refovendae magis quam spargendae, after war forces are rather to be cherished
then wasted. And thus much in answer of Necessity.

Answer to the Arguments of Profit.
THe profits gained by Foreign Expeditions cannot be any ways so truly
esteemed, Profit of war. Expense of money, Munition and men.
as by setting down the expense of Money, Men, and Munition, by which we have
made purchase of them. I will therefore deliver as they fall in sequence all
the Impositions, Taxes and Lones, whether by general Grant, or Praerogative
power levied of the People; summing after up, as I go along the times of our
Princes, the number of Men, Ships, and vast provisions of Victuals raised to
supply the necessity and expense of War.

William the Conqueror in the entrance of his government took of every
Hideland 12d, A summary of all the exactions upon this State from the Conquest
to the end of the late Queen.
a due of the Subjects to the Sovereign both before and since the Conquest. to
defray such charge as either the defense of the Land from spoil, or the Sea
from Piracy, should expose the Prince to. It is called Dane-geld, Gelda Regis,
or Hidage, and was sessed by the Hide or Plough-land, like to that Jugatio per
jugera taxation by the acre in Rome, yet by no rate definite with this as with
another Exaction, taken, as the Monk of S. Albans Ex Matthew. Paris page 8. and
15.
says, sive per fas sive per nefas, by fair means or by foul. He passed over
into France, into the list of charge he ranked the Bishops and Abbots, sessing
upon them and at their charge a proportion of Soldiers for his service,
exiling many worthy men that opposed this thraldom.

William Rufus anno 7. William Rufus.
set upon the heads of so many as he mustered up for the French wars 10. shil.
a man, and so discharged them. In an. 9. he to the same end spoiled the
Churches of their Ornaments and Holy vessels, and levied 4 Hidages of every
Plough-land, Ex antiq. legibus Anglioe.
Tributis Angliam non modo abradens, sed excorians, not only shaving, but even
flaying England with his impositions; so that wearied with war and expense,
ne respirare potuit Anglia sub ipso suffoc^ta, England was quite stifled by
him, and could not so much as breath. -- Silius Italicus.
Quid jam non Regibus ausum? Aut quid jam Regno restat Scelus? -- What durst
not Kings then do? What mischief could the Nation suffer more? in this Kings
time.

Ex Hist. Gualt. Gisborn.
Henry the first anno 5. magnam a Regno exegit Pecuniam, exacted a great sum
of his Kingdom, with which the passed into France: and by this means Ex Hist.
Mat. Paris.
gravabatur terra Angliae oppressionibus multis, England was born down with
many oppressions. Ex Hist. Mat. Westminster.
He took in the 10. year 6. shillings Danegeld. Ex Hist. Hen. Hunting.
And in the 17. Quod inter eum and Regem Francoru^ magnu^ fuit dissidium,
Anglia fuit variis depressa Exactionibus, and Bonis sine peccato spoliata, by
means of the great difference betwixt him and the King of France, England was
oppressed with diverse exactions, and men spoild of their goods for no offense
at all.

Of King Stephen there need no more then the words of the Monk of Gisborn,
Stephen.
Ex Hist. mon. Gisborn.
Post annum sextum Pax nulla, omnes parts terrebat violenta Praedatio, after
the 6. year of his reign there was no quiet, but all parts of the land became a
prey and spoil to violent men.

Henry the second, Henry 2.
alluding not unlike to the Feoda given the Eremitae in the decline of the
Empire, as Salaries by which they stood bound to defend the Frontiers against
the Incursions of the Barbarous Nations, continued the Policy of his
Progenitors, who allotted the land into such and so many equal protions, as
might seem competent for supportation of a Knight or man at Arms; from whom
(as occasion required) they received either service or contribution. This
Tenure, now esteemed a Thraldom, began upon a voluntary and desired
submission; for who from his gift would not of the Prince accept land upon the
like conditions, so it touches not the Sovereign as a wrong to the Subject,
but as in right his own? And therefore respecting their first immediate
dependency upon the Crown, which is a great part of the Kings Honor, their
duties and Escheats a great benefit, and their attendance by Tenure in war at
their own charge to the number of 60216 at the least, (for the Knights Fees in
England are no less) a great ease, strength, and security to his State; for
they are totidem Hostagia, so many Hostages, as Bracton says; it were a thing
perilous now to alter, after such a current of time and custom. This King to
understand the better his own strength, publico praecepti edicto quod quilibet
Praelatus and Baro, quot Milites de eo tenerent in Capite publicis suis
instrumentis significarent, he caused it to be proclaimed that every Prelate
and Baron should notify by public deed how many Knightships they held of him
in capite. By this rule of Scutage, constant in the number, he levied always
his Subsidies and relief, though diverse in the rate. Of the first, which was
near the beginning of his Reign, there is no record. The second Scutage, Ex
Gervas. Dorobernen. anno 1159.
which was anno 5. amounted to 124 millia librarum argenti, thousand pounds of
silver; which reduced to the standard of our money 5 shil. the ounce, whereas
that was not five groats, will amount to near 400000l. An. 7. Ex lib. Rub. in
Sccrio.
Scutagiu^ fuit assessum ad duas Marcas pro Exercitu Tholosae, a Scutage was
assessed 2 Marks for the army at Toulouse; which if summed up by the received
number of Knights Fees, being 60216 in the hands of the Layety only, of our
moneys cannot be less then 250000l. The like in the next year. In an. 11 Ex
Gervas. Dorobernens.
there was an Aid pro servientibus inveniendis in exerciu, to find men to serve
in the wars, of 2d. de unaquaque libra in every pound. And 4. sequentibus annis
de singulis libris singulis denariis, in the four following years a penny in
the pound was taken of all men, the estates of men's Fortunes being delivered
upon their Oaths. In the 14. year a Scutage was assessed Rub. lib. in Sccrio.
ad Marcam unam de singulis Feodis, one Mark on every Fee. And anno 18. Ex
hist. Rossens.
Scutagium pro quo libet Feodo, a Scutage for every Fee. A Tenth of all
movables was granted in the 35. of his Reign. In which year dying, 900 Ex
hist. Mat Paris.
millia librarum in auro and argento, praeter utensilia and jocalia reliquit,
he left in money 900000 pounds, besides Plate and Jewels.

Rub. liber in Sccrio.
Richard the first in the beginning besides Scutagium Wallae assessum, Richard
1.
a Scutage assessed upon Wales at 10. shil. levied as in the succor of the
Holy Land a Subsidy out of all the Movables in the Realm to his own use; Ex
hist. min. Math. Paris. Rub. libr.
Et eleemosynae titulo vitium Rapacitatis inclusit, cloaking his ravenous
extortion under the fair name of a pious alms. A contribution there was in the
6. year of 150 Ex hist. Walt. Coventr.
millia marcarum argenti ad pondus Columniensium, 150000 marks of silver to pay
his ransom: as also a Scutage assessed at 20 shil. In the Ex. Rog. Hoved. and
Walt. Covent.
7. he imposed for his wars a contribution called Tenementale. Extremity (for
by his waste and imprisonment he had almost exhausted the wealth of the State)
invented nova and varia praedandi vocabula, new and sundry words to express
his exactions, as Tacitus Tacit. annal. 4.
says, of Centesima and Quinguage fima, an hundredth part and a fiftieth part,
(names that since have found reception and use with us.) This was 2. shillings
of every Plough-land from the Husbandman, and from the Gentry and Nobility the
third part of their Military service. He enforced the Cistertian Monks Ex Joan.
Eversden.
to redeem the same year their woolls fine Pecuniaria, at a Fine. For his Army
into Normandy Rub. lib. in Sccrio.
he took a Scutage assessed at 20 shillings. Ex Walt. Coventr.
And 4. years after of every Plough-land 5. shillings, and of every Borough and
Ex Math. Paris.
City duos palfridos and totidem summarios, 2. horses and as many summaryes;
and of every Abbot half as much. Then loosing of purpose his great Seal,
proclaimed that Ex charta origin.
Omnes Chartae and Confirmationes novi Sigilli impressione roborarentur, all
Charters and Assurances should be confirmed by the new Seal. Whereby anew he
drew from all men a composition for their Liberties. This fashion was
afterward taken up by some of his Successors; as Ex hist. Mat. Paris pa. 209.
of Henry the 3. when all again were enjoined qui suis volebant libertatibus
gaudere, as many as would enjoy their Liberties, ut innovarent Chartas suas de
novo Regis Sigiilo, to renew their Charters from the Kings new Seal. Some
reason Exhist. Rog. Hoveden.
Richard had in the end to becoma a gatherer, that had not long before by
account of Chancellor Hubert then Archbishop, spent infra blennium undecies
centena millia Marcarum argenti de Regno Angliae, King John.
within less then 2 years eleven hundred thousand Marks of silver current
English money.

His brother John succeeding Rad. Cogshall and Rub. lib. in Sccrio.
took in the first of his Reign a Scutage assessed at two Marks. Ex Rog.
Hoveden.
For the two next years 3 shil. of every Plough: Ex Math. Paris.
and the year following, besides a Scutage as before, the 40. part of the
Revenues of the Clergy and Layety. Lib. Rub. in Sccrio.
In the 4. year he took the like Scutage, and the Ex Math. Paris.
seventh part of the moveable goods of the Baronage and Clergy. A Scutage
assessed at 2 Marks Ex Lib. Rub. Sccrii.
in an. 5. Ex Rad. Cogshall.
The like in the 6. and 7. years 20 shil. Scutage; and the 13 part of Movables
as well of the Church as Layety in the year following. In Ex Math. Paris.
an. 9. he exacted by redemption of the Concubines of the Clergy a great
sum: In the 11. Walt. Coventr. and Rad. Cogshall.
extor sit tributum grave, scil. 140 millia librarum a viris Ecclesiasticis, he
extorted a great tribute, viz. 140000 pounds of the Churchmen. And to furnish
his Army, Ex Math. Paris.
Clericorum Horrea invadit, he came upon the Barns of the Clergy. In Ex Rad.
Cogshall.
the 12. a Scutage assessed at two marks, besides an exaction Rub. lib. in
Sccrio.
of 22000l. from the Cistertians. He took Ex Rad. Cogshall and Rub. lib. in
Sccrio.
in the 13. year a Scutage assessed at 20 sh. pro excrcitu Walliae, for his
Welsh Army; exacting Math. Paris hist. min.
from the Ministers of the Church in the year following 40000 marks. Rub. lib.
in Sccrio.
And in the 16. year Scutagium assessum fuit pro exercitu Pictaviae ad 3
Marcas, a Scutage was assessed at 3 Marks so the Army in Poictou. Thus in the
space of 17 years the State was delivered but thrice from Impositions.

In the time of Henry the third, Henry 3.
Ex Rub. lib. in Sccrio and Joan. Eversden.
upon the Clergy, Nobility and Gentry there was assessed 15 Scutages; one at
10 shillings, two at 20, eight at two Marks, and 4. at 40 shillings the Knights
Fee. Mat. Paris, and ex Rot. Claus. and finium an. 12, 13, 15, and 19. Hen. 3.
and ex lib. Chart. Cantuar. Episc.
The land of the inferior sort twice taxed; first at 2 shillings, after at
half a Mark the Plough. Rot. Pat. anno 8. H. 3.
And two Tallages upon the land of the Crown. Ex Tho. Walsingham, and Mat.
Paris. Claus. anno 19. H. 3.
From out of the Lay Subjects moveable goods has been taken 5 times: as the
40. the 30. 20. and 15. parts, Ex Mat. Westmonast.
and once the 16. of the Clergy for this King. Ex statuto anno 4. c. l7. Dors.
claus. anno 16. H. 3 and Eversden.
A Tenth he 9. times imposed upon the Church: six times for a year only, and
by it self; once accompanied with the First Fruits; once for 3. years; and
once for 5. Ex lib. Cantuar. Episc.
Besides 2. Aides, the one moderate, the other called Ex Eversden and Paris.
gravis exactio, a heavy exaction, and worthily, if to the 800. Marks imposed
upon Ex Mat. Paris and Eversden and Dors. claus. anno 16. H. 3.
S. Edmunds Bury all the other Abberes were rated accordingly. Ex Walt. Gisborn.
And by the account of Willihelmus de Midleton Rad. Cistrensis, ex Eversden,
Paris and lib. Chart. Cant. Archiep. anno 8. H. 6.
he received in the time of his government de exitu Iudaismi 4020000l. And as
in all the 56. years of his reign (excepting five) either the Church or
Commonwealth were charged with contribution-money to relieve the expense of
war; so were they grieved with other Exactures, either for Cariages, or
Victuals, or personal attendance. In the 16. year the inhabitants of
Winchelsey were enjoined Ex Joan. Eversden Pat. an. 3. E. 1. m. 26.
ut providerent december bonus naves and magnas ad transfertandum in Pictaviam in
servitium Regis, to provide ten good and stout ships for the Kings service in
Poictou. Rot. claus. an. 26. Henr. 3.
And at another time 20. Dunwich and Ipswich 5. a piece, and the Ports
proportionable, all at their own charge. In the same year Ex H. Mat. Par. p.
517.
and for the same service there was transported 10000 quart. of wheat, 5000 of
oats, and many Bacons. The Church not forborne in those charges: For from
Winchester Ex Rot. lib. anno 26. H. 3.
2000 quarters of Wheat and Oats, and 1000 of Bacons was taken. Ex Hist. Mat.
Paris.
The other Bishops and Clergy bearing their parts of victuals in the like
Exactions, coming -- ut unda supervenit undae: ac si esset Anglia puteus
inexhaustus, as wave follows wave, as if England were a pit never to be drawn
dry. Dors. claus. anno 14. H. 3. n. 8. and claus. 12. He. 3. m. 2.
In the 12. and 14. the King levieth Soldiers for his wars beyond Sea,
collecting pro Exercitu suo de singulis duabus Hidis cur. upon every two Hides
so much for his Army, and to bring secum victualia victuals with them: and
those for whose service the King dispensed, et quos Rex vult remanere in
partibus suis, and such as he pleased should continue at home, to contribute
victuals to those that went for 40. days: commanding the Sheriffs Claus. an.
14 H. 3. n. 7.
to swear all ad Arma qui post eum remanebant in Anglia, in forma qua jurati
fuerant tempore Ioannis Patris sui, to Arms, who stayed behind him in England,
after the manner they were sworn in the time of King John his father; by which
Ordinance of King John all able Subjects from Youth to decrepite Age were bound
to arm themselves, and be in continual readiness Claus. an. 16 H. 3. m. 11.
a sero usque ad mane from night to morning, (for so the Record is) to attend
the Kings pleasure. And therefore Henry the third in anno 14. Claus. an. 14. H.
3. m. 9.
mandavit Vicecomitibus quod venire faciant ad excercitum Regis homines juratos
ad ferrum, commanded the Sheriffs to send all those to his Army who had been so
sworn, bringing with them Loricas, Habergiones, etc. Coats of Maile,
Habergeons, etc. And to such as neglected this service he sent his Writs,
reprehending them at first, Claus. in Dorso, an. 15. Hen. 3.
Jurgatorie e quod, etc. tartly for that, etc. and after fining them according
to their abilities and Tenures. Taking Rot. finium 26. H. 3. m. 4.
an. 26. of Willihelm. de Umfrevile pro quietatione passagii, for the securing
of his passage into Gascoign 100 Marks; and so in proportion of many others.

Edward the first exacted from the land of his Subjects 4. Edward 1.
times Scutage, assessed every time at 40. shillings the Knights Fee. And once
an Aid called Auxilium novum, a new Aid, which he farmed out for ready money.
Of the Rents of the Clergy he took a Tenth part twice for one year, and once
for six; and the 20. part twice from both the Provinces, and once for two
years from Canterbury only.

The possessions of the Priors Aliens he seized once into his own hands,
putting the Monks to a bare Pension of 18. pence a week. Of the goods of the
Clergy he took the 30. the 15. and the 5. part once, the Moietie three times,
and the Tenth seven times; whereof the Grant was first for two years, and then
for three years, and once for six years. Rot. Pat. anno 25. E. 1. m. 3. sced.
Of the goods of the Commons the 8. the 9. and the 12. part he took once, twice
severally the 10. and 11. the Sessors being sworn to levy and rate truly. Three
times he had the 15. part, and once the moiety of a 15. From the Clergy and
Laietie together the King had granted of their Movables a 10. a 15. and a 30,
part. Of the Cities and Boroughs, besides a great Loan, once the 7. and 8. and
twice the 6. part. From the Merchants a 20. and a 7. portion once of their
Commodities; imposing a new Custom of a Noble upon every Sack of Wool which
he let out to Farm. And under pretense of some breach of Amity with those parts
whether his Merchants traded, he seized anno 22. Rot. Vascon. anno 22. E. 1. m.
8.
all the Woolls into his hands, and made of them instant Sale to the best
value, leaving them upon security to a short price and a long day of payment.
He took Ex Rot. Vasco. an. 22. E. 1. m. 17.
the same year, to the distaste of the Pope and murmr of the Clergy, all
the money gathered in sub sidium Terrae Sanctae, for the succor of the Holy
Land, to furnish his Journeyes. Upon the persons of his Subjects he imposed one
Tallage, Ex Rot. Vas. an. 22. E. 1.
sessed either in communi in general, or per capita by the Poll. And twice the
like upon the Jews: whereof the one amounted to 50000 Marks. Neither were his
people by continual payment (for there was but one year of intermission all
his Reign) freed from attendance in their Persons. For in record there
appears plentifully his writs to the Sheriffs: as Rot. Pat. anno 31. E. 1.
an. 31. de poditibus eligendis de tota Anglia, for the choosing of
foot-Souldiers throughout all England; and to be found and furnished by their
several Countries: calling Ex Hist. Joan. Eversden.
his Earls, Barons and Knights to personal service according to their Tenures.

His Son the second Edward assessed upon the lands of his Subjects twice
Scutage; Edward 2.
once at two Marks, and once at 40. sh. the Knights Fee. From the Revenues of
the Clergy rated by the book of Tenths, he at distinct times took 4d. 5d. and
12d. in the Mark; and once the 15. part of the whole. From the goods of the
Clergy a Tenth for three years. And twice Claus. an 8. E. 2. m. 9.
a Loan from the Abbots and Bishops. From the Layetie (besides a Tallage of
their Movables) in Cities and Boroughs once a Tenth, twice a 15. and twice a
20. part of their goods. Besides a Loan from the Commons, and 10. shillings
borrowed upon every Sack of Wool from Merchant Strangers, and a Noble from
others. Claus. 16. E. 2. Claus. anno 12. E. 2.
From the Clergy and Layetie together of their goods a Tenth, a 15. and twice
an 18. part, besides a Loan. He augmented his fathers new Custom with an
Imposition of a Noble more upon every Sack of Wool. And anno 10. Ex memor.
Sccii. an. 10. E. 2. ex part Rem. Thesaur.
quia exitus Regni sui and terrarum, because the profits of his Realm and
dominions elsewhere, together with all the money granted by the Church and
Layetie, ad sumptus Belli sufficere noluit, was not enough to defray the
charges of his wars, and that he must infinitam pecuniam effundere, spend a
vast deal of money; he sesseth and increases an Imposition upon all Commodities
inward and outward to an extreme Rate; and caused the Commons in every Shire to
lay down money in deposito to pay his Soldiers; and took from the Nobility and
Gentry a large contribution toward his wars; and seized Rot. Vascon. anno 22.
E. 2. m. 13. in sced.
omnes Lanas and Coria Mercatorum, data securitate Possessoribus derationabili
pretio postea solvendo, All the Woolls and Hides of the Merchants, giving
security to the Owners that a reasonable price should be paid for them
afterward. He charged the Ports and Sea-Townes 12. several years ad costos
suos and sumptibus villarum, at their own costs, and the charge of the Villages
about them, (as the Record says) to set to Sea in his service Ships furnished
Armis and victualibus, with Arms and Victuals; sometimes for one month, as
anno 11. Rot. Scot. anno 11. m. 17
sometimes for 4. as Rot. Scot. anno 12. m. 8.
12. and sometimes for 7. as anno Rot. Pat. anno 4. E. 2.
4. the number of Ships more or less as occasion required. In an. 17. Dors.
Claus. anno 17. E. 2 m. 11.
Southampton was charged with six, and 118. Sea-Towns more with rateable
proportions for the Kings service. Sometimes, as anno 18. Claus. anno 38. m. 34.
embarguing all the Ships in any Port that were of forty Tons or upwards, or
of 50. Tons and upward, as an. 20. Ex Rot. Vascon. m. 29.
contra hostiles aggressus Gallorum, against the hostile attempts of the
French. Causing the town of Southampton anno 6. Claus. an. 6. E. 2.
to build a Galley for himself of 120. Oars. Commanding all the Sheriffs for
provision of Victual, as anno Rot. Scot. anno 1, 2, 3. m. 10. and an. 4 m. 5.
and an. 9. and Rot. pat. anno 10. m. 12
1, 2, 3, 4, 9. to provide de Exitibus Comitatuum certum pretium, at the charge
of the County a certain Rate, to the proportion sometimes of 30500 Quarters of
Corn and many Bacons, as anno 16. Rot. Pat. an. 16. m. 3.
and to send them to the Kings Army. As also Rot. Scotiae anno 8. m. 9.
Carrecta and Carra cum Equis and Bobus, Carts and Wagons with Oxen and Horses
out of the Countyes severally for the use of war. Sometimes he made the Ports
to send provision themselves, as anno 7. Rot. Scot. Dorso, anno 7. m. 8.
and not to suffer any Ships with victuals Dorso claus. anno 16. m. 3.
ibidem discariari, to be there unladed, but to order them by security for
those parts where the Kings Army was lodged.

And not sparing the Church, exacted Rot. Scotiae anno 1, 2, 3. m. 8.
his three first years Frumenta and alia victualia pro exercitu suo, Corn and
other Victuals for his Army from them.

Besides the former Charges, the Persons of Men, as well of the Nobility as
meaner rank, were at their own Charge often enjoined to serve by reason of the
wars. Rot. Scotiae anno 8. E. 2. Dors. claus. anno 9.
As in 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. and 16. Claus. an. 16 E. 2.
of this King, when they were called singulatim man by man, as well Widows as
Knights Ex Dors. claus. 7. E. 2 m. 7.
and Noblemen, and such as held 40. l. land according to their Tenures, Claus.
an. 16. m. 20.
sub forisfactura terrarum and Catallorum Equis and Armis, sumptibus propriis,
to appear with Horse and Arms, at their own charge, under penalty of
forfeiting their Lands and Chattels; and to provide de hominibus ad Arma ultra
famulos suos consuetos, men for the service besides their ordinary Servants:
according to Augustus Ex Paterculo de Aug.
rule, Viri Foeminaeque ex Censu coactae dare Militem, both men and women were
forced to find their Soldiers. And of this the Clergy was not exempted Claus.
an. 16. m. 11. and cla. an. 15. m. 19.
anno 16. of this King. And out of every town one sumptibus propriis, at their
own charges, for 40. days, as anno 15. 1. or for 60. as anno 9. 1. or pro 7.
Septimanis for 7. weeks, as anno 4. Rot. Scotiae anno 3. E. 2. m. 8. Dorso.
Sometimes 1000. in one Country, as anno 3. Rot. Scotiae an. 11. m. 16.
Sometimes an entire Army of 18300. an. 11. and Rot. Pat. an. 15. m. 19.
48800. at the charge of all the Countyes anno 15. Rot. Scotiae anno 12. m. 13
London sumptibus Civitatis at the Cities charge, found 500. men for 40. days
anno 12. Claus. an. 18 m. 13.
and the like anno 18. contra insultus Regis Franciae, against the invasions of
the King of France. Rot. Pat. an. 16. m. 27.
The King commanded anno the 16. that all of 40. shil. land and upwards should
rateably send to his service men; Rot. Pat. anno 9. m. 22. Dors. Cla. 10. m.
26. claus. anno 15. m. 13 Rot. Pat. anno 16. m. 27
And annis 9. 10, 15, and 16. that all jurati adarma, sworn to Arms, or from
16. to 60. secundum Statutum Wincestriae, according to the Statute of
Winchester, should attend their Services. Rot. Scotiae anno 13. m. 2.
And anno 13. injoined all from 20. to 60. to be armed and victualled at their
own charge. Dors claus. anno. 6. m. 28. Rot. Scotiae anno 7. m. 2. claus. anno
8. m. 30. claus. an. 16. m. 12. Rot. Scotiae anno 12. m. 6. Rot. Pat. anno 18.
m. 21.
And commanded the Sheriffs annis 6. 7. 8. 12. 16. and 18. to see all the able
men of England so furnished, that Parati sint and muniti ad veniendum ad Regem
quando vocati fuerint, they should be provided and in a readiness to march to
the King when he should call them, their weapons to be provided ad sumptus
Incolarum, at the charge of their neighbor dwellers; and themselves enjoined
to muster and train every six weeks. If any neglected his appointed service,
there was sent ot the Sheriff Rot. claus. anno 15. E. 2. m. 14. Rot. finium:
anno 15. m. 16
a writ de habendo illos coram concilio, qui praemoniti non venerunt in
expeditione Regis, to bring them before the Council, who knowing of it before,
refused the expedition, as anno 15. 1. the parties imprisoned, and their goods
seized into the Kings hands, as Rot. claus. anno 9. Rot. Pat. anno 16. m. 12
anno 9. et 16. or else redemption by fine, as the Rot. claus. anno 15. m. 19
Sheriffs of Buckingham and Bedford did their men for 600. Marks anno 15. The
owner of 40. shillings land to redeem his first default Rot. Scotiae anno 13.
E. 2. m. 1.
cum tertia part Bonorum, with the 3. part of his Goods; the second, cum tota
residua, with the remaining parts; at the third, sint Corpora eorum ad
voluntatem Regis, their Bodies to be at the Kings disposal; and of Knights,
qui non fuerunt in exercitu Regis, 20. l. de qualibet Hida, which were not in
the Kings Army, 20. l. for every Hide, as Claus. an. 13 m. 20.
anno 13.

I have the longer insisted upon this King, that tanquam in speculo, as in a
glass we may behold the intolerable miseries of the Nobility and Commons
inseparably accompanying the times of war.

Edward the third charged Pat. an. 48. E. 3. m. 10.
the lands of his Subjects twice 40. Edward 3.
shillings of every Knights Fee; and 5. l. 16. shillings of every Parish in the
48. year of his Reign. Out of the Goods of the Commons he took once the 9.
part, and 15th. of Forest and Wast; twice the tenth, thirteen times a fifteenth
for one year, and twice for three years: and once the 20. part of all
movables, and 30000. Sacks of Wool upon conditions. Of the Boroughs and
Cities, 4. Tenths, and one for three years. From the Lords the tenth Sheaf,
Lamb, and Fliece: who with the Bishops and Knights grant 20000. Sacks of Wool
for payment of the Kings debts, giving in the interim security themselves by
Bond to the Earl of Britain, to whom their Sovereign stood engaged. Of the
Clergy alone one Tenth for 4. years, three for three years, and one for one
year. Besides a Contribution in the 12. of his Reign, seizing in the same
year all the Goods of the Cluny and Cistertian Monks. Of the Church and Laiety
together he received 6. times the 10. of all their Movables. From the
Merchants and State a Subsidy of Wool for 3. years. Imposing anno 33. 26.
shil. 8d. upon every Sack transported: which doubled the Impositions of his
Father and Grandfather. Advancing it after for 6. years to 40. shillings; and
in an. 38. (being the year he resumed his Style of France,) to 46. shillings
4d. the Sack of Wool. Taking Poundage 6d. of all Commodities inward and
outward, and enjoining the Merchants for every Sampler of Wool transported to
return in 40. shillings Bullion to his Minte. Ex Rot. Alman. an. 12. m. 17.
Himself becoming Merchant of all the Tin in Devonshire and Cornwall anno 12.
in auxilium supportationis onerum Belli, to help him bear the burden of his
wars: assessing upon the heads of his Subjects a fine of 4d. severally anno 51.
Besides in Claus. an. 20 E. 3. m. 22. in dorso.
anno 20. he took a Loan of the Bishops, Abbots, Justices, et aliis
potentioribus Regni, de diversis pecuniarum Summis inter Summas de 1000. l. and
40. l. and other wealthy men of his Realm, in several sums of money, betwixt
the sums of 1000. l. and 40. l.

In the first of his Reign Claus. an. 1. E. 3. Rot. Sco. anno 1. E. 3.
he commands all the Sea-towns to attend with Ships his service, sumptibus
propriis and duplici Esk^ppamento, at their own proper charge, and with double
Skippage, and to provide as many as they can of 60. Tun and upwards. And the
year following Claus. an. 2. E. 3.
lays the like charge upon 76. Port-Townes for all Ships of 40. Tun and
more. And anno 10. Claus. an. 10
the like at their own charge, besides a contribution of money, Rot. Scotiae
anno 10. m. 9. and Rot. Alman. an. 12. m. 12.
for payment whereof the Officers are commanded, ut eas per districtiones and
alias punitiones prout expedire viderint compellent, to force it by
distraining, and what other punishments they shall find expedient. Injoyning
such Merchants of London, qui ex transmarinis passagiis lucra adquirunt, who
had traffic in foreign parts, to furnish Ships for war at their own Charge.
Rot. Scotiae anno 13. E. 3. m. 15.
And anno the thirteenth the Cinque Ports set out to sea 30. Ships, and
maintain them during the service, half at their own, half at the Counsels
charge. Fourscore Ships being furnished and defrayed by the Out-Ports, the
Admiral directed to embargue all other Ships for the Kings service. Rot.
Scotiae anno 10. E. 3.
And although the Subject found this an infinite grievance, yet could he (upon
humble complaint in Parliament) receive no further relief, then that the King
would not have it otherwise then before. Rot. Alman. anno 1. E. 3. m. 2.


For Provision of his Arms, the King took at one time, and at a rate of loss
to the Subject, 19000. quarters of Grain, 2200. Oxen salted, and 3000. Bacons;
besides of other Provisions an infinite quantity. Rot. Scotiae anno 10. m. 17
The like very frequent all his Reign, pro guerris necessariis, ubi id magis
commode fieri poterat, for the necessities of his wars, where it could be done
with more convenience.

The Persons of all his meaner Subjects from 16. to 60. he causes Rot. Scotiae
anno 1. m. 2.
to be armed in readiness ad praemonitionem 5. dierum, at 5. days warning; the
Decrepite to contribute ad expensa praemissorum, toward the expenses of the
rest: and to arrest the Bodies of the disobedient, that de ipsis tanquam de
inimicis sumat vindictam, they might be dealt withal as enemies. Rot. Scotiae
anno 1.
The Gentry and Nobility supplying the King in his wars, and at their own
Charge, Parla. an. 13 E. 3. Parla. anno 14. E. 3.
sometimes with 7. or 800. men at Arms, and 2. or 3000 Archers, as anno 13.
with other proportions at diverse years following. And the Bishops ordered Rot.
Franc. anno 46.
to furnish Armis and Equis competentibus, serviceable Arms and Horses, so
many as occasion required: and their Persons (together with the Lay Nobility)
commanded Claus. an. 1. E. 3. m. 1.
quod sint parati Equis and Armis and toto servitio debito, with Horse and
Arms and all necessary accoutrements to attend the King in his wars.

These wars (which as Edward the third professes himself in Parliament, Parl.
an. 22. E. 3. n. 9.
could not without his great danger and loss of Honor be maintained, unless
by perpetual Aid from the Subjects) were so grievous to them, that in anno
22. they complain in Parliament of the miseries they underwent thereby: As of
their Aides advanced to 40. shillings Fine, that by law should be but 20. shil.
Their setting forth of men, and the Kings taking of their Victuals without
payment; The Sea left to the charge of their keeping, and from their woolls by
way of Subsidy 60000. l. yearly exacted without Law; besides the lending of
2000. Sacks, and themselves restrained from transporting any. But such was the
Necessity of these times, that neither they had redress of their Complaint,
nor the State one year discharged of Contribution all his Reign.

Richard succeeding his Grandfather declares both Parl. an. 2. and 14. Rot. 2.
n. 8.
anno 2. Richard 2.
and 14. that the great Wars he was left in, and the Territories he inherited
beyond Sea could not be maintained, except the Subject of this Realm gave
supply of means thereto. He therefore of the Clergy and Laiety took once the
tenth of all their lands, and thrice of the goods of the Commons the like
entirely, and six times the half, twelve times a fifteenth, and six times the
Moiety: And had anno 21. granted one Tenth to him, and a 15. and a half of
either of them yearly for term of life. From out the Boroughs and Cities thrice
a full Tenth, and once a Moiety. Out of the Merchandises he received three
years 6d. In the pound, and once twelve pence. And for every Tun of Wine, and
such Commodities, for 2. years 6d. doubling it for as many, and trebling it
for three years after. The Custom of Woolls, etc. by Edward the first rated
at a Noble the Sack, and under his son increased as much more, was to this King
advanced to 22. shil. 8d. which singly for 8 years he had granted unto him,
besides once for 3. years, and once for 4. having it after improved to 34.
shil. 4d. and again to 43. shil. 4d. the Sack. The sum of one of these
Subsidies in anno 14. amounted to 160000. l. From out of the goods of the
Clergy he had 8. Tenths and a half; and one out of those and the Laiety
together; besides a Loan anno 5. of 60000. l. By the poll or heads of all his
people from above 15. years, he collected twice a Contribution, assessed
proportional from the Beggar to the Duke: Besides in strength of Praerogative
only, of every Ship and Fisherman 6d. the Tun: the like of Newcastle Coals, and
of every Last of Corn inwards or outward the like Sum.

To furnish his journey for Ireland he took their Horses, Armor, Cattle. Rot.
Pat. anno 2. R. ^. m. 3.
Hinc factus est suis Subditis invisus, Hereupon he came to be hated by his
People, says the Bishop of London. And so it seemed: For at his deposing, it
was one of the objected Articles against him.

He the first year of his Reign imposed upon his Subjects, as formerly his
Ancestors had done, a personal service ab anno primo, That all the Clergy
should array Armis and Equis competentibus, with serviceable Horses and Arms,
from the age of 16. to 60. et eos in Millenis and Centenis poni faciant, and
cause them to be entered into Regiments and Companyes. And two years after
commanded all according to their Tenures by service to fit themselves Equis and
Armis, with Horse and Arms to attend the wars. But these the courses of elder
times were about this time much altered, and the King for the most part ever
supplied in his wars by contract with the Nobility and Gentry, to serve him
with so many men, and so long, and at such a rate as he and they by Indenture
accorded; of which there are in the Pell plenty yet remaining. Thus under
grievous burdens did the State labor continually all his time; for his
Treasury being wastfully emptied, was, as Tacitus says of Tiberius, Tacit.
lib. 2.
Scelere replendum, to be filled some ill way; by which he meant intolerable
racking of the people. Hence was it that often in this Kings time Rot. Parl.
annis 3, 4, and 5. R. 2.
the Subjects humbly beg some ease of the insupportable Tallages.

But he little regarding the tears or groans of his heartlesse People, answered
them as an. 4. That their Petition and his Honor could not consist together.
Rot. Parl. anno. 1. H. 4. n. 32.
They again plead extreme poverty, in bar of further relief; complaining that
good money was transported, and the State enforced to use base; and that the
price of Wool by wars (to their utter impoverishing) was fallen, and that the
Kings want was only the ill government of his Revenues; and therefore crave to
have his present Officers removed: and very hardly would be drawn any more to
tax themselves, but conditionally, and with this Limitation, That their money
should be received, expended, and accounted for to themselves, and by
Treasurers of their own election; and are content to lend in the end; loading
this poor Kings dejected Fortune with the reproachful weight of these their
many Burdens.

Henry the fourth in 13. Henry 4.
years out of the land of his people received twice relief; once auxilia de
medietate Feodorum, an Aid of the Moiety of the Fees, and again a Noble out of
every 20. l. throughout all the Realm. Out of the Goods of the Commons 4 times
a Tenth, besides one for 3. years, and the like one and a half for 2. By
several grants and years five Fifteens, besides one for 2. and one for 3.
years. Out of Staple Commodities of Wool, Fells, etc. one Subsidy for one
year, four for two apiece, and one for 3. years. A Poundage at 8d. once,
four times 12d. whereof the last was for 2. years. The like number and years
of the Tunnage, the first only rated at 2. shil. the rest at 3. shil. the Tun.
Out of the Movables of the Clergy thrice a Tenth, and twice a Moiety; as also
of every stipendary Minister, Friar, and such manner persons 6. shil. 8d.
apiece. Besides all these of all he took an. 8. a Hist. Tho. Walsingham
Contribution ita gravis, so heavy, that it was granted ea condition, ne
trahatur in Exemplum, and ut Evidentiae post datum Computum cremarentur, upon
this condition, that it should not be made an Example to following times, and
that after the Account the Evidences should be burnt.

Next his succeeded his Son the 5. Henry 5.
Henry; in whose 9. years Reign I find no charge imposed upon the Land of the
Subjects. Out of the Goods of the Commons he received 6. times the 10. and the
15. entirely, and once two thirds only of Staple wares; a Subsidy once for 4.
years, and after for life: three shillings Tunnage, and 12d. Poundage for the
like terms as the former Subsidies. Thrice he had the Tenth of his Clergy. And
in the eighth of his Reign, when the Chancellor bewailed to him in Parliament
the Feebleness and Poverty of the People by reason of wars and scarcity of
money, he (who of as many attempts as he undertook, totidem fecit Monumenta
victoriae, raised himself so many Monuments of Victory,) yet for redress and
ease of those miseries (as Livy says of an excellent Soldier) Pacem voluit
etiam quia vincere potuit, he preferred Peace because he knew he could
overcome. And left in the 9. year of his Reign a peaceable succession and
Heir, Henry 6.
nimium felix malo suo, too happy to his own undoing, as the event proved. For
retaining nothing ex paterna Majestate praeter speciem nominis, of his Father's
Greatness more then the specious Name of a Great King, by Fear and Facility he
laid the way open to his Factious Ambitious kindred, to work themselves into
popular Favor, and himself into Contempt: which was soon done by leading the
easy King by Expense into Extremity. For besides the Resumptions he took of his
own and Fathers Grants, (which was of purpose plotted to make a consumption of
Duty and Affection toward him) he out of the old inheritance of his Subjects
exacted 6d. in the pound anno 14. and doubled twice that valuation, not only
on all lands purchased from the entrance of Edward the first, but of all
Freehold and Coppy-hold under 200. l. and two in twenty of all above. He
further imposed first 6. shil. 8d. and then 20. shil. upon every Knights Fee.
Out of the goods of the Commons he had 6. Tenths, whereof one for 3. years,
besides 3. Moieties, and one third; of fifteens 3. halfs, one third, and eight
entire, of which there was of two a 3 years grant. Besides these former, out
of the woolls he had 37107 l. raised by a Moiety of a 10th. and 15th. and again
of all goods 6. shil. 8d. in the pound. Of the Merchant of Subsidies rated as
in former times, he had then by grant once but for a year; trebled for three
and a half. This Subsidy advanced to 33. shil. 4d. of Denisons, and 53. shil.
4d. of Aliens. The Sack of Wool was twice granted for 4. years at a time, and
an. 31. for term of the Kings life. Besides a Subsidy alone of Aliens goods,
Tonnage and Poundage improved to six shillings 8d. he took in his 18. years.
And after the Rates of his Fathers time he had it first thrice by his several
grants and years, then as often for two years, and again by a new grant for
5. years, and in the end for term of his life. Of the Clergy he had besides
one half of Dismes, 4. entire Tenths. And by the State in general anno 31.
2000. Archers maintained for half a year at the common Charge. By the Poll he
exacted anno 18. of every Merchant Stranger if a householder 16. shillings a
piece, if none 6d. And anno 27. 6. shillings 8d. every such stranger, and 20d.
of their Clerks. An. 13. he had granted for term of life ten pounds a year of
all Inhabitants mere Aliens, and a third less of Denizons, and 20 shil. of
every Stranger Merchant that came into the land* The first Monopolies I find
were grounded upon the extremities of these times; Nota First monopolies.
for in anno 29. the Spinellos, Merchants of Genua, had by grant for 8000. l.
the sole Trade of many Staple-Commodities. As the Merchants of Southampton had
all Allome for the like sum. Yet for all the Contributions, Taxes and Shifts,
(whereby the impoverished People were enforced to petition redress; for which
a Parliament was anno 10. summoned only,) the Kings Coffers were so empty, and
the yearly Revenues so short, as the Lord Treasurer was constrained Rot. Parl.
an. 11. H. 6.
an. 11. to complain in Parliament of the one, and declared there the other to
want 35000. l. of the needful expense, as the best motive to work a Relief
from the Commonwealth: which was by the people in part effected. Rot. Parl.
an. 18. Hen. 6. n. 38.
But by an. 18. the debts were swollen again so great, that the Parliament was
reinforced not only to see them, but to support and victual his household.
Thus was this unhappy Princes Reign all war and waste: and in the end, as one
says of Ex Paterculo.
Lepidus, a Militibus and a fortuna deserebatur, being forsaken both of
Soldiers and Fortune, he was left a while to a disgraced life, spoliata quam
tueri non poterat dignitate, and despoiled of that Dignity which he was not
able to maintain.

Edward the fourth, Edward 4.
Rot. Parl. an. 2, and 8. E. 4.
besides two resumptions not only of the Grants of such Kings as he accounted
de facto, and not de jure to Reign, but also of those made by Placita Coronae.
himself, and that Sea of profit that by infinite Attaintures flowed daily into
his Treasury, took notwithstanding of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal only
a Tenth of their yearly possessions, and of the Commons six Tenths, three
quarters; and the like proportion of Fifteens: A Benevolence in an. 14. which
Chron. Fabiani.
Fabian calls a new Contribution: And charged them Rot. Parl. anno 12. E. 4.
n. 8.
anno 12. with wages of his Archers to a Sum of 51117. l. Of the Merchant he
had Tonnage and Poundage for term of life. Besides of Strangers, as well
Denizons as others, a Subsidy the Rot. Parl.
22. year of his Reign. Leaving his Kingdom in the next to the few days of
his son Edward the fifth. Edward 5.
For Ostendunt terris hunc tantum Fata, nec ultra

Esse sinunt. --

The Fates only showed him to the world, and took him away again.

Richard his Uncle succeeded, Richard 3.
homo ingeniosissime nequam, and facundus malo publico, a man mosting eniously
mischievous, and full of Art to beguile the people. He to make a just semblance
of his unjust entry, besides his Act of Parliament full of dangerous Untruths,
dissembled the part of an excellent Prince, making the Commons believe by a
Statute, to which he gave first form, as life, discharging them for ever from
all exactions called Benevolences, that his opinion was, Ditare majus esse
Regium quam ditescere, that it was more Kinglike to enrich his Subjects then to
grow rich himself. Whereas he did but lively imitate Nero, that took away the
law Manlia de vectigalibus, only ut gratiosior esset populis, to ingratiate
himself the more with the people. And so all his short Reign I find recorded
but once any Tax upon the people, and that was Tenths granted by the Clergy of
both Provinces.

Henry the seventh succeeding, Henry 7.
resumed in the 3. of his Reign most of the grants of Office made by the
Usurper his brother, and assessed upon the land only of his Subjects but one
Aid in an. 19. out of their Goods and Lands a tenth penny, and of their Goods
only 3. times the tenth, five Fifteens, besides a Tenth and Fifteenth arising
to 120000. l. He took three Subsidies, whereof the last was not above 36000. l.
Fabian.
and one Benevolence, the proportion of every Alderman being 300. l. and the
entire Sum of the City of London 9688. l. 17. shillings 4d. Of the Clergy he
had twice the Tenth, and 25000. l. by way of Subsidy. Ex litera missa
Abbatiss. Barking manu Regis H. 7.
And of them and the Commons 2. Loans; the City of London rated at 6000. l. the
other not definite in proportion, but so assessed as Commissioners and the
Lenders could agree.

And as well to ease the expense of wars, as issue of the good money going over
to Bullen, Ex litera Ducis Nerfolciae.
he stamped an allayed Coin then usually termed Dandeprats: A course that
necessity after enforced his Son and Successors to practice, and is an apparent
Symptom of a consumed State. But that whereby he heaped up his mass of
Treasure, ( Ex lib. Acquit. int. Regem and Dudly R. C.
for he left in Bullion 4. millions and a half, besides his Plate, Jewels, and
rich attire of house) was by sale of Offices, redemption of Penalties,
dispencing with Laws, and such like, to a yearly value of 120000. pounds.

His Successor, Henry 8.
reaping the fruit of his Fathers labor, gave ease of burden to the Subjects
his first two years; taking within the compass of his other 34. three Tenths
of the Commons, four Fifteens, 6. Subsidies, whereof that an. 4. amounted to
16000. l. and that an. 7. 110000. l. Tonnage he had and Poundage once for a
year, and after for term of Life. Of the Clergy 4. Tenths by one grant, and 3.
by several, every of them not less then 25084. l. Of Subsidies he had one of
the Province of Canterbury, another of both; the Stipendary Ministers there to
be taxed according to the rate of their wages. In an. 22. they granted a Moiety
of all their Goods and Lands, payable by equal portion in 5. years, every part
arising to 95000. l. to the yearly Revenues of his Crown, by an inhumane spoil
of sacred Monuments, and impious ruin of holy Churches, if Gods blessing could
have accompanied so foul an Act. And as these former Collections he grounded
upon Law, so did he many upon Praerogative: As Benevolences and Loans from the
Clergy and Commons. Of the first there were two remarkable, that in an. 17.
acted by Commissioners, who as themselves were sworn to Secrecy, so were they
to swear all those with whom they confer or contract. The Rates directed by
instructions, as the thirds of all Goods, Offices, Land above 20. l. and the
4th. under. And although the Recusants (whether from Disobedience or Inability)
are threatened with Convention before the Council, Imprisonment, and
Confiscation of Goods; yet in the Ex originali signat. manu Regis.
Design Original under the Kings hand, it has so fair a name as an Amicable
Grant. The other about Ex originali Instructione.
an. 36. exacteth out of all Goods, Offices, land from 40. shillings to 20. l.
8d. in the pound, and of all above, 12d. And amongst the many Loans, there is
none more notorious then that of an. 14. Ex instruct. originali anno 14. H. 8.
which was 10. l. in the hundred of all Goods, Jewels, Utensils, and land from
20. l. to 300. l. and twenty marks of all above, as far as the Subjects
Fortune, revealed by the extremity of his own Oath, would extend. And to stop
as well intentions if any had been, as expectations of repayment of such Loans,
Rot. Parl. an. 21. H. 8.
the Parliament in an. 21. acquitteth the King of every Privy Seal or Letter
Missive.

Edward the sixth his Son, Edward 6.
besides Tonnage and Poundage for life, an. 1. received of his Law-Subjects six
Fifteens, and of both three Subsidies, leaving one of the Temporalty
ungathered: which his Sister Mary remitted in an. 1. Q. Mary.
of her reign; yet after (incited by the French King succouring her Rebels,
and suffering her money adulterated in his Dominions, purposely to be hither
transported, as also to side the quarrel of Philip her husband against him)
being drawn into wars, she was enforced to press upon her people, and (besides
the Loan in an. 1. for term of life granted unto her by Parliament) took five
Fifteens of the Commons, and of them and the Clergy three years Subsidies.

Her Sister of happy memory succeeding, Q. Elizabeth
besides diverse Loans of her people and others in foreign parts, (as anno 5.
when William Horle was dispatched into Germany to take up at Interest for 6.
years great Sums of money, the like an. 18. from the Merchants of Colen and
Hamburgh upon Bond of the City of London, and again of Spinello and Pallavicini
upon the former security, strengthened with the assurance also of many of her
chiefest Counselors,) had by grant of her Subjects 38. Fifteens, 20. Subsidies
of the Commons, and 18. of the Clergy. All which together rose to a sum of
two Millions and 800000. l.

HAving thus far (with as light a hand as I could) drawn down the many and
mighty burdens of the Commonwealth, Princes extremities beyond the ease of
their people by reason of wars.
if but with a touch of the Princes Extremities beyond the ease of these former
helps I heighten up this draught, Credit of Ks. so much impaired, that they
could not borrow but upon surety and extreme interest.
it will with much more life and luster express the Figure of wars Misery.
Math. Paris.
The Credit of Kings it has brought to so low an ebb, that when by force of
necessity they borrowed money, they could not take it up but by collateral
security, and extreme Interest. As Edward the 3. in the Patent to Rot. Pat.
anno 13. E. 3. m. 13.
William de la Poole confesses, that propter defectum pecuniae negotia sua
fuerunt periculo sissime retardata, for want of money his affairs were
dangerously delayed, (they are the words of the record) and the honor of him
and his Royal Army magnae fuit depressioni patenter expositus, and progressus
non sine dedecore suo perpetuo impeditus, he was brought to a manifest low
condition, and his proceedings to his great dishonor had been constantly
hindered; if De la Poole had not as well supplied him with the credit of his
Security, as with the best ability of his own Purse. For which service he
honored him and his posterity with the degree of Baronets, Nota.
and 500. l. land of inheritance.

The interest of Henry 3. ad plus quam centum quotidie libras adscenderat, ita
ut imminenet tam Clero quam Populo Angliae Deso latio and Ruina, came to more
then a hundred pound a day, so that present ruin and desolation hung over the
heads as well of the Clergy as the People.

Q. Mary Ex Instruct. Thomae Gresham, anno 1557.
borrowed in Flanders at 14. in the hundred, besides Brocage upon collateral
security.

The late Queen was enforced Ex Instruct. Willielm. Herie 16. August. an. 5.
Eliz. Similiter
to the like thrice with Strangers upon the City of Londons assurance, as
before, and with her Thomae Gresham. 1563. and 76.
own Subjects after upon Mortgage of Land. A course more moderate then either
that of the first William, that took out of Churches such money as several men
had committed thither for more security: Ex litera Edw. Lee orat. Regis H. 8.
in Hisp. anno 28.
or that of Charles the fifth, that to repair the waste of his Italian wars,
went in person to Barcilona, to seize into his hands a Mass of money called
Depositum Tabulae, which as well Strangers as Subjects had there laid up in
Sanctuary. But these are not the conditions of Princes of our times only: for
in the lives of Caligula, Nero, and Vespasian, Suetonius of them severally
writes, Exhaustus and egenus calumniis rapinisque intendit animum, being drawn
dry and grown poor, they bent their minds to Calumnies and Rapines. For
Perni^los^^res est in imperante tenuitas, Want in a Prince is a dangerous
thing; and as Theodoricus said, Periculosissimum animal est Rex pauper, a Poor
King is the most dangerous creature living.

It has abated the Regalties of Houses; Kings enforced to abate their
hospitality.
an. 16. of Richard the second, and 18. Ex Rot. Par. 18. H. 6.
of Henry 6. when as well from want of means, as the Subjects Petitions in
Parliament, (for Expeditissima est ratio augendi Census detrahere Sumptibus,
the readiest way to raise the Revenue is to take down Expenses,) they have much
lessened their Hospitality; their Tables being either defrayed by their
Subjects, as of Henry the 6. or as Henry the 3. when by necessity Ex hist.
majori Math. Paris.
ita consueta Regaiis Mensae hospitalitas abbreviata fuit, ut (posposita solita
verecundia) cum Abbatibus, Clericis, and viris satis humilibus hospitia
quaesivit and prandia; the wonted hospitality of the Kings Table was sunk so
low, that (without farther shame) he many times lodged and dieted with Abbots,
Clerks, and very mean Persons.

It has caused our Kings to sell and alienate the possessions of the Crown:
Kings enforced to pawn and sell their Dominions.
as Henry the Rot. Pat. anno 51. H. 3. m. 17.
3. who gave to Edward his son Licentiam impignorandi terram Vascon^ae, leave
to pawn the Duchy of Gascoign; And caused himself not long after by the like
occasions, to sell for 300000. l. (except some pittances reserved) the Ex
contract. orig. and Hist. Norman.
entire Signiorie of Normandy. What our late Mistress and her Father did, is
yet fresh in memory. But this mischief has trenched deep into the Fortunes and
Affections of the Subjects, when Princes to repair the breach of their own
Revenues, have often resumed the possessions of their people; as Rot. Vasc 5.
E. 2. Rot. finium an. 8. Rot. cui titulus, ex tract. de donacionib. c. 9. and
10. E. 2.
Edward the second anno 5, Kings enforced to make Resumption of their Lands.
8, and 10. Omnes donationes per Regem factas ad damnum and diminutionem Regis
and Coronae suae, all the Grants made by the King to the lessening and
prejudicing of the King and his Crown. Rot. Parl. ^. anno 1. R. 2.
Richard the second an. 1* did the like of all Grants made to unworthy persons
by his Grandfather, and recalled all Patents dated since 40. of Edward 3. Thus
did Henry Rot. Parl. anno 1. Hen. 5 n. 12.
the 5. an. 1. and Rot. Parl. anno 28. H. 6. and E. 4.
Henry the 6. in the 28. of his Reign, Edward the 4. in an. 3. with all Offices
of his Crown granted either by the Usurper or his Brother. Neither is this in
it self unjust, since as well by reason of State as Rules of best Government,
the Revenues and Profits Ex legibus Theodos. and Valentinian. in Codice.
quae ad sacrum Patrimonium Principis pertinent, which belong to the sacred
Patrimony of the Prince, should remain firm and unbroken.

But when neither Credit, Ks. enforced to pawn and sell their Jewels.
Frugality, or Sale of Lands would stop the gulf of want, our Princes have been
so near beset, as with N^rva and Antonius the Emperors to sell and pawn their
Jewels. The Archbishop of York had power from Henry 3. an. 26. Rot. Pat. anno
26. H. 3. m. 1. Similiter an. 56. H. 3. in 21. m.
(in wars beyond Sea) impignorandi Iocalia Regis ubicunque in Anglia pro
pecunia perquirenda, to pawn the Kings Jewels any where in England to raise
money. Rot. Pat. Claus. an. 1. E. 1. m. 7.
Edward the first sends Egidius Andevar ad Iocalia sua impignoranda, to pawn
his Jewels. Claus. an. 1. E. 3.
Edward the 3. pawneth his Jewels to pay the L. Beaumont and the Strangers
their wages in war. The Black ^he. Walsingham.
Princes was constrained to break his Plate into Money to pay his Soldiers.

Ex originali de anno 6. R. 2. Rot. 17.
Richard the second pawned Vasa aurea and diversa Iocalia, vessels of Gold and
diverse Jewels to Sir Robert Knowles. Pat. anno 3. H. 4. m. 3.
Henry the 4. an. 3. to a Merchant for money invadiavit Tabellam and Trisellas
suas Argenteas de Hispania, engaged his Tablet and stools of Silver which he
had from Spain. Pat. an. 10. Hen. 6. Pat. anno 12. H. 6. m. 13.
Henry the 6. gageth and sells to the Cardinal of Winchester and others an.
10th. 12th. and 29. Pat. an. 29. H. 6. m. 20.
many parcells of his rich Jewels. Kings enforlced to pawn their Regal Crown.
And the late Queen in the end of her days (to ease her Subjects) did the like
with many in the Tower.

And Extremity has yet stretched some of our Kings to so high a stain of
Shift, that Edward the third Pat. Pars. 1. an. 17. E. 3.
invadiavit magnam Coronam Angliae, pawned his Imperial Crown 3. several
times; an. 17. in partibus transmarinis in foreign parts, and twice to Sir
John Wesenham his Merchant, first in the Pat. an. 24. m. 21.
24. and after Claus. an. 30 E. 3. Com. de Ter. Hill. 38. E. 3. ex part Rem.
Regis.
an. 30. in whose custody it remained 8. years. To Henry Bishop of Winchester
Henry the 5. invadiavit magnam Coronam auream, gaged his imperial Crown of
Gold in the 5. of his Reign. And when Henry the third had laid to gage Pat.
anno 5. H. 3. m. 23. and similiter an. 9. Rot. Pat. an. 51. H. 3. m. 17. and 18.
omnia Insignia Regalia, all his Robes and Kingly Ornaments, and upon assurance
of redelivery or satisfaction had pawned Aurum and Iocalia Feretri S. Edwardi
Confessoris, the Gold and Jewels belonging to the Shrine of S. Edward the
Confessor, (A course more moderate then by force to have taken, as William the
Conqueror did the Chalices and Shrines of other Churches, or as Ex historia
^uicciardini.
Glement the 7. who to pay the Soldiers of Charles the fifth melted the
Consecrated Vessels) was in the end, when he had neither means of his own left
nor reputation with others, constrained to beg relief of his Subjects in this
low strain, Ex hist. S. Albani.
Pauper sum, omni destitutus Thesauro; necesse habeo ut me juvetis: nec aliquid
exigo nisi per gratiam; I am poor, and have no Treasure left; ye must needs
relieve me: neither do I demand any thing but of your mere love and courtesy:
And turning to the Abbot of Ramsey, to say, Amice, obnixe supplico quatenus me
juvas mihi centum libras conferendo, My friend, I beseech thee for Gods sake to
help me with 100. pound: adding withal majorem Eleemosynam fore sibi juvamen
confer pecuniamve, quam alicui ostiatim mendicanti, that it would be a
greater deed of Charity to contribute to his Wants, then to give to one that
begged from door to door. So that of the waste of these times and want of those
Princes I may truly with the Satyrist say, Ossa vides Regum vacuis exuta
medullis. Thou see the Bones of Kings spoi'ld of their Marrow.

IT now rests by some few particulars to observe with what Wealth we have
returned home, In place of spoil the Soldiers return oppressed with extreme
Beggary.
laden with the Spoils of our Enemies; since no motives are so powerful to the
Common greedy People as the hopes of gain, which will easily enforce them
Lucan. de Bello Civili lib. 7.
Ire super gladios, superque Cadavera patr^^,
Et caesos calcare Duces, --
Tread upon Swords, and on their Fathers Graves,
And spurn their slaughtered Captains. --


In the Expeditions of Henry 3. their purchases were so great, that the Math.
Paris page 580.
Londoners were more grieved at the intolerable Beggeries that the King and his
Army brought back, then for the expense of their own moneys: For Cum labor in
damno est crescit mortalis egestas, When Toil brings Loss, Begg'ry must needs
increase.

The same King, although called in by the Nobility of France Hist. Mat. Paris
p. 1358
in Faction against their Master, returned no better rewarded then Consumpta
pecunia infinita, and Nobilibus and Militibus innumeralibus vel Morti datis vel
infirmitati, vel fame attenuatis, vel ad extremam redactis paupertatem, with
the having spent an infinite deal of money, his Nobles and Soldiers without
number being either slain, or sickly, or maimed, or half-starved, or else
reduced to extreme poverty.

Innocentius the Pope repayed the expense of Henry the 3. and his people in his
Sicilian Service with no better wages then this Scoff, That England was Math.
Paris page 909.
Puteus inexhaustus quem nullus poterat exsiccare, a Well not to be emptied
which no man could draw dry. What the succeeding times afforded may be wed
gathered out of the many Petitions in Parliament, 22. Edward 3. 4, and 7. of
Richard 2. 8. of Henry 5. and 10. of Henry 6. ever complaining of the extreme
Beggary the people brought home, and (...) some (...) Relief.

The Treasue Ex lit. Cardin. Wolsei ad Card. Sodrin.
Henry the 8. spent in aid of Munimi (...) recovery of Verona nullum alin^
factu^^ nisi damnum and dedecus peperit, brought him nothing else but Loss, and
Dishonor. For the Emperor having his turn served, delivered, contrary to
Contract, that City to the French, threatening to confederate with them, ni Rex
ei continuo per solveret, unless the King would forthwith pay him down a great
sum of money; believing (as the words are) Minis and terrore ab hoc Rege
pecuniam posse haberi, that this King would part with his money upon
threatenings and great words. For the great Army of this King sent over into
France, and the Million almost of Crowns he supplied the Emperor and Duke of
Burbon with in their wars of Millan, his People enduring new and unheard of
Taxes at home, and his Soldiers great Extremity abroad, he was himself at the
last of all, (their ends effected) having spent the Treasure of his Father, and
the Bounty of his Subjects, forsaken and left as the Pasquill painted him,
inter Moysem, Christum and Mahumitem, betwixt Moses, Christ and Mahomet, with
this word, Quo me vertam nescio, Which way to turn me I know not. For 2.
Millions of Ex Instruct. Rich. Wingfield.
Crowns bestowed in purchase of Tournay, not without suite of his own, he
delivered it with little or no recompense: and rated his potentiall Interest of
France at no greater Sum then an Annuity Ex lit. Tho. Wolsey Episc. Lincoln.
of 100000. Crowns. What from the 30. of this King until the last of his son
Edward the sixth for Ex compute in Archivis Rob. Com. Salisb.
3173478. l. 15s. 4d. spent at Sea and Land in Foreign wars, this State
received of inrichment, it seems so mean, as not worthy any place either in
Story or Accounts.

Until the late Queen was drawn into wars, she had in Treasure 700000. l. but
after she was once entangled, it cost her before the 30. of her Reign 1517351.
l. at which time she was but entering into the vastness of her future Charge:
For the annual expense of 126000. l. in the Low Countries, from 1587. until
1593. the yearly disbursment for Ex tractat. anno 1598.
Flushing and the Brill 28482. l. the debts of the States 800000. l. and the
Aides of the French King since he attained to that Crown to above 401734. l.
was after that time. Thus by reason of war, besides Taxes upon her People to
the Sum of two Millions, and 800000. l. by Subsidies, Tenths and Fifteens,
she has spent of her Lands, Jewels and Revenues an infinite proportion.

As for the imaginary Profit grown by the many rich Spoils at Sea and Attempts
in Spain, it may be well cast up by two examples of our best Fortunes. The
Journey of Cales Ex computo deliberat. Domino Thesaur. Burleigh.
defrayed not the Charge to her Majesty by 64000. l. And our times of most
advantage by Prizes between Ex computo Joannis Hawkins Thesaur. Naviae.
anno 30. and 34. of the Queen, wherein we received but 64044. l. defrayed not
the Charge of her Navy, arising in the same years to 275761. l. As to the
greatest Loss, expense of Christian Blood, it may well suffice to be moan with
Hor. Epo. 7.
Horace, Parumne Campis atque Neptuno superfusum est Latini sanguinis?
Neque hic Lupis mos nec fuit Leonibus Unquam, nisi in dispar feris.
Is there as yet so little Latin Blood
Spilt on the Fields and Floods?
Nor Wolves nor Lions do we ever find
So cruel to their kind.


THe last motive from Utility is, Foreign Dominions always charge, no benefit.
increase of Revenues to the public Treasury by addition of Foreign
Dominions. Which can receive no answer so full of satisfaction, as to instance
the particular Sums, exhausted in every Age to retain them. Beginning first
with the Duchy or Normandy: Example in Normandy.
For retention whereof William the Conqueror from hence, (as the Math. Par.
Author says) laden Thesauris innumeris, with uncountable Treasure, exacted
sive per fas sive per nefas, in Normanniam transfretavit, gathethered together
by hook or by crook, wafted over into Normandy. His Son Ex Legibus antiquis.
ad retinendam Normanniam, Angliam excoriavit, to retain Normandy flayed off
Englands skin. The same end by Ex Walt. Gisborn.
Henry the first, Anglia fuit bonis spoliata, England was despoiled of its
Goods. His Ex lib. Rubro.
Grandchild took Scutagium pro Exercitu Normanniae, a Scutage for his army in
Normandy 3. times at a high rate; and was enforced then against incursions of
the French to build and man Ex lib. Pipnell.
13 Castles de novo and integro, entirely new.

Richard the first Rad. Coggeshall.
exacted heavily upon his people, ut potentes homines Regis Franciae sibi
conciliaret, ut terram propriam Normanniae tutaretur, therewith to make himself
friends amongst the most powerful Courtiers of France, so to keep quietly his
possessions in Normandy.

King John Math. Par.
as wearied with the Charge neglected it: And his Son Ex Archiv. de redit.
Norman. tempore H. 3.
feeling a burden more then benefit, resigned his interest there for a little
Money. When it was again reduced by Henry the fifth, Ex origin Instr. Domini
Scrope.
the judgment in Council was, That the keeping of it would be no less of
expense then to war forth for all France. In the quiet possession of his Son
Henry Ex libro Domini Carew de anno 1. and 2. H. 6.
( John Duke of Bedford then Regent) this Duchy cost the Crown of England
10942. l. yearly. In an. 10. it appears by the Accounts of the Lord Cromwell
Treasurer of England, Ex Rot. Par. de. an. 11. H. 6
that out of the Kings Exchequer at Westminister the entertainment of the
Garrison and Governor was defrayed, the Rents of the Duchy not supporting the
charge ordinary. Ex lib. originali Roberti Cotton.
When Richard Duke of York was in the 15. year of Henry the 6. Regent, the
certain Expense overballanced the Receipt 34008. l. And an. 27. Rot. Parl. an.
27. H. 6. n. 27.
the Lord Hastings Chancellor of France declares in Parliament, that Normandy
was not able to maintain it self. But thus it continued not much longer; for
this Crown was both eased of the Duchy and Charge shortly.

Of the Principality of Aquitain, Aquitain, Gascoign, Guien.
the Duchy of Gascoign, Guien and the Members, I find the state thus in
record. In the 26. of Henry 3. Rot. liber. anno 26. H. 3.
there was issued from the Treasurer and Chamberlains at Westminster 10000 l.
for paiments in Gascoign; besides an infinite proportion of Victuals and
Munition thither sent. To retain this Duchy in Duty and possession, Rot. an.
22. H. 6.
this king was enforced to pawn his Jewels, being aere alieno graviter
obligatus, Thesauris, Donativis, Tallagiis, and extersionibus in Anglia
consumptis; very much indebted, and having spent all his Treasures, Grants,
Tallages, and other Sweepings in England. Besides the people there at his
departure extorserunt ab eo confessionem quadraginta millia Marcarum, forced an
acknowledgement from him of 40000. Marks. And a Story of that time says of
ann. 38. Math. Paris Page 578.
Ille per multos labores and expensas inutiliter recuperavit Castra sua propria
Vasconiae, with a great deal of toil and expense, he unprofitably recovered
his own Castles in Gascoign: Ex Comput. Willielm. de Otterhampton, anno 17. E.
2.
of which the Labor was more then ever the Benefit could be.

And thus it appears to have continued; for an. 17. of Edward the second, the
money disbursed out of England to defray the surcharge there came to 46595. l.
9. shillings 7d. besides 29660. Q^arters of Gram, and of Beeves and Bacons an
infinite proportion. In the first of Edward the 3. Pat. an. 1. E. 3.
the issues of Gascoign were 10000. l. above the Revenues. The Signiories in
Aquitain Ex Comput. Richardi Longley an. 36. E. 3. in Thesaur. Regis Westmon.
in Rot. Aquitaniae.
cost in 8. years ending 36. of this King, 192599. l. 4. shill. 5d. de receptis
forinsicis only. It was delivered in Parliament, an. 1. Rich. 2. Rot. Parl.
anno 1. R. 2. m. 24.
that Gascoign, and some few other places that were then held in France, cost
yearly this Crown 42000. l. And in the 17th. of this King Rot. Parl. anno 17.
R. 2.
a Parliament was summoned for no other cause especial, then to provide money
to clear the annual expenses of those parts. The charge of Bordeaux Ex Comput.
Walt. de Weston.
but one Town, surmounting in half a year all Rents and perquisites there 2232.
l. As Fronsack in Aquita^n 5787. l. for double that time; when the entire
Dutche exceeded not 820. l. in yearly Revenues.

The Charge of Guien all the Reign of Henry 4. Ex Comput. Tho. Swinburn anno
10. H. 4.
was 2200 l. annually out of the Exchequer of England. By account Aquitain
(besides Guien 6606. l.) was the Ex Comput. Ioannis Tiptoft an. 1. H. 5.
first of Henry the fifth in surplussage of charge 11200. l. and the Town of Ex
Comput. Will. Clifford and Robert: Holme an. 5. H. 5.
Bordeaux the 5. first years of the same King 6815. l. In the 11. of Ex Rot.
Par. an. E I. H. 6.
Henry the 6. Sir John Radcliffe Steward of Aquitain received from the Treasury
of England pro vadiis suis, etc. 2729. l. and for expense in custody of
Fronsack Castle only he paid 666. l. 13. shill. the profits of the Duchy no
ways able to clear the Accounts.

The Benefit we reaped by any footing in Britanny, Britanny.
may in a few Examples appear. Ex Math. Paris.
Henry the third confesses that ad defensionem Britanniae non sufficiebant
Angliae Thesauri, quod jam per triennium compr^bavit, that the Treasure of
England would not suffice to maintain Britanny, which he had found to be true
upon 3 years trial: and left in the end tam laboriosis expensis amplius
fatigari, to tire himself farther with such toilsome expenses.

The Town of Breast Breast.
Rot. Parl. anno 2. R. 2. Ex Comput. Tho. Parry. Cust. astri de B^^t, a. 9. R.
2. Callis.
cost Richard the second 12000. Marks a year, and it stood him in an. 9. in
13118. l. 18. shillings.

For Callis, I will deliver with as much shortness as may be, from the first
acquisition until the loss, in every age the Expense (for the most part
either out of the Treasury or Customs of England,) disbursed. Ex comput.
Williel. Horwell in Thesaur. Regis.
From the 18. of Edward the 3. until the 21. in which space it was taken, the
Charge amounted to 337400. l. 9. shil. 4d. Anno 28. of the same King for little
more then a year 17847. l. 5. shillings. In an. 29. 30581. l. 18d. for 2.
years complete. Ex comput. Richardi Eccleshall de annis 28, 29, and 30. E. 3.
In 30. received by Richard de Eccleshal Treasu^er of Callis from the Bishop of
Winchester Treasurer of England, 17847. l. Ex Rot. Rar. anno 2. R. 2.
And in the year following 26355 l. 15. shillings. Ex Comput. Rob. Thorley.
In the second of Richard 2. de receptis forinsecis, which was money from the
Exchequer at Westminster, 20000 l. for 3 years complete. Ex Comput. Simonis de
Burg.
Anno 5. 19783. l. For three years ending Ex Comput. Rog. de Wald. anno 13. R.
2. and 15.
anno 10. 77375. l. For the like term until ann. 13. 48609. l. 8. shillings.
And Ex Comput. Joannis Bernam, anno 23. R. 2.
for the 4. succeeding years 90297. l. 19. shil. And for the last 3 years of
his Reign, 85643. l.

From the end of Ex Comput. To. Thorley.
Richard 2. until the 4 of Henry 4. for 3. years Ex Comput. Nich. Vske.
62655. l. 17. shillings. And for one succeeding, 19783. l. The Charge in
Victual and Provision for 2 years 5. months in this Kings Reign Ex Comput.
Rob. Thorley.
46519 l. 15. shillings.

In the first 4. and peaceable years of his Son there was issued from the
Treasury of England Ex Comput* Rob. Salvin, de annis 5. H. 5.
86938. l. 10. shil. for this place. And from anno 8. until the 9. 65363. l.
It cost Henry the Rot. Parl. an. 11. H. 6.
6. above all Revenue 9054. l. 5. shillings in an. 11. The Subsidies in England
were an. 27. Rot. Parl. anno 27.
levied in Parliament to defray the wages and reparation of Callis. And the
Rot. Parl. anno 31.
31. of this King there was a Fifteen and 2. shil. of every Sack of Wool
imposed upon the Subjects here to the same end. Rot. Parl. anno 33.
And the Parliament of 33. was assembled of purpose to order a course for
discharge of wages and expense at Callis: and the like authority directed 4. of
Edward the fourth, Rot. Parl. 4. E. 4.
that the Soldiers there should receive Victuals and salary from out of the
Subsidies of England. The disbursement thereof one year being 12771. l. Ex
comput. Majoris Stapulae anno 1. R. 3.
And in the 16. of the same King for like term there was de Portu London, Hull,
Sancti Botolphi, Poole, and Sandwico, by the Ports of London, Hull, Boston,
Pool, and Sandwich, 12488. l. paid to the Treasury of Callis. Ex comput.
origin. inter Chartas Roberti Cotton.
And in an. 20. from out of the Customs of the same Ports to the same end
12290. l. 18. shillings. Ex comput. Domini Lisle.
And in 22. 11102. l. And the year following 10788. l. The settled ordinary
wages of the Garrison in this Town yearly was 24. Ex lib. de expens. Bellor. H.
8. and E. 6. in Musaeo Com. Salisbur.
Henry 8.8834. l. And about 30th. when the Viscount Lisle was Deputy, 8117. l.
And from the 30th. of this King to the end of his Son Edw. 6. this place did
cost the Crown 371428. l. 18. shil. From the first purchase of it by Edward the
3. until the loss thereof by Queen Mary, it was ever a perpetual issue of
the Treasure of this Land, which might in continuance have rather grown to be a
burden of Danger to us, then any Fort of Security. For from the waste of
money, which is Nervus Reipublicae, the Sinew of a Commonwealth, as Ulpian
says, we may conclude with Tacitus, Dissolutionem Imperii docet, si fructus
quibus Respub. sustinetur diminuantur, it foreshews the ruin of an Empire, if
that be impaired which should be the sustenance of the Commonwealth. And
therefore it was not the worst opinion (at such time as the Captivity of
Francis the French King incited Ex litera Archiep. Cant. Card. Wolsey.
Henry the 8. to put off that Kingdom, although in the close major pars vicit
meliorem, the greater party out-voted the better,) that to gain any thing in
France would be more chargeable then profitable, and the keeping more then the
enjoying. The issue was in Tournay, Bullen, and this Town manifest. Besides the
jealousy that Nation ever held over our designs and their own liberty. For as
Graecia libera esse non potuit dum Philippus Graeciae Compedes tenuit, Greece
could never be free so long as Philip had the Fetters of Greece in his custody;
so as long as by retention of Callis we had an easy descent into, and
convenient place to trouble the Country, a Fetter to entangle them, they
neither has assurance of their own quiet, nor we of their Amity. And it was not
the least Argument from Conveniencie in the detention of Callis (after the 8
years expired of Re-delivery) used by the Chancellor of France, Ex litera
Thomae Smith Secret. anno 1567. 3. Maii.
That we should gain much more in assured peace, which we could never have so
long as we were Lords of that Town, then by any benefit it did or could yield
us. It was never but a Pike and Quarrel between the two Realms: For upon every
light displeasure, either Princes would take by and by to Callis, and make war
there. God has made a separation natural betwixt both Nations, a sure wall
and defense, Et penitus toto divisos Orb Britannos;
That is, the English were divided from all the world.

But a little more to inform the weight of these Charges, it is not amiss to
touch (by way of comfort) that from which we are so happily by the infinite
blessings of God and benignity of a Gracious King delivered; and also that
other of burden still, (though much lightened) until conformity of Affections
and designs of Counsels shall further effect a Remedy.

The Charge of Barwick and the Frontiers in 20. Ex comput. Joannis Tiptoft.
Edward. 3. was 3129. l. for three years. In the end of Richard 2. and
entrance of Henry the 4. Ex comput. Hen. Percy, anno 1. H. 4.
10153. l. And Parl. an. 11. H. 6.
11. of Henry 6. the Custody of the Marches 4766. l. In the 2. Mariae the
annual Charge of Barwick was 9413. l. Ex musaeo Com. Salisbury.
And in an. 2. Elizabeth 13430. l. And an. 26. 12391. l.

The Kingdom of Ireland, beyond the Revenues, was 29. E. 3. Ex comput.
Williel. de Brumleigh.
2285. Barwick.
l. An. 30. Ex comput. Nicol. Episc. Meth, an. 30. Ed. 3.
2880. l. and Ex comput. Tho. Scurla^ anno 50. E. 3.
an. Ireland.
50. 1808. l. All the time of Richard 2. Ex comput. Joan. Spencer, de annis R.
2.
it never defrayed the charges; And came short in 11. Henry 6. 4000. Marks Ex
Rot. Par. anno 11. H. 6.
of annual issues. The Revenue there in omnibus exitibus and proficuis, in all
the rents and profits yearly, by Account of Cromwell Lord Treasurer, not above
3040. l. But passing over these elder times; in the Reign of the late Queen,
when the yearly Revenue was not 15000. l. the expense for 2. years Ex amotat.
Dom. Burleigh ex Musaeo Com. Salisbury.
ending 1571. amounted to 116874. l. In anno 1584. for less then 2 years came
it to 86983. l. Ex comput. Rad. Lane.
The charge there in two years of S. John Parrots government ending 1586. was
116368. l. In anno 1597. the Receipt not above 25000. l. the issue was 91072.
l. And when in 35. Elizabeth the Rents and Profits of that Kingdom exceeded
not 27118. l. the Disbursments in 7 months were 171883. l. The Charge 1601. Ex
comput. in Musaeo Com. Salisbury Thesaur. Angliae.
for 9 months 167987. l. And for the two years following accounted by the
allayed money 670403. l. And in the first of the King, 84179. l. Whose
government although it has blessed both us and that Kingdom with the benefit
of Peace, yet has it not delivered himself from a large and yearly expense
here for supportation of that State out of his own Treasure. And thus far in
answer of the Argument from increase of Revenue by foreign Dominions.

As to the Arguments of Honor by addition of Titles and foreign Territories;
Addition of any foreign Title no Honor.
it may suffice in answer, That so long as this Crown was actually possessed of
any such Signiorie, the Tenure and Service did ever bring with it a note and
badge of Vassallage; then which nothing to so free a Monarch as the King of
England (who is Baldus.
Monarcha in Regno, and tot and tanta habet Privilegia quot Imperator in
Imperio, a Monarch his Kingdom, and has as many and as large Privileges
therein as an Emperor in his Empire,) could be more in blemish or opposition.
To write Domino Regi nostro Franciae, To our Lord the King of France, as during
the time we held the Provinces in France we usually did in all our Letters and
public Contracts with that Crown, can be called no addition of Honor. And
whether upon every command to act in person those base services of Homage and
Fidelity, as first in putting off the Imperial Crown, the kneeling low at the
foot of that King, and taking an oath to become Homme liege du Roys de France,
a liege subject to the Kings of France, etc. we in performing so the duties of
a Subject, do not much more disparage the dignity of a Sovereign, is no
question of doubt. From these considerations of Reputation and Honor, (the
greatest stays that support Majesty, and retain Obedience) our Kings of
England have as far as to the forfeit of those Signiories, either avoided or
refused the services. As King John did Normandy; Style of Normandy and
Aquitain, accounted by our Kings a vassalage.
and Edward the 2. resigned to his Son the Duchy of Aquitain, to put off the
act of homage from himself, to whom it could not in respect of his Regaltie but
be in dishonor. As appears in Henry the 2. who having made his Son Consortem
Imperii, a King of England with him, Homagium a Filio noluit (says the Record)
quia Rex fuit, sed securitatem accepit; would not receive Homage of him,
because he was a King, but took his Security. In the 17. of Richard 2. the
Lords and Justices would not consent to a Peace with France, unless the King
might not do Homage, they held it so base, supposing thereby the liberty of the
Kings Person and Subject wronged. And thus much of the little Reputation that
either in Title or Territory those subordinate Dutchies in France added to
this Crown.

As for the Kingdom of France, Style of France restrained by petition in
Parliament.
the people of England were so little in love with that Title, as any Honor to
them, that by Acts of Parliament 14. Edward 3. and 8. Edward 5. they provided
that the Subjects of England should owe no Obedience to the King as King of
France, nor the Kingdom of England be in any wise subjected by such Union to
that Crown.

And so much we have ever been in fear of that place, France possessed would
leave us to the misery of a province
lest it might leave this State to the misery of a Provincial Government as in
17. of Henry 6. the Commons urged to contribute for the recovery of that Crown,
answered, that the gaining of any footing in France would induce the Kings
abode there, and by such absence cause great decay and desolation in this
State; besides the transport of our Money in the mean time, which would enrich
that Country, and impoverish the Realm at home, whereby we should justly again
say, Tacit. in vita Agricolae.
Britannia servitutem suum quotidie emit, quotidie poscit, The Britans are
every day begging to be slaves, every day giving money for it.

THe last motive is, To enterprise any war, not so easy.
the advantage we now have of greater Facility and assurance of Success in
any foreign enterprise, by this happy Union of both Kingdoms, then ever any of
our Ancestors had.

To which is answer nothing can be more full, Means of success formerly.
then laying down the motives and means that led on the Kings of this Realm to
attempt and prosperously effect their undertakings in other parts, weigh how
they suite these times, and whether that any or all the advantages we now have
may be to them of equal worth and valuation. The first consideration is in
Place, Advantage of Place and Party.
the next in Person. Advantage of Place.
In the wars of France (whether those for the defense of particular Signiories,
or competition of the intite Kingdom) we had ever Ports to land at, and Forts
to retire to, which now we have not. The coast of Normandy was our own, by
which we might enter the midst of France. And Edward 3. when he intended to
annoy the East part, sided with Montfort against Charles de Bloys, whom he
invested with the Duchy of Britain, that so he might have there an easy
footing. Thus by leave of his Confederats in Flanders he had safe entrance for
all his Army to invade the other side, and a sure retreat, when upon any
occasion he would come back, as he did to Antwerp. And wheresoever any army may
have a quiet descent, the greatest difficulty is overcome; for the rest
consists in Chance, wherein Fortune is rather wont to prevail then Virtue.
But Livy lib. 28.
ibi grave est Bellum gerere, ubi nullus est Classi Portus apertus, non ager
pacatus, non Civitas Socia, non consistendi aut procedendi locus, quocunque
circumspexeris hostilia sunt omnia; There it is a hard task to wage war, where
there is no Port open for our Navy, the Country our enemy, no City our
Confederate, no place to make a stand or to march out from, but whithersoever a
man looks, he can see nothing but hostile intentions against us. And this must
be now our case, which was never our Ancestors.

Advantage personal was either A Party found made.
Confederates.


For the Persons considerable, they are the Subjects to our enemies, or our own
Confederats. Of the first, our Kings heretofore did either work upon the
opportunity of any dissension ministered, or by Pension and Reward either make a
fraction in Obedience, or Neutrality in Assistance with the Subjects of their
Adversary. The Duke of Burgundy, Earls of Britain, Dreux and others in France,
offended with their Sovereign, Math. Paris in vita H. 3.
Confoederati erant Comiti Britanniae Henrico and Regi Angliae, became
Confederates with Henry Earl of Britain and King of England; and thereupon
drew him over into Britain. Math. Par. vita Hen. 3.
The same King by yearly Pensions of 7000. l. kept diverse in Poictou in
fraction against their Lord and their own Loyalty. Edward 3. had never
undertaken the conquest of France, if Froisard.
Robert de Artoys (displeased with the Sentence of Philip his Master for that
Earldome) had not incited and complotted for him, as Godfrey of Harecourt did
after. Nor Henry Walsingham. T. Livius Foroliviensis in vita He. 5.
5. if the unsound memory of the French King, the jealousy of those Princes and
Orleantial Faction had not made his way and Fortune.

THe Confederates our Kings held formerly for mutual Aid were of such
consequence in all their affairs, Confederates were the only ground of all the
good success.
that those so best strengthened achieved ever the greatest and most glorious
victories. As the first the 3d. Edwards, the 5th. and 8th. Henry's. Whereas
Henry the sixth, that was of all the rest left most naked to himself, although
the greatest otherwise in opportunity, lost all the purchase of his Ancestors
in the end. It is not amiss in such a foundation of Greatness as Confederacy,
to lay down successively, first, with whom we tied that knot of love; then,
what were the motives or assurances; and lastly, whether the same in both is
left to our occasions and will now or no.

Henry the first, A list of all the Confederates from Hen. the firsts Reign to
the end of the last Queen. Henry 2.
but to assure his own posses sions beyond Sea, Ex Contract. orig. in Arch.
These. West.
adscivit in praesidium Comitem Britanniae, and Theobaldum Comitem Blesensem,
called to his aid the Earl of Britain, and Theobald Earl of Bloys.

Henry the second did the like with Ex Radulp. de Diceto.
Robert Earl of Flanders. And again Ex orig. signat. a Comite and Castellanis,
in These. West.
cum Theodorico Comite Flandriae, Richard 2.
Baronibus, Castellanis, and caeteris hominibus Comitis, with Theodoric Earl
of Flanders, the Barons, Governors of Castles, and other the Subjects of the
said Earl; who stood bound to serve him in summonitione sua, sicut Domino, pro
feodis quae de ipso teneant, upon a summons, as well as their own Lord, for the
Fees which they held of him.

Baldwin Earl of Flanders contracteth under Bond Ex Radulph. de Diceto.
mutui subsidii, quod sine Rege Richardo Angliae non componeret cum Rege
Francorum, of mutual aid, that he would not come to agreement with the French
King without Richard King of England. And the Math. Paris 184.
Britains relicto Rege Franciae Regi Richardo adhaeserunt, forsaking the King
of France, did join with King Richard.

Between King John In dorso Cla. an. 1. Joannis.
and the Earl of Flanders there was a Combination mutui auxilii contra Regem
Francorum, King John.
of mutual assistance against the French King. Ex orig. in These. Westminster.
The like with the City of Doway and Earl of Holland.

Henry 3. Henry 3.
an. 11. drew Dors. Pat. 11. H. 3. m. 11.
Peter Duke of Britany into Confederacy against the French; and Fernand Earl
of Flanders with a Pension annual of 500. Ma^ks. Rot. lib. an. 14. H. 3. m. 7.
ex originali.
And anno 38. Alfonsus King of Castile combineth with him and his heirs contra
omnes hom^nes in mundo, against all the men in the World. To whom he remained
so constant, that an. 8. and 10. Edw. 1. he would not grant a Truce to the
French King, but ad preces and instantiam at the instant suit of the King of
England.

Edward 1. Edward 1.
an. 13. Claus. an. 13. Edw. 1.
by a pretense of inter-marriage d^ew Florence Earl of Holland from the French
to his party: Ex origin. in Thesaur.
and the year following, by mediation of the Lord of Black-mont, the Earl of
Flanders, who is Rot. Vascon. an. 20. m. 19.
an. ^0. assisted him in the wars of Gascoign. Rot. Alman. de annis 22. and 31.
m. 13.
In the 22. he combined with Adolph King of the Romans, and the Earl of
Gueldres; tying the Nobility of Burgund^e with a yearly donative of 30000. l.
Turonensium to aid him contra Regem Franciae, against the French King. Ex
origin. sub. sigillo in These. Westminster.
He had Guido Earl of Flanders and Philip his son for 100000. l. Turonensium
in pay against the French King, an. 24, 25, and 31. of his Reign; Rot. Alman.
an. 31. m. 14.
retaining the Earl of Gueldres by pay of 1000000. l. the Duke of Lorrain by
1600000. l. Dors. Rot. Alman. 18.
the Nobility of Burgundy by a Pension of 30000. l. and Wallerand Lord of
Montay by 300. l. Turonensium in his service the same year. Rot. Pat. an. 34.
m. 24.
And in an. 34. Reginaldum Comitem Montis Beliardi and alios de Burgundia
contra Regem Franciae, Reginald Earl of Mont-Belliard and other Burgundians
against the King of France.

Edward 2. Edward 2.
had Rot. Vasco. an. 9. and 11.
auxilium tam maritimum quam terrestre a Genoensibus, assistance as well by Sea
as by Land from the Genoeses. Dors. Claus* an. 18. m. 7.
And in an. 18. besides his Alliance with Flanders, John Protector of Castile
aideth him contra Gallos cum 1000. equitibus and peditibus, and Scutiferis
10000. against the French with 1000. horse and foot, and 10000 other armed men.

Edward the 3. Froisard.
had by the Marriage of Philip, Edward 3.
the Earl of Henault and Holland her Father assured to him; and retained John
of Henault and his Followers, Rot. libera 2. m. 6.
qui venerunt in auxilium adrogatum Regis, who came to assist the King at his
call, with a Salary of 14000. l. yearly. Before he adventured to avow and
maintain his Challenge to the Kingdom of France, Rot. Alman. anno 11.
he made up to his party Lodowick the Emperor, (who the better to countenance
his enterprise, elected him Vicarium Imperii, Vicar of the Empire.) Rot.
Antwer. anno 12.
Reginald Earl of Geldres, Lewis Marquess of Brandenburg, Conrade Lord of
Hard, who served him with 50. men at Arms, the Cardinal of Genoa and his
Nephew, who aided him with Galleys, the Magistrates of Colen, Bruxells, Lorrain
and Mechlin, and Froisard.
Jacques de Artevile head of the Gantois Faction; who having quitted all duty to
the banished Earl, submitted themselves and most of Flanders to the service
and protection of Edward 3. who to free them of two Millions of Crowns,
wherein, as a Caution of obedience to the Crown of France, Ex Rot. Antwerp. an.
12.
they stood bound as well by Oath as Obligation, took upon him the Title of
King of France, and employed John Duke of Brabant and Lorrain, William
Marquess of Iuliers, and the Earl of Henault and Holland, his assured
Friends, Procuratores suos ad vend candum Regnum Franciae, his Procurators to
claim the Crown of France, Rot. Parl. anno 14. n. 8.
These his Allies nor long after meeting him at Tournay with 100000. men, as
Robert de Artoys did with 50000. at S. Omers against the French King. And thus
he attired and furnished his first enterprise, weaving into his Faction and
support more and more, as often as either pretense or just occasions would give
him leave. By claus. an. 18. m. 25.
color of Marriage he drew in the King of Sicilie in the 18th. year, the Duke
of Millain, and the King of Castile for mutual aid; and Dors. claus. an. 18.
m. 20.
Simon But anger Duke of Genoa, and his Subjects for hire and reward. In the
19. year Dors. calus. an. 19. m. 14.
the questionable Title of the Duchy of Britain assured him of John de
Montford; against whom the Froisard.
French King maintained Charles de Bloys for that Duchy. In an. 24. Rot. Pat.
an. 24. n. 8.
he renewed the Contract with the Genoeses; and in 30. made a convention of
Peace, and mutul auxilii cum Rege Navarrae, and of mutual aid, with the King
of Navarre. In Ex orininali de anno 37. in lib. To. Cotton.
the 37. with Peter King of Castile: and in that and 41. Ex orig. in These.
West. de annis 37. and 41.
an alliance of Aid and Amity. he entered with the Duke of Britain: and an. 45.
Ex orig. sub sigillo.
again with the Genoeses and Lewis Earl of Flanders and Duke of Brabant: Ex
Contract. origin, in Archiv. These. Westminster.
and an. 46. with Ferdinand King of Portugal.

Richard the second rene weth Claus. an. I. R. 2.
in an, Richard 2.
I. the confederation that his Grandfather had with the Duke of Britain; and
with whom anno 3. he contracted anew, as he had done anno 2. with Lewis Rot.
Franc. anno 2.
Earl of Flanders. In the 6. Ex orig. in These.
year he combineth with the Flemings Rot. Parl. anno 6. n. 11.
contra intmicos communes, against the enemies of them both; with Ex Contract.
in the lib. Italico Rob. Cotton.
the Kings of Naples, Sicille, Navarre and Arragon, de mutuis auxiliis, for
mutual ai^e; Rot. Franciae anno 6. m. 28.
and with Wenceslaus the Emperor contra Carclum Regem Franciae and Robertum
Regem Scotiae, against Charles King of France, and Robert King of Scotland. In
an. 8. Rot. Franc. anno 12. m. 16 and anno 18. and 19.
with the Kings of Jerusalem, Sicilie, and Portugal. In the 10. with
Portugal, who at his own charges aided this King with 10. Galleys. And with
William Duke of Gueldres de mutuis auxiliis, for mutual1 aid. And an. 12. Rot.
Franc. an. 12. m. 16. and anno 18. and 19.
18. and 19. with Albert Duke of. Bavaria. Rot. Franc. anno 20. m. 2.
And an. 20. with the Earl of Ostrenant de retinentiis contra Regem Franciae,
against the King of France. And Rupertus Count Palatine of the Rhene an. 20.
became a Homager for term of life to this King.

Henry 4. entered alliance Rot. claus. an. 2. Hen. 4. and Rot. Fran. anno 2. and
3. H. 4. m. 6. Henry 4.
of mutual aid in 2. years with William Duke of Gueldres and Mons. Rot.
Franc. anno 12. H. 4. m. 21. Henry. 5.
In the 12th. with Sigismond King of Hungaria. Tho. Walsingham.
And in the 13. by fiding with the Factions of the Dukes of Berry and Orleans,
laid the basis upon which his Son that succeeded reared the Trophies of his
Renown.

For Henry the fifth going forward upon the Advantage left and daily offered,
strengthened himself anno 4. Ex Rot. Parl. anno 4.
by a League perpetual with Sigismond the Emperor; renewing that of Richard
the 2. Ex orig. in These, Westminster.
with John King of Portugal, as his Father had done. He entered a contract with
the Duke of Britain, and with the Queen of Jerusalem and Lewis her Son for the
Duchy of Anlou and Mayn; and with the King of Portugal and Duke of Bavaria
for supply of men and Munition by them performed. Ex chron. Rogeri Wall. in
vita H. 5. anno 5. and 8.
And the year before the battle of Agincourt sends the Lord Henry Scrope to
contract with the Duke of Burgundy Ex Instruct. orig. 31. Aug. 5. H. 5.
and his Retinue for Wages in servitio suo in Regno Franciae vel Ducatu
Aquitaniae, in his service in the Kingdom of France, or the Duchy of
Aquitain; esteeming the alliance of that house the rea^iest means the attain
his end.

Henry 6. Henry. 6.
Ex Contract. originali.
so long as he held the Amity of Britain (for which he contracted) and the
confederacy of Burgundy, his friend or eldest assurance and best advantage,
which he did to the 16th. year of his government, there was no great decline
of his Fortune in France. But when Burgundy Ex Tractat. Alrabatensi.
brake the bond of our assurance, and betook him to the Amity of France, and
dealt with this Crown but as a Merchant by way of intercourse, first at the
Treaty of Ex tractat. Brugens. 1442
Bruges 1442. then at Ex tractat. Callisiae 1445. Ex tractat. Bruxellensi 1446.
Callis 1446. the reputation and interest we held in France declined faster in
the setting of this Son, then ever it increased in the rising of the Father.

And Edward the fourth who succeeded, sensible of this loss, woed by all the
means either of Intercourse or Marriage to win again the house of Burgundy,
Parl. an. 7. E. 4. n. 28. Edward 4.
which in an. 7. he did, to join for the recovery of his right in France. Rot.
Franc. anno 8. m. 22. and ex contract. originali.
And drew in the year following the Duke of Britain to that Confederacy. In
the Rot. Franc. an. 11. E. 4. m. 7.
11. year he renewed with Charles of Burgundy. the bond of mutual Aid; and
contracted the next Rot. Franc. an. 12. m. 22. and ex orig. in. These. Westminster.
year the like with the King of Portugal. And in an. 14. pro recuperatione
Regni Francae, contra Ludovicum Usurpantem, for the recovery of the Kingdom of
France out of the hands of Lewis the Usurper, ( Rot. Fran. anno 14. m. 18. and
19.
as the Record is) entered a new Confederacy with the Dukes of Burgundy and
Britain; Ex Contr. de anno 1487. pro solutione 50000 scutorum ad 100. annos.
And in the end wrought from them a round Pension of money, though he could not
any portion of land

Henry the 7. Henry 7.
Rot. Fran. anno 5. and 6. Hen. 7. and Contract. origin. an. 8. H. 7.
an. 5. Henry 8.
and 6. entertaineth an Alliance with Spain against the French King. The like
in the 8. with the King of Portugal: and in the 10. Ex magno Intercusu de an.
1495.
with the house of Burgundy for Intercourse and mutual Aid.

Henry the 8. in an. 4. Ex tract. original. de dat. 1513.
renews the Amity of Portugal; and the next year combineth with the Emperor
Maximilian against Lewis the French King, who aideth him out of Artoys and
Henault with 4000. horse and 6000.foot; whereupon he wins Tournay, Ex litera
Max. Imp. Card. Ebor. dat. 15.
Consilo, Auxilio, and favoribus Maximiliani Imperatoris, with the advice,
assistance, and countenance of the Emperor Maximilian. In anno 7. Rot. Fran.
anno 7. H. 8.
to weaken the French King, he enters league with the Helvetian Cantons by his
Commissioners Wingfield and Pace; and with Ex tract. Bruxellensi 1515.
Charles of Spain for Amity and mutual Aid: into which Maximilian the
Emperor and Ioane of Spain Ex originali subscript. card. Sedunensi de dat.
1516.
were received the year following Ex tract. Callis. anno 1521.
In an. 12. with the Emperor Charles and Ex tract. orig. subscript. manu Card.
Ebor. and Margar. Regent. 24. August. 1521.
Margaret Regentesse of Burgundy the makes a Confederation against Francis the
French King, as the common enemy: and quia Rex Angliae nonpossit ex propriis
Subditis tantum equitum numerum congerere, the King of England could not
furnish such a quantity of Horse of his own Subjects, as was mentioned in the
contract, the Emperor gives leave that he levy them in any his Dominions in
Germany. And the Pope in furtherance of this intendment interdicteth the French
territories, calls in aid Brachii Secularis, of the Secular power, Ex tract.
Winsor. 1522.
those two Princes; appoints the Emperor Protectorem and advocatum
Ecclesiae, the Churches Advocate and Protector; and styles their Attempt
sancta expeditio, holy expedition. Ex tract. Cambrens. 1529.
And this is by the Treaty at Windsor the next year confirmed and explained.
Renewing in the years Ex tract. ultrajectensi.
21. 35, and 38. the association, and bond of mutual aid with the same
Princes, and against the French King, if he brake not off his Amity with the
Turk.

And although Ex tract. de anno 1543. Ex originali dat. ultimo Janu. 1547.
Edward the 6. in the first year of his Reign made the Contract between the
Crown of England and the house of Burgundy perpetual; Ex instruct. Rich.
Morison Edward 6.
yet forbore he to aid the Emperor in the wars of France, disabled (as he
pretended) by reason of the Poverty the troubles of Scotland had drawn upon
him; Ex litera Ducis Summers. Magist. Page 1549.
And therefore offered the Town of Bullen to the Imperial protection.

During the Reign of Queen Mary, there was no other but that Ex contract.
Matrimoniali 1554.
of Marriage, Aid and Intercourse with the Emperor, Spain and Burgundy;
Extract. Matr. 1559. Queen Mary,
and besides that tripartite bond at Cambray of Amity and Neutrality.

Our late Renowned Mistress entertained with the Prince of Conde Ex artic.
subscript. a Vidame de Chartres 1562. Elizabeth.
about New Haven, and Ex s^^der. Trecensi. 1564
with Charles the 9. 1564. and at Ex tract. ^l^sensi.
Bloys 1572. with the King of Navarre before the accession of the Crown of
France to him, and after Britain, and lastly by the Duke of Bullen Ex tract.
Londim. 1596.
in 96. And with the States of the Netherlands in the years 85. Ex tract. cum
ordin. Belgiae de annis 1585. and 1598.
and 98. diverse Treaties of Amity, Confederats of most benefit to England.
Confederation and Assistance.

By all these passages, (being all that well either our Story or Records can
discover) it appears manifest the Kings of England never to have undertaken,
or fortunately entertained any Foreign Enterprise without a party and
confederate. Amongst which by situation, those of best advantage to us have
been the Dukes of Britain, Lords of the Netherlands, the City of Genoa, the
kings of Portugal and Spain, and the Empire, since knit into the house of
Burgundy

As for the remote and inland Princes of Germany, Princes whose Confederation
are of least benefit.
the Kings of Denmark, Poland and Sweden, (so far removed) I have seldom
observed that this Crown has with them contracted any League of Assistance or
Confederacy, but of Amity and Intercourse only.

IT remains to observe a little, Bonds of Confederation cannot be the same
they were before. As with the State of Genoa.
what were the reasons that first induced, and then preserved the Affection and
Alliances of these several Nations respectively to this Crown. The assurance
we had of the State of Genoa was their Pensions and Traffic here. All which
time by equality of Neighborhood they stood of themselves without any jealousy
of Surprise. But as soon as Vicinum Incendium, the fire began in Millain, they
put themselves into the protection of Spain, foreseeing how dangerous it would
be for a weak State to stand Neutrall, according to Aristhenus counsel to the
Aetolians, Livy Dec. 4. l. 2.
Quid aliud quam nusquam gratia stabili praeda victoris erimus? What else will
become of us, being in firm friendship with neither side, then to be made a
prey to the Conqueror? Since which time Spain by estating Doria, Grimaldi, and
the Spinellos, chief Families of that City, with great Patrimonies in Naples,
retaining their Galleys in his perpetual service and salary, the Inhabitants
of all sorts in beneficial Trade, and (no less in Policy to engage that City,
then to supply his own Wants) continually owing the wealthiest Citizens such
vast sums of money, as the Interest of late exceeded In Relatione de Statu
Genoae an. 1595.
25. Millions; he has tied it more sure to the Spanish party, then if it were
commanded by a Cittadell; so that it must ever now follow the faction and
fortune of that Crown.

Navarre and Britain (while States of themselves) were so long firm to our
Confederacy, Navarre, Britain.
as they were tied with the bond of their own Calamity, occasioned by that
power, which incorporating lately the one by Descent, the other by Contract, is
by that Union and return of all the Appennagii, more potent now then ever it
has been under the House of Capet.

Burgundy was so long our friend, Burgundy.
as either they were enriched by Staple of our Commodities, or had protection
of our Swords against France, who not only claimed Sovereignty over most, but a
proprietary interest in part; and therefore had reason to give aid and Arms
to such a Confederate as did by a diversive war secure, and by particular
Immunities enrich that State. But now growing into Spain, they need no such
assurance in the one; and we almost undone by their draping of our wool,
(which is happily called home,) not able to return them the benefit of the
other, cannot presume upon any such assurance of their aid as heretofore.

Spain may seem to give us the best hope of a fast Confederate for 2. Spain.
respects. First, for that he is absolute, and that we be equally devoid of
demand, neither having against the other any Titles. Next, for that the
intercourse of Trade is more reciprocal between us then France, and our Amity
founded upon long love and old blood. To this may be made a twofold answer,
from the change of their Dispositions: First, for that they never assist any
now, but to make themselves Master of their State. Thus ended they the strife
between the Competitors of Portugal. And when they were called into Naples by
the Queen against the French, they combined with her Adversary, and divided the
Kingdom. And after upon the River of Garillon, under their Leader Gonsalves,
taking an advantage, they defeated the whole Army of the French, holding ever
since that entire Kingdom themselves. For Spain will admit neither Equallity
nor Fellowship, since upon Union of so many Kingdoms, and famous Discoveries,
they begun to affect a fifth Monarchy. The Other; that the late hostility
between them and us has drawn so much blood, as all forms of ancient Amity
are quite washed away: and as Paterculus Paterculus.
says of Carthage to Rome, so may we of Spain to England, Adeo odium
Certaminibus ortum ultra metam durat, ut ne in victis quidem deponitur, neque
ante invisum esse desinet quam esse desut: The hatred begot by former quarrels
does endure so lastingly, that the very conquered party cannot forget it; and
in such a case the very places must cease to be, before the hatred and envy
toward it can cease.

BEsides these local considerations, there will 2. other Dangers now fallout
from any Contract of mutual aid: The one from diversity of Intention, Dangers
in Confederacy by diversity of Ends. Examples, that ends served, Confederates
quit all bonds of Combination
and the other of Religion. In the one, when either the Confederate has safely
attained his own secret End,(whatsoever he pretended in the entrance,) he
leaves the other to work out his own designs. Thus was Hen. 3. served, called
over by the Earls of Toulouse and March; they in the mean time having made
their Peace with France: Matthew Paris 1242.
Et expertus jam infidem, imo perfidiam Pictavensium, turpiter recessit, and
festinans non pepercit Calcaribus, in so much that having found the treachery
and perfidiousness of the Poictovins, he was forced dishonourably to retreat,
and for haste to spur away; the peril the poor King was left in being so
great. He was handled like to this by Pope Alexander the fourth, who having
drawn him into the wars of Apulia against Manfred, in the end, depauperato
Regno Angliae and undique bonis suis spoliato, his Kingdom of England being
impoverished, and wholly despoiled of its Goods, left him to his own shift. The
King of Navarre calling in the aid of Edward 3. Rot. Parl. anno 29. E. 3. n. 6.
against France, and appointing the Isle of Gersey the Rendezvous of their
forces, revolteth to the French, after he had by countenance of that
preparation wrought his Peace. Maximilian the Emperor to induce Henry 8. not
only contracteth to aid him in person to recover the Crown of France, and pro
tyrannico Rege repellendo, and to remove the tyrannical King, (they are the
words of the League;) but conferreth upon him in the same Coronam Imperialem
and Imperium Romanum, the Imperial Crown and the Roman Empire in reversion;
and estateth the Duchy of Millain after recovery upon his person, and suorum
naturalium masculini sexus haeredum, modo feodorum Imperialium, and his heirs
male lawfully begotten, to hold in Fee of the Empire: yet in the close left the
King to his own fortune, his turn for Millain and Verona, served. Charles the
fifth when by the incuision of the French he saw his portion in Italy
distressed, in safety whereof consisted the whole Pulse of the Spanish,(as he
used himself to say,) for it supplied his Army with great Levies, and was fitly
seated for a fifth Monarchy; he then engaged Hen. 8. in the wars of France, and
bound himself (as Bourbon his Confederate) that he would assist him to the full
Conquest of that Kingdom, and the other should become Homager to Hen. 8. as to
his Sovereign. But after that Bourbon had advanced his Army and distressed the
French King, he in his answer to Master Pace the Kings Ambassador refused that
assurance of duty, and gave a just suspicion, that he by help of his Party
intended to usurp upon that State himself, which the Emperor never meant to
the King of England; least by such footing in France, Suspecting that an Allie
may grow too great, dissolveth alliance
he might grow so great as to give law to his neighbors. And to fall off upon
such grounds has ever been excusable, howsoever the bonds of Alliance were.
Thus did Hen. 8. as often change his hand of help, as either Princes of Spain
and France got ground of the other. And the Spaniard now, to keep the States in
Italy disunited, compoundeth differences at his pleasure, or takes part with
the weaker, not suffering any, though his own dependant, to grow too strong:
which was lately seen in patronizing the D. of Mantua against Savoy, according
to the Rule of Quinctius in Livy, Live. lib. 34.
Non tantum interest Aetoloru^ opes minui, it does not stand us so much in hand
to break the strength of the Aetolians, (yet they were enemies,) quantum, non
supra modum Philippum crescere, as it does to see that Philip grow not too
potent, who was their friend.

The difference in Religion may bring likewise a twofold danger. The one with
our Confederates, the other with the Subjects of this Crown.

For whenever we shall attempt upon a Catholic Prince, as France, where we
have the fairest pretenses, for with any other we are like to have no question;
then is all Contract of mutual aid left to the election of our Danger by
difference in Religion, in respect of the Confederates, who Subjects. May break
by dispensation, though both Catholics. ought to break out of the Romans
doctrine, one accounted heretic.


Confederate, who may with all easiness procure from the Sea of Rome a
discharge of all Contracts, although they were by Oath. For if in Leagues where
either party have been Catholics, as that between Edward 3. and John King of
France, and that between John of Caunt and the King of Cast^le; they ever out
of such suspect inserted this Clause, That neither side should procure
dispensationem, etc. either per Ecctesiam Romanam, vel per aliquam aliam, a
Dispensation either by the Church of Rome, or any other way, to do contra
formam Tractatus, contrary to the form of Agreement: how much more must their
jealousy be to us? And therefore in a Consultation in Henry the 8s. time, Ex
original. in manu Domini Cromwell.
whether with best security we should confederate with France or Spain, it was
resolved that either of them may slip off their advantage by color of our
Separation from the Church of Rome, if there be no better hold in their
Honesties then in their Bonds. For it will be held not only worthy
dispensation, but merit to break all Leagues with the enemies of that Church,
by the Doctrine of that See; which teaches all Contracts with any Catholic
Prince to be instanti dissolved, Doctrine of the Sea of Rome touching leagues
with Heretics.
because we are by them ranked in the list of Heretics: which holds proportion
with the Rule and Direction that Urban the sixth sent by Ex Bulla origin. sub
sigillo vrbani 6. an. pont.4.
Bull to Wenceslaus King of Bohemia, and Charles then Emperor, (before the
Council of Constance,) declaring all Confederations, Leagues and Conventions
to be Lege Divina temerariae, illicitae, and ipso jure nullae, etiamsi forent
fide data firmatae aut Confirmatione Apostolica roboratae, to be by the Law of
God invalid, void, and in law null, although confirmed by the plighting of
faith, nay though strengthened by confirmation Apostolical, if the parties
were separatae ab Unitate sanctae, Ecclesae, separate from the Unity of Holy
Church, when the league was made; or si postea sint effecti, if they become so
after. What assurance can there then be, either with France, who is received?
by his Rebenediction, into the Bosom of the Church, and his son made
Adoptivus Filius Ecclesiae, an adopted Son of the Church; or against him with
Spain, who being Protector and Champion of that See Apostolic, submits
himself (as he has ever done) to the Popes pleasure and design, and must not
only forsake? but aid against us in any war we should there undertake?

Besides it is considerable, Subjects obedient to the Popes Censure a dangerous
Party.
howsoever all sides of our own will join in point of defense to a mutual
aid; whether they will so in a foreign Invasion; (especially when the party
assailed shall be of their own Religion.) For when the Interdiction of the Pope
could draw against John King of England and Ex Eulogio Hist.
Lewis the 12. a side of their own Subjects, (as it did after in the same
Kingdom against Hen. 3. though all 3. conformable in points of Religion to
that See;) how much more will it work with the people devoted to their opinions
in a State divided from their obedience? For amongst us the Catholic Church
has many Jesuits to raise Faction, and divert people from duty; the Recusants
many, and Malcontents not few; all which with war will discover themselves,
but now by this happy calm unassured of assistance, lock up their riches in
security, and their hearts in silence. And therefore by any enterprise, it is
not with the rule of Seneca safe, concutere felicem statum. For provoking of
some adversary in respect of Papal protection, they pick advantage to ground a
quarrel of Religion: and then the sancta Expeditio, the holy expedition against
Lewis, will be made Bellu^ Sacrum, a holy War against us.

But admitting no less then in former times an easiness to attempt; it is not
a meditation unnecessary to think in general of the dangers and
impossibilities to retain. For first we must more then transgress Limits quos
posuerunt Patres, the Bounds which our Fathers owned; Et penitus toto divisos
or be Britannos,


And Britans from the world wholly divided; and relinquish that defense of
Nature, wherewith she has incirculed, divided, and secured us from the whole
world; ( Festus Amoenus.
Te natura potens Pelago divisit ab omni
Part orbis, tuta ut semper ab host fores.
From all the Earth Nature has parted thee
With Seas, and set thee safe from Enemy.)
and commit our Frontiers (had we never so much upon the next Continent) to the
protection of an Army, Danger of large Frontiers.
which besides the continual Charge, if we give Ambitious and able Commanders,
(as unable for our Interest we will not,) how ready shall it be in such a
Leader, and backed, if he please, to give Law to his own country? For Trifles
will be quarrels good enough for such as can make them good by Power; And
whenever means and Ambition leads any to trouble the State, he will be sure
to color his pretext with honest Titles. Salust. in Bello Catil.
Alli, sicuti Iura populi defenderent Pars, quo Senatus authoritas maxima
foret, bonum publicum simulantes: some declaring to maintain the rights of the
People, others to uphold the authority of the Senate, all pretending to act for
the public good. Hence was it that Augustus Suetonius in vita Augusti.
refused to add any more of the Barbarous Nations to the body of his Empire,
which with great facility he might have done; Dion Cassius
and to restrain that infinite and unsafe desire of enlarging, left in Charge
to his Successors that especial point of advice, Tacitus.
coercendi intra Terminos Imperii, to keep the Empire within due and fitting
bounds. The like moderation from the same ground was in the late Queen, who
refused the sovereignty of the Netherlands, Ex proposit. Statuum de anno 1585.
so often and earnestly offered to her, foreseeing well, that as her State
should grow more respective by addition of People, and augmentation of
Territory; so Factions and Discontents (a common accident in worldly affairs)
would arise from superfluity. Besides, What State may best admit addition.
the State that may best admit increase is that, unto which addition may be on
every part indifferently. Such was the advantage of Rome, by being situate in
the midst of Europe: whereas we are thrust out of the world; to which we have
no other contiguity, then an unsure element of fluxible foundation, the Sea,
subject to tempest, contrariety of wind, and more commodious for a potent enemy
to intercept, then our selves to secure. For how large soever any Kingdom is,
all great directions move from one place, commonly from one man, as the Heart
in the Body. It is therefore necessary that the seat be so placed, that as well
Intelligence as Dispatch may safely pass with indifferency and assured Speed:
And those Forms are most quick and easy in motion, whole extremes are all
equally distant from the Center; for the more different from the Circle, the
more slow and hard. Rome may sufficiently example this: For so long as the Orb
of that Empire so moved about her, all things kept on their course with order,
and ease; but after the Seat was by Zozimus in vita Constantini.
Constantine removed to an extremity of the Circle, it stood a while still, and
in the end dissolved. For either through the mass of Business, the limitedness
of any man's sufficiency, or impossibility to consider all due Circumstances but
in re praesenti, there must fall out infinite defects in the directions. Or if
none, either by reason of Distance they come too late, or if not, by reason of
Remoteness, he who is to execute will be bolder with his Instructions then is
fit for a Minister to be. How dangerous is it then by addition of Territories
for our Master, Velleius Paterc. de Expeditione Caesaris.
Alterum pene Imperio nostro and suo quaerenti Orbem, whilst he is seekng to
join another world, in a manner, to his and our Empire, to alter either the
settled order of directions, or walls of our security. Besides, as in the
Frames of Nature Anima rationalis, the rational soul cannot informare, give
life, sense, or discourse to the matter of an Elephant or a Fly; (or any other
body disproportionable to a Form so qualified:) so is there as well a bound of
amplitude and structness wherein the soul of Government is comprised; Bodin. de
Repub. lib. 6.
Between which extremes there are many degrees of Latitude, some approaching to
the greatest (that nature seldom or never produces) some to the least, and
some to the mean; beyond which proportions respectively though some may have a
will to effect they never can have a power to attain. And this we may see in
the former accession of so much to us in France, which we could never either
with Profit or Assurance retain? being gotten by Conquest, and but tacked to by
Garrison, contrary to the nature of Hereditary Monarchies. For some Kingdoms
(in which number this may be accounted) are of the same condition that
Demosthenes Ex orat. Demosth. ad Athenienses.
makes the Athenians: Non ea vestra ingenia sunt, ut ipsi aliis vi oppressis
Imperiateneatis; sed in eo magnae sunt vires vestrae, ut alium potiri
principatu prohibeat is; aut potitum exturbetis; It is not your way, violently
to oppress other States and seize the Government; but in this is your strength
manifest, that you can hinder another from possessing the Government, or when
he is possessed of it, throw him out again. Since then by Situation and Power
we are the fittest, either to combine or keep several the most potent and
warlike Nations of the West, it is the best for Safety, and the most for
Honor, to remain as we were, Arbiters of Europe, and so by Neutralitie sway
still the Balance of our mightiest Neighbors: Safety in Neutralitie.
which by holding of our hands, and only looking on, we shall easily do, since
Spain and France hang so indifferently, that a little weight will cast the
Beam; employing ours, as Claudius did his Forces in Tacitus and Dion Cassius.
Germany, ut subsidio victis Victoribus terrori essent, ne forte elati Pacem
turbarent, to assist the Conquered party, and to overawe the Victor, lest he
should be puffed up with pride, and disturb our peace. Thus did Hen. 8. with
the French and Spanish Princes, using as his Motto of Honor and Power this.
Cui adhaereo praest, He rules whom I stick to. And the late Queen studied
rather how to guard her Allies, then to enlarge her Dominions, multiplying her
Leagues more by giving then receiving gratuities; winking at her own wrongs,
rather then willing to revenge. And (as the great Mistress of the world once)
did what rather became her Greatness, then what severity of Arms required.
Hence were her Seas for the most part freed from Pirates, and her Land here
cleared of Enemies. For according to Micipsae's counsel to Jugurth, Non
exercitus, neque Thesauri praesidia Regni sunt; Neither Armies nor Treasure are
the safety of a Kingdom: but such Allies as neither Arms constrain, nor
monyes purchase, sed officio and fide pariuntur. And since by fortune of the
times succeeding, this State has grown more upon Opinion then Deed, and that
we know Magis fama quam vi stare res nostras, that our affairs stand rather by
Fame then Force; Honor attained by Neutrality, in being the Arbiter of all
differences between the might est Nieighbours.
it is most safe, neither to discover weakness, nor hazard loss by any
attempt. Besides, standing as we do no ways obnoxious by Site to any of our
neighbors, they will always be ready to refer the judgment and order of
their differences to us. As the Froisard.
Brabanters and Henowayes to the Arbitrament of Edward the third: and Ex Regist
and libris Tractatuum.
Charles the fifth and Francis the French King the decision of their quarrel to
Henry the eighth. Thus every pare shall woe us, all Princes by their Orators
shall resort unto us, as to the Common Consistory of judgment in their
debates, and thereby add more to our Reputation then any power of our own. For
as well in States as in Persons, Suitours are an infallible token of Greatness;
which Demost henes Ex Demost. 4 Philip.
told the Athenians they had lost, since none resorted to their Curia or
Praetorium. By this way shall we gain the Seat of Honor, Riches, and Safety;
and in all other but endless Expense, Trouble and Danger.

Robert Cotton Bruceus.

FINIS.
THE FRENCH CHARITY:

WRITTEN In French by an English Gentleman, upon occasion of Prince Harcourt's
coming into ENGLAND;

And translated into English by F. S. J. E.

LONDON, Printed for William Shears, at the Bible in S. Paul's Churchyard,
Anno 1655.

THE FRENCH CHARITY.
ALthough we see that natural causes produce sometimes contrary effects, that
the Sun which draws up the Clouds can also scatter them, that the same Wind
both lights and blow's out the taper, that Vipers serve for wholesome
medicaments, and Scorpions carry about them an Antidote to their own poison: it
is not so nevertheless in moral and politic affairs, wherein that which is
once ill, is always accounted such; from whence is begot in us that quality
which we call Experience, whereby wise men are accustomed to judge of present
and future actions by those that are past. Which is the foundation whereupon
all Monarchies and Republics have established the Maxims of their subsistence,
And found out both what they ought to follow and what to avoid.

The Charity which France has testified to pacify our differences is so great
that it is become incredible, so unseasonable that it is suspected, and so
contrary to their former proceedings that it is quite otherwise understood.
Philosophers say, we cannot pass from one extremity to another without some
mean; I cannot see by what steps they are come to this perfect goodness, nor
what good Genius can have made them in an instant so good friends of such
dangerous neighbors to us. I will pass my censure upon nothing, yet let me
have the liberty to judge of all. I find so great a wonder in this change, that
I find a conflict in my self to believe it. It is no common marvel, that those
who have for so long a time beheld all Europe in a flame, and could not be
moved by the blood and destruction of so many people to cast thereon one drop
of water should now have their bowels so tender as to compassionate the
dissensions arising in a corner of the world which has always bin fatal to
them; That those who have made it their chiefest interest to divide us, should
now make it their glory to reunite us; That those who place their rest in our
troubles, should now apply their cares for our repose; and that after they have
cast us down headlong, they should reach us a plank for to come ashore. Let the
wise Reader here (whilst I determine nothing) allow me at least a little
distrust; it is the Mother of Safety. The Trojans, who could not be overcome by
Arms, perish't by a pledge of peace. All the French civilityes are fair and
good; but in the bottom Quicquid id est, timeo Gallos, and dona ferentes.

Let us see what reasons can oblige them to interest themselves so passionately
in our agreement. Is it Religion? surely no; for that which they profess is
contrary to that of this Kingdom; and the little Charity they have for their
own, ought not to persuade us that they have much for ours. Is it for the
inclination they have to peace? surely no; for if they esteemed it a benefit,
they would seek first for themselves. It is perhaps for an acknowledgement of
their obligations to us in the late wars, and for the assistance we gave to
those of Rochel. I, his would be truly Christian indeed, to render us good for
evil. They will say that they are the bands of blood and parentage, which bind
them to the Queen; and yet they have let the Mother beg her subsistence and
retreat among strangers which she could not find with them? and having beheld
her without pity and succor in her greatest extremities, they advise to offer
her a remedy upon the declining of her ill. But if this be the reason of their
admittance, I conceive them no lawful nor indifferent Mediators, since they
are so much concerned in one of the parties. They will whisper us in the ear,
that the design is to pacify us, and to engage us in a league with them
against the Spaniard; although at the same time they design Ambassadors for
Munster to endeavor a peace with him. O, we should wrong them very much to
believe it, though they might seem in an humor to desire it of us; They are
too gallant spirited to pretend it, they know that we are better advised then
to serve them to pull their Chestnut out of the fire; that a body recovering
health from a long sickness ought not to expose it self to a violent
agitation; that the State will find it self laden with debts, and the Subject
exhausted by Contributions; that we ought to prefer the evident profit of
traffic before the uncertain vanity of a conquest; that Iealousies being not
yet removed, nor aemulations suppressed, all kind of arming would be suspected by
the State, fearing least some under pretense of a foreign war might study
private revenge, or the oppression of the public liberty; and that in the end
it will be our gain to see them deal with Spain, and to make our advantage of
their troubles, or not to meddle at all with them, unless by adding secretly
(according to the revolution of affairs) a little weight to them that shall be
found the lighter. If then it be none of these motives, it remains that it must
be either Generosity, or deceit. O Generosity (that have so long since
withdrawn thy self to heaven, there to keep company with the fair. Astraea, or
rather, who were buried in France in the Sepulcher of Monsieur Gonin) is it
possible that thou should be risen again, or that France should have recalled
thee with her exiles since the death of her King; and that the first labor she
should put thee to should be in favor of England, against whom but few days
since she showed such violent resentments, for an offense received by a
pretended violation of the treaties which had past between us? Truly if it be
she, we must reverence her with extraordinary respects; but before we give her
the Honors due unto her, we must know her, for fear of Idolatry in adoring
her masque for her self, or embracing a cloud in stead of a Goddess. Let us
give a thrust with our lance into the Trojan horse, to see if there be no
ambush within.

In walking lately with some French Gentlemen (as this nation is free enough of
their discourse) a word escaped from one of the company without making
reflection (as I think) of what Country I was, That amongst their Prophets
there was one which said, That the Conquest of England was promised to their
young King. This thought cast into the air though inconsideratly, seemed to me
very considerable; and having given me an occasion to reflect upon all things
both past and present, it served me as a light to guide me in the obscurity of
this Labyrinth, upon which before I had reasoned but superficially, From thence
being returned to my lodging, I opened accidentally a book of Monsieur de
Rohan, entitled The interest of the Princes of Christendom, and I fell
presently upon a passage where he said, That one of the surest ways to make
ones self Master of a State, is to interpose and make himself arbiter of its
differences. I had no need of any other Oedipus to expound to me the riddle of
the Prophesy, these first motives of suspicion having cast me into more
profound thoughts, I revolved in my mind how France had managed the whole
business, both before and since the beginning of our troubles, and weighed all
the circumstances of this Embassage. Why such a solemn Embassage in a time
when all things seem most exasperated and furthest from accommodation? Why then
not sooner, while differences were not yet irreconcilable between the two
parties? Why such a warlike Prince, who is not experienced in the affairs of
this Kingdom, to manage a negotiation of a peace the most nice and intricate
that the world at this time affords? Why at the same time levying of Soldiers
in Normandy, when all the other troops are in their quarters? Why therefore
should they supply one of the parties with money, when they come to act the
persons of mediators; if not to cast wood and oil into the flame? Why at the
same time an Agent in Scotland, who propounds to them openly a League with
France? Why begin they only to turn their cares upon England, when they are
upon the point of concluding a peace with Spain? May not we well judge that it
is to prepare themselves for a new employment? since they themselves confess
that their boiling and unquiet temper has need of continual exercise, and
that the only means to prevent troubles at home, is continually to furnish
them with matter whereupon to evacuate their choler abroad. Why does only
France afford us this so sudden and unexpected Charity, after all the fresh
wounds which bleed yet among them because of the expulsion of the Capuchins,
after the continual cares she has taken for so many years to lay the
foundation of our troubles by the secret negotiations of the Marquis of
Blainville, by the intriques of the Cardinal of Richelieu with Buckingham, by
the long plots in Scotland, and, by the open solicitations of the Marquis de
la Fert? by all which they sometimes incited the Kings ministers to make him
independent and absolute, offering to that purpose their assistance, and anon
they solicited the States to shake off the yoke of servitude, finally they
transformed themselves into a thousand different shapes, till having plunged us
deep enough in the gulf, they then call back their Embassage, to give in
appearance some satisfaction to the King, but in truth because his commission
was expired. May not we well conclude from all this, that they will now reap
the fruits they have so carefully sown and cultivated amongst us? From these
considerations falling insensibly on those of England? what need (said I in my
self) have we of the intermeddling of strangers? are they more versed in our
interests then our selves? can they afford more expedients? are they more
sensible of our miseries then those that suffer them? Is it to exhort us, or to
constrain us? the first is superfluous; the second dangerous. It must needs be
that either in the one case they think to go beyond us in wit, or in the other
to master us by force. If peace be profitable for us, have we any need either
of a Master to make us know our advantage, or of an Orator to persuade us to
it? If it be hurtful to us, we ought to give them thanks for their advice, but
follow that which is better. If the peace be feasible, why should we leave the
glory of it to others? if impossible, why loose time in making vain
propositions? why should we acquaint strong and ambitious neighbors, and trust
the Philistines with the secret of our force? Must England, that has in times
past compelled France to purchase peace, be now constrained to beg it of her?
that one of the most considerable and flourishing Monarchies of the world
should serve for matter of sport to the vanity of the French, and be the first
upon whom they exercise the Title they give themselves of being Arbiters of
Christendom? What Counsel then shall we follow in this encounter? That of good
and wise Nature, who having separated us from all other Nations by a vast and
deep trench, silently teaches us, that the principle of our subsistence is in
our selves, and that we ought not to submit our government to the arbitrament
of others.

FINIS.

