A MOST TRVE And exact RELATION OF That as Honorable as unfortunate Expedition
of Kent, Essex, and Colchester.

By M. C. A Loyal Actor in that Engagement, Anno Dom. 1648.

Printed in the Year, 1650.

The Authors Letter to the Publisher.
To the truly Noble, and my Worthily honored friend Sir C. K.
Honored Sir,
SInce through the Calamitous, and dark distractions of these unfortunate
times, I am thus eclipsed, and linkt to an ill and duskie fate; as by being
Cloistered in a Dungeon, am debarred of that happy liberty that might allow me
the wished for opportunity of kissing your hands; Yet am I thus only
Cloistered, since though my Body suffer a most severe and strict confinement,
it rather adds to the liberty of my Soul, and makes it expatiate it self with
a greater Freedom; And so I am always waiting on you, though not to your
apprehension, yet with my better Genius; and though not as an Angel guarding
you, yet still attending the illustrious throne of the All-powerfull Majesty in
my wishes, and Prayers for you.

And that you may not only know the reality of my Soul, but the command also
you have over it; I have adventured to answer (in my obedience) your Will,
though perhaps not Expectation, in sending to you, with this my account of
Colchester; by which you shall only understand I stood not there as a dumb
Cipher, though not as a very eminently active Figure: Other Honor to my self I
dare not appropriate by it, but am content (choosing ex malis minimum) to lay
open to your serious scanning my greatest imperfections, rather than adventure
the hazard of falling under the censure of ungrateful disobedience; hoping
your Charity will extend to a Courteous reception of my Imbecillities, because
clothed with as cheerful endeavors; in which garb they humbly thus come to
wait on you, having for attendance only this serious request: That your own
eyes alone may be made witnesses of their nakedness.

For though I know that truth (which I assure you here really is, and nothing
else) need not be abash't who ever she meet with, she is naturally of her self
so Beautiful, and never was more than in this service: Yet I am sensible
enough how gross an absurdity it is for any man to send her abroad in vile,
and ragged unshapen Garments; of which I must acknowledge my self too much too
guilty to expect a Justification when I shall appear at the bar of a judicious
Examination; but therefore suffer under the condemnation of a just and weighty
Censure.

Which I might the more seriously expect, were it more exactly done, should it
come to the public stage, since I have been informed, and made it my
observation too, how the Honor of that unparalled action is daily crucified,
with a confusion of monstrous, and prejudicial opinions, almost metamorphosing
it into a prodigious disguise past knowledge.

Yet I have a little digressed as possible, knowing that many passionate
Historians transported with splean against Tyrants, or too great a luxury in
the glorification of those theyhonored, have imperfectly delineated the image
of Truth; like Aurelius a Roman Painter, who, when he was to draw the face of
any Image, always made it to the resemblance of a Woman that he most dearly
affected.

But I have confined my self to a strict-Commentary of the real passages; and
to add more to your satisfaction, I have drawn my rise not only from the
first step of it is motion, but the cause that gave a product to that motion. By
which means it must prove something more tedious to you; Yet if your patience
shall so far sympathize with my desires, as my obedience has done to your
will; and at some intermisse times permit you to run it over: You shall not
only receive the benefit of satisfaction to your own fancy in requital, but a
knowledge to give the like to others that you shall find unresolved, and
deserving, in it, and heap much of Obligation and Honor on

Your most entirely devoted, and humblest Servant, M. C.

To the Reader.
INgenious Reader, (for to none other do I wish this may come) not that I
value any man's censure of the Author, but because it is an Age wherein Truth is
accounted Diabolical, and Loyalty a Treason unpardonable: And I may justly
suppose some thick-skull'd Separatist, or frothybrain'd Ignoramus, whose
customs are to criticize, because they would undervalue what they fancy not,
as much as what they understand not, will be swarming about it with their
Hypocritical Censures to stifle it with an undeserving odium: But let not the
so sloslovenly, and obscure birth of this offspring of Loyal Zeal, any whit
derogate from its worth in your opinion; for you cannot but know, that many
gallant Pieces, and Personages, have received life from as great an obscurity;
and truly I shall thus far Apologize for it, (though its deserts require not
any) read but the foregoing Letter, (not at all intended for what is now
placed) and you shall easily understand, that the Authors will, and desire of
not publishing it, as not intending it for the public stage of the world, has
been the chiefest reason of it: having made it his request, as being diffident
of its worth, that it might not suffer the danger of the Press. But I having
raised a contrary reason, and far exceeding his for silencing, from the same
grounds, thought it a greater evil to let so worthy a structure lie buried in
the womb of perpetual oblivion, when it had received so happy a conception,
then to give it a lasting life, though by so obscure a birth.

I cannot but expect that the so many Legions of Lies, that do every day
oppress the very Press it self, and tire out men's fancies with their
mutinous tumults upon the stage of the world, will be ever justling at so
handsome and candid a piece of Loyal truth, whilst the Devil the Father of
Lies is so much adored, and Christ that fountain of honor and truth crucified
and slandered every hour amongst us. But I am confident their power will never
prevail to beat it off, while there is yet a spark of Loyalty left to light
us through this dark Chaos of Atheistical Rebellion.

That I am cautious of too plainly divulging its Author, is, because otherwise
there might much of inconveniency accrue to him for so bold a discovery of his
conscience, (being already in prison) by the splenitick malice of some baseborn
phlegmatic dispositions; whose stomachs are so full gorged with Rebellion
against God and his Vicegerent, they can brook or digest nothing that savours
not of Treason or Disloyalty.

These reasons being well weighed by any ingenious and Loyal Reader, will be
sufficient. Wherefore I shall urge no more, but desire all such, as they
peruse, to draw examples of Loyalty from it, and pick not out more cautiously
what they may more artificially convert to poison, if not liked; as it is too
often seen: and let your constant endeavor (who ere you be) in the behalf and
Service of your King, and Country, exceed his if you can; then censure and
spare not; So wishing all men's Consciences as good and faithful Subjects to a
sweet and glorious Prince ought to be, Reader I commit you to the protection of
Heaven so long as you are so, and bid you farewell.

Your Friend as you censure mine, C. K.

A most true and exact Relation of that as Honorable as unfortunate expedition
of Kent, Essex, and Colchester.
UPon Christmas day, 1647. many Gentlemen and others of the meaner rank in the
City of Canterbury in Kent, being Religiously disposed to the Service of
Almighty God, according to the Liturgy and Orders of the Church, (a heinous
offense, I must confess, in these times of Reformation) met at Saint Andrews
Church in the High Street, Where M. Allday the Resident Minister of the Parish
preached to them a Sermon answerable to the day; A thing so much out of Custom
now, that we begin to forget even that Christ was ever borne, as well as the
Celebration of his Birth. And now this piece of orderly and Christian Devotion
startled the consciences of the new Saints, who enflamed with fiery zeal,
began to make tumults in the streets, and under the Church windows, thinking
thereby to drown the voice of the Preacher: but it could not any whit
discourage him from persisting in his holy and devout Exercise.

The Sermon being done, the people began to flock more tumultuously together,
so that the disturbance increased very much; By the means especially of the
Major, (a man indeed Knave enough, and I think as much Fool, as appears by
this) who walking through the Streets purposely, would have forced some people
to open their Shops, and set out their Wares to keep the Market (the day being
Saturday, and Market day) but he denying, and urging of it more seriously; one
man answering his Commands with some words which he could not well relish, he
struck him a blow in the face with his Fist: Making himself, by that means, the
first ingager and instrument to the breach of that Peace, which upon all
occasions whatever, he was Sworn to see kept and preserved.

This made a greater Distraction and Hubbub in the City; and many men thronged
together, and so mad they grew, that the Mayors heels were soon flung up, and
all his Worship thrown in the Channel, he was afterward glad to shift for his
life, as he supposed. But one of the Constables, by name and quality Huse, a
Shoo-maker, a Senior of the Faction, ran hastily out with a Pistol in his
hand; and running up and down the Streets with aggravating Clamours summons
out his Crew, who immediately tumbled out of their houses with their Arms in
their hands, and such mischievous Weapons as first they could lay hold of, in
such have, they over powered all they met: among the rest, one White a Barber,
(a man swelled as full of ungodly Schismatic Principles of Rebellion as a
Toad with poison) standing in the Street with a Musket loaded, and his match
ready cockt, meeting another man by chance stepping forth of his door, as
being Inquisitive to understand the occasion of the tumult; whom he knew to be
one that fancyed not his humor, made not much dispute with him, but upon his
questioning his standing in that posture, lets fly at him, and Shot him through
the Body, so that there was little hope of life in him.

Thus the business grew still to a greater height, and more people still
flocked together, as it is always seen in such Mutinous Broils; and many
bickerings fell out in the Streets: But ere long those Gentlemen, who ranged
about as furiously at first, as Herod's Soldiers in the Infant Martyrdom,
began to slink, and were at last glad to betake themselves to their heels, and
every one to shift for himself. White being taken, was committed to Custody
into the Town Goal, there to lie till he should receive the Justice of the Law
for so horrid a Villainy.

The other party being thus enraged, and incensed by so foul an Affront, began
to think of their own security; and knowing the malice of those they should
most certainly have to do with, seized on the Magazine of the Town, and placed
Guards about at every Gate of the City; fearing that mischief which indeed
afterward came to pass, and might have been prevented, had they not thought
themselves too secure. At last they grew something violent, and increased to a
very great number, till Sir William Man, Master Lovelace the Counselor, and
some other Gentlemen, by an extraordinary Industry had persuaded them to a
quiet desisting from prosecuting those rash Attempts which they boldly resolved
on; engaging themselves with the Mayor, and Master Savin an Alderman, and
Justice of Peace, by Articles drawn up, and Signed between them, that no man
should be molested or questioned for an thing that was done.

Upon this, they all quietly lay down their Arms, and every man betook
himself to his Vocation, and particular Habitation, which else might have
produced greater matters both in that City and the whole County.

About a month after, upon the instigation of the Mayor, whose malice could
not be appeased without revenge, by Order of Parliament came down Col. Husons
Regiment of Foot from about London to quarter in Canterbury; who no sooner were
settled in their quarters, but by Order from the House they seized on Sir Will:
Man, Master Lovelace, M. Savine, M. Dudley Wiles, and some other Gentlemen; and
many poor men of the City also, and hurried them away to Leeds Castle near
Maidstone, where they continued Prisoners about two months, and more, till
some of the poorer sort that had not where withal to subsist (none daring to
relieve them) were well nigh starved there, as their Wives and Families at home.
At last, with some solicitation of the Gentlemen to the House, by the mediation
of the Burgesses of the City, and some other of the Deputy Lieutenants of the
County, who began to be a little touched with a sense of their abominable
Injury, procured so much favor as to have Bail taken for their Liberty, till
they should be called upon to answer at the Bar of their Mock-Justice for
this high and unpardonable Riot of Peacemaking. This high favor being
obtained, they all returned home; but they were no sooner there, and scarce
settled, but the Mayor, out of his own power, having Myrmidons enough then to
maintain him in any thing, though never so ignoble, wicked, or unjust,
(although he had before Signed to the Articles of Indemnity, and that those
poor men had suffered so much misery, notwithstanding) would have had all those
of the most Inferior rank to be Whipped, or ride the Wooden Horse; for now he
knew how to domineer, having the Soldiers to clap him at the back, and
encourage what ever he would do: But by the more grave advice of some of his
more moderate Brethren he was taken off from that project, and the business lay
quiet till about a forthnight before Whitsontide; at which time the Parl. gave
Commission of special Oyer and Terminer for a Court of Sessions in the Castle
at Canterbury, and sent done Sergeant Wild, and Sergeant Steel to try them upon
Life and Death, who in the whole business were the only Sufferers, and the
Raisers of that, got either to be their Judges, or Witnesses against them to
condemn them. Condemned indeed beforehand, as by the sequel appears.

A Grand Jury also was Summoned in of Gentlemen from every Lathe of the County,
and none to be pricked but such as they thought so well affected to the
Parliament as to cast any whom they should desire to convict. All the Deputy
Lieutenants were also appointed to meet at this great Sessions; Sir Michaell
Lusey being then one of the House, and not in Command (a Colonel in the
Service once, and before that, in debt far beyond what he was worth, but now
clear from all, and his Estate very much augmented) made it his suite to the
House that he might have leave to be there at the Bench, which he soon
obtained; and coming down, made it his Brags that he thanked God he had
obtained leave of the House to be there, and that he would endeavor to set
some of those Gentlemen packing to another World, which he would willingly have
done had God given so large a power into his hands; but his protection guarded
them from the intended ruin these Unjust Judges had pre-ordained them to.

For the day being come, and the Judges and Bench in much State and Pomp set,
the Prisoners were summoned to the Bar, and the Jury Impannell'd: Then the
Indictment was read, and the Jury sent out to bring in their Verdict, who
retiring, and scanning the business after they had heard the Indictment
pleaded against, found an Ignoramus upon it; and being again brought in, gave
in their Verdict accordingly, at which the Bench wondered, and the Judges were
much displeased, having resolved their doom beforehand; wherefore the Jury was
a second time commanded forth, and again returned the same Verdict; whereupon
the Judges, as it were forced to it, cleared the business for that time, and
broke up the Court, but would not absolutely quit them, till the House should
resolve farther upon it, intending to have brought them to a second Trial: But
ere the Bench could rise, came in a Packet from the House of Parliament, with a
Relation of that great defeat given the Welsh at S. Fagons near Cardiff in
Clamorganshire; which being read, one of the Bench rising up, said to one of
the Grand Jury, Had we known but this news before, we would have made you
found something else than an Ignoramus: But the Gentleman being a resolute man,
and as Conscientious, soon made him this answer, Neither your news Sir, nor
your threatening words should have made us give in a Verdict upon another man's
Life, contrary to the result of our Consciences.

Let the world now judge by this, what the Justice of these men is, whom
nothing but fear shall keep from committing Homicide and murder on their
Fellow Christians, Subjects and Country, upon the very seats of Justice and
Judgment.

After this passage, the Grand Jury all meeting together, began to revolve in
their discourses, (being aggravated by so inconscionable a speech) of the
intolerable misery and slavery this wretched Kingdom was involved and plunged
into; and under what a Tyranny they did now suffer, by the Unlimited, Usurped,
and Arbitrary Jurisdiction their Fellow Subjects now used over them, as so many
illegal Lords and Kings; supported in it, by the unmercifull power of the
blood thirsty Sword; still disputing with much resolution and boldness among
themselves, which way they might best set themselves Freemen from such an
inhumane slavery, and unsufferable bondage: They refolved unanimously at the
last to Petition their Servants (that should be) the Commons, and their
Servants Servants, the Lords once more, to see if they could be persuaded yet
into any remorse, or consideration of the misery with which they had
overwhelmed this gasping Commonwealth. Where a Petition was drawn up, and
after some Correction, showed to some of the Deputy Leiutenants, who seeing the
Gentlemen so confident in it, though visibly against their Interest they were
sensible enough it was, yet durst not dis-approve of it. The Petition was as
follows: To the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons Assembled in
PARLIAMENT at Westminster.
The Humble Petition of the Knights, Gentry, Clergy, and Comminalty of the
County of Kent, Subscribed by the Grand Jury the 11 of May, 1648. at the
Sessions of the Judges upon an especial Commission of Oyer and Terminer, then
Executed at the Castle of Canterbury for the said County.

Shows,

THat the deep sense of our own Miseries, with a fellow-feeling of the
Discontents of other Counties exposed to the like Sufferings; prevails, with
us, thus humbly to present to your Honors these our ardent desires.

1. That our most Gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles, may with all speed be
admitted in Safety and Honor to Treat in Person with his two Houses of
Parliament, for the perfect settling of the Peace both of Church and
Commonwealth, as also of his own Just Rights, together with those of the
Parliament.

2. That for prevention, and removal of the manifold inconveniences occasioned
by the continuance of the present Army under the Command of the Lord Fairfax,
their Arrears may be forthwith audited, and they Disbanded.

3. That according to the Fundamental Constitution of this Commonwealth, we
may for the future be governed and judged by (the English Subjects undoubted
Birthright) the known and established Laws of the Kingdom, and not otherwise.

4. That according to the Petition of Right, our Property may not be invaded by
any Taxes or Impositions whatsoever; and particularly that the heavy burden of
Excise may no longer be continued, or hereafter imposed upon us.

All which our earnest desires we humbly recommend to your grave and serious
considerations, not doubting of that speedy satisfaction therein, which the
case requires, and we humbly expect: Whereby we may well hope to see (what
otherwise we cannot but despair of) a speedy and happy end of those sad and
heavy pressures and distempers, whose continuance will inevitably ruin both our
selves and our Posterities: Your timely prevention whereof, by a cheerful
condescent to what we here propound, in order thereunto, shall oblige us ever
to pray, etc.



Which Petition soon obtained the approbation of all the Gentry and Clergy,
excepting some who were troubled with the heart-burning Faction, and could not
digest so great a State-pill. Some Deputy Lieftenants also did approve of it,
and willingly Signed; others seemed to approve of it likewise, but when they
were desired to Sign, slipped their necks out of the Collar, and left the City:
but that day it was Signed by above two hundred Gentlemen then in the City, and
Copies transcribed, and dispersed amongst them all, by which means, by a very
quick flight they were dispersed over all the County also; there being so many
Centlemen then met together from every Lath and Hundred, a more fitting
opportunity could never have been fancied. Then on the backside of every
Petition was Endorsed this Postscript: It is desired, that all Copies and
Subscriptions be brought into Rochester on Monday, the 29. of this Instant May
1648. And that all who intend to accompany this Petition do meet at
Black Heath the day following by nine of the Clock in the morning.



By this means the whole County might unanimously go, not only in their
Subscriptions, but in the presentation of it to the Parliament.

But there were at the same time some of the Grandees, in the City, who by no
means could swallow it, lest it should have choked their Reputation, with the
House; and indeed, being stung with too guilty a Conscience, found this pill
too harsh a Corrasive to them. Amongst the rest, Sir Henry Heyman, and Sir
Michaell Lnsey, who posted immediately away to the Parliament to give them a
timely notice, for prevention of a design so Honorable, Conscientious, and
Religious, but absolutely destructive to their Interest and Proceedings; or at
least, that they might, by being praemoniti, be also praemuniti, which two are
seldom other then Correlatives; the one drawing a usual consequence from the
other, as indeed it proved by them, as will afterward appear by their Votes,
and Stratagems against it.

But ere they went, out of the tender affection his rebellious Bowels yearn'd
with, toward his true Brethren in Iniquity, went to the Prison where White
the Barber lay for his horrid Villainy; (the man not being yet recovered) and
brought him out, with hat in hand, giving him thanks for his so good service,
and extraordinary zeal to the Cause; and thus set him at liberty without ever
being questioned for his Fact.

Upon Sunday following, Letters were sent from the Speaker of the Lower House,
to all the Deputy Lieftenants in the County, and what Justices of Peace the
House thought good, that they understood of an intended Petition to be
preferred to the House from that County, willing them to use their utmost
endeavors for the speedy preventing it, and suppressing the people in it.
Never disputing the Justice of it, nor injustice of themselves in denying the
proceeding of it, which was as horrid as might be for any man that knows how
to judge between right and wrong almost in any thing, knows that the
intentions of a Kings calling a Parliament are for the speedy redressing the
agrievances of his Kingdom, and the admitting by him, and the choosing by the
People, the Commons into Parliament never for any other reason then to present
the Agrievances of the Commons in general for what part of the Kingdom they
served as Representatives, by way of Petition, from them to the King and Lords
for redress. But they have now so altered the Constitution of Parliament by
their newfound Kirk-lawes of Reformation, that no man, no not the best of
Politicians is Physician good enough to feel its pulse, though in a most horrid
distraction too of ill humors; and our blessed Reformers have so long faught
for the Privilege of Parliament, as that they have both lost that, and the
Liberty, and true Rights of the Subject, with the Prerogative of the King to
Boot; and Metamorposed the Laws of the Kingdom into the shapelesse monster of
an Arbitrary Government, and Tyrannous power of the Sword.

But these Letters also they were ordered and authorized to Seize, and Surprise
all persons they should find, or suspect to to be active in the prosecution of
it; and to secure all Castles, Towns, and strong holds in the County; and by
their greatest care to prevent all public Meetings at any places whatsoever
within the County, except their own. Then began the Committee to thunder abroad
their loud menaces with high threats, to all such as should dare to prosecute
so bold a Villainy, and tumultuous Seditions, as they termed it; and issued
forth a Libellous Order against it, and all such as should sign it, or any way
prosecute the progress of it amongst the people, by any public or sinister
means. The Order was as follows. By the Deputy Lieutenants of the County of
KENT, the City, and County of Canterbuy, at their General Meeting at Maidstone
the 16. of May, 1648.
WHereas we understand, that diverse persons have given out, that they intend
to assemble themselves toward the latter end of this Month, or the beginning
of the next, at several days and places, upon pretense of carrying a Petition
to the Parliament, which does concern matter against the Authority of both
Houses, and tends to the raising of Seditions and Tumults, within this
County: We having lately received a special Command from the House, to use our
best endeavors for the preserving the peace of that County, do hereby, in
order thereunto, advise all whom it may concern, to forbear all occasions of
public disturbance, by any such pretense whatsoever: And if any well-affected
persons have been abused, and misled, so as to Sign, or procure hands to any
such seditious Paper under the name of a Petition, and upon false-giving out,
that the Deputy Lieutenants of this County do approve thereof, to the end that
such wellmeaning persons may be undeceived, we having seen a Copy of the said
pretended Petition, do hereby signify our utter detestation of such Seditious
practices: and do advise all wellwishers to their Countries peace to take heed
thereof, and to Counsel, and persuade their Neighbors accordingly: And if any
pretended Copies of such pretended Petition come unto or be in their hands, to
deliver up the same unto the next Deputy Lieutenant. And we do hereby, require
the Ministers of several Parishes publicly to read this signification in
their Parish Churches upon the next Lords Day after the receipt hereof,
immediately before they begin their Morning Sermon; And the Church Wardens of
the several Parishes, are hereby required the next day after the time
appointed for the said Publication, to certify what has been done therein
under their hands unto the next Deputy Lieutenants, who is hereby directed
forthwith to transmit the said Certificate to the standing Committee at
Maidstone, that so notice may be taken what Ministers, and Church Wardens or
other Persons do their Duty therein: And such as shall be found wilfully
faulty, may be proceeded against accordingly.

Ant: Wilding. John Rivers. Richard Lee. Thomas Lewis. James Oxenden. Richard
Beale. Thomas Syliard. Lam: Godfrey. Will: James. John Bix. Will: Keniorash.


To the Mayor of Gravesend, who is hereby required to cause Proclamation hereof
to be read in open Market, next day after the receipt hereof, in the height of
the Market by the common Crier, and afterward to deliver it to the Minister of
the said Parish to read it in the Church.


But this violent course of theirs in endeavoring to obstruct, added rather a
more vigorous life to it, and made it fly through the County with a far greater
velocity, and the more exasperated the whole Country to a prosecution of it,
according to the saying of Seneca: Patientia laesa fit furor.

The whole County being, by this means, enraged, they resolved upon the
prosecution of their Petition, being so far engaged, maugre all obstructions
what ever, which caused many meetings of the Gentry, in Canterbury and
Rochester, and diverse other places of the County, at which meetings the
business was more deliberately weighed; and upon a serious deliberate scanning
they found themselves likely to be lost in a maze of Inconveniences if they
went not resolutely forward in what they had begun, whereupon this Order of the
Committee was re-viewed, and a Vindication of their proceedings in Answer to
it, drawn up, and published as follows: The Petitioners Vindication and
Answer to the Deputy Lieutenants Declaration against the said Petition.
WE the Knights, Gentry, Clergy, and Comminalty of the County of Kent, who have
Subscribed, and do intend to present the real Petition (which is absolutely
called a pretended one, and a Seditious Paper) to the Honorable the Lords and
Commons Assembled in Parliament at Westminster, according to the Just Rights
and Privileges of the Subjects of England, in pursuance of the Suscriptions of
the Grand Jury of our County the 11. of May, 1648. (who are, and ought to be
representers of the sense of our County) have taken notice of a late Order, or
Declaration, of the Deputy Lieutenants of our County, of the 16. of May, 1648.
tending to the discountenancing, and suppressing of our said Petition; and
untruly charging the same to contain matter against the Authority of both
Houses (to whom it is addressed) and the Petitioners to be raisers of Sedition
and (...). In a deep sense whereof, and indignation of such false Scandalls
imposed upon us, we do declare to the world,

That the matter of the Petition, contains in it, nothing but what is Just,
and fit for freeborne Subjects to demand, and tends to the preserving of the
Peace, not only of our County, but of the Whole Kingdom.

And the manner of our Intentions to prosecute the same shall be so peaceable
(on our parts) as shall not give occasion of Tumults, or public Disturbance.

We do protest against raising of any Factious against the Parliament, to whom
we address our selves for a Just relief of our Grievances: In pursuance of
the Right of Subjects, and their own Ordinances, and our intentions so
peaceable, we must declare,

That (not withstanding all (...) threats, published to our discouragement) we
shall go on to prosecute our Just rights and desires, in such a way as shall
neither render us guilty of Sedition, or public Disturbance; nor of betraying
our selves to the violence of such who shall unjustly endeavor to oppose us.

And we do desire all persons of our Comity, well affected to the said
Petition, not to be discouraged from the just prosecution thereof, upon any
Threats or Orders: Whatsoever. Our intention being (if it shall please God
(...) dispose us) to Sacrifice our (...) and Fortunes in the prosecution of
these our Just Rights and Desires.

We have not a desire to deceive any (...), nor have we (...) to (...), with
pretending the Deputy ^ of our Paetition. Nor do We desire any to join with
us, but those whose Reason and Conscience dictate to themselves the sense of
our Petition.



Now the Committees began to bestirre themselves on the other party with more
resolution, because they saw Threats would no whit prevail to their Advantage;
and sent out their Warrants for all the Trained Troops and Companies to meet at
Rendezvouze at several places of the County. But this neither would avail, or
any whit answer their Expectations; for, not any showed in answer to their
Warrant, but rather absented themselves from their Homes, except Captain Foach,
and some of his Troop; who, with about twenty of his Men, met together, and
Marched away to Maidstone there to attend the Committee, who thought it by
this, time to consider of their own security. Sir T. T. sent out his Warrants
likewise for his Troop to meet him at Barham Down, where appeared some ten, but
not one Officer, nor any Colors, for his Officers were all engaged for
prosecution of the Petition. There he waited almost all the day in constant
hopes and expectation of their coming up; but toward night, no more
appearing, he dispatched his Man away to Canterbury, to see if any were met
together there, and to Invite them (for now he durst not Command) but his
Worships man no sooner entered the Gates of the City, but he was surprised by a
Guard there, and Dismounted, and so forced to return back to his Master on
foot. In the interim Sir T. staying on the Downs with his few men he had, by
chance was resolved to drink; and calling for some Beer, one of his men began
the Kings Health to him, which rellished not well with his Palate, having long
time been a trusty Wight for the Parliament; and as he said, not being
accustomed to drink Healths, it would impair his own Health very much; but
indeed was something jealous they did that but as an occasion to advance some
other Inconveniency to him: Whereupon he stole away from them, and clapping his
heels to his Mule (for Spurs he seldom wore any) away he drove as furiously
as Jehu, never making the least stop till he thought he was clear of the danger
of the Cannon Jug; and like a Hare, regarding nothing before him; overtaking by
chance another of the Deputy Lieutenants more suttlely plodding along, and
ruminating upon the business; he had certainly overrun him had his Beast been
big enough to have performed it without taking any notice of him; so
extraordinary was his have, as I was informed by the same Deputy Lieutenant
himself.

Now, as it was high time, the Gentlemen engaged in the Petition began to
consider farther of their Interest; and being so far engaged, how to make
what they had done good, and which way with most security to go forwards; for
retreat they could not now, and not to perfect what they had initiated, was not
only to undo it, but themselves also without dispute; wherefore they neglected
not to meet every day. And considering withal, the imminent danger of that
perpetual slavery, not only they, but the whole Kingdom were fallen into; and
the extremity of violence the Grand Taxments of the Kingdom did threaten to
crush them with, for but Petitioning (with the Children of Israel under the
slavish Tyranny of Pharaoh) for ease of their burdens; resolved like Men of
Kent to maintain, if it were possible, their Ancient Honor and Liberties, or
to perish in the Attempt, which indeed they knew must prove a hard difficulty,
having such an infection within themselves all over the whole body of the
County; insomuch that they knew not any sound part in it, but that every one
might be likely enough to cherrish and breed up Vermin to destroy it. But yet,
notwithstanding their losty menacings, and Bugbear threats, to proceed in
their Engagement. Whereupon a Manifesto was drawn up by them, and Signed as an
absolute and unanimous Engagement amongst themselves, and afterward dispersed
to the view of the whole world, that all might know the candid reality of their
Resolutions, in these words:

THat the Innocence of our intentions, and Justice of all our undertakings may
clearly appear to all men of incorrupt understandings, and hearts not made too
servile by the long, and odious custom of Oppression. We the Knights,
Gentlemen, Clergy, and Franchlins of the County of Kent, the most free people
of this late flourishing Nation, by the wisdom and valor of our Ancestors
delivered from the Laws of the Conqueror, and to the late days of unhappy
confusion and distraction enjoying the same, through all the reigns of the
most glorious, and victorious Kings and Princes of this Nation: Do hereby
declare, and manifest to all the world, that our Meetings, and Assembling
together, is no other then a Vindication of our selves, and purposes from the
scandal and aspersions of the Committee of this County; who, upon occasion of
a Petition, in behalf of the County of Kent, assented, and subscribed to, by
the Grand Jury at the Sessions of the Judges, upon special Commission of Oyer
and Terminer, executed at the Castle of Canterbury the 11. of May instant for
the said County; have not only made Orders against the same, and Commanded them
publicly to be read in all Churches, sentencing and condemning the said
Petition, and all the Abettors thereof; but have summoned the Troops of Horse,
and forces of Foot of this County for suppression of the said Petition. Which
tends not only to the suppression of the Liberty even of the most enslaved
persons in the world, but also, as much as in them lies, show an endeavor upon
any causes whatsoever, which suit not with their humors, to over-owe the
sentences of other men; and, upon opposition therein, think they have ground
enough to take away the lives or fortunes, or both, of their said opposers.

In consideration whereof, and that now the said Committee finding themselves
unable to involve this County in blood, have made their addresses to the
Parliament and Army; and make strange, and malicious representations of our
purposes, thereby discovering nothing so much as their own pride and malice.

We the said Knights, Gentlemen, Clergy, and Free Yeomen of the said County of
Kent, do hereby appeal to all the world to judge, if it were not high time for
us to put our selves into a posture of defense: And do further declare, that
we will prosecute our said Petition, with our lives and fortunes, not doubting
of a fair reception from the two Houses of Parliament, whom we know to have
been instigated against us by the said Committee.

And therefore, saving to our selves, the enlarging of the said Petition: we
have resolved to charge the said Committee with increasing the Taxes of this
County above due proportion, and only for maintaining their own private
luxury and pride; with usurping a power over the Estates and Fortunes of the
free men of this County, not granted to them by any power of Parliament; and
with a Tyrannical, unlimitted, and imbittered spirit naturally engrafted in
them, and expressed by words and actions all along the exercise of this power
(which makes them unfit to rule) to the exasperating of the peoples hearts into
all animosity, and overthrowing of all love and peace in this County: which
also has been followed to that height of persecution, that had not the two
Houses given a stop to their (...) proceedings, we had suffered much more under
the torment of these men's projected designs.

Wherein we do acknowledge our selves also to have been secured in the temper
and moderation of the Houses. We have no more to say or do, but to defend our
selves till we can have a right understanding of our purposes and actions
before the Houses. In the mean time we shall look upon all opposition as the
provocation of a conscious and endangered Committee; and in respect of the
Invasion lately made upon the persons of our neighbors, we think fit not to
lie at the mercy of the Soldiers, but to have refuge to our Arms, from which
no threats, or face of Soldiery shall drive us, knowing well the justice of
our Cause, and the temper of our own Hearts.

Thus resolved they proceeded in their desigue, seizing all the Arms and
Ammunition at Scots Hall, Ashford, Feversham, and diverse other places, whilst
Sir Michael Lusey, and some others of the Deputy Lieutenants ceased not to act,
to the utmost of their power, for the suppressing of them; But Esquire Hales
(being a man well beloved, and that indeed for his true desert, and worth) in
short time had raised a great party in that part of the County; and falling to
work with those bold opposers, soon laid their Power flat, and their Honor in
the dust, till at last they were forced to shift for a better security than
their Arms, and took sanctuary in Sir Peter Ricots house at Ailsford; but the
Foxes lay not long there ere his Terriers were so near forcing them forth, that
they were glad to make Conditions for Law to run away from them; which being
granted, they delivered up the House, a great Magazine of Arms and Ammunition,
which proved very serviceable to the Victors.

In the interim other parties being increased, and modeled into order, still
moved up and down, and received all that wished well, and had signed and
engaged in the Petition, who were so unanimous, that within two days space
there were strong parties gotten together about Wy, Ashford, Sittingborne,
Rochester, Gravesend, and diverse other places; insomuch, that the whole
Committee were glad to make trial of the old Proverb, One pair of legs is
worth two pair of hands, so they posted away to London to tell a lamentable
story to the Parliament. Captain Lee, and another of the House being sent
down by order of the House, came to Rochester to Parley with those that were
met there; where, upon debate of the business, they used the greatest policy
they could to persuade them to accept of an Act of Indemnity from the House,
and to lay down their design; but these Gentlemen were immediately confined,
and were forced to treat for their own Indemnity and Liberty at last; for
well the Engagers knew what the Indemnity of the House would be, if once they
laid their Swords out of their hands, and were submitted to the malice of
theirs.

Tuesday, May 23. a great number of Knights and Gentlemen were again met at
Canterbury, intending one and the same Interest, and as Active as Cordial in
the real advancing the general business, not minding any other interest then
the public welfare; concluding with a magnanimous courage, to March with the
Petition in one hand, and a Sword in the other: Not, though (as some have
Malicioufly (not Conscientiously) given a false interpretation to) to force the
Higher Powers to what they should fancy, or desire, (which indeed they might
have done, (according to so grand examples in that kind, as have been showed
by those too they were to deal with) the Law now being swallowed up into the
unlimited arbitration of the power of a, though bloud-drunk, yet bloodthirsty
Sword) but that they might make their way through all obstructions, and have
liberty; maugre all apposition to present their Agrievances (according to the
Ancient Custom of this Kingdom) to the Houses of Parliament, a thing never
opposed, nor accounted Riotous till this Parliament by their All-powerfull
Arbitration voted it so. Which being a general resolve through the County, all
men betook themselves cheerfully to their Arms; the Inferior sort, and
Comminalty, submitting themselves to the Commands of the Superiors; who, as
Commissioners, acted what by a General Council was thought most convenient
for the security of so great an Engagement as that was now brought to. And that
there might be a clear, and candid satisfaction given as well to their friends
as enemies throughout the Kingdom for their thus Arming themselves, caused
this ensuing Remonstrance to be Published. (Having also understood before of
the Bloody answer their neighbors of Surrey had to their peaceable and legal
Petition; for which unhumane massacre the Butchering Mirmidons (being fetched
for the same purpose by some of both Houses) had the thanks of the House.)

BEing reduced to this choice, whether to deliver up our Lives and Liberties
together, or die Free: We are resolved to act the last scene of this Tragedy
with our Swords in our hands, which we shall sooner turn upon our own hearts,
than upon the public Peace. By what necessities exasperated to this resolve
let the world determine, and understand, that a Petition to Religion and Honor
(if the Parliament may be Judge) is by some persons neither Warranted by any
Authority from the two Houses, nor pretending to it, upon their own Score have
audaciously affronted: The Petitioners menaced, and persecuted into this
extremity, by spirits so implacably distempered, that Sir Anthony Welding vowed
he would not cross the street of Rochester to save one Soul that subscribed to
the Petition. And it was a proposition of Beales, to hang two of the
Petitioners of every Parish. If this be not enough to admonish others, let it
suffice that it awakens us into a just sense and scorn of these Indignities.
We have lost all with patience; and if at last it be accounted a crime to Beg,
we shall prefer to Perish.

Therefore we do Solemnly, and Religiously, oblige our selves, with our lives
and fortunes, to oppose effectually, what person or persons soever shall
presume to interrupt us in the just and legal presentation of our humble
desires to the two Houses of Parliament; and to the utmost of our endeavors to
save harmless, and protect each the other in a Privilege so undoubtedly our
own; and so not only adjudged, but practiced and encouraged by this present
Parliament. And further, in case any single person shall be for this Engagement
prosecuted, all of us to rise as one man to the rescue; this so help us God, as
we shall respectively perform, and resolutely.

Thus gallantly resolved was the greatest part of the Gentry in the County,
which animosity encouraged also the Comminalty into as great Bravery, and
resolute Boldness. And indeed it was high time, as the state of all the
Kingdom then stood, in so dismal a cloud of dull and sordid Slavery: The
Tyrants swords having so long time drunk the Blood of the Loyalhearted Gentry
of the Kingdom, that now they were insensible how they went on, or upon whom
they exercised their Cruelty.

This Tuesday, about noone, the Knights and Gentlemen that were entrusted as
Commissioners (for that part of the County) at Canterbury, gave Commission to
Colonel Robert Hammon for the beating up his Drums to raise a Regiment of
Foot, and Colonel Hatton for Listing, and raising a Regiment of Horse. Their
Commissions ran thus:

For the more safe and speedy expedition in preferring the general Petition of
this County, we the gentry now Interested and trusted therein, do nominate and
appoint you R.H. Colonel of one Regiment of Foot, etc.

Having the day before seized on the Magazine of that part of the County then
in that City, being very great both of Arms and Ammunition of all sorts;
Colonel Hammon immediately beating up his Drums, he had in a short time Listed
a considerable number of men, more, I think, than ever were listed by one man
in so short a time. Then both Colonel Hatton and he had Orders given to
Rendezvous the next day at Barham-Downe, where all the Trained Soldiers of
that part of the County were appointed (by warrant from the Commissioners) to
meet: But this day proved extraordinary wet, which hindered the appearance very
much.

However Colonel Hammon came with about 300. Foot well Accoutred and Armed;
and Colonel Hatton with about threescore Horse: a good Collection for so short
a time as one half day to (...) them in: But there came not in above (...)
Trained men by reason of the illness of the weather. Here met also most of the
Knights, and Deputy Lieutenants then in that part of the County, for now many
of the Deputy Lieutenants had joined with the Petitioners, although, I suppose,
out of a Politic consideration, not a Cordial (...), as indeed did afterward
appear. There (after some consultations) they (...) many businesses for the
advancement of the Engagement, using their utmost endeavors for the raising
not only of Men, but Money also, for the supporting, and encouraging those who
were not able to go through it themselves, being off from all their Callings
and Employment. Engaging for the constant paying both of Soldiers and Officers
whilst they should continue in the Countries Services: For the better
advancement whereof, every Gentleman, according to his Ability, subscribed to
the loan of Moneys, some a Hundred pounds, some Eighty, some Fifty, some Forty,
some more, some less; and sent abroad their Warrants into all parts of the
Country for the summoning all such men as had, and would engage in that service
for the advancing the general safety of the County, and Liberty of the
Kingdom. Toward night the Rendezvouze breaking up, Colonel Hammon, and
Colonel Hatton Marched off to quarter toward Dover. Then Sir Richard Hardres,
Sir Anthony Aucher, and Master Ant. Hammond, Justices of the Peace, and men as
hearty, as real, and as indulgently Industrious in the propagation of the
Engagement as men could be. And Mr. Thomas (...) with about seven score Trained
men, being then by reason of the wetnesse of the weather on horseback as
Dragoones, marched toward Sandwich, having dispatched a Messenger with a Letter
to the Mayor of the Town before to advertise him of their coming, and
intentions. Where, when they came, they found the Ports all shut, and guarded
round about the Town; then Master Mat. Carter, by appointment of the rest of
the Gentlemen marching in the head of the men, gave a summons to them; but they
at first refused to open the Gates, till after some parley with them an Officer
asked him if Sir Rich. Hardres were there or not, who was one of the Deputy
Lieutenants for the Parliament: who coming to them, and demanding entrance,
the Recorder of the Town came out, and told him that the Mayors orders were,
that if he came the Gates should be opened, but not else. So immediately they
were, and marching quietly in, they drew up in the Market place, and first
changed all the Guards about the Town before they engaged in any other
business, it being then almost night. Then the Commissioners being together,
they sent for the Mayor of the Town, and demanding his subscription to the
Petition, gave him orders immediately for the raising of Moneys for the
forwarding the business; but he proved very slow in that service, pretending
that the Town was very poor, and could by no means raise any: The Excise
officers were also called in, but their stores proved very poor also; insomuch
much that there remained little hopes of any good to proceed from that place.

In the evening came in a Gentleman that had been formerly a Divine, and a
Chaplain at Sea, and a Major in the service of the Parliament, (as it seemed
by his deportment) very penitent for that he had engaged himself in so unjust a
Cause, and Horrid Employment; and proffered the best, and utmost of his service
to the furthering the Petition, and the Engagement of the Country if he might
be employed in any thing that might give him opportunity. Whereupon, they
knowing him to have been at Sea, and well acquainted with the Navy, being both
Chaplain there to the Earl of Warwick, and Minister of Deal, thought it could
not prove amiss to employ him, having signed to the Petition before; and so
had Letters drawn up for him that night, to every Ship one, and in every Letter
a Copy of the Petition, making this absolute result, that some happy success
might follow; however, if it did no good, yet it could no way endamage them;
which indeed proved a most happy, and fortunate design as all the Kingdom are
witnesses of. The next morning being Thursday, the Mayor and Aldermen were
again called upon to know what moneys they had raised, or would advance to
that Service, being solely for the Re-enthronement of the King (as they told
them) and the speedy redemption of the most Turkishly enslaved Subjects of
England to their true, ancient, and native Liberty: But they were then found as
tardy as before, dull, and unwilling to endeavor, pleading the great
necessity, and inability of the Town, as nothing touched with any
consideration of Loyalty or Conscience to their imprisoned King, or the
bleeding (...) of their enslaved Country. Whereupon the Commissioners thought
it neither (...), nor fitting, to entrust them with a Military Power; but took
away the Comissions from the Mayor (who was Captain of a Trained Company in
the Town) and the other Trained Captains, and disposed of the Companies to
other Gentlemen in the Town, such as for their Honesty and loyalty were thought
worthy the trust; cutting to pieces that Commission of the Captain of the
Auxiliary Company, then seized on the Magazine of the Town; and having loaded
a Wagon with powder, Match and Ball, for the present occasion made ready for a
March toward Dover.

But ere they Marched, the Soldiers being again drawn up to their Colors in
the Market place, the Commissioners went together to give a Visit to a
stripling Imposture that lodged (by order of the Mayor, and his wise Brethren)
at Captain Forstalls house, one of the Jurates, who pretended himself to be the
Prince of Wales, and that he was forced to fly out of France, because the
Queen, his Mother, had endeavored to poison him: Which notable fancy he had
seriously insinuated into the general opinions both of Town and Country, by
his often asseverating it with impudent Oaths, and damnable imprecations:
Insomuch that many Gentlemen and Women came daily to kiss his Hand; and many
Presents he had made him, Rich Clothes, and Accommodation in every kind
provided him by the Mayor and Jurats of the Town, who were so serious in it,
that Sir Thomas Dishingto a Scottish man, being upon a Message from the Queen,
and Prince, into England; and at Dover, in his journey back again, hearing the
report so generally in the Country of the Princes being at Sandwich was much
startled at it; and to satisfy himself went to Sandwich to be informed, where
he found him indeed a Welsh Prince, but not the Prince of Wales: and coming to
him, after some discourse, as asking him who was his Gentlemen Usher, who his
Pages, and other Servants? where the Queen was when he left her, and the like
questions? he not being well provided with answers to either; and those
questions so unexpectedly proposed to him, could give him no account at all
(which was enough to satisfy any reasonable opinions that he was an Impostor)
whereat Sir Tho. being much incenst, called him Villain, and Counterfeit
Rogue; the new-coyn'd Prince immediately shows his power, and Commands the
Mayor to clap Sir Tho. up in prison for his Treason; The Mayor presently obeyes
his Command, and Sir Tho. instead of going back to Dover, is carried to prison,
where he lay about two days ere he could be set at liberty. Master Carter was
also the Sunday after Sir Tho. was confined to see him too, to satisfy not
only himself, but some Deputy Lieutenants in the County whether it were he or
not, (coming in so strange a manner as on foot, and in an old black ragged
suit, without any Companions but Lice) being acquainted with some of the
Jurates, who knew that he could satisfy them well too, but would not be
convinced of their foolish confidence, although he not only assured them
(amongst the rest, Captain Forstall, at whose house he lay) that he was an
Impostor, but affronted him upon the beach, before the Mayor and Jurates, who,
with a Guard of Musquetteers were walking there with him. So highly did this
young Prince of Sandwich bear up his business in as high a raunt as can
possibly be imagined above a week; Trumpets sounding his Meat to the Table most
commonly, and, as some say, most nights drunk ere he was acquainted with his
Bed.

But the Commissioners having had this account, and understanding of him,
intended to carry him away with them; believing he was sent (by some who have
too long enjoyed a power of marring Princes, though not of making any) upon
some design on the County; and finding the hearts of the people much inclined
to him (as believing what he had said to be true) spoke nothing at all of him
over night, nor of their resolutions, but just as they were ready to March, as
to give him a civil visit, went to see him, having an empty Coach of Sir
Richard Hardreses, in which they intended to Invite him to March with them, as
to free him from that restraint he had, by a Declaration which he had
published, pretended to be in, lest by violently taking him away they might
cause a Mutinous Hubbub in the Town and Country: But this would not take, for
when they came to the House, this precious Prince, and his confederates,
surmising their intentions, as guilty of their real Knaveries, refused to let
them in; Captain Forstall shutting his doors, told them, the Prince had
commanded him to keep them out, and he durst not disobey him. This they took as
a high indignity and affront; and upon their desires Master Carter immediately
drew up sixty Musquetteers before the house to force an entrance, the rest of
the party loading their Muskets, and lighting their Matches, stood all to
their Arms, expecting some sudden service; for now the whole Town grew into
a Mutiny, and Distraction, so that the Commissioners were forced to prepare
themselves for to fight too, for they did expect it every minute, and commanded
all Houses, and Shops, to be shut up.

Mean time this young Impostor raunting in his new invested Authority, waves
his Hat, and Plume, out at the window, calling out, Raise the Town, Raise the
Town: Seamen, stand to me Seamen: throwing out handfulls of Money into the
Streets among the people, which began to swarm up and down in throngs and
tumults; women weeping for the violence they feared would be done to their
Prince, and men swearing they would all die rather than suffer the Prince to be
injured any way, or violently taken away: Almost every one either certainly
believing him to be really the Prince of Wales, or else undoubtedly
confederates in the same design, raised so high a Tumult as would have ended
in much mischief, had not the Gentlemen bestirred themselves resolutely, and
undauntedly, in the quelling them.

But whilst they were thus forcing an entrance into the House, those
Confederates who were within, privately conveyed him through the Backside; and
some Seamen waiting purposely at the Waterside, transported him immediately
over into the Isle of Thanet, where a party being sent after him, found him
that night at Master Crispes house at Supper, where he was entertained like him
that he pretended himself to be: from whence he was conveyed to Canterbury,
Master Crispe being so courteous as to lend him his Coach thither also, and
from thence to Newgate. This passage being over, he escaped for the time; they
took Captain Forstall, and would have carried him away prisoner for refusing
to let them enter his House; and by that means expressing his confederacy in
the design of that Mock-Prince, and so being the cause of the Hubbub in the
Town, which was so dangerous as might have caused much Blood. But pretended he
did really believe him to be the Prince, and he had commanded him to it, and he
durst not disobey him: Then the Town Clark engaging himself for his appearance
when he should be called to answer for his default, he was left behind.

Then the Gentlemen leaving some of those men they brought with them, and an
Officer with them in the Town for the securing of it, and Orders to the new
Captains to call their Companyes to their Arms; they Marched away with the
rest toward Dover, where they found Colonel Hammons Regiment increased by
that time to five hundred, and upwards; and Colonel Hattons of Horse to be
about 200. according to their former Orders drawing up to face the Castle, with
some Trained Companies of that part of the County; and many people with Carts
of Scaling-ladders, Spades, Shovels, and Pickaxes, according to the former
days Warrants.

Here they found the Town in a joyful posture to receive them with much
alacrity, where Captain Bethels Fort resigned to them, and all the Town
unanimously betook themselves to their Arms; Trained men (which were two
Companies) and others to join with them in so hopefully-happy a design, as by
all appearance that must of necessity be.

In the afternoon diverse summons were sent to the Castle for Surrender of it
to the service of the King and Country, but all denied. Sir H. a grand
Independent, and Parliament man being then in it (pretending no power at all
there (as by his Letters indeed appeared) yet bearing the only sway, and
commanding all privately) by whose command those in the Castle had made
incursions up. on the Country a night or two before, and drove in many Sheep
for to Victual it; resolving to make out his own Interest, as it seems, under
the notion of the Parliaments; for it was without any Commission from them, as
if it were an axiom amongst them, every one to act his fancy for the
propagating the general Calamity of the Kingdom, no matter at what rate, so
their interest were secured: So large an extent has their arbitrary
Prerogative, and unlimitted illegal Jurisdiction, as to abhor, as destructive,
all conscience, or thought of affection to their Countries peace, which easily
discovered it self by the answers he made to the Letters and Propositions which
were sent into the Castle to him from the Commissioners: As if that burden of
intolerable guilt of innocent blood, and unparalled misery of this gasping
Nation had overwhelmed his Conscience with a cloud of despair of any other
safety than the old Roman Rule, Per (...) semper, sceleribus tutum est Iter;
knowing indeed himself to have been as zealous a promoter, and accessory to
the general Calamity as any confederate in the grand Juncto what ever; to whom
indeed the name of Peace is as odious as the Punishment they know themselves
guilty of, and if given over to the hand of Justice, and the Law of the
Kingdom, they must unavoidably perish under. Of which I doubt not, but though
their resolutions be with Cataline, yet their end will be as the thirty Tyrants
of Athens, whose proceedings have not much deviated from theirs.

Now they sent not only summons to the Castle, but also civil Letters to Sir
Hen: H. to invite him to a compliance, or at least to a cessation from his
Engagement, with all promises of their Engageing for his security, and fafety,
either for his staying in the County, or passing to London, or where he
pleased; But he was far enough from harkening any whit to their civil
Treaty, and by his means and one Lieutenant Swans, (who had before betrayed
the Princes Commission (after he had engaged his faith for the acting according
to it,) and endeavored the taking away the lives of some Gentlemen that
himself treated with about it) those in the Castle withheld from any rendition
though often summoned, and the greatest part as often willing to deliver.

This night Major Keme that went to the Fleet returned, assuring that those
Letters he carried to the Commissioners, were not only received with
extraordinary cheerfulness, but answered with as industriously real action,
relating, that the Mariners had no sooner read them, but immediately declared,
one, and all, for the King, the liberty of the Kingdom, and the Engagement of
the Gentlemen of Kent. Boldly disputing the business upon the deck (though
they knew not generally one another minds) with their Arms in their hands;
as if being surprised with so happy an opportunity were resolved to try what
party they could make against opposition; which they found indeed so weak as
not to engage, much more dispute, then to give them occasion to seize on some
Officers and a few mariners in their particular Vessels, who did but
timorously seem to contradict their actions; for oppose they durst not, so
small was their Party, they were able to make amongst them, as any else whose
former knowledge made them undesirous, or unwilling to trust, who they secured
immediately upon their business in the holds, and round-houses of the
respective vessels.

Upon this, the shouts they made Aboard were so loud, that they ecchoed a
shrill alarm to the ears of Colonel Rainsborow, then Vice Admiral, who
being a Shore at Deal Castle, and hearing such acclamations made him haste from
the Leads of the Castle (where he stood all the while the Commissioners and
Gentlemen were marching by, waving his Sword over his head in a threatening
defyance to them) to go Aboard, that he might be the more certainly informed
of the cause of this so general Shout, not being from one, but every Ship then
riding at Anchor in the Downs.

But when he came near, and would have Boorded, the Admiral, he was put off by
the Mariners, who told him he had nothing to do with them, nor should he. He
demanded their reason, and what the matter was, being so much amazed at so
sudden an alteration? they answered him immediately, That they were now upon
other designs then they knew he would lead them on, or join with them in, and
had declared themselves for the King, and the Gentlemen of Kent. But did
confess he had been a loving, and Courteous Colonel to them; and in that
respect should have no injury offered unto him, nor should he suffer any the
least damage in Person or Goods; but what things he had aboard he should have
safe away when he pleased.

Whereat, seeing them so serious, and resolute, demanded a Pinnace to carry him
up to London, for he was something timorous, and jealous how to trust himself a
Shore, although he had the Command of Deal Castle within his Commission. But a
Coxon stepping forth upon the Deck, answered him: Sir, we cannot spare you any
the least Vessel in the Downs, they are engaged for better Service; but there
is a Dutch Flyboate at shore, and for six pence you may have a passage in her
to London. This much distracted him, and augmented an apprehension of danger in
him; for understanding that Sandown Castle had at the same time declared with
the Navy for the King and Country: He did not know how to trust himself either
at Sea, or ashore. For he might justly fear the same in every Castle for ought
he understood of their resolutions, yet was forced to betake himself to that
ultimum refugium; in which manner, with his Wife, Children, Sisters, and the
rest of his Family, which remained before in Deal Castle, he wafted it away to
give an account of his Honorable escape to his great Masters at London: which
alteration, with him, was as much beyond all men's expectation as his own.

This welcome Messenger having given this fortunate account of his, and the
general good success: he was immediately dispatched away with Letters of
Summons to the other two Castles of Deal and Wamer; having instructions also,
and power to treat with them for Rendition. Which actions, at that time,
although they carried a martial face with them, to the opinion of our Enemies,
yet took form and life only from prudentiall, and cautious premonition, not
military Designs, for who could not but think it most unsafe to the Country,
especially that part of it? and dangerous both to private and public Interest,
to leave the strongest holds of those parts? in the Rear of them possessed by a
violent and bloody Enemy to make Encursions, and Inrodes upon them, when they
should please, the greatest strength of the County being to March away with the
Petition; of which, those in Dover Castle, by Command of Sir H. H. had given us
a taste, as a fair warning, some two or three nights before; having sent out a
party, and plundered the Country, taking (or rather robbing) from one man at
least a hundred Sheep, and many more from others, that they had intelligence to
have been interested in the Petition. Yet in all these actions of possessing
the Fleet and Towns, was there so orderly a comportment, that not the least
prejudice accrued thereby, either to the Life, Person, Estates, or Goods of any
man.

Then were Letters sent into France, and Holland, with Engagement of the Gentry
and Merchants, for the bringing over ten thousand Arms, and a great proportion
of Ammunition of all sorts; as Letters also to the Prince to give him an account
of all proceedings and intents of the engagers; altogether as honest, as
resolute, and as yet (by Gods providence) so prosperous, that fortunes gates
seem to be wide set open to their so Honorable resolutions: being nothing
intended, or inclinable to the raising of any offensive War, but the
purchasing (though at the hazard of all our Lives and Fortunes) of a happy and
lasting peace; and that not particular to our selves, but general, to the Sion
of our Church and Commonwealth for which all men, I think, ought both to pray,
and fight, if rightly, and Loyally called to it.

And now having thus far proceeded, and with so auspicious success, they went
on, and prosecuted their business with much expedition, alacrity, and courage:
know that time admits not any delays where danger always is knocking at the
door; and sloth and neglect in desperate and difficult enterprises, are
advancements only to ruin and destruction; but in extremities the winning of
time is the purchase both of life, and Honorable success.

Wherefore the next morning they marched back from thence toward Deal Castle,
leaving in Dover, and before the Castle, the Trained Bands of the Town, and
three other Companies of that part of the Country that were not yet completely
come up. And M. Arnold Brumes, and one or two more Justices of Peace more,
being Commissioners for the Country, to steer at the Helm, lest for want of
good Pilots the business should suffer wrack; who the next morning drew up the
great pieces that were planted on the Bench, and mounted them on the most
advantageous ground on the hill near the Castle, which they did without any
more loss than of one man, although the Castle played both small and great
Shot very thick upon them; and having boldly planted them (where, I believe,
never any Cannon were ever known to be placed, it being a most extraordinary
(...)) very near the Castle; they played very hot upon it, and battered the
walls very much, being old; supposing, that seeing this violent prosecution,
they would have yielded it up, but all to no purpose, and Storm it they could
not.

The Commissioners, with the rest of the Gentlemen, (which were a handsome
Company) marched on toward Deal, carrying with them Colonel Hammons Regiment,
being by this time completed to a thousand, well Armed, and as perfectly
resolved, with Colors Flying, of white answerable to the candid innocence of a
peacemaking Egagement; and Col. Hattons Horse, with some Dragooners: The
Gentlemen being about forty, were orderly drawn up into a Troop, and marching
thus all the way upon the Downs, gave a very handsome appearance both to the
Country on the one side, and the Ships then riding at Anchor in the Downs on
the other, which gave encouragement to both, and a disheartning also to the
Castles, then upon treaty for Rendition.

Then the Castles discovering so orderly a Body of men advancing toward them,
sent to the Commissioners to desire that they would not advance any nearer to
them till they had concluded their Conditions, being on Treaty about them, the
Articles being drawing up. Whereupon a halt was made, and a Rendezvous, the
party being drawn up, and planted an orderly Front toward the Castles.

The Knights and Gentlemen then leaving them at the Rendezvous, rid away to
Deal Town; where the first (as indeed most requisite) thing they did, was the
taking care for sending provision to that small Army they left in the Field;
and afterward went aboard the Ships to take possession of them, and to place
such Officers as they thought fit to entrust with their Command. Where they
were received with great acclamations and expressions of Joy.

There one might have read in every man's face a perfection of cheerfulness, as
having been a long time like slaves Gally-chain'd to a more than Turkishly
condemnation, and now happily set free into the glorious liberty of Loyal
obedience; wherein they expressed themselves so highly devoted to the service
of the King and Country, as that they would not only be Commanded by Sea, but
desired they might have first admittance to be listed Ashore; but that would
not be granted them by the Commissioners, for they should thereby have
disfurnish'd the Ships, and did not perceive they should have any need of them
for Land service; for now they thought, that although they expected nothing
less then an affront, and opposition ere they should have performed what they
had undertaken concerning their Petition; yet they supposed the County would so
unanimously join, as there should be little want of number, able to force
through all obstruction whatsoever: Foot coming in at that time also very fast
from all parts, and this happy success, and gallant deportment of the Gentry
being so high an encouragement to call them to their aid, gave new life and
courage to the Commonalty, and made them content to leave all rural occasions
to join in that so Christian-like, and Loyal design. Although there were yet
too many that lay lurking in their dunghill dens suttlely, to join with any
Enemy that should endeavor to make a prey of them, and help forward (upon any
opportunity) so desperate a ruin, as they cared not though it turned to a
general dissolution to the whole Kingdom, and a most wretched and untimely
fall to their too indulgent, gloriously virtuous, and unparalled patient
Sovereign; so their own Factious Interest might recover to their wished (but
ignorantly proposed) end.

A nest of other Cockatrices lay brooding also as idly in the very heart of
the County, nay, too many all over, whose dirty Souls were so settled on the
lees and puddle of worldly interest, as depressed them down to so ignoble and
cold a disposition, that would not suffer them to look up to Loyal obedience,
nor permit their capacities to climb so high as a knowledge of that duty they
owed to their King and Country, though their own Interest was as much included
as anies that was the most active, every man being alike concerned in a
general peace; and, I think, according to his quality and condition ought to
endeavor as industriously for its advancement, many of them, knowing as much
too, yet so wretchedly worldly as to prefer the enjoyment of their Estates,
though like Jews, under the worst of bondage, than like Christians to hazard
(the impairing them only) for the settled and assured enjoyment of them in the
happiest liberty the Golden Age of a Just and Religious peace would give them
in the future.

There were some Deputy Lieutenants also came in, (for their security more than
their Conscience sakes, which they slubber'd over with a counterfeit disguise
of dissimulation to purchase a better welcome) whom I could name too, but shall
forbear; the coming in, and entering the Lists, with these Loyal Engagers,
after they had signed not only to the Petition, but Warrants, and Commissions
too, made a fair retreat, and bidding adieu to the danger of proving Loyal
Subjects, slipped their engaged Collar, and stole away to London, and may chance
deserve a Halter for it hereafter, as well as the rest of the greatest
Opposers: But, I suppose, ere this, though not in respect of their fortunes,
(for which they may rejoice) yet in respect of the better wealth of their
Souls they may have undergone so much of repentance, as may purchase a pardon
from Heaven, which my charity makes me hope rather, than wish the contrary: and
they are sensible enough they have a Sovereign to deal with, so far
inheritor of his Fathers Virtues as well as Honors and Prerogative, as by his
excess of mercy to mittigate the rigor of Treason and Law against them.

But to return to our new Sea-Royalists, who now not only thought, but
expressed also the great happiness of their changed condition; saying
cheerfully, many of them, They only now lived, and had a long time, as it
were, lain amazed 'twixt life and death, and desired rather to die in the
service of their King, then to live again in that of the Parliament.

All which the Commissioners were much joyed to see, and encouraged them on in
their gallant Loyalty, giving amongst them in every Ship, a sum of money to
drink, which they as gratefully received; and at their putting off to shore,
gave them from every Vessel many great Shot, answered with as many Shouts, and
Acclamations. But many of the Mariners were so eager in prosecuting this new
engaged Loyalty, that the greatest difficulty in the ordering them, proved in
the keeping them Aboard, being almost Mutinous to come ashore to list
themselves for Land service, as believing they should not find any opposition
at Sea; or if, yet not time enough for them to express in their actions what
they had already done in their words, and as absolutely resolved in their
hearts, as it was the expression of many of them.

Which, to make up the more complete, they afterward, of themselves, sent away
a Messenger to the Commissioners of the Navy with this Declaration following.
The Declaration of the NAVY, in a Letter to the Commissioners at LONDON.
Worshipful,
THese are to certify you that we the Commanders, and Officers of the Ship
called the Constant Reformation, with the rest of the Fleet, have secured the
Ships for the service of the King and Parliament; and we have refused to be
under the Command of Colonel Rainsborow, by reason we conceive him to be a man
not well-affected to the King, Parliament, and Kingdom: And we do hereby
declare unto you, That we have unanimously joined with the Kentish Gentlemen in
their just Petition to the Parliament, to this purpose following, viz.

First, that the Kings Majesty may be with all expedition admitted in safety,
honor, and freedom to Treat with his two Houses of Parliament

Secondly, That the Army now under the Command of the Lord Fairfax, their
Arreares being paid them, be forthwith Disbanded.

Thirdly, That the known Laws of the Kingdom may be re-established and
continued, whereby we ought to be Governed and Judged.

Fourthly, That the Privileges of Parliament, and the Liberty of the Subjects
may be preserved.

And to this end and purpose we have sent our loving friend Captain Penrose
with a Letter to the Earl of Warwick; and we are resolved to take in no
Commander whatsoever, but such as shall resolve to live and die with us, in the
behalf of the Kingdom, and Paliament, which is the positive result of us: And

We humbly desire your speedy Answer.

Officers of the Constant Reformation.
Thomas Lisle Licutenant. And: Michell Boatswain. James Allen Gunner. Tho: Best
Carpenter.
Officers of the Swallow.
Leonard Harris Captain. Joh: London Master. Nic: Lawrance Licutenant. Andrew
Jackson Gunner. John Short Carpenter.


Signed also by the Captain of the Roe-Buck, Hynde, and several other Officers
of these, and other Ships.



This day about night the Articles for the Castles of Deal, and Wamer were
signed, and the one delivered before, the other after the Commissioners marched
away. Their conditions upon surrender were to march away with their baggage,
leaving their Arms and Ammunition behind them entirely, without any imbezelment
or diminution.

The Rendevouze being broke up, they marched away and quartered in Sandwich
again that night, leaving in Deal Anthony Hamond, Esquire. and Cap. Bargrave, who
had been formerly an Officer of the Navy; (both Justices of Peace, and gallant
discreet men, (not according to those of this wise reformation) as
Commissioners for the managing of the business there, and in the Fleet; having
sent away for Sir John Mince, Capt. Fogg and some others, Officers that had
formerly been employed at Sea by the King, and for their Loyalties displaced by
the Parliament, who were also earnestly desired by the Officers and mariners
aboarde.

When they came to Sandwich having been so prosperous in all these
undertakings, and done so much in so little time as indeed amazed the whole
Country. The Mayor and his brethren began to comply, and received them with
far more cheerfulness then before they had done; and that night made them a
present of two hundred pounds to the advancement of the Design, who before
were so needy they knew not how to subsist amongst themselves, much less to
raise any sum of money for extraordinary service.

The next morning they hasted their march from thence to Canterbury, leaving
also behind them two or three Commissioners, and five trained companies, for
the better securing that Town, being a place very factious and apt to take the
opportunity of the weakness of the Country, to make a mutinous opposition in
case of a retreat.

That night being Sunday night, they quartered in Canterbury, not slipping any
opportunity or minute of time, without an improvement of it to the best
advantage, and acting something to the furtherance of that Engagement; the next
day being the appointed limitation for their meeting at Rochester. Here there
came in many Gentlemen and others to Join with them that were not at all
Engaged before, unless against us; amongst the rest, Sir John Roberts, and one
or two Deputy Lieutehants more who Signed to the Petition, and Subscribed to
the Loan of Money, although they had before engaged themselves with the rest
of the Committee against the Petition; But rather like Physicians, that out of
a private interest, are nimble to assist and pleasure others to profit
themselves, than out of any cordial affection to so just, and honest an
enterprise.

The Dutchmen of the City (which indeed are very numerous) engaged themselves
for the raising and paying of two Companies; here also Colonel Hammon
completed his Regiment, many more men coming in to him, and others that he
had raised in the City, and near about fitted themselves for a farther March.

In this City and Suburbs were three Trained Compaines which were all drawn up
to Arms; which, that they might secure the place (with the two Dutch Companies
then a raising) they left behind some Knights and Gentlemen to manage the
Affairs in that part of the County were left there, lest some insurrection
might happen by the obstructers of the design, who swarmed about that place;
and by surprising it, not only do much mischief in the Rear of the Body, but
in case so much misfortune should befall them, as to force them to a Retreat,
(which caution is no whit too soon remembered in the strongest, or more
prosperous Armies at any time) and which indeed most unfortunately fell out to
them at the last.

In this time the noble Peer, the Earl of Tha. acted his most Heroic gallantry
about Ashford, Hotfield, and Charing, being indeed the first that rose, and
drew that part of the Country to a resolution of betaking themselves to their
Arms, by sending his Letters to all Gentlemen he knew had any power, and
secured above a thousand men in that part to rise in a short time; and at the
first of any rising at all in the County, giving an account of it also to
Squire Hales, encouraging him thereto, who far more gallantly proceeded than
ever he began.

So now, when he had made a fair and hopeful beginning, and had assured very
large assistance from his purse, makes a slovenly exit from this scene of
Honor, and obscures himself behind the hanging of Apostatisme. In so much
that when he was sought for by his neighboring Gentlemen, whom he had incited
by his forwardness, and invited by persuasions, the Noble Earl was fled, (not
for Religion, nor I think to any) to take council of his peer the Earl of
Pembroke; whom (after some grave and wise consultation had) he Engaged so far
as to go with him to Derbyhouse, there to plead with the quintessence of his
oratory for forgiveness, promising if he might but escape a whipping, then
never to do so again, Which he did.

Where the gallant and doubty Earl (after a pause for recovery of breath) made
what discovery the whole action was liable to, and his capacity could reach;
Making also several propositions to the Committee, which he assured them was
the only way to remove those distempers; declaring, that he had heard such
things from diverse Gentlemen in the Engagement that gave assurance to his hopes.

The Committee thereupon began to be a little enclinable unto his discourse,
and gave as much credit to it, having his Friend, and Cousen P: to swear for
him; and thereupon resolved upon some Instuctions to be given him as concerning
indemnity upon a disbanding, and submission again to the Yoke, and the like:
Which being rereported to the House, were resolved on; and he on the thursday
morning dispatched away with them.

Who immediately posts home, and with his greatest power endeavors the
disbanding of the Commonalty; beginning first with the discouraging the Gentry,
who being once down, the other must necessarily fall; and indeed proceeded so
far in it, that caused diverse Gentlemen, as well as Commoners, to desert the
business; but the generality being constant, and their Consciences linck'd to
the service, by the golden chain of Religion, and Loyalty, were not to be
disheartened; insomuch, that I think, those stratagems, as the other endeavored
for suppression, gave a more courageous life to their actions, and converted
that pestiferous obstruction to a cordial advancement.

The Gentlemen and Commoners being not only sensible of this his baseness,
but also insens'd at it, gave the noble Earl this satisfaction to that design
of his (or rather treachery) as it were a pill for to purge his Apostatisme
(better physic I confess might have been administered, and more proper)
remitted him up to the Committee with this Letter. To the Right Honorable the
Committee of Lords and Commons at Darby House.
My Lo:
WE have seen the Instructions from your Lordships, to the Right Hourable the
Earl of Thanet, upon consideration whereof we have thought fit to return this
answer to Your Lordships.

That we have cause to believe there are many persons about your Lordships, who
endeavor to infuse into you very sinister opinions of our proceedings, in
relation to the safety of this County at this time: who when we shall be
admitted to a fair and equal hearing, will appear to be the greatest
disturbers thereof themselves: And that our intentions are free from all other
ends than natural defense, We humbly beseech your Lordships to understand,
that we are in firm resolution to observe the Declaration of the Houses; and
for the manner of presenting our Petitions and Complaints will follow the
directions in the said Declaration. But saving to our selves always the
liberty of preserving the most Ancient and inviolate Freedoms of this County;
we must desire your Lordships to put a fair interpretation upon our purposes
of continuing within the safeguard of our Arms, till we have assurance from
your Lordships that the Clamours of those above against us, have had no
success in their enraged designs of engaging against this County in blood and
ruin when they find never so small a diminution of their Arbitrary Power, so
long exercised over us, endeavored to be taken from them; not doubting but
upon the presentation and fair reception of our Petition, and just Complaints,
the Houses will give such seasonable relief therein, as will abundantly
discover the inclination of this County to Peace and Amity.

My Lords, this is the account we can give you of this County by the hands of
the noble Lord, the Earl of Thanet, whom also we have desired to inform your
Lordships further: That our present posture tends not to offer violence to the
Parliament; nor suffer acts willingly unbeseeming our fair intentions; but
do, and shall take strict care to repress wheresoever ever we find it, the
incensed spirit we see in the people: Which, how it has been raised, we shall
in due time be able to make appear. And so we rest

My Lords, Your Lordships most humble Servants. Tho: Peyton. John Darell. Tho:
Palmer. James Hales. Tho: Hardres. Tho: Godfrey. Geo: Newman. Ja: Newman. Tho:
Courtop. Edw: Whitton. Will: Hugesson. Rich: Lee Jun. James Darell. R:
Wilkinson. Edw: Roberts. Phillip Ward Mayor of Rochester




Thus did this Jewish Apostat Lord fall short of his intended Treachery to his
Lord and Master the KING, and disloyally to his Country: And his supposed
Glorious design extinguished in a stink, so great, I fear, as will remain
fresh in the nostrils of Fame, and render him odious to his Country to all
Posterity; how he savoured in the apprehensions of the Committee I know not.
Yet he has obtained thus much reward, he has gotten a fame by it, which he
may if he please boast of; that in it he shall live after death; But it is no
better then that of Erostratus, who wilfully set fire to the Temple, that he
might get to himself a fame when he was dead. Which will be as due a
recompense as so unhandsome and unnatural Apostatisme can deserve.

But now on the contrary our Resolute Engagers resolving to regard no
obstructions what ever, any further then to kick it out of the way; and the
time drawing near to the limitation of the Postscript, those from Canterbury
hasted their march on the monday morning toward Rochester both Horse and Foot:
But the march was too tedious, and the men not able to perform it, that day
being the time of meeting, and to march away again the next morning toward
Black Heath; Wherefore the Foot marched no farther then Sittingborne, where
they quartered that night, intending to march on the next morning. But the
Commissioners and the rest of the Gentlemen, with Col. Hattons Horse marched on
that night to Rochester, ordering their march to a very military conformity.

At Rochester they met with the Gentry of the County from all Quarters, in a
very great number, as at a general Rendevouze: But the maine body of those men
they had drawn together, (or rather who had drawn themselves together) for they
came in with a voluntary cheerfulness, and as cheerful a resolution) lay in,
and about Daertford, as being an advance twenty miles forwards of their next
days march to the appointed Rendevouze.

That night came one or two Gentlemen out of Essex, To treat with the
Commissioners at Rochester (being then generally met from all parts of the
County) about the association of both Counties in that general Engagement,
assuring that the whole County of Essex would unanimously rise to join with
them, and desired a meeting of a resected party of the Kentish Gentlemen, to
join in a parley some where over the Water, with some that should be selected
in Essex for that purpose, but we being then so near the period of that time,
wherein by our general Engagement we had bound the whole Country to meet, and
to march toward London, could not Join in any such thing; but took the
promise of those Gentlemen as an assurance, that the County of Essex would
unanimonsly Concur to rise at the same time to join with us in the maine
Interest; Others came also from Surrey to treat on the same terms, promising
as great a readiness of that County to join in that association which was
received with a great deal of alacrity.

But about midnight the same night (they being to march onwards the next
morning) came down a post with an order from the House of Commons to Rochester,
to the Commissioners joined in that Engagement to this purpose; that, whereas
they did understand that the people of Kent were coming up to Westminster in a
tumultuous, and pretended petitionary way, they knew not the Intentions of it,
and had therefore referred them to treat with the General the Lord Fairfax,
and the Committee of Derby-house.

This rigorous order of prevention being received and read, In the morning the
General council being met, the business was scand and discust; for now this
grain of paper had quite turned the Balance, and absolutely altered the
constitution of the General Interest; for they could not but believe that the
Army would advance entirely against them, knowing well enough (considering the
posture the Country was in) what it would be to treat with a conquering and
potent adversary, in that inexperienced condition, I mean of a new raised and
unmodelled body of raw men.

Whereupon by a general result, orders were immediately dispatched away to
Dartford; and the other places adjacent, where the maine Body then quartered
and lay upon Guard, to march then back to Rochester; having also intelligence
within a very short time that the Lord Fairfax with his maine Body was
advanceing toward us already: But however upon their retreat left a Guard at
a place called Stone bridge near Gravesend to secure that pass, but they could
not long hold it, the enemy (for so we might easily guess them to be by this
time, by the ceizing all Gentlemen and others they met) coming up so close,
although, to say truth, a better order might have been observed in it; and
indeed would, had the Party been a formidable Body.

When they came back to Rochester, Master Mat: Carter having received
Commission of Quartermaster General of all the forces then raised, or to be
raised in that County, from the Commissioners and Gentlemen engaged, received
Orders from the Council for the Quartering them there, Whereupon he first
caused them to be drawn up by distinct Regiments in several Fields; whereby he
was able to take an exact account of the strength of every. Regiment, so to
know how to dispose of them, and ascertaine the Council of the full number in
gross; which then he Mustred in rank and file completely armed, seven thousand
of the Infantry, and as well accoutred, being most of them very sufficient men
of ability, and not wanting of as Honorable resolutions. The Horse not being
drawn together, but abroad, the most of them upon several parties, could not
be so well taken notice of. At which time also there were at several places of
the Country about three thousand more which never came up to this party, as at
Canterbury, Maidstone, Sittingborne, Sandwich and Dover. This gallant Body by
his care were equally divided into Quarters in Rochester, Strood, and Chatham
the Horse in Villages near adjacent. And the Engagers now began to cling more
closely, and taking time by the fore-locke, thought it not good to let slip any
minute, lest their hopes and security might be lost with it; and began more
seriously to consider what might most probably advance their safety and honor,
knowing that what they were now to trust too was difficult severity of Fortune,
the Army being like enough to fall in suddenly upon them.

Amongst many considerations, at last they easily concluded, that the next
business that must be endeavored, must be to mould that party into a
formidable Army, and to appoint one particular man to Command in Chief. For now
they were forced to stand upon their own guard, to maintain that with the Sword
which was intended only in a just and peaceable way, according to the Ancient
Customs of this Kingdom. But this is a new liberty of the Subject, none of
the old I am sure: A sad world when men shall fall deeper into the pit of
Destruction, by the endeavors of those they supplicate for aid to bring them
out; and who, by natural, as well as legal alliance, and interest, are bound
to assist, and by themselves placed for it. If this be to Reform, Heavens
bless all good Christians, and Loyal Subjects from Reformation. Having now
thus resolved, they appointed a Rendezvous the next day at Barham Down, some
three miles distant from thence toward Maidstone: Where the Lord Norwich was
proclaimed General in the head of the Army, (for now being drawn together,
they deserved that Title) so gallant a Body they were of Infantry, who received
him with as much cheerfulness; expressing an unparalled willingness to
serve their King, and as much joy that they were so engaged to it, knowing that
their service was not only for Him, but the whole Kingdoms peace, the
recovering of their Countries Liberty, and the Churches tranquillity. As it has
been a general, and as true an Observation in all Ages and Commonwealths,
that those that engage in other men's quarrels are more remiss, and unspirited,
as knowing that they shall partake in the danger, but not in the victory, since
another would receive the greatest and fairest fruit thereof, and arrogate the
Honor likewise to themselves: whereas they also that take Arms for their
Country, may conceive better hopes that God will prosper them, for that they
seek not to take from others, but to keep their own; and that they fight not
for other men's phancies, but their own defense, whereby the whole benefit of
victory will redound to themselves.

This Rendezvous being broke up, the Army Marched again into Quarters, though
not the same as before, neither by the Quartermaster Generals laying out;
much, I confess, contrary to the Lord Generals sense or intentions, whose
advice it was that it would have been most convenient to lodge them close
together, or in the Field, it being very fair weather at that time. Although I
have been informed there are some, who have broached a most damnable Aspersion
on the Earl of Norwich; throwing this dirty and odious Calumny in the face of
his innocent and unspotted Fame: That he was the man who betrayed that service
to its succeeding destruction; and that he made it his design to take that
Command upon him, that he might the more easily effect that design, being
himself no Soldier.

And so impudently, or else ignorantly, they proceeded in this Ignoble
derogation, as to raise a confirmation of it from this conclusion: That had it
not been so, he had as well paid the loss of life for his Loyal service, as
the Lord Capell, and the Earl of Holland, etc.

First, that his own design steered him to that Interest, is so palpably
false, that it was as absolute an accident as could be, that brought him to
Rochester, (as at the first of his coming, and at his being in Colchester I
have heard him relate my self) being in his Journey to Sussex, and taking that
road to escape the Army, who then lay very thick in the other, and who knows not
how dangerous it is to travail amongst them. Where when he came, and the
Commissioners (Just then upon the dispute, whom to invest with that command)
hearing of his arivall, Immediately selected peculiar Gentlemen to make a civil
address unto him, with the tender of that Command, and their serious obedience
and service with it, as being a Peer of the Realm, and a man of so known a
worth, and a mind so deep and able, as to capacitate him for any great command.
Whereby he might easily end that strife which so suddenly might have been blown
up to a destructive flame, being already kindled by those more then sparks of
Emulation, in the breast of some Gentlemen then Interested; Having before with
much earnestness solicited the Duke of Richmond, to that no whit dishonorable
(though it might be feared unbeneficiall) Engagement. But his fears turning
Prophets, dictated to his Soul more powerful arguments for easy denyalls.

To which the Earl of Norwich returned this most courteous answer, (with as
modest an excuse from undertaking so high a concernment in a Country where he
had so little engagement) That he was confident the Duke would yet Engage with
his Country, being so generally, unanimously, and courageously met, and upon so
just, unquestionable, and candid a design, and that he believed he would
undertake the command. For the further advancing whereof, proffered himself a
solicitor for them to the Duke; which favor they accepted gratefully, and he
as willingly performed.

And going to Cobham to him with his best rethorick, and powerful persuasions,
Invited, and courted him to it; But all to no effect. Whereupon the
Commissioners at his return still entreating him, and as it were pleading a
necessity of it to him, he at the last accepted of it, to the great content,
and satisfaction of all the Gentry, and Commonality too, then met together.

But (as I have heard him declare since) only that the Army might be modelled,
whereby it might be a greater invitation to the Duke; Not that he intended
afterward to dissert the service, but continue it, only with an acknowledgment
of superiority in the Duke, for the better encouragement of the Army; who must
of necessity receive so much the more of a vigorous courage, by how much the
more nobility, and Generous honor, is Engaged in their Conduct.

Yet all persuasions proved alike in effect; By which means he became totally
Engaged. Which I think (though he were no Soldier) was then as advantageous
(if heaven had designed it fortunate) as could be then expected.

For through the whole course of the succeeding service, upon any nicety, he
did most prudently declare himself, and after his own opinion laid down, gave
it a reference to a Council of War, for a more mature and general result:
Appearing in his constant actions more a Soldier then some of no small name and
undertaking, who have so boldly adventured to traduce his Loyalty and Honor.
More confutations, I neither need, nor shall desire to give.

Now this night the Army, (by persuasion of some at the Council held in the
field (as being indeed more generous spirited Gentlemen then experienced
Politicians, or Soldiers) was quartered at large in the Country, the General
and Commissioners returned back to Rochester, where Sir Anthony Aucher, and
Master Hales left them; not as some falsely surmise, and give out, because they
heard of the Enemies advancing; nor through any discontent as others as Idly
report; But upon this account, Master Hales being of a more noble and virtuous
gallantry, then his years might speak him to be, living within fifteen miles
of Rochester, had upon his first Engagement, (as his expression to my hearing)
made a resolution not to see home till he had seen the Army in a formidable
posture; according to which resolution he had not, but constantly continued
with them till this night, and now having seen the Army in such a model as
that days Redevouze and the appointment of a General rendered it: took it for
an absolute solution of his Engagement, and resolved that night to go home
only to accomodate himself the better with Money, and other necessaries for a
longer March, and to return the next morning; so took his leave of the
General, the Commissioners, and the rest of the Gentlemen, and rid to his
House; and Sir Anthony Aucher, by his earnest entreaty, went along with him,
but the misfortunes of the succeeding night obstructed their return.

For in the night the Lord Fairfax, with his whole Body, marching down toward
Maidstone, and finding the River slightly Guarded, about Farley Bridge beyond
the Town some two miles, easily got over; and with a strong party fell upon the
Town, ere those within it were almost Alarumed; in which Town lay part of Sir
John Maynies, and Sir Will: Brockmans Regiments enquartered, that never came to
the Rendezvous, consisting of about eight hundred men.

The Enemy being possessed of that pass, Marched over with their whole Body,
they in the Town not having any true Intelligence all the day before of them,
or their motion, and fell in upon their Out-guards so violently, that within a
very short space those in the Town were forced to fight upon extraordinary
disadvantages; the Enemy so far exceeding them in number, and the Army
quartered at such a distance, they could never make a Retreat, nor have any
Relief time enough to assist them. However, their Courage was such, as made
their Enemies know they fought with men so well satisfied in the justice of
their Cause, as not to be daunted, or startled at the appearance, or
apprehension of Death, though in never so grim a shape; but rather like
true-borne Heroes contemning all danger, and death it self, so they might but
bury their misfortunes in the wounds of their surious opposing, and oppressing
Enemies; who thinking them no other then a number of men hudled together in a
tumultuous manner, because of their being so suddenly gotten together, the
whole Body being raised within ten days; fell on them with so much violence,
as if they had been Lions, and would have devoured them at an instant; or like
a boisterous whirlwind scattered them before them like dust: But much contrary
to their expectations, instead of finding a prey, they met with those that were
more likely to make a prey of them, whose bold resolutions soon daunted their
fury. And these tumultuous disorderly fellows, as they termed them, they found
orderly enough to oppose them; and although newly raised, yet of courages of
the oldest Soldiers, selling their Lives and Liberties at as dear a rate as
ever men did; few of them falling without first dispatching twice as many I am
confident, (and their survivers must confess it) to receive their reward of
their Grand Lord and Muster, who, I believe, has ere this paid them their
Arreares in the other world for their good service in this.

This service, (though unexpected) grew very smart, and hot, both parties
contending which should express more Valor; the one defending their Lives,
disputing their fortification, which were but bare, and thin Hedges, with as
little thought of danger, or security, as if this had been in an impregnable
Fort.

The Foe behaving themselves as gallantly as if they did not think of such a
thing as a possibility of being beaten. Yet this over-powred party so bravely
defended their ground, that ere long them had beaten they off, in such manner
that the Lord Fairfax finding his party in such disorder, even upon a Retreat,
alighted from his Horse, and came on himself with them to encourage them on,
who were so daunted by the unexpected courage of these defendants, that their
disorder was like enough to have much endangered their whole Body.

But at the last, fresh men still pouring their shot in upon them, they were
beaten off from their Hedges, and forced to dispute the loss of their ground
from place to place, against an extraordinary disadvantage, the Enemies Horse
now breaking in upon them on all parts, and showing but little remissness in
their execution, when they had an opportunity to make any home Charge upon
them; yet they left not their Courage with their ground, but still disputed the
loss of every foot with as clear a Courage as if but still beginning to
engage; from Street to Street, and from Porch to Porch, often falling upon the
Enemies Horse with only their Swords, in such a generous manner, as they
seemed as prodigal of their Bloods, as they were of their Blows, which they
distributed in a plentiful manner on every one durst stand to receive them;
insomuch, that they put them to as often Retreats, by their so handsome and
bold Encounters; but being still over-powred by the numerous reserves that
continually advanced on them, were enforced still to Retreat, till at the last
they came to the Churchyard, and from thence to the Church, quitting not any
place dishonourably, or unhandsomely: So that they made the business so really
hot, and difficult, that I am confident the Victors themselves would have
wished to have rather been without that Victory, than to have purchased it at
so dear a rate. But this party, after a long Fight, were drawn to so hard a
push, they were forced to capitulate, none coming up to their assistance or
relief unless it were a few scattering men, who hearing them so engaged,
though without any order, left their Quarters and hudled into this Crowd of
confused Destruction, which they were overwhelmed in.

And here again in a cause received, that too many Gentlemen conceive
sufficient for them to approbriate the General, as either treacherous, or
infinitely negligent in not relieving that Party, which as they say might
easily have been done. And then in all their discourses they frequently urge,
endeavoring thereby to obscure the face of his Honor with black shades of
Infamy. But all cannot do; his Honor is too high flowne, for those short
winged Bastards to reach at, having a Soul I am confident as white, with
Innocent and Loyal thoughts, as his head with hairs, and a Spirit as active as
the boldest he that dares question it: And to clear him in this, first,
although proclaimed General of that Army, yet of so little a date was that
Title to him, as that he was not so immediately and clearly empowered with the
charge of them, and conduct of their Interest, as (like a General) to act his
own will immediately in it; There being as yet too many Generals, or at least
ambitious Spirits Interested, who having formerly a power in the (...) of them,
had not yet so clearly laid down their power, they supposed, that nothing must
be done (or at least ought) without the result of their opinions in it. By
whose advice and persuasion the whole body was quartered in the Country at
large; too wide indeed to be rallyed in any time considerable, or drawn to any
Rendevouze, what ever occasion might, or should fall out; as it fell too
appearantly true in this. Although of my own knowledge it was the advice of the
General, to Lodge them all that night in the field by the river side; which
counsel, had the Gentlemen of that County observed, the body had remained
entire, ready to wait, and receive the Enemy upon any motion they should, or
could make; and the river so guarded that the Enemy could never possibly have
forced any place, pass, or Forde of it. But the men are thought weary, and
harased off their legs, (having indeed marched very tedious marches) and
therefore must have fresh quarters, and large, to revive and refresh their
tired Spirits; By which means the enemy made an easy passage over the river,
without any opposition at all, and the Party in the Town quite lost, e're the
Army or a Party considerable for their relief could be drawn together to any
Rendevouze. And yet not only strangers to the business (who indeed ought also
to be careful how they censure, and asperse men of so much Honor) but some
whose young Soldierships counsels were partly the cause, cast the loss of the
business upon the General, who I am assured all that night, while constant
Alarums were sounded in his ears, of their being in fight, did his endeavors
to draw Parties to a Rendevouze from their quarters, to their assistance; but
none could be forced out, at least considerable; Whereupon the next morning
early, he caused the Army as soon as it was possible to get them together,
(having sent out orders at the first news of their being in fight at
Maidstone) to be drawn up to a Rendevouze at Finsbury fields, on the other side
the river Medway, by Stroode; Where a Council was called in the field, and
upon a report that it was yet possible to relieve them at Maidstone, it was a
general result, and desire of the General, yet to march entire thither.
Whereupon the whole Army marched through Rochester, it being the resolution of
the General if it were yet possible to relieve them or to fight the whole Army
of the Enemy.

But he had not marched two miles, when certain Intelligence came, that they
were all cut off, and taken Prisoners the night before early; though many of
them came up to the Army afterward having made their escape.

Upon this Intelligence the Army was marched back again to Rochester; Where
the General with the Commissioners betook themselves to their Counsels
again, to consult what was best to be done in that condition; the Parliament
having before hand refused to receive their Petition, and the Enemy already
entered the very bowels of their Country, and a party roaving about, and making
a prey of their Estates, and Friends. For one Major Osborne an Officer of the
Parliaments with a Troop of Horse, was before wheeled down about Ashford, and
so toward Sittingborne, whereupon Col. Hammon was ordered to stay with his
Regiment at Sittingborne, and Col. Hatton marched back with his Horse, and
liting on this troop of the Enemies, Chared them, where Major Sumner was
killed, and one or two Gentlemen more wounded. Upon which Sir Rich: Hardres was
again entreated back, by the Commissioners, into East-Kent to raise the rest
of the Country, and to take care for the securing of Canterbury and the other
towns. Sir Michaell Lusey was also raising all he could make, this Major
Osborne with his troop securing him in it; by which means the whole Country
began to seem with a face of an absolute seat of War. But now the courage of
the Soldiery at Rochester was such, as would not admit the General time enough
to resolve on any thing, being then at consultation what course to steer; For
though the weather were such as would have envited them rather, to desire the
shelter of the town, then to expose themselves to such an extremity of Rain,
as then showered down; yet they were so desirous and greedy of action, as
almost tended to mutiny; For drawing out their colors themselves caused their
Drums to beat, saying; If their Officers would not march, they would both march
and fight without them. Whereupon the Earl of Norwich commanded them to be
drawn into the field to a Rendevouze in the same place as before; not being yet
resolved which way to contrive the laying of his design to the best advantage;
for he would act nothing without the absolute conclusion of the Council, in
which was now included many able Soldiers, which came in from several parts to
Join and engage with us, more indeed there came then the present condition of
the County would permit accommodation to: Which gave an occasion to diverse
Gentlemen to think themselves disrespected, wanting Horse, and other
conveniences for War, by reason of their coming down from London by water,
and unprovided: But indeed the County at that time could not yield so many
Horse as was supposed it would, therefore they could not be furnished for the
present, but order was given by the Commissioners for their Civil treatment,
and an Ordinary provided at the County charge for them, that they might
continue on free quarter with promise of the furniture of all accoutriment
answerable to their Quality, as opportunity would give leave: Master Hales also
out of his own purse presented a Party of them that most wanted for the
present, with thirty pound to be distributed amongst them.

Now it had been the advice of some to plant the Army in that place, and by
fortifying that City to maintain it as long as they could; But this young
millitary policy was not liked by some, who better understood that the General
Engagement concerned action, and not to lie still under a passive design,
besides that town was not to be maintained, though some think it was, by
reason of that River which of it self was a fortification to one part of the
town.

Wherefore now coming into the field, the General called again the chief
Officers of the Army and Gentlemen to Counsel; Where it was a great dispute,
and the only now, whether they should march on toward London in the
prosecution of the intended design, according to the Engagement, or march back
to fight the Enemy who was wildly roaving, and raving in the very heart of
their Country; and by Joining with those in East-Kent strengthen their force,
and either fight the Enemy or secure that County: But it was not long, e're
they concluded to march on; knowing that though their body of Infantry was
strong enough for to give the Enemy a field, if occasion should require it; yet
the Horse was so weak as not to enable them to any Fight at all, having not two
hundred Horse they durst put any confidence in; and for joining with those in
East-Kent, they were strong enough, or would be, of themselves; besides, they
knew, that if they Marched backwards, the Enemy would certainly draw down more
powerfully upon them; and forcing them to retreat into a corner of the Country,
take off all hopes of any assistance from any other County, which they
expected, according to the association agreed on betwixt Surrey, Essex, and
themselves. And if they Marched on, they should draw the Army after them: And
by drawing nearer those two Counties be both an encouragement, and assistance
to draw them together; who once joining with them, would make so great a Body,
as in all probability would be formidable to the Enemies; for now they were
forced by that violence, into an absolute defensive War.

This being the result of the Council, we immediately Marched from the
Rendezvous toward Dartford; only Colonel D. Wyles with his Regiment (some of
them being gone before) Marched away toward East-Kent; which Regiment was full
upon Muster twelve hundred men. Colonel Hammons of Foot lying about
Sittingborne, Feversham, were ordered by the General to March back to
Canterbury, to strengthen that place, and never came up to the Rendezvouze at
all.

About midnight we came to Dartford, where the General caused a Letter to be
drawn up, and sent to the Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of
London, to give them notice of our March that way, as also of our intentions.
Desiring withal, that if it might be, we might have their assistance, which we
hoped for, having Treated before with them: Or at least wise that if we might
not have their assistance, yet that they would permit us to March through the
City of Westminster without interruption, or resistance. Engaging the whole
Counties security for theirs that they should not thereby be endamaged the
least mite.

But they (like a Dog to his Vomit) turned to their old course of Parliament
Service; and no sooner received the Letter, but immediately instead of
returning a civil Answer to the General, dispatched it away to the Speaker of
the House unbroke up.

However, we knew nothing thereof till the next evening; so we marched on all
that night, and the next day without any refreshment, or repose at all. The
next day about noone we came to Greenwich, where the General drew the whole
Army into the Park, expecting to receive some good satisfaction from the City,
as also from Surrey, Southwark, and Essex.

But we found but small encouragement, or reason for the continuance of those
hopes, receiving no intelligence from Surrey, nor any news of appearance of
men for our assistance, either from thence, or any other place. London we heard
had shut, and guarded their Ports against us; Only there came a Gentleman out
of Southwark, as he said, who coming to the Quartermaster General, assured
him, that if the General would send any considerable party into the Borough
of Southwark for their assistance, that they would unanimously rise and join
with us; which he acquainted the Lord General with, and returned him this
Answer: That in regard he was a stranger, and not known, he must not expect a
party should be adventured upon his bare assertion; but if he would return to
those Gentlemen of the Borough that he said employed him, and that any of the
Principle men would engage to what he promised, that then they should have what
party they should desire. With which answer he returned, but never came again.

There came a Gentleman also out of Essex, who assured the General that the
County was up for to join with us, (which was more then we expected, having
heard contrary news before at our first coming to the Park, or afterward
found trne) and that about Bow there were two thousand men in Arms, and more
at Chelmesford: Upon which intelligence the General (earnestly intending the
prosecution of what he had undertaken) crossed the Water in the Ferry-boat with
his Horse, and went over privately into Essex himself, not carrying one Servant
with him, intending only to go to Stratford, or Bow, where his intelligence
assured him a Body was gotten together, to assure himself of the truth of it,
and to return; and in case it proved not true, to steer some other design
with the Army: But if he should find the Country in so good posture as his
Intelligencer related, upon his return to provide Boats, and to conduct the
Army safe over to join with them. Leaving Sir William Compton with the charge
of the Army then Major General, by whose appointment provision of Bread,
Beer, and Cheese, was brought into the Park: Though it proved a great
difficulty to procure it in that Town, not being very well furnished for its
own store.

But now our party began to be much weakened from what it was two days before,
and no assurance of any aid appearing, and we absolutely frustrated of our
design, of marching through the City to Westminster: Our Condition began to
seem something desperate, not knowing what to trust to, besides Gods
providence: For we were not able to fight with any hopes of victory, or
success, if they had followed us, although so great a resolution was still
amongst us, that had an Army double the Enemies Engaged us, it would have
proved something of a difficulty to have vanquished us.

Now the night being come, and the General not returned, according to
expectation; Which he could not do, for finding no party stirring at Bow, or
Stratford, he made no stay till he came to Chelmsford, because he would assure
to himself a certainty of the condition of that County ere he returned, which
would be the next morning. There being no possibility of procuring Boats for
the transporting such a number of men over the River in the night, which was
the next hopes we had left, some timorous Spirits began to steal away, which
put such a distraction amongst the whole Party, as every man was almost in an
amazed confusion. To advance which disorder, one Riding into the Park in the
dark of the night, told the Soldiers, that they were in very great danger, and
that their Officers wished them to shift for themselves; no man regarding what
he was, nor demanding his reason; which so amused the Soldiers that heard it,
and so aggravated the distraction (although no Enemy were near) then many
began to shift for themselves, and procuring the Ferry boat wafted over to the
Isle of Dog as they thought for their absolute security. Some also
endeavoring it, and being got into, were again forced back by other Soldiers,
who exclaiming upon them for running away, threatened to fire at them if they
should offer to stir off the shore with their boat.

Thus did this hopefully well-ordered business suddenly suffer under the
unconstant humor of fortune, to the greatest change that ever was. But all men
are naturally subject to change, and therefore ought to be the more cautious in
prosperity and resolute in change; for too much security in the one
precipitates to the other, and too much dejection and remissness in the other
hurles into despaite; to destruction.

At last this causlesse, and unlooked for distraction begat in some a pannick
fear, in others a mad fury; so that every man began to shift for himself, and
hunt out for his own security, being doubtful of it almost in every place;
but as a thing designed by an extraordinary providentiall power of that
All-powerfull Divinity that always prevents misfortunes, and so gives life to
future; actions, especially such as are ground in religious Honor, though in a
disorderly rout, throwing themselves into the very mouth of Destruction (who
else might have been secure enough, had they remained till the Generals
return where he left them) the greatest part of the Foot, and some few of the
Horse at several places transported themselves over the River of Thames, no
man knowing what would be the event of their rashness, nor able almost to give
a reason for what they did in it, or if any, but a supposititious one, though
it proved lucky enough: For had we remained there till the Generals return,
according to the condition he found the Essexians in, he would hardly, in
reason, have laid the scean of his design that way; by which means we had
likely, not only have lost that service which afterward happened, but have
fallen in an instant, and in much less Honor.

But this rashness had been ill enough too, had not the great and All-seeing
Soul of Nature inlivened our then almost dead fortunes by a miraculous guidance
through that gulf of mischief we were then plunged into, and as before
strangely, and unexpectedly brought us together, so now as providentiall
conducted us through a misery as great, and else, unevitably ruinous. For
having thus confusedly, as it were, thrown our selves over to the other side
of the Thames for our further safety, (in that fear where indeed no danger was)
we had no sooner landed, but supposing our selves to have been in Essex, where
then our only hopes had fixed their Anchors; but we unexpectedly understood that
we were in Midlesex, under the Hamlets of the Tower, and posting to absolute
ruin; like that unfortunate vessel, that seeking to avoid the fatal Rock of
Scylla, plunged her self into the more desperate gulf of Charibdis.

Here (by the appointment of the House) lay a Regiment of Hamletteers of the
Tower drawn up to their Arms in several Guards, ready to receive, and cut us
off at our Landing, which might easily enough have been performed, considering
the disorder we were then in; every man Marching according to his own fancy,
and coming up from the River sides at several places and ways: Yet all, at
it were by a strange sympathy, steering one and the same course.

But Sir Will: Compton (a man truly Noble, and more complete in Gallantry,
Virtue and Honor, than years) having first discovered this plotted mischief,
and perceiving the ruin we were running blindfold into: As supposing it the
best course in that condition, treated with them for the whole party before he
would permit any man almost to March in amongst them. By which means conditions
were drawn, and Signed between him, and the Officers in Chief of the Regiment:
Which were, that all our Foot should, upon laying down their Arms, depart to
their own homes, or where they pleased quietly, without any violence, or
molestation offered to them. And all Gentlemen, and Officers, with their
Horses, and Arms, to March where they pleased also without any disturbance.
But those conditions were soon as almost broke, as made; for, before the foot
came up, some Gentlemen marching through their Guards, had their Horses and
Arms both taken from them by the Major of the Regiment, by whom the Articles
on their party were Signed.

Then the Foot, and a greater number of Gentlemen, by their easy March coming
up together; and understanding what was done, and how unlikely they were to
keep Articles when they should lie unarmed at their mercy, that had so
unworthily begun, and so soon broke them, Marching through two or three
Guards, no man being permitted to pass any by-way, by reason of the easy
March the Gentlemen made, the Foot came closer up; so that they hoped the
better to avoid abuses of those who began already to scoff and fleere at us.

And considering what a condition an inauspicious fate had reduced us to, and
how these Gallants had broken conditions; we began to think of some other way
then so lamely disband, and submit our selves by such worthless Boores, (who
understood not so much Honor (I except the chiefest of them) as to know what
was meant by drawing, and signing Articles of Conditions) and so began to sift
out the disposition of the private Soldiers, who we soon found so resolute as
to express themselves rather desirous to die there, in the bed of Honor, than
to survive such an infamous misfortune, and live slaves all the days of their
lives after.

This bold resolution proved now the happy guide to a better Fate; and all
concluded to make a second dispute for Conditions, and Charge through them. And
being now in the midst of them, every man provided himself accordingly, the
Foot all lighting their Matches, and the Gentlemen drawing their Pistols, began
to alter the constitution of our fleering Hamletteers, who left their vanity of
jeering, and so we marched on from gaurd, to gaurd, through the midst of them,
as moving to the place of disbanding, where we expected an opposition, and as
much resolved to force through it; but that proved the last and utmost guard
just at Bow town.

But now they beholding us marching in this resolute manner, and still moulding
our selves into better order, were absolutely dashed from a thought of
opposition; so we marched on without the least affront till we came to
Bow-bridge, where we supposed was the place for our disbanding: At the other
end of which bridge was a turne-pike strongly guarded with Musketteers, and
having entered upon the bridge, we made a stand to parley with them; but after a
very short discourse being asked whether they were Friends, or Foes, we were
answered from them, Friends; whereupon we replied, if you are Friends let your
turne-pike be opened; so they opened their turne-pike, and with a very great
shout let us in. And now we were in Essex.

So we marched clear through these Hamletteeres, and carried away the Major
Prisoner, and another Officer; but afterward, upon their Parolls, they were
suffered to go to London, but never returned again according to their
Engagements, by which also you may guess how much Honor they had in them; so
we marched on still till we came to Stratford.

Here we met with the General again, returning back to us, expecting to have
found us in the same posture he left us in the Park at Greenwich: But
understanding the carriage of the business, and what had fallen out, was much
troubled at it, and knowing the long and tedious marches they had made, and the
precedent nights actions, could not permit them any repose; nor that they had
received any refreshment for two nights, and that the third day. Immediately
gave command for the drawing them up into order, and by planting on the green,
to procure such refreshment as the place would afford for the present, ere we
marched any further.

And here was a providence in all this unhappiness, had we received the least
affront or opposition by these Hamletteers, or by any obstruction been hindered
never so little time, we had been absolutely cut off; or had we been
disbanded, we had been as suddenly ruined; for we had no sooner marched over
the bridge, and scarce drawn up, but we received a very strong Alarm by a
Party of Col. Whalies horse; Who, as it was conceived, came thither purposely
upon the Intelligence that we were to disband, to make a prey of us when we
were naked; and by surprising us, make what spoil they pleased with the
private Soldiers, and take all the Gentlemen Prisoners; but by Gods assisting
providence that was prevented; and now they fell on thinking to have beat us
off from our guards by their sight only, so they marched on a full carreer
(having laid an ambuscade of Dragoones to secure their retreat) as if they
would have destroyed us in a minute, which indeed had been facile enough had we
been as tame as they supposed we had been, and had not the Gentlemen bestirred
themselves courageously; But now we were awakned again by this Alarm, and
roused from the drowsy spirit that possessed every man almost, if he but sat
down, or still on Horseback; and drawing out a Party of Foot to strengthen the
Guard, rallyed a Party of Horse to a number of thirty, and marching forth the
turne-pike, gave them such a home charge, that so started them, as it put them
to such a perfect rout in an instant, and killed and wounded many of them;
which succesful action gave life to our defatigated spirits, and encouraged our
Party so, that they followed the pursuit as far as Milend-greene; but by that
means fell into their ambuscade, who fired upon them from the hedges, so they
were forced to make as much speed in retreating, though none pursued. In which
service only one Gentleman, a Grecian, being shot by the Dragooners was left
behind about the Green, and in the Charge Cap. John Lynne cut over the Chin,
and over the Breast, which was all the hurt we sustained in it. But although our
pursuit continued no further, yet the Enemy kept on their flight in that
disorder, no body following them, till they came to White. Chapel; which, as
I was Informed, gave an Alarm to the whole City, as far as Temple-barre.

But now the Hamletteeres began again to oppose us, but were as soon forced
to take Sanctuary in Bow Church, where we surrounded them with a Party of Horse
and Foot, and put them to treat with us for a quiet returning home to their
own houses, engaging themselves never to oppose us again. Thus was there a
convertible change of various fortune in two opposite Parties, in less then
two hours space.

After this our Party again retired within the Turn-pike; and strong Guards
commanded on all Passes and Fords about the River, and on all Highways and
Avenewes, for hindering the Enemy from making Incursions upon us, who were
again calling and drawing up a strong Guard at Milendgreene, both of Horse and
Dragoones.

But after all this, our Party resting a little began to take heart again, as
thinking themselves secure from any opposition or Inconveniencie, being amongst
our professed Friends; When our condition gave another reverse, and was like to
change for the worse, then ever before: For after he had run through so many
difficulties, and wearied out with so tedious marches, our Soldiers ready
almost to fall down in the Street for want of food to sustain them: we were
like to fall into another encounter with adverse fortune. The General,
notwithstanding his great age, which might easily have dis-inabled him from
such toil, yet as if he had been absolutely Indefatigable, or else
miraculously nourisht, (not receiving almost any rest or sleep, for the space
of four days, and three nights, and yet not seeming to want any) posted
immediately away again to Chelmsford, where the Gentry of the Country were
met; giving order for the Quartering that shattered Army in Stratford till
further orders from him.

But when Quartermaster General Carter had sent for the Constable, and given
him Orders accordingly: The Constable seeming to go about in obedience to his
Warrant (whilst by some other Gentlemen he was civilly, and honorably treated
as a stranger) makes no long stay ere he returned again, accompanied with
three or four burly Gentlemen, (as I conceive Justices of Peace of that part of
the Country) who making it their business, began to question the
Quartermaster General of his Authority of Quartering an Army in that Country,
intimating that they were all quiet before, and at peace amongst themselves,
and with the Parliament; and that the Parliament had granted them what they
desired, and had sent them an Act of Indemnity: But we bringing an Army into
their County, should draw down the Parliaments Army upon them, and make it a
Seat of War; and they could not any way condescend that we should fix a
Quarter there, it being no way for their safety, but like to prove the readiest
way to their destruction.

Cheerful expressions to men that had run through so many hazards, and
confused difficulties. Having let our own Country to the Cruelty of a most
barbarous and merciless Enemy, to come as by an abolute associated engagement
to their assistance; whereby we hoped to be strong enough to break the bonds,
and tear off the shackles from our most inhumanly imprisoned Sovereign, and
unnaturally enslaved Countrymen; and now no sooner entered the Confines of their
County (from whence so many public Declarations of their Loyal and sincere
Intentions had flowne abroad throughout the Kingdom) and so late checked the
Insolence of the proud Enemy, and beaten them off from forcing a violent
incursion upon it, and to have such an unexpected welcome, was too harsh, and
severe, and might have proved very mischievous, if resented by the inferior
sort of the Army, whose fury knows little, or no more, when enflamed with so
just a discontent.

But the Quartermaster General returned them this Answer in short: That for
the power by which he Quartered that Army, it was by Commission from the
General, and that he quartered them in that place by immediate Command also
from him: But for our coming into that Country, it concerned him not to
dispute it; neither could he give any other account then the Engagement between
both Counties, and the General, the Earl of Norwich: But if they should desire
any further satisfaction, to their desires, they must receive it from the Lord
General himself.

But the General being gone to Chelmsford, Sir Will: Compton being Major
General, hearing of this dispute, came also to them, and gave the like
satisfaction, but would not long dispute the business with them, knowing
nothing at all of them, nor by what Authority they were empowred to make those
interrogatories.

And now our Bloods being hardly cool, since the last Affront, when heated
again by this new, and the consideration of the sad success of our so just,
and honorable Designs, almost boiling to fury, resolved to Quarter there till
we should again receive Orders from the General; and then (in case the
business of the Country should prove so, contrary to our hopes, and the
expectations of the whole Kingdom, as to answer the expressions of those men
of Beliall) to March on, forcing our way through all obstructions, till we
should find a party to join with, or be destroyed in the Field; that we might
thereby win an Honorable Liberty, or Tomb.

Here we Quartered till Wednesday in the afternoon, it being Sunday morning
when we came thither, still keeping the Enemy in some play, who lay with their
Guards within half a mile of us, and their Scouts still pekiering with us at
Bow Towns end. All which time the Earl of Norwich continued at Chelmsford,
agitating the business with the Gentlemen of the County; and minding to what
it would turn there, who had not long before put forth this declaratory
Engagement. The Engagement, or Declaration of the Grand Jury, Free holders, and
other Inhabitants of the County of Essex, in prosecution of their late Petition
presented to both Houses.
WE the Grand Jury, Freeholders, and other the Inhabitants of the said County
in the prosecution of the said Petition, do Engage our selves one to another,
and Declare,

1. That we will not pay any more Exoise, or other Taxes, till all the desires
expressed in our said Petition be obtained by us.

2. That we will admit of no Soldiers to come into our County but such as
agree with us in our said Petition, and in this Engagement.

3. That we will employ our utmost endeavors to preserve and defend our Royal
King Charles, His Kingly Government; the Subjects Liberty, and the known Laws
of this Kingdom: That is to say, the Common, and Statute Laws, and will never
submit our selves to any other kind of Laws, much less to any Arbitrary power
whatsoever.

4. That we will protect, and defend one another, and all that shall adhere to
us in the pursuance, performance, and keeping of this Engagement: And that if
any Inhabitant of our County shall refuse to join with us herein, we shall
esteem him a person disaffected to the Peace and welfare of the same.



But notwithstanding this Engagement, they were yet backward enough in
prosecuting any thing to the purpose, in answer to their Petition, or
Association here. When his Excellency came, he found the greatest part of the
Gentry of the County met; but all business so dis-joyn'd, and so strangely
confused, as there seemed almost an impossibility of any good to proceed from
that so high Engagement, and mountainous Conception: And our party consequently
left (as inconsiderable) to be cut in pieces by a most cruel Enemy, who had
already possessed themselves of our whole Country; ruined our Friends, made
lavish havoc of our Estates: and having proclaimed us Traitors for coming
thither for their assistance, would prove as undoubtedly prodigal of our
lives, if ever we should fall under their power.

The distraction indeed was so great, that the Gentlemen, and Commoners, who
came there with real intention to prosecute their Petition, and Engagement,
were likely to have been dispersed in less time then they were in coming
together; Capt. Lin of that Country had once before raised a thousand men,
which were immediately dispersed. An order of Indemnity being read in the head
of them by Colonel Far, which the Committee of the County so pressed to them,
that they went all quietly home. And now were as active in their Endeavors for
the ruin of the maine interest of that Design; as indeed it concerned them
enough, for they knew the prosperity of Loyalty is destruction of Rebellion: I
leave them to make the Application.

They were so active in their Machivilian Stratagems for countermining all
policy against them, as that Charles Lucas being there urgently tending upon
the design, and many other Gentlemen with careful diligence for the
advancement of the King, and Countries Liberty, (it being the sole and general
end, both they and we really intended, and the sole reward of our actions we
all aimed at; and consequently prosecuted secuted all circumstantiall
opportunities which we conceived conducing to it, that at last, though by the
hazard of a War, we might generally attain to the happy blessing of an
honorable and lasting Peace) thought it their best course in that distraction
to depart privately forth the Town, lest some unexpected inconveniency might
take hold on their persons, if once it had overwhelmed the general interest,
as now they began to fear would be, absolutely dispairing of any good at all.

But some of the Country Gentlemen then got together in the Town, and by chance
meeting them, desired Sir Charles Lucas that he would not go away so, but let
the Committee do what they would, they were sensible enough how they had
ruined and undone them, and they would be abused no longer by them; but if he
would be pleased to draw them out into the Field, and stay with them, they
would one and all engage with him, and live and die in that Engagement,
according to the intention of their meeting together, having resolved not to
return till they had performed something.

This sudden change in a little time proved very violent, as it is commonly
scene in all things; so they immediately drew into the Field, and seized on the
Committee, and were so furiously incenst against them, that some of them would
have killed them immediately, had not some Gentlemen rescued them, and pacified
the others fury, and afterward placed a Guard over them; for now they were
resolved, that since they had actively engaged themselves, they would be no
more obstructed in their prosecution by those grand Opposers; who they well
understood would be active enough in their endeavors, for the destruction of
that design, (if at liberty) and the ruin of the Actors in it, being
right-becked Committee Men of the Parliaments own bringing up, as appeared
afterward by Sir Tho: Honywood, who being at liberty, and at his own house at
Coxwell, always an Enemy to the King and Kingdom, made himself appear so
really now, by raising both Horse and Foot, as many, as by his power he could
draw together, either for love, or fear, and made his house a Garrison to
oppose the County (as much in him lay) in their proceedings in that design;
But his party proved so inconsiderable then, as it could do but little injury.

The business coming to this height, his Excellence the Lord Norwich sent his
orders to Sir William Compton, to march away toward Chelmsford; so we marched
away from Stratford with our whole Party, which by this time was well recruited
by many of our men that came up, and diverse Prentices from London, who came
daily in and listed themselves; And about Wensday night we met the General at
Rumford, but the Enemy marching after us, so obstructed our march by Alaruming
us in the Rear, that the whole Body could not get up till the next morning;
though the Enemy durst not adventure in all the march to fall on upon the Rear
guard.

The next day being the eight of June, we marched on toward Burntwood, whither
Sir Charles Lucas was advanced with a Party both of Horse, and Foot, to join
with us: And having Intelligence, how the Enemy followed us with Alarums in our
Rear, commanded forth all the Horse that were then in the Town to assist us;
so we marched up, and quartered that night at Brentwood; and the next day being
the ninth, we marched on to Chelmsford, where the Lord Capell, the Lord
Loughborow and diverse Gentlemen of quality (...) Hartfordshire, and other
Counties, came in to join also with us; which gave a great encouragement to our
Army. There came in a Party also of Gentlemen consisting of about fifty, who
entering their combination in London made their Rendevouze at Hideparke corner,
and marching all night, the night before intended to beat up a quarter of the
Enemies at Epping (being in their way) But the Party was drawn out by chance
hard by the Town, upon some other design, so they were disappointed of their
Strategem; but though they found them ready drawn up in order, yet unexpecting
any affront (not thinking of any Enemy) they marched up, and being well Horst
charged through them, and the next day came up to us, having lost only one Man,
and one Horse; but the Horse being a gallant one and taken by a Countryman,
was recovered again, the Gentleman that lost him coming off afterward, went
out with a Party and fetched that man in, and so regained him.

That afternoon both Parties of Kentish, and Essex, were drawn out to a
Rendevouze in Newhall Park near the Town, belonging to the Duke of
Buckingham, which General meeting gave much encouragement to both Parties.
Where the General and Sir Charles Lucas joining in consultation the Gentlemen
of both Counties also, that by a unity in the engagement, as well as the
Interest, there might be greater hopes of prosperous success.

At which council it was once a general result to have marched away
Immediately, and fallen upon the Party of Sir Tho: Honywoods at Coxwell; but
upon a more serious deliberation otherwise resolved on, and orders given out
for the quartering in the Town that night; But this Party of Coxwell
disincouraged the Country that they began now to be very slack in their
apearance to join, in relation to what they were before; not only by reason of
Sir Thomas Honywoods activenesse, but because of the Enemies entering also into
the Country with their whole Body.

Saturday the tenth we marched on toward Brantree, but took Leeds house in
our march, belonging to the Earl of Warwick, where we were like to have been
opposed by some people who were purposely placed there, and upon the
Quartermastergeneralls coming thither to secure it from the violence of the
Soldiers, refused to open their gates, being about twelve or more men with
Fire-armes and two Drakes, saying that they were placed there for the securing
that house, and they would rather die, then deliver it up to be plundered
tamely. But being afterward by some parley Informed that the General himself
was coming, and that the Quartermaster General was commanded before to secure
them from Injury; they gave him entrance with some other Gentlemen, believing
it was but little boot for them to dispute with an Army: about noone the
General and Sir Charles Lucas came, and haviug first dined there, ceised on
the Armory, where they found a good Magazineboth of Arms and Ammunition of all
sorts; so we carried from thence the two brass field pieces, and about two or
three hundred Muskets, and as many pikes, with about 60. great Sadles, and body
Arms proportionable to them, and some Pistols and Carbines; and a good
proportion of Match and Ball, with diverse other Instruments and furniture of
War; But many of the Sadles we left behind for want of carriages for them.
Here we Rendevouzed all the afternoon, till toward night in the Park beyond
the house; the Enemy of Rendevouzing also with a Party of theirs very near the
other side, and that night in the Park; but adventured not to appear all that
day in sight of our Army. There was a Party of Horse also came in to us upon
the march, (which along time we supposed an Enemy) from Hartfordshire and
Bedfordshire consisting of about six score. From thence we marched forwards,
and quartered that night at Braintree. Where the next day being Sunday, both
Parties were drawn into the field in the forenoone to Rendevouze: And after
prayers all the Gentlemen that were in the Army, were drawn into troops,
under the command of the Lord Norwich, Lord Capell, and the Lord Loughborow,
and Sir Charles Lucas; that they might not only know to dispose of themselves
upon any occasion of Alarm; but being in order it would be a great
conveniencie, for disposing them into quarters upon every remove.

About nine of the clock at night we marched from thence; and continued our
march all that night, making only one halt about daybreake, till the next day
about four of the clock in the afternoon; about which time we drew near
Colchester, whither at a Council the night before, upon Sir Charles Lucas his
desire, and belief of recruiting very much there, they concluded to march, but
not to stay above one night or two at the most, and therefore moved in the
night to amuse the Enemy that they might not to suddenly follow us; And being
within five or six miles of the Town, a Party was sent before toward it, for
Sir Charles Lucas had received intellithat they would not receive him in Arms;
then himself, with some other Gentlemen, marched onwards before the Army, after
that party was marched away: But ere the Quartermaster General left them to
go to the Town, came intelligence from the Party, that the Town stood upon
their Guard, and were so far from giving entrance to our party, as that they
opposed them, and were too strong for them: At which news Sir Charles, and the
Gentlemen with him, set Spur to their Horses, and hasted on with a full speed
till they came within sight of the Town, and coming near, they found that
they had shut their Gates, and drawn out about sixty Horse in a very formal
Troop, well Armed and Accoutred; some of their Scouts being without the
Turn-pike by the Alms Houses, then Sir Charles made a stop to send back a
Messenger to the Army to hasten their March; but some four or five Gentlemen
keeping on their speed, drew their Swords only, and Charged up to them, and
forced them within their Turn-pike; so they retreated on the Head gate, where
their whole Troop was drawn up in order; and the Gentlemen retreated again
toward the Turnpike, but some of them, as they retreated, fell in amongst the
Gentlemen, yet never fired a Pistol till they came out of the Turn-pike
again, then one of the Gentlemen turning quick about shot one of them, and he
fell from his Horse. But when they perceived the Body of the Army coming, and
that Sir Charles Lucas had drawn up two or three Troops of Horse very near
them, they sent out to treat with him; and upon his Engagement that the Town
should not be plundered, nor any injury offered them for what they had done,
they submitted themselves, and engaged to deliver up their Horse, and Arms,
with the Town; so the Gates were opened, and the Army quartered that night in
the Town.

The next day being Tuesday, June 13. about noone we received a very strong
Alarm, and that the Enemy was advanced within a mile of the Town; and indeed
by that time we could provide parties to send forth, their Forlornes were
engaged with our Out-guards in the Suburbs; which Guardes were immediately
doubled, and it was not long ere we were as ready to receive them, as they to
assault us: Our men being drawn up to their Colors, fresh parties were sent
out to assist the Guards, both of Horse and Foot; and the Enemy came on as
strongly on all parts of that side the Town next Lexden, and fired up to the
very Hedges and Guards of our Foot, but were as furiously opposed, till at the
last some of the Guardes wanting Ammunition to maintain the heat of the
Service, about the Alms houses, and the house called Grimstones house, were
over-powred with the number of men that threw in their Shot like hail upon
them, and so forced to retreat, and gave the Enemy the Liberty of all that
ground. Which retreat gave them also advantage of falling upon our other Guards
near Sheere-gate; whereupon the Out-guards were ordered to retreat within the
town; it being the best policy to take the greatest advantage in opposing an
Enemy, were an Army double the Enemies strength: But ere this retreat could be
made; and the Guards drawn within the Gates, that dispute grew close, and very
hot; the Enemy coming on so violently, that it was much difficulty to
maintain any ground against them, yet were they still as resolutely opposed,
so that it was as hard a matter to judge whether showed more courage, the Enemy
in assailing, or our Party in defending.

Now we being forced to a retreat, although as much out of policy, as danger,
gave an enencouragement to the Enemy to prosecute their charge upon us, as
thinking themselves more then half victors already, and that they should in
short time make themselves masters both of the Town and us.

But this new and scarcely flesht Army of Country men, added fire to the heat
of the Service, in such a height, and with so undaunted a resolution, far
contrary to the Enemies expectation, although they had received an
experimental knowledge of them at Maidestone, that many of them could not
digest it, but left their bodies in the Streets, and Hedges, as Infallible
witnesses of what was done; yauning out their Souls to receive their arreares,
in another world, for their so Religious rebellion in this.

Many of their dead bodies they threw into wells, some they buried in ditches,
many they carried off; yet left so many behind, upon the place, that by some
relations we received from the Country, of the condition of their Army the next
day, and the account we had of many of their Soldiers, that came voluntarily in
to us; we could not believe that they lost less then seven hundred men; Col.
Needham and diverse others of their prime Officers being also killed, besides
many which were wounded, and above one hundred and thirty Prisoners, taken and
brought into the Town; for having retired within the walls, our shot fell so
thick in amongst them, they could not long abide it; but after a seven or eight
hours fight were so gauld, that they were forced to a dishonorable retreat,
leaving behind them one brass piece of Ordnance (which they brought to force
the gate) twelve of their train Horses being shot within twenty yards space of
ground, and about five hundred Arms, which the next morning were brought into
the Town. Their retreat was in such distraction, that had we sallyed out with
a fresh party upon them, as was once intended, we had cut their whole Army off,
or the greatest part, as many of their own acknowledged. I must confess I
never yet saw any men fight with a more gallant resolution, and courage, then
those men did, although raw Country men, as they could not but do indeed,
having so rare presidents, in so honorable personages, as those Lords and
Gentlemen under whose conduct they were brought thither, and under whose
Command they then fought, who ceased not themselves to act the duty of the
meanest and most inferior Officers, or run the hazard of the privatest
Soldier; but took Pikes in their hands, when their Horses were not of
immediate service, as well for the maintenance of their ground, as to give
encouragement to the more inferior sort lest by unusual heat of the service
they might grow slow, and dull in the performance of their duty to the utmost:
The Lord Capell charging at Head-gate (where the Enemy was most pressing) with
a Pike, till the Gate could be shut, which at the last was but pind with his
Cane. The Enemy still gallantly enough too, (to give them their due)
endeavoring to force their entrance in upon us, adventured on so far as to
fire under the Gate, and often times to throw stones over.

In this service we lost Sir William Campion and Col. Cook, men of
incomparable and unblemisht honor, both receiving mortal shots upon the first
charge in the suburbs, and one Lieftenant, and about thirty or forty private
soldiers, though many more were wounded

Sir William Layton, though not interested in any immediate command in the
Army, yet of so high and noble a soul, as could not admit of a private
engagement, in so general a design, took the charge of an outguard, and
endeavoring to make his retreat, when he perceived the enemy possessed of so
much of our ground as to get between him and home, was unfortunately shot in
the foot; so that ere he could recover the gate, it was shut, and the enemy
intermixed with his party; so that he could by no means escape being taken; but
by chance, by a soldier that had formerly served four year under him, in the
Kings service, and in his own Company; who upon the service, knowing him, came
to him, and would have carried him off, but was forced by reason of the shot
that came so thick in upon them from the town, to run away and leave him; but
though he were very near, yet had lost so much blood, and was grown so stiff,
he could not shift for himself: After a while, the soldier coming again,
carried him off, and rescued him from the most inhumane usage of other
soldiers; which soldier afterward proved very officious also to him, and
upon the receipt of the next pay to conduct him home, left the Army upon the
unchristian demeanours he observed amongst them.

Lieutenant Colonel George Rawlins, commanding another out-guard on that part
of the town, was also surprised ere he could make his retreat, and about forty
foot soldiers; so that in all were taken of ours about fourscore prisoners;
But many of them that were taken, upon their distracted retreat got from them
again, and came safe into the town.

But night coming on, and it proving very dark, was an opportunity for them to
steal a retreat; but ere they drew off, set fire on some houses near to Head
gate; hoping thereby that the wind would so force the fire inwards, that it
should burn the whole town; but the diligence of the soldiers proved as great
in defending it from fire, as before from plunder and the sword, guarding it
from an enemy merciless in the one, and insatiable in the other, as the
suburbs in the town can well witness; where although poor people were so
little indamaging them, or assisting us, that they rather seemed to oppose us,
not only in our coming thither, but in all we did there; yet the next morning
we found scarce one house unplundered, from the one end to the other, and many
poor men dead in their houses, and women and children fled.

Amongst the rest my self by chance recevied this account the next morning by
break of day: Just over against the Almes-houses lived a poor Weaver, where I
chanced to ride by, and finding a poor woman very heavily (...) her self, and
in so lamentable a nature, could not but demand the cause of so much grief;
whereupon she answered me, that the last night, some of the soldiers that
fought against the town came violently into her house, and took what they
pleased; and that they were no sooner gone, but more came in, and not finding
any thing in the house left that pleased them, came to her husband in the loom
at work, and demanded money of him, who told them, that he had been worth but a
little before in the house, and what he had, the soldiers that came before
them had taken from him, excepting only some small sum he had in his purse,
which he would willingly give them if they would be fatisfied with it; But it
not answering their expectations, no more would they answer his desires, but
told him he was a Cavalier Rogue, and had more money, which they would have or
kill him; both which he denying, one of them shot him through the body, so that
he immediately died; at which noise his son coming in, they fell to cutting of
him, and had so cruelly wounded him, that he lay more likely to die then live.

Now having thus made their retreat in the night, the next morning they drew
back to Lexden, a village about a mile from the town, where they fell
immediately to work, and cast up a Fort just upon the highway to secure the
headquarters, and barricado's cross all the highway; here they lay about two
days still; then approaching nearer, in the night cast up another Fort in that
road toward the town, where they placed a guard; and the next night they
entered ground upon the hill called the Warren, and placed a strong guard there
the night following, and so every night broke up fresh ground in several
places, which they thought most advantageous, running their line by degrees
from one Redoubt and Fort to another.

This gave us just occasion to believe that they intended to plant themselves
before us for a longer continuance then before we had imagined, and to block us
up; by which we were invited to consider of our own future security, which then
consisted in the greatest care of victualling and fortifying; the only two
things to be first thought on in such a case; especially in a town so much
defective in the one and the other. A place, I suppose, as little ever
supposed, as before by us intended, for what it was afterward ordered to; no
man, I think, that had surveyed it with the judicious eye of an experienced
soldier, could be so weak as to suppose it a place fitting to be mantled, or
maintained for a garrison; it was our intentions only to take it as a present
quarter for a night or two.

But this engagement having forced us to it, enlivened every man with an active
and cheerful diligence to forward an advancement of all requisites.

To march away now we could not, for we had no way to march, but that we must
within a day fall into a champian country, where the enemy being so very strong
(as we were weak) in horse, would have cut us off at an instant; our Foot being
no such experienced soldiers as to maintain a charge of themselves, both
against Horse, and Foot, where there were no hedges to guard and shelter them
from Horse; though some have judged otherwise of the design, and the conduct of
it.

Now by this incomparable diligence on all parties (no man at the first knowing
where to find provision of any sort, more then belonged to every private family
for ordinary sustenance) we found in a short time, in several places of the
town, and a place called the Heyth adjacent, many private stores of corn, and
wine of all sorts, with much salt, and some fish, and a good quantity of
powder, the want whereof would suddenly have thrown us into absolute ruin,
having very much exhausted our magazine by the last days business.

It is said, that he that will picture War, must first begin with the belly: so
we (according to that policy) having many bellies to feed; and not knowing how
long it should please God to continue us there, were the more inquisitive after
provision; by which means at the Hieve (for so it is more vulgarly called) we
found a greater assistance then indeed we could have hoped for, which was
conveyed into the town as conveniently, as time would permit, the Enemy being
so favorable as never to endeavounto cut us off from that place, till we had
almost dreyned the honey from the comb: which they might easily have done, had
they ever enterprised it. A providence almost as great as that of the
Israelites in the Wilderness: For, it is reported, that in the memory of man
there never was known such plenty of all things in that place, as accidentally
then.

Whilst we were thus active for prevention of all dangers that might happen,
by strengthening the walls of the town, and fortifying where no wall was, by
casting up rampires and counterfcarfs, as a very great part of the town
required, the Enemy was as busy without, in running their trenches, making
their approaches, and casting up Forts and Batteries against us, still earthing
themselves, and we as diligent and laborious within, as in truth not without
much necessity on our part, the Town being in all places very weak, neither
had it any more then one Flanker about it, and that very bad too, which was
called the Old-Fort.

Now if it shall be objected, why in this time, not being certain of any timely
relief, we did not draw out and fight with them, as it has been often urged:
They that will judge discreetly of our condition, will easily be satisfied of
it: had we had no hopes at all of relief, which we then had, both from the
Scots, and diverse other places, at the same time in action; besides it was
conceived the greatest piece of policy, by keeping the enemy in a lingering
action, to give a remora to their designs, and so ruin them by delays; by
which means especially we should give liberty, and all opportunity to others
that intended any action, to work their designs without interruption, and not
to run the hazard of an immediate ruin, by giving them battle: for had we
fought with them, it must have been upon infinite disadvantages, (as I said
before) first in the inequality of the number of Infantry: And secondly in that
we had no considerable party of Cavalrie in respect of theirs, whose greatest
strength consisted in horse. And it was not a rash or fond supposition to think
that could we hold what we had, till the rest of the Kingdom should rise, we
should then do as good service, as in the immediate victory: we supposed we
might possibly hold out a month, and were resolved on it, though it concluded
in our own ruin; yet by that time, if not sooner, we could not but expect (in
all probability) a relief.

By this design also we were (...) to give liberty to the Scots to march (...)
into the Kingdom, being then as we most assuredly understood, upon their
march, and near the borders.

Neither was this all the hopes we cherisht by this resolution; but there
remained a possibility of a victory over that Army, by delaying to fight with
them, till some more fit opportunity should offer it self, or the tediousness
of the service weaken them by hard duty, constant action, and unseasonable
lying in the field, in respect of the weather; and we have many gallant
examples in this kind. Pompey was well advised for a while when he refused to
fight and gave Caesar ground: But when by the importunity of his Captains he
adventured the battle at Pharsalia, he lost the battle, the freedom of Rome,
and by it his own life.

The Constable of France made frustrate the mighty preparation of Charles the
fifth, when he invaded Provence, by wasting the Country, and forbearing to
fight; so the Duke of Alvaria, by that policy wearied the French King in
Naples, and dissolved the boisterous Army of the Prince of Orange in the Low
Countries.

One (...) I shall insert, to touch more (...) upon those hot-spur Politicians
that shall so violently criticize upon that point, and accordingly refer the
application, by looking into that battle of Pavy, as tragical as fatal to
France, where the King was taken prisoner, and the French frustrated of their
main hopes of Italy.

The day before this overthrow, the King summoned a general Council of War,
and desired the opinion of his Officers, whether he should give a Field to the
enemy or not: Whereat an old Captain began exceedingly to persuade the King to
stay, and delay engaging till supplies (which were already levied) should come
up and strengthen his Army: desiring him not to throw into hazard
unnecessarily, the welfare of France; Urging, that the consultation was not
only for the Kings honor, but his safety: At which time there was at the
Council a young hotspur, fitter to begin, then continue a charge, who alleged,
that nothing was more honorable then that the victory should be gained by
fight, etc. taunting the old Captain, It was no marvel though an old man and
fearful sought delays, whose mind was disturbed with his usual fears, and
now was seeking a passage through his guts: The old man could not endure this
his scurrility, but replied, Seeing the King will have us fight, I will die to
morrow an honorable death before his face; when thou, forgetful of thy brags,
and rashness, shall by a base flight forsake the field: Which Prophecy in all
respects was fulfilled, the field desperately lost, and the King taken
prisoner. Many more examples in this nature I could insert, but I think it as
unnecessary, as tedious.

Now although we gave them not a fieldbattel, yet suffered them not to lie idle
from fighting constantly almost in one place or other, both night and day.
Neither were they so weak (...) some suppose, after our shattering them, but
that they were in their foot still above, or equal our number before the
Suffolk Foot joined with them, who lay upon the bridges of the river so strong
before the enemy drew them over, that we could not have forced our passage, in
case we had attempted it, but that we had been fallen on by the enemy in the
rear, and been engaged both ways, to the hazard of an immediate destruction of
our whole Army.

About the twentieth day of the month, diverse gentlemen were sent forth
privately with Commissions to raise men in Norfolk, Suffolk, and Cambridge
shire: But the Country forces having broken up the bridges, and guarded the
passes, and the enemy taken the Fort called Mersey Fort, that commanded the
passage into the Island, there was no passage left open for them, so they were
forced to return again, which they did secure, although through the enemies
quarters, not a man being taken.

The next night a party of horse, and foot was commanded forth into the hundred
of Tendering, for the bringing in of provision, which returned the day following
safe, with about one hundred sheep, and sixty beeves; which were all delivered
into the Commissary for the general store, and so everynight fo far as our
bounds would reach till the enemy begirt us closer, provision was brought in to
the public store.

Two or three days after that part of the Country rise, to join with us: but
(...) who by Commission from (...) (...) Lucas was to levy and command them,
would have betrayed them to the enemy in their rising, to ingratiate himself
with the prevailing power, (an Epidemicall disease in this Kingdom) but was
discovered, having not so much policy as villainy; and seized on by the
Countrymen, till Sir Charles Lucas: his pleasure might dispose of him; and them:
To whom they sent two sufficient men of their party, to give him an account,
making it their earnest suit, that he would send a party of Horse and Foot to
assist them in their rising, and conduct them, safe into the town, which
according to their request was done; A party was drawn out and sent in the
night, who stayed there about a week, and afterward returned safe with those
they had raised through the quarters of the Suffolk Foot, who were drawn over
the river, and encamped betwixt them and the town.

Then was another party commanded forth in the night, which marching out at the
North-gate, forced through their quarters, and in the morning returned safe,
losing not above two men, for which loss they gained livelihood for many more;
for they brought in with them about fifty oxen, and cowes, besides sheep, and
some corn and other provisions, and might have brought more: But Sir Charles
Lucas being tender of his Country, would not permit them to drive from any,
but those they should know to be actual enemies; which proved afterward a
very great inconveniency, and prejudice to the Town, for after that we never
obtain the like opportunity, the enemy drawing immediately down nearer upon us,
came within less compass, and begirt us more straight; for they were indeed
much (...) with anger amongst themselves, that they should fuffer us to march
through their quarters upon a sally, and return again safe. Yet we secured the
Heith, as a final refuge for provision, from whence we conveyed daily, such
provisions as it would afford, keeping a constant guard there; which the enemy
endeavored not to hinder us of, till we had left very little there.

July 5. The Council of War published a Proclamation, for the calling in all
such townes-men, as would serve upon the line for the security of the Town, to
list themselves for the service under several Captains and Officers, being
deputed by Sir Charles Lucas to command them, and all others, to bring in their
arms to be delivered up into the Magazine; and that none, who should refuse to
list themselves, should keep any arms in their houses, upon pain of death, and
the forfeiture of their goods, to the benefit, and use of the Town.

About this time the enemy incroach't so near upon us with their approaches,
notwithstanding our daily sallies, and skirmishes with them on all parts, as
that they fell down into East-street, and seized on the Mill on the river, and
placed a strong guard there; which guard, (out of hopes to have fired all that
part of the street hetwixt them and the Town, because many of our men both
quartered and guarded there also) set fire to a Tanners house and barn, with
all the goods, leather and corn in it; the house being the next house to the
inner-side over against them, and bringing down two Drakes began to be
something busy, and troublesome to our guards; whereupon at the next Council
of War upon the dispute, a result was made for a grand sally on that part of
the Town, which was accordingly performed, and Sir Charles Lucas commanding in
chief, marched in the head of the horse, and Sir George Lisle commanded the
foot; the whole party consisted of five hundred foot, and two hundred horse,
out of which a forlorn party being drawn out, they first marched down toward
the river, where the enemies guard was on both sides the street, and a
Barricado cross, from whence with their case shot from their Drakes, and small
shot from the Barricadoe and guard-houses, they played very thick upon them,
having no other passage over (...) river then a foot bridge, the end whereof
reached within five foot of the enemies barricado. But as if it had been but a
sporting skirmish amongst tame soldiers at a general muster, they regarded it
not; but running on in a single file over the bridge, and some for have through
the river, mounted their barricado, and beat the enemy off in an instant; and
having once gained that, overturned the Drakes, and charged on upon other
parties that still fired on them in the street, and passed by the Guard-houses
till they had cleared a great part of the street; then surrounding them,
charged in upon them, who having neither possibility of relief, nor indeed of
retreat, or escape, yielded upon Quarter; so they took the Captain, Lieutenant,
and Ensign, and about four score private Soldiers, with all the other
inferior Officers. Many were also killed in the adjacent houses, the whole
street almost being full of Soldiers. The Drakes they over turned, and one of
them they threw into the River, but not having Teames ready, could not bring
them off. Now the whole party being marched up, and having thus surpised the
Guard, they marched on, and made good the Charge till they had cleared the
whole Street; which gave so great an Alarm into all their Leager, that they
immediately rallyed together all the Foot and Horse on that side the River, and
marched down the hill from behind the Windmill, on the top of another hill in a
very full and orderly Body, only they left their Colors and Pikes with a
reserve behind the Windmill. But our Party having gained almost the top of the
first hill, followed their charge so smartly upon them, that they soon forced
them to a disorderly retreat, and quickly made them strive to take their leave
of their ground: But the Fields were overspread with distractedly dispersed
Soldiers both of Horse and Foot, some from Houses out at Back-doores and
windows, and others from Hedges in a great disorder. Our Party being thereby
encouraged, prosecured their success, till they had beat them up beyond the
Wind mill, and forced Reserve and Colors, and all they had, or could rally, to
quit their ground, and so to disperse themselves, that they were forced to
divide their Horse into three Squadrons or Bodies, one Division to keep the
Field against ours, having now made a stand to draw into better order; and the
other two constantly (...) up and down, beating their Foot up as they ran away:
Which course, had they not taken, their Foot would never have disputed a hedge,
(for that was their refuge now) and we had immediately cleared all that part of
the Leager.

But now having gotten a very thick hedge for their shelter, and being thus
forced up, began again to stand: and our Foot out of more heat of courage
indeed then mature policy, having engaged thus far, some of them still ran
on, till they gained an old thin hedge, opposite to the Enemy, beyond the
Windmill, where they still fired upon the Enemy, maintaining the opposite
hedge, a party of the Enemies Horse still wheeling about in the Field between
them; Which party by chance discovered that they had spent all their Ammunition
by hearing a Soldier foolishly ^^^ing out for some, and thereupon suddenly
clapped spurs to their Horse, and made a full Charge in upon them through that
hedge, (as they might easily do any part of it) who not having Ammunition, nor
time to retreat, were most of them killed and taken. Till when we had lost very
few in all the Charge, though many were wounded in it, as could not otherwise
choose in so smart a service: Althrough I confess the Saints of our times have
found out such a way of fighting, as to kill thousands, with the loss of very
few ^nites: but it is only Tongue-charmes that guard their Armies, and not any
Providence, that conducts them to such Miracles.

Now the Body of our Party being upon their Retreat, and perceiving of this,
faced about again, and received their Charge with such an undaunted retort,
they forced them again to as speedy a Retreat; and so marched easily off into
the Town (...) and in very good order.

In this action Sir George Lisle was once taken Prisoner, but immediately
rescued; and in all we lost one Captain, and one Lieutenant, and about 30,
private Soldien which were taken at the broken hedge, (...) very few killed.
Mr. Weston, a Gentleman of the Generals Troop, being shot in the belly, was
also taken Prisoner. Of the (...) 80. and odd were brought into the town
prisoners, and between two and three hundred killed; amongst which was the
Colonel that succeeded Colonel Needham, in the Command of his Regiment, who
was killed the first nights on-slaught, and many of them wounded; of which very
few escaped, but dyed within a very short time, as their party confessed
themselves to our prisoners: either through neglect of their Surgeons, (in
which we suffered very much also within the Town) or through the
unseasonablenesse of the weather, (...) that diverse that came into the Town
afterward, and these men too that had been formerly in the Kings Service,
affirmed that the business was at the least 500, men (...) to them; besides
many that left the Leagure upon it, some coming into the Town, three or four
in a day, and often more for a long time together, and others stealing away to
their own homes.

After which Sally the Countrymen began to disgust the Service, and thought it
hard duty to lie so long in the Trenches, and were glad to entertain all
comers that would undergo their duty for them, allowing them 10. s. a week
constant pay to be excused themselves: By which means many that came up from
London and other places to have joined with us, not being able to come into the
town, entered themselves in their Arms; by which means they might more
advantageously come to us, if it had been our fortunes to march out into the
Field; But Heaven had otherwise ordained, having a farther Judgment for this
wretched Nation.

The next night the Enemy strengthening their Leager on that part of the Town,
fell into the street again, with a stronger party then before, and possessed
themselves of their former guards and ground, and again fell to firing the
houses on that side of the River next the Town, supposing thereby to fire our
(...) which we had now placed in the face of them, being but a River (...),
which much end (...) them, and kept the fire still from doing any harm: Then
they set fire to all the Windmills near the Town, to hinder us from grinding
our Corn, but we soon salved that sore; for finding at the Heith by the River
side many Milstones, lying for transportation, some of them were brought into
the Town, and diverse Horse mills set up, which proved very serviceable all the
Seidge.

Then they raised two or three Horn works and Redoubts on the North side of
the Leagure, running their Trench up to them from the River side over against
the Warren, where they placed diverse great Pieces, which they played violently
at (...) Mill called the middle Mill upon the (...) the only Mill they supposed
we had left and indeed was, excepting those Horse-mils, but did little hurt to
(...) for they thought, if they dis-inabled us to grind Corn for the Soldiers,
that they would mutiny for bread which was probable enough, and might have
been, having such poisonous (...) to set them on as they had (I am confident)
privately (...) amongst them, and (...) towns people to second them; but this
was happily prevented by the dilligent care of the Lo: Loughborow, who made the
most laborious toil as pleasing as the lightest recreation, by undertaking,
and continuing the general charge of providing all necessary provisions to be
daily ordered and distributed by the Commissaries to the whole Town; insomuch
that he would many times half a day together continue his strict eye over both
Mills and Bakers, lest by their indiscreet (or it might be (...)) neglect, very
great inconveniences might happen.

The same care was also ordered to be taken by the Mayor for the peeple of the
Town, who was commanded by the Council of War to make supplies of provision
for the Inhabitants of the Town, and to set up Mills for the grinding their
Corn, who by this time began to be in want, the Town very full of them, and
many of them indigent peeple, who were not in a capacity to provide for
themselves, nor had scarce been when the Town was open: But the Mayor (whether
out of a rebellious wilfulness, or sottish simplicity, I leave others that
know him to judge) but as I guess my self, rather desiring to hazard the
starving them, that so by the violent instigation of unmercifull hunger they
should be urged to a mutiny in the Town, by which means the Enemy might take
hold of our confusion amongst our selves, and over-whelme us in a sudden and
general destruction; for, notwithstanding all (...) and daily urgencies from
the Lord Loughborow, and Sir Charles Lucas, he still neglected all care to
provide Corn for those who had none, or Mills to grind for those who had yet
some left.

Whereupon the poor of the Town having quite exhausted their provision, began
to throng together, making great clamours and exclamations of their ill usage,
and the necessities they were fallen into, their Bellies sounding alarums to
their Mouthers, made their mouths instruments to thunder them forth to the
ears of the Officers of the Army, now not at all reflecting upon the duty of
the Mayor and Officers of the Town: Then Sir Charles Lucas at the next Council
of War (commisserating them as his own Towns-born people) made his desire to
the Lords, that they might have some Corn delivered them out of the general
store, which was as easily granted as motioned, and an Order immediately drawn;
by which Order the Comissaries were appointed to deliver to every Family
according to the number of people in it, such a proportion of Breadcorn, which
amounted in gross to 300. quarter of Wheat and Rye; the want whereof proved
afterward so great an inconyeniency to our selves, as that half that quantity
would have supported us til we had obtained better conditions from the enemy.

At a Council of War the 12. by a general consent, the Earl of Norwich caused
this ensuing Declaration to be dispersed, as well in the Enemies Leager, as in
the Country:

A Declaration of his Excellency, George Lo: Goring, Earl of Norwich: With the
Gentlemen and Freeholders of the County of Kent and Essex, in Arms for the
presecution of their General Petition, and solemn Engagement: And their Offer
unto all such Officers and Soldiers as shall repair unto them.

COuld Prosperity make us insolent, this overture should be the story of our
present fortunes: how numerous, how unanimous, how associated, how associated,
or (in a word) how heaven and earth conspire to our deliverance. Consider with
what assurance we have managed our very despaires, and raised our selves to
this height out of nothing. Consider withal, that we move still by the same
resolves, as we are favored and encouraged by that hand of Providence, which
at first raised us.

From this posture (Gentlemen and Fellow Subjects) we salute you in a temper of
love, and Christianity, disingaged (we assure you) from any interest, or
mixture of revenge or fear. Peace is the end we aim at, and by Peace, if it
be possible, we propound to accomplish that end.

To which purpose, upon a sad and (...) thought, how many Innocent souls are
seduced by the Imposture of a pretended liberty, and how many more corrupted,
by their own importune necessity, into an erroneous, and unfortunate
engagement; all which must in probability perish, except they may be recovered
by the offer of this, and this only expedient: What Officer, or Soldier
soever, now in Arms against us, shall before the 21. of this gresent July,
make his repair unto us, or any part of our Forces, and there enter into an
Engagement, not to Act any thing against us for the future, shall have his
arreares audited and paid: And we do further oblige our selves, to interpose
unto his most Sacred Majesty, for an Act of Indemnity; the success whereof
from our gracious Sovereign the King, we at all doubt not. And for the
performance on our parts, we (...) our Honors and the Faith of the County;
Avowing with all, that we design nothing of alteration either in Church or
Commonwealth, but what this present Parliament has declared to be the duty of
good Christians, and Loyal Subjects.



July the 28 the Enemy drew down upon the Heith, where we had a guard placed
in the Church, but the Officer (Cap. Horsmander by name) who then Commanded the
guard no sooner saw the Enemy, but delivered up his guard, himself, and
Soldiers, without so much opposition as the firing of one Musket; Which had he
disputed he might in a very short time been relieyed and drawn off; though the
place could not have been maintained. But that place proved very little
benefit to them for by that time we had scarce left any thing of Provision or
Ammunition there, only this benefit they might receive, they might understand
what a neglect they had committed, in permitting us so long to keep it within
our Quarters, when with so much ease they might have surprised it from us, for
it lay so opportune to them to have fallen on, that had they made an attempt
upon it we could not have maintained it without engaging our whole Body, and
quitting the Town; and indeed had they surprised that place in any convenient
time, as they might easily enough have done, before we drained it, we could not
have kept the Town ten days, there lying the greatest part of our Provision,
by which we afterward Subsisted.

The next day having drawn the line very near the Lord Lucas his house, they
planted to Demi Cannons, against St. Mary's Church, from whence they fired
threescore and odd great shot at St. Mary's Church steeple, but did very little
hurt, for with as much speed as could be a battery was raised against them upon
the Curtain, from whence we had not played above four shot, but one of their
best Cannonneers fell, and about six men more, whereupon theydrew off their
Guns from that place, finding it too hot for their continuance.

Now the cause that made them so envious at that Steeple, was because we
always kept a Sentinel there, which discovered their motion both night, and
day; besides we had made a platform in the frame of the Bells, and planted a
brass Sakar there, which flanking their trench did them much Injury.

The 25. day the Enemy drawing their line nearer the Lord Lucas his house,
under the shelter of an old wall, and some buildings, brought up two Demi
Cannons, and battering upon the Gate House (wherein was a guard of a hundred
Musketteers) beat one side of it to the ground, which falling into their work
(that was but a small half moon drawn from one side of the great House to
the other) anoyed them very much; then fired two or three Grenades immediately
with it, which buried many in the stones and dust, the rest not able to stand
the shock; betaking themselves to their Swords, and the but ends of their
Muskets, disputed it very hard from one place to another, after they had lost
their line, till most of them got away, some out of the Wicket of the gate, and
some out of the windows, and broken places of the house. The Officers also
forcing their liberty with the points of their Swords, came all off safe.

Neither could the Enemy much boast of this surprise, although it were some
advantage to them; for they purchased it with the loss of many stout men, and
of their oldest Soldiers, who they quickly found by the wall and trench sides,
some dead, and others speaking their Enemies valor, in their own miserable
dying groans, Whilst of the whole guard consisting of a hundred men, not above
ten were taken Prisoners, and some four or five killed, many I confess were
wounded, but came off and recovered.

And having thus (...) themselves of this House, (as it is their custom in all
other places, the first thing thought on is plunder) they fell to searching the
House, and those things that were in it (...) though little of worth, or
convenience they took away; which could be little more then bedsteeds, and
(...), and the like. That house having been (...) times before, and indeed the
(...) in the Kingdom, as is believed plundered: But finding themselves no better
rewarded for their service, that they might be more notorious in their villainy,
broke up the vault wherein the ancesters of that Family were usually Interred,
under the pretense of searching for money, and finding them not yet quit
dissolved, the corpse of the Lady Lucas, and the Lady Killigrew, (as I received
it from eye witnesses) wrapped in Lead; they tore open that coffine, beyond what
ever was known or read of before, or amongst the most unhumane barbarous
thoughts, dismembered their trunks, throwing a leg in one corner of the vault,
and arm in another, and were so Impudent in this so and worse then (...) act,
as to bear away the hair of their heads in their Hats as a triumphant (...)
in honor to their villainy. In which posture the vault continued, till the
corpse of Sir C. Lucas, that Loyal Martyr, was brought to possess it. Is not
that Commonwealth happy that must receive a reformation from such Saints? Who
have these ten years been practicing acts, absolutely monstrous to even nature
it self: Beyond parallel, president, or political complotment of the most
subtle Machavillian, or bloody Tyrants in the world.

By this time our Magazeens began to be very empty, all our flesh being spent,
whereupon the next business that was concluded on and ordered, was the
searching what private stores there were in the town, but they proved as weak
as the other, then the Council of War, (receiving a return of the searches
what the condition of the town was, for matter of Provision, who had now
examined every private Family.) ordered that all the Horse excepting two
hundred, should in the night (...) forth, and break through the Leager, and if
they could get through with that convenience they wished, to march Northward
toward our supposed relife; For at that time we had received very great
assurance by private letters, that relief was intended, and hasting toward us
from Duke Hamilton, under the Command of Sir Marmaduke Langdale: So the Horse
were allidrawne to a Rendevouz in the Castle yard late in the night, and a
party of Foot with them for their assistance in forcing the Enemies line with
Pioneers, to level a way for them to let the Horse in, when the Foot should
have (...) the Enemy from their line, which was supposed would easily have
been performed, and thus they marched over the River by the Middle-mill, and
came within the Enemies Centinells e're they were discovered, or any part of
their guards Alarmed; but their guides, and Pioneers (being for the most part
Townsmen) as out of a plotted combination amongst them, ran away from them, the
night being dark. So they were forced to retreat again into the town which
they did, without the loss of a man but it gave the enemy so much notice, as
(...) made an absolute discovery, together (...) their intelligence from the
town: so it (...) (though afterward) but bootlesse to (...) a second attempt.

At the next Council of War, considering that the stores were so exhausted,
and all the stesh, or very near the matter, spent, it was thought most
convenient to keep those horse, which were fitting, for the Soldiers to eat;
so they were again drawn into the Castle yard, with order that not any Officer
whatsoever should conceal his Horses, but cause them to be brought into the
field, upon the forfeiture of them to immediate slaughter; and the 3dpart of
every Troop drawn out and disposed to the Commissary to be killed, and some to
be immediately distributed, and the rest powdered; which the Soldiers very
willingly submitted to, and as cheerfully fed upon them, rather than deliver
themselves to their Enemies, upon any base or dishonorable terms, which
expressions of theirs were so common and public, as that the Enemy hearing of
our falling to Horseflesh, heard also of that resolution of the Soldiery,
which did something startle them; for before they hoped for, and expected, our
da yly submission to a Treaty for Rendidion.

Now upon the last search that was made in the Townsmens houses and shops for
all things edible, there was very little Corn found, as in some houses not
above a peck, and in some two, some none, or any Flesh hardly, yet was there a
good quantity of spice and Oil; which so far as it would hold out, proved very
useful with the Horse-slesh; some starch also was found, which was preserved,
and made very good puddings.

It has been reported, as I understand that at this time we had some relief
brought into us by water, from the (...) at Sea, but it was nothing at all
true, for although there were a River that came up to the Town, yet the Sea was
not (...) by seven miles of the Town and upwards; and besides the enemy had
possessed themselves of the Blockhouse against the Island of Mersey that
commanded the pass into it, so that no boat could stir by them to the Hieth,
which was the nearest place that any could come.

And it has also been esteemed a very great ruin to the Engagement, that the
(...) was neglected and lost, for want of first possessing that Fort. As for my
part I believe no such thing, for indeed had we taken it, as it was once
intended, and Col. Tuke (though to late the Enemy being pre-possest) appointed
for the same design, I cannot understand any way possible that it could have
been any thing beneficial, as the constitution of our Interest then was; for
it lay above seven miles then from us, so that the Enemy falling about the Town
and begirting us, as we might without any prospective of extraordinary policy
discover, would possess themselves of all parts of the River betwixt them and
home, and soon hinder all recourse betwixtus, the River being not above twelve
foot broad in most places; then had it been the same thing in respect of the
River, and those men in the Fort left to work out an improbable safety for
themselves. Neither was it such an Island as some fancy it to be, that is not
capable of releiving half such a body as we then were, had we endeavored to
seek any sanctuary there, as some would believe would have been our best
course, when we saw we could not keep the field; and to think to strengthen
our power by dividing it, is a stratagem beyond my shallow capacity, and I am
certain no policy of Machiavils, unless our number had been complete to have
engarison'd both places and if they shall think that had we marched entire
thither we might have been relieved by Sea, they are easily answered, that
though we knew of the submission of the ships to the Royal Authority, yet we
did not understand the condition they were in, which had we, I suppose was
such, as not to be able to furnish us with a months provision, much less more,
when they could hardly victual themselves, and I would feign have those
politic men inform me, which way we could expect relief there, when five
hundred men at the pass would have kept us in till we should be starved, and
the Army at Liberty to March whither they pleased to obstruct all parties from
rising to our assistance.

But let men dispute and censure what they please; The Enemy (having possessed
themselves of the Lord Lucas his house, and the Hieth) began to draw their Line
more straight about us, and now lay absolutely round us, so that we were
soddainly begirt within a very little distance; Then they brought their biggest
pieces of Battery, as 2 Demi-Cannon, and 2 whole Culverins, near St. John's
House, and again fell to Battering St. Maryes Steeple, and after some time beat
down one side of it, and a great part of the Church, and broke the Saker that
was planted in it, but killed not on man, only bruised one of the Matrosses.

The five and twentieth, in the night, the Enemy alarmed us round the Line,
and fell on upon the Guard in the Middle Mill, against Ryegate, and getting
over the River at a fordable place came in upon them, and beat them off to a
retreat into the Town, and set fire of the Mill (Colonel Rainsborow commanding
in chief) but a party of fresh men with Halberts and Sithes (most of them
Gentlemen) (...) drawn down upon them, gave them so desperate a welcome as made
them soon betake themselves to their legs, and throwing down their Arms run
disorderly off, and mistaking the ford of the River, many of them were drowned,
and about twelve killed, and some five or six taken Prisoners, and the Mill
soddainly quenched, by the Soldiers throwing water into the fire with their
hats; so that little harm was done, and the Enemies storm prevented, which we
were informed they had intended that night.

It will not be much out of the way in this progress to look into an accident
that happned at this Guard, neither do I think it any whit unworthy to be taken
especial notice of.

An Ensign of Col. Tills Regiment, being shot through the Body, in at one
side, and out at the other, with a five pound Bullet, went from the Guard to
his quarters in the heart of the Town by the help of one Soldier only leading
him, the Bullet hanging by his side in the skin, and being laid on his bed, the
Bullet (...) out and carried with it his last spirits of life; only giving him
time to breath out this expression; Oh that I had been shot with my Colors in
my hand, that furling my self in them, I might have so dyed; my Friends might
then have believed, I really loved my KING, and that I (...), and cheerfully
dyed in His, and my Countries service. An expression as gallant as the (...) of
the shot by which he dyed; and pity it were the memory of so great a loyalty
should sleep in security, but be rather erected an everlasting Trophee in the
hearts of all true Christian Royalists, and conscientious Subjects to his never
dying fame, and it much grievs me, that I am unfortunate in the ignorance of
his name.

The seven and twentieth day the Enemy lying in Maudlin-street, began to cast
up two or three Redoubts in the Field, betwixt it and the Town, over against
Berry fields, (for so were they called next Eastgate) and beginning to
express their unwelcomnesse by their turbulent behavior, we supposed they
intended to be ill Neighbors, whereupon a party was drawn forth, which made a
smart sally upon them, and beat them off from their works, and followed them
into the street, and houses, and killed many of them, still maintaining their
ground (although it were about noonday) till the Enemy began to draw great
Bodies of Horse and Foot upon them, then they made an orderly and fair Retreat,
bringing off some (...) or more Prisoners, with the loss of one man and two
more hurt; and afterward that they grew thus near, daily sallyes were made in
one place of their Leaguer or other, to the end of that (...).

On the Sunday following Sir William Massam, one of the Committees that were
Prisoners in the Town, was sent forth in Exchange for Mr. (...); whose man was
permitted to come to the Walls (but not within the town) where he received him;
joyful enough of his Liberty from that Imprisonment; though some have boldly
asperst the Gentlemen to whom they were Prisoners, and avoucht that they were
placed just upon the Line, because they should be killed by the Impartial shot
of their Friends; which is false enough, they being lodged there at our first
coming to Town, not suspecting any such service, but as the best, and most
convenient Inn, and afterward the Town being so full, would not admit any
better convenience for them, and I think, let them acknowledge only the truth,
and they must needs confess civility enough was showed them to the end, being
allowed to receive any provisions of fresh and hot meats, as Venison Pasties
and the like into the Town, without any the least opposition or affront, whilst
the Lords and Gentlemen themselves fed generally on Horse flesh. I must
confess that once or twice the top of their House was shot through with great
shot from the Leaguer, (I know not what House could be assured free in the
Town) whereupon they sent a special Message to the Lord Fairfax, to let him
know what House they lay in, and desired him that he would not shoot that way;
they should have gotten an Order of Parliament that the bullets should not have
dared to molest them, if he did shoot that way, they might then have fedsecure.
Now the Enemy thus proceeding in their siedge in a very formal order, crept
still with their approaches nearer and nearer to us; yet many of their men paid
dearly for their boldness, for though by reason of the scarcity of our
Ammunition we could not make very great sallies upon them, nor constantly fire
from the line, yet sallies were made almost every day in one part or other, and
our shot so warily disposed of, that many of them fell daily; some of our men
they often killed going out to (...) and bring in grass for the Horse; for we
had no Horse-meat left in the Town, but what they first fought for, and brought
in and sold; going in parties, and some firing at the Enemy whilst the others
cut grass, all the thatch from the Houses, and boughs from the Trees being
eat up, but very few else did we lose in all the time of the siedge.

August the tenth, The Lady Kath: Scot, accompanied with some other Ladies,
desiring leave of the L. Fairfax that she might have the liberty of going to
the L. Norwich her Father (the Lady Norwich being newly dead) could not procure
so much liberty as to go into the Town to him, but only to come to the Sally
port; and not (...) neither but accompanied with a guard, that might hear all
discourse that should pass between them; there came with them the
Quartermaster General Gravener, and some other Officers, and were entertained
with a collation of Horseflesh, and a Bottle or two of wine; the best
accommodation we could treat them with, which they eat heartily on, and liked.

And now began Horseflesh to be as precious to us as the choicest meat before,
the Soldiers in general, and all Officers and Gentlemen from the Lords to the
lowest degree or quality, eating nothing else, unless Cats and Dogs, which
the enemy disgusted very much, expecting a daily rendition by us, by the
assurance whereof, they constantly encouraged their Soldiers on, to the
continuance of the hard duty they then underwent, who else would have been
hardly kept together being often upon the March, either away into the Country,
or else to us into the Town.

It was so hansome a diet grown by this time amongst the Soldiers to eat such
food, that we could harely secure our Horses in the Stables, but every morning
one Stable or other was robbed, and our Horses knocked o'th head, and sold in
the Shambles by the pound; nor was there in a short time a dog left, for it was
the custom of the Soldier to reserve half his ammunition Loaf, and in a
morning walk the streets, and if he discovered a Dog, to drop a piece of
bread, and so drill him on, till within his reach, then with the but end of his
musket knock his brains out, and away with him to his quarters; I have known
there six shillings given for the side of a Dog, and yet but a small one
neither.

Then the Enemy perceiving they could work nothing upon us by summons, threats,
nor force of arms, betook them to petty stratagems, sometimes sending false
fires of strange improbable News of great victories over the Scots, long before
they ever met with them; and Lists of prisoners taken, never in Arms, and such
like Whimsies, hoping thereby to terrify the Inferior sort of Soldiers to
such a timorous apprehension of their condition, as to force their Officers by
their mutinous resolutions, to treat for conditions, orleave them in the lurch,
which of the two this Enemy rather wished, that so many Gentlemen might fall a
prey to their unsatiable malice.

Then they sent private papers into the Town amongst the Soldiers by Women,
incensing the Soldiers against their Officers, reproaching them with that
odious name of Rebels (which they knew to whom more properly due) and men
acting against the Peace of the Kingdom without Commission, which still they
hoped would so poison the brains of the Soldiers, that if they would not
mutiny, yet at least the greatest party would be incenst against their Officers
and quit their Line, by whose loss we should have been so weak, as to be easily
stormed and taken.

But instead of receiving any benefit by these sucking stratagems, they wrought
nothing more than an injury to themselves; for it engaged the Soldiers to
higher resolutions.

Then they shot Arrows into the Town at several places, with papers fastened to
them, promising our Soldiers, that if they would desert the Town, they should
have fair quarter, pardon for what they had done, and liberty to go to their
own homes, with passes from the General, without being plundered, or suffering
the least prejudice or injury: But this neither proved any benefit to them, or
injury to us, but still rather exanimated and enlivened the Soldiers, who were
so courageous in their resolutions as very often to express that they would
either live with Liberty, or dye with Honor, neither of which could arise by a
poor submission to an ignoble Enemy.

And now the Enemy had possessed themselves of al places of convenience and
advantage round about the Town, and began to annoy us very much in diverse
places about the Line, from the opposite and flanking Houses, and our Magazines
began to grow very low of powder, so that Order was given out, that the
Soldiers should be careful not to wast their ammunition by firing without a
very real occasion, and that no Gunner should fire a Cannon without the
Command of a Field Officer of his Post, or a General Officer of the Field. But
these Houses under the Line proved so obnoxious, that by degrees they made that
line to hot for any almost to abide it; and the enemy having found this
advantage drew thicker down into the Suburbs, under the shelter of the houses;
which the Officers being very sensible of, knew there remained no securer
remedy, sallyed out amongst them, and beat them out of the Streets, and some
houses they set fire to, having given order to those Inhabitants (...), to
secure and convey away their goods first; and those which lay immediately under
the Line, and Wall they first pulled down by Carpenters, and other Workmen,
that the Materials might be preserved, and the less (...) done to the Town,
and Owners; Which should they have let stand, would have proved so miserable an
inconveniency, that we could not have maintained the Town one half hour, I am
confident, had the Enemy ever attempted a resolute storm, when once they had
begirt us so close; by reason that in many places the st airs came up to the
top of the Wall, in the highest places of it, so large that two or three men
might have come up a Breast, and some Rooms equalled the height of the Wall in
a perfect Diameter. And if the Enemy should have taken no other benefit but the
opportunity of a Wind, and set fire to them, they might probably have set fire
of the whole Town; Which they attempted the first night, and once after had
effected, had not the Wind been very calm, and the Soldiers as extraordinary
diligent in quenching still as they fired.

The eleventh day more Arrows were again shot into the Town to entice the
Soldiers by alluring charms, (...) with as severe threats, to quit the
service; intimating, That if they came not away before the next Monday (it
being then Friday) that not a man which came after should have any quarter;
Which Messages the Soldiers still resented so well, as that they resolved to
answer it by the same Messengers, and took some of their own Arrows anointing
them with a (...) and wrapping the same in paper fastened it to the heads of the
Arrows, and writ on the papers this superscription, An Answer from Colchester
August the 11th. (...) as you may smell; informiug by that how little they
regarded their baits, or esteemed their threatenings.

And now by this time the greatest part of our Horse had changed their Stables
for Slaughter Houses, and their Riders being willingly dismounted took up foot
Arms, the Gentlemen Halberts, and the private Troopers Sithes, ready fitted
with long staves for the service, which were very terrible for execution; and
there were many Sithes found in the Town upon a search for Arms, more than
ever was known to be in the Town before; and many brown Bills were also made in
the Town; so that no man might be idle for want of Arms; these men were all
listed both Gentlemen and private Troopers (for more orderly disposing them in
duty and service) in particular companies, under the Lord General, the Lord
Capell, and Sir Charles Lucas; the Lord Capell marching himself a foot, with a
Halbert on his shoulder, in the head of his Company to the guard, that none
might make any scruple or acception against it; which Company lay constantly
upon reserve at several places of the Line at some distance in Tents built
purposely for them; which point of War must of necessity arise from as high a
convenience as any, and indeed was a course constantly practiced amongst the
best and most judicious Conquerours of the World, and they have left us
Arguments for it in the Chronology of diverse Victories obtained, and lost
fields recovered by Fortune and resolute Reserves, although but of small
numbers, of which I shall instance one of Serverus the Emperor, who in a
Battle against Albinus, General of the Britains, before Lugdunum was himself
put to (...), beaten off his Horse, and hid himself, whilst the Britains
followed the Chase, chanting out their praise as H. I. H.
victors; till Latus, one of Serverus his Officers, staying behind with some
fresh Troops, and making a fresh charge, the Serverians took heart again, and
Mounting Serverus, put on his purple A Military Mantle.
(...), when the Albinians thinking themselves Masters of the field, being
disordered, and furiously charged by fresh Troops, after a short resistance
fled, the Severians following them with great execution to the City Gates.

Now these Companies must not be understood neither, for the only reserves we
had, for it was the constant method of the Armies duty in General (for I
cannot willingly, nor I think rationally, term it a Garrison, but a quarter)
to lie every Regiment on their several post, the one half upon guard, and the
other all night very near, at the most convenient place upon reserve.

And having maintained and held it out in defiance of a proud, succesfull, and
imperious Enemy (this being the 17 of August) still cherishing our resolutions
with hopes of relief, and having yet no certain intelligence of the state of
affairs in the other parts of the Kingdom, nor relief approaching, and our
stores very much-wasted, insomuch that all our Corn was welnigh spent, and very
little Ammunition left to maintain our guards only with; by a General result
of the Council of War, His Excellency the Lord Norwich, the Lord (...), and
Sir Charles Lucas, signed Letters to the Lord Fairfax, to desire him to grant
them twenty days respite, and a pass through his quarters, for them to send
some Gentlemen to Sir Marmaduke Langdale, that they might receive a real
information of his condition, and if they found him as they had given him out,
and not advancing toward us, and that in that time there was no hopes of
relief, that then they would Treat for surrender.

Other hopes we had none left (and indeed but little reason for these) the Duke
of Buckinghams, and the Earl of Hollands parties were already dissolved into
nothing (indeed without doing any thing) and no other parties risen, or
expressing any inclinations, much less intentions, to it.

But this would not be granted; then they were forced to send away private
Spies and Messengers, and concluded in a general resolution, to maintain and
defend it to the last; and in that time not to be idle with them, but as active
as the want of Ammunition would admit; and according to those resolutions, send
out a party every day or night at the Sally port (they went voluntarily upon
it) and sallying upon them were troublesome enough to them, and kept them upon
constant and hard duty; but ultra posse, non est esse; and our Ammunition was
so exhausted, that we could not send out great parties often; yet found out a
way with what materials could be gotten to make some match, which though it
were not so good as what we had before, yet served our present necessity; and
some powder also we made, but it was not much, for we were forced to resign
ere we could bring it to prefection.

Then our Commissaries began to complain their stores which were almost empty,
the people generally much necessitated for bread (the true staff of Life) and
the poorer sort merely for want of Corn near starving, we being not able to
relieve them again.

Then the poor people Petitioned the L. Fairfax by the Mayor and Aldermen,
that they might have liberty to leave the Town and disperse themselves into the
Country amongst their friends, that would keep them from famishing. But he
thought it not policy to grant it, but on the contrary gave order to his whole
Army round the Leaguer, that if any should be turned forth, by us, they should
fire at them; but at that time they considered by their private friends (our
bosom Enemies) their Town intelligence, that we had made Proclamation at that
time, that whosoever had not twenty days provision in their houses, should
depart the Town, as well rich as poor; at which time search being made again,
very few were found to have provision for above two or three days, and then
the Enemy having given this unchristianlike, though politic, order, it would
have been a very difficult thing, to have forced so many people through a Sally
Port, and dangerous to attempt, who of themselves were apt enough to a Mutiny,
and as inhumane a policy (though policy it would have been) to have forced them
from their own houses upon the Swords of a most cruel and merciless Enemy.

Then the stores were again reviewed, and the Magazine also, and the stores
found to be so empty as not to yield two days provision of bread in them, for
the whole Army; and the Magazine not to maintain two hours fight, if a storm
should happen: Then a Council of War was again summoned, where this want
being considered, it was agreed, That it was the best course to Treat with the
Enemy in time; and by the Major part by Voices it was carried; and Letters
accordingly were drawn up, and Doctor (...) a Phisician then living in the town
employed in the Message.

And now too sad it was to understand, we had done our utmost, and as much that
was, I think, as was possible for men to do in our condition; having engaged
so potent and conquering an Enemy so long, with so inconsiderable a party, and
now at the last destitute of any hopes remaining of a possible relief in so
short a time as our Condition would enable us to hold out.

The next morning the Doctor returned again with this Answer from the General;
That we had held it out so long against him, and to the utmost denied his
Summons, That the best Conditions we must expect from him, must be to submit
to Merey, only that the Inferior Officers and Soldiers should have liberty to
go to their own homes. Which was so much beyond the Honor of our actions,
that it was thought as unhonourable to be accepted.

Tuesday the two and twentieth, Early in the morning more Arrows were shot
into the Town at several places of the Line, with Papers fastened to them,
wherein was written as follows.

August 21. 1648.

Whereas on Sunday last, in a Letter to the Lord Goring, Lord Capel, and Sir
Charles Lucas, Conditions were offered to all private Soldiers, and inferior
Officers under (...), to have liberty to go to their several homes, without
injury or violence; and all superior Officers, Lords and Gentlemen to submit
to Mercy. And whereas the same has been concealed from the Soldiers and
Inferior Officers aforesaid, nevertheless if they will before Thursday next
lay hold on the said Conditions, and come away in a Body from the Enemy, the
same Conditions shall be performed to them which have been offered; but in case
they shall suffer the (...)-People (whom we shall not receive) to be turned out
of the Town, and suffer them to perish under the Walls, they must expect no
Mercy; And if the Townsmen in arms shall join with the soldiery in coming
forth in a body as aforesaid, they shall also be free from violence.

This pretty little stratagem they thought would have infused such a wildfire
in the mutinous brains of the Rout, as would in an Instant have blown our
Interest into Air, and invited the Soldiery to have delivered their Officers up
as a Sacrifice to obtein their own Liberty: But their hopes were laid flat in
this, for instead of a compliant acceptance of these Propositions, they
resolved to accept of no Conditions, wherein their Officers should not receive
a benefit.

The Council of War having also the day before permitted Doctor Glyston to
go out again, with one Master Sheffield (one of the Committee then Prisoner in
the Town, brought from ( helmsford) to mediate with the General for the People
of the Town, sent also by him other Letters concerning the Soldiery, for
Condiditions of Rendition, but Answer was returned, that they had given us a
former account of what Conditions they would give us, and those they would
stand to, and no other we must expect.

And now being drawn to a sad exigency, and plunged into a very great
extremity, it was not for us to protract time, but to add Wing to our
resolutions, and close up our misfortunes as near as we could, with an
honorable conclusion, and with the best contrivancy of speed that might be;
for we had scarce left uneaten, one Cat or Dog in the Town, some Horses we
had yet alive, but not many, for there were at that time in the Commissaryes
account a list of seven hundred nnd thirty Horse, that had been killed by him,
and orderly distributed out; besides those that the Soldiers had stolen out of
the stables and killed, and others that Gentlemen flaughtred for their private
tables, which I am consident made the number above eight hundred; and for Bread
there was not Corn left for one days provision, and many mouths to feed, for
we had made all kind of Corn the Town would afford, as Malt, Barley, Oats,
Wheat, Rye, Pease, and all we could recover into bread, for eight Weeks
togegether, to lengthen our store, still contented to undergo any thing in
particular that we might advance the general service; but our hopes were now
quite dissolved in absolute fear of unavoidable ruin.

Yet this ghastly visage of our Interest could not exile that incomparable
courage that generally inspired this gallant party with lively actions and
patient sufferance, as if it had been equally indifferent to them, contentedly
to undergo prosperity or misfortune; all men's resolutions were set on fire to
desperate designs and by some unpresidented attempt to ruin their Enemy, or to
perish nobly in the enterprise, since it is much better to die Honorably, than
live Basely.

The meanest of the Soldiers as yet held a conformable obedience to the
commands of their Officers, undaunted in their courages, and courageous in
their actions, notwithstanding the many defigns and politic engines the Enemy
had employed to alienate them from their duty, and dishearten them in their
service.

But least there might be any mis-apprehension betwixt the Soldiers and
Officers upon the putting any design in execution, This Engagement was drawn,
and generally signed by the Officers, and Gentlemen through the Quarters.

WE whose names are here under written, do in the presence of Almighty God,
protest against all conditions that are or shall be sent from the (...), by
which our libertyes may be infringed, and our Honors blemished. And we do upon
our honors solemnly engage our selves, not to desert one another, nor the
Foot, till by Gods assistance we have forced our passage through all that shall
oppose us, or to perish in the act, which we (...) this three and twentieth of
August, one thousand six hundred forty eight.

Then the Town was again searched what Provisions was left, a severe account
given, and all private stores taken, and brought into the Commissaries, leaving
but to every family that had most but one peck of Corn, of all or any sorts,
yet all would hardly amount to one days Provision of bread.

The next day being Thursday the four and twentieth, the Enemy sent in a paper
Kite to the Town, which hovering a good while over, that the Soldiers might
take notice of it, at last they let drop in the midest of it, with many papers
fixed to it, to the same purpose as those before shot in with the Arrows, and
with them a book also of the relation of a great Victory over the Scots, and
their general rout; and within two hours after made a general triumph
through the whole Leaguer, giving a volley both of small and great shot, round
the Town in all quarters; and some of their shot playing thick into the Town
gave us a very strong alarm, and as great hopes that it was but the forerunner
of a storm, or the Beginning of one, till we perceived it at so great a
distance, as beyond and about the Windmill beyond the Eaststreet. But now their
assurances were so great of gaining a Victory without blows, that they thought
(as indeed it was) the best policy to forbear, although they had drawn their
approaches so near the Line under Berry Fields, by the shelter of a wall which
was yet standing, as that their Soldiers from the Trenches, and ours from the
Line might talk together, and throw stones at one another, and did frequently.

Friday the five and twentieth, the Council of War met again early in the
morning, where they resolved to send the Lord Fairfax word into the Leaguer,
That since he denied to treat upon any conditions that were Honorable,
notwithstanding our actions and demeanours in the (...) had been nothing but
what became our Honoursand fidelity, if he were pleased to make an attempt of
attaking us, he should not need to spring any Mine (as he boasted he had
ready,) but that any Gate (...) the Town, that he should (...). choice of,
should be set open, and his entrance disputed afterward.

But he was now sure (as he thought) of having us at an easier rate than the
loss of so much blood as such a surprise must cost him if he had carried it,
which he would hardly have dove. And indeed it was his best policy not at all
to storm us, since he had leisure enough to wait our doom, the Kingdom in
general being so dull and sluggish, as not to act any thing that might require
his remove; which had but any parts done by rising, though with small parties,
at that time, might have easily forced him to; so that he must either attempted
a surprise by storm, or fairly retreated with a hazard' of his honor, if not
his Army; and (...) he stormed we had endangered the shattering of his whole
Body, the edge of whose fury was by this time much taken off, and something
startled both at our resolutions and courses for defense, and much frighted at
our Sithes, and scalding Pitch, which was kept boiling in Iron pots and
caldrons, every night round the Line, with long Ladles to cast it over the
Rampire upon their storming.

Wherefore considering the condition we were so sadly plunged in, through the
defeat of the Scots, the disloyalty of the whole Kingdom, and the want we were
in of provision to subsist any longer, not having any hopes that we could
possibly hold out two days longer, unless without bread, which we must do, or
not (...) all; it was the final result of the Council of War, to draw out
the whole party that night, to their Arms, both Horse and Foot, with what
Ammunition was lest, which was not much, and as many short Scaling Ladders as
could be procured in the interim, and in the deadest time when we might be
least expected, to set open two of the Gates, and march out and storm their
Line, and so falling into their head quarters, beat up their whole Army, and
relieve our selves, or force our march through all oppositions that they should
endeavor to obstruct us with, or perish in the attempt; and if the private
Soldiers should entertain any suspicion that the Gentlemen, and Officers, who
had yet Horses, should seek out their safety by flight, and leave them engaged
every man (excepting only the General and the Major General) to pistol his own
horse in the head of them; Which design being agreed on, and secrecy enjoined,
and every one taken his orders according to his duty in it, the Council broke
up, and every man betook himself with the utmost of his endeavors to the
making preparation in the day for the nights service.

The Enemy having this day planted four great pieces for battery against Berry
field; fired about sevenscore great shot in the foorenoon against the old Wall,
but did very little hurt, only beat off the tops of two old ruined Towers upon
it, and killed some three men.

This was taken as an opportune alarm to call the Soldiers generally to the
Line, whereby they might unexpectedly be in a readiness for the intended sally
without Bag or Baggage, which was concluded generaly to be left behind; for if
we gained our hoped victory, we should command both them again, and our Enemies
to boot; if we failed, we resolved to have no need of them.

This I confess would have been a desperate enterprise, but as Noble, and had
it proceeded to action, it might (for ought I know) to as honorable success,
by a glorious victory; and turned not only to our own liberty, but the whole
Kingdoms freedom, and peace; as it happened in Paris once, when the Duke of
(...) being besieged, and so distressed, that his Soldiers called out to him to
yield rather then starve, made a resolute sally upon the French Army, destroyed
the whole body, and took the King prisoner; and from (...) marched against
Rome, where, although he was killed, yet the Army took the City, and besieged
the Pope in the Castle of (...).

Now all things were almost in a readiness before night, and the Ammunition and
scaling Ladders brought to a particular place, ready to be carried to the Line;
but long ere night there was some Officers that (although I am so charitable as
to think not dissenting from the design) alleged many Arguments, that it might
be better deferred till the next night, because they thought that then they
should be in a far better readiness; by which means it was put off.

But that night, by a most desperate misfortune, though by what means I know
not, but before morning, some mutinous spirit had insinuated, into the private
Soldiers, that the Officers and the rest of the Gentlemen were resolved that
night, or very suddenly to break away through the Leaguer, and escape, and leave
them all engaged.

Which spark role to such a flame, as indeed proved a prefating Comet to our
succeeding ruin, and those Soldiers so remarkeably gallant before, gave a
curb to that courageous spirit that guided their Actions in the honorable
obedience; and poisoned their disturbed brains, into a frenzy of desperate
mutiny round the Line; In foam places threatening to cast their Officers over
the Line: So high a mutiny indeed it was grown before day, that it was rather
likely to end in an immediate ruin to themselves and Officers too, than a
(...); for the Enemy never wanted their incendiaries amongst us, to agravate
any mischief that mightpost forward our destruction, and we might be assured
would not only (and did) add (...) to this unnatural combustion, but give the
(...) notice thereof, that they might make the best use of it.

Then the Lords, and Sir Charles (...), Sir William (...), and Sir George Lisle,
expressed themselves indeed in all the proceedings, men as active as
honorable, and beyond expression in both; but never more than in the managing
of this Business, the rest of the Officers as diligently bestirring themselves
also as could be expected, and indeed to admiration, so that at the last they
had wrought a little mildness amongst them, by endeavoring to give them all
the satisfaction that could be in this their misapprehension.

Yet notwithstanding all endeavors to pacify and allay this strangly conjured
Devil, it proceeded so on till it grew to such a height, that many left their
guards and got in crowds about the Line, and at the last, whilst the Council
of War was sitting, selected about thirty, which they sent to the Council, to
know what their intentions were, saying, That if they would not make conditions
for them, and such as they should (...) of, they (...) Article for themselves
over the Line, and leave their Officers to shift for themselves as they
understood their Officers would have done by them. This put the Council of War
into a great distraction, the Soldiers, till then, never having acted any
thing dishonorable, or unlike the most gallant Soldiers that ever defended
Town; and had suffered the greatest inconveniences that ever, I think, men
did, with as extraordinary (...), never showing the least discontent at any
thing.

These coming to the House where the Council sat, sent in two, which they
supposed to be most able speakers, who being called in, The Lord Norwich
assured them of the falsity of their allegation; to confirm which, he also
gave them a true understanding of the design; telling them-also, hat they were
so far fro (...) them, or seeking any good, that should not extend in as great
a measure to the meanest Soldier amongst them, as to themselves; That they
were resolved to give themselves a prey to their Enemies mercy, (as it proved
indeed) and cast (...) into the greatest inconveniences that cruelty of a
bloody enemy could (...) them with, if thereby they might (...) the (...)
Soldiery from suffering; and that it was their desires to deliver themselves
(...) to the Enemy, to purchase them an honorable liberty; to which end, they
were Commissioning Gentlemen to the Lord Fairfax to Treat for it.

To which the Soldiers returned this Answer, that they desired not any liberty
that should be purchased at fo dear a rate, with many affectionate expressions
of their resolutions to serve their Officers again then, or at any time, when
they should be commanded, and departed very much satisfied: which for the
present appeased the Mutiny, and so well indeed, that through their own folly
their misery was like to arise, and began to examine how this jealousy began,
but now it was unseasonable.

And now it was as much too late to think of any thing but the worst of
adverse Fortune for the superiors, and present delivery; the Enemy already
knowing as much of our Condition in every respect as we our selves.

So the Soldiers being thus pacified and and (...) to (...), it was generally
resolved as most convenient in that condition, to (...) a Gentleman from the
Council to (...) with the Enemy for conditions, being frustrate of all hopes
of longer subsistence or security, or possibility of further attempting any
design. Whereupon Col. Sam. (...) ((...) in Honor and Ingenuity) was
immediately sent forth, with full power to accept of any conditions he could
obtein, and to conclude before he came back, who returned not till very late
that night, yet time enough to let us know the sad conclusion we were like to
have. For the General (by the instigation ofhis Council of war) was fallen from
those conditions which formerly he had offered, and now they began to insult
over our miseries, and the best that could be obtained, were to deliver our
selves up, the Soldiers Prisoners at War with all Officers under Captains, and
the Lords, and other Officers and Gentlemen, to submit to Mercy; and that we
should send the (...) forth (that were Prisoners with us) the next morning, if
we would have any thing at all with him.

See a just judgment for disobedience, in this reward these Soldiers gained to
themselves, for their so tumultuous and mutinous disorder: their own thraldom
((...) proved ruin to many of them) their (...) destruction, and (for ought I
know the ruin of a design, that might else have been so prosperous, as to give
redemption to the whole Kingdom from that Vassalage it is unhappily plunged
into.

The next morning, being Sunday the 27 of August, the Council of War meeting
again, and this account given, inthere was no refuge, nor remedy left, nor any
thing to trust to, but what conditions the Enemy would give us; the Committee
was therefore immediately dispatched, and Col. Tuke with five other Officers
sent forth again to the Enemy, to confirm and sign Articles for rendition, and
manner of delivery. The Soldiers of the Enemies Army and ours being already
mixed on many places of the Line, no fire given on either side, as if we had
been absolute Prisoners, long (...) any conclusion was made.

Toward night they came back, and brought with them the articles, which were
to be put in execution the next morning.

The several Regiments to lay down their Arms at their several Posts, and
there to (...) with their Officers under Captains, till they should be disposed
of.

The Lords, with the rest of the Officers and Gentlemen to be by eight of the
Clock in the morning at the Kingshead, and (...) Horses and Arms without any
imbezilment, in Saint Mary's Churchyard.

All the Ordnance to be (...) on the (...) as they were planted; all the (...)
of (...), Match and Ball, to be left in the (...) at the Town Hall which was
easily don, for there was but one barrel and a half of powder left; many
great shot were indeed left, in the Lord Capels quarters, which the Enemy had
shot into the Town, and the Soldiers gathering up, sold to him for six pence a
Bullet.

But many of our Horses were taken violently out of their Stables by the
Soldiers of the Leagure, who flockt into the Town before the Gates were
opened, contrary to the Articles, and plundered every thing they could lay their
hands on.

And now began the last sceene of this Tragedy; The Lords and Gentlemen
according to the Articles met at the Kings head, and the rest of the Army at
their appointed places, and all things ordered according to conditions; and
about two of the clock in the Afternoon, the Lord Fairfax entered the Town, and
rid it round to view our Line and show himself in triumph to the inferior
Soldiers, but camenot near the Lords; where he found a just cause for his
admiration, how it was possible we could maintain it so long against him,
whose very name was as he thought enough to conquer.

Then he went to his quarters in the Town, where a Council of War immediately
met according to his appointment to luxuriate their unsaciable malice, in a
collation of Loyal blood, and raise their trophies in ruin of Incomparable
virtue.

And after they had insulted upon our conditions, (...) sported away some Votes
of contempt upon us, then lying at their unmercifull mercy, they concluded
their (...), and decreed a barbarous sacrifice of innocent virtue, and of some
prey.

Then they sent Colonel (...) to the (...) to visit, as we thought the Lords
and Gentlemen, but he brought a sentence of death in his heart, though not
(...) in his mouth, which easily discovered it self in his death-like (...).

Coming up into the Chamber, first (...) the Lords, and afterward came to Sir
Charles Lucas, and with a (...) told him, That the General (...) to speak with
him at the (...) of War, with Sir George Lisle, Sir (...) Gasquoine, and
Colonel (...) if he were there, but he was not there; so Sir Charles (...) as
presaging what indeed did afterward follow, took his (...) leave of the Lords
and the rest of his fellow prisoners that were near him, and calling Sir George
Lisle (who was in discourse, and heard not what was spoke) and Sir Bernard
(...) went (...) with him, leaving the rest of the (...) with sympathizing
Souls, sighing prayers for them, for well they might imagine what evil was
intended (...) them; though they knew them guiltless of any thing that might
justly bring their lives in question, though (...) the mercy of the Enemy, it
being a general rule, that the greatest expression of noble valor appears in
the highest civility to an Enemy subjected to (...), and was always the
practice of the most gallant Enemies in the World.

So (...) Caesar, having (...) (...), in the field (his most implacable Enemy)
pursued him into (...), where, when he came, his head was presented to him
(treacherously taken off) by Theodotus, who thought (...) that means to
ingratiate himself into (...) extraordinary favor with (...); but he no
sooner beheld it, but (...) of rejoicing at the (...) of such an Enemy, turned
away his head, and wept; and understanding the actors of that (...) to be (...)
an (...), and (...), immediately (...) (...) to be put to (...), and had given
the (...) reward to the other, had (...) to the Army and opposed him.

Many examples in (...) kind (...) I (...) with, but never any for men to
murder with mercy.

But what should we expect in a Kingdom, so heathenishly reformed, but loyal
obedience by pretended Law to be made Rebellion, and horrid T: placed Judge of
the Court; whilst innocent Allegiance receives its deadly doom at the Bar.

The Lords and Gentlemen sitting thus expostulating with their discontents, and
still revolving in their distracted minds what would be the event; about an
hour after came a Messenger from Sir Charles (...), to desire a Chaplain to be
immediately sent to him; which struck a dead sorrow in to the hearts of all.

Whereat the Lords (desiring that no man might be a particular sufferer in so
general a cause) called up one Captain (...) an Officer of the Enemies, and
Entreated him to hasten to the Council of (...), and desire them in the
behalf of the Prisoners, that they would not make those Gentlemen they had
taken from them any greater sufferers then they intended to all; who being all
(...) concerned in condition, desire also to be so in suffering.

But all this could take no effect in them, having past their doom without ever
calling the convicted to the Court, or Bar. A new unheard of way, of condemning
men in our Nation.

The Condemned, though not Convicted Knights, were immediately conducted to the
Castle; which was nothing now but a Dungeon and the County Goal; Then Col.
(...) coming to them, said they must prepare themselves for death; Then Sir
(...). Lucas asked him, by what Law they were to dye, or whether by an
Ordinance of Parliament, by the Council of War, or by command of the
General? To which Ireton made this answer; That it was by the Vote of the
Council of War according to an Order of Parliament; by which Order all that
were found in Arms were to be (...) against as Traytirs.

Then Sir Charles Lucas replied, alas! You deceive your selves, me, you cannot,
but we are conquered and must be what you please to make us: with a countenance
cheerful as one going to a banquet rather than death, not showing the least
symptom of fear; but as it were scorning Death as much as he did the
Instruments that gave it; Only he desired time till the next morning, as to
settle some things in this World, so especially to prepare and fit his Soul for
another, but that could not be granted, then he went on again, Sir, Do (...)
think I make this request (...) of any desir: I have to live, or escape the
death you have doomed me to, for I scorn (...) life at your (...); but that I
might have time to make (...) addresses to God above, and settle some things
below, that I might not be thrown (...) of this world with all my sins (...)
me; But since it will not be by (...) charity, I must submit to the mercy of
(...) whose holy will be done; Do your worst I shall soon be readyfor (...).

Sir George (...) said very little, only in the like manner desired a little
respite, that he might have time to write to his Father and Mother; but was
also denied. True Servants of their old Master, and good practitioners in his
doctrine, thought it not enough to destroy the body, but as much as in them lay
to kill the Soul also.

But Colonel (...) having taken his leave of them, they took an (...) that
poison, and went immediately to prayers; Sir Charles Lucas first praying and
breathing forth such zealous expressions and heavenly ejaculations that (...)
seemed translated already into another World while he was yet alive, they
afterward prayed with the Chaplain, and received the blessed Sacrament.

This religious devotion being finished they were hastened, forth into the
Castleyard to be executed; But Sir (...) (whom they (...) ere they understood
what Conntry-man he was, and after they had again considered of him) was
reprieved out of the consideration that he was a stranger to the Kingdom.

When these two true English Worthies came to the place appointed for execution
(scarce to be believed amongst Christians or men of humanity) there came Col.
(...), Rainsborow, and (...) to be as well spectators as actors, in this
inhumane tragedy; to make their eyes witnesses (though not their souls
sensible) of their unchristianity.

Where they found the Loyal (...), ready to be sacrificed, and with as undanted
resolutions to receive death there; as ever before they had dared it in the
Field, where the boldest Rebel never gained Honor by questioning their
Gallantry.

Sir Charles being the first that was to receive this honor of Martyrdom told
them that he had often looked death in the face in the field, and now they
should see he durst dye; Then having a little while retired himself upon his
knees, he rose upwith a cheerful countenance and opening his doublet, showed
them his breast and setting his hands to his sides calls out to them, see I am
ready for you, now Rebels do your worst; so they immediately fired at him and
shot him in four places; so that he was suddenly dead.

Then Sir George Lisle his turn being next, (being before carried a little
aside, that he might not see his Friend fall) was brought to the place to
perform the conclusive part of this bloody scene; and viewing the Body of his
dear friend and fellow Martyr dead and bleeding on the ground, kneled down and
kissed it sobbing forth a funeral Elegy in many sweet Characters of his
peerlesse and unspotted honor.

Then standing up, took out of his pocket five pieces of gold (the whole stock
he had about him) and gave one of them to his Executioners, and the rest to a
Gentleman then standing by (who formerly had been his servant) to deliver as
his last Legacy to some friends in London, with some filial expressions of duty
to his Father and Mother, and recommendations to some other friends.

Then turning to the spectators said, Oh! how many of your lives here have I
saved in hot blood, and must now my self be most barbarously (...) in cold? But
what dare not they do that would willingly cut (...) throat of my dear King,
whom they have already imprisoned; and for whose deliverance, and Peace to this
unfortunate Nation, I dedicate my last prayers to Heaven, and now Traitors do
your worst. Then standing regardless of them with many invocations on the name
of Jesus, was suddenly also thrown dead on the ground; Which place lest there
should want a monument of that cruel (...) to all eternity, I am informed (by
those, and they diverse, who have since viewed it) is yet bare of grass, and
cannot be forced by any art to bear any.

And since I have endeavored to erect. a monument to their immortal fames,
though but their very names alone were enough to adorn it, yet shall adventure
(though with a hazard of many a heavy censure for my audacity) to imprint this
Epitaph upon it is cloudy front.

Though here is no Calpe, nor Arbyla nigh,
Yet here two Pillars with non ultra lie;
And those Herculean too whose red (...) st ands
(As the other) crushed betwixt 2. mighty lands.
Measure their lives by their brave Images
In Death (as by the foot was Hercules)
Each a Colosse of Honor was, and strid
Over (...) higher than a Pyramid.
Their Foes (more (...) than what Afric bred)
Insulted when these noble Victimes bled;
Whilst they were glad their Souls were Vshers made
To march in Glory (...) the Royal (...).
Malice thy work is done, While this sad Isle
New (...) surround for Lucas and for Lisle.
Thus fell these matchless twins of valor, and pair of glorious Martyrs,
posting to receive the inheritance of that never-dying honor in the other
world; being thrust headlong out of this for having too much here.

Night being come, and the Chaplain being returned, and this being related to
the Lords and Gentlemen, every man expected that his own turn might be next,
looking one upon another with clouded faces, that dictated to each other a
noble sympathy of their troubled hearts, not out of any consideration or fears
of what they expected to suffer, but for the untimely loss (...) those
Gentlemen so untimely by a barbarous mercy murdered. Thus they were al thrust
into one Room, from whence if any but stepped to another, he was immediately
stripped stark naked; thus continued the rest of the Prisoners till about
Candlelighting, then in came Commissary General Ireton, Col. Whaley, and Col.
Ewers, and saluting the Lords, told them, They were sent from the General, to
them, and the rest of the Gentlemen, to tell them that now (for they supposed
it was not unknown what had been done) he did by them give an assurance of what
before they held doubtful: fair quarter as Prisoners of War.

But the Lord Capel, instead of returning thanks, told them, They should have
given the General (...) thanks if he had saved the lives of those two Knights,
whom they had already executed, then for the grant of their own; saying also,
that their conditions in relation to the service, and their own yet alive,
were alike, and all equally concerned in the managing of that design, and it
was their desire to have run all one hazard; which seemed much to displease the
Messengers; after this these Gallants made an exit, the Lords, with some other
Gentlemen, were drawn out and conducted to Mr. (...) house over against the
Kings head.

Colonel Far having escaped for the present, escaped also the Judgment the
other two underwent; but was afterward taken, and sent with a guard, to his
own quarters, and there kept close prisoner till the remove of the rest.

After the General had kept us thus up three or four days, he found out a new
stratagem, both for disposing the prisoners, and paying his Army; first he
lays a fine of 13000 l. upon the Town, with which money he intended to pay
the private Soldiers; and for the Officers, he distributed to every Regiment a
certain number of Gentlemen that were prisoners, as slaves to the Gallyes, or
to ransom themselves. The Officers whereof came to the pound (as the manner of
grasiers is by their cattle) and called them first out of that into another, and
then drove them away for the market, to make the most of them; so most of them
afterward as they were able, and according to the civility of those they were
distributed to, bought their liberties, and returned home; in which manner they
disposed of the greatest part excepting those who in that design were in
principal command.

The private Soldiers and inferior Officers were drawn from their Line, and
shut in the Churches, where they immediately placed guards over them, and gave
free Liberty to their foot Soldiers, to go in and pillage them; so that in a
very short time there was very few or none left with any clothes on them,
hardly shirts, and afterward they having thus pillaged and stripped them, some
changing for their rags, and some giving them nothing, they marched them away,
in a day when it rained so violently, as (had we not had Gods engagement to the
contrary) we might have feared a second deluge; how they disposed of them
afterward I know not, but there are diverse in the Kingdom that will tell you
how they marched them from place to place (...) the country, lodging them in
Churches and such places till many of them starved, and diverse that could not
march by reason of their (...), they pistold in the high ways, and some they
sold (as before they did the Scots) to be transported into foraine Countries
from their Wives and Children, no matter whither so they were once gone.

The Lords, with the rest of the prisoners, were kept in the same places they
were at first, till the Tuesday following, and then (that they might be
dispersed, as near as possible to their absolute ruin) they first (by
examining their servants) having gotten knowledge of each particular man's
Country, transmitted them to several prisons, as contrary and far distant from
their own homes as they could contrive; the Lords with some of the Gentlemen to
(...), and the rest to Oxford, Lynn in Norfolk, Warwick, (...) in Cornwall,
and St. Michaells Mount, (...) Castle in (...), Gloucester, Hereford, Cardiff in
Glamorganshire, and (...) other places.

What became of them since, is writ in the daily book of their several
misfortunes.

This unhappy success waited upon these noble Gentlemen and their design,
which let no man judge by the event (a great argument with those whose
understandings cannot perpetrate beyond the outward bark or face of things) for
by the same inference they may conclude unrighteousnes in God, who is sometimes
pleased to give victory to the enemies of his truth. It is too saucy a thing to
confine his providence, or determine his holy will, for my part I am confident
had our repentance been as ripe for his favor and mercy, as our sins were
before (and I fear do yet continue) for his frowns and judgments, this
engagement had brought home the Ark to Israel, our liberty, and His, whose
glorious seat is now in Heaven, while His memory on Earth lives fresh in the
martyrdom of the most Saintlike man that ever swaid an Earthly Scepter.

It was said by Plutarch of those who murdered Caesar, ex percussoribus
Caesaris (...) triennium nemo vixerit, of those murderers of Caesar, not one
survived three years. I am no Prophet, but I believe God is just, and it not
possible, but his vengeance is preparing for so execrable a Regicide, that
wants an equal in story for the malice and barbarity.

As I dare not say without blasphemy there is no God in Heaven. so I must not
say without Treason there is no King in our (...), while our hopes bud in the
name of CHARLES the second, who may yet succeed his Father, both in His Throne
and Virtues. Exurgat Deus and (...) inimici, you that have not hands to help
him, may yet take up the arms of the Church, (...) and (...).

For my own part I will not despair while there is mercy in Heaven, and a just
title upon Earth, but he may fulfill that Prophecy that is so authentickly
averred concerning his Person; when all these horrid distractions and clouds
shall vanish into a calm, and there shall be no more a Babel City,

Carolus, a Carolo,
Major erit Carolo Magno.
To my ingenious friend upon his Exact Iournall of the Kentish Forces.
What I must say on this (my very Friend)
Should rather be to cherish, than commend;
Since Critics Iury-men (perhaps) may grudge
That one so partial should be thy judge:
Yet I may draw my attestation so,
That as a Witness they may let me go.
Then on thy Commentary (which in right
I cannot call less, since thou did act and write)
I will say this; Thou do not Mercury't
In any circumstance, except in Wit:
For he will know that language understands,
Thou 'st Jacobs voice, as well as Esau's hands.
Thine own herds slaughter too, thou'st dressed so neat,
That to the aged it will be savory meat:
And may they bless the for it, that thus do tell
With how much brav'ry Lisle and Lucas fell.
There thou tol'dst thy Saints bell, that our eyes
To them might pay their annual obsequies.
And shew'dst their slaughter-men, that they survive,
Whom they of life intended to deprive.
Indeed their Mansion they have changed thus;
That is, they live, not in themselves, but us.
Thus by thy pen, thou give them what they lost,
Anticipating their last rise almost:
For them (as then) we now in Glory spy,
But I confess, it is Intellectually.
Thy language thus givs both a life, and shape
To the Martyred Corpses, as an AEsculape.
Yet for this Art none can reward thy pen,
Since there is no triumph over a Citizen;
Unless you would saved (not raised them) you cannot own,
A just pretense unto the Grassy Crown,
Thus (stead of Laurel) I must now bequeath
Naught to thy Front, except a Cypress wreath.
For (I think) rightly no man understands
A fatal Tragedy, that claps his hands.
(...) (friend) thou see, I can no bays confer;
I Will be thy Usher not thy Trumpetter.
Thy new born offspring I will cherish rather,
(As Gossips do) saying, it is like the Father.
Your impartial Fidelio, G: W.

To the Ingenious Author of these Commentaryes.
I Have read thy tract, this is my sum,
Thou'st made thy Kent, our Christendom.
RODERIGOE.
To my Honored Friend upon his Commentary.
THose able Souls who can claim great Estates
In the large fields of fancy, whose conceits
Free, high, and virgin in each golden-line,
Like gems set in that glistering metal shine,
May chance go near to cloth their muse (my friend)
In a fit equipage for to attend
Thy triumph, when a poor, and needy brain
Must be a blot in thy more pompeous train.
When such as I endeavoure thee to praise,
We do but bring thee thorns instead of Bays,
And by an indiscreet affection wound,
Those Temples we intended to have Crowned.
Yet must I on, and so with what I do
Thee Injury, must crave thee pardon too;
For should I see thee thus engaged among
An host of Enemies, fcourg'd by thy tongue,
And like a true-borne coward, nor strike a blow
In thy behalf, nor dare to face the foe,
As well might these great spirits who there died
Condemn my cowardice, as now my pride.
Thou Have greater art than D^dalus ere knew
To twist even Ink it self into a clew.
More power than the highest fates afford,
Makes paper fighting, and a pen a Sword.
Then lead the way, and we will learn of thee
Anew to spell our mis-lead loyalty.
Thou who could guide us through the wild maze
Of error, and teach truth those narrow ways
She Is often lost in, learn confused fame
In her mixed Dialect for to speak plain,
Taught by what thou'st observd, and done before,
And now have said we will act, and err no more.
No more shall Kent hang down her drooping head,
And sadly tell the number of her dead;
But bless her overthrow, as proud that thou
Have taught her thus the way to conquest now.
Lucas, and Lisle, shall start amazed that words
Should have a power to vindicate their swords.
And CHARLES himself confess his Wain to be
A great deal fitter to be driven by thee.
Nay which is more, he shall at length confess
His Wain full mooned by thy brains increase.
E. P.
FINIS.

