THE COUNTERS DISCOVRSE, With it is Varlets Discovery, Being a merry Dialogue
betwixt three cunning Rookes, Viz.

Tenterhooke the Sergeant, Catchall the Yeoman, and Spy-all their Setter.

Printed in the year, 1641.

THE COVNTERS DISCOVRSE, WITH its Varlets discovery, being a merry Dialogue
betwixt three cunning Rookes, viz.
Tenterhooke the Sergeant, Catchall the Yeoman, and Spiall their Setting Dog.

Spyall. HOw now mad shaver, what circumference and perambulation must I go
make to day? I led you a brave dance yesterday, how we traversed the City as
so many boote-halers to get in prizes! never did a Dunkirk Frigate watch a
Newcastle Collier, nor a jealous wife a wanton husband, nor yet a Cat a poor
Mouse, as we looked after desperate debtors.


Catchall. Faith Spiall I tell thee thou art one that stand in no need of
perspective glasses, for thy eyes are as piercing as a Hawks, and as dangerous
as a Basiliskes, thou put a prodigal spend-thrift to as many turnings as a
Woodcock has windings, and thou have one quality more; thou art no kin to
the Snaile, nor yet to the Dormouse; a flie-boat or a Turkish galley is not
quicker at Sea than thy indefatigable legs be on land, sure thou wearest some
Goose-grasse in thy shoes, for Physicians say that Herb will keep those that
wear it from weariness.


Spiall. Pox of your jesting for me, I am sure your hands would do little
without my eyes, never did a poor Mill-horse tire himself out of his skin,
and labor out his own eyes for others profit, more than I do for yours, and
to speak truth, as the poor Mill-horse is at last devoured by my Lord Majors
Hounds; so are such as we are by his Sergeants: what, will you give us any
thing this morning? for I protest I am Crop-sick of yesterdaies Physic, I gave
my self a vomit, but without the direction of any Quack-salver, and now a
Modicum this morning would be a general restorative to my watery stomach.


Catchall. Well Spiall, let us go see our Grand-Seignior Master Tenterhooke,
for he made a private composition last night betwixt two wilde-mad-brain
fellows, that will maintain him and us too this fortnight; if he had not
clapped in just as he did, I had ended the business, and pocketted the Cash up
my self, but come, we will to him, and never did a Bartholmew-faire beggar
more earnestly set upon a Gentleman passenger for an alms, than we will invade
him for a good bit this morning, to satisfy our hungry mawes.


Spiall. With all my heart, and I know he will bid me welcome, for I can tell
him of two nests of great wilde-fowle which are yet very fat, I know their
haunts, I spyed out their taking wing to fly abroad, I followed, and saw them
housed, and like an old setting dog, I traced them back again to their
sleeping holes, do you think that this news will not be welcome to M
Tenterhooke? I says I think you and he could as ill subsist without me, as a
new upset Apothecary could without the custom of some well practiced
Physician. He assure you, if the officers of the Counter had any charity in
them, they would always remember such as I am for their special Benefactors,
and upholders; I have sent them in five or six couple of rich feathered fowls
in a week, which they have pulled bare, and devoured in a week after; no
Poulterer can sooner unplume a Partridge than those Coysterels can a prodigal
youngster in the poultry; yonder is the man we looked for, he is stirring
betimes, I believe he is going about some Ambuscado, come, we will up to him:
how do you Master Tenterhooke?


Tenterhooke. What my two Harpies? well met, you could not have come in a
fitter time, I have employment for you both presently, come, there is Cash for
you both aforehand, and we will be joviall, do we but intercept this Canary
bird; he lies in Lime-streete, and we will lay strong lime-twigs for him;
Gatchall, I hope your fingers are not soaped, and Spiall, your eyes are cleared
this morning, are they not? If we surround him, never was a narrow piece of
Kersies stretched more upon the Tenters, then he shall be by our Tallons, you
must be sure to watch narrowly, he is an easy Gul without a sword, or stout
company, he goes in Plush, and I Will warrant you we will make him blush, there be
three passages to secure, Spiall, walk you by such an Alley, and there stand
as if you were making water, but have an eye to such a door, if any such rich
Capparizon'd younker sallies out, presently withdraw you to us to such a
Tavern, we will about him like so many Wolves, and feast our selves upon his
Cash, or his Carcass.


Catchall. What say you Spiall to this, is not this brave hunting, this is
better than beating of Hares, or threshing, and hedging in the Country for two
pence a day and porridge, what though we be cursed? yet you know the Fox then
fares best; Is not this Man-catching a brave trade? Those who are called
spirits, that catch men for new plantations, are mere butter-flies to us; if
once we utter but our terrible Apology, The King greets you, into what a
shaking fit puts it men into, our pressing men into the Counter, is more
dreadful than a Constables is into the Kings service.


Spiall. Tush Catchall, now I am feed with good silver, I am ready for any
villainy, I would not spare to betray my own father: what though we be counted
Varlets? it is nothing, I would venture upon the stoutest Milford-lane man with
as good a stomach, as a hungry dog would upon a creeping pudding. I Will deal
plainly sirrah with thee, we in our offices must be like thieves upon the
highway side, have no respect of persons, command all to stand, all is fish
that comes to the net with us, rich, or poor.


Tenterhooke. Do but observe what a confession the young gallant will make
when he is taken, oh how I rejoice to hear him, he does it in hope to find
mercy at our hands, alas, it is much like that which Thieves make at the place
of execution, without any pity or hope of pardon; A man may as well look for
mercy at the hands of an Argiere pirate, as at a Sergeants, for we are as
cruel by land, as they are by Sea, they pass them away to the Galleys, and we
to the Gallows. When we cope such a Spark at any time, the first place of
debating the matter, is, if he be well lined with moneys, the next Tavern,
but if he be a bird but of an ordinary flight, then the next rotten, old,
dark Alehouse, our intent is there to gorge our selves upon him, as so many
Carrion Crows, and to fish out of him whether he be in further danger or not,
and sometimes it is to send in the interim to the Creditor, to give him
intelligence that long looked for is come at last, and to bid to haste to the
Counter, and enter the action against him, for that is an usual trade with us,
first to arrest a man, and then enter the action a little antidated, that our
knavery may be concealed.


Catchall. Tush, that is as usual as it is for young wenches, first to
adventure a great belly, and when they are sped, then to procure a License, but
how we squeeze him in the interim, he might have sitten as easily bare buttockt
upon thorns all the while, as to have stayed there amongst us, if we give him
liberty to send Letters to any of his friends, Spiall, or he that we send,
knows how to protract time, or go about other business, or to say they were
not at home, or else he would go again anon to their houses, and all this the
poor gull takes for great courtesies from us, when it is nothing less, for we
do it either to have the longer time to feast our selves in, or else to gain
moneys of him for keeping him as we say for going to the Counter, or to put him
into the greater fears, while we sit and laugh at him.


Tenterhooke. This is all as true as Gospel, but my nimble villains, there is
more you know in it than all this; you know a privilege that I have beyond all
this, for if I smell that he is well lined with gold no Chemist has more
dexterity to extract sophisticate gold from other Minerals, than I have to
scrue metal out of his feathered pockets, I have a trick under the vizzard
of extraordinary courtesy and favor to drill this Bussard home to my rooste,
where I find lodging at ten shillings a night, and diet with a shoulder of
Mutton, and a Capon, at thirty shillings with the sauce; Vintners reckonings
are often paid with brawling and quarrelling, but I have all paid me with
hearty thanks, and a prayer to boot, to be good unto him, if in case I see he
will be fetched off, I am sure one or two days to keep out of sight of
purpose, that his friends may spend the freer, and his score run the higher;
besides when I do come in, I make as though I was sorry for the Gentleman's
trouble, when as it is a thousand to one, but I have been entering some other
new action against him, or else informed some of his other Creditors to do it
while he is in Limbo, and then he and his friends will pay any thing to quit
him of my house, when alas poor bird, I have agreed with another of my
brethren to take him in again as soon as I am discharged, beside all this I
have a devise to go to his Creditors, to desire them not to be seen in the
business as yet, telling them also, that if they keep off, and not cloze too
soon with him, they may have their full debt and charges, when as all this
while I do work only to spin out my prisoner to the highest strain, as Nuns
do fine Lawne, so that you Varlets ye see, how I like a cruel devil torment
this poor soul: Is not this a brave trade my nimble dexterous slaves? and how
often have I at the upshot got good fees for you also?


Spiall. And do you think great Commander, that all comes into your purse? No
I Will warrant you, for if once I have found out but a debtors lodging, he shall
not want for visits, for once or twice a week I come and salute him, where I
am sure to be well fee'd with an Angel at least for concealment of him from
your clutches; besides good Sack and Clarret, and oftentimes good victuals too,
for most men love liberty, and they will try all conclusions before that of a
Jail, when once they are there, they give themselves lost men, and are as sure
bound, as Gally-slaves be to their Oars.


Catchall. I protest I hold the City like a racket Court, and debtors to be
like Balls, Spiall throws them into our hands, and we bandy them from one
hazard to the other, most commonly under line, so that all that come in, are
either tossed and lost, or else broken and spoiled with our violent usage, we are
like the gamesters, make sport at their misery, there are as few debtors come
sound off from our hands, as there do found wenches from old bawdy-houses, or
good horses from an old horse-coursers stable, or full dishes of meat from a
dinner amongst old Soldiers in a beleaguerd town. A Mildew rots not more
sheep, then we consume men's estates, what Caterpillars are to fruit, that are
we to prodigals.


Tenterhooke. We may (I hope) speak merrily amongst our selves (old Rogues) I
hold the City like a Wilderness, and we be the beasts of prey, if Usurers be
Tigers, and Attorneys be Leopards, Clerks and Sollicitors be Foxes and
Badgers, your Informers and Promoters Whelps and Beagles, your Justices Clerks
as Cats, and if Brokers be Wolves and Bears, yet it is the strong number of
Sergeants, Yeomen, and Setters that be the Lions and Mastives, if it were not
for us, you should see Guildhall as empty of complainers, as Westminster Hall
is in a long Vacation, or a dangerous pest-time, we find all those work,
therefore all the rest are in fee with us; what quick return have we four
days in a week at Guild Hall; and it would seem strange if we should not be
well f^d, as long as the Sheriffs keep open house; I tell you Magpies cannot
feed better in a full Cherry Garden, then we do there.


Spy-all. There Is no fear of our thriving as long as men can borrow money, and
forfeit their day of payment; I have Tenterhooke, a list of mad shavers that
will fall into your hands ere long, but all the mischief is, they live in
fortified places, such as are Milford-lane, Ramme-Alley, Chancery Lane,
Grayes-Inne-lane, Charter House, Great Saint Bartholomewes, the little
Minories, Saint Catherines Liberty, and the Tower freedom, if you dare make
your approaches upon these Bulwarks, and enter a strong battery, you may be
sure of prizes enough.


Tenterhooke. Pox take you, do you jeere us? the name of those Garrisons how
it startles me, I once had an enterprise upon one of those forts, and though
the enemy had no intelligence a long time, nay I had possession of my Captive,
but suddenly the alarm was taken, or all the women were as ready as they be in
the Isles of I^rnsey and Garnsey, or in the I Will of Wight, upon the discovery of
a French or Spanish Navy, and fought most desperately, so that I was forced to
foregoe my purchase, and glad I came off with life, you shall as soon persuade
a thief to go up Holborne Hill, and hang himself at Tyburne, as to get me
against any of those Citadels again.


Catch-all. Let me have one passage with you amongst the rest, I had a large
fee once given me, when I was Yeoman to Sergeant Snap-all; to adventure upon
that narrow Sconce called Ram-Alley. We had our prize that we went for, but
before we could get off, we were environed by the enemies forces that lay in
Ambuscado, but we were so imprisoned, so sentenced, so shaved, so trimmed, so
anointed, so washed, so slashed, and gashed, that had we not stuncke so
miserably, I looked for no other preferment then to have been sliced out for
steakes for a breakefast; but at last it was generally resolved on, that seeing
we were such stinking Carrion, we were fitter for Fishes or Duckes then for
men, and so in a desperate manner, we were flung over the Castle walls into the
water, either to swim or drown, I never was in such hot service before, and
will never adventure it the second time; see the marks they gave me on my
face, head, hands, limbs, and buttockes. I Will rather turn futurer to my Lord
Majors kennell of hounds, and be bound all my life to carry guts to the Bears
for a penny a day, then ever be pressed upon that thanklesse service again.


Tenterhooke. Come, come, there is no gains without pains, sometimes we are
hard put to it, but however we get something by the hand, we have as many
cheating tricks as a dancing Bear though some escape, yet it is not one of an
100. Well, lets hear some news, what is there any stirring?


Spy-all. There was a rumor the other day, but I hope it is but a report, that
our Deanes should be searched, and our Officers examined, about unjust fees,
and unlawful imprisonment, 'twas said too that the Sergeants should be reduced
to their pied-party-coloured-coats, and to answer to all such prisoners as
should make just complaints against them, and to give satisfaction to the
parties wronged, 'twas reported likewise that prisoners should pay but two
pence a night for their lodging, and not above four pence a meal, and that
Sergeants should not arrest on the Lords day, and such as would not wear such
coats, should be put out of office, and many such hard Impositions.


Tenterhooke. S'foot, if this be true, I Will go sell my place forthwith, for if
all these Injunctions be laid upon us, I shall nere keep them, and therefore
it is best to get something for it in time; some locusts cannot live in Israel,
nor such Caterpillars be suffered in a reformed Kingdom, we know what
hazzards we have run, and if we should be called to an account for them, we
had better flee away then stay; as great as our selves have done so besides,
there be such store of Protections out, that we know not how to seize upon a
man for fear of lost labor. I met with two such this last week; well lets
make hay while the Sun shines, I am afraid of the worst, if such a
Leather-fac'd fellow, as I or thou art, should but be brought into question,
our very downe-looks would half hang us, a bleare-ey'd man had as good gaze
upon so many shining Suns at once in their full luster, as you or I view that
great Parliament at midday: well, I am for the country, I Will buy a little Farm
and live thereon, and repent me for all my former iniquities, farewell.


Catch-all. Will he so soon cashiere himself? sure he has heard of some ill to
that company of Varlets, but sirrah Spy-all, what shall you and I do? thou
may have as good an head to advise well as thou have eyes to spy well.


Spy-all. Well, if you will be ruled by me, go you to Gregory, and see that in
case you come into his hands as you are doubtful you shall, that he should
quickly turn you from earth to your great Patron in hell, for that will be
your habitation, you that put so many into dens, it is fit that you should live
in one your self.


Catch-all. And what will you do you mad slave?


Spy-all. Who, I Will warrant you I am not to seek, I Will post into Italy and
catch frogs, and present them to the Duke of Parma, for Netherlandish Ducks,
let me alone. Well for this time, Farewell.


FINIS.

