A DECLARATION Unto the PARLIAMENT, Council of State, and Army, showing
impartially the Causes of the Peoples Tumults, Madness, and Confusions: As also
eleven Particulars, which will perfectly cure their Distempers; WITH The Method
of a Commonwealth, Hinted in Twelve Particulars; With what Persons and
Callings are useful therein; ALSO Showing the benefit, which comes by a Common
wealth rightly constituted in nine Particulars; And Answering six Objections;
Humbly offered to Consideration by WILLIAM COVEL, Gent.

We for our selves are not by nature born,
Our own to seek, and leave all else forlorn.
London, Printed in the Year, 1659.

A Declaration with some Proposals unto the Parliament, Council of State, and
Army, and unto all others of all sorts.
BEholding the glory of that pure God of nature, who has wonderfully cleared
my sight, and quickened my benumbed senses; I say, that blessed good nature
enforces me to declare my self at this time, or else I can have no peace.
Blessed be the Lord, the Heavenly Powers, that created all things good. Praise
ye the Powers for ever and ever.

And I must speak to all, without respect of persons. I beholding the whole
Creation to be very good, and very comely, in order to uses and ends; (for they
were not created in vain;) I being but a little while in the School of Nature,
began to compare Gods Creation with man's Inventions; and upon consideration, I
wondered not why man was so confounded, so out of order, and so full of
complaints, etc. and concluded that the worlds glory is vanity and vexation,
and that man is the cause of his own confusion. O England, if thy glory be thy
invention, how vain, and vexatious, and ugly faced is thy glory?

I say, that Good Nature is pure, and is not in vain, but is of, and from the
great Powers, and is in order and method, within its own Lines of
Communication: The voice of the Turtle is heard there and no where else.

But thou Oh England! can not hear the Voice in thy own inventions; The
trampling of Horses, the noise of the Drums, the clashing of Swords, the noise
of the Hammers, the rattling of Coaches, the observing of Fashions, the fine
things on your backs, and the many projects in your heads, your great gains,
and sometimes great losses, the distractions in your families and amongst your
friends, hinder you from hearing the Voice.

Therefore my work is to show you where you may hear it pleasantly, and be
delighted in it. It is (my Friends) in Natur's School; It is Universal and
Divine, like God, universally good. You of the Universal Spirit understand me,
the others do not; But let me ask them; Will ye come into the universal, divine
School of Nature? I mean Gods Creation, that is the School.

But before you come, let me ask you this question whatever you are, you
great-Ones, you Kings, Princes, Noblemen, you great-Ones in the world, and you
ignorant little ones also; What have you, that you have not recieved from that
Universal, Divine Storehouse of good Nature? How came you, you Great-Ones, by
so much, when others have so little of the glory of the world of invention?
Your eyes stand out with fatness, you have more then you can wish for; was it
for you only created? It appears so by your holding it so fast.

But how came you Poor-Ones by your poverties and miseries? you answer me, and
say, Ever since the people did choose Kings, and put their Images on Silver and
Gold, and with that bought and sold: Ever since the people did forsake good
Nature, and fell to invention, to build Cities, and to get Charters; to buy the
poors labors for half the worth, that they scarce have bread for them, their
wives and children, because they have none of the Kings and Queens Images: Oh
how the buyers and sellers are guarded, fenced with walls, and defended with
Laws! what cannot buyers and sellers have, if that they ask for it to advance
Trade?

Oh English hearts! consider soberly! Have not Kings and single Persons been
very chargeable to the Nation? Are not all vain things chargeable to you? Are
not the learned Fraternities of Lawyers, the Ecclesiastical powers, your
Merchants, your Tradsemen, chargeable? have they not all spongy Tongues, to
lick up the golden and silver Idols? the people being made happy by having
those Idols, or miserable by not having of them: How they draw the heart of
man? What slaves men are made to fetch Gold out of other Nations? How many
loose their lives before they bring it? What tricks the people are fiegn to use
before they can get it? how they study and strain their wits, and lay
stumbling blocks before their brethren? Do you not see the possessors of it
lift up themselves, and snuff up the wind, and have scornful eyes, and
taunting speeches for the poor? but you shall see that they have a smile for
their Lovers. In this age the Proverb is made true, Birds of a feather will
flock together. Behold therefore, and wonder not, they stand but in slippery
places; behold the golden and silver Idols, your great Idol, the mother of the
little Idols! behold the great Cathedrals, the mothers of the little Churches!
Behold, I say, what whoredoms and fornications are committed! what lyings!
what cheatings! what blood! what murders! what divisions! what tumults! what
pride! what covetousness! Oh how many Religions there are! what brave Cloaks
and Coats they are made to cover the sins of the world!

There are but two sorts of people, the good and the bad, according to your own
account: the good man must be the universal man; one that lives in the
Universal and Divine School, whose object is good Nature.

The other is the narrow covetous man, whose heart is set to get wealth, and he
lives in the worlds School, which is Invention; and his object is gold, silver,
honor, and the pomp of the world. Behold the ugly-faced glory of the world!

Do but set the ugly cheating world of Invention aside, and you will see, that
man was made to sound forth praises to his Creator, and with delight to read
the book of creatures.

Come you learned wise men, from all parts of the whole world, with all your
skill and Learning! there is a book, the book of Creation for you to read; all
your time is too little, your skill is too weak, you want understanding, you
dare not look on the King, he is so glorious, he is pure nature; there is pure
orders, pure method, pure Laws; there is no confusion, there is no pain or
vexatious thing. You universal Ones! do you sing Praises to our Heavenly King:
Let the dark covetous men be in burnings in their own inventions, with their
Idols, and with their worships, until the matter that hinders them be consumed.

Before they can be universal, they must be Students in the universal School of
Nature, which is divine; and all Schools set up by man are but humane, men made
them; Oh my dear brethren, take heed how you hear, and what you hear! will any
come to the work prepared? Rouse up your spirits you English men, you
great-Ones, you Rulers! I fear that word will be made good in our days; Not
many wise men, nor many mighty men, but God has ordained the foolish to
overcome the wise things, and the weak things the mighty things.

The chief end of my Declaration is, to hint unto you what a Commonwealth is,
and how happy England may be, before any part of the world, if they will:
Indeed it is an hard work for poor men to act it; many know how to act it, but
have not power and ability; many that know how, and are able, but will not,
they are so covetous. Now the Parliament, (the peoples Representatives,) has
declared for a Commonwealth; therefore I hope I do not offend you to speak
concerning what it is, or how in some measure it ought to be.

Therefore, to the Parliament and Army, and to the Army and Parliament
jointly, who are all of them the peoples Trustees; Therefore, I say, to them I
speak in the first place; the one to do the work, and the other to see it done:

For me to hold a little Candle to the great Lights of the world, it will but
turn to my scorn and reproach; but all is one to me; if the work of the Lord be
done, (which work is the Restoration of the Creation of God,) I care not.

There are certain Rules of Policy the wicked world stands upon; the
foundations and grounds whereof are good, were they well observed and applied.
1. The First is, Strength united is stronger. 2. The Second is, Divide, and
spoil. 3. The Third is, Make poor enough, and you will Rule well enough.


Pray Parliament, Council, and Army! Consider seriously; Oh English hearts
observe and consider! If good things be associated, then wicked things will be
scattered; if good things be uppermost, then wicked things will be undermost;
whereas now things are quite contrary.

2ly. Divide the good things from the wicked things, and spoil the wickedness.

3ly. If nothing will destroy wickedness, but poverty, Then do it wisely; but
certainly there are other ways.

Now indeed wickedness is so associated, that wickedness is established by a
Law: Men dare set up their posts by Gods posts; men and women will have their
wills, dominier, and rule, and be upermost, or they will divide and spoil, or
make them poor. Behold there the ugly-faced glory of the inventing world; take
away the trash and trumpery from before the peoples faces: I speak to you that
are entrusted.

Consider, are not Kings associated to uphold each others glory? Are not the
learned Lawyers associated? Behold their Halls and Charters! Are not your
Ecclesiastical Powers associated? they use to say in your Newes-Books, The
associated Ministers of the West! Are not Cities and Corporations associated?
witness their Halls, Companies and vanities; the great ones eating up the
little ones; the great Tradesmen living on the sweat of the brows of
Handy-crafts men, and inventing bables and Babies, which are useless; Nea, the
Merchants of the Land carrying out of the Land English Commodities, and for
them bringing in things of vanity and pride: The Idols of Gold and Silver are
the mark that they all shoot at; to some it is a sign of glory, but to others
a sign of death, etc.

Pray you tell me how the Plow can go, or the Handycrafts, which are useful,
can work with comfort, when all these, with all the idle persons, depend on
them; they are made the very scorn of the Nation. We know the Army are an
Association, and an Heavenly one too! but it is in case of necessity; and the
tumultuous people is the cause of it; let them bear the burden, and pay the
charge.

My humble Request is therefore to the Supreme Powers of this Nation, to grant
unto the people these following necessary things.

1. That a Commonwealth may be really acted; deeds are better than words.

2. A Tolleration of Religion; no more persecutions, etc.

3 Equal Privileges to all Societies and Manufactures, without restriction, or
exemption, and all Charters of Incorporation taken away.

4 An universal Magistracy to hold the Balance equal to all sorts of people.

5 Ecclesiastical powers abolished; if any will hear Parish-Ministers, let them
that will have them, pay them.

6 Let the Tithes pay public debts, and after serve for Charitable uses, and
to raise a Stock to defend the Nations from their enemies: Besides the Tithes
that are payable every year, the charges of repairing the Churches and painting
them, (to bewitch the hearts of the youth,) with the Bells, (to draw the hearts
of the people, sounding forth nothing but inventions, and taking the senses,
and mis-placing of them,) might be better employed and converted to public
uses. Behold, and wonder! The high places of Idolatry stand and are preserved,
when the Temples of the holy Ghost (men's Bodies) are neglected, perish and
starve! Oh horrible wickedness in the Land! the teachers of the people runn to
shed blood!

7 All the wast earth to be improved to the best advantage. The Patents and
Grants by the Kings to Lords of Manors may be well searched into, for they are
Encroachments upon the people, the Lords of Wastes are known to be cruel to the
poor, not permitting them to gather a bag of chips in some places.

8 That all useful and necessary arts and handy-crafts may be encouraged, and
that the things useless may die in course; I mean whatsoever is hurtful to man;
for man is naturally to be preserved above and before all things, which he
himself makes.

9 That in En^field (which is a very poor Town) there may be 500: acres of land
taken from the 1500: acres, which is for the Commonets; and that the rest of
the Commons may be divided to the Commoners to be improved; and that on the
500: acres the Parish may set up 24: Almshouses for the aged; and a workhouse
for the youth, in which shall be a manufacture, where the Idle persons may be
set to work; the 500: acres to be managed with a manufacture on the earth; And
a manufacture set up together, will in short time raise all things necessary;
the disjoynting of them spoils all: experience makes it true all over England:
the uniting the plow, and handy-crafts, and mariners, and arts recovers it all
again: It was never done in the world yet.

10 That all Idols may be destroyed, I say, and all other things whatsoever
that are useless and hurtful to man; for, I say, man was created to serve his
Creator, and to read him in all his works.

11 That a Bit of earth about the bigness of a Nut may be given for a sign, and
for exchange of Commodities amongst our selves: the Coyns may serve other
nations, and destroy them, as the picture of the Owl on Brass did destroy the
Lacedaemonians Commonwealth: and truly the pictures of Kings and Queens put
fair to destroy England; experience shows us that many in England are
destroyed by them, with them, and for want of them. Oh people of England rage
not at me! for the earth is in conjunction with the greatest Powers, and thou
thy self art a flower of her, and shortly the Powers will summon you: be it
known unto you, the earth will swallow you up, and the spade will bury all,
both you, and the Images that you make, and all the works of your hands.

Now while we live here, let us consider soberly of some order and methods for
the Society, which hereafter may be gathered together; for we want method
excedingly in associating together in good things: we see it practiced in
wicked things.

Let some rich men give out of their abundance some lands or goods to raise a
Stock, never to expect any principal, or profit thereof: These are Fathers that
lay the foundation; they may give advice and counsel in that Order and Method.
I commend London for their wisdom; they are too wise in their Commonwealth
for all England, etc. yet she wants that which should make her happy she is in
confusion.

2ly. A well qualified people may come together, not in Handy-crafts and Arts
only, but to mix the Arts and Handy-crafts together with earth; that every
Genius may be delighted in what it pleases, by improvements of that which is
good in Nature and in Art, etc. that which is good in Natures School. There
needs not any Society to be above 100 houses, whereof 40 families may live
Rentfree; which are the poor Handy-crafts-men.

3. That every Society may have its Government within its self, according to
order and Method; to learn Hebrew, Greek, Latin, Natur's Arts, Handy-c^^^ts;
observing to do that which is most necessary for the well-being of it.

4. That the greatest gifts of God in nature, may be known freely, without
making sale of them, as they commonly are.

5. The matter on which the Handy-crafts-men work, must be a common Stock to
them only; and the profit to them only.

6. All necessaries by them raised, are to be kept in a Storehouse for the use
of them only, the overplus sold, or exchanged for other Commodities for them
by their Stewards, ordered in a Method by the Fathers and themselves, and their
Successors for ever.

7. No buying and selling amongst themselves: The Fathers and their successors
must take care of their own Societies, that the Stock be increased, and that
made out once or twice in a year: A good encouragement it will be to all rich
people, either in their life time, or at their death, to give something to so
good a work,

8. Being associated with Mariners, the Fathers may trade, and that with their
own Proprieties, for their own benefit, and follow the earth and Plantations,
in which they most delight; for sure England with care may be made as rich
again as it is; and no beggars in it.

9. The Fathers purchasing Lands, may know their own propriety, although they
be in one Society: which may consist of 1000 or 2000 Acres to every Society:
they may increase it, and dispose of it by Will as they please, to wife,
children, or friends.

10. Therefore it will be fit for every Proprietor to have his Will lie in the
Office where he is a Father.

11. That the increase of Societies will soon take up the people, that you will
want people in England.

12. That as Societies are increased, (as) to four or five in some Parishes,
and that the people come to understand the benefit (...) that Rule, that
Strength united is stronger, they will come in with Lands and goods; and by
degrees the whole earth will become a Paradise: I say, the earth has more work
in it, and upon it, then there are now people to do it: The people are wearyed,
(being but few) with the burden, and run to Arts and Handy-crafts, and there
they cannot live one by another; so that the poor cry all over the Nation:
(indeed they are very poor, and very wicked,) they are idle, and so en-forced
to steal; Some would work, and some would set them to work, but there is not
money to pay them; Consider in time, before it be too late; all men are weary,
and at their wits-ends, unless it be a few, whose hearts are as hard as a
nether mil-stone.

Much has been said, but nothing yet done to recover the Nation, but who
regards it? nea, we have fine tricks; we can tell how to blast every good work,
by loading them with Reproaches, and cry down good things as bad things, and
cry up bad things as good things. Be wise oh people! He that created you is
coming to sift you; We cheat one another, but there is a discerning Eye that
beholds all, and the Nations of the world will find it true.

1. Therefore observe and Associate in good things; it is but to strengthen
your selves, and gather together: advise first, and then put into action.

2ly. In every Mile, and half Mile, where there is matter in the earth, or upon
the earth let Societies and Manufactures be settled; first, one for a pattern,
that every one may see, learn, and teach the right use of the things that are.
Here is work for all the rich; for the Kings, Nobles, for the Ladies and
Gentry, for useful Handy-crafts, to repair to the places; where the matter is,
Them that have skill, there to be employed, and to make what is necessary,
without running to Markets; so that every Society may be supplied, one from
another by land or by water, in order and method by exchange; and that by the
Governors and respective Fathers of the Societies. The sole end is, that all
people may enjoy the labors of each other at the first and best hand, with
peace and rest, and less trouble. Food and Raiment, all over England may be
raised with diligence; and it will be found better work to raise Commodities,
than to raise moneys. Oh England! thou wants but Method; Blessed art thou above
other Nations! but thy Ignorance, and wilful covetousness is thy curse.

3. Blessed and Praised be the greatest Powers! Good Nature come forth! thy
people are many of them willing to see thy beauty; and it lies in the works of
thy hands. Behold the Wonders! behold the Divine universal Good! the
Philosophers Stone! You beholding the Work, will then inquire for the Workman:
Does not the great God with the Heavens, and the earthly Powers, work you
bread, clothes, things for your need, delight and pleasure: whither run you?
you seem to outrun God and nature! Come back you Gallants! Is it gold or
silver that makes you happy? n^^ is not rather the Picture of a King on it? and
a Law of your own making, that you so much dote on? Let me call you foolish
Galatians, you are bewiched; and you have done it your selves. Call all the
gold and silver, and laws of men, and books of men's making and Images, and see
if you can be delivered; give them for a bribe to the earth! she will not
accept of them: for she tells you, these are all hers, they came out of her; by
the powers they were created in her, and she will command you, and them.
Therefore trouble her not, for she is firmly set, to command you; therefore, I
say, you are not happy to see any other unhappy.

The well qualified people, men skilful in the things that are, are desired to
be in the first Society to be a pattern; for the spongie tongues will blast it
sufficiently, and if devils and men can destroy it, it must be destroyed.

Therefore, oh Parliament and Army! take care herein, and stand upon the
foundation, divide and spoil: Divide the Oppressor from the oppressed, and
spoil the oppressing thing. Here is work when you call a Fast; take off every
yoke, let the oppressed go free; hide not your face from your own flesh;
respect not persons as you do, but be like God, who is universally good, and
so is his whole creation good, it is a learned Book; there is more Letters in
that Book, then 24. Pharaoh and the Egyptians, and Belshazzar were made to read
the hand-writings, and letters with a witness. Therefore when you come to
destroy the Idols, do not do as Saul did, spare the Amalekites; for, for that
his kingdom was rent from him. You Rulers! Rebel not against your maker, make a
Through-work of it now; yea, let the work be wrought in you, and through you,
or you will be made Ciphers, and your work will be done by others; for this is
a day of Burnings, Confusions, Tumults, and Cries: Me thinks! all look to be
Rulers, but none will be ruled; all will be Teachers, but none will be taught,
and all is to get places of honor, pleasure, profit, that they may have the
Capp and knee, that they may dominere, and have their wills. Man is so
ignorant, that he centre's his happiness in having his own will obeyed, more
than in having his will subject to the will of God: he that submitts to God is
at rest; and in his silent resting in God, and beholding the great wonders,
(the works of God standing firmly,) the wonderful Powers let into that man
wisdom, discerning of the things that are, and the things that are to come.
But oh man! never do you exspect this state, until you have submitted without
making conditions: It may be you pray that way to God, and your prayer is
rejected: Know this, that before submission, you are not fit to recieve of his
fullness, or to have the secret of the Lord revealed to you. Oh! who can submit?
Oh how hard it is to be a Christian! where are you, that I may know you? I say
to you, although you are black, with the scorchings of the world, and the
persecutions of tongues, you are happy and blessed for ever.

Therefore I send greeting to you all, wherever you are, that you may
consider, and gather your selves together, and be hid in the day of the fierce
wrath of the Lord, what Language, Nation, or Tongue soever you are: for our God
is no respector of persons. And as I have been bold to search into the heart;
so you must give me leave to search into men's callings: I only speak to that,
which I see at present is necessary, and call to them, that they will consider,
and hearken to hear the voice of the Turtle-dove in the divine School of
Nature.

Plow-men, Sheepheards, Heards-men, Gardiners, Smiths, Carpenters,
Brick-layers, Turners, Coopers, Wheelewrights, Dyers, Weavers, Sheer-men,
Tailors, Turners Curriers Shoe-makers, Hat-makers, Oatmeal-makers,
Basket-makers, Sive-makers, Coller-makers, Rope-makers, Fell-mongers, Barbors,
Physicians, or Chemists, Schoolmasters, Earthenpotmakers A Glass-maker, or
Glazier, A Slaughter-man.


The Office.
The Governors for a year, The Stewards, The Recorders, The Cash-keepers, or
Accomptants, Three in every Office.
Here is 34: and 20 Fathers to make one Family; all to live distinct, about a
Square or Triangle, on 10 or 5 acres in order, as in a College.

By the Water side you need more Arts, and Handy-crafts.

You having 60 Families, as one Family, in one Common Hall at several tables,
at dinner or supper, at the ring of a bell; will be beneficial and profitable,
and easy for all and unto all; which appears as follows.

1. As first, the Magistrates trouble will be little, or none, but to oversee
and keep them in order, countenancing the well-doer, etc.

2 Much time is saved, and many accidents that happen are prevented, which is
occasioned by the running up and down of the people.

3 The expense of the third part of the household stuff is saved, which is used
in the Nations, besides less fires.

4 The Creatures that groan, will find ease by it.

5 None need be covetous, or steal for want.

6 Idleness and ignorance will be destroyed, which is the mother of want.

7 Cheating, and lying will be much destroyed.

8 You need not bind your children to be slaves for seven years, nor give
sums of moneys; and oftentimes they like not the trades, when you have done
it.

9 In time there will be less use of moneys, and less buying and selling; for
by breeding, and planting the earth, the Nation shall be enriched, and the
people restored from their hard labor, and from their cares; nea, much more
privileges you shall be invested with, than my tongue is able to express. Lift
up your heads you English Nation; the glory of God, and the good of the land is
before you.

My good Friends, suffer me to be plain with you; There are good Ancient Laws
and Customs, which were before the Norman yoke; as that of the Gavel-kind;
that is, that Estates got by the industry of Parents were lest equally to their
Male children; the forsaking that good old Law, gave an advantage to the
raising of Families to Titles of honor, without deserts, being graced by the
Kings; the eldest Son to have all, and the other to be poor, and miserable, or
else put to trades, to tell lies, and out-wit one another; so that a man knows
not how to live, nor what to do; the poor are come to be so oppressed, that
they will tell you to your faces, that they will have it one way or another,
and that a short death is better than a lingering death: And truly there is but
death in hanging, and it is no more in starving. Where are you Gentlewomen? you
will not be known in wool and flax; it is too homely a work for you, but in
pride and vanity you are seen, etc. all over.

1. Ob. You say I am a Leveller, and would destroy Propriety?

I Answer, I am not.

2. Ob. You are against Cities, and Markets, buying and selling, and Trades,
and moneys?

Answ. I am against the evil in all places, and that which is the occasion of
it: It is pretty to see the Country people cheated, as I my self have been
often, with a picture of a King or Queen, but especially when it is set on
brass: Here I commend the Cities of the world for their wit; to see how finely
they can sit, and draw the people to them: Alas, the Country are as a prey,
when as they please, even as a Lamb before the Lions. You Country people! if
you knew the worth of the Creation of God, you would not run up and down with
the Creatures as you do; and part with them for that, which is your
destruction, and breeds in every place distractions. I may say to England, you
are very cunning Apes; you make Resemblances of all things on your Signs in
your streets, only you want power to give life to them; they are chargeable to
you, they have eyes and see not, legs and walk not, etc. Oh the Idol-makers,
you lying wonder-makers of the world! I will stand upon the earth, and turn me
round about, and behold more glory and true beauty in the Firmament, and on the
earth, then all the inventing world can show me, which so tickles the
Fantasies of fools; your bables and babies are not fit for children: They hurt
them, and poison their understandings, etc. Let me tell you, that you have
wished for a Reformation, and have read that Chapter, the 8: of the Romans,
which mentions the Restoration of the Creation of God. Pray you be patient;
rage not at me, but at your own folly, that you should be so cheated by your
own Inventions: I hope you will conclude, That man's destruction is of himself;
and that it is true, That sin shall stay the wicked man.

3. Ob. But you would destroy us, by spoiling our Callings, and therefore we
cannot bear your saying; therefore we will destroy you one way or other?

Answ. I expect that if you can: you will either publicly or privately: I do
here declare, that I have no evil design toward any of you, neither do I know
of any evil design, but would gain you from your trouble, and your care and
confusions, which you are in, and are like to come upon you.

4. Ob. You spoil us of our delights, and comforts, we will not bear it?

Answ. You part with a little short comfort, which in your inventions is mixed
with trouble: which of you can deny it, that hereby you shall enjoy an eternal
weight of glory, here and hereafter: You show me man's works, and I show you
Gods works. Pray which of them affords you the best comfort?

5. Ob. But you say, I speak that which is true; but you have Laws to maintain
you?

Answ. But how came you by them; and if you have Laws, they are but of men's
making, and them they may null, if they please: but if they will not, I hope
they will not say, they are as good as Gods Laws, Orders, Methods, and Decrees
are: And I dare say, that not any man shall be judged at the great Day by any
Laws of men's making, but by the Laws of Gods making; which are the book of
the Creatures, and the book of Conscience: It is but fit you should be
acquainted, and well read in these Books: and it highly concerns you to take
care in this point.

6. Ob. You talk of a Commonwealth; but what Authority have you to show us, to
Act it?

Answ. To some that have made that Objection, I Answer, That the Parliament
has declared England, etc. to be a Common wealth, and I doubt not, but they
will make good what they have Declared. Therefore seeing that Endfield was
first in the last Tumult, I propose, that 500 Acres of the Commons, which are
set out, may be ordered for to act the Commonwealth on, for the benefit of the
poor in that Parish; for although England be a Commonwealth in general, yet by
little Commonwealths it must appear; as many Towns make one County, and many
Counties one Nation; And I dare say, in a short time you may behold a Pattern,
which may be fit for England, and the whole world to follow.

The Conclusion.
LIft up your hearts ye Rulers, and ye of our English Nation! For you are
designed for a General Work; be not afraid; and let all your enemies know, both
beyond the Seas, and at home, (which are not to be valued,) that so long as you
of the Parliament and Army are found doing the work of Reformation, that there
are seven thousand, and seven times seven thousands, which have not bowed the
knee to Baal, neither will they, who will stand by you: I speak to you, which I
hope do understand me; As for the others, let them scoff, tumultuate, and rage!
He that made them are mightier than they; one shall chase a 1000. and ten shall
put ten thousand to flight: I say fear not, but come forth in well-doing, and
the God of all health, and wealth be with you, and lead you forth to do his
works, and not your own.

But if you neglect that duty, and dis-unite, the people then will make their
applications for relief in these their necessary requests, to such of you as
shall be most propense and ready to effect their Desires.

These four Laws, and no more, need be made.
I.
All Tithes, Delinquents Estates, Innes of Court, and Chancery, Universities,
and the lands thereunto belonging, to pay public debts.

II.
Gavel-kinde tenure to be re-established, that the Eldest may not have all, and
the youngest be a Beggar.

III.
Settling all Wast-lands, and Commons on the poor for ever.

IV.
That the Rich may pay according to their Estates, whereby to maintein the
Impotent and aged poor in Hospitals; and that in every Parish an Hospital may
be erected for that purpose, as also Societies for youth, and manufactures for
those that are able to work, where need shall require.

V.
All other Laws to be Null for ever.

By these means we shall come to the old, honest, indifferent, and righteous
Agrarian Law, which was exercised in the good-old Roman Commonwealth, which
is opposed by none, but arbitrary King-mongers, and factors for single persons
in Government, and such as are enemies to the precious freedom, and liberty of
the people, in a natural equality, ordained from the first Creation of the
world.

My Canto on the Times.
COnsidering of things, I then looked about
Times clear forgot, and almost worn quite out:
The people were willing in the year forty two,
But since by experience it has proved their woe;
For faith and good works are even now forgot,
The peoples Teachers faithful are not.
To say and to do, is the Righteousness of man,
But to do that without money who can?
It makes men honest, and that wicked too,
For, most men for that will each other undo.
I was not afraid, but served the State eight years;
My name in their Musters most clearly appears;
Suffering hardship, imprisonment, and loss of my blood;
But if we act for Common wealth, 'twill be good.
We then fought against wickedness, and all evil things,
Which began, when the people cried up their Kings:
But when the danger was past, and in place was found gain,
I wanted not accusers, to make me Heretic amain;
For so was I tried by Articles, (which were but their Trash,)
In Edinburgh, with their pretended Zeal so rash;
And for their good works were so well rewarded,
Increasing in Honor and wealth, and are so much regarded:
And now to ambitious and covetous men all is but a prey,
Crying Religion, and Justice, and that is their way.
What running and riding! what whipping they make
Each one of the other, and how they mistake!
For to be Honorable, Great, Rich, and Upper most,
Nature, and their brethren must be made their post.
But where is their one who will regard the poor?
Will you still buy, sell, lie, and paint over the Whore?
Let me look but a little, and see well about,
And I will soon find all the wickedness out,
Both in mine own self, and also in my brother,
Oh! that, that might be destroyed in each other!
To strengthen each other in any wicked thing,
Shall they find rest? No! nor see the face of the King.
Unite and strengthen thy brother, and do it ever,
Let good be your object, and gather your selves together,
Not with the Drum, the Sword, nor the battle spear;
For the universal Magistrate you shall not need to fear:
The universal, divine School of Nature will you and them teach
And every one there will learn for to preach,
And there find him truly, who gives all rest
Before your inventions can, though you think them best:
There shall they sing Praises unto their Creator,
Not regarding Silver, or Gold, or Picture-maker.
Therefore You of the Royal Race sing full loud and fast,
For You shall find Rest, which is Heaven at the last.
FINIS.

