The Country Farmer's Vainglory; in a New Song of Harvest Home: Together with
an Answer to their undecent Behavior.
Sung to a New Tune much in Request.
Licensed according to Order.



Our Oats they are how'd, and our Barley's reaped
Our Hay it is mowed, and our Hovel's heaped;
Harvest home, Harvest home,
We'll merrily roar out our Harvest home,
Harvest home, harvest home;
We'll merrily roar out our Harvest home,
We'll merrily roar out our Harvest home*
We cheated the Parson, we'll cheat him again;
For why should the Vicar have One in Ten,
One in Ten, One in Ten,
For why should the Vicar have One in Ten:
For why should, etc.
For staying while Dinner is cold and hot,
And Pudding and Dump^ing's burnt to pot,
Burnt to pot, burnt to pot,
Till Pudding and Dumpling's burnt to the Pot,
Burnt to pot, etc.
We'll drink off our Liquor while we can stand,
And hey for the Honor of Old England,
Old England old England,
And hey for the Honor of Old England,
Old England, etc.
An ANSWER to Harvest Home: OR, A True Character of such Countrymen who Glory
in cheating the Vicar, and prefer Bag-pudding and Dumpling before Religion and
Learning.
To the Tune of Harvest Home.
THE Country store up Hay, Oats and Wheat,
And glory how they can the Parson cheat,
Parson cheat, Parson cheat,
And glory how they can the Parson cheat,
And glory, etc.
The Country Bumpkin may speak with shame,
That ever he cheated, for he is to blame,
He Is to blame, he is to blame;
That ever he cheated, for he is to blame,
That ever, etc.
Likewise by the Laws of this potent Land,
Now he in the Pillory ought to stand,
Ought to stand, ought to stand,
Now he in the Pillory ought to stand,
Now he, etc.
Degrading of Learning does plainly show,
They never knew nothing but Hi, je, ho,
Hi, je, ho, hi, je, ho;
They never knew nothing but Hi, je, ho,
They never, etc.
Their hungry Appetite to suffice,
Bag-pudding and Dumpling they Idolize,
Idolize, Idolize,
Bag-pudding and Dumpling they Idolize,
Bag-pudding, etc.
And still as their Paunches they stuff and fill,
Faith they are as safe as a Thief in a Mill,
Thief in a Mill, Thief in a Mill
Faith they are as safe as a Thief in a Mill,
Faith they, etc.
Religion and Learning they all contemn,
A lusty Bag-pudding is more to them,
More to them, more to them,
A lusty Bag-pudding is more to them,
A lusty, etc.
Tell them of going to Church to pray,
They Would rather hear Robin the Piper play,
Piper play, Piper play,
They Would rather hear Robin the Piper play,
They Would rather, etc.
And when they have gathered in all their store,
They merrily revel, nay rant and roar,
Harvest home, Harvest home,
They merrily roar out their Harvest home,
Harvest home, Harvest home,
They merrily roar out their Harvest home,
They merrily roar, etc.
Printed for P. Brooksby, J. Dencon, J. Blare and J. Back.


