A WORD To the LII LONDON MINISTERS. SHEVVING That the most zealous Professors
of Religion in all Ages have been the greatest Persecutors of Christ and his
most Spiritual Members, illustrated and proved.

By Nicolas Cowling.

IOH. 16. v. 2. They shall put you out of the Synagogues, yea the time comes,
that whosoever kills you will think that he does God service. IOH. 7. v. 48.
Have any of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees believed on him? LONDON, Printed in
the Year, 1648.

A Word to the 52. London MINISTERS.
HAving seen of late a little Book entitled a Testimony to the Truth of Jesus
Christ: and finding my self by name, listed for an Heretic, in that I have
formerly Asserted that a Believer is perfect in this life, or never, which I
yet hold for a truth, seeing that as the tree falls so it shall lie, and it
has been the Doctrine of reverend Hierom, Bolton, Dod, and others; As the day
of death leaves thee, the day of judgment shall find thee: but to be convicted
for an Heretic by no other Argument but that female one, it is so because it
is so, I cannot so be satisfied; therefore my humble desire unto you is, that
some one amongst you will be pleased to set forth from the letter of the
Holy-Scriptures (without any of your fallible interpretations. The time when,
the place where, and the means by which, a man that before he dies is not
perfectly made one with the Father and the Son by the Spirit, but shall be
made so after death: It shall be sufficient unto me to retract my opinion
although I have nothing asserted but is Scripture phrase in the letter thereof,
if you please to consider the same, seeing the Apostle affirms on the behalf
of his brethren the Jews. I bear Romans 10. 2.
them record that they have a zeal of God, but not according to knowledge.
Giveme leave to set before you that glass that has plainly shown me my former
mistakes, when I was zealus in my conformity unto that administration of the
Prelacy, and since of that covenanted form of Independency, those that did know
me in either, can bear me witness of the truth of my zeal unto my principles:
but having a clear manifestation of the true ground and cause from whence
arises all the revylings bitings and devourings that is amongst brethren, to
be no other but that old root of bitterness which separated Adam from his
Maker, namely Ambition and Covetousnes; his Ambition led him no higher than
God, but to be equal with him in knowledge, his Covetuosnesse led him out to
that which was none of his, either by gift or purchase: the same principle of
Ambition and Covetuosnes remains, but in a different manner, no more
ascending up so high as God, for that way our necks were broken; but now the
design is we will fetch God down as low as our selves, or we will have none of
him, nay we will knock him out of the country, if he dare to manifest himself
in any other way then we prescribe him. As we may plainly see in Cain, when
he had formed a sacrifice in which he thought GOD was bound to meet him, and
the way of Abel was accepted, and his rejected; how was his countenance cast
down, and wrath increased against his brother, so that nothing could satisfy
his disconted soul, but the death of his brother, that so he might no more be
troubled with such a manifestation of God as appeared in him, which was
contrary unto his for me? Genesis 3. 5. 6.
Korah because all the people were holy, would not allow that manifestation of
God unto Moses, to be any whit superlative unto him, or any of the people, and
therefore stubbornly we will not come up. Numb. 16. 12.
more particularly come and see the reason why the Prophets of the Lord could
perish no where but at Jerusalem, where the temple of God was, the high Priest
that was anointed with holy oil, the Tabernacle, the Mercy seat, the Altar of
Incense, the daily sacrifice, and the Holy of Holies, where were the Oracles,
and yet in this place must the Prophets fall.

Undoubtedly for no other cause but that the Lord was pleased to manifest
himself in them, unto the people in a more spiritual and salubious manner
then he did appear in the Scribes who were their expositers of the law of
Moses, seeing therein no farther than the bare letter (the Prophets being no
weekly Lecturers, nor Masters of any Synagogues) but spoke only when sent, and
as the Spirit gave them utterance. It may seem strange that Isaiah a Prophet of
so long standing as to prophecy unto four Kings, should in his old age be by
the learned Rabbis awarded no better death, than to be sawed in pieces. It
must needs be for some grievous blasphemy; two of which ye may find in his
prophecy Isa. 42. 1. 6. 7.
according to their expositions, the first was that the Gentiles should be a
glorious Church, the second was that which reigns so much amongst us now,
namely he preached down Isa. 66. 3.
Ordinances, He that kills an Ox as if he slew a man, he that sacrifices a
Lamb, as if he cut off a Dogs neck; he that offers an oblation as if he
offered swines blood, he that burns incense as if he blessed an Idol, this
was blaspheming enough to deserve the Saw, and that the first was blasphemous
enough to deserve death, may appear by that of St. Paul Act. 22. 21. And he
said unto me depart, for I will send thee far hence, unto the gentiles, v. 22.
And they gave him audience unto this word, and then lift up their voices and
said away with such a fellow from the earth, for it is not fit that he should
live: so that to all such now as are yet in the ministration of Moses, and no
farther, can and will kill any that live higher above Ordinances, in the
Spirit, if they can but get Pilate to give judgment, for the like causes did
all the rest of the Prophets suffer, the being more spiritual, God bearing
witness in them, did outshine those that lived in the bare letter of
Ordinances, and therefore could not bear such doctrines that did cross their
mouths. First, their Sacrifices and their standing before the Lord to enquire
after his will, their hypocritical humiliations and bowing down the head like a
bulrush. These things with many other spoken of by the Prophets, and sharply
inveighed against; many more (which I could mention, but for brevity I omit)
were the only causes why those godly men according to the letter did deal so
inhumanely barbarous with those dear servants the Prophets of the Lord, but
you will say if the whole Sannedrim of the Jews did consent, how came their
Prophesies to be enrolled in the cannon of holy writ? It is probable that in
all ages there were some few that had their negative voice, and did survive the
execution of those horrid counsels and when good Magistrates reigned, then
were those records reveiwed, and then was enquiry made for their Sepulchers to
have them adorned; and had we lived in the days of our fathers we would not
have killed the Prophets of the Lord as they did, and so the generations
successively filled up the measure of their fathers iniquity; more plainly,
this is to be seen in the days of the Lord Jesus Christ, if we consider well
how he being so popular, when he came to save his life by the vote of the
people, lost it so shamefully that a Murderer was preferred before him, and
the more strange it is that their affections but two days before were so fixed
on him, that they durst enter into the strong garrison of Jerusalem, being then
under the command of the Romans, Pilate being Governor; and there openly to
proclaim a new King of the house of David, crying Hosanna, Alarm sufficient to
have brought them to a Council of War, and there they might have thrown dice
for their lives; and yet these men upon serious consideration changed their
minds, and within three days voted him to death. But you will say this was a
giddy multitude easy to be drawn by cunning, crafty, wicked men; the Jewish
nation were never accounted fools in worldly wisdom, neither were these men
profane, but devout in expecting their Mesias, and upon that account they
followed him from sea to sea to hear his Doctrine, and see his Miracles, and
when spies were sent to carp at him, none so ready as they to justify him, as,
when the Christ comes will he do greater things than this man has done. And
lo on an instant, crucify him, away with him, he is not worthy to live. Lets
enquire into the cause hereof, and surely you shall find it not to proceed from
lightness, malice against God, or from profaneness, but rather from their zeal
unto God, and the preservation of his holy Ordinances, as appears thus. Upon
this uproare Caiphas calls an assembly (not of drunkards, swearers, and
profane persons) but of the most reverend Priests, Ioh. 11. 49. 50.
Scribes, Pharisees, and devout men, that walked constantly in the performance
of all Religious duties toward God, according to the fashion of the Church in
those days; and some of them had walked in all good Conscience toward God, as
concerning the Law, unblameable unto that day.

Now says he, Ye know nothing at all, neither do ye consider that our nation
is like to perish, if this Jesus remain alive, you are so conscientious of
shedding blood least he should be a Prophet, and so you think you shall
thereby fill up the measure of our Fathers iniquity; but we must sometimes act
Providentially, as well as Piously and Justly; and therefore whether is it
better that one man should dye, or a whole Nation perish? this is now put to
the vote, and carried in the affirmative, only two are in the negative Joseph
of Arimathea and Nicodemus, but here is the quaere, the people so doat on him,
that they will stone us, we must therefore get him by night, and when we have
seized him we shall easily draw off the people from him: for in deed and truth
he is not of God, but does all his works by Beelzebub, and thus the people shall
clearly see when we have gotten him: Christ is now in their hands by the
treason of his own servant, and that in the night when the multitude was
asleep, and now the people are called in having secured his person from their
reach; and now the high Priest begins to act his part, beginning thus or the
like, brethren you are the Children of Abraham, of the noble stock of Israel;
to whom are committed the Oracles of God, and you are all of you devout and
zealous toward God, as we are this day, according to the Law of Moses, and the
traditions of the Fathers, for ye are sure that God spoke with Moses; but I
shall make it appear unto, that all that this man has done is by the power of
Beelzebub, for you may be assured that whosoever keeps not the commandments
which Moses gave us, is not of God, and when this does appear, you will have
other thoughts of him, call in the witnesses, does this man, your great
Prophet, keep the Sabbath day? nothing less, he works himself, and justifies
others, also he made clay for a plaster, he allowed his Disciples to gather
corn, he commanded the impotent man to carry his Bed, he cured the withered
hand, and many more such pranks he does on the Sabbath day: well, what think
ye, is he a friend to our nation? or does he not complot with the Romans to
destroy us? It is very probable; for we desired him to resolve us whether it
was lawful to give Gods penny to Caesar or no, he bids us Give unto Caesar the
things that were Caesar's, and unto God, the things that are Gods; see he cares
not how he burtheneth the nation. What think ye of him concerning the
Ordinances and the Temple, does he maintain them? here is witness that he did
intend to destroy the Temple: a very good testimony; what say thou to all
that is witnessed against thee, answerest thou nothing for thy self? we intend
to do nothing against thee but justice; nay, thou shall have mercy from us, so
far as it may not empeach the glory of God for which our zeal is purely
fervent. Christ answers nothing, as if he were sure the major vote of the
people would carry it for him,

He is now commanded to withdraw, and now the Priests turn to the people what
think ye, is he worthy to live? some of the wiser and more conscientious
amongst them demur'd upon it, the witnesses not agreeing fully in every
punctilio to the Articles exhibited against him: now the Priest replies I see a
mighty besottednesse upon your spirits; the breach of the Sabbath, the
destruction of the Temple, the laying aside of Ordinances is nothing with you,
I think you will tolerate Blasphemy; likewise (nay) there is no blasphemy
proved against him, but what if you hear him blaspheme to your faces? call him
in again: Come sir you have hard thoughts of us, as if we intended to take
away thy life right or wrong, which appears to us by thy silent carriage
toward us; but I would have thee know we are holy conscientious men, and do
earnestly wait for the Mesiah, and if we were sure thou were him, we would
worship thee, this set the people right to judge of him: now follows the oath
ex officio. I adjure thee by the living God to tell us whether thou be the
Christ the son of the living God. Thou have said; nevertheles I say unto you,
hereafter shall ye see the son of man sitting on the right hand of power, and
coming in the clouds of Heaven. Now ye have heard his blasphemy. Mat. 26. v.
66, to 68. See then how priest and people (though devout) were transported into
a frantic zeal, for preserving God from being blasphemed, not being able to
bear the appearancy of God in the flesh, and so became the betrayers and
murderers of the Lord of life, and so those people that but even now feared no
danger for Christ, being no higher principled than in the carnal commandment
of godliness given by Moses, which is but the utter Court of the Temple, were
easily drawn aside (by the specious pretense of that seeming godliness which
the Scribes and Pharisees lived in, and thereby deceived themselves as well as
the people) and so thought it a more Pious equitable work to vote, that a
murderer (who was penitent) should live, than to preserve a Blasphemer, that
continues in his sin, and so disturbes the peace of their carnal Church.
Upon the same account did our Popish Bishops destroy the Lollards, and burn
the Martyrs, not because they were godly people, but because they were adjudged
Heretics, yet we condemn them as great persecutors of the Saints: and yet we
must make up the measure of our Fathers iniquity? if Penry Barraw and Grenwel
will be so bold as to affirm Bishops to be Antichristian, he must hang for it,
in the days of famous Elizabeth; and if Hack^t will affirm that Christ is in
him the hope of glory, he must^russ likewise: I hope you will not conclude our
Clergy to be maliciously wicked, but what they did was in order to the peace of
the Church, and the glory of God, as it did then appear unto them. Christ told
Peter that flesh and blood revealed not that confession; as if he should have
said, If thou had all the Divinities of the Priests, Scribes, Pharisees, and
learned Grecians, nay, if thou had been Doctor of the Chair in Oxford and
Cambridge, all these, nor any of these can reveal me, but my Father which is in
Heaven; and therefore the time shall come, and still is that the Rabbis of the
Churches shall think they do God good service when they kill my beloved ones.

Now my dear hearts, and fellow members in that glorious head the Lord Christ
Jesus, be not bitter in your spirits, and judge nothing before the time;
experience is the best teacher, and therefore to you that are not privy to your
selves of any secret selvishnesse, but are simply and purely zealous for God,
as was Saul, and will not knowingly smite or offend the least of Christ's
members, I say let me be bold in love to impart unto you my former experience
in the mystery of Christ. I thought a long while a faith in Jesus, that dyed
at Jerusalem, was the top gallant of a Christian, but since it does clearly
appear, that all the faith the disciples had in Christ their Master, which was
a faith only without, and none of the mystery of Christ within them. I say that
faith in the person of the Lord Jesus dyed with him, so that when he was dead
there was not one that did expect ever to see him again; for Mary went not to
see whether he was risen, but to anoint his dead body; yea the disciples who
had ground enough for belief, could be so charitable as to judge Mary to be no
better than a liar, in reporting fained things, affirming that he was risen,
and we trusted it had been him that should have delivered Israel, said the two
disciples, but he is dead; so that its clear all the faith they had in Jesus
dyed with Jesus: now the Apostle tells you Phil. 3. 9. That we may be found in
him: not having mine own righteousness which is of the law, but that which is
through the faith of Christ (not in Christ) the righteousness which of God by
faith. And likewise it is not sufficient that we believe there was such a one
dyed at Jerusalem, and God was fully pleased in him. But the same Apostle tells
you, Col. 1. 24. That as the head passed through sufferings, so there is a
remainder of afflictions of Christ in our flesh, for the bodies sake. And ver.
27. And that it suffices not that there is a Christ without us. But Christ in
you the hope of glory. And therefore it is Christ in the mystery that will
save; a wooden leg that is tied on may do some service, but the leg that is
naturally fixed is useful for all occasions* seeing by all those former
examples, that the Prophets, the Lord Jesus, the holy Martyrs, not one of them
in their generation, died as the servants of the Lord, but as blasphemers and
dangerous heretics, according to the account of the reverend Clergy then
living, whose zeal (for God and the preservation of the peace and purity of
holy mother Church, to preserve the glory of the one, and the honor of the
other, was the principle cause that led them forth to deal so cruelly with
them. Now seeing that unmatchable Pharisee Saul (which profession in the church
of God in that generation was accounted most pious) that could say as
concerning the law he was unblameable in his conversation) being mad in his
zeal for God, against the dear Saints of God. Consider in how desperate a
condition he was in, when going to Damascus, if mercy had not met him: and
seeing the Lord Jesus constitute in his church, never a Constable nor Justice
of peace to meddle with any of his Saints, why are you so importunate to call
in the Magistrate for your assistance, seeing you do not produce your warrant
or president from him, and seeing I find but one civil officer in his family,
namely a Treasurer: and for his sake, be so courteous as not in the least to
engage the civil Magistrate with his corrective power to enforce any man to be
a believer, before that holy spirit convince him, so shall the church more
probably be freed from hypocrisy and backsliding, and you shall not through
mistakes attract any guilt upon them or your selves; and the rather because you
ingeniously confess that you do but conceive this way you prescribe to be the
right way.

See how our grandmother Eve was deceived in her conception when she brought
forth Cain, it could be no less then the Mesiah, as she thought; and lo a
Murderer* and Abraham a Prophet of the Lord, and the father of the faithful,
thought he had gotten the heir of promise when he had Ishmael, and he had
nothing but a persecuting scoffer, therefore take heed of zeal not rightly
informed: and surely those several forty stripes save one, which Paul so
frequently met with, will fall very smart upon his back, that will at any time
take the boldness (upon his fallible judgment) to lend them unto any Saint;
and surely it will not repent any Saint of God that he did not enterprise to
grieve the least little one, that believes. And therefore sweetly David, 1 Samuel 25. 33, 34* By which counsel he was diverted from executing the
determination of his counsel of War; consider seriously who they were that
persecuted Jesus Christ, the Prophets, and the Martyrs, were the men that did
openly profess themselves enemies to godliness, nothing less; suppose in the
days of Christ Jesus the people would have had Religion reformed, who should
have been chosen for the Assembly? doubtless it must have been Scribes and
Pharisees, and no Publicans; surely Gamaliel was likely to have been
Prolocutor, and his disciple Saul might have been the public notary; and yet
see how these learned souls in their zeal for God were mistaken; leave all the
rest, and to our present time, how many of our reverend Divines in the time of
their Prelaticall obedience, how earnestly did they contend for the upholding
of the Leturgie, against such as opposed it: which now they cast out with
tongues and slice. And had Bishop Laud not steadfastly believed God was highly
concerned in those material churches, and that men's cringing and crouching
were of high concernment before God, he would never have run the hazard of his
head as he did. It is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing.
Gal. 4. 18. And having no other ground but our fallible conceptions to guide
our selves and others by, let us be very tender of enforcing.

Now Christ alone having the government upon his shoulders who is only wise and
infallible, and seeing the temple is filled with smoke and that he will bring
his people into the wilderness and plead with them, and that tongues shall
cease, and ye shall no more say one to another know the Lord, but ye shall be
all taught of me, from the greatest to the least, why shall we limit the holy
one of Israel, and say the time is not yet? And seeing he has a fan in his
hand, he will thoroughly purge his floor. And be not like those officious
husbandmen, who no sooner thought they saw a blade like a tare, but they must
be picking of it up; the answer was, let both grow together until harvest, and
unto James and John, ye wot not of what spirit ye are of, I come not to destroy
but to save. It may seem here is begging for a tolleration; for my self I pass
not what men conclude on in the matters of God, if they break his bonds, cast
away his cords, and will not have Christ to reign over them, they are but
laughed at, and will fall to pieces, knowing and being well assured that there is
a rest for the people of God, and they that enter into it cease from their
works as God did from his, and that the kingdoms and the powers shall serve
the Lord Christ in the Saints, and this suffices me.

FINIS.

