GOOD NEWS FROM IRELAND.

Being a true and exact Relation of two great Victories obtained against the
Rebels there: the one by Sir Charles Vavasour, who with less then 500. men
has raised the siege of Kelly, and Barry, taken 12. of the chief Commauders of
the Rebels, and brought them in chains to Dublin, and took from them 1000.
Cowes, and 700. sheep besides other cattle, doing also great spoil by fire.
The other by Captain Bartlet, who took 40. Irish Commanbers, with great store
of Ammunition, and carried them Prisoners to Barranakilly; and how the great
Oneale is wounded, and not like to escape.

Sent in a Letter from Captain Courtney at Dublin, to M. Snow, one of the
Adventurers for Ireland. Dated November. 10. 1642.

Also an Order made by both Houses of Parliament, prohibiting the aiding and
relieving of the Rebels in Ireland.

LONDON, November. 21. Printed for T. Wright. 1642.

TRUE INTELLIGENCE from IRELAND: Being the Copy of a Letter from Captain
Courtney at Dublin, to M. Snow one of the Adventurers for Ireland, Dated the
10. of November, 1642.
SIR,
WIth grief I have considered your last Letter, and no marvel of such
distractions in the Kingdom, when as the Ports are opened to receive those
rebels and traitors which pass from hence to His Majesty, and as by your
Letters and Pamphlets of news they are received and made chief Commanders of
His Majesty's Army; there is, as I conceive, a great default in the searchers
of Plymouth, Bristoll and Mineard, which suffer any to pass without
examination or otherwise, so that the Kingdom is in a desperate condition, and
lies at the brink of destruction.

Oneale the great Rebel has of late been very sick, and we all think he will
hardly recover it, for what with his wound in his side at Felles siege, and
sickness together, he lies desperately sick. We often hear from him, th^^ he
is well recovered, but by his ragged soldiers which we take daily, they have
confessed that he cannot live; and in case he should die, the young Makarkey
shall be made General over the whole Kingdom: what soldiers we take we dare
not keep them for fear of infection, for the plague is very much dispersed
among them, and hundreds die at a time. We have had it likewise amongst our
soldiers, but we received it first from the Rebels and captives which we took;
but we hope the worst is past, for there dies not above 100. a week, and some
weeks less, which is but a moitie of those hat die of the rebels. Sir, about
4. days before the date of my Letter, we advanced our Forces toward Felles,
where we found some of the Irish Army drinking of carowses and healths to the
King of Spain their supposed Protector; but in the midst of their jollity our
Army fell upon them, and slew 200. whereupon a greater party of the Rebels
appeared, and assaulted us, and there was a stout fight on both sides, laying
aside pikes and muskets, and fighting only with our swords, so that our men had
slain and wounded most of them, had not Colonel Bourne with a fresh supply of
600. come in the interim. Nevertheless our soldiers made good their parts,
and came off with the loss of 100. at the most. We brought from them 1000.
cowes, besides horse and sheep, and great store of other pillage that was
freely given to the soldiers for their pains, which very much incourageth
them. Oneal his soldiers are most lamentable distressed poor people, hardly
sufficient to cloth their nakedness. We were much afraid of the Spanish
Forces which landed at Waterford two days before the fight, but, as God would
have it, our soldiers carried their pillage quite away before they came to
assist Colonel Bourne, who was chief Commander amongst the Rebels in that
fight.

We have great hopes of Captain Bartlet, for hitherto he has done very good
service; and this instant day he took a Dunkirk ship full of ammunition, and
40. Irish Commanders in it, and immediately brought them to Barannakilly: they
were driven with a tempest upon our coasts, for it appeared by their
examination that they intended to have landed at Tingmouth, Dartmouth, or some
such like creek in the West parts of England.

I cannot but admire at a Merchants ship of Bristoll which lately anchored at
Crockhaven by reason of tempestuous weather, the Captain and Master of the ship
fearing lest the rebels would sink her, invited the chiefest rebels of the
town aboard, and gave them royal entertainment, in hopes to have merchandise
for their Tobacco, they had fair promises protested aboard, but when the rebels
got the Captain and Master ashore, they vowed to hang them if they commanded
not the rest of the Mariners to come ashore and leave their ship and goods
amongst them. The Captain and Master escaped with their lives, though it were
not a penniworth of hurt if the rebels had hanged them in earnest, for they
needed not to h^zzard ship or goods, nor were they constrained to go ashore,
but they might have carried away or curbed the rebels at their pleasure.

Sir Charles Vavasour is worthy of honor, and very forward in any design, he
has lately been at Kelly and Barry, and although the towns have been
besieged, yet with less then 500. he raised the siege, and enforced them to
take their bulwarks for their refuge, and between their works and sconces in
the trenches he spied at least 200. of the rebels dead, who died of the
sickness, and lay on the ground like dead dogs: he commanded his soldiers not
to touch any of them, which they all obeyed, yet he departed not empty, for his
soldiers took 7. or 800. sheep, besides cowes and hogs: besides other spoil
by fire which he did before he departed, he took 12. Commanders, and coupled
them in chains, and brought them unto Dublin. I will not trouble you with
superfluous matter, only this, our City of Dublin is at great expense for the
payment of soldiers, and is strongly fortified within and without, being
double chained in every cross street, and 1000. armed men every night equally
distributed to the Courts of Guard: nevertheless the rebels affront us to the
very ports of the city; but I hope God in his good time will abate the pride of
those his enemies, assuage their malice, and confound their divellish devices,
unto which I shall ever say, Amen.

Dublin, November, 10. 1642. Your assured loving friend, THOMAS COURTNEY.

An Order made by both Houses of Parliament, forbidding the aiding and
relieving of the Rebels in Ireland.
WHereas great numbers of Papists, both English and Irish, some whereof have
been, and are Commanders in the Wars; and others, such as have estates in
England, have gone out of this Kingdom into Ireland, immediately before and
during the present rebellion there, and traitorously joined themselves with the
Rebels of that Nation, against His Majesty, and the Crown of England; and
likewise diverse other Popish Commanders, and such as have estates in England,
are daily preparing to go thither, to the same wicked ends: and great store of
Arms, Ammunition, Money, Corn, and other Victuals and Provisions have been
sent, and are daily preparing to be sent to that Kingdom, for the assistance
and encouragement of those Rebels: For prevention whereof, the Lords and
Commons in this present Parliament assembled, do hereby Order and straightly
charge and command all Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Bailiffs,
Constables, and other His Majesty's Officers within the Realm of England, and
Dominion of wales, That they apprehend and examine all such persons, as they
shall suspect to be Papists, and going out of this Kingdom, and the Dominion
of Wales into Ireland. And that they also make stay of all Arms, Munition,
Money, Corn, and other Victnals and Provisions, which they shall suspect to be
prep^ring for transportation into Ireland, for the aid and relief of the Rebels
there, And to give speedy notice thereof unto the Parliament.

Hen. Elsing: Cler. Parl. D. Com.


