ROBERTUS COTTONVS BRVCEVS.


Aesculapius hic Librorum aerugo, Vetustas
Per quem nulla potest Britonum consumere chartas.
T. Cr^ss sculpsit

A DISCOURSE OF Foreign War: With an ACCOUNT Of all the Taxations upon this
Kingdom, from the Conquest to the End of the Reign of Queen ELIZABETH. Also a
List of the Confederates from HENRY I. TO THE End of the Reign of the said
Queen; showing which have proved most Beneficial to England.

Formerly Written by Sir Robert Cotton Barronet, and now Published by Sir John
Cotton Barronet.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Mortlock, at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard,
and at the White-Hart in Westminster Hall. 1690.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
SO strange a desire and itch of writing, does possess the greatest part of the
world; and men are so in love with their own imaginations, that they would have
their follies engraved in Brass and Marble. Upon this account the learned and
most ingenious Physician in Sr. Tho. Brown.
that incomparable piece of his Religio Medici has these words; I have heard
some with deep sighs lament the lost lines of Cicero; others with as many
groans deplore the combustion of the Library of Alexandria: for my own part, I
think there be too many in the world, and could with patience behold the Urn
and Ashes of the Vatican, could I, with a few others, recover the perished
leaves of Solomon. It Is not a melancholy U^inam of my own, but the desires of
better heads, that there were a general Synod; not to unite the incompatible
difference of Religion, but for the benefit of Learning, to reduce it as it lay
at first, in a few and solid Authors, and to condemn to the fire those swarms
and millions of Rhapsodies, begotten only to distract and abuse the weaker
judgment of Scholars, and to maintain the trade and mystery of Typographers.
What a multitude of books ((...)) concerning the controversies in Religion
between us and the Romanists has invaded the world; and to use Homer's words,
(...)? But of these (excepting some few) as for example, that of the Archbishop
Laud's against Fisher, Mr. Chillingworth against Knot, The Author of Via Recta,
and Via Devia, and that incomparable pair of learned men Dr. Stillingfleet and
Dr. Tillotson, with the most Learned and Pious Dr. Hammond against that Pest
and (...) of Mankind, Sergeant) the Major part, are (as he says) a spurious
brood, the laborious effects of ease and idleness, not worthy the Vacant hours
of a serious person. Having said this it may justly be objected against me, why
I by putting forth this Book, should help to increase this Epidemical disease.
To this I answer: 1. I received some encouragement by the general favor and
acceptance which the world was pleased to give to this small Treatise. 2. My
pious affection and Duty to the Author did inflame my desires to propagate his
Name (as much as in me lay) to Posterity. 3. Being but a small Book it was
secure from that censure, (...). If this little Treatise may find not only
pardon, but some acceptance, from those few of the more knowing persons, I have
obtained my design: To please all I know is impossible; -- (...)
(...).


John Cotton.

PROPOSITIONS OF WAR and PEACE Delivered to His Highness PRINCE HENRY By some
of his Military servants.
Arguments for War.
FRames of Policy, as well as works of Nature, Pansae and Hirtii consilium
Caesari.
are best preserved from the same grounds they were first founded on. By Arms
was laid the foundation of this State, whether we respect the Saxon or the
Norman. It was War that of seven Crowns in the Heptarchy made one fit for that
Monarchy, that since by many glorious exploits has made good in foreign parts
the renown of her own greatness, and crowned thereby this State with an eternal
peace. Times nor our own virtues are not changed: Necessity, Benefit, and
Facility of War being the same that they were before to our forefathers.

Reasons of foreign War drawn from 1. Necessity, for 1 Preservation of our own
peace. 2 Venting of factious spirits. 3 Instructing in arms our people.
We never were so near peril by shipwreck in any tempest abroad, as at home by
the calm government of Henry the sixth. For France by the awful hand of his
father reduced, it fared with us as with the mistress of the world, Velleius
Paterculus.
Remoto Carthaginis metu, and Imperii aemula, when the fear of Carthage her
competitor for the Empire was removed, that fell not by degrees, but Praecipiti
cursu ab Armis ad vo^uptates, (...) negotio ad otium, rushed headlong from arms
to pleasures, from employment to idleness.And from hence as greatest Nations,
cum ab externis causis tutae videntur, ipsae suis viribus onerantur, when there
is no longer fear of foreign enemies, their own strength becomes a burden to
them: so after many conquests abroad, we were at home pressed down with the
unnatural weight of civil arms: For cum foris non habent hostem, domi
inveniunt, when people have no enemies abroad, they will find some at home; as all
warlike and fruitful Nations will, not otherwise delivered either of their
humors or people. To add to this necessity, the sending away of our factious
spirits, it will remove the seat of blood from our own doors, and prove the
cheapest school to train up in arms the better dispositions, whose military
skill may after serve to defend the State; and by the late accession of another
Nation will be now more needful, Tacit. An. 10.
Ne novus populus otio and nimia pecunia lasciviret, lest that other people
should grow wanton through too much wealth and idleness, and we in the end
enforced with the Satyrist Ju^l.
to confess, N^n^ patimur longae patis mala, saevior armis
Luxuria incubuit --
We suffer now the harm of a long peace,
Whil^st Riot, worse than war, does thus increase.
2 Benefits. 1 Wealth, by 1 Spoil of the Enemy. 2 Addition of Revenue by
subjected territories.
2 Honor, by addition of 1 Title. 2 Dominion. 3. A more facility to effect than
heretofore, by 1 Addition of new strength. 2 Substraction of diversions
The facility to effect this being now more than ever by the addition of
strength, and substraction of diversions, in this happy union of the Britain
Empire.

The benefits arise from Profit and Honor. The Spoils we have brought away in
our French and Spanish attempts exceeding ever the charge in getting; and the
Revenues of the subjected Signiories, as Normandy, Aquitain, etc. supporting
with much and vantage the expense in keeping: Our Honor, as the Style of our
Kings, by confluence of so many Titles increased; and by accession of so many
Territories as we held in France, our Dominions and liberties so far enlarged.


AN ANSWER TO THE FORMER Arguments made by the command OF HIS HIGHNESS.
AS he can give best Rules to preserve the health of a body natural, that by
observing the diverse humors, accidents and dispositions thereof, finds at
length the cause from whence it is or well or ill-affected, and so by mixture
of Art and Observation sets to his Patient rules of exercise and diet: so is it
in a Kingdom or Commonwealth. If then out of the Registers of Record and Story,
the true Remembrancers of Art and Error in passages of State, it shall appear
Answers to the former Arguments.
1 Affections of our wisest Princes ever to peace. 2 Foreign expeditions 1
Rebellions at home. 2 Cause of 1 Endless taxations. 2 Vassalage. 3 Danger to
the State.

3 Confederacy and alliance the means of former victories, no ways to be
restored as heretofore.
that those times which have been glorified with the mightiest Princes and
wisest Councils, would ever acknowledge that Sil. Ital. lib. 11.
Pax una triumphis Innumeris potior; one Peace outgoes for worth Innumerable
triumphs; That Combustions at home were like Meteors, ever kindled in another
Region, but spent themselves there; That our men instead of Laurel and Olive
Garlands to adorn with victory and peace our Gates and Temples, have ever
brought home fireballs to burn our Cities; That foreign spoils have been
summed up with Taxes and Penury; That this addition of Revenue has tied us to
a perpetual issue of our own Treasure; That by these titles of Honor we have
bought Slavery, and by extenture of Territories, Danger; And that difficulty
either to undertake or pursue any foreign enterprise now is much more than in
any age before; I think that no Englishman will either love his own error so
much, or his Country so little, as to advise a course so far estranged either
from judgment or security.

IT is manifest by warrant of our own examples, Examples of the affection of
our Kings successively to Peace.
that the Kings of England, (except in some heat of Youth, which is not the
best director of Counsel) preferred unjust Peace before the justest War: none
inthralling their minds with ambitious desires of extending Territories, or
imaginary humors of licentious Sovereignty; every one willing to pass his time
with content of his private fortunes. Upon this ground Henry the second gave
20000 marks Benedictus Monachus in vita H. 2.
Expensarum nomine, under the notion of expenses, to the French King, ut
firmior Pax haberetur, that he might have a firm and settled Peace. His
succeeding son pro quieta clamatione de sorore sua ducenda, for a peaceable
claim to the marriage of his sister, which was like to make a fraction, gave to
the French King Ex Matthew. Paris page 214.
docem millia librarum, ten thousand pounds. Three hundred thousand marks John
gave to the French King, to match his calm entrance to a secure peace. Until
the Confederacy with Rog. Hoveden.
Scotland, and invading of the Land by Charles de Valoys the French King
provoked Edward the first, he never disquieted France with noise of war, as
after he did by the Ex additam. Prosperi Aquitaniae Episc.
Earls of Richmond and Lancaster, although Boniface the Pope incited him
thereunto. His Son, the second Edward, anno 2. requires the Bishops and Clergy
to pray and offer alms for him, and the people of this State; the words are,
Rot. Claus. anno secundo E. 3. m. 11.
ut Deus nos regat and dirigat in mundi hujus turbinibus, that God would rule
and direct us in the troubles of this world; for that having sought all means
with France he could for Peace, ut Guerrarum discrimina vitaret, that he might
avoid the dangers of war, he reaped nothing but bitterness, and detention of
his Messengers, Son, and part of his Duchy of Gascoigne, his Rebels enjoying
all Protection, and his Merchants all Inhospitality, whose ships his enemy
hostiliter cepit, and Mercatores interfecit, took in a hostile sort. and slew
the Merchants. The Parliament quinto of Edward 3. Ex Rot. Par. anno 5 Ed. 3. n.
r.
was especially called to consult how Peace might be procured. In his 17 year
Ex Rotul. ^arl. anno 17 E. 3.
the Peers and Commons petition him to labor a peace with France, and to
solicit the Pope for mediation. The truce from hence effected he would by no
means violate, but in the twentieth year moves peace by all the offers he Ex
Rot. Franci^ an. 19. m. 10.
can, as Contracts, Intermarriage, and to take up the Cross with France, in
succursum Terrae Sanctae, for succor of the Holy Land. But all he could do
could abate no whit of the French ^ury, Ex ^o^. Claus* (...) 20 E. 3. m. 16.
part. 1.
who invaded by themselves Aquitain, England by the Scots, surprising in breach
of Truce his Nobility of Britain, whom at Paris ignominiosae morti tradidit, he
put to shameful deaths; there and in Gascoign murdering the rest of his
Subjects, and rasing his Castles nor would upon a second meditation admit any
way of peace. War then was left his last refuge; Iiv. lib. 9.
Et pia Armaquibus nulla nisi in Armis spes est, War is to that man just and
lawful, who has no hope of help but by war. And this his Clergy was enjoined
to open in Sermons, that he might eschew the infamy of Christian bloodshed. In
his two and twentieth year finding war to have brought to his people Rot.
Claus. anno 2 Ed. 3.
gravia onera and multa mala, heavy burdens and many mischiefs, as the Record
says, and that the fortune of War cum splendet frangitur, when it shines
clearest is then nearest breaking; he passed over into France to seek peace
diverse times; and to strengthen his affections with the best hopes, he
injoyneth all the Bishops of England to offer Dors. Claus. an. 22 Ed. 3. m. 11.
Similiter 8 R. 2. Claus. m. 34.
devotas preces suppliciter ad Deum, humble and devout prayers to God, to
direct his actions to Gods glory and the peace of his Country, nec non ad
totius Christianitatis commodum, and the advantage of the whole Christian
world; which he believed could not follow but by a firm amity with his
neighbors. This is the dislike of war he opens himself in the five and
twentieth year Rot. Parl. anno 25 E. 3.
in Parliament, declaring the great means he had wrought by the Pope, but could
not effect it: And in the third year after Rot. Parl. anno 28 E. 3.
calls again the body of the State, to devise with him the means to obtain
it; for that he saw his Subjects by war so greatly wasted. But Rot. Parl. anno
29 E. 3.
when anno 29. to redeem himself and subjects from the hard tasks they had
undertaken, and to avoid effusionem sanguinis Christiani, quantum potuit, vel
decuit, pacem quaesivit, the shedding of Christian blood, he sought peace as
much as in him lay, and as far as was fitting, sending the Duke of Lancaster to
Avignon in intercession, but all in vain; he stood upon his own strength. By
which his confident adversary (the year following captive) that was before
obdurate, justly found, that one hour can overthrow simul parta and sperata
decora, at once both the honors we enjoy and those we hope for. And we may
truly conclude of this Kings success, as Livy Live. l. 5. Dec. 5.
of the Roman fortune, Propterea bella felicia gessisse, quia justa, that
therefore his wars were prosperous, because they were just.

To obtain his desire and Subjects quiet, he was contented to disclaim Ex
Chart. origin. de renunciat. in Thesaur.
the interest that Right and Fortune had cast upon him. And after, though often
again incited, yet never would be drawn to ^he hazard of war; for improbe
Neptunum ac^usat qui iterum naufragium facit, he blames Neptune very unjustly
who suffers shipwreck ^he second time: until the French King Claus. anno 45 E.
3.
con^ra juramentum and formam pacis, contrary to ^is oath and the form of
peace, had vexillis ex^licatis with banners displayed, invaded his do^inions in
France, and with a Fleet intended ^o attempt England, ad ipsum Regem viribus
sub^ertendum, utterly to undo the King by force of Arms.

Richard the second, whom as well he left Successor to his troubles as to his
Kingdom, ^ntred in the decline of his Grandsires fortune, and after many years
of war and much loss, had ^n the end an expectation of peace; which opened ^o
his Commons and Council in Parliament, Rot. Parl. anno 7 R. 2. n. 17.
their longing affection was so much inclined hereto, that they advised the
King, though it were ^n doing homage for Guien, Callis and the rest, he should
not let slip that opportunity.

Until Charles of France had received Ex contract. origin. inter Owinum
Glendowr and Regem Franciae.
that ^angerous Rebel Owen Glendowr, by the name ^f Metuendissimi Principis
Walliae, the most ^read Prince of Wales, into a strict confederacy against his
Master (whom he vouchsafed no ^ther title than Henricus de Lancastria) by
^ontract, and had harrowed the Isle of Wight by ^he Duke of Orleans and Earl of
Saint Paul, ^ntred into Gascoign himself, and prepared a Fleet and an Army to
invade this Land, Henry the fourth did never disquiet his peace; and after many
prorogued Truces, would not break out again, until Burgundy Rot. Parl. anno 11
Hen. 4. n. 2.
(that had wrested into his hand the Government of France) mean^ with all his
force to besiege Callis, and annoy this Realm.

The Uncle and Chancellor to Henry the fifth declared in Rot. Parl. an. 4 Hen.
5.
Parliament the desire his Master had to procure Peace, and how the French King
had refused all reason, denying to render his prisoners, or ransom those taken
at Agin-Court battle: so that the King was driven to his last hope, which was
by dint of sword to seek his peace, concluding thus his speech; Bella faciamu^
ut Pacem habeamus, quia finis Belli Pax est. Let us fight, that we may obtain
peace; for the end of war is peace.

Henry the sixth, to save the expense of his people and treasure, offered Rot.
Parl. anno 14 H. 6. n. 2.
many large and liberal conditions, but received in exchange nothing but
scoffs: he was contented to part with the Duchy of Main, to make up a peace
with his uncle of France.

Against the Duke of Somerset it was objected Ex Artic. in Consilio contra D.
Somerset.
by the Duke of York, that he (contrary to the Oath and Council, by breaking
the Amity between the two Princes) was the only ground of the loss of Normandy.

There is extant in the Treasury Int. Record. These. Westminster.
a petition of 9 Hen. 7. from the Captains and military men, propace habenda,
that they might have peace.

Neither interest of right, nor jealousy of increasing power, could draw Henry
8. unto the quarrel of France; until the Church complained against Lewis 12. Ex
Bulla Pap. H. 8.
who neither esteeming ^f God, good fame, nor conscience, detained ^he revenues
of the Clergy, supported the Cardi^al William to aspire to the Papacy, aided in
the ^ege of Boucy Alfonso of Ferrara, and the Benivagli, both Traitors to the
Papal See, where ^e intended to lay the foundation of his Empire ^o usurp all
Italy,) and besought him for the pity ^f our Savior, and by the virtue of his
famous Ancestors (for I use the words of the Popes Brief) Ex tractat^ origin.
in l. B. 266.
that never forsook the Church of God in di^ress, and by his filial obedience,
(the strongest ^ond) to enter into that holy League, they having ^lected him
against Lewis, Coput foeder is Italici, Head of the Italian League.

Edward the sixth, Ex procla. E. 6. de e^peditione contra Scotos.
until urged with the touch of his honor, being by his neighbors neglected ^n
the marriage of their Mistress, never attempted any war against them.

The quarrels of France in the time of his suc^eeding sister, after the
marriage with Spain, were neither properly ours, nor begun by us, although ^n
the end we only went away with the loss.

Her Sister of holy memory, to effect the peace with France, forbore Ex tract.
Cambrensi. 1569.
the demand of Callis for ^ight years, and neglected to urge a just debt of
four millions from that Crown. Ex proc^. anno 3. Eliz.
And the labors she ^pent to confirm amity with Spain, by many ^riendly
offices of mediation, are apparent to the whole world; though in the end of her
desires she ^ailed: whether happily in prevention of the Spa^ish Monarchy
eternizing her memory, or that ^his work of peace was by divine providence
re^erved for him that could and has best effected ^t, I know not. Only I
conclude, that as the first Monarch in Rome, so the first in Britain might
justly write, Pace Populo Britanno terr^ marique parta, Janum clausi, having
settled Britai^ in peace by Land and sea, I have shut up the door^ of Janus
Temple.

Foreign arms the ground of trouble at home, by the Enemy who to divert will
attempt. Subjects. wearied with Toil. Taxation. Feared with the effect of
tyranny. Inured to wars can never suit after to a quiet life.
It is evident by our own examples, that for the mo^^ part, the Civil or
Foreign Armies that have oppressed this State, have been either bred out of
our first attempting of others, or out of the grievance of the Nobility and
people, either wearied with the toil and charge, or feared with the effect of
Tyranny, which might corrupt the good fortune of their King, or else (a^ plague
no less of war) that the better sort inured to command abroad, have forgotten
to obey at home, and the inferior by living there upon rapine and purchase,
unwilling here to tie themselves again to order and industry.


There is in the Register of State no time that Examples of Invasion drawn from
the attempts of others.
so well expresses either the danger or damage we underwent in making an
adversary, as that of Edward the third. Out of many examples I will select some
few, beginning with the tenth of his reign; at what time his intention was to
attempt somewhat in France, but diverted by Philip, who, mustring in partibus
Britanniae ad invadendum Regnum Angliae, in the parts of ^ritany to invade the
Kingdom of England, a ^uissant Army, enforced Edward the third to fall Ex Rot.
Scotiae anno 10 E. 3. m. 14.
from his first purpose, and insist upon his own ^uard: for which cause, to the
infinite charge ^f himself and people, he levied 80000. men ^ut of the Shires
of this Kingdom. To withdraw ^is forces from France, in the thirteenth of his
^eign, they invaded the Realm, and burned the ^owns of Plymouth and
Southampton, places that suffered from the same motive the like ca^amity.

In the first of Richard the second, after the ^attel of Cressy, when they
feared our too much ^ooting, and we too much believed our own for^une, for she
cito reposcit quod dedit, quickly ^alls for back what she gave us; the Rot.
Parl.
Duke of Normandy, to draw home our forces, levieth an Army of forty thousand
men at arms, and forty ^housand foot, sharing by idle contracts before^and
with his Confederates not the spoils only, ^ut the Kingdom it self: the Honor
and some ^ther portion of benefits he reserved as his own ^eed; the possessions
of many English Subjects ^n pure alms he voweth to the Church of Normandy, and
to the French King an yearly tribu^ary Fee of twenty thousand pound. In these
^erms this Realm stood almost all the time of Edward the third.

The Coast-dwellers were so frighted from their habitation, as in the
thirteenth year the King commanded the Earl of Richmond Rot. Fran^. in dorso.
22 E. 3. m. 6.
and other Peers to reside at their border houses; and was enforced in the two
and twentieth to enjoin by Ordinance, that none should remove that dwelt within
sex leucas a mari, six leagues of the Sea.

It was no whit altered under his successor Richard the second; for in his
entrance the Frenc^ burnt the Town of Rye, and in the third year after
Gravesend. And in the tenth year of his reign, to change his intended journey
for France in person, the French King prepares an Army to invade this Land.
This quarrel led us almost into an eternal charge at Sea, and in the Northern
limits, they and our Neighbors there being tied of old in strict assurance of
mutual aid: by whose desperate and perpetual incursion (for nescit Plebs jejuna
timere, an half-starved rabble fears nothing,) the fattest parts of our borders
were left waste, the men and cattle of England (as 16. of Edw. 2.) impetus
Scotorum fugientes, being fled for safety to the Forests and desert places.
The like I find in the first of Edward the third: they ever thus interrupting
us in our expeditions into France; as in 20 Ed. 3. and in the first and second
of Richard the second, in the fifth of Henry the fifth, and in the fourth of
Henry the eighth, when he undertook his holy voyage against Lewis the twelfth.

And either being no less ready to nourish the least spark of Rebellion in this
State, as that of the French King to counterpoize King John; or work out Henry
the third from his Duchy of Normandy, as France did; or moving underhand by
the Duke of Britain, the Earl of Hartford to reach the Crown of Richard the
second, and when he had got the Garland, suborning Owen Glendowr (with whom he
contracted as Prince of Wales) to busy the same King at home, that he might
divert his intended purpose from France or Scotland.

WHen Henry the third had devoured in his Nobility in dislike of foreign
expeditions have rebelled.
mind the Kingdom of Sicily, the Nobility finding the expense of Treasure, and
fearing the exposing of their own persons, grew so unwilling, that by the bent
and course of the record it appears Ex Rot. pat. and claus. de annis 40, 41,
42 Hen. 3.
not the least ground of that rebellion which after drew the King and his Son
to so foul conditions.

A judgment there must be between powers and undertakings, that though
affections may carry a man to great things, they make him not attempt
^mpossible: for where great minds are not accompanied with great judgments,
they overthrow themselves. As in this Prince, who by the Popes ^ncitement
simplicitatem Regis circumveniens, circumventing the King in his honest
meaning, (they are the words of the Author Cominei censura de com. char. cap. 8.
) intend^ng to rifle the fortunes of others, was in the end ^nforced to play at
dice for his own stake.

The Earls of Hartford, Bohun and Bigot, made Burden of personal service
grievous.
^he grounds of their commotions the distaste they ^ook at Edward the first for
exacting their Service in the quarrel of Gascoign, a foreign Country. And
they might seem to have some color to refuse, but in a more mannerly fashion,
either attendance ^or charge in recovery or defense of Provinces in France,
since so many consents in Parliament as Ex Rot. Parl. de annis 20 Rich. 2. 6.
and 9 Hen. 4. 1. and 7 Hen. 5.
the twentieth of Rich. the second, the sixth and ninth of Henry the fourth,
the first and seventh of Henry the fifth affirm the Commons not to be bound
pour supporter ses Guerres en la terre de France ou Normandy, to support his
wars either in France or Normandy; declaring no less by public protestation,
than they did by undutiful denial.

For the burden of Charge, it was no less distasteful Burden of charge
grievous, ground of much trouble and oppression.
than the former of Service, this Kingdom being (as it is said Cicero Epist. ad
At. lib. 5.
of the Roman Provinces occasioned by war) made desert, and the people
desperate by Exactions. In the Conquerours time the Bishop of Durham was killed
by the tumultuous people, opposing an imposition levied by him. There was Ex
Radulpho Gogeshal. de anno 8 Joannis.
murmuratio and imprecatio Praelatorum in Regem Joannem, mutterings and curses
from the Prelates against King John, for demanding in the eighth of his reign a
relief of them and the Laiety for his wars. In the sixteenth year Cives
Londinenses Joannem odio habuerunt pro injustis Exactionibus quibus Regnum
fatigaverat, the Londoners detested King John for his tiring out the Kingdom
with unjust taxations. Ex Matthew. ^estm.
The sink of his expense in war was so bottomless, that (as the story says) he
was constrained desaevire quotidie cum incremento, to grow every day more
unreasonable in his carriage toward the Church and Commonwealth, eas bonis
suis variis modis spoliando, by despoiling them several ways of their goods.
Ex Matthew. Paris hist. minori.
Hinc secutum est Bellum inter Regem and Barons quod cum morte Joannis solum
finem habuit: This was it which kindled that war betwixt the King and his
Barons, which nothing could quench but the death of John himself.

In the twenty sixth of Henry the third, ob exactionum frequentiam est Regi cum
Baronibus contentio, by reason of the continual exactions there arose a
contention betwixt the King and his Barons Ex Matthew. Paris hist. ma. p. 780.
. At the Parlee of peace with them being demanded a reason of that their
action, they answer that since he came to the Crown, being not twelve years,
multoties ei auxilium dederunt, they had many times supplied him; and
expressing the particulars besides in the same place, he had received ^ot
Escaetas, so many Escheats, by the vacancy of rich Bishoprics, death of so
many Barons and others that held of him, that those alone would have made him
rich if they had been well employed. That the Itinerant Justices had by
amercing the defaults gleaned them so near, that per illa amerciamenta and alia
Auxilia prius data omnes de Regno it a gravarentur and depauperarentur, ut
parum aut nihil habeant in Bonis, by those Amercements and the Subsidies they
had formerly given him, all the Kingdom was so crushed and impoverished, that
they had little or nothing left them. And that was the ground of their
resistance. Ex Joann^ Eversden.
Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis and alii Praelati resistunt Regi, the Archbishop
of Canterbury and other Prelates resist the King, when in his fifteenth year he
demanded Scutag^. And although he laid open to the Parliament his great debt
causa bellicae expeditionis in partibus transmarinis, occasioned by his
foreign expeditions, was answered by Ranulph Earl of Chester, the mouth of the
Laiety, That in the former Aides Pecuniam suam effuderunt, quod inde pauperes
omnes recesserunt, unde Regi de jure auxilium non debebant, they had poured out
their money so liberally, as that being all impoverished by it, they were not
obliged to assist him any farther. And thus Ex hist. Matthew. Paris page 32.
dissolved the Parliament.

The Clergy of the Realm in the twenty fourth of Edward the first denied the
demand of Contribution Ex Matthew. Westminster. Walt. Gisborn.
in expeditionem Regis contra Gallos and ad reprimendos Scotos, toward the
Kings expedition against the French, and the repressing of the Scots. And ob
has crebras exactiones magnus fit tumultus inter Regem and Barons, by reason
of these frequent extorsions, there arose a great difference betwixt the King
and the Barons.

One of the Articles of treason objected against Mortimer Rot. Claus. anno 5
Ed. 3.
in Parliament in the fourth of Edward the third, was the offense he bred in
the Commonwealth, by causing a Subsidy to be exacted. This humor of the
people did somewhat suit with that of the Inhabitants of Trevers, Cassiodori
Var.
who stoned to death Proclerus for persuading Theodoret the Goth to crave a
Subsidy.

The Clergy in the twelfth of Edward the third, Rot. Alm. m. 22.
deny such a grant of their Wools as the Laiety had yielded to, for supplying
the King in his affairs of France. The like answer they make the forty fourth
of the same King, when he The. Walsingham. Rot. Parl. anno 44 E. 3.
demanded in Parliament a Subsidy of them and the Commons of 100000l. And the
same King grown doubtful of his people pressed down with Impositions, requires
the Archbishop, Rot. Alm. 12 E. 3. m. 22
Quod cum Populus Regni sui variis Oneribus, Tallagiis and Impositionibus
praegravetur, ut idem Archiepisc. Indulgentiarum muneribus, piis
Exhortationibus, and aliis modis, eundum Populum placare studeat, and ipsum
Regem excuset, that since the Subjects of his Kingdom were overcharged with
many Burdens, Tallages, and other Impositions, the said Archbishop would by
grant of Indulgences, seasonable Exhortations, and other ways endeavor to
pacify the people, and excuse the King.

By reason of the Census per Capita, Pol-money imposed by Parliament in the
third of Richard the second to defray the wars in France, there were Ex Rot.
Par. de an. 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, and 9 R. 2. and Claus^ anno 8 E. 2.
dirae imprecationes in Regem, and magnae ^ost perturbationes in Regno ex
Plebis insurre^ione, heavy and bitter imprecations against ^he King, which were
followed with great trou^les in the Nation by the insurrection of the Commons.
And as well in the reign of this King, as some other of his Predecessors and
Suc^essours, the Parliament was so tender in grant of Subsidy and other Taxes,
that they added into their Act, Ex chron^ S. Albani.
quod non trahatur in consequentiam, that (...) should be no example for the
future, appointing ^eculiar Treasurers of their own to give account upon Oath
the next Parliament: and such Grants, which they professed to proceed Rot.
Parl. anno 1 H. 4.
ex libera and ^pontanea voluntate Dominorum and Comitatuum, from the free and
voluntary grant of the Lords and ^espective Counties, to be void if Conditions
on ^he Kings part were not performed. And this un^ortunate King had cast upon
him as an argument of his unworthiness to govern, the exacting of so great
Subsidies, and extorting so much money from ^he Shires that submitted their
Fortunes unto his ^mercy.

And when Henry the sixth in anno 20. would ^ave had a Relief from his Subjects
In Bundel Inquisitionum, anno 20. and anno 24 H. 6.
de aliqua ^umma notabili, of some considerable sum; he ^ad in answer, Propter
inopiam, etc. populi il^ud non posse obtineri, that in regard of the pover^y,
etc. of the people it could not be granted. The ^ike in the twenty fourth of
the same King. Great men have been disposed sometimes to humor the waste of
Treasure in their Princes, either to subject Power by Need to their devotion
and ^we, (for Princes dare most offend them whom they have least cause to use;)
or to force Necessity to extend Prerogative so far, until by putting all into
Combustion, some may attain unto the end of their Ambition, others the redress
of supposed Injuries. Ex lib. Abbat. de (...) a^^^ey.
Thus did the Faction of Henry the fourth in the one, and the Nobility under
Henry the third in the other; who hereby quitted the State oppressed (as they
thought) with the Kings Half-brothers, the Poictovins and other Strangers.

Subjects fear to have the enemies of their Sovereigns too much weakened, lest
themselves become Tyrants. And it is in the farthest respect in the Mat. Paris
Hist. min.
Baronage under John, Henry his son, and Ex Adam ^erimouth in vita Ed. 2.
Edward the second, to fear as much the absolute Greatness of their Sovereign,
as they did the Diminution of their own estates. And therefore when they found
their King to grow too fast upon any neighbor Adversary, then would they lend
their best aid to diminish his power or fortune; left by enlarging himself upon
the other that poized his greatness, he might forget and become a Tyrant; as
one says of Henry the first, Mat. Paris Hist. min.
Assumpserat cornua audaci^ tam contra Ecclesiam quam Regni universalitatem,
Roberto fratre and aliis inimicis edomitis, having once overcome his brother
Robert and other enemies, with audacious and presumptuous horns he goared as
well the Church, as the rest of the Kingdom, breaking his Seal, his Charter,
and his Oath.

The memory of this caused the Nobility Mat. Paris Hist. majori.
to call in the French Kings Son, when John their Sovereign began to know his
own authority (as they thought) too much. And the French Subjects aided on the
other side Henry the third against their Master, when he was almost cooped up
in his Britain journey. This (as the Stories report) being a practice usual in
those days.

THe last mischief is the disposition that Military Military Education cause of
trouble in the state.
education leaves in the minds of many; For it is not born with them that they
so much distaste peace, but proceeds from that custom that has made in them
another nature.

It is rarely found that ever Civil troubles of Heads of dangerous Rebellions
have been only such as by Command in War have forgot to obey in Peace.
this State were dangerously undertaken, but where the plot and pursuit was
made by a spirit so infused.

King John had been after Mat. Paris anno 5 Joan.
sine Regno without a Kingdom, as he was at first sans terre without land, if
his rebenediction had not wrought more upon the disloyal designs of Fitzwalter
and Marshal, (whom his own elective love had made great in opinion by the
Norman Services) than either his rebated Sword or blasted Scepter could.

Willielm. de Rishanger in Historia.
If Simon Montfort had not been too much improved in Experience and his own
Opinion by the many services he underwent in the Government of Gascoign, he had
never so much dared against Duty, as to come over at the first call to make
head against his Master, and pursue him with that fury of Ambition, until he
had forced him to redeem the liberty of his person by the blasting of so many
flowers of his Imperial Crown: and to set himself so far below the seat of
Majesty, as to capitulate with them upon even conditions, which not performed
(I use his own words) Ex Charta con^ess. Baronibus an (...) 49 Hen. 3.
Liceat omnibus de Regno nostro contra nos insurgere, it shall be lawful for
all persons in our Kingdom to rise up against us, and to do omnia quae gravamen
nostrum respiciant, acsi Nobis in null^ tenerentur, so to act all things in
reference to the grievances from us upon them, as if they were by no tie
obliged to us.

If Richard Duke of York had never learned to be so great a Soldier at the
cost of his Master Henry the sixth in another State, he had never disquieted
the calm of his Times, or given just occasion to his Opposite Somerset to say,
That if Verba Ducis Somerset. contra Ducem Eborac. coram Rege.
he had never learned to play the King by his Regency in France, he had never
forgot to obey as a Subject when he returned into England.

Our own times can afford some, whose spirit improved by Military employment,
and made wanton with popular applause, might have given instance of these
dangers, if good success had been a relative to bad intentions. And every age
breeds some exorbitant spirits, who turn the edge of their own sufficiency upon
whatsoever they can devour in their ambitious apprehensions, seeking rather a
great than a good Fame; and holding it the chiefest Honor to be thought the
Wonder of their times: which if they attain to, it is but the condition of
Monsters, that are generally much admired, but more abhorred.

But war some may say mouldeth not all men thus: for virtuous men will use
their weapons for ornament amongst their Friends, against Enemies for defense.
And to those men their own goodness is not safe, nam Regibus boni quam mali
suspectiores sunt, for Kings suspect good men sooner than bad. Kings must have
their Ministers pares negotiis fit for their business, and not supra above it,
or too able for it. For another man's too-much sufficiency (as they take it) is
a diminution of their respectiveness, and therefore dangerous.

THe meaner sort having forgot the toil of Many disorders in the State by
return of the common Soldier.
their first life by inuring themselves to the liberty of War, which leaves
for the most part the lives of men to their own looseness, and the means of
getting to their own justice, can never again endure either order or labor;
and so return but to corrupt the Commonwealth with their lawless manners. For
living more riotously than the rapine of foreign victory could warrant, (as
for the most they do) in contempt of their own private Want and Fortune, they
desire a change of the public Quiet. In Tumults and Uproars they take least
care for their livings, however the world goes they can be no losers: for like
Silla's Army, making no difference between sacred and profane Robberies, (for
the victors Sword seldom teaches either mean or modesty) they will be ready
upon every advantage to pillage their Contrymen at home. For who can expect
men dissolutely disciplined can ever use their arms with moderation?

Against the fury of such seditious Outrages many Parliaments, as Parl. anno 22
Hen. 6.
in the twenty second of Hen. the sixth have been solicited for redress. And
that example in Frois^r^
Champaign after the Peace at Callis 1360. where this licentious Rout at the
close of those wars slew the Duke of Bourbon, and besieged the Pope at Avignon,
may suffice to express this mischief.

It has no less weakened the bond of mutual Trade: since our Merchants, whom
the necessity of late times left to recover by force the losses they pretended,
do now teach, as a Maxim of their Mystery and our State, That the directest
way either to wealth or security is by Rapine and Spoil: and to cloak their own
ends pretend the common good; as if the State stood by their affections, when
in truth they themselves cannot fish but in aqua turbida in troubled waters:
and therefore would have Incendium Patriae a bonefire of their Country, if it
be but to keep warm and awake their own humors.

THe last motive from Necessity is, the ease War brings to a surcharged
State. Intending Exhausting of the people no Necessity but Danger.
it seems War but as the Sink, and Soldiers but as the Corruptions of
Common-weals; whereas besides the inevitable use of the one, and the noble
condition of the other, (an Error in the argument) Nature does never oppress
further by increase, than she again discharges. The breast of the Mother she
enableth to nourish up as many as the Womb shall uno partu at one birth ever
bring forth; proportioning to the number of the Children the condition of their
Strength and Appetites. It is then accession of our own that may furcharge; for
Parents by such indulgent admission may soon famish whom in Motherly affection
they intend to cherish.

But admitting the former ground, whether by this way of waste we be ever able
and at pleasure to gage the Issue (when such elective power is left to him only
qui suis stat viribus, non alieno pendet arbitrio, who stands by his own
strength, and not at the pleasure of another) is considerable; since to begin
cuivis licet, deponere cum victores ^^lunt, is easy for any man, but the
laying down ^ill be at the Conquerours pleasure. For the wast^g of our people
in ambitious Enterprises (as that ^r an Empire by Constantine in France) left
this (...) and as a prey to the barbarous Frontiers, Beda Hist. Eccl. lib. 1.
^mni milite and floridae juventut is alacritate spolia^, being left naked of
Soldiery, and robbed of ^e choicest flower of youth. And when we were ^ed to
make good our undertaking in France, the waste of our people was so great, that
to supply extremity we took purgamenta urbium, the dregs ^f Towns, (as Curtius
says of Alexander;) Ex Rot. Franciae an. 22 Ed. 1.
^eed hiring the Bankrupts by protection, as in ^e twenty second of Edward the
first; and en^orcing, against the rule of justice, the Judges to ^ut Placita
little in respectu qui in obsequium Re^is profecturi sunt, Pleas in the behalf
of such as ^ere to go in the Kings service. And as Tacitus ^f a declined
Majesty says, emunt militem, non ^egunt, they buy their Soldiers rather than
make ^hoice of them; we made purchase of general Pardons of all that were
Utlegati, Banniti, aut de Feloniis indictati, si cum Rege transitare voluerint,
outlawed, excommunicated, or indicted of Fe^ony, in case they would go over
with the King. As in the same year of the former King and in the year after
were dischaged out of all Prisons in the Realm to the number of ninety seven
notorious Ma^efactors. (b) And in the eighteenth of Edward the (c) Ex Rot.
Original. in Arch. Thesaur.
second, and eighth of Edward the third, and ^weleth of Edward the fourth we
did the like. An army better apted by Necessity than Election to ^ive upon the
Enemy, Quibus ob Egestatem and Flagitia maxima peccandi necessitudo est, whose
^ndigency and former ill way of life must needs make them ready for any
mischief. In the end (...) this King last remembered, and entrance of (...) Heir
Richard the second, the State began to be se^ sible of consuming Issue; which
not lying in the Kings power (now as the strength of France, set o^ Revenge,
stood) to stay at pleasure, (for -- arm^ tenenti Omnia dat qui justa neg at --
Deny the Soldiers due, You give him all you have) it w^ urged to him in
Parliament in the Ex Rot. Par. an. 7 R. 2.
seventh of h^ reign, as an error in his Government: whereto (...) answered,
that they ought not to lay the cause up^ on him, for that together with the
Crown the Wars descended unto him. And the Chancellor (...) the fourth of
Henry the fourth, declared publickl^ in the Higher House, that by the mischance
of W^ and want of reasonable Peace, (for I use the word^ of the Roll)
occasioned by dissensions and priva^ desire, the flower of Chivalry and Rock of
Noble^ within the Realm was in a manner consumed.

Nobilit as cum Plebe perit, lateque vagatur Lucan.

Ensis, and a multo revocatum est pectore ferrum.
The Peer and Peasant falls, and hating rest
Bloody the Sword returns from many a breast.
And the whole State by war had been thus subverted Better to disburthen the
state by Colony than War.
had not God as a mean raised that King.

But since the end of man's creation is not for the Slaughter, nor education of
Arms to make me^ Cast-aways; the course most answerable either to Charity, or
Example, (for Rome did by Coloni^ enlarge and confirm her Empire) is to
transpla^ that we may best spare. In Ireland we may increase the King many
Subjects, and in the Indi^ God many servants: a world from our Forefathers
^ockt up by divine Providence, as only best to glorify and purify these
Times. And as in war conquirendus potius miles quam dimittendus, Soldiers are
rather to be listed than disbanded; so post ^ellum vires refovendae magis quam
spargendae, after war forces are rather to be cherished than wasted.

And thus much in answer of Necessity.
Answer to the Arguments of Profit.
THe profits gained by Foreign Expeditions Profit of war. Expense of money,
Munition and men.
cannot be any ways so truly esteemed, as by setting down the expense of
Money, Men, and Munition, by which we have made purchase of them. I will
therefore deliver as they fall in sequence all the Impositions, Taxes and
Lones, whether by general Grant, or Prerogative power le^ied of the People;
summing after up, as I go along the times of our Princes, the number of Men,
Ships, and vast provisions of Victuals raised to supply the necessity and
expense of War.

WIlliam the Conqueror in the entrance of A summary of all the exactions upon
this State from the Conquest to the end of the late Queen.
his Government took of every Hide-land twelve pence a due of the Subjects to
the Sovereign both before and since the Conquest, to defray such charge as
either the defense of the Land from spoil, or the Sea from Piracy, should
expose the Prince to. It is called Dane-geld, Gelda Regis, or Hidage, and was
sessed by the Hide or Plough-land, like to that Jugatio per jugera taxation by
the acre in Rome, yet by no rate definite with this as with another Exaction,
taken, as the Monk of S. Albans Ex Matthew. Paris page 8. and 15.
says, sive per fas sive per nefas, by fair means or by foul. He passe^ over
into Francs into the list of charge he ranke^ the Bishops and Abbots, sessing
upon them and a^ their charge a proportion of Soldiers for his ser^vice,
exiling many worthy men that opposed th^^ thraldom.

William Rufus anno 7. set upon the heads of s^ William Rufus.
many as he mustered up for the French wars te^ shillings a man, and so
discharged them. In an. 9. he to the same end spoiled the Churches of their
Ornaments and Holy vessels, and levied four Hidages of every Plough-land, Ex
antiq. legibus Angliae.
Trib^ Angliam non modo abradens, sed excorians, n^^ only shaving, but even
flaying England wi^ his impositions: so that wearied with war and expense, ne
respirare potuit Anglia sub ipso suffocata, England was quite stifled by him,
an^ could not so much as breath. -- Sillius Italicus.
Quid jam non Regibus ausum? Aut quid jam Regno resta Scelus? -- What durst not
Kings then do? What mischief could the Nation suffer more? in this Kings time.

Ex Hist. Gualt. Gisborn.
Henry the first anno 5. magnam a Regno exegit Pecuniam, exacted a great ^umm
of his Kingdom, with which he passed into France: and by this means Ex Hist.
Mat. Paris.
gravabatur terra Angliae oppress^nibus multis, England was born down with many
oppressions. Ex Hist. Mat. W^stm.
He took in the tenth year si^ shillings Danegeld. Ex Hist. Hen. Hunting.
And in the seventeenth Quod inter eum and Regem Francorum magnum fuit
dissidium, Anglia fuit variis depressa Exactionibus, and Bonis sine peccato
spoliata, by means of the great differenoe betwixt him and the King of France,
England was oppressed with diverse exactions, and men spoiled of their goods for
no offense at all.

Of King Stephen there need no more than the Stephen.
words of the Monk of Gisborn, Ex hist. mon. Gisborn.
Post annum sextum Pax nulla, omnes parts terrebat violenta Pradatio, after
the sixth year of his reign there was no quiet, but all parts of the Land
became a prey and spoil to violent men.

Henry the second, alluding not unlike to the Henry 2.
^eada given the Eremitae in the decline of the Empire, as Salaries by which
they stood bound to defend the Frontiers against the Incursions of the
Barbarous Nations, continued the Policy of his Progenitors, who allotted the
Land into such and so many equal portions, as might seem competent for
supportation of a Knight or man at Arms; from whom (as occasion required) they
received either service or contribution. This Tenure, now esteemed a Thraldom,
began upon a voluntary and desired submission; for who from his gift would not
of the Prince accept Land upon the like conditions, so it touches not the
Sovereign as a wrong to the Subject, but as in right his own? And therefore
respecting their first immediate dependency upon the Crown, which is a great
part of the Kings Honor, their duties and Escheats a great benefit, and their
attendance by Tenure in war at their own charge to the number of 602 16. at the
least, (for the Knights Fees in England are no less) a great ease, strength and
security to his State; for they are totidem Hostagia, so many Hostages, as
Bracton says; it were a thing perilous now to alter, after such a current of
time and custom. This King to understand the better his own strength, publico
praecepit edicto quod quilibet Praelatus and Baro, quot Milites de eo tenerent
in Capite publicis suis instrument is significarent, he caused it to be
proclaimed that every Prelate and Baron should notify by public deed how many
Knightships they held of him in capite. By this rule of Scutage, constant in
the number, he levied always his Subsidies and relief, though diverse in the
rate. Of the first, which was near the beginning of his Reign, there is no
record. The second Scutage, Ex Gervas. Dorobernen. an. 1159.
which was anno 5. amounted to 124 millia librarum argenti, thousand pounds of
silver; which reduced to the standard of our money five shillings the ounce,
whereas that was not five groats, will amount to near 400000 l. An. 7. Ex lib.
^ub. in Sccrio.
Scutagium fuit assessum ad duas Marcas pro Exercitu Tholosae, a Scutage was
assessed two Marks for the Army at Toulouse; which if summed up by the received
number of Knights Fees, being 60216 in the hands of the Laiety only, of our
moneys cannot be less than 250000 l. The like in the next year. In an 11. Ex
Gervas. Doroborne^s.
there was an Aid pro servientibus inveniendis in exercitu, to find men to
serve in the wars, of two pence de unaquaque libra in every pound. And 4.
sequentibus annis de singulis libris singulis denariis, in the four following
years a penny in the pound was taken of all men, the estates of men's Fortunes
being delivered upon their Oaths. In the fourteenth year a Scutage was assessed
Rub. lib. in Sccrio.
ad Marcam unam de singulis Feodis, one Mark on every Fee. And anno 18. Ex
hist. Rossens.
Scutagium pro quolibet Feodo, a Scutage for every Fee. A Tenth of all
movables was granted in the thirty fifth year of his Reign. In which year
dying, Ex hist. Matthew. Paris. Richard 1.
900 millia librarum in auro and argento, praeter utensilia and jocalia,
reliquit, he left in money 900000 pounds, besides Plate and Jewels.

Rub. liber in Sccrio.
Richard the first in the beginning besides cutagium Walliae assessum, a
Scutage assessed upon ^ales at ten shillings, levied as in the succor of the
^oly Land a Subsidy out of all the Movables in ^e Realm to his own use; Ex
hist. min. Matthew. Paris. Rub. lib.
Et eleemosynae ti^lo vitium Rapacitatis inclusit, cloaking his raveous
extortion under the fair name of a pious alms. (...) contribution there was in
the sixth year of 150 Ex hist. Walt. Coventr.
millia marcarum argenti ad pondus Columni^sium, 150000 marks of silver to pay
his ran^ome: as also a Scutage assessed at twenty shillings. ^n the Ex Rog.
Hoved. and Walt. Covent.
seventh he imposed for his wants a con^ibution called Tenementale. Extremity
(for by ^is waste and imprisonment he had almost ex^austed the wealth of the
State) invented nova and varia praedandi vocabula, new and sundry ^ords to
express his exactions, as Tacitus Tacit. annal. 4.
^aith, of Centesima and Quinquagesima, an hun^redth part and a fiftieth part,
(names that since ^ave found reception and use with us.) This ^as two shillings
of every Plough-land from ^he Husbandman, and from the Gentry and No^ility the
third part of their Military service. He enforced the Cistertian Monks Ex Joan.
Eversden.
to re^eem the same year their woolls sine Pecunia^ia, at a Fine. For his Army
into Normandy Rub. lib. in Scerio.
he took a Scutage assessed at twenty shil^ings. Ex Walt. Covent.
And four years after of every Plow^and five shillings, and of every Borough
and Ex Matthew. Paris.
City duos palfridos and totidem summari^s, two horses and as many summaries:
and of every Abbot half as much. Then losing of purpose his great Seal,
proclaimed that Ex charta origin.
Omnes Chartae and Confirmationes novi Sigilli impressione roborarentur, all
Charters and Assurances should be confirmed by the n^ Seal. Whereby anew he
drew from all men composition for their Liberties. This fashion w^ afterward
taken up by some of his Successors as Ex hist. Mat. Paris p. 209.
of Henry the third, when all again w^ enjoined qui suis volebant libertatibus
gauder^ as many as would enjoy their Liberties, ut inn^ varent Chartas suas de
novo Regis Sigillo, to r^ new their Charters from the Kings new Seal Some
reason Ex hist. Rog. Hoveden.
Richard had in the end to become a gatherer, that had not long before by
account of Chancellor Hubert then Archbishop, spent infrae biennium undecies
centena mill^ Marcarum argenti de Regno Angliae, within le^ than two years,
eleven hundred thousand Marks (...) silver current English money.

His brother John succeeding Rad. Cogshall and Rub. lib. in Scorio.
took in the King John.
first of his Reign a Scutage assessed at two Marks Ex Rog. Hoveden.
For the two next years three shillings of every Plow: Ex Matthew. Paris.
and the year following, besides a Scutage as before, the fortieth part of the
Revenues (...) the Clergy and Laiety. Lib. Rub. in Sccrio.
In the fourth year (...) took the like Scutage, and the Ex Matthew. Paris.
seventh part (...) the moveable goods of the Baronage and Clergy A Scutage
assessed at two Marks Ex lib. Rub. Sccrii.
in an. 5. Ex Rad. Cogshall.
The like in the sixth and seventh years twenty shillings Scutage; and the
thirteenth part of Movables as well of the Church as Laiety in the year
following. In Ex Matthew. Paris.
an. 9. he exacted by redemption of the Concubines of the Clergy a great sum.
In the eleventh Walt. Coventr. and Rad. Cogshall.
extorsit tributum grave, scil. 140 millia librarum a viris Ecclesiasticis, he
extorted a great tribute, viz. 140000 pounds of the Churchmen. And to furnish
his Army, Ex Mat. Paris.
Clericorum Horrea invadit, he came upon the Barns of the Clergy. In Ex Rad.
Cogshall.
the twelfth a Scutage assessed at two marks, besides an exaction Rub. lib. in
Sccrio.
of 22000 l. from the Cistertian Monks. He took Ex Rad. Cogshall and Rub. lib.
in Sccrio.
in the thirteenth year a Scutage assessed at 20 s. pro exercitu Scotiae, and
another at two marks proexecitu Wallia, etc. for his Welsh Army; exacting Mat.
Paris hist. min.
from the Ministers of the Church in the year following 400000 marks. Rub. lib.
in Sccrio.
And in the sixteenth year Scutagium assessum fuit pro exercitu Pictavia ad 3
Marcas, a Scutage was assessed at three marks for the Army in Poictou. Thus in
the space of seventeen years the State was delivered but thrice from
Impositions.

In the time of Henry the third, Ex Rub. lib. in Sccrio and Joan. Eversden.
upon the Henry 3.
Clergy, Nobility and Gentry there was assessed fifteen Scutages; one at ten
shillings, two at twenty, eight at two Marks, and four at forty shillings the
Knights Fee. Mat. Paris, and ex Rot. Claus. and finium an. 12, 13, 15, and 19
Hen. 3. and ex lib. Chart. Cantuar. Episc.
The land of the inferior sort twice taxed; first at two shillings, after at
half a Mark the Plow. Rot. Pat. anno 8 H. 3.
And two Tallages upon the land of the Crown. Ex. Tho. Walsingham, and Mat.
Paris. Claus. anno 19 H. 3.
From out of the Lay Subjects moveable goods has been taken five times: as the
fortieth, the thirtieth, the twentieth and fifteenth parts, Ex Mat. Westmonast.
and once the sixteenth of the Clergy for this King. Ex statuto an. 4. c. 17.
Dors. claus. anno 16 H. 3. and Eversden.
A Tenth he nine times imposed upon the Church: six times for a year only, and
by it self; once accompanied with the First Fruits: once for three years; and
once for five. Ex lib. Cantuar. Episc.
Besides two Aides, the one moderate, the other called Ex Eversden and Paris.
gravis exactio, a heavy exaction, and worthily, if to the eight hundred Marks
imposed upon Ex Matthew. Paris and Eversden and Dors. claus. anno 16 H. 3.
S. Edmunds Bury all the other Abbyes were rated accordingly. Ex Walt. Gisborn.
And by the account of Willihelmus de Middleton Rad. Cistrensis, ex Eversden,
Paris and lib. Chart. Cant. Archiep. anno 8 H. 6.
he received in the time of his Government de exitu Judaismi 402000 (...) And
as in all the fifty six years of his reign (excepting five) either the Church
or Commonwealth were charged with contribution-money to relieve the expense of
war; so were they grieved with other Exactures, either for Carriages, or
Victuals, or personal attendance. In the sixteenth year the inhabitants of
Winchelsey were enjoined. Ex Joan. Eversden, Pat. an. 3 E. 1. m. 26.
ut providerent december bonas naves and magnas ad transfretandum in Pictaviam in
servitium Regis, to provide ten good and sto^ ships for the Kings service in
Poictou. Rot. claus. an. 26 Hen. 3.
And at another time twenty, Dunwich and Ipswich five a piece, and the Ports
proportionable, all at their own charge. In the same year Ex H. Mat. Paris. p.
5171.
and for the same service there was transported ten thousand quarte^ of wheat,
five thousand of Oats, and many Bacons. The Church not forborne in those
charges (...) For from Winchester Ex Rot. lib. an. 26 H. 3.
two thousand quarter of Wheat and Oats, and one thousand of Beam was taken.
Ex Hist. Mat. Paris.
The other Bishops and Clergy bearing their parts of victuals in the like
Exactions, coming -- ut unda supervenit undae acsi esset Anglia puteus
inexhaustus, as wa^ follows wave, as if England were a pit nev^ to be drawn
dry. Dors. claus. a^no 14 H. 3. 8. and claus. 12 H. 3. m. 2.
In the twelfth and fourteenth the King levieth Soldiers for his wa^ beyond
Sea, collecting pro Exercitu suo de s^ gulis duabus Hidis, upon every two Hides
unu^ hominem bonum secure, and to bring secum v^ ctualia victuals with them:
and those for whose service the King dispensed, and quos R^ vult remanere in
partibus suis, and such as he pleased should continue at home, to contribute
victuals to those that went for forty days: commanding the Sheriffs Claus. an.
14 H. 3. n. 7.
to swear all ad Arma qui post cum remanebant in Anglia, in forma qua jurati
fuerant tempore Joannis Patris sui, to Arms, who stayed behind him in England,
after the manner they were sworn in the time of King John his father; by which
Ordinance of King John all able Subjects from Youth to decrepit Age were bound
to arm themselves, and be in continual readiness, Claus. an. 16 H. 3. m. 11.
a ^^ro usque ad mane from night to morning, (for ^o the Record is) to attend
the Kings pleasure. And therefore Henry the third in anno 14. Claus. an. 14 H.
3. m. 9.
mandavit Vicecomitibus quod venire faciant ^d exercitum Regis homines juratos
ad fer^um, commanded the Sheriffs to send all those ^o his Army who had been so
sworn, bringing with them Loricas, Habergiones, etc. Coats of Maile,
Habergeons, etc. and to such as neglected this service he sent his Writs,
reprehending them at first, Claus. in Dorso, an. 15 Hen. 3.
jurgatorie eo quod, etc. tartly ^or that, etc. and after fining them according
(...) their abilities and Tenures. Taking Rot. finium 26 H. 3. m. 4.
an. 26. ^f Willihelm. de Umfrevile pro quietatione pas^agii, for the securing
of his passage into Gas^oign 100 Marks; and so in proportion of many there is.

Edward the first exacted from the land of his Edward 1.
^ubjects four times Scutage, assessed every time (...) forty shillings the
Knights Fee. And once an Aid called Auxilium novum, a new Aid, which he
farmed out for ready money. Of the Rents of the Clergy he took a Tenth part
twice for one year, and once for six: and the twentieth part twice from both
the Provinces, and once for two years from Canterbury only.

The possessions of the Priors Aliens he seized once into his own hands,
putting the Monks to a bare Pension of eighteen pence a week. Of the goods of
the Clergy he took the thirtieth, the fifteenth, and the fifth part once, the
Moiety three times, and the Tenth seven times; whereof the Grant was first for
two years, and then for three years, and once for six years. Rot. Pat. anno 25
E. 1. m. 3. sced.
Of the goods of the Commons the eighth, and the ninth, and the twelfth part he
took once, twice severally the tenth and eleventh, the Sessors being sworn to
levy and rate truly. Three times he had the fifteenth part, and once the moiety
of a fifteenth. From the Clergy and Laiety together the King had granted of
their Movables (...) tenth, a fifteenth, and a thirtieth part. Of the Cities
and Boroughs, besides a great Loan, once the seventh and eighth, and twice the
sixth part From the Merchants a twentieth, and a seven^ portion once of their
Commodities; imposin^ a new Custom of a Noble upon every Sa^ of Wool which he
let out to Farm. And under pretense of some breach of Amity wi^ those parts
whither his Merchants traded, (...) seized anno 22. Rot. Vascon. anno 22 E. 1
m. 8.
all the Wools into his hand^ and made of them instant Sale to the best val^
leaving them upon security to a short price a^ a long day of payment. He took
Ex Rot. Vasco. an. 22 E. 1. m. 17.
the sa^ year, to the distaste of the Pope and murm^ of the Clergy, all the
money gathered in su^ dium Terrae Sanctae, for the succor of the H^ Land, to
furnish his Journeys. Upon the p^ sons of his Subjects he imposed one Tallage,
Ex Rot. Vas. an. 22 E. 1.
sessed either in communi in general, or per capita by the Poll. And twice the
like upon the Jews: whereof the one amounted to fifty thousand Marks. Neither
were his people by continual payment (for there was but one year of
intermission all his Reign) freed from attendance in their Persons. For in
record there appears plentifully his writs to the Sheriffs: as Rot. Pat. anno
31 E. 1.
an. 31. de peditibus eligendis de tota Anglia, for the choosing of
foot-Souldiers throughout all England; and to be found and furnished by their
several Countries: calling Ex Hist. Joan. Eversden.
his Earls, Barons and Knights to personal service according to their Tenures.

His Son the second Edward assessed upon the Edward 2.
lands of his Subjects twice Scutage; once at two Marks, and once at forty
shillings the Knights Fee. From the Revenues of the Clergy rated by the book of
Tenths, he at distinct times took 4 d. 5 d. and 12 d. in the Mark; and once the
fifteenth part of the whole. From the goods of the Clergy a Tenth for three
years. And twice Claus. an. 8 E. 2. m. 9.
a Loan from the Abbots and Bishops. From the Laiety (besides a Tallage of
their Movables) in Cities and Buroughs once a tenth, twice a fifteenth, and
twice a twentieth part of their goods. Besides a Loan from the Commons, and ten
shillings borrowed upon every Sack of Wool from Merchant Strangers, and a Noble
from others. Claus. 16 E. 2. Claus. anno 12 E. 2.
From the Clergy and Laiety together of their goods a tenth, a fifteenth, and
twice an eighteenth part, besides a Loan. He augmented his fathers new Custom
with an Imposition of a Noble more upon every Sack of Wool. And anno 10. Ex
memor. Sccrii. an. 10 E. 2. ex part Rem. Thes^ur.
quia exitus Regni sui and terrarum, because the profits of his Realm and
dominions elsewhere, together with all the money granted by the Church and
Laiety, ad sumptus Belli sufficere noluit, was not enough to defray the charges
of his wars, and that he must infinitam pecuniam effundere, spend a vast deal
of money; he sesseth and increases an Imposition upon all Commodities inward
and outward to an extreme Rate; and caused the Commons in every Shire to lay
down money in deposito to pay his Soldiers; and took from the Nobility and
Gentry a large contribution toward his wars; and seized Rot. Vascon. anno 22
E. 2. m. 13. in sced.
omnes Lanas and Coria Mercatorum, data securitate Possessoribus de rationabili
pretio postea solvendo, All the Wools and Hides of the Merchants, giving
security to the Owners that a reasonable price should be paid for them
afterward. He charged the Ports and Sea-Towns twelve several years ad costos
suos and sumptibus villarum, at their own costs, and the charge of the Villages
about them, (as the Record says) to set to Sea in his service Ships furnished
Armis and victualibus, with Arms and Victuals; sometimes for one month, as
anno 11. Rot. Scot. anno 11. m. 17.
sometimes for four as Rot. Scot. anno 12. m. 8.
anno 12. and sometimes for seven as Rot. Pat. anno 4 E. 2.
anno 4. the number of Ships more or less as occasion required. In anno 17.
Dors. Claus. anno 17 E. 2. m. 11.
Southampton was charged with six, and an hundred and eighteen Sea-Towns more
with rateable proportions for the Kings service. Sometimes, as anno 18. Claus.
an. 18. m. 34.
embarguing all the Ships in any Port that were of forty Tuns or upwards, as
an. 20. or of fifty Tuns and upward, as ^n. 23. Ex Rot. Vascon. m. 29.
contra hostiles aggressus Gallorum, against ^he hostile attempts of the
French. Causing ^he Town of Southampton anno 6. Claus. an. 6 E. 2.
to build (...) Galley for themselves of an hundred and twenty Oars.
Commanding all the Sheriffs for pro^ision of Victual, as Rot. Scot. anno 1, 2,
3. m. 10. and an. 4. m. 5. and an. 9. and Rot. Pat. anno 10. m. 12.
anno 1, 2, 3, 4, 9. to provide de Exitibus Comitatuum certum proti^m, at the
charge of the County a certain Rate, ^o the proportion sometimes of thirty
thousand five hundred Quarters of Corn and many Ba^ons, as anno 16. Rot. Pat.
an. 16. m. 3.
and to send them to the Kings Army. As also Rot. Scot. anno 8. m. 9.
Carrecta and Carracum Equis and Bobus, Carts and Wagons with Oxen and Horses
out of the Counties severally for the ^se of war. Sometimes he made the Ports
to ^end provision themselves, as anno 7. Rot. Scot. Dorso, anno 7. m. 8.
and ^ot to suffer any Ships with victuals Dors. claus. anno 16. m. 3.
ibidem discariari, to be there unladed, but to order them by security for
those parts where the Kings Army was lodged.

And not sparing the Church, exacted Rot. Scot. anno 1, 2, 3. m. 8.
his three first years Frumenta and alia victualia pro exercitu suo, Corn and
other Victuals for his Army from them.

Besides the former Charges, the Persons of Men, as well of the Nobility as
meaner rank, were at their own Charge often enjoined to serve by reason of the
wars. Rot. Scot. anno 8 E. 2. Dors. Claus. anno 9.
As in an. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 16. Claus. an. 16 E. 2.
of this King, when they were called singulatim man by man, as well Widows as
Knights Ex Dors. claus. 7 E. 2. m. 7.
and Noblemen, and such as held forty pound land according to their Tenures,
Claus. an. 16. m. 20.
sub forisfactura terrarum and Catallorum, Equis and Armis, sumptibus propriis,
to appear with Horse and Arms, at their own charge, under penalty of
forfeiting their Lands and Chattels; and to provide de hominibus a^ Arma ultra
famulos suos consuetos, men for the service besides their ordinary Servants:
according to Augustus Ex Paterculo de Aug.
rule, Viri Foeminaeque ex Censu coactae dare Militem, both men and women were
forced to find their Soldiers. And of this the Clergy was not exempted Claus.
an. 16. m. 11. and cla. an. 15. m. 19.
anno 16. of this King. And out of every Town one sumptibus propriis, at their
own charges, for forty days, as anno 15. or for 60. as anno 9. or pr^ 7.
Septimanis for seven weeks, as anno 4. Rot. Scotiae anno 3 E. 2. m. 8. Dorso.
Sometimes a thousand in one Gounty, as anno 3 Rot. Scotiae an. 11. m. 16.
Sometimes an entire Army of eighteen thousand three hundred, an. 11. and Rot.
Pat. an. 15. m. 19.
forty eight (g) Claus. an. 18. m. 13.
thousand eight hundred at the charge of all the Counties anno 15. Rot. Scotiae
anno 12. m. 13.
London sumptibus Civitatis at the Cities charge, found 500. men for forry days
anno 12. and the like anno 18. contra insultus Regis Eranciae, against the
invasions of the King of France. Rot. Pat. an. 16. m. 27.
The King commanded anno 16. that all of forty shillings land and upwards
should rateably send to his service men; Rot. Pat. anno 9. m. 22. Dors. Cla.
10. m. 26. Claus. anno 15. m. 13. Rot. Pat. anno 16. m. 27.
And an. 9, 10, 15, and 16. that all jurati ad arma, sworn to Arms, or from
sixteen to sixty, secundum Statutum Wincestriae, according to the Statute of
Winchester, should attend their Services. Rot. Scotiae anno 13. m. 2.
And anno 13. enjoined all from twenty to sixty to be armed and victualled at
their own charge. Dors. claus. anno 6. m. 28. Rot. Scotiae anno 7. m. 2. claus.
anno 8. m. 30. claus. an. 16. m. 12. Rot. Scotiae an. 12. m. 6. Rot. Pat. anno
18. m. 21.
And commanded the Sheriffs annis 6, 7, 8, 12, 16 and 18. to see all the able
men of England so furnished, that Parati sint and muniti ad veniendum ad Regem
quando vocati fuerint, they should be provided and in a readiness to march to
the King when he she them, their weapons to be provided ad (...) ^ncolarum, at
the charge of their neig^ dwellers: and themselves enjoined to must^ train
every six weeks. If any neglected h^ted service, there was sent to the Sheriff
^it de habenda a Rot. claus. anno 15 E. 2. ^n. 14. Rot. finium, anno 15. m. 16.
^llos coram Concilio, qui praemo^ cum venerunt ^n expeditione Regis, to bring
them before the Council, who knowing of it before, refused the expedition, as
anno 15. 1. the parties imprisoned, and their goods seized into the Kings
hands, as Rot. claus. anno 9. Rot. Pat. anno 16. m. 12.
anno 9. and 16. or else redemption by fine, as the Rot. claus. anno 15. m. 19.
Sheriffs of Buckingham and Bedford did their men for six hundred Marks anno
15. The owner of forty shillings land to redeem his first default Rot. Scotiae
anno 13 E. 2. m. 1.
cum tertia part Bonorum, with the third part of his Goods; the second cum
tota residua, with the remaining parts; at the third, sint Corpora little ad
voluntatem Regis, their Bodies to be at the Kings disposal; and of Knights, qui
non fuerunt in exercit^ Regis, 20 l. de qualibet Hida, which were not in the
Kings Army, 20 l. for every Hide, as Claus. an. 13. m. 20.
anno 13.

I have the longer insisted upon this King, that tanquam in speculo, as in a
glass we may behold the intolerable miseries of the Nobility and Commons
inseparably accompanying the times of War.

Edward the third charged Pat. an. 48 E. 3. m. 10.
the lands of his Edward 3.
Subjects twice forty shillings of every Knights Fee; and five pound sixteen
shillings of every Parish in the forty eighth year of his Reign. Out of the
Goods of the Commons he took once the ninth part, and fifteenth of Forest and
Waste; twice the tenth, thirteen times a fifteenth for one year, and twice for
th^ars: and once the twentieth part of all move^ and thirty thousand Sacks of
Wool upon co^. Of the Buroughs and Cities, four Tenths, (...) one for three
years. From the Lords the ten^eaf, Lamb, and Fleece: who with the Bishops ^d
Knights grant twenty thousand Sacks of Woll for payment of the Kings debts,
giving in the interim security themselves by Bond to the Earl of Britain, to
whom their Sovereign stood engaged. Of the Clergy alone one Tenth for four
years, three for three years, and one for one year. Besides a Contribution in
the twelfth of his Reign, seizing in the same year all the Goods of the Cluny
and Cistertian Monks. Of the Church and Laity together he received six times
the tenth of all their Movables. From the Merchants and State a Subsidy of
Wool for three years. Imposing anno 33. 26 s. 8 d. upon every Sack
transported: which doubled the Impositions of his Father and Grandfather.
Advancing it after for six years to forty shillings: and in anno 38. (being the
year he resumed his Style of France) to 46 s. 4 d. the Sack of Wool. Taking
Poundage 6 d. of all Commodities inward and outward and enjoining the Merchants
for every Sampler of Wool transported to return in forty shillings Bullion to
his Mint. Ex Rot. Alman. an. 12. m. 17.
Himself becoming Merchant of all the Tin in Devonshire and Cornwall anno 12.
in auxilium supportationis onerum Belli, to help him bear the burden of his
wars: assesting upon the heads of his Subjects a fine of 4 d. severally anno
51. Besides in Claus. an. 20 E. 3. m. 22. in dorso.
anno 20. he took a Loan of the Bishops, Abbots, Justices, and aliis
potentioribus Regni, de diversis pecuniarum Summis, inter Summas de 1000 l. and
40 l. and other wealthy men of his Realm, in several sums of money, betwixt
the sums of 1000 l. and 40 l.

In the first of his Reign Claus. an. 1 E. 3. Rot. Sco. anno 1 E. 3.
he commands all the Sea-towns to attend with Ships his service, sumptibus
propriis and duplici Eskeppamento, at their own proper charge, and with double
Skippage, and to provide as many as they can of sixty Tun and upwards. And the
year following Claus. an. 2 E. 3.
lays the like charge upon seventy six Port-Towns for all Ships of forty Tun
and more. And an. 10. Claus. an. 10.
the like at their own charge, besides a contribution of money, Rot. Scotiae
anno 10. m. 9. and Rot. Alman. an. 12. m. 12.
for payment whereof the Officers are commanded, ut eas per districtiones and
alias punitiones prout expedire viderint compellent, to force it by
distraining, and what other punishments they shall find expedient. Injoyning
such Merchants of London, qui ex transmarinis passagiis lucra adquirunt, who
had traffic in foreign parts, to furnish Ships for war at their own Charge.
Rot. Scotiae anno 13 E. 3. m. 15.
And anno 13. the Cinque Ports set out to sea thirty Ships, and maintain them
during the service, half at their own, half at the Councils charge. Four score
Ships being furnished and defrayed by the Out-Ports, the Admiral directed to
embargue all other Ships for the Kings service. Rot. Scotiae anno 10 E. 3.
And although the Subject found this an infinite grievance, yet could he (upon
humble complaint in Parliament) receive no further relief, than that the King
would not have it otherwise than before. Rot. Alman. an. 1 E. 3. m. 2.


For Provision of his Arms, the King took at one time, and at a rate of loss to
the Subject, nineteen thousand quarters of Grain, two thousand two hundred Oxen
salted, and three thousand Bacons; besides of other Provisions an infinite
quantity. Rot. Scotiae anno 10. m. 17.
The like very frequent all his Reign^ pro guerris necessariis, ubi id magis
commode fie^ poterat, for the necessities of his wars, where (...) could be
done with more convenience.

The Persons of all his meaner Subjects from sixteen to sixty he causes Rot.
Scotiae anno 1. m. 2.
to be armed in readiness ad praemonitionem 5. dierum, at five days warning;
the Decrepite to contribute ad expens^ praemissorum, toward the expenses of
the rest: an^ to arrest the Bodies of the disobedient, that (...) ipsis tanquam
de inimicis sumat vindictam, they might be dealt withal as enemies. Rot.
Scotiae anno 1.
The Gentry and Nobility supplying the King in his wars, and (...) their own
charge, Parla. an. 13 E. 3. Parla. anno 14 E. 3.
sometimes with seven or eigh^ hundred men at Arms, and two or three thousand
Archers, as anno 13. with other proportions (...) diverse years following. And
the Bishops ordered Rot. Franc. anno 46.
to furnish Armis and Equis competentibus, serviceable Arms and Horses, so many
as occasion required: and their Persons (together with the Lay Nobility)
commanded Claus. an. 1 E. 3. m. 1.
quod sint parati Equ^ and Armis and toto servitio debito, with Horse and Arms
and all necessary accoutrements to attend the King in his wars.

These wars (which as Edward the third professes himself in Parliament, Parl.
an. 22 E. 3. n. 9.
could not without his great danger and loss of Honor be maintained, unless by
perpetual Aid from the Subjects) were so grievous to them, that in anno 22.
they complain in Parliament of the miseries they underwent thereby: As of their
Aids advanced to forty shillings Fine, that by law should be but twenty
shillings. Their setting forth of men, and the Kings taking of their Victuals
without payment; The Sea left to the charge of their keeping, and from their
Woolls by way of Subsidy sixty thousand pound yearly exacted without Law;
besides the lending of two thousand Sacks, and themselves restrained from
transporting any. But such was the Necessity of these times, that neither they
had redress of their Complaint, nor the State one year discharged of
Contribution all his Reign.

Richard succeeding his Grandfather declares Richard 2. a Parl. an. 2, and 14.
Rot. 2. n. 2.
both a anno 2. and 14. that the great Wars he was left in, and the Territories
he inherited beyond Sea could not be maintained, except the Subject of this
Realm gave supply of means thereto. He therefore of the Clergy and Laity took
once the tenth of all their lands, and thrice of the goods of the Commons the
like entirely, and six times the half, twelve times a fifteenth, and six times
the moiety: And had anno 21. granted one Tenth to him, and a fifteenth and a
half of either of them yearly for the term of life. From out of the Buroughs
and Cities thrice a full Tenth, and once a Moiety. Out of all Merchandises he
received three years (...) d. in the pound, and once 12 d. And for every Tun of
Wine, and such Commodities, for two years six pence, doubling it for as many,
and ^ling it for three years after. The Custom of Wolls, etc. by Edward the
first rated at a Noble the Sack, and under his Son increased as much more, was
to this King advanced to twenty ^llings eight pence, which singly for eight
year (...) had granted unto him, besides once for three ^rs, and once for four,
having it after improved ^y four shillings four pence, and again to sorry three
shillings four pence the Sack. The sum of one of these Subsidies in anno 14.
amounted to one hundred and sixty thousand pound. From out of the goods of the
Clergy he had eight Tenths and a half; and one out of those and the Laiety
together; besides a Loan anno 5. of sixty thousand pound. By the poll or heads
of all his people from above fifteen years, he collected twice a Contribution,
assessed proportional from the Beggar to the Duke: Besides in strength of
Prerogative only, of every Ship and Fisherman six pence the Tun: the like of
Newcastle Coals, and of every Last of Corn inwards or outward the like sum.

To furnish his journey for Ireland he took their Horses, Armor, Cattle. Rot.
Pat. anno 2 R. 2. m. 3.
Hinc factus est suis Subditis invisus, Hereupon he came to be hated by his
People, says the Bishop of London. And so it seemed: For at his deposing, it
was one of the objected Articles against him.

He the first year of his Reign imposed upon his Subjects, as formerly his
Ancestors had done, a personal service ab anno primo, That all the Clergy
should array Armis and Equis competentibus, with serviceable Horses and Arms,
from the age of sixteen to sixty, and eos in Millenis and Centenis poni
faciant, and cause them to be entered into Regiments and Companies. And two
years after commanded all according to their Tenures by service to fit
themselves Equis and Armis, with Horse and Arms to attend the wars. But these
the courses of elder times were about this time much altered, and the King for
the most part ever supplied in his wars by contract with the Nobility and
Gentry, to serve him with so many men, and so long, and at such a rate as he
and they by Indenture accorded; of which there are in the Pell plenty yet
remaining. Thus under grievous burdens did the State labor continually all his
time; for his Treasury being wastefully emptied, was, as Tacitus says of
Tiberius, Tacit. lib. 2.
Scelere replendum, to be filled some ill way; by which he meant intolerable
racking of the people. Hence it was that often in this Kings time Rot. Parl.
annis 3, 4, and 5 R. 2.
the Subjects humbly beg some ease of the insupportable Tallages.

But he little regarding the tears or groans of his heartless People, answered
them as an. 4. That their Petition and his Honor could not consist together.
Rot. Parl. anno 1 H. 4. n. 32.
They again plead extreme poverty, in bar of further relief; complaining that
good money was transported, and the State enforced to use base; and that the
price of Wool by wars (to their utter impoverishing) was fallen, and that the
Kings want was only the ill government of his Revenues; and therefore crave to
have his present Officers removed: and very hardly would be drawn any more to
tax themselves, but conditionally, and with this Limitation, That their money
should be received, expended, and accounted for to themselves, and by
Treasurers of their own election; and are content to lend in the end; loading
this poor Kings dejected Fortune with the reproachful weight of these their
many Burdens.

Henry the fourth in thirteen years out of the Henry 4.
land of his people received twice relief; once auxilia de medietate Feodorum,
an Aid of the moiety of the Fees, and again a Noble out of every twenty pound
throughout all the Realm. Out of the Goods of the Commons four times a Tenth,
besides one for three years, and the like one and a half for two. By several
grants and years five Fifteens, besides one for two and one for three years.
Out of Staple Commodities of Woolls, Fells, etc. one Subsidy for one year, four
for two apiece, and one for three years. A Poundage at 8 d. once, four times
twelve pence, whereof the last was for two years. The like number and years of
the Tunnage, the first only rated at two shillings, the rest at three shillings
the Tun. Out of the Movables of the Clergy thrice a Tenth, and twice a
moiety; as also of every stipendary Minister, Friar, and such meaner of persons
six shillings eight pence apiece. Besides all these, of all he took anno 8. a
Hist. Tho. Walsingham.
Contribution it a gravis, so heavy, that it was granted ea condition, ne
trahatur in Exemplum, and ut Evidentiae post datum Computum cremarentur, upon
this condition, that it should not be made an Example to following times, and
that after the Account the Evidences should be burnt.

Next him succeeded his Son Henry the fifth; in Henry 5.
whose nine years Reign I find no charge imposed upon the Land of the Subjects.
Out of the Goods of the Commons he received six times the tenth and the
fifteenth entirely, and once two thirds only of Staple wares; a Subsidy once
for four years, and after for life: three shillings Tunnage, and twelve pence
poundage for the like terms as the former Subsidies. Thrice he had the Tenth of
his Clergy. And in the eighth of his Reign, when the Chancellor bewailed to him
in Parliament the Feebleness and Poverty of the People by reason of wars and
scarcity of money, he (who of as many attempts as he undertook, totidem fecit
Monumenta victoriae, raised himself so many Monuments of Victory,) yet for
redress and ease of those miseries (as Livy says of an excellent Soldier)
Pacem voluit etiam quia vincere potuit, he preferred Peace because he knew he
could overcome. And left in the ninth year of his Reign a peaceable succession
and Heir, nimium felix malo Henry 6.
suo, too happy to his own undoing, as the event proved. For retaining nothing
ex paterna Majestate praeter speciem nominis, of his Fathers Greatness more
than the specious Name of a Great King, by Fear and Facility he laid the way
open to his Factious Ambitious Kindred, to work themselves into popular Favor,
and himself into Contempt: which was soon done by leading the easy King by
Expense into Extremity, and the People into Burdens. For besides the
Resumptions he took of his own and Fathers Grants, (which was of purpose
plotted to make a consumption of Duty and Affection toward him) he out of the
old inheritance of his Subjects exacted six pence in the pound anno 14. and
doubled twice that valuation, not only on all lands purchased from the entrance
of Edward the first, but of all Freehold and Coppy-hold under 200 l. and two
in twenty of all above. He further imposed first six shillings eight pence, and
then twenty shillings upon every Knights Fee. Out of the goods of the Commons
he had six tenths, whereof one for three years, besides three moieties, and one
third; of fifteens three halfs, one third, and eight entire, of which there was
of two a three years grant. Besides these former, out of the Woolls he had
37107 l. raised by a moiety of a tenth and fifteenth, and again of all goods
six shillings eight pence in the pound. Of the Merchant, of Subsidies rated as
in former times, he had them by grant once but for a year; the like doubled for
two, and trebled for three and a half. This Subsidy advanced to thirty three
shillings four pence of Denisons, and fifty three shillings four pence of
Aliens. The Sack of Wool was twice granted for four years at a time, and anno
31. for term of the Kings life. Besides a Subsidy alone of Aliens goods,
Tonnage and Poundage improved to six shillings eight pence he took in his
eighteenth year. And after the Rates of his Fathers time he had it first thrice
by his several grants and years, then as often for two years, and again by a
new grant for five years, and in the end for term of his life. Of the Clergy
he had besides one half of Dismes, four entire tenths. And by the State in
general an. 31. two thousand Archers maintained for half a year at the common
Charge. By the Poll he exacted anno 18. of every Merchant Stranger if a
householder sixteen shillings apiece, if none six pence. And anno 27. six
shillings eight pence of every such Stranger, and twenty pence of their Clerks.
An. 31. he had granted for term of life ten pounds a year of all Inhabitants
mere Aliens, and a third less of Denizons, and twenty shillings of every
Stranger Merchant that came into the land. The first Monopolies Nota First
Monopoly.
I find were grounded upon the extremities of these times; for in anno 29. the
Spinellos, Merchants of Genua, had by grant for eight thousand pound the sole
Trade of many Staple-Commodities. As the Merchants of Southampton had all
Allome for the like sum. Yet for all the Contributions, Taxes and Shifts,
(whereby the impoverished People were enforced to petition redress; for which a
Parliament was anno 10. summoned only,) the Kings Coffers were so empty, and
the yearly Revenues so short, as the Lord Trea^^r^r was constrained Rot. Parl.
an. 11 H. 6.
an. 11. to complain in Parliament of the one, and declared there the other to
want thirty five thousand pound of the needful expense, as the best motive to
work a Relief from the Commonwealth: which was b^he people in part effected.
Rot. Parl. an. 18 Hen. 6. n. 38.
But by anno 18. the debts were swollen again so great, that the Parliament was
reinforced not only to see them, but to support and victual his household. Thus
was this unhappy Princes Reign all war and waste: and in the end, as one says
of Ex P^terculo.
Lepidus, a Militibus and a fortuna deserebatur, being forsaken both of
Soldiers and Fortune, he was left a while to a disgraced life, s^ quam tueri
non poterat dignitate, and despoiled of that Dignity which he was not able to
maintain:

Edward the fourth, Rot. Parl. an. 2, and 8 E. 4.
besides two resumptions Edward 4.
not only of the Grants of such Kings as he accounted de facto, and not de jure
to Reign, but also of those made by Placita coronae.
himself, and that Sea of profit that by infinite Attaintures flowed daily into
his Treasury, took notwithstanding of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal only a
Tenth of their yearly possessions, and of the Commons six Tenths, three
quarters; and the like proportion of Fifteens: A Benevolence in anno 14. which
Chron. Fabiani.
Fabian calls a new Contribution: And charged them Rot. Parl. anno 12 E. 4.
n. 8.
anno 12. with wages of his Archers to a sum of 51117 l. Of the Merchant he
had Tonnage and Poundage for term of life. Besides of Strangers, as well
Denizons as others, a Subsidy the Rot. Parl.
twenty second year of his Reign. Leaving his Kingdom in the next to the few
days of his son Edward the fifth. For, Edward 5.
Osten dunt terris hunc tantum Fata, nec ultra
Esse sinunt. --
The Fates only showed him to the world, and took him away again.

Richard his Brother succeeded, homo ingeniosissime nequam, and facundus malo
publico, a Richard 3.
man most ingeniously mischievous, and full of Art to beguile the people. He to
make a just semblance of his unjust entry, besides his Act of Parliament full
of dangerous Untruths, dissembled the part of an excellent Prince, making the
Commons believe by a Statute, to which he gave first form, as life, discharging
them for ever from all exactions called Benevolences, that his opinion was,
Ditare magis esse Regium quam ditescere, that it was more King-like to enrich
his Subjects, than to grow rich himself. Whereas he did but lively imitate
Nero, that took away the law Manlia de vectigalibus, only ut gratiosior esset
populis, to ingratiate himself the more with the people. And so all his short
Reign I find recorded but once any Tax upon the people, and that was Tenths
granted by the Clergy of both Provinces.

Henry the seventh succeeding, resumed in the Henry 7.
third of his Reign most of the grants of Office made by the Usurper or his
Brother, and assessed upon the land only of his Subjects but one Aid in anno
19. out of their Goods and Lands a tenth penny, and of their Goods only three
times the Tenth, five Fifteens, besides a Tenth and Fifteenth arising to
120000l. He took three Subsidies, whereof the last was not above 36000l. Fabiar.
and one Benevolence, the proportion of every Alderman b^g 300l. and the entire
sum of the City of London 9688 l. 17 s. 4 d. Of the Clergi^e had twice the
Tenth, and 25000 l. by way of Subsidy. Ex litera missa Abbatiss. Barking manu
Regis H. 7.
And of them and the Commons two Loans; the City of Land. rated at 6000 l. the
other not definite in proportion, but so assessed as Commissioners and the
Lenders could agree.

And as well to ease the expense of wars, as issue of the good money going over
to Bullen, Ex litera Ducis Norfolciae.
he stamped an allayed Coin then usually termed Dandeprats: A course that
necessity after enforced his Son and Successors to practice, and is an apparent
Symptom of a consumed State. But that whereby he heaped up his mass of
Treasure, ( Ex lib. Acquit. int. Regem and Dudly R. C.
for he left in Bullion four millions and a half, besides his Plate, Jewels,
and rich attire of house) was by sale of Offices, redemption of Penalties,
dispencing with Laws, and such like, to a yearly value of 120000 l.

His Successor, reaping the fruit of his Fathers Henry 8.
labor, gave ease of burden to the Subjects his first two years; taking
within the compass of his other thirty four three Tenths of the Commons, four
Fifteens, six Subsidies, whereof that an. 4. amounted to 16000 l. and that anno
7. 110000 l. Tonnage he had and Poundage once for a year, and after for term of
life. Of the Clergy four Tenths by one grant, and three by several, every of
them not less than 25084 l. Of Subsidies he had one of the Province of
Canterbury, another of both; the Stipendary Ministers there to be taxed
according to the rate of their wages. In anno 22. they granted a moiety of all
their Goods and Lands, payable by equal portion in five years, every part
arising to 95000 l. And not long after he had added 150000 l. to the yearly
Revenues of his Crown, by an inhumane spoil of sacred Monuments, and impious
ruin of holy Churches, if Gods blessing could have accompanied so foul an Act.
And as these former Collections he grounded upon Law, so did he many upon
Prerogative: As Benevolences and Loans from the Clergy and Commons. Of the
first there were two remarkable, that in anno 17. acted by Commissioners, who
as themselves were sworn to Secrecy, so were they to swear all those with whom
they conferr or contract. The Rates directed by instructions, as the thirds of
all Goods, Offices, Land above 20 l. and the fourth under. And although the
Recusants (whether from Disobedience or Inability) are threatened with
Convention before the Council, Imprisonment, and Consiscation of Goods: yet in
the Ex originali signat. man^ Regis.
Design Original under the Kings hand, it has so fair a name as an Amicable
Grant. The other about Ex originali Instructione.
an. 36. exacteth out of all Goods, Offices, land from forty shillings to 20 l.
8 d. in the pound, and of all above 12 d. And amongst the many Loans, there is
none more notorious than that of an. 14. Ex instruct. originali an. 14 H. 8.
which was 10 l. in the hundred of all Goods, Jewels, Utensils, and Land from
20 l. to 300 l. and twenty marks of all above, as far as the Subjects Fortune,
revealed by the extremity of his own Oath, would extend. And to stop as well
intentions if any had been, as expectations of repayment of such Loans, Rot.
Parl. an. 21 H. 8.
the Parliament in an. 21. acqui^teth the King of every Privy Seal or Letter
Miss^ve.

Edward the sixth his Son, besides Tonnage and Edward 6.
Poundage for life, an. 1. received of his Lay-Subjects six Fifteens, and of
both three Subsidies, leaving one of the Temporalty ungathered: which his
Sister Mary remitted in an. 1. of her reign; yet Q. Mary.
after (incited by the French King succouring her Rebels, and suffering her
money adulterated in his Dominions, purposely to be hither transported, as also
to side the quarrel of Philip her husband against him) being drawn into wars,
she was enforced to press upon her people, who besides the Loan in an. 3. and
Tonnage and Poundage an. 1. for term of life granted unto her by Parliament,
took five Fifteens of the Commons, and of them and the Clergy three years
Subsidies.

Her Sister of happy memory succeeding, besides Q. Elizabeth.
diverse Loans of her people and others in foreign parts, (as anno 5. when
William Herle was dispatched into Germany to take up at Interest for six years
great sums of money, the like anno 18. from the Merchants of Colen and
Hamburgh upon Bond of the City of London, and again of Spinello and Pallavicini
upon the former security, strengthened with the assurance also of many of her
chiefest Counselors) had by grant of her Subjects thirty eight Fifteens,
twenty Subsidies of the Commons, and eighteen of the Clergy. All which
together rose to a sum of two Millions and 800000 l.

HAving thus far (with as light a hand as I Princes extremities beyond the ease
of their people by reason of wars. Credit of Kings so much impaired, that they
could not borrow, but upon surety and extreme interest.
could) drawn down the many and mighty burdens of the Commonwealth, if but
with a touch of the Princes Extremities beyond the ease of these former helps I
heighten up this draught, it will with much more life and luster express the
Figure of wars Misery. Matthew. Paris.
The Credit of Kings it has brought to so low an ebb, that when by force of
necessity they borrowed money, they could not take it up but by collateral
security, and extreme Interest. As Edward the third in the Patent to Rot. Pat.
anno 13 E. 3. m. 13.
William de la Poole confesses that propter defectum pecuniae negotia sua
fuerunt periculosissine retardata, for want of money his affairs were
dangerously delayed, (they are the words of the record) and the honor of him
and his Royal Army magne fuit depressioni paterter expositus, and progressus
non sine dedecore suo perpetuo impeditus, he was brought to a manifest low
condition, and his proceeding to his great dishonor had been constantly
hindered; if De la Poole had not as well supplied him with the credit of his
Security, as with the best ability of his own Purse. For which service he
honored him and his posterity with the degree of Baronets, and five hundred
pound land Nota.
of inheritance.

The interest of Henry 3. ad plus quam centum quotidie libras ascenderat, ita
ut imminer^t tam Clero quam Populo Angliae Desolatio and Ruina, came to more
than a hundred pound a day, so that present ruin and desolation hung over the
heads as well of the Clergy as the People.

Queen Mary Ex Instruct. Thomae Gresham, anno 1557.
borrowed in Flanders at fourteen in the hundred, besides Brocage upon
collateral security.

The late Queen was enforced Ex Instruct. Willielm. Herle 16. August. an. 5
Eliz. Similiter.
to the like thrice with Strangers upon the City of Londons assurance, as
before, and with her Thomae Gresham. 1563 and 76.
own Subjects after upon Mortgage of Land. A course more moderate than either
that of the first William, that took out of Churches such money as several men
had committed thither for more security: Ex litera Edw. Lee orat. Regis H. 8.
in Hisp. anno 28.
or that of Charles the fifth, that to repair the waste of his Italian wars,
went in person to Barcilona, to seize into his hands a Mass of money called
Depositum Tabulae, which as well Strangers as Subjects had there laid up in
Sanctuary. But these are not the conditions of Princes of our times only: for
in the lives of Caligula, Nero, and Vespasian, Suetonius of them severally
writes, Exhaustus and egenus Calumniis ^apinisque intendit animum, being drawn
dry and grown poor, they bent their minds to Calumnies and Rapines. For
Perniciosa res est in Imperante tenuitas, Want in a Prince is a dangerous
thing; and as Theodoricus said, Periculosissimum animal est Rex pauper, a Poor
King is the most dangerous creature living.

It has abated the Regalities of Houses; an. 16. Kings enforced to abate their
hospitality.
of Richard the second and 18. Ex Rot. Par. 18 H. 6.
of Henry 6. when as well from want of means, as the Subjects Petitions in
Parliament, (for Expeditissi^a est ratio augendi Census detrahere Sumpti^us,
the readiest way to raise the Revenue is to take down Expenses,) they have much
lessened their Hospitality; their Tables being either defrayed by their
Subjects, as of Henry the sixth, or as Henry the third, when by necessity Ex
hist. majori Matthew. Paris.
ita consueta Regalis Mensae hospitalitas abbreviata fuit, ut (postposita
solita verecundia) cum Abbatibus, Clericis, and viris satis humilibus hospitia
quaesivit and prandia; the wonted hospitality of the Kings Table was sunk so
low, that (without farther shame) he many times lodged and dietted with Abbots,
Clerks, and very mean Persons.

It has caused our Kings to sell and alien^ Kings enforced to pawn and sell
their Dominions.
the possessions of the Crown: as Henry the thi^ Rot. Pat. anno 51 H. 3. m. 17.
who gave to Edward his son Licentiam (...) pignorundi terram Vasconiae, leave
to pawn (...) Duchy of Gascoign; And caused himself (...) long after by the
like occasions, to sell (...) 300000 l. (except some pittances reserved) (...)
Ex contract. orig. and Hist. Norman.
entire Signiory of Normandy. What (...) late Mistress and her Father did, is
yet fresh (...) memory. But this mischief has trenched (...) into the Fortunes
and Affections of the Subje^ when Princes to repair the breach of their (...)
Revenues, have often resumed the possessions (...) their people; as Rot. Vasc.
5 E. 2. Rot. ^n^um an. 8. Rot. cui titulus, extract. de donationib. a. 9. and
10 E. 2. Kings enforced to make Resumption of their Lands.
Edward the second an. 5, (...) and 10. Omnes donationes per Regem factas (...)
damnum and diminutionem Regis and Coronae (...) all the Grants made by the King
to the lesse^ and prejudicing of the King and his Crow^ Rot. Parl. anno 1 R. 2.
Richard the second anno 1. did the like of^ Grants made to unworthy persons by
his Gran^ father, and recalled all Patents dated since (...) fortieth of Edward
the third. Thus did Henry (...) Rot. Parl. anno 1 Hen. 5. n. 12.
an. 1. and Rot. Parl. anno 28 H. 6. and E. 4.
Hen. 6. in the twenty eighth (...) his Reign, Edward 4. in anno 3. and 12. A^
Hen. 7. in an. 3. with all Offices of his Cro^ granted either by the Usurper or
his Broth^ Neither is this in it self unjust, since as well (...) reason of
State as Rules of best Government, (...) Revenues and Profits Ex legibus
Theodos. and Valentinian. in Codice.
quae ad sacrum Pa^ monium Principis pertinent, which belong to (...) sacred
Patrimony of the Prince, should remain (...) and unbroken.

But when neither Credit, Frugality, or S^ Kings enforced to pawn and sell
their Jewels.
of Lands would stop the gulf of want, o^ Princes have been so near beset, as
with Ner^ ^d Antonius the Emperors to sell and pawn ^eir Jewels. The
Archbishop of York had ^ower from Henry the third an. 26. Rot. Pat. anno 26 H.
3. m. 1. Similiter an. 56 H. 3. in 21. m.
(in wa^s ^yond Sea) impignorandi Jocalia Regis ubi^nque in Anglia pro pecunia
perquirenda, to ^wn the Kings Jewels any where in England to ^ise money. Rot.
Pat. Claus. an. 2 E. 1. m. 7.
Edward the first sends Egi^ius Andevar ad Jocalia sua impignoranda, to ^awn
his Jewels. Claus. an. 1 E. 3.
Edward the third pawn^h his Jewels to pay the L. Beaumont and the ^rangers
their wages in war. The Black Tho. Walsingham.
Prince was constrained to break his Plate into Mo^ey to pay his Soldiers.

Ex origin. de anno 6 R. 2. Rot. 17.
Richard the second pawned Vasa aurea and ^iversa Jocalia, Vessels of Gold and
diverse ^ewels to Sir Robert Knowles. Pat. an. 3 H. 4. m. 3.
Henry the ^urth anno 3. to a Merchant for money invadi^vit Tabellam and
Triscllas suas Argenteas de ^ispania, engaged his Tablet and stools of Silver
which he had from Spain. Pat. an. 10 Hen. 6. Pat. anno 12 H. 6. m. 13.
Henry the sixth ^ageth and sells to the Cardinal of Winchester and others
an. 10, 12, and 29. Pat. an. 29 H. 6. m. 20.
many par^els of his rich Jewels. And the late Queen in ^e end of her days (to
ease her Subjects) did the ^ke with many in the Tower.

And Extremity has yet stretched some of our Kings enforced to pawn their
Regal Crown.
Kings to so high a strain of Shift, that Edward ^e third Pat. Pars 1. an. 17
E. 3.
invadiavit magnam Coronam An^liae, pawned his Imperial Crown three several
^mes; an. 17. in partibus transmarinis in for^aign parts, and twice to Sir John
W^senham his ^erchant, first in the Pat. an. 24. m. 21.
twenty fourth, and after Claus. an. 30 E. 3. Com. de Ter. Hill. 38 E. 3. ex
part Rem. Regis.
an. 30. in whose custody it remained ^ight years. To Henry Bishop of
Winchester Henry the fifth invadiavit magnam Coronam auream, gaged his Imperial
Crown of Gold in (...) fifth of his Reign. And when Henry the thi^ had laid to
gage Pat. an. 5 H. 3. m. 23. and similiter an. 9. Rot. Pat. an. 51 H. 3. m. 17.
and 18.
omnia Insignia Regalia, (...) his Robes and Kingly Ornaments, and upon
assurance of redelivery or satisfaction had pawne^ Aurum and Jocalia Feretri S.
Edwardi Confess^ris, the Gold and Jewels belonging to the Shri^ of S. Edward
the Confessor, (A course mo^ moderate than by force to have taken, as Willi^
the Conqueror did the Chalices and Shrines (...) other Churches, or as Ex
historia Guicciardini.
Clement the seventh^ who to pay the Soldiers of Charles the fifth me^ed the
Consecrated Vessels) was in the end, wh^ he had neither means of his own left
nor reputation with others, constrained to beg relief of his Subject^ in this
low strain, (c) Pauper sum, omni destitu^ (a) Ex hist. S. Albani.
The sauro; necesse habeo ut me juvetis: nec aliqui^ erigo nisi per gratiam: I
am poor, and have (...) Treasure left; ye must needs relieve me: neither d^ I
demand any thing but of your mere love and courtesy: And turning to the Abbot
of Ramsey, to say, Amice, obnixe supplico quatenus me juvas mi^ centum libras
conferendo, My friend, I beseec^ thee for Gods sake to help me with an hundred
pound: adding withal majorem Eleemosyn^ fore sibi juvamen confer pecuniamve,
qu^ alicui ostiatim mendicanti, that it would be a greater deed of Charity to
contribute to his Wants, than to give to one that begged from door to door. So
that of the waste of these time^ and want of those Princes I may truly with the
Satyrist say, Ossa vides Regum vacuis exuta medullis.
Thou see the Bones of Kings spoiled of their Marrow.

IT now rests by some few particulars to observe In place of spoil the
Soldiers return oppressed with extreme Beggary.
with what Wealth we have returned ^ome, laden with the Spoils of our Enemies;
^ince no motives are so powerful to the Common greedy People as the hopes of
gain, which will ^asily enforce them

Lucan. de Bello Civili lib. 7.
Ire super gladios, superque Cadavera patrum,
Et caesos calcare Duces, --
Tread upon Swords, and on their Fathers Graves,
And spurn their slaughtered Captains --
In the Expeditions of Henry the third, their purchases were so great, that the
Mat. Paris page 580.
Londoners were more grieved at the intolerable Beggeries that the King and his
Army brought back, than for the expense of their own moneys: For Cum labor in
damno est crescit mortalis egestas,When Toil brings Loss, Begg'ry must needs
increase.

The same King, although called in by the Nobility of France Hist. Mat. Paris
p. 1358.
in Faction against their Master, returned no better rewarded than Consumpta
pecunia infinita, and Nobilibus and Militibus innumer abilibus vel Morti datis
vel infirmitati, vel fame attenuatis, vel ad extremam redactis paupertatem,
with the having spent an infinite deal of money, his Nobles and Soldiers
without number being either slain, or sickly, (...) maimed, or half-starved, or
else reduced to (...) tream poverty.

Innocentius the Pope repayed the expense (...) Henry the third and his people
in his Sicilian S^vice with no better wages than this Scoff, The England was
Mat. Paris page 909.
Puteus inexhaust us quem (...) lus poterat exsiccare, a Well not to be emp^
which no man could draw dry. What the succeeding times afforded may be well
gathered o^ of the many Petitions in Parliament, in the twenty second of Edward
the third, the fourth and seventh of Richard the second, the eighth of Henry^
the fifth, and tenth of Henry the sixth, ever complaining of the extreme
Beggary the people brought home, and desiring some speedy Relief.

The Treasure Ex lit. Cardin. Wolsri ad Card. So drin.
Henry the eighth spent in aid of Matoimilian about recovery of Veron^ nullum
aliud factum nisi damnum and dedec^ peperit, brought him nothing else but Loss
and Dishonor. For the Emperor having his turn served, delivered contrary to
Contract, that City to the French, threatening to Confederate with them, ni Rex
ei continuo persolveret, unless the King would forthwith pay him down a great
sum of money; believing as the words are) Minis and terrore ab hoc Rege
pecuniam posse haberi, that this King would part with his money upon
threatenings and great words. For the great Army of this King sent over into
France, and the Million almost of Crowns he supplied the Emperor and Duke of
Bourbon with in their wars of Millan, his People enduring new and unheard of
Taxes at home, and his Soldiers great Extremity abroad, he was himself at the
last of all, (their ends effe^^ed) having spent the Treasure of his Father, and
the Bounty of his Subjects, forsaken and ^^st as the Pasquil painted him, inter
Maysem, ^hristum and Mahumetem, betwixt Moses, Christ and Mahomet, with this
word, Quo me vertam ^^scio, Which way to turn me I know not. For ^wo Millions
of Ex Instruct. Rich. Wingfield.
Crowns bestowed in purchase ^f Tournay, not without suit of his own, he
deli^ered it with little or no recompense: and rated ^is potential Interest of
France at no greater ^umm than an Annuity Ex lit. Tho. Wolsey Episc. Lincoln.
of 100000 Crowns. What from the thirtieth of this King until the last ^f his
son Edward the sixth for Ex computo in Archivis Rob. Com. Salisb.
3173478 l. ^5 s. 4 d. spent at Sea and Land in Foreign wars, his State
received of inrichment, it seems so ^ean, as not worthy any place either in
Story or Accounts.

Until the late Queen was drawn into wars, ^he had in Treasure 700000 l. but
after she was ^nce entangled, it cost her before the thirtieth of ^er Reign
1517351 l. at which time she was but ^ntering into the vastness of her future
Charge: For the annual expense of 126000 l. in the Low Countries, from 1587.
until 1593. the yearly disbursement for Ex tractat. an. 1598.
Flushing and the Brill ^8482 l. the debts of the States 800000 l. and the
Aides of the French King since he attained to that Crown to above 401734 l. was
after that time. Thus by reason of war, besides Taxes upon her People to the
Sum of two Millions, and eight hundred thousand pounds by Subsidies, Tenths
and Fifteens, she has spent of her Lands, Jewels and Revenues an infinite
proportion.

As for the imaginary Profit grown by the many rich Spoils at Sea and Attempts
in Spain, it may be well cast up by two examples of o^ best Fortunes. The
Journey of Cales Ex computo deliberat. Domino Thesaur. Burleigh.
defrayed not the Charge to her Majesty by 64000^ And our times of most
advantage by Prizes between Ex computo Joannis Hawkins Thesaur. Naviae.
anno 30, and 34 of the Queen, wherein we received but 64044 l. defrayed not
the Charge of her Navy, arising in the same yea^ to 275761 l. As to the
greatest Loss, expense of Christian Blood, it may well susfice to bemo^ with
Hor. Epo. 7.
Horace,

Parumne Campis atque Neptuno superfusum est Latini sanguinis?
Neque hic Lupis mos nec fuit Leonibus Unquam, nisi in dispar, feris.
Is there as yet so little Latin Blood
Spilt on the Fields and Floods?
Nor Wolves nor Lions do we ever find
So cruel to their kind.
THe last motive from Utility is increase of Revenues to the public Treasury
by addition Foreign Dominions always charge, no benefit.
of Foreign Dominions. Which can receive no answer so full of satisfaction, as
to instance the particular Sums, exhausted in every Age to retain them.
Beginning first with the Duchi^ Example in Normandy.
of Normandy: For retention whereof William the Conqueror from hence, (as the
Mat. Par.
Author says) laden Thesauris innumeris, with unaccountable Treasure, exacted
sive per fa^ sive per nefas, in Normanniam transfretavit, gathered together by
hook or by crook, wafted over into Normandy. His Son Ex legibus antiquis.
ad retinendam Normanniam, Angliam excoriavit, to retain Normandy flayed off
Englands skin. To the same end by Ex Walt. Gisborn.
Henry the first, Anglia fuit bonis spoliata, England was despoiled of its
Goods. His Ex lib. Rubro.
Grandchild took Scutagium pro Exercitu Normanniae, a Scutage for his army in
Normandy three times at a high rate: and was enforced then against incursions
of the French to build and man Ex lib. Pipnell.
thirteen Castles de novo and integro, entirely new.

Richard the first Rad. Cogshall.
exacted heavily upon his people, ut potentes homines Regis Franciae sibi
conciliaret, ut terram propriam Normanniae tutaretur, therewith to make himself
friends amongst the most powerful Courtiers of France, so to keep quietly his
possessions in Normandy.

King John Mat. Paris
as wearied with the Charge neglected it: And his Son Ex Archiv. de redit.
Norman. tempore H. 3.
feeling a burden more than benefit, resigned his interest there for a little
Money. When it was again reduced by Henry the fifth, Ex origin. Instr. Domini
Scrope.
the judgment in Council was, That the keeping of it would be no less of
expense than to war forth for all France. In the quiet possession of his Son
Henry Ex libro Domini Carew de anno 1, and 2 H. 6.
(John Duke of Bedford then Regent) this Duchy cost the Crown of England 10942
l. yearly. Ex Rot. Par. de an. 11 H. 6.
In an. 10. ^t appears by the Accounts of the Lord Crom^wel Treasurer of
England, that out of the Kings Exchequer at Westminster the entertain^ent of
the Garrison and Governor was de^rayed, the Rents of the Duchy not supporting
^he charge ordinary. Ex lib. originali Roberti Cotton.
When Richard Duke of York was in the fifteenth year of Henry the sixth ^egent,
the certain Expense over-ballanced the Receipt 34008 l. And an. 27. Rot. Parl.
(...) 17 H. 6. n. 27.
the Lord Hastings Chancellor of France declares in Parliament, that Normandy
was not able to maintain it self. But thus it continued not much longer; for
this Crown was both eased of the Duchy and Charge shortly.

Of the Principality of Aquitain, the Duchy Aquitain, Gascoign, Guien.
of Gascoign, Guien and the Members, I find the state thus in record. In the
twenty sixth of Henry the third. Rot. liber. anno 26 H. 3.
there was issued from the Treasurer and Chamberlains at Westminster 10000 l.
for payments in Gascoign; besides an infinite proportion of Victuals and
Munition thither sent. To retain this Duchy in Duty and possession, Rot. an. 22
H. 6.
this King was enforced to pawn his Jewels, being are alieno graviter
obligatus, Thesauris, Donativis, Tallagiis, and extortionibus in Anglia
consumptis; very much indebted, and having spent all his Treasures, Grants,
Tallages, and other Extortions in England. Besides the people there at his
departure extorserunt ab eo confessionem quadraginta millia Marcarum, forced an
acknowledgment from him of 40000 Marks. And a Story of that time says of anno
38. Mat. Paris page 598.
Ille per multos labores and expensas inutiliter recuperavit Castra sua propria
Vasconiae, with a great deal of toil and expense, he unprofitably recovered
his own Castles in Gascoign; of which the Labor was more than ever the Benefit
could be.

And thus it appears to have continued; for an. 17. Ex Comput. Willi^lmde
O^erhampton, anno 17 E. 2.
of Edward the second, the money disbursed out of England to defray the
surcharge there came to 46595 l. 9 shillings 7 d. besides 29660 Quarters of
Grain, and of Beeves and Bacons an infinite proportion. In the first of Edward
the third Pat. an. (...) E. 3.
the issues of Gascoign were 10000 l. above the Revenues. The Signiories in
Aquitain Ex Comput. Richardi Longley an. 36 E. 3. in Thesaur. Regis Westmon. --
in Rot. Aquitaniae.
cost in eight years, ending the thirty sixth of this King, 192599 l. 4 shill.
5 d. de receptis forinsecis only, it was delivered in Parliament, an. 1 Rich.
2. Rot. Parl. anno 7 R. 2. m. 24.
that Gascoign, and some few other places that were then held in France, cost
yearly this Crown 42000 l. And in the seventeenth of this King Rot. Parl. anno
17 R. 2.
a Parliament was summoned for no other cause especial, than to provide money
to clear the annual expenses of those parts. The charge of Bordeaux Ex Comput.
Walt. de Weston.
but one Town, surmounting in half a year all Rents and perquisites there 2232
l. As Fronsack in Aquitain 5787 l. for double that time; when the entire Duchy
exceeded not 820 l. in yearly Revenues.

The Charge of Guien all the Reign of Henry the fourth Ex Comput. Tho. Swinburn
anno 10 H. 4.
was 2200 l. annually out of the Exchequer of England. By account Aquitain
(besides Guien 6606 l.) was the Ex Comput. Joannis Tiptoft an. 1 H. 5.
first of Henry the fifth in surplusage of charge 11200 l. and the Town of Ex
Comput. Will. Clifford and Robert. Holme an. 5 H. 5.
Bordeaux the five first years of the same King 6815 l. In the eleventh of Ex
Rot. Par. an. 11 H. 6.
Henry the sixth, Sir John Ratcliffe Steward of Aquitain received from the
Treasury of England pro vadiis suis, etc. 2729 l. and for expense in custody of
Fronsack Castle only he paid 666 l. 13 shill. the profits of the Duchy no
ways able to clear the Accounts.

The Benefit we reaped by any footing in Britany, Brittany.
may in a few Examples appear. Ex Mat. Paris.
Henry the third confesses that ad defensionem Britanniae non sufficiebant
Angliae Thesauri, quod jam per triennium comprobavit, that the Treasure of
England would not suffice to maintain Britany, which he had found to be true
upon three years trial: and left in the end tam laboriosis expensis amplius
fatigari, to tire himself farther with such Breast.
toil some expenses.

The Town of Breast Rot. Parl. anno 2 R. 2. Ex Comput. Tho. Parry Cust. Castri
de Breast, a. 9 R. 2. Callis.
cost Richard the second 12000 marks a year, and it stood him in an. 9. in
13118 l. 18 shill.

For Callis, I will deliver with as much shortness as may be, from the first
acquisition until the loss, in every age the Expense (for the most part either
out of the Treasury or Customs of England,) disbursed. Ex Comput. Williel.
Horwell in Thesaur. Regis.
From the eighteenth of Edward the third, until the one and twentieth, in which
space it was taken, the charge amounted to 337400 l. 9 shill. 4 d. Anno 28. of
the same King for little more than a year 17847 l. 5 shillings. In anno 29.
30581 l. 18 d. for two years complete. Ex Comput. Richardi Eccleshall de an.
28, 29, and 30 E. 3.
In the thirtieth received by Richard de Eccleshal Treasurer of Callis from the
Bishop of Winchester Treasurer of England, 17847 l. Ex. Rot. Par. anno 2 R. 2.
And in the year following 26355 l. 15 shill. Ex Comput. Rob. Thorley.
In the second of Richard the second de receptis forinscecis, which was money
from the Exchequer at Westminster, 20000 l. for three years complete. Ex
Comput. Simonis de Burg.
Anno 5. 19783 l. For three years ending Ex Comp. Rog. de Wald. an. 13 R. 2.
and 15.
anno 10. 77375 l. For the like term until an. 13. 48609 l. 8 shill. And Ex
Comp. Joannis Bernam, an. 23 R. 2.
for the four succeeding years 90297 l. 19 shill. And for the last three years
of his Reign, 85643 l.

From the end of Ex Comput. To. Thorley.
Richard the second until the fourth of Henry the fourth for three years Ex
Comp. Ni^h. ^ske.
62655 l. 17 shillings. And for one succeeding, 19783 l. The Charge in Victual
and Provision for two years five months in this Kings Reign Ex Comp. Rob.
Thorley.
46519 l. 15. shillings.

In the first four and peaceable years of his Son there was issued from the
Treasury of England Ex Comp. Rob. Salvi^, de an. 5 H. 5.
86938 l. 10 shill. for this place. And from anno 8. until the 9. 65363 l. It
cost Henry the sixth Rot. Parl. an 11 H. 6.
above all Revenue 9054 l. 5 shill. in an. 11. The Subsidies in England were
an. 27. Rot. Parl. anno 27.
levied in Parliament to defray the wages and reparation of Callis. And the
Rot. Parl. anno 31.
one and thirtieth of this King there was a Fifteen and 2 shill. of every Sack
of Wool imposed upon the Subjects here to the same end. Rot. Parl. anno 33.
And the Parliament of 33. was assembled of purpose to order a course for
discharge of wages and expense at Callis: and the like authority directed the
fourth of Edward the fourth, Rot. Parl. 4 E. 4.
that the Soldiers there should receive Victuals, and salary from out of the
Subsidies of England. The disbursement thereof one year being 12771 l. Ex Comp.
Majoris Stapulae anno 1 R. 3.
And in the sixteenth of the same King for like term there was de Portu London,
Hull, Sancti Botolphi, Poole, and Sandwico, by the Ports of London, Hull,
Boston, Pool, and Sandwich, 12488 l. paid to the Treasury of Callis. Ex Comp.
origin. inter Chartas Roberti Cotton.
And in an. 20. from out of the Customs of the same Ports to the same end
12290 l. 18 shill. Ex Comp. Domini Lisle.
And in 22. 11102 l. And the year following 10788 l. The settled ordinary wages
of the Garrison in this Town yearly was 24 Hen. 8. Ex lib. de expens. Bellor.
H. 8. and E. 6. in Musaeo Com. Salisbur.
8834 l. And about the thirtieth, when the Viscount Lisle was Deputy, 8117 l.
And from the thirtieth of this King to the end of his Son Edw. 6. this place
did cost the Crown 371428 l. 18 shill. From the first purchase of it by Edw. 3.
until the loss thereof by Queen Mary, it was ever a perpetual issue of the
Treasure of this Land, which might in continuance have rather grown to be a
burden of Danger to us, than any Fort of Security. For from the waste of
money, which is Nervus Reipublicae, the Sinew of a Commonwealth, as Ulpian
says, we may conclude with Tacitus, Dissolutionem Imperii docet, si fructus
quibus Respub. sustinetur diminuantur, it foreshews the ruin of an Empire, if
that be impaired which should be the sustenance of the Commonwealth. And
therefore it was not the worst opinion (at such time as the Captivity of
Francis the French King incited Ex litera Archiep. Cant. Card. Wolsey.
Henry the eighth to put off that Kingdom, although in the close major pars
vicit meliorem, the greater party out-voted the better,) that to gain any thing
in France would be more chargeable than profitable, and the keeping more than
the enjoying. The issue was in Tournay, Bullen, and this Town manifest. Besides
the jealousy that Nation ever held over our designs and their own liberty.
For as Graecia libera esse non potuit dum Philippus Graeciae Compedes tenuit,
Greece could never be free so long as Philip had the Fetters of Greece in his
custody; so as long as by retention of Callis we had an easy descent into, and
convenient place to trouble the Country, a Fetter to entangle them, they
neither had assurance of their own quiet, nor we of their Amity. And it was not
the least Argument from Convenience in the detention of Callis (after the eight
years expired of Redelivery) used by the Chancellor of France, Ex litera
Thomae Smith Secret. anno 1567. 3 Maii.
That we should gain much more in assured peace, which we could never have so
long as we were Lords of that Town, than by any benefit it did or could yield
us. It was never but a Pique and Quarrel between the two Realms: For upon every
light displeasure, either Princes would take by and by to Callis, and make war
there. God has made a separation natural betwixt both Nations, a sure wall and
defense, Et penitus toto divisos Orb Britannos;That is, the English were
divided from all the world.

But a little more to inform the weight of these Charges, it is not amiss to
touch (by way of comfort) that from which we are so happily by the infinite
blessings of God and benignity of a Gracious King delivered; and also that
other of burden still, (though much lightened) until conformity of Affections
and designs of Councils shall further effect a Remedy.

The Charge of Barwick and the Frontiers in Ex Comp. Joannis Tiptoft.
20 Edward 3. was 3129 l. for three years. In the end of Richard 2. and
entrance of Henry 4. Ex Comp. Hen. Percy, anno 1 H. 4.
10153 l. And Parl. an. 11 H. 6.
11 Henry 6. the Custody of the Marches 4766 l. In the 2 Mariae the annual
Charge of Barwick was 9413 l. Ex musaeo Com. Salisbury.
And in an. 2 Elizabeth 13430 l. And an. 26. 12391 l.

The Kingdom of Ireland, beyond the Revenues, was 29 E. 3. Ex comp. Williel. de
Brumleigh.
2285 l. An. 30. Ex comp. Nicol. Episc. Meth, an. 30 Ed. 3.
2880 l. and Ex Comp. Tho. Scurlay. an. 50 E. 3.
an. 50. 1808 l. All the time of Richard 2. Ex Comp. Joan. Spencer, de annis R.
2.
it never defrayed the charges; And came short in 11 Henry 6. 4000 Marks Ex
Rot. Par. an. 11 H. 6.
of annual issues. The Revenue there in omnibus exitibus and proficuis, in all
the rents and profits yearly, by Account of Cromwell Lord Treasurer, not above
3040 l. But passing over these elder times: in the Reign of the late Queen,
when the yearly Revenue was not 15000 l. the expense for two years Ex annot.
Dom. Burleigh ex Musaeo Com. Salisbury.
ending 1571. amounted to 116874 l. In an. 1584. for less than two years came
it to 86983 l. Ex Comp. Rad. Lane.
The charge there in two years of Sir John Parrots Government ending 1586. was
116368 l. In anno 1597. the Receipt not above 25000 l. the issue was 91072 l.
And when in 35 Elizabeth the Rents and Profits of that Kingdom exceeded not
27118 l. the Disbursement in seven months were 171883 l. The Charge 1601. Ex
Comp. in Musaeo Com. Salisbury Thesour. Angliae.
for nine months 167987 l. And for the two years following accounted by the
allayed money 670403 l. And in the first of the King, 84179 l. Whose Government
although it has blessed both us and that Kingdom with the benefit of Peace,
yet has it not delivered himself from a large and yearly expense here for
supportation of that State out of his own Treasure. And thus far in answer of
the Argument from increase of Revenue by foreign Dominions.

As to the Arguments of Honor by addition of Addition of any foreign Title no
Honor.
Titles and foreign Territories; it may suffice in answer, That so long as
this Crown was actually possessed of any such Signiory, the Tenure and Service
did ever bring with it a note and badge of Vassalage; than which nothing to so
free a Monarch as the King of England (who is Baldus.
Monarcha in Regno, and tot and tanta habet Privilegia quot Imperator in
Imperio, a Monarch in his Kingdom, and has as many and as large Privileges
therein as an Emperor in his Empire,) could be more in blemish or opposition.
To write Domino Regi nostro Franciae, To our Lord the King of France, as during
the time we held the Provinces in France, we usually did in all our Letters and
public Contracts with that Crown, can be called no addition of Honor. And
whether upon every command to act in person those base services of Homage and
Fidelity, as first in putting off the Imperial Crown, the kneeling low at the
foot of that King, and taking an Oath to become Homme liege du Roys de France,
a liege subject to the Kings of France, etc. we in performing so the duties of
a subject, do not much more disparage the dignity of a Sovereign, is no
question of doubt. From these considerations of Reputation and Honor, (the
greatest stays that support Majesty, and retain Obedience) our Kings of
England have as far as to the forfeit of those Signiories, either avoided or
refused the services. As King John did Normandy; and Edward the Style of
Normandy and Aquitain, accounted by our Kings a Vassalage.
second resigned to his Son the Duchy of Aquitain, to put off the act of homage
from himself, to whom it could not in respect of his Regality but be a
dishonor. As appears in Henry the second, who having made his Son Consortem
Imperii, a King of England with him, Homagium a Filio noluit (says the Record)
quia Rex fuit, sed securitatem accepit; would not receive Homage of him,
because he was a King, but took his Security. In the seventeenth of Richard the
second, the Lords and Justices would not consent to a Peace with France, unless
the King might not do Homage, they held it so bas^, supposing thereby the
liberty of the Kings Person and Subject wronged. And thus much of the little
Reputation that either in Title or Territory those subordiante Duchies in
France added to this Crown.

As for the Kingdom of France, the people of England were so little in love
with that Title, as any (...) of France restrained by petition in Parliament.
Honor to them, that by Acts of Parliament 14 Ed. 3. and 8 Ed. 5. they
provided that the Subjects of England should owe no Obedience to the King as
King of France, nor the Kingdom of England be in any wise subjected by such
Union to that Crown.

And so much we have ever been in fear of that France possessed would leave us
to the misery of a Province.
place, lest it might leave this State to the misery of a Provincial
Government: as in 17 H. 6. the Commons urged to contribute for the recovery of
that Crown, answered, that the gaining of any footing in France would induce
the Kings abode there, and by such absence cause great decay and desolation in
this State; besides the transport of our money in the mean time, which would
enrich that Country, and impoverish the Realm at home, whereby we should
justly again say, Tacit. in vita Agricolae.
Britannia servitutem suam quotidie emit, quotidie poscit, The Britains are
every day begging to be slaves, every day giving money for it.

THe last motive is, the advantage we now have of greater Facility and
assurance of Success in To enterprise any war, not so easy.
any foreign enterprise, by this happy Union of both Kingdoms, than ever any
of our Ancestors had.

To which in answer nothing can be more full, Means of success formerly.
than laying down the motives and means that led on the Kings of this Realm to
attempt and prosperously effect their undertakings in other parts, weigh how
they suit these times, and whether that any or all the advantages we now have,
may be to them of equal worth and valuation. The first consideration is in
Place, the next in Person. In the Advantage of Place and Party. Advantage of
Place.
wars of France (whether those for the defense of particular Signiories, or
competition of the entire Kingdom) we had ever Ports to land at, and Forts to
retire to, which now we have not. The coast of Normandy was our own, by which
we might enter the midst of France. And Edward the third when he intended to
annoy the East part, sided with Montfort against Charles de Bloys, whom he
invested with the Duchy of Britain, that so he might have there an easy
footing. Thus by leave of his Confederates in Flanders he had safe entrance for
all his Army to invade the other side, and a sure retreat, when upon any
occasion he would come back, as he did to Antwerp. And wheresoever any Army may
have a quiet descent, the greatest difficulty is overcome; for the rest
consists in Chance, wherein Fortune is rather wont to prevail than Virtue.
But Live. lib. 28.
ibi grave est Bellum gerere, ubi nullus est Class^ Portus apertus, non ager
pacatus, non Civitassocia, non consistendi aut procedendi locus, quocunque
circum spexeris hostilia sunt omnia; There it is a hard task to wage war, where
there is no Port open for our Navy, the Country our enemy, no City our
Confederate, no place to make a stand or to march out from, but whithersoever a
man looks, he can see nothing but hostile intentions against us. And this must
be now our case, which was never our Ancestors.

Advantage personal was either A Party found made


For the Persons considerable, the a^ the Subjects to our enemies, or our own
Confederates. Of the first, our Kings heretofore did either work on the
opportunity of any dissension ministered, or by Pension and Reward either make a
fraction in Obedience, or Neutrality in Assistance with the Subjects of their
Adversary. The Dukes of Burgundy, Earls of Britain, Dreux and others in France,
offended with their Sovereign, Matthew. Paris in vita H. 3.
Confederati erant Comiti Britanniae Henrico and Regi Angliae, became
Confederates with Henry Earl of Britain and King of England; and thereupon drew
him over into Britain. Matthew. Par. vita H^n 3.
The same King by yearly Pensions of 7000 l. kept diverse in Poictou in fraction
against their Lord and their own Loyalty. Edw. 3. had never undertaken the
conquest of France, if Froisard.
Robert de Artoys (displeased with the Sentence of Philip his Master for that
Earldom) had not incited and complotted for him, as Godfrey of Harecourt did
after. Nor Henry Walsingham. T. Livius Foroliviensis in vita H. 5.
5. if the unsound memory of the French King, the jealousy of those Princes
and Orleantial Faction had not made his way and Fortune.

Confederates.

THe Confederates our Kings held Confederates were the only ground of all the
good success.
formerly for mutual Aid were of such consequence in all their affairs, that
those so best strengthened achieved ever the greatest and most glorious
victories. As the first and third Edwards, the fifth and eighth Henry's.
Whereas Henry the sixth, that was of all the rest left most naked to himself,
although the greatest otherwise in opportunity, lost all the purchase of his
Ancestors in the end. It is not amiss in such a foundation of Greatness as
Confederacy, to lay down successively, first, with whom we tied that knot of
love; then, what were the motives, or assurances; and lastly, whether the same
in both is left to our occasions, and will now or no.




Henry the first, but to assure his own possessions A list of all the
Confederates from Hen. the firsts Reign to the end of the last Queen. Henry 2.
beyond Sea, Ex Contract. orig. in Arch. These. West.
adscivit in praesidium Comitem Britanniae, and Theobaldum Comitem Blesensem,
called to his aid the Earl of Britain, and Theobald Earl of Bloys.

Henry the second did the like with Ex Radulph. de Diceto.
Robert Earl of Flanders. And again Ex orig. signat. a Comite and Castellanis,
in These. West. Richard 2.
cum Theodorico Comite Flandriae, Baronibus, Castellanis, and caeteris
hominibus Comitis, with Theodoric Earl of Flanders, the Barons, Governors of
Castles, and other the Subjects of the said Earl; who stood bound to serve him
in summonitione sua, sicut Domino, pro feodis quae de ipso teneant, upon a
summons, as well as their own Lord, for the Fees which they held of him.

Baldwin Earl of Flanders contracteth under Bond Ex Radulph. de Diceto.
mutui subsidii, quod sine Rege Richardo Angliae non componeret cum Rege
Francorum, of mutual aid, that he would not come to agreement with the French
King without Richard King of England. And the Matthew. Paris 184.
Britains relicto Rege Franciae Regi Richardo adhaeserunt, forsaking the King
of France, did join with King Richard.

Between King John Indorso Cla. an. 1 Joannis.
and the Earl of Flanders there was a Combination mutui auxilii King John.
contra Regem Francorum, of mutual assistance against the French King. Ex orig.
in These. Westminster. Henry 3.
The like with the City of Doway and Earl of Holland.

Hen. 3. anno 11. drew Dors. pat. 11 H. 3. m. 11.
Peter Duke of Britany into Confederacy against the French; and Fernand Earl of
Flanders with a Pension annual of five hundred Marks. Rot. lib. an. 14 H. 3. m.
7. ex originali.
And anno 38. Alfonsus King of Castile combineth with him and his heirs contra
omnes homines in mundo, against all the men in the World. To whom he remained
so constant, that an. 8. and 10 Edw. 1. he would not grant a Truce to the
French King, but ad preces and instantiam at the instant suit of the King of
England.

Edward 1. an. 13. Claus. an. 13 Edw. 1.
by a pretense of intermarriage Edward 1.
drew Florence Earl of Holland from the French to his party; Ex origin. in
Thesaur.
and the year following, by the mediation of the Lord of Black-mont, the Earl
of Flanders, who in Rot. Vascon. an. 20. m. 19.
an. 20. assisted him in the wars of Gascoign. Rot. Alman. de an. 22. and 31.
m. 13.
In the 22. he combined with Adolph King of the Romans, and the Earl of
Gueldres; tying the Nobility of Burgundy with a yearly donative of 30000 l.
Turonensium to aid him contra Regem Francie, against the French King. Ex
origin. sub sigillo in These. Westminster.
He had Guido Earl of Flanders and Philip his son for 100000 l. Turonensium in
pay against the French King, an. 24, 25, and 31. of his Reign; Rot. Alman. an.
31. m. 14.
retaining the Earl of Gueldres by pay of 1000000 l. the Duke of Lorrain by
1600000 l. Dors. Rot. Alman. 18.
the Nobility of Burgundy by a Pension of 30000 l. and Wallerand Lord of Montay
by 300 l. Turonensium in his service the same year. Rot. P^^. an. 34. m. 2^.
And in anno 34. Reginaldum Comitem Montis Beliardi and alios de Burgundia
contra Regem Franciae, Reginald Earl of Mont-Belliard and other Burgundians
against the King of France.

Edward the second had Rot. Vas^ an. 9. and 11.
auxilium tam maritimum Edward 2.
quam terrestre a Genoesibus, assistance as well by Sea as by Land from the
Genoeses. Dors. Claus. an. 18. m. 7.
And in anno 18. besides his Alliance with Flanders, John Protector of Castile
aideth him contra Gallos cum 1000. equitibus and peditibus, and Scutiferis
10000. against the French with 1000. horse and foot, and 10000. other armed men.

Edward the third Froisard.
had by the Marriage of Edward 3.
Philip, the Earl of Henault and Holland her Father assured to him; and
retained John of Henault and his Followers, Rot. Lib^ 2. m. 6.
qui venerunt in auxilium ad rogatum Regis, who came to assist the King at his
call, with a Salary of 14000 l. yearly. Before he adventured to avow and
maintain his Challenge to the Kingdom of France, Rot. Alman. anno 11.
he made up to his party Lodowick the Emperor, (who the better to countenance
his enterprise, elected him Vicarium Imperii, Vicar of the Empire.) Rot.
A^^wer. anno 12.
Reginald Earl of Gueldres, Lewis Marquess of Brandenburg, Conrade Lord of
Hard, who served him with fifty men at Arms, the Cardinal of Genoa and his
Nephew, who aided him with Galleys, the Magistrates of Colen, Bruxells, Lorrain
and Mechlin, and Froisard.
Jaques de Artevile head of the Gantois Faction; who having quitted all duty to
the banished Earl, submitted themselves and most of Flanders to the service and
protection of Edward the third, who to free them of two Millions of Crowns,
wherein, as a Caution of obedience to the Crown of France, Ex Rot. Antwerp. an.
12.
they stood bound as well by Oath as Obligation, took upon him the Title of
King of France, and employed John Duke of Brabant and Lorrain, William Marquess
of Juliers, and the Earl of Henault and Holland, his assured Friends,
Procuratores suos ad vendicandum Regnum Franci^, his Procurators to claim the
Crown of France. Rot. Parl. anno 14. n. 8.
These his Allies not long after meeting him at Tournay with one hundred
thousand men, as Robert de Artoys did with fifty thousand at S. Omers against
the French King. And thus he attired and furnished his first enterprise,
weaving into his Faction and support more and more, as often as either pretense
or just occasions would give him leave. By Claus. an. 18. m. 25.
color of Marriage he drew in the King of Sicily in the eighteenth year, the
Duke of Millain, and the King of Castile for mutual aid; and Dors. claus. an.
18. m. 20.
Simon Butangre Duke of Genoa, and his Subjects for hire and reward. In the
ninteenth year Dors. claus. an. 19. m. 14.
the questionable Title of the Duchy of Britain assured him of John de
Montford; against whom the Froisard.
French King maintained Charles de Bloys for that Duchy. In anno 24. Rot. Pat.
an. 24. n. 8.
he renewed the Contract with the Genoeses; and in the thirtieth made a
convention of Peace, and mutui auxili cum Rege Navarre, and of mutal aid, with
the King of Navarre. In Ex originali de an. 7. in lib. Rob. Cot.
the thirty seventh with Peter King of Castile: and in that and the one and
fortieth Ex arig. in T^^^^. ^^st. de an. 37. and 41.
an alliance of Aid and Amity he entered with the Duke of Britain: and anno 45.
Ex origsub sigillo.
again with the Genoeses and Lewis Earl of Flanders and Duke of Brabant; Ex
Contract. origin. in Archiv. These. Westminster.
and an. 46. with Ferdinand King of Portugal.

Richard the second renews Claus. an. 1 R. 2. Richard 2.
in anno 1. the confederation that his Grandfather had with the Duke of
Britain; and with whom anno 3. he contracted anew, as he had done anno 2. with
Lewis Rot. Franc. anno 2.
Earl of Flanders. In the sixth Ex orig. in These.
year he combineth with the Flemings Rot. Parl. anno 6. n. 11.
contra^nimicos communes, against the enemies of them both; with Ex Contract.
in lib. It alico Rob. Cotton.
the Kings of Naples, Sicily, Navarre and Arragon, de mutuis auxiliis, for
mutual aid; Rot. Franc. an. 6. m. 28.
and with Winceslaus the Emperor Contra Carolum Regem Franciae and Robertum
Regem Scotiae, against Charles King of France, and Robert King of Scotland. In
anno 8. Rot. Franc. an. 12. m. 16. and an. 18. and 19.
with the Kings of Jerusalem, Sicily, and Portugal. In the tenth with Portugal,
who at his own charges aided this King with ten Galleys. And with William Duke
of Gueldres de mutuis auxiliis, for mutual aid. And anno 12. Rot. Franc. an.
12. m. 16. and an. 18. and 19.
18. and 19. with Albert Duke of Bavaria. Rot. Franc. an. 20. m. 2.
And an. 20. with the Earl of Ostrenant de retinentiis contra Regem Franciae,
against the King of France. And Rupertus Count Palatine of the Rhene anno 20.
became a Homager for term of life to this King.

Henry the fourth entered alliance Rot. claus. an. 2. H. 4. and Rot. Fran. an. 2
and 3. H. 4. m. 6. Henry 4.
of mutual aid in two years with William Duke of Gueldres and Mons. Rot. Franc.
an. 12 H. 4. m. 21. Henry 5.
In the twelfth with Sigismund King of Hungaria. Tho. Walsingham.
And in the thirteenth by siding with the Factions of the Dukes of Berry and
Orleans, laid the basis upon which his Son that succeeded reared the Trophies
of his Renown.

For Henry the fifth going forward upon the Advantage left and daily offered,
strengthened himself anno 4. Ex Rot. Parl. an. 4.
by a League perpetual with Sigismund the Emperor; renewing that of Richard
the second Ex Orig. in These. Westminster.
with John King of Portugal, as his Father had done. He entered a contract with
the Duke of Britain, and with the Queen of Jerusalem and Lewis her Son for the
Duchy of Anjou and Mayn; and with the King of Portugal and Duke of Bavaria for
supply of Men and Munition by them performed. Ex Chron. Rogeri Wall. in vita H.
5. an. 5. and 8.
And the year before the Battle of Agincourt sends the Lord Henry Scrope to
contract with the Duke of Burgundy Ex Instruct. orig. 31 Aug. 5 H. 5.
and his Retinue for Wages in serviti^ suo in Regno Franciae vel Ducatu
Aquitaniae, in his service in the Kingdom of France, or the Duchy of Aquitain;
esteeming the alliance of that house the readiest means to attain his end.

Henry the sixth (i) so long as he held the Amity Henry 6.
of Britain (for which he contracted) and the (e) Ex Contract. origin.
confederacy of Rurgundy, his friend of eldest assurance and best advantage,
which he did to the sixteenth year of his Government, there was no great
decline of his Fortune in France. But when Burgundy Ex Tractat. Alrabatensi.
brake the bond of our assurance, and betook him to the Amity of France, and
dealt with this Crown, but as a Merchant by way of intercourse, first at the
Treaty of Ex Tract. Brugens. 1442.
Bruges 1442. then at Ex Tract. Callisiae 1445. Ex Tractat. Bruxellensi 1446.
Callis 1446. the reputation and interest we held in France declined faster in
the setting of this Son, than ever it increased in the rising of the Father.

And Edward the fourth who succeeded, sensible of this loss, wooed by all the
means either of Intercourse or Marriage to win again the house of Burgundy
Parl. an. 7 E. 4. n. 28.
which in anno 7. he did, to join for the recovery of his right in France. Rot.
Franc. an. 8. m. 22. and ex contract. originali.
And drew in the year following the Duke of Britain to that Confederacy. In the
Rot. Franc. an. 11 E. 4. m. 7
eleventh year he renewed with Charles of Burgundy the bond of mutual Aid; and
contracted the next Rot. Franc. an. 12. m. 22. and ex orig. in These. Westminster.
year the like with the King of Portugal. And in an. 14. pro recuperatione
Regni Franciae contra Ludovicum Usurpantem, for the recovery of the Kingdom of
France out of the hands of Lewis the Usurper, ( Rot. Fran. an. 14. m. 18. and
19.
as the Record is) entered a new Confederacy with the Dukes of Burgundy and
Britain: Ex Contr. de an. 1487. pro solutione 50000 scutorum ad 100. annos.
Henry 7.
And in the end wrought from them a round Pension of money, though he could not
any portion of land.

Henry the seventh Rot. Fran. an. 5, and 6 H. 7. and Contr. orig. an. 8 H. 7.
Henry 8.
anno 5. and 6. entertaineth an Alliance with Spain against the French King.
The like in the eighth with the King of Portugal: and in the tenth Ex magno
Intercusu de an. 1495.
with the house of Burgundy for Intercourse and mutual Aid.

Henry the eighth in anno 4. Ex tract. origin. de dat. 1513.
renews the Amity of Portugal; and the next year combineth with the Emperor
Maximilian against Lewis the French King, who aideth him out of Artoys and
Henault with four thousand horse and six thousand foot; whereupon he wins
Tournay, Ex litera Max. Imp. Car. Ebor. dat. 15.
Consilio, Auxilio, and favoribus Maximiliani Imperatoris, with the advice,
assistance, and countenance of the Emperor Maximilian. In anno 7. Rot. Fran.
anno 7 H. 8.
to weaken the French King, he enters league with the Helvetian Cantons by his
Commissioners Wingfield and Pace; and with Ex tract. Bruxellens. 1515.
Charles of Spain for Amity and mutual Aid: into which Maximilian the Emperor
and Joan of Spain Ex orig. subscript. card. Sedunensi de dat. 1516.
were received the year following. Ex tract. Callis. an. 1521
In an. 12. with the Emperor Charles and Ex tract. orig. subscript. manu Card.
Ebor. and Marg. Regent. 24. August. 1521.
Margaret Regentess of Burgundy he makes a Confederation against Francis the
French King, as the common enemy: and quia Rex Angliae non possit ex propriis
Subditis tantum equitum numerum congerere, the King of England could not
furnish such a quantity of Horse of his own Subjects, as was mentioned in the
contract, the Emperor gives leave that he levy them in any his Dominions in
Germany. And the Pope in furtherance of his intendment, interdicteth the French
Territories, calls in aid Brachii Seculdris, of the Secular power, Ex tract.
Winsor. 1522.
those two Princes; appoints the Emperor Protectorem and advocatum
Ecclesiae, the Churches Advocate and Protector; and styles their Attempt
sancta expeditio, an holy expedition. Ex tract. Cambrens. 1529.
And this is by the Treaty at Windsor the next year confirmed and explained.
Renewing in the years Ex tract. ultrajectens^.
twenty one, thirty five and thirty eight the association, and bond of mutual
aid with the same Princes, and against the French King, if he brake not off his
Amity with the Turk.

And although Ex tract. de anno 1543. Ex originali dat. ultimo Janu. 1547.
Edward the sixth in the first year of his Reign made the Contract between the
Crown of England and the house of Burgundy perpetual; yet Ex instruct. Rich.
Morison. Edward 6.
forbore he to aid the Emperor in the wars of France, disabled (as he
pretended) by reason of the Poverty the troubles of Scotland had drawn upon
him; Ex litera Ducis Summers. Magist. page 1548.
And therefore offered the Town of Bullen to the Imperial Protection.

During the Reign of Queen Mary, there was no other but that Ex contr.
Matrimoniali 1554.
of Marriage, Aid and Intercourse with the Emperor, Spain and Burgundy; Ex
tract. Matr. 1555. Queen Mary.
and besides that tripartite bond at Cambray of Amity and Neutrality.

Our late Renowned Mistress entertained with the Prince of Conde Ex artic.
subscript. a Vidame de Chartres 1562 Elizabeth.
about New Haven, and Ex foeder. Trecens^. 1564.
with Charles the ninth 1564. and at Ex tract. Plesens^.
Bloys 1572. with the King of Navarre before the accession of the Crown of
France to him, and after Britain, and lastly by the Duke of Bullen Ex tract.
(...). 1596.
in ninety six. And with the States of the Netherlands in the years eighty five
Ex tract. cum ordin. ^giae de an. 1585. and 1598
and ninety eight, diverse Treaties of Amity, Confederation and Assistance.

By all these passages, (being all that well either our Story or Records can
discover) it appears manifest the Kings of England never to have undertaken,
or fortunately entertained any Foreign Enterpize without a party and
confederate. Amongst which by situation, Confederates of most benefit to
England.
those of best advantage to us have been the Dukes of Britain, Lords of the
Netherlands, the City of Genoa, the Kings of Portugal and Spain, and the
Empire, since knit into the house of Burgundy.

As for the remote and inland Princes of Germany, the Kings of Denmark, Poland
and Sweden, (so far removed) I have seldom observed that this Crown has with
them contracted any League of Assistance or Confederacy, but of Amity and
Intercourse only.

IT remains to observe a little, what were the Princes whose Confederation
are of least benefit. Bonds of Confederation cannot be the same they were
before. As with the State of Genoa.
reasons that first induced, and then preserved the Affection and Alliances of
these several Nations respectively to this Crown. The assurance we had of the
State of Genoa was their Pensions and Traffic here. All which time by equality
of Neighborhood they stood of themselves without any jealousy of Surprise.
But as soon as Vicinum Incendium, the fire began in Millain, they put
themselves into the protection of Spain, foreseeing how dangerous it would be
for a weak State to stand Neutral, according to Aristhenus counsel to the
Aetolians, Live. Dec. 4. l. 2.
Quid aliud quam nusquam gratia stabili praeda victoris erimus? What else will
become of us, being in firm friendship with neither side, than to be made a
prey to the Conquer our? Since which time Spain by estating Doria, Grimaldi,
and the Spinellos, chief Families of that City, with great Patrimonies in
Naples, retaining their Galleys in his perpetual service and salary, the
Inhabitants of all sorts in beneficial Trade, and (no less in Policy to engage
that City, than to supply his own Wants) continually owing the wealthiest
Citizens such vast sums of money, as the Interest of late exceeded In
Relatione de Statu (...), an. 1595.
twenty five Millions; he has tied it more sure to the Spanish party, than if
it were commanded by a Citadel; so that it must ever now follow the faction
and fortune of that Crown.

Navarre and Britain (while States of themselves) Navarre. Britain.
were so long firm to our Confederacy, as they were tied with the bond of their
own Calamity, occasioned by that power, which incorporating lately the one by
Descent, the other by Contract, is by that Union and return of all the
Appennagii, more potent than ever it has been under the House of Capet.

Burgundy was so long our friend, as either Burgundy.
they were enriched by Staple of our Commodities, or had protection of our
Swords against France, who not only claimed Sovereignty over most, but a
proprietary interest in part; and therefore had reason to give Aid and Arms to
such a Confederate as did by a diversive War secure, and by particular
Immunities enrich that State. But now growing into Spain, they need no such
assurance in the one; and we almost undone by their draping of our Wool,
(which is happily called home,) not able to return them the benefit of the
other, cannot presume upon any such assurance of their aid as heretofore.

Spain may seem to give us the best hope of a Spain.
fast Confederate for two respects. First, for that he is absolute, and that we
be equally devoid of demand, neither having against the other any Titles. Next,
for that the intercourse of Trade is more reciprocal between us than France,
and our Amity founded upon long love and old blood. To this may be made a
twofold answer, from the change of their Dispositions: First, for that they
never assist any now, but to make themselves Master of their State. Thus ended
they the strife between the Competitors of Portugal. And when they were called
into Naples by the Queen against the French, they combined with her Adversary,
and divided the Kingdom. And after upon the River of Ga^ rillon, under their
Leader Gonsalves, taking an advantage, they defeated the whole Army of the
French, holding ever since that entire Kingdom themselves. For Spain will admit
neither Equality nor Fellowship, since upon Union of so many Kingdoms, and
famous Discoveries, they begun to affect a fifth Monarchy. The other; that the
late hostility between them and us has drawn so much blood, as all forms of
ancient Amity are quite washed away: and as Paterculus Paterculus.
says of Carthage to Rome, so may we of Spain to England, Adeo odium
Certaminibu^ ortum ultra metam durat, ut ne in victis quidem deonitur, neque
ante invisum esse desinet quam esse des^t: The hatred begot by former quarrels
does endure so lastingly, that the very conquered party cannot forget it: and
in such a case the very places must cease to be, before the hatred and envy
toward it can cease.

BEsides these local considerations, there will Dangers in Consederacy by
diversity of Ends. Examples, that ends served, Confederates quit all bonds of
Combination.
two other Dangers now fall out from any Contract of mutual aid: The one from
diversity ^f Intention, and the other of Religion. In the one, when either the
Confederate has safely attained his own secret End, (whatsoever he pretends
in the entrance,) he leaves the other to work out his own designs. Thus was
Henry the third served, called over by the Earls of Toulouse and March: they in
the mean time having made their Peace with France: Matthew. Paris 1242.
Et expertus jam infidem, imo perfidiam Pictavensium, turpiter recessit, and
festinans non pepercit Calcaribus, insomuch that having found the treachery and
perfidiousness of the Poictovins, he was forced dishonourably to retreat, and
for haste to spurr away; the peril the poor King was left in being so great. He
was handled like to this by Pope Alexander the fourth, who having drawn him
into the wars of Apulia against Manfred, in the end, depauperato Regno Angliae,
and undique bonis suis spoliato, his Kingdom of England being impoverished, and
wholly despoiled of its Goods, left him to his own shift. The King of Navarr
calling in the aid of Edward the third Rot. Paul, anno 29 E. 3. n. 6.
against France, and appointing the Isle of Gersey the Rendezvous of their
forces, revolteth to the French, after he had by countenance of that
preparation wrought his Peace. Maximilian the Emperor to induce Henry the
eighth not only contracteth to aid him in person to recover the Crown of
France, and pro tyrannico Rege repellendo, and to remove the tyrannical King,
(they are the words of the League;) but conferreth upon him in the same Coronam
Imperialem and Imperium Romanum, the Imperial Crown and the Roman Empire in
reversion; and estateth the Duchy of Millain after recovery upon his person,
and suorum naturalium masculini sexus haeredum; modo feodorum Imperialium, and
his heirs male lawfully begotten, to hold in Fee of the Empire: yet in the
close left the King to his own fortune, his turn for Millain and Verona served.
Charles the fifth when by the incursion of the French he saw his portion in
Italy distressed, in safety whereof consisted the whole Pulse of the Spanish,
(as he used himself to say,) for it supplied his Army with great Levies, and
was fitly seated for a fifth Monarchy; he then engaged Henry the eighth in the
wars of France, and bound himself (as Bourbon his Confederate) that he would
assist him to the full Conquest of that Kingdom, and the other should become
Homager to Henry the eighth as to his Sovereign. But after that Bourbon had
advanced his Army and distressed the French King, he in his answer to Master
Pace the Kings Ambassador refused that assurance of duty, and gave a just
suspicion, that he by help of his Party intended to usurp Suspecting that an
Allie may grow too great, dissolveth alliance.
upon that State himself, which the Emperor never meant to the King of
England; left by such footing in France, he might grow so great as to give Law
to his neighbors. And to fall off upon such grounds has ever been excusable,
howsoever the bonds of Alliance were. Thus did Henry the eighth as often change
his hand of help, as either Princes of Spain and France got ground of the
other. And the Spaniard now, to keep the States in Italy disunited, compoundeth
differences at his pleasure, or takes part with the weaker, not suffering any,
though his own dependant, to grow too strong: which was lately seen in
patronizing the D. of Mantua against Savoy, according to the Rule of Quinctius
in Livy, Live. lib. 34.
Non tantum interest Aetolorum opes minui, it does not stand us so much in hand
to break the strength of the Aet^lians, (yet they were enemies,) quantum, non
supra modum Philippum crescere, as it does to see that Philip grow not too
potent, who was their friend.

The difference in Religion may bring likewise a twofold danger. The one with
our Confederates, the other with the Subjects of this Crown.

For whenever we shall attempt upon a Catholic Prince, as France, where we
have the fairest pretenses, for with any other we are like to have no question;
then is all Contract of mutual aid left to the election of our Confederate,
Danger by difference in Religion, in respect of the Confederates, who may break
by dispensation, though both Catholics.
who may with all easiness procure from the Sea of Rome a discharge of all
Contracts, although they were by Oath. For if in Leagues where either party
have been Catholics, as that between Edward 3. and John King of France, and
that between John of Gaunt and the King of Castile; they ever out of such
suspect inserted this Clause, That neither side should procure dispensationem,
etc. either per Ecclesiam Romanam, vel per aliquam aliquam, a Dispensation
either by the Church of Rome, or any other way, to do contra formam Tractatus,
contrary to the form of Agreement: How much more must their jealousy be to us?
And therefore in a Consultation in Henry the eighths time, Ex original. in manu
Domini Cromwell.
whether with best security we should Confederate with France or Spain, it was
resolved that either of them may slip of their advantage by color of our
Separation from the Church of Rome, Danger by difference in Religion, in
respect of the Confederates, who ought to break out of the Roman doctrine, one
accounted heretic.
if there be no better hold in their Honesties than in their Bonds. For it will
be held not only worthy dispensation, but merit to break all Leagues with the
enemies of that Church, by the Doctrine of that See; which teaches all
Contracts Doctrine of the Sea of Rome touching leagues with Heretics.
with any Catholic Prince to be instanti dissolved, because we are by them
ranked in the list of Heretics; which holds proportion with the Rule and
Direction that Urban the sixth sent by Ex Bulla origin. sub sigillo urbani 6.
an. pont. 4.
Bull to Wenceslaus King of Bohemia, and Charles the Emperor, (before the
Council of Constance,) declaring all Confederations, Leagues and Conventions to
be Lege Divina temerariae, illicitae, and ipso jure nullae, etiamsi forent fide
data firmatae, aut Confirmatione Apostolica roboratae, to be by the Law of God
invalid, void, and in Law null, although confirmed by the plighting of faith,
nay though strengthened by confirmation Apostolical, if the parties were
separati ab Unitate sanctae Ecclesiae, separate from the Unity of Holy Church,
when the league was made; or, si postea sint effecti, if they become so after.
What assurance can there then be either with France, who is received, by his
Rebenediction, into the Bosom of the Church, and his son made Adoptivus Filius
Ecclesiae, an adopted Son of the Church; or against him with Spain, who being
Protector and Champion of that See Apostolic, submits himself (as he has
ever done) to the Popes pleasure and design, and must not only forsake, but
aid against us in any war we should there undertake?

Danger by difference in Religion, in respect of the Subjects
Besides it is considerable, howsoever Subjects obedient to the Popes Censure a
dangerous Party.
all sides of our own will join in point of defense to a mutual aid; whether
they will so in a foreign Invasion; (especially when the party assailed shall
be of their own Religion.) For when the Interdiction of the Pope could draw
against John King of England and Ex Eul^gio Hist.
Lewis the twelfth a side of their own Subjects, (as it did after in the same
Kingdom against Henry the third, though all three conformable in points of
Religion to that See;) how much more will it work with the people devoted to
their opinions in a State divided from their obedience? For amongst us the
Catholic Church has many Jesuits to raise Faction, and divert people from
duty; the Recusants many, and Malcontents not few; all which with war will
discover themselves, but now by this happy calm unassured of assistance, lock
up their riches in security, and their hearts in silence. And therefore by any
enterprise, it is not with the rule of Seneca safe, concutere felicem statum.
For by provoking of some adversary in respect of Papal protection, they pick
advantage to ground a quarrel of Religion: and then the sancta expeditio, the
holy expedition against Lewis, will be made Bellum Sacrum, a holy War against
us.

But admitting no less than in former times an easiness to attempt; it is not a
meditation unnecessary to think in general of the dangers and impossibilities
to retain. For first we must more than transgress Limits quos posuerunt
Patres, the Bounds which our Fathers owned; and relinquish that defense of
Nature, wherewith she has incircled, divided, and secured us from the whole
world;

Festus Amaenus.
(Te natura potens Pelago divisit ab omni
Part orbis, tutaut semper ab host fores.
From all the Earth Nature has parted thee
With Seas, and set thee safe from Enemy.)
and commit our Frontiers (had we never so much Danger of large Frontiers.
upon the next Continent) to the protection of an Army, which besides the
continual Charge, if we give Ambitious and able Commanders, (as unable, for our
Interest we will not,) how ready shall it be in such a Leader, and so backed, if
he please, to give Law to his own Country? For Trifles will be quarrels good
enough for such as can make them good by Power; And whenever means and
Ambition leads any to trouble the State, he will be sure to color his pretext
with honest Titles. Salust. in Bello Catil.
Alii, sicuti Jura populi defenderent; Pars, quo Senatus authoritas maxima
foret, bonum publicum simulantes: some declaring to maintain the rights of the
People, others to uphold the authority of the Senate, all pretending to act for
the public good. Hence was it that Augustus Sueton^us in vita Augusti.
refused to add any more of the Barbarous Nations to the body of his Empire,
which with great facility he might have done; Dion Cassius.
and to restrain that infinite and unsafe desire of enlarging, left in Charge
to his Successors that especial point of advice, Tacitus.
coercendi intra Terminos Imperii, to keep the Empire within due and fitting
bounds. The like moderation from the same ground was in the late Queen, who
refused the sovereignty of the Netherlands, Ex propos^. Statuum de anno 1585.
so often and earnestly offered to her, foreseeing well, that as her State
should grow more respective by addition of People, and augmentation of
Territory; so Factions and Discontents (a common accident in worldly affairs)
would arise from superfluity. The State that may best admit increase is that,
unto which addition may be on every part indifferently. What State may best
ad^^^t addition.
Such was the advantage of Rome, by being situate in the midst of Europe:
whereas we are thrust out of the world; to which we have no other contiguity,
than an unsure element of fluxible foundation, the Sea, subject to tempest,
contrariety of wind, and more commodious for a potent enemy to intercept, than
our selves to secure. For how large soever any Kingdom is, all great directions
move from one place, commonly from one man, as the Heart in the Body. It is
therefore necessary that the seat be so placed, tha^ as well Intelligence as
Dispatch may safely pas^ with indifferency and assured Speed: And tho^ Forms
are most quick and easy in motion, whose extremes are all equally distant from
the Center; for the more different from the Circle, the more slow and hard.
Rome may sufficiently example this: For so long as the Orb of that Empire so
moved about her, all things kept on their course with order, and ease; but
after the Seat was by (...) in vita (...).
Constantine removed to an extremity of the Circle, it stood a while still, and
in the end dissolved. For either through the mass of Business, the limitedness
of any man's sufficiency, or impossibility to consider all due Circumstances but
in re praesenti, there must fall out infinite defects in the directions. Or if
none, either by reason of Distance they come too late, or if nor, by reason of
remisness, he who is to execute will be bolder with his Instructions than is
fit for a Minister to be. How dangerous ^s it then by addition of Territories
for our Master, Velleius Paterc. de Expeditione Caesaris.
Alterum pene Imperio nostro and suo ^tuaerenti Orbem, whilst he is seeking to
join another world, in a manner to his and our Empire, to alter either the
settled order of directions, or walls of our security? Besides, as in the Frames
of Nature Anima rationalis, the rational soul cannot informare, give life,
sense, or discourse to the matter of an Elephant or a Fly; (or any other body
disproportionable to a form so qualified:) so is there as well a bound of
amplitude and strictness wherein the soul of Government is comprised; Bodin. de
Repub. lib. 6.
Between which extremes there are many degrees of Latitude, some approaching to
the greatest (that nature seldom or never produces) some to the least, and
some to the mean; ^eyond which proportions respectively though ^ome may have a
will to affect, they never can ^ave a power to attain. And this we may see in
the former accession of so much to us in France, which we could never either
with Profit or Assurance retain, being gotten by Conquest, and but tacked to by
Garrison, contrary to the nature of Hereditary Monarchies. For some Kingdoms
(in which number this may be accounted) are of the same condition that
Demosthenes E^ cra^. Demonsth. ad Athenienses.
makes the Athenians: Non ea vestra ingenia sunt, ut ipsi aliis vi oppressis
Imperia teneatis; sed in eo magnae sunt vires vestrae, ut alium potiri
principatu prohibeatis, aut potitum exturbetis; It is not your way, violently
to oppress other States and seize the Government; but in this is your strength
manifest, that you can hinder another from possessing the Government, or when
he is possessed of it, throw him out again. Since then by Situation and Power
we are the fittest, either to combine or keep several the most potent and
warlike Nations of the West, it is the best for Safety, and the most for
Honor, to remain as we were, Arbiters of Europe, and so by Neutrality sway
still the Balance Safety in Neutrality.
of our mightiest Neighbors: which by holding of our hands, and only looking
on, we shall easily do, since Spain and France hang so indifferently, that a
little weight will cast the Beam; employing ours, as Claudius did his Forces in
Tacitus and Dion Cassius.
Germany, ut subsidio victis, Victoribus terrori essent, ne forte elati Pacem
turbarent, to assist the Conquered party, and to overawe the Victor, lest he
should be puffed up with pride, and disturb our peace. Thus did Henry the
eighth with the French and Spanish Princes, using as his Motto of Honor and
Power this, Cui adhaereo praeest, He rules whom I stick to. And the late Queen
studied rather how to guard her Allies, than to enlarge her Dominions,
multiplying her Leagues more by giving than receiving gratuities: winking at
her own wrongs, rather than willing to revenge. And (as the great Mistress of
the world once) did what rather became her Greatness, than what severity of
Arms required. Hence were her Seas for the most part freed from Pirates, and
her Land here cleared of Enemies. For according to Micipsae's counsel to
Jugurth, Non exercitus, neque Thesauri praesidia Regni sunt; Neither Armies nor
Treasure are the safety of a Kingdom: but such Allies as neither Arms
constrain, nor moneys purchase, sed officio and fide pariuntur. And since by
fortune of the times succeeding, this State has grown more upon Opinion than
Deed, and that we know Mag is fama quam vi stare res nostras, that our affairs
stand rather by Fame than Force; it is most safe, neither to discover weakness,
nor Honor attained by Neutrality, in being the Arbiter of all differences
between the mightiest Neighbors.
hazard loss by any attempt. Besides, standing as we do no ways obnoxious by
Site to any of our Neighbors, they will always be ready to referr the
judgment and order of their differences to us. As the Froisard.
Brabanters and Henowayes did to the Arbitrament of Edward the third: and Ex
Regist. and libris Tractatuum.
Charles the fifth and Francis the French King the decision of their quarrel to
Henry the eighth. Thus every part shall woo us, all Princes by their Orators
shall resort unto us, as to the Common Consistory of judgment in their
debates, and thereby add more to our Reputation than any power of our own. For
as well in States as in Persons, Suitors are an infallible token of Greatness;
which Demosthenes Ex Demost. 4 Philip.
told the Athenians they had lost, since none resorted to their Curia or
Praetorium. By this way shall we gain the Seat of Honor, Riches, and Safety;
and in all other but endless Expense, Trouble and Danger.

Robert Cotton Bruceus.

FINIS.

