Upon the DEATH of that Aged, Pio^s, Sincere hearted CHRISTIAN, JOHN ALDEN, Esquire
Late MAGISTRATE of New Plymouth Colony, who died Sept. 12th, 1687, being about
eighty nin^ years of age.
THE ^taff of bread, and water eke the stay,
From sinning Judah God will take away,
The prudent Counselor; the Honorable,
Whom Gracd and Holiness makes delectable,
The Judge, the Prophet and the ancient Saint,
The deaths of such cause sorrowful complaint,
The Earth and its Inhabitants do fall,
The aged Saint bears up its pillars all.
The hoary head in way of Righteousness
A crown of glory is. Who can express
The abundant blessings by Disciples old
In very deed they are more than can be told.
The guise it is of a wanton generation
To wish the aged soon might quit their station.
Though truth it be, The Lord our God does Jrown,
When aged Saints by death do tumble down.
What though there be not such Activity,
Yet in their Prayers there is such Fervency
As does great mercy for a place obtain,
And gracious presence of the Lord maintain.
Though Nature's strength in old age does decay,
Yet the inward man renewed is day by day.
The very presence of a Saint in years.
Who lifts his soul to God with prayers and rears,
Is a rich blessing unto any place
Who have that mercy to behold his face:
When sin is ripe and calls for desolation
God will'call home old Saints from such a nation.
Let sinners then of the Aged weary be.
God give me grace to mourn most heartily
For death of this, dear servant of the Lord,
Whose life God did to us so long afford:
God lent his life to greatest length of days;
In which he lived to his Redeemer's praise.
In youthful time he made Moses his choice,
His soul obeying great JEHOV AH's voice,
Freely forsook the world for sake of GOD,
In His House with His Saints to have abode.
He followed GOD into this Wilderness;
Thereby to all the world he did profess,
Affliction with the Saints a better part
And more delightful to his holy heart
Than sinful pleasures, lasting but a season:
Thus said his Fa^^^ so says not carnal Reason
He came one of (...) first into this Land,
And here was kept (...) ^od's most gracious hand
Years sixty-seven which time he did behold.
To poor New England mercies Manifold:
All God's great works to this His Israel
From first implanting what to them befell:
Of them he made (...)serious Observation,
And could of them present a large Narration,
His walk was holy, humble, and sincere,
His heart was filled with JEHOVAH's Fear
He honored GOD with much integrity,
God therefore did him truly magnify.
She hearts of Saints entirely did him love,
His Uprightness so highly did approve,
That whilst to choose they had their liberty
Within the Limits of this Colony
Their Civil Leaders, him they ever chose.
His Faithfulness made hearts with him to close.
With all the Governors he did Assist;
His Name recorded is within the List
Of Plimouth's Pillars to his dying day.
His Name is precious to eternal Ay.
He set his Love on God and knew His Name,
God therefore gives him everlasting Fame.
So good and heavenly was his Conversation,
God gave long life, and showed him His Salvation.
His work now finished upon this earth;
(Seeing the death of what he saw the birth)
His gracious Lord from heaven calls him home,
And says, My servant, now to Heaven come:
Thou have done good, been faithful unto Me,
Now shall thou live in bliss ETRNALLY,
On dying bed his Ailes were very great,
Yet verily his heart on GOD was set.
He bare his griefs with Faith and Patience,
And did maintain his lively confidence:
Saying to some, The work which God begun,
He would preserve to its perfection.
His mouth was full of blessings till his death
To Ministers and Christians all: his breath
Was very sweet by many a precious word
He uttered from the Spirit of his Lord.
He lived in Christ, in Jesus now he sleeps:
And his blessed soul the Lord in safety keeps.
JOHN ALDEN. Anagram End al on hi.
Death puts an End to all this world enjoyes,
And frees the Saint from all that here annoyes.
This blessed Saint has seen an end of all
Worldly perfections. Now his Lord does call
Him to ascend from earth to heaven high,
Where he is blessed to all Eternity.
Who walk with God as he, shall so be blessed,
And evermore in Christ His bliss shall rest.
Lord, Spare thy remnant, do not us forsake,
From us do not thy Holy Spirit take.
Thy Cause, thy Interest in this land still own:
Thy gracious presence ay let be our Crown.
J. C.


