The Adamites Sermon: Containing their manner of Preaching, Expounding, and
Prophesying: As it was delivered in Marie-bone Park, by Obadiah Couchman, a
grave Weaver, dwelling in Southwark, who with his company were taken and
discovered by the Constable and other Officers of that pl^ce; by the means of
a woman's husband who dogged them thither.

And some part likewise by means of a Gentlewoman, a widow, which is a
Ministers daughter in the City of London, who was almost persuaded to become
one of their Society, if her father had not dissuaded her from it.

Also a Dialogue between an Adamite and a Brownist, concerning their Religion,
etc.

depiction of a group of Adamites

Printed for Francis Coules, in the Year 1641.

A Dialogue between an Adamite and a Brownist, concerning their Religion, etc.
Adamite. PEace be upon you well beloved brother, may I be bold to know whither
the Spirit moves you to bend your course? for if I be not mistaken, your
frequent and far fetched sighs, the continual elevation, and lifting up of
your eyes, your sober, and very serious solitary countenance, the decent and
seemly cut of your hair, made even with the top of your ears, the comeliness
of your broad Hat, and narrow Ruff, the position, or putting of your Dogs-skin
gloves under your girdle, and the folding of your hands one within the other,
reveal unto me, that you are one of the innocent or harmless Lambs of the
holy Flock.


Brownist. In sincerity, my dear brother, (for your insight into me shows
you to be no less) I dare pronounce my self one of those harmles Lambs you
speak of; I am a poor sheep whom the ravenous and greedy Wolves have pursued
with eagerness and greediness to devour, but by the assistance of the holy
Spirit which rules in me, I have like a mild and guilelesse Dove, been
delivered from the Tallons of the greedy Gosse-Hawk. Moreover, I am by trade a
weaver, and by profession one of the brotherhood: I am now going to converse
with some of our brotherhood concerning our next assembly.


Adam. I assure you well beloved brother, I took you to be one of our
Congregation, and am heartily sorry that such pure zeal as dwells in you
should be so misled: I profess to you, you err very much, and are gone far
out of the way: you profess your self to be one of the brother^ood, therefore
you are out of the way, because you are one of the brotherhood.


Brown. Dear brother you condemn me before you do apprehend me, you do not
rightly conceive what the brotherhood is, but be not so passionate.


Ad. My zeal pusteth me up exceedingly therefore I care not what the
brotherhood is; for be it what it will, the brotherhood i^ superstition.


Brown. Dearly beloved brother, I beseech you bridle and curb the fury of your
hot zeal, and I will tell you what the brotherhood is, and give you good
reason for it.


Adam. Reason: art thou of a Religion thou can give a reason for? I say
Religion ought to be guided by the motion of the Spirit, not Reason: Surely
thou art one of the learned, that read in the language of the beast; thou
talkest so much of Reason.


Brown. No, I deny I am learned in the profane tongues, and do utterly
abhor and detest them: I have no more learning than my Father before me had,
who did in all humility submit his neck to the yoke or collar, because he could
not read: I hold it Idolatry to learn to read, because the very first letter
begins with a Cross: therefore it is superstition in the highest degree.


Ad. I heartily crave your forgiveness, good brother for my impatience, and
hope you will ascribe it to the heat of my ardent zeal, which often breaks
into passion: For my self, I am the Son of Adam, who begot me in his
innocence; I follow his steps before he fell: that is, I am an Adamite: And
though at this present you see me clothed in garments, which in verity and
truth ought not to be worn but by the wicked, yet know, that when we expound,
we lay aside those superstitious weeds and coverings of our bodies: and as my
father Adam was naked, whilst he was in Paradise, so do we prophecy naked;
that is to say, free from sin, as our Father was whilst he was naked.


Brown. How often do you prophecy, daily?


Ad. Not daily no, we have three days a week to meet upon mondayes, wensdayes,
and fridayes: The first day is a day of Conference, on which day we hold parley
how to increase and augment our number, and how to secure us from them that
envy our innocence: the second day is a day of humiliation, whereon we humble
our selves by fasting, and praying by the Spirit.


Brown. What need you to humble your selves so long as you are in innocence.


Ad. Yes, lest we should be subject to the like casualties our Father was, so
long as we so humble our selves, we are incapable of falling.


Brown. But what is done on the third and last day?


Adam. That is a day of rejoicing: on that day he on whom the Spirit falls is
led in state between two sisters, and mounted on a Chair, circled on every
side with holy brethren, and more holy sisters, where he prophesies till the
spirit gives way to the flesh, and suffers it to rebel: then he whom the
Spirit so moves, by the insurrection of the flesh makes his election among the
holy sisters, the rest follow his example, and so they endeavor to propagate,
and augment their number. This is the day of rejoicing, good brother follow my
steps into the place of prophesying, and you shall return abundantly edified.


Brown. Well, in regard it is for propagation, and if I be edified as you say,
I doubt not but to bring forth fruits accordingly.

So they both departed from that place where they held this conference, and
went straight to Mary-bone Park, where were gathered at least one hundred men
and women, and only stayed for this Adamite; and so soon as he was come, they
instantly stripped themselves naked to the bare skin, both men and women: and
then in the manner aforesaid, one of this holy Tribe ascends the Chair,
wherein he preached this Sermon verbatim, as follows.


The Adamites Sermon.
MOst dearly beloved, now we are congregated and gathered together in the
fear of the Lord, like an innocent and harmless Flock of sheep in this holy
place, much like that Garden of Paradise wherein our first parents Adam and Eve
were placed, Let us (my holy Brethren, and more holy sisters) imitate their
examples, for you know they were naked, which is to say (if we rightly expound
it) they were naked or without Clothes: therefore let us lay aside and set
apart these unsanctified and wicked weeds, these rags of ungodliness, and
profane Relics of sin, that is to say our Clothes; not only Gowns and
Breeches, Peticoats and Doublets; but also our shirts and smocks, especially
because they are of the color white, and like to the whore of Babylons
superstitious smock, with whom the wicked commit the act of Adultery.

To which purpose I have made choice of a Text, and will by the holy assistance
of Inspiration, Interpret, Expound, and Prophecy. Therefore with holy
attention, I charge and command you to give ear (for I hope none of our Sect
have ever lost theirs) and mark, as you shall find it thus registered and
recorded (or that the infants of grace may plainly understand) printed in the
(...) Chapter of Genesis, and the (...) Verse, the words are these: And they
were both naked; And they were both naked. Beloved, such is the sweetness of
these words that I am loath to lose the taste of them out of my mouth, but to
satisfy the expectation of this fair assembly, according to the motion of the
Spirit I shall prophe^ie: Mark, beloved, and give attention to the sound of
the words: And they were both naked: They are words indeed of pleasure for all
the senses. No question but the Prophet Genesis himself was naked when he
writ these words. Beloved by these words understand a twofold nakedness; The
first is a nakedness, or being void or expert of garments to cover the body:
whereunto a nakedness of sin is incident, and appertaining to the naked of
Garments; or to explain it more fully, they that wear no clothes, wear no
coverings for sin.

The second is a nakedness of stone-walls, and windows full of Idolatrous
pictures, Organs that bellow like the Beast of Rome, or to interpret it more
plainly: Nakedness of a Church, is the third nakedness meant and understood
in my Text: of all which, by the assistance of the Spirit, in their order. And
first for nakedness of garments*

Those that are naked, and uncloathed have no covering for their sins, whereas,
those that are clothed in fine raiment, like Dives spoken of in the
Evangelist, have the visible marks of the beast: they are proud, haughty, and
ambitious, they are gluttons and surfeit with the Banners of pride: many wear
Cloaks for their sins, yea, brethren and sisters double Cloaks, yea though they
be short Cloaks, yet they are lined with Plush, they are outlandish plush
cloaks, they smell of cursed Mahomet. Others my beloved brethren and Sisters,
wear Cloaks of red Scarlet, side, large, and down to the hams, which are
indeed covers for their sins that are as red as scarlet; they are popish and
idolatrous, for they are invented by the French: they wear also locks, like
the curled locks of Antichrist, to cover their ears, as if they were all
Scriveners: long hair is the ensign of pride, and the world is full of these
ensigns. Nay my beloved, those that are the chief heads and Governors of the
Kingdom, the punishers of vice, maintain it in themselves, by wearing side
and long robes of Purple, and Scarlet, under which are hid innumerable
multitudes of iniquities. Nay, moreover, my beloved Brethren and Sisters, the
popish Bishops do gird sin to them, and keep it close, as if they were in love
with it, under their Canonical Cassocks, which are bound to them with
Leviticall Sursingles, and upon them they wear large Surplices, made of fine
linen, like Dives that is spoken of before, and they wear upon them Gowns of
beyond sea Satlens; the very name whereof is Idolatry, because it is a cousin
German to Saten: thus much for Habits. Now to the next point of Nakedness, which
is nakedness of a Church, They were naked, that is to say, without a Church.

Now beloved, we must consider what a Church is. A very zealous Brother had the
unhappiness to be a bookish Scholar, and to understand the profane language
of Rome, but before his death he was very penitent for it, and sorrowed
exceedingly. He said the name of a Church in the Idolatrous Latin tongue was
Ecclesia, which is derived from a Greek word, (...), which signifies to call,
and that is the reason those profane things called Bells were first invented
so call the people to the Church. Beloved, I say it is Idolatry to have Bells
in the Church, in regard they call men thither, whereas they ought indeed to
be guided by the motions of the Spirit, and so congregate themselves together,
and not be called together by those musical Bells, Bells that do ring
Idolatry in Changes. There are in those Idolatrous Churc^es ^reat bell owing
Organs, that roar like the great beast of Rome, which the wicked say is to
stir up their devotion. Oh beloved, this ought nor to be so, I am sure it is
otherwis^ with us, who (whilst we are in this Park) are in innocence like our
Father: our devotion is more zealous, which is only moved by the Spirit, and
not by the calling together, and compulsion of the Bells and Organs. These
wicked beloved, sing their prayers in prick song, they keep men and boys
purposely for singing, which are clothed in white Raiments, they provide houses
for them in Pe^ty Canons; Beloved, I know you are not ignorant what Canons are,
Canons I say, that were invented by the Arch-Prelate of Lambeth, wherein was
included that Portentous Monster, etc. Now the singing men live in the Petty
Canons, what then are the Great Ca^ons? Then the Ministers that preach in those
Churches are learned and skillful in the variety of tongues such as were at
the confusion of Babel, which I hope will be the confusion of their Church; for
it was the confusion of languages that pulled down that high steeple, that
Grantham spire steeple of Babel: They speak in that Idolatrous tongue Latin
so boldly as they do in the Masses, and without contradictions my beloved,
they give Logical Reasons too which is most ab^ominable: they read prayers
likewise upon the book, and not pray by the motion of the spirit that reigns
within them: and beloved more th^n all this, they pe^forme these superstitious
offices in their Clothes, which is more abominable than all the rest; for
were their actions never so good, being done in their clothes, it is most
profane. Moreover beloved in these Churches there are great windows, nay
painted windows, I say unto you windows full of Images and Pictures; and the
wicked do kneel when they pray, and do look upon these Images, which is
mere popery it self: they also marry and give in marriage in those
Churches, which is altogether to be abhorred, which is a great hindrance to
propagation, when a man is tied to one woman.

These my dearly beloved, are infallible signs of popery nourished in their
hearts, and expressed in their actions: but there is one thing more cherished
and favored as their chief darling, which I am afraid is a sin so name.
Believe me brethren, it sticks in my jaws very hard, it is a Cross, it is a
Cross I say: Do not they set upon their Idolatrous Churches the Cross? Do not
they build in the middle of their Cities Crosses and put heads of Gold upon
them? Do they not make Percullices for the City gates with cross beams in
them? Do they not suffer the Lettices, or ensigns of the house of the beast
with seven heads and ten horns, I mean of Tavernes and Ale houses, to be
made with cross bars? Do they not set up signs to their houses, (which
show there is nothing but popery within) of the Cross Keys? Do they not
picture Saint Laurence a cross his Gridfron? Do they not make the bottom of
their Andirons in crosses? Are not their bed cords a cross? Are not the Leads
in their windows a cross? are not their two-handed swords made in form of a
Cross? Is not their coin, as shillings, six pences, and the like, full of
Crosses? Our well affected brethren the Scots are enemies to those Idolatrous
crosses, who make their two pences with Roses and Thistles upon them? have not
their gold of 11. shillings the Daggers a cross? Do they not lay Sacks upon
the backs of their horses a cross? Are not the Spokes of Coach-wheeles a
Cross? are not the horses harnesses made a cross: And moreover, lest they
should not have enough of Crosses, do they not name their streets Red Cross
street, and White-crosse street? Nay more than this, do they not set watchmen
every night to attend the headless Cross in Barbicane with Halberts that are
a cross? My beloved they deal with many more crosses, which the Spirit will
not suffer me to name; But I will prophecy the destruction of these Crosses;
Thou Cross in Cheap Side shall be deprived of thy h^ad, for thou art a
Traitor; Thou art like tho Image that Nebuchadnezzar set up, thou have a head
of Gold: thy bars about thee shall not desend thee, thou shall down, and the
Idols which thou bear about thee shall down also; thou shall be like thy
Idolatrous sister in the Strand, thou shall be robbed of thy riches, have thy
head cut off, and be made a byword to the Brethren. Thou Tottenham high
Cross, thou high place of Tottenham, thy steps shall be degraded, and the
Boys shall no more fall down and worship thee. Thou profane Tailor that
sit cross legged, thy hands shall be troubled with the Fellon, ^hy knuckles
shall be troubled with the itch: bread for thy sake shall mould, an^ for want
of it thou shall eat thy own vermin^; tho bills shall be rent in the middle and
thou shall dye a beggar. Thou Cobbler, that drawest thy threads a cross, the
Sole thou take in hand to translate shall fleet; for thy sake the patent for
Leather shall be renewed, it shall be transported into ^ra^ce: thy old Boots
hanging at thy shall shall be mouldie, and none shall buy them, thou shall
pawn thy Aule for drink, and thy end shall be in the stall. Thou wicked
Waterman, that does cross the Water, there shall be for thy sake a great
press, so that thou shall forsake the River: when thou returnest, thou shall
see fires and Coaches upon the Thames, and the first Fair thou carriest after,
thou shall be paid with the P. and say I thank you mistress: these plagues
my beloved shall fall upon these Idolatrous Crosses, and their Adorers. Nay
more, the very name of Cross shall be utterly abolished. Let not your
Daughters my dearly beloved, sit like Tailors cross legged, it will hinder the
increase of the godly: Let not your old men go cross gariered, nor go with
crutches under their arms, that are made like Crosses, for it is popery in
the abstract: Do not covet to enter their idolatrous Churches for they are
abominable: This our assembly is more holy than their consecrated Church: the
green Liverie of these trees more pleasant than their painted windows; the
Summer apparel of the earth more delightful and softer by far than their
stones: the chirping of these pretty birds more melodious than their howling
Organs; and lastly, our nakedness Innocence, and their vestments Idolatrous;
nay, they are popish and superstitious in all their actions: but good brethren
and sisters, be not seduced by them, for they be wicked, abominable, and
profane.

But beloved brethren, and more beloved sisters, it is no wonder, though they
be altogether Idolatrous, when their very bread that is their chief
nourishment, is Cross Buns, which is Idolatrous, and is made of corn that is
ground by a wicked Miller, who has carried it in a Sack cross his shoulders,
I say, cross his sholders, and has ground it in a Windmill, the Sails
whereof are cross: And my beloved, as if this were not Idolatry sufficient,
they cloth their sails with clothes, and never think of the golden saying,
And they were both naked.

We therefore, my dearly affected, that are void of these superstitious
coverings, not only Clothes, but also Churches, for we prophecy in the open
fields as our Father Adam did in the garden of Eden, must needs be in the state
of innocence, as he was, for we have not so much as fig leaves upon us: let us
therefore rejoice exceedingly, and express our joy in the lively act of
Generation, and propagation of the godly, that may be borne naked as we are at
this present. And so much for this time.

FINIS.

