THE COUNTRY-PARSON'S ADVICE TO HIS Parishioners.

In Two Parts.

I. Containing a Plain and Serious Exhortation to a Religious and Virtuous
Life. II. General Directions how to Live accordingly.
LONDON, Printed for Benj. Took, at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1680.

The Contents.
PART I. A Serious Exhortation to a Religious and Virtuous Life.
THe Introduction. Page 1.
Chap. 1. Containing the first Argument to a Holy Life, viz. That being God's
Creatures we ought to be subject to God, as all other, Creatures are; to
Consult the Laws of our Creation, and consult the Honor and Dignity of our
Nature. p. 2. Chap. 2. Containing a second Argument to a Holy Life, from those
Obligations, which our Profession of Christianity lays on us. p. 7. Chap. 3.
Containing a third Argument to a Holy Life, from the General Consideration of a
future Judgment. p. 13. Chap. 4. Containing a Fourth Argument to a Holy Life,
The Consideration of the future punishments of wicked men, viz. That their
Torments, are extreme and intolerable, without Ceasing and without End. p. 22.
Chap. 5. Sect. 1. Containing a Fifth Argument to a Holy Life, from the
Consideration of those great Rewards God has prepared for Good men, in the
other World; the Greatness of which, may be in some Measure estimated, p. 40.
1. From God's Goodness to good men even in this World. p. 41. 2. That the
Reward is not proportioned to our Deserts, which are very little, but to the
Goodness of God, which is Infinite. p. 43. And 3. Is designed as the most
glorious Manifestation of the Divine Goodness. ibid. And 4. It is the Purchase
of Christ's Blood, and the Reward of his Obedience and Sufferings, which are of
Infinite Merit. p. 45.

Sect. 2. Containing a Prosecution of the same Arguments, That this Reward of
good men must be great; Because 5. It is not only the Reward Christ purchased
for his Disciples, but that also which he has obtained for himself, as the
Recompense of his Obedience and Sufferings; With a more particular Explication,
wherein this Happiness consists; a serious Expostulation with those who slight
it, and the necessity of Holiness for the obtaining of it. p. 46. Chap. 6.
Containing a Sixth Argument to a Holy Life, from considering that these Rewards
and Punishments are not so far off, as some persons vainly imagine: With the
conclusion of this first part. p. 54.
PART. II. General Directions how to live a Holy and Christian Life.
THe Introduction. Page 61.
Chap. 1. Sect. 1. Containing the First Advice, Seriously to resolve upon a
Holy Life; the necessity of such a Resolution, and the great Virtue and
Efficacy of it. p. 63.
Sect. 2. Containing some Directions how to form a lasting Resolution. First,
to resolve soberly, and deliberately, not rashly and in have; maturely to
consider what it is we must resolve; and carefully to examine all the Advantages
on both sides. p. 64. Secondly, to take the matter into Consideration several
distinct times, before we fix our Resolution. p. 71. Thirdly to back the
Resolution with a solemn Vow. p. 72.

Sect. 3. A Prosecution of the same Argument, containing some further
Directions, in making a lasting Resolution; as, Fourthly to write down our
Resolutions, in the words wherein we make them, and to engage our selves to God
in a solemn Bond and Contract. p. 72. Fifthly to make known this Resolution to
the World, as often as a fit occasion offers, which very much tends to the
Glory of God, delivers us from many Temptations, and makes us more steadfast to
what we resolve. p. 73. Sixthly, to seek out some good men who have taken up
the same Resolutions, and to contract an Intimate Friendship and Acquaintance
with them; or, if we cannot find any such, to endeavor to persuade our old
Friends and Companions to enter into such a Religious Friendship. p. 79.

Chap. 2. Sect. 1. Containing the second Advice, To take up our Cross, and
forsake all to follow Christ: Where is explained the Nature of this Duty, and
the necessity of it. p. 85. Sect. 2. Containing several Arguments to reconcile
us to this Duty of Self-denial, From the necessity of it, in order to our
Spiritual Life and Health; from the Example of our Savior, who was a great
Pattern of Self-denial; from the Reasonableness of this Duty considered in it
Self, and the great Advantages of it. p. 104. Sect. 3. Containing some
Directions how to put this Duty of Self-denial in Practice. p. 110. Chap. 3.
Sect. 1. Containing a Third Advice, to give up our selves, Souls and Bodies
entirely to God, with several Arguments to persuade us to it. p. 118. Sect. 2.
Containing several Directions how to put this Advice of giving our selves to
God, in Practice. p. 123. Chap. 4. Sect. 1. Containing the Fourth Advice, To
grow in the Knowledge of God, and of the things of God. p. 145.
Sect. 2. Containing several Directions how to improve in all divine Knowledge,
as, Truly know what is necessary, and may be helpful to thee. p. 149. And the
means of procuring this Knowledge, 1. Reading the Holy Scriptures. p. 150. 2.
Reading good Books. p. 151. 3. Hearing of Sermons and good Discourses. Ibidem.
4. Frequent conferring with serious Christians. p. 152. 5. Meditating upon the
good things we hear and read. p. 154 6. Prayer, which ought never to be
omitted. p. 156. 7, Regulating our lives according to this Knowledge. p. 157.

Chap. 5. Sect. 1. Containing a Fifth Advice, To live always as in God's
sight; with the great Usefulness of this, to promote a holy Life. p. 159. Sect.
2. Containing some Directions for the Practice of this Duty, of living always
as in God's sight. p. 163
Chap. 6. Containing the last general Advice. To commit our Souls to the Care
and Conduct of Spiritual Guides: with proper Directions relating to it. p. 171.
1. Christ has settled an Order of men as his Substitutes on Earth, to take
Care of Souls. p. 172. 2. This Order of Men thus settled by Christ, are
authorized by him to preach the Gospel. p. 175. 3. Christ has Promised, and
accordingly has, is, and will be with them in the Exercise of their Office. p.
176. 4. Christ as he has appointed an Order of men to guide the Church, so he
has charged all men to respect them as his Officers. p. 178. The Practice of
this last general Advice. p. 185.

A Catalogue of some Books Sold by Benj. Took, at the Ship in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
HErodoti Halicarnassaei Historiarum libri ix. gr. lat. Folio. Francisci Suarez
Tractatus de Legibus ac Deo Legislatore. fol. Causin's Holy Court. fol.
Archbishop Bramhal's works. A Collection of all the Statutes now in Force in
the Kingdom of Ireland. fol. Baker's Chronicle of England. fol. Bishop
Sanderson's Sermons. fol. Le Beau Pleadeur, Judge Winche's Book of Entries.
Holyoake's large Dictionary in 3. parts. fol. Dr. Browne's Travails. 4o. A True
Widow, a Comedy by Tho. Shadwel. 4o. Dr. Dumoulin's Vindication of the
Protestant Religion. 4o. Phocaena, or the Anatomy of a Porpess by E. Tyson. 4o.
Dodwel's separation of Churches from Episcopal Government, as practiced by our
present Non-Conformists, proved Schismatical. 4o. -- His two letters of Advice,
1. For the Susception of Holy Orders, 2. For Studies Theological, especialy
such as are rational. 8o. -- Some Considerations of present Concernment, how
far Romanists may be trusted by Princes of another Persuasion. 8o. -- Two short
Discourses against the Romanists. 12o. Stearne de obstinatione. Praefixa sunt
Prolegomena H. Dodwel. 8o. Evelyn of Navigation and Commerce. Bishop Wetenhal
of Gifts and Offices in the Public Worship of God. 8o. -- The Catechism of the
Church of England with Marginal Notes. 8o. Balei Elenchus motuum. 8o.
Langhornii Chronicon Regum Anglorum. 8o. Poems and Songs by T. Flatman. 8o.
Poems by N. Tate. 8o. The French Gardener. 8o. Gardener de Trinitate, contra
Sandium. 8o. Phaedri Fabulae in usum Scholar. 8o. Dumoulins short view of the
Points in Controversy between us and the Romanists. Herbert's Country-Parson.
12o. Wensely on the Church Catechism. 12o. Henshaw's Register of the Air. 12o.
A Letter of Advice to a young Gentleman leaving the University.
A SERIOUS EXHORTATION TO A Religious and Virtuous Life.
The Introduction.
I Design, (dear Brother) through God's grace, to give thee the best assistance
I can, in a Religious and Virtuous life; to direct thee how to live to God's
glory, and to attain that perfect, and happy Estate, which God has made thee
capable of, and which thy Savior desires to bring thee to, by that Holy
Religion which thou do profess. But before thou do accept of my assistance,
and direction, it may be, thou will desire to know, whether there be any reason
why thou should apply thy self to live such a life, and whether thou may
not as prudently let it alone, and live as the most of thy neighbors do; and
therefore I desire, that thou would do me, and thy self, the kindness,
seriously to consider the following things.

CHAP. I.
Containing the first Argument to a Holy Life: viz. That being God's Creatures
we ought to be subject to God, as all other Creatures are; to observe the laws
of our creation, and consult the Honor and Dignity of our Natures.

FOrasmuch as thou know that thou art God's Creature, and did receive thy
Being and life from him, and subsistest altogether in him, thou must
necessarily acknowledge that thou art, and ought to be at his disposal, and
to live, and act according to his intention, and the end for which thou wast
made. As thou art God's Creature, and have no other Being than what thou have
received from him, so thou can have no power nor end, but what he who gave
thee thy Being, gives, and prescribes to thee. This is a law which all the
Creatures of God are, and must necessarily be subject to, and thou see that
all the inferior Creatures do act according to it: they do employ themselves,
according to the capacity of their Being, in that for which God Created them,
and tend directly to the end, for which they were Created, and ordained; and
therefore, thou can not but know, that thou ought to do so likewise, and
that, for whatever end thou wast Created, thou art constantly to intend and
prosecute the same in thy whole life. Could thou thy self give life, and
Being to any thing, thou would and might justly expect the same from it.
And therefore, I must beseech thee to consider why and for what end God gave
thee thy Being; for, That thou art indispensably obliged to intend, and
prosecute. Now thou art sensible, that thou have an excellent Being, and that
the other Creatures, which thou beholdest in the World, are much inferior to
thee. Thou have an Understanding, and by that the knowledge of things, which
they have not, and cannot have, viz. of things Spiritual and Immaterial: Thou
have a will free to choose, or refuse, to do, or not to do, according to the
direction of thy Understanding, without Coaction or Compulsion; whereas they
act necessarily, and without any such liberty: thou have desires implanted in
thy Soul after things, which they have no apprehension of; and art capable of
some enjoyments, which they are altogether incapable of: to what end then,
had thou this excellent Being bestowed upon thee, and what is it, that thou
art to aim at, to desire, and endeavor whilst thou art in the world? Can
thou think, when thou considerest thy own faculties, and capacities, that thou
wast made merely to get a little money, by carking and careing, by toyling and
sweating, by plotting and contriveing? a poor business surely for such an
excellent Creature to be employed about! and thou debasest thy self extremely,
and reproachest thy Maker, if thou do imagine it. But Brother, thou know
that money is not a thing desirable for it self, but for Use, as it procures
necessaries for the belly and the back, and things grateful, and pleasing to
sensual appetites and desires; and therefore, thou must enquire further,
whether thou wast made only to eat and drink, and having made provision for the
flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof: and I beseech thee, brother, tell me,
whether this will not sink thee down into the condition of the beasts, and
birds, and reflect as injuriously upon thy Maker; for certainly, they are as
capable of such gratifications, and satisfactions, as thou art, notwithstanding
thy excellent Spirit and better capacities: they can feast as gustfully upon
those provisions that God has made for them, as thou can do, and sing as
merrily. Thou do not Cloth thy servant in purple, and fine linen, to send
him to the plough: nor bring up thy child in all the polite learning of the
world, on purpose to employ him in feeding hogs: and if thou should see thy
neighbor act so foolishly, thou would not fail to deride him for it. And
will thou dare to impute the like folly to the wise Creator, and Governor of
the World, and believe that he has given thee an immortal Spirit, to be
employed only about the Objects of Sense, to the end that thou may live like
the Beasts that perish? far be it from thee. Thou art made certainly for a much
better, and nobler end than they were, and the consideration of the powers, and
capacities of thy Soul, would lead thee to the knowledge of it, though God had
given thee no other means of knowing it. Thou art capable of knowing thy
Creator, of contemplating his infinite perfections, of admiring, and praising,
and loving what thou know. Though thou live in the world, yet thou can
have thy mind in Heaven, and dwell with God by desire and love; and whilst
thou do seast thy senses upon these material and perishing things, thou
can feast thy Spirit much more upon the never failing wisdom, and goodness
of the Maker of all things. Thou know him to be the supreme Good, and that
every thing is good, and happy only so far as it partakes of his goodness, and
felicity; and thou know that there can be no nearer, no other way to perfect
happiness, than to give up thy self wholly to him, to submit to his government
and Conduct, to do whatever he will have thee to do, to suffer all that he
will lay upon thee, to have thine eye always upon him, to delight thy self in
him, to desire and hope more fully and perfectly to know him, and enjoy him.
These things thou know, or may know, and thou art capable of acting
according to thy knowledge: thou can give thy self to God, thou can
submit thy self to him, thou can serve him, and obey him with a cheerful and
active service; thou can praise, and magnify him, and rely altogether upon
him, and hope and long for a complete fruition of him. Behold then, what thou
wast made to do, and observe how thou art to employ thy self in the World. Here
is thy end, and this is thy work, a work worthy of so excellent a Creature; it
is called in one word, to serve God; and whatsoever thou do, or endeavourest
to do, or bestowest thy time in, that is contrary, or impertient to this end,
is but vanity and folly, near lost labor, and will bring forth no fruit but
grief and sorrow, shame and confusion; for that, it is not the work that we
came into the world to do. We were made men, that is in the Image of God, not
to live like beasts, no, nor to please our selves in any way; but to serve, and
please, and glorisy God here, and to possess and enjoy him for ever hereafter.
Judge then, good Brother, whether thou have not reason to serve God with all
thy Might in a holy and Virtuous life.

CHAP. II.
Containing a second argument to a Holy Life, from those obligations which our
profession of Christianity lays on us.

FOrasmuch as thou do profess thy self a Christian, I must desire thee to
consider seriously, what the Christianity is which thou do profess, and what
the profession of it does oblige or bind thee to. To this purpose, I beseech
thee to reflect upon thy Baptism, and to call to mind what was then transacted,
and done between God and thy Soul, or (which is all one) between God and the
Church in thy behalf. Now, in that Holy Ceremony thou wast dedicated to God the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and, renouncing-the World the Flesh and the Devil,
did promise, and vow obedience to all his commandments; and God did
mercifully accept of thy abrenuntiation, and dedication; and did take thee into
his house and family, that family which Christ did purchase with his blood, and
which he governs by his Spirit, and for which he has prepared everlasting
bliss, and Glory. Thou wast then taken off that rotten, and corrupt Stock of
the first and earthly Adam, which brings forth fruit only to Death, and
Destruction, and grafted into the living Stock of the second and Spiritual
Adam, which fructifies to everlasting Glory, and Happiness. Thou did renounce
that Principle of Sin and Death, which thou did derive from thy first
Parents, and whatever is grateful and pleasing to it; and giving up thy self to
God, thou wast received by him, and given to his Son Jesus Christ, who took
possession of thee by his Spirit, which is a Principle of new life in thee.
That all this is done in Baptism, not in Ceremony, and by way of representation
only, but in deed, and in real effect, is plain enough in the Scriptures. Thou
may look into the following places for thy Satisfaction. Our Blessed Savior
tells us, John 15. v. 5. I am the Vine, and ye are the Branches; he that
abides in me, and I in him, brings forth much fruit. Now, this Abiding in
him, does presuppose our Ingrafting into him: and this was done in our Baptism;
for then, as the Apostle St. Paul tells us, 1. Epistle to the Corinth. 12.13.
v. We were baptized by one spirit into one body; and that Body is the body of
Christ, as you will see v. 27. of the same Chapter. And therefore, we are said
in Baptism to put on Christ, Gal. 3. v. 27. and in the 6th Chapter to the
Romans, we are said to be planted together ( viz. by Baptism) in the likeness
of Christ's death, v. 5th. and by this the same Apostle tells us, That we are
saved, Titus 3. v. 5. According to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of
Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost. And, that we cannot (ordinarily)
be saved without this Washing, and Renewing; our Blessed Savior told
Nicodemus, John 3. v. 5. Except a man be regenerated of water, and the spirit,
he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. These places of Scripture being
understood in that sense, which the first and best Christians did take them in,
do teach us all that which I said before concerning Baptism; and the Church,
whereto we do belong, understanding them accordingly, does teach us the same,
both in the Office of Baptism, and the Catechism, telling us, that in Baptism
we are regenerated, and made members of Christ, and inheritors of ( that is we
have a Right thereby to inherit) the Kingdom of Heaven. Thou see then (dear
Brother) what thou art, as thou art a Christian, and what thou professest thy
self to be. Thou art separated from the world, dedicated and consecrated to
God, united to Christ Jesus, and in him and by him a Child of God, and an Heir
of everlasting Lise. Thou art not thy own (therefore) but God's, and thou art
his, not only by Creation, but by Redemption and Purchase, by thy own act, and
voluntary resignation of thy self to him, by Covenant and Promise, by a real
incorporation into the Body of Christ, and the participation of his Spirit.
This is an honorable and a happy Estate, and it was a wonderful Grace, that
such a worthless, rebellious Creature should ever be admitted into it. And need
I now to tell thee (Brother) what kind of life, such a man as thou art, and in
such an Estate ought to live? It is a rule in Nature, (thou know) that such
as a Being is, such will be the actions and operations of it; and therefore, it
is necessary that thy life and actions be agreeable to thy Being and state, as
thou art a Christian; and since the estate of a Christian is an Holy and Divine
estate, it is necessary that thy life and actions be Holy and Divine, as thy
state is. Art thou a Member of Christ, ingrafted into his Body, and quickened by
his Spirit; and ought thou not to be conformable to Christ, and to live the
life of Christ? Art thou a Child of God, and ought thou not to be led by the
Spirit of God, [ Romans 8.14.] and to be a follower or imitator of God (as the
Apostle says, Ephesians. 5.1.) in Love and Purity? Art thou an heir of Heaven,
(for all the Children of God are Heirs, Romans 8.17.) and ought not thy
Conversation to be in Heaven? Ought not thy Thoughts and Desires to be upon
thine inheritance; and thy Heart and Life to be such as may render thee meet to
be a partaker of it, Coloss. 1.12? Would not thou wonder to see the pleasant
Vine degenerate into a sorry Thistle, and the fruitful Olive into an
unprofitable Bramble? And what do thou less, if being a Christian thou do
live like a Heathen, if being in the Spirit thou do walk after the Flesh, and
mind the things of the Flesh? Was it not a most dreadful Curse that drove the
great King Nebuchadnezzar out of his stately Palace into the Fields, amongst
the Beasts, to eat grass like the oxen, Dan. 4? And do not thou make his
Curse to be thy own choice, when being a Child of God, an Heir of the Kingdom
of Heaven, which is more than to be Emperor of the whole Earth, thou do set
thy heart upon this dunghill World, and have no esteem or relish of Heavenly
things? If with profane Esau, thou sellest thy Birthright for a mess of
Pottage, and despising thy Eternal Inheritance, desire to have thy Portion
only in this life? The reason of all this is plain enough, and I hope, will be
readily acknowledged by thee: But however, it is impossible but thou must
confess, that thou art obliged to perform thy Promises, and to pay thy Vows
unto the most High; and that, since thou have given up thy self to God, thou
have not the least power over thy self, but ought to live altogether to him.
If thou have an ill opinion of thy Neighbor, and that justly, when he is not
as good as his word to thee, how can thou but condemn thy self, when thou
breakest thy Vows unto the Lord? and if, when any Profane thing has been
offered to God, and consecrated by Prayer, and Ceremonies, and serves to Holy
and Divine Administrations, thou esteemest it as separated from common Use, and
call it Sacrilege and Profaneness to employ it in common ways; art not thou
thy self guilty of the highest Sacrilege, when, being Dedicated and Consecrated
to God by Baptism, thou do withdraw thy self from him, and never imployest
thy self for him, nor referrest thy self unto him? The Apostle tells us, That
we are not our own, because we are bought with a price ( i.e. the Blood of the
Son of God) 1 Cor. 6. v. 19, 20. and I add to it, because we have likewise
given up our selves to him that bought us; and therefore, there is the greatest
reason that we should glorisie him in our Bodies, and our Spirits, which are
God's. It was the Saying of a Devout Man, many years ago, 'That it had been
better for us never to have been, than to dwell in our selves and to our
selves; and we shall find it too true one day, if, forgetting our state and
Profession, and Obligation as we are Christians, we do live to our selves, and
not to God. But this leads to a third Consideration, viz.

CHAP. III.
Containing a third Argument to a Holy Life, from the general Consideration of
a future Judgment.

COnsider, that there will a time come, when thou must give an exact account of
thy life and actions; and it shall be known to all the world, how thou have
demeaned thy self, both as a Man, and Christian. Dear Brother, believe thou
the Scriptures? I know thou do, and thou have the greatest reason in the
world to do so. Observe therefore what they tell thee concerning that account
which thou art to make; and then, consider whether there be no reason enough,
why thou should be careful to lead a Virtuous and Holy Life. It is a mighty
encouragement indeed to us in well doing, that our Savior is to be our Judge;
for he, who loved his Enemies so as to die for them, will never forget the good
works of those whom he does call his friends, John 15.14. but lest ny of us
should be so unwise as to make this an Argument for a licentious and careless
way of living, promising our selves much favor from him, and an easy account
at the Day of Judgment; he has told us frequently, that he purposes to proceed
severely with us, and to show no favor but what may consist with the exactest
Justice. And it well deserves our observation, that, though he was the mildest,
and mercifullest Person alive, and expressed the greatest tenderness, and love
to sinful men that ever was, insomuch that his Enemies cast it as a reproach
upon him, that he was a friend to Publicans and Sinners; yet he never spoke of
the Day of Judgment, but with great severity; nor of himself, as the Judge of
the world, but in such words as altogether exclude that fond partiality which
wicked men expect from him at that day. Thus in one place he represents himself
to be an austere and hard man, and tells us, That he expects to reap, where he
did not sow, and to gather where he did not straw, i.e. He will expect, and
require from us (when he comes to Judge us) an Increase of those Talents which
he has entrusted us with; and if we have not improved them to his advantage,
he will first take them away from us, and then cast us into a Prison of
darkness, where shall be weeping, and gnashing of teeth; Math. 25, 26, 27. and
we may note there, that it is with the unprofitable Servant, the Servant that
brought him no Increase, that he will deal so severely; and therefore, how
rigorously may we believe he will deal with those that do mispend his Talents,
and make no Use of them, but to his dishonor? In the same Chapter likewise; we
find him no less severe to five foolish Virgins, whom he shuts for ever out of
Heaven, because they had no oil with their Lamps, and were not ready exactly at
the hour (though it was midnight) to meet the Bridegroom, v. 12. In another
place, he condemns to everlasting misery, not only those who accept not his
invitation to his Marriage Feast, but those likewise that came to it without
wedding garments, Math. 22. v. 12, 13. and in the 7th Chapter of the same
Gospel he declares, That this shall be the portion of all the workers of
iniquity, though they have called him Lord, and prophesied in his Name, and
cast out Devils, and done many wonderful works; that is, though they have
professed themselves his Disciples, and Servants, and done some things, which
the world accounts great, for his honor, yet he will not own them; and though
they make fiar Pleas for themselves, and beg his mercy, and favor, with the
greatest earnestness, and importunity, yet he will have no regard unto them,
but banish them for ever from him. All this, and much more than this, has our
Blessed Savior told us by way of Parable; and he has no where encouraged us
to hope for any thing more easy and favorable, when he speaks plainly of it,
and without a Parable. He has let us know in plain words, that he will judge
our works, nay, our very words also, and require an account, not only of our
filthy and ungodly Speeches, but of our idle, our vain and unprofitable
discourses likewise, Math. 12.36. v. Nay farther, he has told us, That the
very thoughts and purposes of our hearts shall be brought into Judgment; the
offending eye, the lustful, adulterous eye may cause the whole body to be cast
into. hell; and that a causeless anger entertained against our brethren, though
it show it self neither by words, nor deeds, will bring us into danger of
Condemnation, Math. 5.22, 23. Thou will think these hard Sayings, it may be;
and yet there is somewhat more to be considered, which may make thee think them
much harder. Might our Judgment be in private, and our accounts be made between
God, and our selves only, we might, perhaps, notwithstanding all that which
has been said, look upon it as tolerable. But, alas! we are told, that it must
be public, (without any regard to our modesty) and before all the world; that
the very Secrets of our hearts shall be disclosed before men and Angels; that
the hidden things of darkness shall be brought to light (as one tells us who
well knew the mind of Christ, 1. Cor. 4.5.) and all our counsels be made
manifest. And further, that this shall be at a time when (perhaps) we did not
look for it, at midnight or at Cocks-crowing; that we may be hurried away to
Christ's Judgment Seat, before we can trim our lamps, or make ready our
accounts, or think what couse to take to approve our selves to our Judge and
Lord. We may be Eating and Drinking, or Buying and Selling, or Planting and
Building (as the people were in the Old World when the Flood came and Swept
them all away) and the Son of man shall be revealed from Heaven, and we shall
be taken as in a Snare, we shall not be able to flee away from him, nor to
stand before him, because we are not prepared and ready for him. See Luke 17.
v. 26, 27, 28. Nay yet further, his Coming, we are told, will be with so much
Majesty and Glory, there shall so many dreadful things go before it, and so
much terror accompany it, that, we shall be utterly confounded, and not able to
lift up our Heads, if clear and good consciences, and just and right accounts
prepared, and made ready before hand, do not give us some confidence and
assurance before him: The Heaven shall pass away with a great noise, and the
Elements shall melt with fervent heat, and the Earth and all the works that are
therein shall be burnt up. 2. Pet. 3.10. and then shall the Lord Jesus descend
from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and the Trump of
God. 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. and all the Nations and kindreds of the Earth, and those
that are in their Graves shall hear his voice, John 5.28. and behold his Glory,
the Glory of the King of Kings, and of the Lord of Lords; who treads the
winepress of the fierceness, and wrath of Almighty God. Rev. 19.15, and 16. O
dear Christian Brother, what will thou do in that day? and what shall I do who
now ask thee the Question? how shall we be able to bear the sight of so great
Majesty, and Glory? how shall we have the courage to appear before it? what
dread, what horror will possess our souls? what confusion will cover our faces?
how shall we tremble, when we think of our trial before that impartial and
dreadful bar? and how will our hearts sink within us, when we are called to
answer for ourselves? O Brother, what will a good conscience, think thou, be
worth at that day? what would thou then give for a pure and unspotted life,
to present before the just Judge of Heaven and Earth? for as great a number of
good works, as thou have of fins, and rebellions and provocations? whatever
thou think of a good life now, believe it, thou will then think well of it;
and happy, thrice happy, shall thou be, if thy own heart condemn thee not of
wickedness and impiety. Whether it will do so or not, I am not able to tell
thee, but this I can assure thee, that no tongue is able to express the
Amazement, the Consternation, the Horror, and Anguish, the Perplexity that
shall possess and overwhelm thee, if it do condemn thee. Thou will not know
what course to take, which way to look, nor whether to betake thy self; to
avoid the Judgment will be impossible, and to bear it thou will not be able: if
thou call for mercy thou shall find none; if thou desire death, thy desire
will not be granted; if thou call to the Hills to cover thee, they shall be
deaf unto thee; all hope, all confort shall utterly forsake thee, and thou must
stand at the dreadful tribunal as a desperate and helpless wretch, till thou
hear that dreadful and irrevocable sentence, Depart from me ye cursed into
everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil, and his Angels. And now Brother, tell
me, I beseech thee, what thoughts thou have of a Holy Life? is there any reason
why thou should be careful to lead such a life, or not? do thou think,
that thou can avoid this dreadful account we have spoken of? or do thou
hope, that an account made according to that careless, and carnal way of living
which we see most men live, will pass at that just tribunal; and be accepted of
as good? can thou have the face to make before God, and all the world, such
a declaration as this? God gave me an excellent Being, I acknowledge, and
appointed me an excellent end; but I neither considered the one, nor thought
upon the other: God made me capable to know him, to love him, and worship and
serve him; and I was frequently told, that the main business of my life was to
do thus; but this I never intended nor designed, or if I did, it was but by the
by, and when I had nothing else to do: I cannot deny but I was capable of
bringing my Maker a great Increase of Glory, by the Use and improvement of
those excellent faculties he bestowed upon me; but the lusts and and appetites
of the flesh, and the pleasures of providing for, and satisfying them, made me
forget my self and the honor of him that made me. I must needs acknowledge
likewise, that it was not ordinary Grace which called me to the knowledge of
Christ, and that I thought my self partaker of no little honor and advantage by
it; but whether my Christianity laid any other obligations upon me than the
bearing the Name of a Christian, I could never find time to consider, nor think
it worth while to enquire: I thought better of my self indeed than of other
men, for my being a Christian; but that I have lived better than they, that I
have been more mindful of God, and more profitable to men, I am not able to
say: I have talked much of Heaven, but I ever loved the World before it; and
though I professed great love to Christ, yet my main business has always been
to please my self. I know thou will cry out upon this, as most absurd and
unreasonable, and conclude it impossible any person should find mercy at that
great day, that can speak nothing better for himself; and yet I defy all our
Common careless Christians, to make any better plea for themselves, or to give
any account of themselves, and those talents that God has entrusted them with,
which may be judged more tolerable, or more likely to be accepted. Have thou a
son or servant, whom thou have bestowed great cost upon, to fit him for doing
thee some considerable, and important service; and have thou committed it to
his care and charge, given him a competent time, and furnished him with all
necessaries and requisites for the doing it; and that Son or Servant after his
time expired returns to give thee such an account as this? So much of my time
I spent in eating and drinking, in revelling and rioting, in singing and
danceing, in courting and sporting, about which all my thoughts and all my care
were wholly taken up; and as for the great business thou commanded'st me to do,
I never thought upon it, or not till it was too late, when I had neither time,
nor other requisites remaining to effect it. Would not such a Son or Servant
vex thee to the heart? and would not thou think him worthy of the greatest
shame and punishment? Remember, Brother, that it will by thy own case, if
neglecting the great end of thy Life and Being, and the indispensible
obligations of thy most Holy Religion, thou can only reckon at the great day
thy getting of money, or thy spending it to the satisfaction of thy beastly
lusts and appetites. But this shall lead me to another Consideration. viz.

CHAP. IV.
Containing a fourth Argument to a Holy Life, the consideration of the future
punishments of Wicked men, viz. that their Torments are Extreme and
intolerable, without ceasing, and without end.

COnsider the punishments which Almighty God has prepared for those unfaithful
men, who will not be able to stand in that Judgment, but must fall under the
dreadful sentence of condemnation. And that thou may know how great those
punishments will be, thou will do well to call to mind what punishments God
has often inflicted upon wicked men in this world. I moit the effects of Adams
sin and disobedience, which the whole World still labors under, as also the
fruits of our own sins, which perhaps we have more than once smarted for: let
it be remembered how God destroyed all math and except eight persons, with a
flood of water, for their sins, Genesis 7. How he overthrew Five Cities with Fire
and Brimstone for their Filthyness and Impiety, Genesis 19. How he destroyed his
own people, for whom he had wrought many wonders in the Wilderness, when they
would not obey his voice, causing three and twenty thousand of them to fall in
one day, 1 Cor, 10. and 8. How he gave Commandment utterly to destroy the
Amalekites, and not to spare their sucking children, for a sin committed by
their Fathers Four Hundred years before: and in a word, how he gave up his own
once beloved people and their City and Country, to the most lamentable ruin
and desolation that ever was; and how their posterity are scattered to this day
over the face of the whole earth, and hated of all people, bearing the sin and
curse of their Forefathers. His blood be upon us, and our children, Math.
27.25. These are great demonstrations of Gods hatred against sin, and from
these we do learn, That those Punishments which are appointed for wicked men in
another World, must needs be very grievous, and such as will make them
extremely miserable. For, as the Scriptures tell us, This is the time of Gods
patience, and forbearance, and goodness toward sinners, Romans 2.4. and if in
this time he shows so much severity, how severe may we believe he will be, when
this time of his goodness is ended, and when the day of his wrath, as the
Scripture calls it, is come; that day of justice without mercy, of vengeance
without pity, of execution without further patience and forbearance: when all
the wrath that wicked men have deserved, and have treasured up against
themsselves, shall fall upon their guilty Souls, and God shall as designedly
magnify his impartial Justice in their torment and misery, as he will magnify
his mercy and goodness in the glory and felicity of his faithful Servants? But
we have yet a better way of learning how great the punishments of the Damned
shall be, and that is, by considering what the Scriptures have told us in plain
words concerning them; they are such punishments, our Blessed Savior tells us,
as are prepared for the Devil and his Angels Math. 25. v. 41. that is, for the
very worst of Beings, for the greatest rebels against Heaven, and the most
irreconcilable adversaries to all manner of goodness; and therefore, we may be
sure that they are as great as we can imagine them to be, not to say that they
are as great as an Almighty God can make them. They are punishments by fire, as
he also tells us, which is the most rageing, the most devouring and Tormenting
thing we know in the World: and that fire is represented to be such as our
Nature does most abhor, and must needs be most insufferable, viz. A Fire with
Brimstone, the Stench of which is as intolerable as the Heat, and which
suffocates as well as consumes, Rev. 21. v. 8. of this Fire, we are told
likewise, There is a Bottomless Lake or Pit. Rev. 20. v. 3. into which there
shall never enter the least Light, the very Blackness of Darkness, as St. Judes
expressions are, v. 17. lying upon it for ever. In this Lake, we are told, the
damned shall be close Prisoners, bound Hand and Foot, Mat. 22. v. 13. without
possibility to escaping, or so much as removeing from one place to another for
the gaining of the least case; and in this Prison, we are told. the Torments
will be such as will cause Weeping, and Wailing, and Gnashing of Teeth, nay,
Yelings and Howlings, and Shriekings, like the Shrieking of the Children frying
in the fire in the Valley of Hinnom. 2 King. 23. v. 10. which the word used by
our Blessed Savior for Hell, Math, 5. v. 29, 30. does imply; and these
Torments, and Wailings, and Heartbreaking Cries shall continue, not for a
Month, or a Year, or an Age, but for ever and ever. The fire shall never be
quenched, Mark 9. v. 44. the smoke of their Torment is ever to ascend, Rev. 14.
v. 10, 11. and they shall find no rest night nor day. This is a little, and but
a little of what the Scripture tells us, of the punishments of the damned; but
in this little there are so many dreadful things employed, that he must be bold
and hardened even to a wonder, that is not affrighted with them. for,

1. It is plain, that the punishments are such as will Torment the whole Man,
Body and Soul, with all their faculties and powers, and that in the Extremest
manner. There shall not be a member of the Body, nor any faculty in the Soul,
but shall have its Torment in one and the same instant, and that Torment shall
be so great that no words can express it, nor heart can conceive it. How can it
be otherwise, do thou think, in a Lake of Fire and Brimstone? what Member of
the Body will not be scorched? what sense will not be afflicted? what faculty
will not be Tormented? The lascivious Eyes will be plagued with darkness, and
the ugly and fearful sight of Devils and Damned Spirits: the nice Smell, with
the loathsome stench of Brimstone, and all the most abominable Filthyness: the
delicate Ears with the shrieks and howlings of Tormenting, and Tormented
wretches: the dainty Taste, with the most Ravenous Hunger and Thirst; and all
the sensible parts, with burning and devouring fire: the Imagination will have
its Torment, by the apprehension of present pains, and of those that are to
come: the Memory by its remembrance of pleasures past, and gone, and never to
return again: the Understanding by the Consideration of the Happiness lost,
and the misery now come on. And if there be any other part which can be
Tormented, it shall have its Torment with no more favor than the rest. O, dear
Christian Brother, what sad and dreadful things are these? and how unspeakably
miserable must those be who must endure them? and yet this is not all; for it
is certain in the second place.

2. That these Torments shall always continue without any the least intermision
or decrease, and those that suffer them shall never find the least ease, nor
help, nor comfort: no, not for one minute: This is no more than is employed in
the places of Scripture before mentioned; the Fire will be always burning, the
smoke ever ascending, so that there shall be no rest day nor night, and those
that are bound hand and foot will not be able to escape or to resist, or strive
against the Torments, but must lie still, and suffer all. Thus it was with the
rich man, of whom our Blessed Savior tells us, Luke, 16. that being in Hell,
Tormented with the Fire which shall not be quenched, he made this request to
Abraham, Father Abraham have mercy on mc, and send Lazarus, that he may dip the
tip of his finger in Water and cool my Tongue, for I am Tormented in this
Flame. v, 24. What smaller request could he possibly make? he desired not a cup
of water, no, nor as much as Lazarus might have held in the palm of his hand,
nor yet so much as might have stuck to hid whole finger: he only desired a drop
from the verp tip of it, or not so much only that he would touch his Tongue
with the tip of his finger a little moistened and cooled with water; and yet
this small request would not be granted him; that little, that very little
ease, which so small a favor would have given him, was denied him. Which sad
story plainly shows us, that the Torments of the wicked have no intermission,
nor decrease, and that those who suffer them, shall never obtain the least help
or ease, though they want it most extremely, and seek for it with the greatest
earnestness, and importunity. They shall be like to a man, that is almost
drowned in the midst of the Sea, who not finding any firm ground whereupon to
set his feet, stretches out his hand every way, and graspes at something with
all his Might, but still in vain, because there is nothing but water round
about him: thus will it be with those wretches in Hell; they are drowning in a
bottomless gulf of unspeakable, miseries, and they look every way for help, and
strive for a little ease; but alas to no purpose, for there is nothing but
sorrow, and misery, and pain, and horror, round about them. And thus it shall
be with them, not for a little time, for a Month, or a Year, but for ever and
ever, whcih is a third thing I desire thee to observe.

3. Their pains and Torments will be endless as well as easless, and when they
have endured them without any intermission, or decrease, as many Years, nay
Ages as there are Stares in the Firmament, or sands upon the Seashore, they
shall still be to endure them, in the very same manner, as many more; as many
more did I say? yea ten thousand more; they shall endure them as long as there
is a just and Holy God to Punish them, that is, to eternal ages. This is but
what God himself has told us in plain words; for thus shall the sad sentence
run at the great day, Depart from me ye Cursed, into everlasting Fire; and the
execution will be accordingly, as we are told, Math. 25. the last v. The wicked
shall go into everlasting Punishment; into Punishment that shall be as lasting
as the rewards of the Righteous, which will be as lasting as God himself.

These are dreadful considerations, my Dear Christian Brother, and he must be a
strange kind of man indeed, and have a heart harder than the Adamant, that is
not mightily affected with them. There are but few men so hardy as to think
upon the Plagues, and Judgments of Almighty God upon sinful men in this World,
without some fear, especially when they think of them as hanging over their own
heads, and apprehend themselves to be in danger of them; and how then can they
choose but tremble at those of another World, which are infinitely more dreadful
than the worst of these? The Evils of the World are Particular evils, they
afflict but one, or some few parts at once; one disease seizes upon one part,
and another upon another part; in one disease one sense is pained, and in
another, another sense, but never are all the parts and all the senses, at one
and the same time, under Torment and pain. In this World there is no Evil so
great, but it has its decreases, and changes, and therefore no man can be so
miserable but he will sometimes have some respite and ease: and let the Evil be
never so sharp and pressing, yet the comfort of hope will not be wanting, and
the foresight of a certain end will be a great relief: and yet notwithstanding
this, we many times think the Evils of this World to be intolerable; and, as
sweet a thing as Life is to us, we wish for Death to deliver us from them. O
how intolerable then must the Torments of the other World be, which spare no
part, or faculty of Body or Soul, which give not the least ease, nor admit of
the least decrease, no not for one minute; which exclude all hope of an end,
and overwhelm the Soul to utter despair of the least remedy! Let our charity
lead us sometimes to visit a poor Sick Creature, and let us observe what pains
and agonies he endures for one night: mark how often he tosses and tumbles from
one side of his Bed to the other; hear how he groans, and what bitter
complaints he makes: observe how he counts the hours of the Clock, and how long
he thinks each hour to be: how passionately he wishes for the Dawning of the
day, and how tedious the night seems unto him. This we look upon as a sad
spectacle, and if we have any bowels in us, they cannot but melt at it, and
when we consider that it may be shortly our own case, we are very sensibly
touched with it. O what shall we think then of the condition of the Damned! how
deplorable and how miserable must we needs believe that to be? to be Tormented
in every member of the Body, and every faculty of the Soul, with the sharpest
and most exquisit Torments, and without the least ease or respit; and this not
for a night of some few hours, but for an everlasting night, a night that has
nomorning, and knows no hope of any Dawning of the day: to lie in such a night,
not upon a loft Bed (as the Sick man does) but in a Bed of Flames or a hot
burning furnace; not at liberty to turn to and fro, and to seek ease, but bound
hand and foot; not with the company of compassionate friends assisting and
comforting to the best of their power, but with the horrid company of the
damned and accursed Spirits, that shall add to their sufferings and their
sorrows, as much as their power and malice can possibly do. This must be misery
in the height, in its full perfection, if I may so speak; who trembles not to
think of it? who will not do any thing to escape it? do we fear Sickness and
pain here, and do not we fear the pains of Hell much more? do we dread a prison
and fly from fetters and chains, and hazard our very lives to preserve our
liberty; and are we not as much afraid of that Eternal prison, whose gates
shall never be opened when once they are shut upon us, and from which there can
be no redemption or deliverance? O dear Christian Brother, are we in our right
senses or not? do thou think, and do we understand what these things mean? do
they belong to us, or are they meant only for others? do we take them for the
never failing truths of God or for the fables and fancies of brainsick men? if
we understand them not, if we believe them not, why do we call our selves
Christians, and make an outward profession of that which in our hearts we
approve not of? but if we understand and believe these things, why do we not
tremble at the thoughts of them? why do we not bethink our selves how we may
escape them? why do we not abhor that Sin and wickedness which will bring us to
them? why do we not apply our selves with all our might, and all our care, to
the Practice of that Piety and Virtue, which alone through Gods mercy, can
deliver us from them? It is an amazing thing my Brother, that these things
should make so little impression upon the generality of Men, as we find they
do; and, but that the Scripture tells us of a God of this World, that blinds the
Eyes, and hardens the Hearts of Men, and makes them inconsiderate as Brutes, we
should be at a loss to give any account of it. We see, that they are
apprehensive enough of Evil in this World, and industrious enough to avoid it;
if any Evil be great, though it be remote, they dread it, and though it is
Coming be uncertain, yet they take care to prevent it. But alas! as to these
unspeakable Evils and Calamities, they are stupid and inconsiderate as blocks,
the least fear of them is full enough, and the least care and pains to avoid
them is thought too much. Surely Brother, there was a time when they had
greater effects upon the world, than now they have, when men thought they could
not be possessed with too great fear of them, nor take too much care and pains
to escape them. Let me show thee what a devout Father has written concerning
some penitents he once saw in a Monastery, and then judge what insluence these
things have had heretofore upon men, St. J. Climac. 9.
and what they ought in reason to have now. When First I came into this
Monastery (says he) I beheld certain things which neither the eyes of the
sluggard have ever seen, nor the ears of the negligent heard, nor yet may it be
conceived in the heart of any careless and retchless Christians. And afterward
he tells us, how he saw many penitents standing with their eyes fixed toward
Heaven, continually calling upon Almighty God with tears and sighs for pardon
and mercy: others again, he saw, that prosessed they were nto worthy to list up
their eyes toward Heaven, or to speak to Almighty God, and these held their
faces down toward the ground, offering their Souls in silence to the mercy of
God, without speaking so much as one word, as men that had been Dumb, full of
fear and confusion. Others were clothed in Sacks, and Hair-cloath, and
kneeling with their faces bowed down to their knees, and smiteing their
foreheads oftentines upon the Earth; did bathe the very Earth with their tears,
and those, that wanted tears did lament very grievously, because they wanted
them. And after this, he tells us, that they had death continually before their
eyes; and speaking one to onother they said, How think ye Brethren? what shall
become of us at the dreadful hour? shall the sentence of Condemnation be
revoked? or shall our Prayers perchance come into our Lords Ears? or if they
do, how shall they be received? and what profit shall we rcceive by them? for
since they proceed out of such unclean Lips, it is to be feared, they may find
but little favor in his sight. And much more to this purpose. To which others
would answer, as the penitent sinners in Nineve, Who knows whether the Lord
will Pardon us, whether he will turn himself to us, and not suffer us to
perish: let us now take Courage and persevere continually in Crying unto him
till the end; for the Lord is merciful, and will be pacified with perseverance:
let us run, my Brethren, let us run with all speed, and return to the palce
from whence we are fallen, and let us in no wise pardon this filthy flesh which
has undone us; but since it has Crucified us, let us Crucify it. And then,
he proceeds to tell us how hardly they treated their Bodies, how they watched,
and fasted, and punished themselves for their oftences against God, insomuch as
that their faces were like the faces of dead men, and their very Eyes were
sunck into their heads through over much weakness. And after all this he tells
us how they behaved themselves when any of their Brethren lay a dying. They
compassed the Bed of the dying Man, and with earnest, and vehement requests,
with moveing countenances and pitiful words they demanded of him, How do
thou Brother? how feel thou thy self? what Hope have thou? what shall become
of thee? have thou obtained thy long suit? Art thou arrived at the Haven of thy
Salvation? have thou received any carnest-penny of thy security? have thou
heard any voice within thee, which said, thy sins be forgiven thee, or thy
faith has made the whole? or have thou peradventure heard any other voice
which said unto thee. The wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all the nations
that forget God, or, Bind him Hand and Foot and cast him into utter Darkness?
What answer make thou, good Brother, unto us? Tell us something, we beseech
thee, that we may understand by thee, what is reserved for us; for thy suite is
now come to an end, and what sentence thou shall now receive shall never more
be reversed: but our casE as yet still depends, and looks for sentence. To
which demands some answered. Blessed be the Lord that has not suffered us to
be cast into the teeth of our enemies: but others after a more doleful manner;
Miserable is that Soul that has not fully observed his profession, for now
shall he well understand what is prepared for him. These, my dear Brother, were
men that did in good earnest believe the Truths of the Gospel concerning
another World, and being fully persuaded that the punishments appointed for
wicked men are most intolerable, were as fully resolved to deliver themselves
from them, though by the greatest pains and the severest mortifications. These
were men that made Use of that Faith, and of that Reason and Understanding
which God has given them; and since they thought it Prudence to be
apprehensive of lesser Dangers, and to prepare against more inconsiderable
Evils; they would not, like the unruly Horse that starts at a Bird, and runs
himself into a Precipice, be fearless of the greatest Dangers, and suffer
themselves to fall into the most insufferable Calamities. And are not we
concerned, my Brother, to do the like, and to make the like Use of that Faith,
and Reason which God has given us? D'os not the Fire of Hell burn as furiously
now as ever it did? Have those everlasting Torments had any end or period
prescribed them since that time? or are we more able to wrestle with them, or
to endure them, than they were? or have we any easier way of escaping them
discovered to us, than was known to them? what easy ways our Lusts may find
out, I do not know; but sure I am, that there is but one safe and sure way, but
one way of Gods appointment, which was made known to them, as it is to us, and
that is, the way of serving God sincerely, and with all our might, in a Holy
and Virtuous Life; which if we fail to do, we shall, as certainly as God is
true, be condemned to these everlasting Torments. Judge then, dear Brother,
whether we have not reason to serve God, and whether it be not madness to live
in that careless and ungodly way which we see most men do. But now because
these things may seem very severe, and possibly occasion in thee some hard
thoughts of Almighty God, I must desire thee to consider,

CHAP. V.
Sect. 1.
Containing a Fifth Argument to a Holy Life, from the Consideration of those
great Rewards God has prepared for good Men in the other World, the greatness
of which may be in some measure estimated, 1. From Gods Kindness to Good Men
even in this World. 2. That the Reward is not proportioned to our deserts,
which are very little, but to the goodness of God, which is infinite. And 3. Is
designed as the most glorious manifestation of the Divine Goodness; And 4. It
is the Purchase of Christ's Blood, and the Reward of his Obedience and
Sufferings, which are of Infinite Merit.

THE Reward, which Almighty God has prepared in another World for those, that
serve him faithfully in this, according to those Obligations that lie upon
them, both as Men and Christians. And this Consideration, I doubt not, will be
as Pleasant, and Delightful, as the last was Sad, and Dreadful; and will no
less declare Gods Goodness and Mercy, than that did his Justice and Severity. I
presume, I need not tell thee, that such is our condition, that no Reward of
right does belong to any Services we can do; and therefore be the rewad great,
or little, which God has prepared for us, we must acknowledge our selves
indebted to his Infinite Goodness for it, and that it is on our parts
altogether undeserved; how much more then must we acknowledge our selves
indebted to his Goodness, (and what a strong obligation should we reckon it to
his Service) when the Reward he has designed for us, is not little, like our
Services; but great, great, as we can imagine it to be, as our hearts can
desire it should be? To give thee a little sight of the greatness of this
Reward, for it is not possible for thee, or me, to comprehend it fully, I might
lead thee through a multitude of Considerations; but I shall restrain my self
to some few, which I think do deserve thy serious regard. And

1. We cannot but acknowledge, that Almighty God is very kind to his Servants
in this World, and there is not one of them can say that he serves God for
naught, as to this present life. God has given them many good Promises, and
does give them many good things daily according to those Promises. They have a
competent share in all the good things of the World, and such a blessing
together with them, as makes them much more sweet and pleasant to them, than
all the possessions of the wicked; and though they have their Afflictions, and
their Trials, yet they have their Pleasures and their Comforts; they have a
Peace within which none can disturb, and such Joys as none can take from them,
I mean the peace of their Consciences, and the joys of the Holy Ghost; they
are either free from all Calamities, or they have such support under them, that
they are rather matter of Joy than Sorrow to them: God is good to them at all
times in a great measure, but sometimes more abundantly, and in a measure
extraordinary; witness the great things that he has done in all Ages for them;
What great Deliverances has he often given them? What cunning Plots and
Devices against them has he brought to naught? What Wonders has he wrought in
their behalf? and how Miraculously, when they have been in their greatest
Distress, has he made them to triumph over all their Enemies? So that, those
who have beheld it, have been constrained to cry out in the words of the
Psalmist, Verily there is a reward for the righteous, doubtelss there is a God
that judges the Earth, Psalm. 58. 11. Now if God deal thus kindly with his
Servants here, what kindness do thou think will he show them hereafter? If
whilst they are in doing his work, he bestows so many good things upon them,
what may they expect from him when his work is done? and if in the time of
their trial they receive such great benefits from him, what shall they receive
(think thou) when their trial is ended, and they are fully approved? If such
great things be done for their encouragement in his Service, what great things
are designed (may we believe) for their Reward? Especially considering,

2. That the Reward, which God intends for them, shall not be proportioned to
the little Merit of their Services, but to his own Infinite Goodness: it shall
not be such as the Services do deserve, but such as becomes him to bestow. It
is a Gift, as the Apostle tells us, Romans 6.23. and such a gift as shall show
the Insinite goodness and Beneficence of the Donor. Yea

3. It is a gift, that is designed for to show it. God intends the fullest
manifestation of his Goodness by it, that he may receive Everlasting Praises,
both from Men, and Angels. And how exceeding great must that gift be? When a
Prince rewards the Services of a poor Subject, he considers not so much what
his Loyal Subject deserves, as what becomes himself to bestow; and though the
service may be but mean, yet he must give as a Prince, largely and freely, with
respect to his Honor: but if a Prince design in rewarding a Servant to show
his Magnificence, and Liberality to the utmost, and to do himself the greatest
honor he can he will give the greatest things his Kingdom will afford; and in
the noblest and most honorable way. O how great then and how good will that
Reward be which the King of Kings, the Supreme Ruler and Governor of the World
will give to his Faithful Servants? How little less than Infinite must that be,
which will become so Glorious a Majesty to bestow? Especially since he designs
to manifest his Goodness and Bounty in the highest measure? and to let all the
World know, how much he deserved the love and service of all his Creatures.
When God before the foundations of the World, did design to declare his Power
and wisdom and Goodness, what a World did he create? What Beautiful Heavens?
what glittering Stars? what Elements? and in how mavelous a manner did he
unite, and compact them together? and yet he intended this Vast, and Beautiful
Building, to last but for a time, and then to be destroyed; and he knew that
the noblest of his Creatures, which he made to inhabit it, would be rebellious
against him, and few of them give him his due honor and obedience. Imagine
then what he will do, when he designs the utmost manifestation of his Almighty
Goodness, in rewarding his Faithful Servants: what a Glorious Place will he
make for them? what Riches and Honors will he confer upon them? will they not
be as great, as his Infinite Goodness can bestow, or as his Infinite Wisdom
can judge to be becoming it? and how incomparably great must we needs judge
those to be? And yet we may Consider further,

4. That this Reward designed for Gods Servants, is that, which Christ has
received from his Father, to give them, for all his pains and tears and sweat
and blood: that it is the Purchase of the Blood of the Son of God, and the
recompense of his Obedience to the death. Now how great a Reward must so
Beloved a Son deserve by so great and perfect and Obedience? Can any thing, how
excellent soever, be thought too good for him, or too great a recompense for
his Sufferings? if, considering our own poor services we could not hope for
such manifestations of Gods Goodness as I have spoken of, yet considering the
Merits of Christ, we have no reason to doubt of them; for if Infinite Goodnese
can admit of any motive to show it self to the utmost, this must needs be the
greatest, and most prevailing. And yet further, to raise our Thoughts one
degree higher, we may consider,

SECT. 2.
Containing a prosecution of the same Arguments, That this Reward of Good Men
must be very great; Because, 5. It is not only the Reward Christ purchased for
his Disciples, but that also which he obtained for himself, as the Recompense
of his Obedience and Sufferings, with a more particular Explication, wherein
this Happiness consists; a Serious Expostulation with those, who slight it, and
the necessity of Holiness for the obtaining of it.

5. THis Reward is not only as the Reward which Christ obtained for his
Servants, but as the Reward which he obtained for himself, as the very
Recompense which his Heavenly Father has given him, for his Obedience; for
that it is the very same Reward which he has received, that his Servants shall
enjoy, the Scriptures teach us plainly. We learn it from his own Mouth, Matthew.
25.21. where he bids the faithful Servant, that had improved his Talents to his
advantage, to enter into the joy of his Lord; and one of his chosen Servants,
that knew as much of this matter as any man ever did, has told us the same,
Romans 8.17. where he expressly affirms, that we are heirs of God, and coheirs
with Christ Jesus, So that whatever glory, or joy, or riches, or honors Christ
is possessed of upon the account of his Obedience, that shall all his faithful
Servants enjoy together with him. Has God exalted him for his Obedience, and
given him a Kingdom above all Kingdoms? it is as certain, that his Servants
shall be exalted likewise, and reign together with him, 2 Timothy 2.12. and Rev.
22.5. Is Christ ascended into the highest Heavens, and does he dwell in the
Bosom of his Father? it is as certain, that he shall come one day from Heaven,
and receive all his Servants to himself, that where he is, they may be also,
Joh. 14.3. Is that frail and mortal body, which he had whilst he was upon the
Earth, and which suffered the Pains and Torments of the Cross, changed into a
glorious, immortal, impassible Body? it is as certain, that the vile bodies of
his Servants, shall be so changed likewise, and fashioned like to his glorious
Body, according to the working whereby he is able to subdue all things to
himself, Phil. 3.21. Is that Glory, which he is exalted to, that Joy and
Happiness, which he is possessed of, never to have an end? it is as certain,
that the Glory and Felicity of his Servants shall be as lasting; for it is an
Inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not away, 1 Peter, c. 1.
v. 4. This, dear Brother, is the reward of Gods Faithful Servants; and can thy
Heart conceive any thing greater, or they Soul wish for any thing more? Can
thou conceive what it is to put off this vile mortal body, with all its Evil
affections, and uneasy attendants, to be freed from all defects and
imperfections, from all diseases and distempers, all infirmities and
deformities; to be like to the Angels in Heaven, and having put on incorruption
and immortality, to shine like the Sun in the Firmament, in the Kingdom of God?
Can thou conceive what a happiness it will be, to be with Christ, to behold
the blessed face of that Dear Person, who does so highly deserve of us, both
upon the score of his Infinite Perfections, and likewise upon the account of
his Inestimable Benefits? Can thou conceive what a happiness it will be to
behold God face to face, as St. Paul's expressions are, 1 Cor. 13.12. or to see
him as he is, as St. John expresses it, 1 John 3.2. that is, to have the most
clear, and comprehensive knowledge of him, that finite Creatures can possibly
have: to know all his adorable Perfections, his Almighty Power, his
Incomprehensible Wisdom, his Eternal Justice, his resplendent Purity and
Holiness, his Immeasureable Goodness and Love; and to feel the mighty power of
this knowledge upon our Souls transforming us into the likeness of God, and
uniting our Wills most perfectly to him, whereby we shall both possess God, and
be possessed of him? Can thou conceive what a happiness it will be, for
Millions of Millions of such God-like Creatures to be inseparably together, and
with united Hearts and Mouths to be continually singing Songs of Praise to the
great God of Love, who loved them Infinitely, and taught them to love him
again, and one another? And can thou think how much it will add to their
Happiness, to have a full and perfect assurance, That it shall never have an
end; that it shall be as lasting as it is great, and never know the least
diminution, or decay? I know, Brother, that all this is far above tho Reach of
they most raised thoughts; it is too great a happiness to enter into the heart
of Man: as flesh and blood cannot inherit it, 1 Cor. 15.50. that is, as Man in
his present weak and corruptible estate cannot be partaker of it, so neither
can he comprehend it: when we and possessed of it, then, and not till then,
shall we fully understand it. O Blessed God! why art thou thus good to
ungrateful and unworthy men? Why have thou prepared such a happiness for those,
who neither consider it, nor seek after it? Why is such a Price put into the
hands of fools, who have not the hearts to make Use of it, who fondly choose to
gratify their lusts, rather than to save their Souls, and foolishly prefer the
momentary Enjoyments of Sin, and folly, before a glorious and happy
immortality? Vain and foolish Men! how is it that you understand not your own
greatest interest? That that Reason and Judgment which in other matters
constantly attends you, does in this, which is of the greatest moment and
concernment to you, so strangely fail you? Does not all the World see, that you
desire, and seek after such things, as you apprehend to be good, and that you
are more, or less careful in seeking after such things, according to the value
you put upon them, and the esteem you have for them? for a small Estate you
will take great Pains, you will run great hazards, and suffer great hardships;
for a great estate you will do and suffer more and for a Crown, or Kingdom yet
more; and why then will you not do and suffer as much for this Glorious and
Eternal Reward, which far transcends all the Riches and the Glories of the
World? The Author to the Hebrews tells us, That Moses did despise the Riches and
Honors and Pleasures of the Court of Pharaoh for this Reward. Heb. 11 c. 24,
25 v. And that a multitude of Wise and Holy men have had trial of cruel
Mockings and Scourgings, of Bonds and Imprisonment, and have suffered
patiently, yea joyfully the worst things that wicked Men and Devils could
inflict upon them, because they had their Eyes upon it, and hoped to obtain it.
And St. Austin, I remember, professes, that he could be content to do or suffer
any thing, yea to suffer the torments of Hell for a time, that he might come to
Heaven at last. And why is it, Brother, that we have not as great an esteem of
it? or if we have why do we not labor, why are we not willing to do and suffer
as much for it? Do thou think, Brother, that this Care and Pains, which I
speak of, is needless as to the obtaining of it? or may we hope for it from
Gods mercy and goodness without that strict and holy Life, which I have spoken
of? What? Do thou believe Almighty God to be a liar, or that he is not in
earnest, when he tells thee, That without Holiness no man shall see Him, Heb. 12
14 does not a reward necessarily relate to service, and can thou expect the
Reward though thou do no service? Can thou imagine, that such a reward, a
reward so great and glorious, that the very best of men, notwithstanding the
promises of God, dare hardly presume to hope for it, shall be given to those
that are Slaves to their own lusts, and either serve not God at all, or no
farther than their Lusts will give them leave? What? is this a Reward for
Apostates from God, for Rebels aagainst Heaven, for those that desire it not,
or value it not, but prefer the Pleasures of Sin and the Profits of the World
before it? What? will it be the same thing as to another World, whether men
answer the end of their Creation or not, whether they dishonor their holy
profession by an unholy life or not, whether they love God or not, whether they
follow the example of Christ or not, and in one word, whether they be meet for
Heavenly Glory and Felicity, by pure and Godlike dispositions, and the
Participation of the Divine nature; or be ever so unmeet for it, by brutish
Lusts or Divelish Qualities, and dispositions? There is a vast difference, dear
Brother, between Heaven and Hell, no less than there is between light and
darkness, between the greatest happiness and the greatest misery; and ought not
there to be a vast difference likewise between those that shall enjoy the one,
and those that shall fall under the other? Can a holy and righteous God make so
great difference between the eternal estates of men, as to make some eternally
happy, and others eternally miserable, who differ here one from another in
little or nothing, but only in a little outward profession, or the observation
of some few Rites and Ceremonies, or in a formal and civil carriage or
demeanor? Surely, Brother, it is impossible that these things should enter
into the head of any sober and considering man, and therefore thou must needs
acknowledge the necessity of living a holy life, if thou hopest for the
Heavenly Glory and Felicity; and is not the Heavenly Glory encouragement enough
for thee to do so? will not that make thee sufficient amends for the greatest
Care and Pains thou can take, for the worst things thou can suffer, or
the greatest hazards thou can possibly run by it? Yes, undoubtedly it will;
and therefore I leave the exhortation of the Apostle with thee 1 Corinthians. 15 58
v. Therefore my beloved Brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always alounding
in the work of the Lord, for as much as you know that your labor is not in vain
in the Lord. I shall add but one thing more; and I will dispatch it in few
words, viz.

CHAP. VI.
Containing a Sixth Argument to a Holy Life, from considering, That these
Rewards and Punishments are not so far off, as some persons vainly imagine;
with the Conclusion of this first Part.

6. THat thou would Consider these Rewards and Punishments which I have
spoken of, not as things at a great distance from thee, but as they are indeed,
and in truth, very near unto thee. There is but a little part of a very short
life, of a life which, at longest, is but a Span long, between thee and them:
we have at most but some few Breaths to draw before we must pass into our
Eternal state, and be either happy, or miserable, without any manner of Change
or alteration for ever: Death is continually laying his snares for us, and has
so many secret and unknown ways to do his work upon us, that we live every
moment, as it were by miracle; and it is a much stranger thing that we have
lived till this day, than it would be, if we should dye before the morrow. It Is
true, we are apt to flatter our selves with hopes of long life; but how fond
such hopes are, the unexpected Fall of some, or other, every day about us, if
nothing else will do it, may convince us. There are thousands now in their
Graves, that came no sooner into the World than we, who hoped to live as long,
as we can do, in it: and what are we, and what are our hopes, that both may not
be cut off within few hours? and why may not we make our beds in the dust as
much sooner than we expect, as they have done? Now tell me, Brother, have thou
so low an opinion of the heavenly glory and felicity, as that it cannot engage
thee to serve God so little a time for it? or have Hell Torments so little of
Terror in them, that thou can not resolve to under go so short a trouble to
avoid them? or is there any thing in this World which can make thee neglect a
matter of so great importance to thee, when thou think how little a while
thou can enjoy it? The Histories of our Country tell us of a Saxon Queen in
this Land, that by an innocent and happy piece of Policy, prevailed with her
Husband to leave his Debaucheries, and to live Christianly: She did it thus;
There was a day when the King and his Favorites did feast and frolic, in an
extraordinary manner; and She, as soon as their Mirth was ended, caused the
same place to be covered with dung and filthiness, and to be made as loathsome
as possible: and when she had done, she desired the King to repair thither, and
to look upon the late Scene of their Mirth and Jollity; which th King
beholding, and musing in his mind of the sudden Change, She took the
opportunity to ask him where all the mirth of the past day was, and what
footsteps did now remain of it? were not all such things as wind, and vanity,
which pass away in an instant, and are not to be recalled? And with these and
the like speeches, she taught him to despise the world, and to seek after the
Kingdom of Heaven. I shall make no other Use of the Story, than to beseech thee
to reslect upon thy life past, and to consider what is become of all thy former
Pleasures: I know that they are all past and gone, and that the time is coming
when as much may be said of all thy worldly enjoyments; they will be as far
from thee, and as useless to thee, as all thy past pleasures are now: In the
hour of Death, and from that hour to all Eternity, thou may say with them in
the Book of Wisdom, What has Pride profited us? and what good has Riches
with all our vaunting brought us? all those things are passed away like a
shadow, or like a Post that hasted by. And therefore be so wise for thy own
Good, as to contemn these worthless fugitive things, and for the little
remainder of thy life, to endeavor to make sure of the better, and more
abiding things, which God has prepared for thee in Heaven. Thou have sometime,
perhaps, been visited with Sickness, and have thought thy self to be upon the
borders of the Grave: call to mind, I beseech thee, what thoughts did then
possess thee: Did thou not then look upon the World as vanity? and did not
all thy past Follies torment thee with a bitter remembrance? Did not the few
good things that thou had done, please thee better than all the World? and
did not heartily repent, that thy whole life was not employed in such good
ways? Remember, I beseech thee, that it will shortly come to that again; the
evil day is at hand, and thy present delights will be vanished, and thy worldly
enjoyments be useless and unprofitable; and if thou have not the Conscience of
a good life to cheer thee, thou will be miserable without help or remedy. O
prepare, prepare, dear Brother, for that time, by a holy and Christian Life,
and let nothing upon Earth divert, or hinder thee. Why should that rob thee of
thy greatest Bliss, which will not profit thee in the least when thou have the
greatest need of it? Why should that make thee miserable for ever, which cannot
make thee happy for a little time? Remender thy End, said a Wise Man, and thou
shall never do amiss. He that knows, that he stands upon the brink of
Eternity, is a bold fool if he dares do wickedly. He is mad that will commit a
Crime this day, who knows that before the next he may be bearing the
punishments of it in everlasting Sorrows.

Thus have I laid before thee, dear Brother, some Arguments and Motives to
persuade thee to a Holy Life: and so I have brought the First Part of my
intended Work to an end. The things that I have offered to thee, I am sure
deserve thy serious consideration: let them be considered accordingly, and
suffer them to have their due influence upon thee, and I shall give thee no
further trouble in this matter. Weigh them well, and according to the Reason
thou find in them, so do; and I ask no more of thee. Live, as a man created
by God on purpose to know and love and serve him here, and to enjoy him for
ever hereafter, ought to live. Live, as a man advanced to the knowledge, and
profession of Christianity, is obliged to live. Live, as a man that must give
an account hereafter of his whole Life to a just and impartial Judge, is in all
reason bound to live. Live, as one that believes that he shall be unspeakably,
and Eternally miserable, if he live amiss; and that he shall be eternally
happy, if he live as he ought. Live, as one that knows that he has but a short
life to live, a life that is but a moment in respect of Eternity, and that
(yet) upon this little moment his Eternal state does depend. In a word. Live,
as a man dying, hastening to the Grave, and to the Judgment Seat of Christ, and
to everlasting Bliss, or Woe, must needs think himself concerned to live. Live
thus, dear Brother, and I have my Desire. Only let me beg thy Prayers, that I
may live thus likewise, that both of us may be happy for ever. Amen, Amen.

The End of the First Part.
General DIRECTIONS how to live a Holy and Christian Life.
PART II.
Introduction.
I Am now, Dear Brother, to give thee some Directions how to live that Holy and
Christian Life, which in the former Part of this Book, I have endeavored to
Perfwade thee to. It shall be my Care, not to trouble thee with many, and less
necessary things; and I beg of thee, that it may be thine, to consider what I
say impartially, and to give it the regard which, upon consideration, thou
shall find it to deserve. Now, because I suppose thee to be convinced, That it
is necessary thou should live a Holy Life, if thou would be happy
eternally; the first thing I shall advise thee to, is,

CHAP. I
Sect. 1. Containing the First Advice, Seriously to Resolve upon a Holy Life;
the necessity of such a Resolution, and the great Virtue and Efficacy of it.
Sect. 2. Containing some Directions how to form a lasting Resolution. First, to
resolve soberly and deliberately, not rashly and in have; maturely to consider
what it is we must resolve, and carefully to examine all the advantages and
disadvantages on both sides. Secondly, to take the matter into consideration
several distinct times, before we fix our resolution. Thirdly, to back this
Resolution with a solemn Vow. Sect. 3. A prosecution of the same Argument,
containing some further Directions in making a lasting resolution; as Fourthly,
to write down our Resolutions in the words wherein we make them, and to engage
our selves to God in a solemn Bond and Contract. And Fifthly, to make known
this resolution to the World, as often as a fit occasion offers, which very
much tends to the golry of God, delivers us from many temptations, and makes us
more steadfast to what we resolve. And Sixthly, to seek out some good men who
have taken up the same Resolutions, and to contract an intimate Friendship and
Acquaintance with them; or, if we cannot find any such, to endeavor to
persuade our old Friends and Companions to enter into such a Religious
Friendship.

1. To Resolve upon it. Make an absolute, and peremptory Resolution to live a
Holy Life. I see, it is necessary that I should do so, (may thou say) I
cannot be happy for ever, if I do not live so; and therefore I am resolved, I
will live so, and nothing shall divert or hinder me. Without this peremptory
Resolution, thou will never be able to do what thou may desire: Thou may
begin well, but wilt fail to persevere to the end. Thou will be as the
double-minded man, which St. James speaks of, Chap. 1. v. 8. unstable in thy
ways: one while in the good way, and another while in the bad, according to
the circumstances of thy life, and the Sway of thy inclinations. But with this
resolution begin and prosper. Resolution works wonders every day in other
matters; and in this, be confident, it will do much more; because God will
bless it. It has a mighty efficacy in it self, and whoever is possessed of it,
seldom sails to bring his Designs to pass. It makes a man intent upon the thing
he would do, inquisitive after the best means to effect it, watchful and ready
to lay hold upon all fitting opportunities, jealous of the least Impediments
and Hindrances, bold and constant in the midst of difficulties and dangers, and
so excludes that forgetfulness and Inadvertency, that Negligence and Sloth,
that Rashness and Levity, that Doubtfulness and Faintheartedness, which
overthrows the good Purposes of many, and frustrates their best Designs. But
how much greater will the efficacy of it be, think thou, when it is backed
with the Almighty Grace of God, which in this matter will be ever assisting to
it? The truth is, thy work is half done when thou art fully resolved, and if
thy resolution fail not, I dare promise thee as good success as thy heart can
wish. But then care must be taken that thy resolutiou continue firm, and
strong; and that it may do so, thou must observe the following directions.

. 2. Thou must make it soberly and deliberately, not rashly and in have. Thou
must consider what thou art about to resolve upon, what difficulties, and
discouragements, thou art like to meet with, and what dangers and
Inconveniences may attend thee in it. And when thou have done this, thou must
consult thy own Reason and Understanding, upon these and the like Questions: Is
it reasonable that I should undertake, and resolve upon such a business as this
is? is it possible for me to effect it? can I march through all the
difficulties, and overcome all the Tempatations which may or can befall me in
it? Is the Design honorable, and worthy of a man? and can I hope for a
sufficient Recompense for all the Troubles it will put me to? And, for the
Avoiding of all error and mistake, it will not be amiss for thee, to put down
in writeting (if thou can) all that thou art to consider upon, as also thy
judgment and determination upon every particular. However, fail not to get as
clear and distinct an apprehension of every thing as possibly thou can, and
let nothing pass thee without due consideration. Run through all the parts and
duties of a holy life in thy thoughts, and tell thy Heart, This I must do; this
I must fly from; this I must suffer; Almighty God requires it, and I cannot
hope to be excused in any thing. Tell me, O my heart, (may thou say) will thou be content I shall do it, or not? Will thou not prove false to me, if I do
resolve it? These things I must attend to, not for a few days only, or at some
certain times and seasons, but constantly and perpetually, throughtout the
whole course of my life: It must be my business to obey and please God in all
my ways, and all my worldly affairs and fleshly Pleasures must give place to
it. Tell me, O my heart, how do thou approve of this? Have I thy free
consent to undertake it? and will thou be contne that I now begin it? And then,
suppose within thy self the greatest temptations, that can befall thee, to
discourage and draw thee aside, suppose that thy Mother who bare thee in her
Womb, and nourished thee with her Breasts, and loves thee as her life, should
come with weeping eyes to thee, and, with the most melting expressions that
Love and Sorrow could put into her mouth, should entreat thee to do some wicked
act, or to forbear the doing of thy duty in any matter: And suppose the Wife of
thy bosom, who is as thy very Soul, should join with her in the same desire,
and tell thee, as Dalilah did Sampson, Judge. 16.5. how can thou say I love
thee, when thy heart is not with me? And, it may be, thy dearest Friends and
Familiars may be importunate with thee also for the same thing; And then say
unto thy self, Shall I be able to withstand all these temptations, to resist
the Importunities of a kind and tender Mother, to turn my back upon the Wife of
my Bosom, and to disoblige all my Friends, rather than sin against God, and
wound my own conscience? And further, represent unto thy self the worst things
that can befall a man in this World, as likely to befall thy self for thy
Conscience toward God: Suppose thou must lose all thou have in the World, yea
and thy very life, if thou will not sin against him; suppose thou must suffer
the sharpest Reproaches, and the most cruel death that ever was invented, if
thou will be faithful to him, and do thy duty: And then charge thy Heart to
tell thee, whether it will not sink at such a trial, and basely betray thee to
Sin and Shame. These are hard things indeed, (may thou say) the bare
thoughts of them are dreadful; and how much more will the things themselves be,
when thou come to try them But what good thing was ever obtained without some
difficulty? and what wise man was ever discouraged with difficulties, that was
sure of a recompense far exceeding the worst of Troubles he could possibly
undergo? Is it not reasonable that I should do and suffer any thing that my God
shall impose upon me? Should not that Life and Being which he has given me, be
altogether at his service? May not my dear and loving Savior justly expect as
much from me, since he has purchased me with his most precious blood? did not
he undergo much more for my sake, than he requires me to do for his? and may
not that joy which encouraged him, be a just. Encouragement for me? will not
Heaven make Amends for all, and justify my choice and resolution to all the
World? What if I am weak and frail? What if there be many subtle Enemies to
this my Undertaking? Is not he that is with me, greater than all that are
against me? Cannot the Spirit of my God make my weakness strong, and cause me
to triumph over all my adversaries? has not he done as much for Millions of
such Weaklings as I am? Have not old men, notwithstanding the Infirmities of
Age; and young men, notwithstanding the strength of their Lusts; and women,
notwithstanding the frailty of their sex, taken up the very same resolution,
and in spite of all the Powers of darkness and their accursed Instruments made
it good to the last minute of their lives? I know, I know, my God and Savior
will not fail me in so good an Undertaking, and he will make my weakness to
redound to the Glory of his Grace; and therefore I my, I must, I will, I do
resolve upon a holy life. Thus I do advise thee, to consider things before thou
do resolve, that thy resolution may be the work of thy whole Soul, that thy
Understanding may fully approve of it under the most disadvantagious
Circumstances, and thy Will entirely embrace it, and that nothing may befall
thee in thy after-life that may stagger thee as not foreseen, or cause thee to
question the wisdom of thy Undertaking. And this advice (thou must know) is not
the mere issue of my own brains, but the Counsel of our great and good Master
in two plain Parables, Luke 14.28, 29. v. etc. Which of you, (says he)
intending to build a Tower, sits not down first, and counts the Cost,
whether he have sufficient to finish it? lest happily after he has laid the
foundation, and is not able to finish it, all that behold it begin to mock him,
saying, this man began to build, and was not able to finish it. Or what King,
going to make war against another King, sits not down first, and considers
whether he be able with Ten thousand to meet him that comes against him with
Twenty thousand, or else whilst the other is yet a great way off, he sends an
Embassage, and desires conditions of Peace. Which Parables do plainly tell us,
That no wise man will begin to build, but upon foresight that he shall be able
to finish That no wise King will begin a War, without first considering his
ability to go through with it. Nor can he be thought wise, that will take upon
him to be a disciple of Christ, and to follow him in a holy Life, before he
has well considered what he undertakes, and what Trouble and Danger it may
cost him to do so; the fruits of such rash and unadvised Undertakings can
ordinarily be no other than shame and sorrow. If Religion be once thoroughly
wrought into the heart, (which will not be done in an hour, or two, and can be
done by no better way than by frequent meditations) it will in all probability
keep possession of it for ever: And if a man be once resolved upon the Practice
of Piety and Virtue, from a full conviction of the goodness, and reasonableness
of it, he will hardly be turned aside from it, by any temptation; whereas, if
it be admitted into the borders or the skirts of the Soul only, possess the
fancy or Imagination, and by the help of it alone does warn the affections, it
will in a little time, be cast off, and all the good Purposes, which it may for
the present produce, will, upon the least alteration of Circumstances, be
forgotten, or laid aside.

. 2. And therefore in the second place, I shall commend to thee, that thou do
not fully determine, and fix thy resolution upon once considering, or
deliberating, (how seriously soever thou have done it) but that thou take the
matter twice or thrice into consideration, after some little Intermissions: for
so thou will discern, whether thy resolution be the effect of thy Judgment, and
thy entire choice; or of a good temper of body apt to receive Religious
Impressions; and a kindly heat, kindled by the working of thy Imagination. If
it be the good temper, and warm Imagination that disposes thee to it, thou will
be of another mind after thou have slept, or been dealing in other matters:
But, if it proceed from the better Principle, but now mentioned, what thou
approvest of this day, thou will approve of to morrow, and for ever; and the
more thou considerest things, the better thou will like of thy intended
resolution, and the more ready thou will be, fully and finally to fix it. What
thou have considered one day, then, in order to a resolution, my Counsel is,
That thou taken a Review of it the next day: consider afresh what thou art to
do, consider the Pleasures which thou must forsake, and the difficulties thou
must undergo; and if, after all, thou find thy self sincerely bent to serve
the Lord in a Holy and Christian Life; and no objection offers it self, which
thou perceivest thy heart to stumble at, then fix thy resolution, resolve
fully, peremptorily and irrevocably. And that it may have all the strength,
which we can possibly add to it, let me advise thee further,

. 3. To back it with a Vow, with a solemn protestation to Almighty God, to keep
it firm and steadfast to the end of thy life: for as long as any sense of God
remains upon thy Soul, thou will dread the Not doing of that, which by a solemn
Promise to God thou have bound thy self to do; it being in the opinion of all
mankind a most abominable thing, to falsify our Vows and Oaths to God, and
deserving the severest vengeance, that can fall upon the heads of wicked Men.

. 3.4. And further, when thou have done this, it will not be amiss to write
down thy resolution, and protestation, in the very words thou have made it,
adding likewise the year, and Month, and day, wherein thou did thus engage
thy self; and to keep it by thee, as a thing of great concernment to thee; and
once a Month at least to look seriously upon it, saying to thy heart, See, O my
heart, what thou have done, observe the bond which thou have laid upon thy
self: it is thy own Act and Deed, there is no disowning it, or excepting
against it: as sure as I now see it with my eyes, it is recorded before God in
Heaven, and it shall one day be brought forth against me to my everlasting
condemnation, if I do not discharge and satisfy it: Go on, O my heart, go on,
as thou have begun, to keep thy resolution firm, and to pay thy Vows unto the
most High: and be confident that the Lord will prosper thy good Desires, and
Endeavors, and reward thee according to his gracious Covenant and Promise,
with everlasting Glory and Felicity.

. 5. All this being done, I think thou may do well, to make known thy
resolution to the World, as often as fitting occasions may be offered thee,
that is, as often as God may receive honor by it, or thy self be secured from
temptation or Sin. Such occasions, in this Age, thou will frequently meet with;
sometimes thou will fall into the Company of evil men, that dishonor the Holy
Religion which they profess, by their wicked and ungodly Lives; and they will
not spare to reproach thee for not running with them into the same excesses and
debaucheries: then thou may do well to tell them, That thou art fully
resolved against such practices, and that thou did long since take upon thee
a profession which allows them not, as they have also done; a profession of
obedience to the doctrine, and of conformity to the example of the pure and
holy Jesus; and that thou can not without gross Hypocrisy and inexcusable
Folly act so contrary to it as they do. Such a declaration as this, will honor
thy Lord and Master, and shame evil doers; if they be not past all shame, and
all Hope of amendment. Sometimes again, thou will meet with men that will play
the Devils part, and use all their Cunning to persuade thee to some sinful act:
Such men thou must let know without delay, That thou art in the full Purpose of
thy heart, as well as in outward Profession, a Christian; and that thou art
resolved to serve thy Lord and Master to thy death, and never to do the thing,
which thou shall know, will in the least displease him: that, how light a
matter soever others may make it, to disown him by their works, whom with their
Mouths they own and flatter, yet thou esteemest it so base and shameful a
thing, that by the help of God's Grace, thou have determined never to be guilty
of it; and that thou can not but believe it to be as bad, nay much worse, to
be false to God, than to be false to men; and that they, who do not think so,
do most unworthily prefer vile dust and ashes, before the High and Holy God of
Heaven and Earth. This must needs stop the Mouths of the most impudent
Tempters; and when thou art known to the World, to be thus well resolved, thou will find a happy freedom from temptations by it. Thy old companions in sin (if
thou have had any) will cease to importune thee, and the Devil, in despair of
success, will seldom trouble thee. However, thou will disarme him of one of the
most dangerous weapons, by which he destroys the Soul of Men; nay, thou will
turn it against himself, and make that to be the Instrument of thy safety,
which might have been the Instrument of thy ruin: I mean, the fear of Reproach
from wicked Men, (which keeps thousands in bondage to sin all their days, going
on in their wonted Courses, not because they approve, or are truly pleased with
them, but because they are ashamed to amend them) which Reproach, when thou
have once courageously contemned by publicly owning thy resolution, thou will
make but little account afterward: for, as a resolute Soldier, that has passed
through the hardest service against the enemy, without Wound or Scar, seels no
Fear within himself of that which remains; so it will be with thee, having born
the first Reproaches of an ungodly World, which are ever the mos bitter, thou will readily contemn and set at naught the rest. The only Fear of Reproach,
which will then remain in thee, will be, but that which is just, and good, viz.
the Fear of deserved Reproach, for not making good that resolution which thou
have declared to the World; and the greater thy Fear of this is, the safer and
the happier thou will be.

Object. Against this part of my advice, I know but one thing that can be
objected, viz. That in case thou should fail to make good thy Resolution
after this, returning to thy former wickedness or carelessness, as many penhaps
have done after they have purposed well, thou shall bring shame upon thy self,
and Dishonor to thy Holy Religion.

Ans. And true it is, (my Brother) that these will be the effects of thy
Failing, and it is as true, that great Care ought to be taken, that nothing be
done which will produce so great an Evil as either of those. But it is not
necessary that thou should fail thus; nay it is not probable, if thou usest
that sincerity, Consideration, Caution, and Circumspection which I have
commended to thee, because of the sufficient Grace of God, which will never
fail thee: so that the force of the objection lies not against all resolving or
owning thy resolution, but against doing it rashly, and unadvisedly, proudly
and vaingloriously: and it only admonishes us to proceed with great
deliberation and prudence, and to forbear the public Owning of it, till we
have had some proof of our sincerity toward God, by the Discharge of our
several duties, and the resistance of some of the more dangerous Temptations;
especially if we know our selves to be of a hasty Temper, and not very constant
in other things. But this being secured, I doubt not but thou will find my
advice good; and I did the rather propose it to thee, because of the abounding
wickedness of the Age; for, though almost every man calls himself a Christian,
and thinks himself affronted if he be not so esteemed, yet true Christian Piety
is owned by very few, and it is become as disgraceful, truly to practice it, or
to plead for it, (more is our misery) as it is to disown that good name, which
should never be without it; and therefore we take it to be as much our duty
now, thus to own the cause of it against the vile Practices of those, who
sottishly reproach and persecute it, even whilst they call themselves
Christians; as it was of old, the duty of Christians to own the Name and
profession, against the Persecutions of the Heathenish and unbelieving World.
Certain it is, That Christ is as well confessed, by maintaining and defending
that real Holiness, which he came to implant in the Hearts and lives of Men, as
he is by the Belief and Acknowledgment of those things which he was pleased to
do and suffer in order to it; and therefore on the other hand, the Denying, the
dissembling, or not owning our obligation to this Holiness, or our resolution
to embrace, and live in it, when ever we have a just cause to own it, is as
truly Denying of Christ, as our protesting in case of danger, that we know him
not, or belong not to him, can be thought to be. Be not afraid nor ashamed,
then, to make thy self known to the World to be in the resolution of thy Heart
a true Christian, that Christ may not be ashamed of thee before the Angels of
God, in that day when all the Secrets of men's hearts shall be made manifest.

Those vile Wretches that live to the dishonor of him whose name they are
called by, and to be Reproach of humane Nature, blush not (as thou may
observe) to make known the baseness of their Designs, and the lewdness of their
actions; they commit their wickedness in the sight of the Sun, and are not
ashamed to boast of it when they have done; and should thou be ashamed to
live worthy of Christ, to be truly a Son of God, and to have a design upon
Glory and Immortality? No, let them be ashamed that do shameful things; but for
thee, thy design is honorable and worthy of a man, and thy resolution is
becoming a Christian, and it is necessary to thee, being one. There is a shame,
we are told, that ends in death; and surely this is that, when men are ashamed
of that which is truly their Glory, and dare not be, what they know they ought
to be, because they may be reproached when they are known to be so.

. 6. There is but one thing more to be added in this matter, viz. That thou will do well to seek out some good men that have taken up the same resolution,
and to acquaint thy self with them, and if possible thou can, to make them
thy familiar, and bosome-Friends. Let them know thy Design, and Purpose of
living Holily, and Christianly. Tell them what an Esteem thou have for them,
because thou perceivest that they design to do no less: beg their good opinion,
and their Love according as they shall behold thy sincerity, and reality in the
profession thou do make: desire their Prayers, their Instruction, their
reproofs, their Encouragements, according as they shall see thee stand in need
of them; and that they will look upon thee as a poor and unworthy member of
that Holy body, to which they do belong, and of which Christ is the head; and
that hopes by the mercy of God to be glorified with Christ one day, together
with them; and that they will therefore have that Regard and tenderness for
thee, which the members of the same body have for one another: and desire them
to accept of the like Regard and Love from thee, and of all the good offices
that true Christian Charity can enable thee to do for them. I confess it will
be no easy matter for thee to find such persons; the number of them is but
small, and they are generally no great pretenders, but modest and reserved, and
perhaps more reserved, all things considered, than they ought to be: for,
though the vile Hypocrisy of pretenders to Holiness in this last Age, and the
daily Abuse of its good name by men, that seek themselves in the Ruin of the
Church, may seem to commend their closeness, and Desire of being unknown, yet
the growth of Atheism and Profaneness, which those false pretenses have
occasioned, and the danger we are fallen into, of Losing those great advantages
for the Practice of Piety, which our Church affords us, does more strongly
require them to lay open that Piety which they practice in secret, and to let
the World know, by actions suitable to a good profession, That there are some,
that own the Cause of real Holiness, without Hypocrisy and Guile. And let me
tell thee by the way, that if these good men of this Church, will thus show
themselves, and unite together in the several Parts, of the Kingdom, disposing
themselves into Fraternities, or friendly Societies, and engaging each other in
their several and respective Combinations, to be helpful and serviceable to one
another in all good Christian ways, it would be the most effectual means for
restoring our decaying Christianity to its Primitive Life and Vigor, and the
supporting of our tottering, and sinking Church. But, not to lead thee too far
from the matter I was about; If thou can find any of these good people, I
have spoken of; I charge thee let thy heart cleave unto them, and let there not
be the least strangeness, so far as lies in thee, between you. Be all as one
man, (thus it was with the Primitive Christians Act. 2.) and so march forward
in the good ways of God against all opposition, observing and considering one
another, to provoke unto love and to good works, as the Apostle's expressions
are, Heb. 10.23. having an Eye continually to the Captain of our Salvation, who
is entered into Heaven, in despite of all the Powers of darkness; and is there
preparing a place for us. Thou will be no sooner engaged with these good men in
Love and Friendship, but thou will begin to feel the advantages of it. Thou will be afraid of no discouragements, when thou have gotten the assistance of
so many true Friends; and thou will never fall back from that resolution, which
has been the occasion of engaging thee in such good Company. If thou
forgettest thy self at any time, thou will not be without a Remembrancer, and
whenever thou failest, thou will find a restorer: and when thou art seized with
any coldness or dullness, they will be ready to warm and quicken thee. These are
advantages so considerable, that thou can not prudently stick at any pains
it may cost thee to procure them: and therefore let me tell thee for a
conclusion of this particular, that if thou can not be so happy as to be
acquainted with any of these good men, thou must do as much as lies in thee, to
make some of thy old Acquaintance good, by engaging them in the same
Resolution, which thou have taken up thy self. To which Purpose, thou must make
Use of all the knowledge thou have of them, and the Interest thou have in them:
tell then what thou art resolved upon, with the Grounds and Reasons of thy
Resolution, urge them to consider and weigh them seriously, and impartially: if
they approve of what thou have done, press them to do the same; if they have
ought to object against it, answer their Objections, and remove their
Prejudices: if thou can not work upon them at one time, try what thou can
do at another, and watch for the fittest Seasons for thy Purpose: if one way of
discoursing will not take effect, try what another way will do, and remember to
fit thy self to their Tempers, and dispositions, so far as innocently thou
may: If Reason will not prevail, try whether Importunity may not, and to all
Endeavors with them fail not to add Prayers to God for them: in a word, press
them with Arguments and Love, and press Almighty God with Prayers in their
behalf, and be confident, that sooner or later thou shall speed according to
thy hearts desire. One Person thus gained will make thee amends for all thy
pains; for besides that, he may prove in a short time as serviceable a Friend
to thee, as those that entered upon a holy Life before thee, he will be a far
greater Comfort to thee than any of them: because in all the Good the does,
thou will have some kind of Share, and every step he takes in those good ways
thou have brought him to, will be as a new Pledge to assure thee of thy future
Glory; there being no greater Promises made to any, than to those who turn to
righteousness, from the error of their ways; see Dan. 12.3. v. But enough has
been said of Framing and Fixing thy Resolution, and the things which I can
conceive to be requisite for the making it firm and effectual. It is now time
that I direct thee how to put it in practice, and therefore.

CHAP. II.
Sect. 1. Containing the second Advice, To take up our Cross and forsake all to
follow Christ; wherein is explained the Nature of this duty, and the necessity
of it. Sect. 2. Containing several Arguments to reconcile us to this duty of
Self-Denial, from the necessity of it, in Order to our spiritual Life and
Health, from the example of our Savior, who was a great Pattern of
Self-Denial; from the reasonableness of this Duty considered in it self, and
the great advantages of it. Sect. 2. Containing some Directions how to put this
Duty of Self-Denial in practice.

. 1. THou must deny thy self, take up thy Cross, and forsake all. This is the
first thing that is to be done by those that are resolved upon a Holy and
Christian Life; and it is so necessary to be done in the first place, that if
thou failest in it, it will be a vain thing for me to offer thee any further
direction. Now, it so much concerns thee to be fully persuaded of this truth,
that thou must give me Leave to show thee, that I tell thee no more in this
case, and give no other Advice, than what our blessed Lord and Master has
done: see Luke 9.23, 24. He said to them all, if any man will come after me,
let him deny himself, take up his Cross daily, and follow me; for whosoever
will save his life shall lose it, but whosoever will lose it for my sake, the
same shall save it. The meaning of which words, is plainly this, all that will
be Christians indeed, must deny themselves, take up their Cross, and follow
Christ, and not reserve so much as their very Lives, but be willing and ready
to resign up all for him. But lest we should imagine this to concern some
choice persons only, whom he designed to bring to greater perfection than
others are obliged to aim at, such as his Apostles may be thought to be, he was
pleased to speak as much, at another time, to the multitudes that followed him,
Luke 14. c. 25, 26, 27. v. There were great multitudes with him, and he turned
and said unto them, if any man come to me, and hate not his Father and Mother,
and Wife and Children, and Brethren and Sisters, yea and his own Life also, he
cannot be my Disciple; and whosoever does not bear his Cross and come after me,
cannot be my Disciple; that is, he that will not deny, and forsake (as we are
wont to do those things we hate) whatsoever is dear to him in the World, be it
Father and Mother, or Wife and Children, or Brethren and Sisters, preferring
Christ before them all, and is not fully resolved and prepared to suffer any
thing, how hard soever, for Christ's sake, cannot be a Disciple of Christ, or a
true Christian. The Word [Cannot] signifies such an Impossibility, as implies a
Contradiction; to deny our selves, and all our dearest interests in this World,
is essential to the sincere profession of Christanity, and therefore he, who
will not do this, cannot be a Christian. Those dear things which he cannot
renounce, will not suffer him to take this profession upon him, or if he do
take it upon him, they will in time cause him to repent his Undertaking, and to
fall away with shame from it. And then in the words following, he advises them
to consider seriously what they are about to do, before they took upon them to
be his Disciples; and that his Advice might sink more deeply into their minds,
he expresses himself in two Parables (which I have before mentioned) viz. of a
man intending to build a Tower, and sitting down first to consider the Cost;
and of a King going to make War against another King, and considering first his
abilities to go through with it: And then he concludes v. 33. So likewise,
whosoever he be of you, that for saketh not all that he has, he cannot be my
Disciple. Which conclusion makes it a plain case, That we cannot wisely nor
safely engage our selves to Christ, or list our selves as Soldiers under his
Banner, till we have denied, renounced, given up all Interest in our selves,
and whatsoever is dear unto us. Not thus prepared, we do but exasperate and
provoke an Enemy, our old Enemy the Devil, whose Forces we shall not be able
to withstand; and so lay foundation for our future Shame and Ruin; and though
at first reading, we may think those Comparisons but ill applied, for what
agreement is there between having Riches and Armies, and forsaking all that we
have? yet upon second thoughts, we may perceive a very wise Design in it. For
Christianity is a spiritual Warfare, and some of the most Powerful Enemies we
are to encounter, are, the Riches and Pleasures and Honors of this World, and
therefore the strength and courage of a Christian Soldier, whereby he will
obtain a glorious Victory, consists in Self-denial, and a contempt of this
World; and a Christian is God's Building, or spiritual House, the Temple of
God, and the very foundation of this Building is laid in Humility and
Self-denial, from whence proceed all those Divine Graces and Virtues, which
both perfect and adorn the Building, which make Humility and Poverty of Spirit,
Renouncing the Love of this World, and the very Possession of it, too, in some
cases, as necessary to our becoming Christians, as a great deal of money is to
erect and perfect a stately and magnificent Building. This appears to be a
great truth, and no groundless Fancy, by the Parable of the Wedding-Supper in
the former part of the Chapter, which thou may do well to reflect upon. The
Master sent his servants to call them that were bidden, when his Supper was
ready; but they all refused, and desired to be excused: one had bought a piece
of ground, and he must go and see it; another had bought five yoke of Oxen, and
he must go and prove them; and another had married a Wife, and he could not
come: but when he sent his Servants to call the Poor, the Blind, and the Lame,
they came in immediately; so that the poor and miserable people of the World,
that have no Worldly thing to trust to, or those who have these things, but
have conquered the Love of them, are better disposed to receive the Gospel, and
to become Christians, than the Rich and the Great that have the World at will,
as we say, and wallow in the Pleasures thereof. We have a very remarkable
Instance of the Mischief that wordly Riches do to those that both have and love
them, in the 10th Chapter of St. Mark's Gospel, and the 17, and 18. v. etc. and
there are several things in the Chapter, relating to it, that deserve our
Regard. In the verses before, we find our blessed Savior displeased with his
Disciples for forbidding little children to be brought unto him, and saying to
them Suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid them not, for of such
is the Kingdom of God; that is, their Innocence and Simplicity, their
willingness to be guided and sustained by others, makes them the sit
Emblems of those that do truly belong to my Chruch, and Kingdom. And then he
adds, Verily I say unto you, whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of God as
a little child, he shall not enter therein, that is, he that takes not the
Christian profession upon him, as a little child, that is, with that very
Humility, Disinteressedness, Self-denial and Resignation, as is remarkable in
little children, will never submit to those laws which I give to the World,
and shall never be received by me as a Christian. Now immediately upon this, as
if Divine Providence had designed it for a confirmation of this truth there
came a young man to Christ, upon a very weighty and important business; this
young man's heart was in a good measure set upon eternal life, and he had
entertained a great opinion of Christ, as appeared by the have he made, by the
humility of his carriage, and the words he used to him. He came running, and
kneeled to him, and asked him, saying, Good Master what shall I do to inherit
eternal life? he had done much in order to it before, he had kept the
Commandments from his youth up; so he professed, and there is no Doubt but he
spoke what he thought, and what he had done in a good measure. for it is said
v. 21. That Jesus loved him, that is, he approved of his good Beginnings, and
desired that they might be perfected: but when he tole him, that there was one
things still wanting, viz. that he must go and sell all, and give to the Poor,
and take up his Cross and follow him; the forward young man dislike his
Counsel, became sad, and went away grieved; and why? because he had great
possessions; he had them, and he loved them likewise; and who can blame him for
being sad, when he was told, That either he must lose Eternal life, or part
with them? He had not got his Riches by fraud and deceit, by violence and
oppression, as many among us have done, and resolve to keep them, and yet hope
for everlasting Life, (for so he had not kept the Commandments which Christ
spoke to him of,) his Love to the World had not prevailed so far upon him, as
to draw him to such wickedness, but his fault was; that he had so great a Love
to his Riches, that he could not find in his heart to part with them, no not
for the Obtaining of Everlasting life. Had he been as a little child, and had
valued them no more than a child would have done, he had obtained his desire,
and had entered into the Kingdom of God: But, because it was not thus with him,
his good meanings miscarried, and he fell short of that happiness which he
sought after. Thus was this unhappy man a sad Instance of the truth of our
blessed Saviors words; and so the Disciples looked upon him, being astonished
at the bewitching power of worldly possessions; (for it is not improbable, that
this might be one cause of their wonder, as well as the words of their Master
upon this accident, for though his first words, how hardly shall those that
have Riches enter into the Kingdom of God? might have astonished them another
time, yet his second words, How hard is it for them that trust in Riches to
enter into the Kingdom of God? would have removed their astonishment; it being
easy for them to apprehend, that those that trust in Riches will not trust in
God, and therefore shall not be saved by him,) but they were astonished to see
a man that meant so well, and was come so near to the Kingdom of God,
overthrown by his great possessions; and since Riches had so great a Power over
him, and could turn him back from the Kingdom of God, they believed, they would
turn all the rich men in the World from it; if he, after having kept the
Commandments from his youth up, did trust in his Riches, no Rich man could be
found, they thought, that they did not trust in them; and therefore said among
themselves, v. 16. Who then can be saved? and though Peter immediately
expressed some hope of his Salvation, and the Salvation of his
fellow-Disciples, because they had left all, and followed him; yet it appears
from what follows in the Chapter from v. 35. that he was deceived in his
opinion of what they had done; for, though they had left their possessions to
follow him, yet there was something of Selfishness still remaining in them, and
to be renounced by them; they had too great an opinion of the Worlds grandeur,
and they aimed at it more than they were to do; and this their Master was very
well aware of, and therefore he tells them in another place, [ Mat. 18.23.]
(when they had proposed a Question to him which discovered the Inclinations of
their hearts, asking him, who was the greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven) That
except they were converted and became as little Children, that is, as
unconcerned for that greatness which they thought of, as little children are,
They should not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. They were converted in a good
measure then, and had given a good evidence of it, by quitting their
possessions for their Master's sake: but it seems there was still something to
be done: they were not so estranged from the World, nor so resigned as to all
fleshly Interest, but they needed to be put in mind, that they must deny
themselves more entirely, and become as little children; then would they be fit
for that service he designed to put them upon, and not till then. And thus
indeed it was with them, for, whilst their heads were possessed with Fancy, that
their Master was to be a mighty temporal Prince, and their Souls were hankering
after the Glories which they imagined they should partake of with him, they
were often offended with his discourse, and when they saw him in the hands of
his enemies and began to suspect the Ruin of their hopes and expectations,
they shamefully deserted him. Thus in the 8th chap. of St. Mark's Gospel, when
he began to tell them, That he must suffer many things, and be rejected of the
chief Priests and Elders and Scribes, and he put to death, Peter took him and
rebuked him, v. 32. And when those things were coming upon him, which he spoke
of, They all forsook him and fled, as we read Mark 14.50. v. but then
afterward, when their Mistakes were rectified, and their Souls more perfectly
purged from the Love of earthly things, by the descent of the Holy Spirit upon
them, every word that their Master had spoken to them, and which the Spirit
brought to their Remembrance, was dear unto them, and they were not afraid nor
ashamed to confess him before their greatest enemies. Then, the Cross of Christ
was their greatest Glory; and to be made like to him in suffering, and
patience, and resignation to God, was the great Desire, and Joy of their
Hearts. Then they could call upon men to deny themselves, and forsake all, as
earnestly, as their Master had done before them; for what else do those
repeated exhortations signify, of not living to our selves; of dying to our
Sins; of being crucified to the World; of being crucified, dead and buried with
Christ; of offering ourselves Sacrifices to God, and many more the like, which
we read in their Epistles? and indeed they did it very effectually, whilst
their doctrine and Practice went Hand in Hand together; for, in spite of the
wickedness of the World, and the subtle malice of the Devil, they prevailed in
all places, and filled every corner of the World with Wonders of Self-denial,
and Patience, and Contempt of the World; with men that could take joyfully the
spoiling of their Goods, as we read Heb. 10. v. 34. And that counted not their
Lives dear for Christ's sake, and the Gospels. And such Self-Denying men were
Christians generally in the first Ages of Christianity: Witness Athenagoras,
who speaking of those of his time, tells us. We are not moved with the loss of
our Estates, which our enemies wrest from us, nor with the violence that is
offered to our Credit and Reputation, or if there be any thing of greater
concernment than these; for, although these things are mightily prized and
valued amongst men, yet can we despise and slight them; nay, we cannot only
when beaten refrain from striking again, and make no resistance against those
that invade and spoil us; but to those that smite one cheek, we can turn the
other, and to them that take away the coat, we can let go the cloak also. Thus
did the Apostles and first Christians deny themselves, and forsake all; and are
not we bound to do so likewise, think thou? may we be his Disciples upon
easier terms than they were? has he made the way to Heaven broader than it was,
and given us allowances which he vouchsafed not to them of former Ages no
certainly. It is true, we are not altoge there in the same circumstances as they
were in, for, the Christian profession (though now honorable among us) was
then so vile a thing in the eyes of the World, and so extremely hated, that
none could take it up, and own it publicly, without hazarding the loss of all
they had; and therefore, if any were so rash as to take it up, before they had
denied themselves, they quickly discovered their rashness and want of
Self-denial, by falling away from it: and therefore it must be granted, that
Self-denial is not now so necessary, as to the Taking up and Retaining the bare
profession of Christianity as it was of old: but then, as to the Practice of
it, it is certainly as necessary as ever it was; and though the Profession be
honored at present, yet the Practice is as much despised, and the making good
of what we do profess in a pure and Holy Life, will as certainly expose a Man
to as many Evils (God be thanked, that I cannot say to death) as the Profession
of old was wont to do; and therefore, he that will satisfy that name which he
has taken upon him, and observe the Profession which he has made in Baptism,
must be brought to that Frame and Temper of Mind, which those good men in the
beginning of Christianity were brought to, that is, he must be taken off from
himself, from all self-interests, and self-satisfactions, he must renounce all
propriety in himself and every thing else, be dead to the World, have no more
affection to the worldly things, than the dead have; that so nothing may hinder
him from living unto God. There are but few indeed that seriously consider
this, and therefore we see, that men generally account themselves Christians
from their Baptism, and as long as they do not renounce their Baptism, they
are confident that they are so: but he that has told us, that many are called,
that is, to be Christians; but few are chosen, that is, will approve themselves
to be so, makes another judgment of them; and they will know it one day to
their Shame and Sorrow. They have fallen by God's good providence upon that
which is in fashion among us, and they see at present no Reason why they should
cast it off, I mean, the outward Profession of Christianity: but as for that
which is not fashionable and in Credit, that is, the Denying of our selves, and
Dying to the World, they never understood it; and because they do not deny
themselves, and dye to the World, they cannot live to God.

This might suffice, my Brother, to convince thee, that thou must deny thy
self, and forsake all, if thou desire to live a holy and Christian Life. But
because I know men's backwardness to entertain this hard Saying, as they are apt
to term it, and because I know that it is so absolutely necessary, that those
who will live a Christian Life, do both believe, and practiss it; I shall show
thee yet further, that the Not-considering, or the Nor-practising this
Self-denial, has been the main cause, why so many have rejected the Gospel in
all Ages, and why so many of these that have seemed to receive it, have yielded
so lame and so imperfect an obedience to it. Did thou never read in thy
Bible, how few of those that heard Christ preach whilst he was upon the earth,
and saw the Miracles that he wrought, especially of the greater sort, did truly
believe in him? Have any of the Rulers or of the Pharisees believed on him, was
a choking Question to any that would dare to speak for him, John 7. c. 48. v.
Those few Disciples that he had, were of the poorer sort of people, that had
not much to trust to, or much to lose for his sake; if any of hte richer or
greater sort were convinced, that He was the Christ, yet they did not dare to
own it, they would go by night, and in secret to tell him of their Faith; but
publikly and openly they professed it not: and what might be the Reason of
this, do thou think? Had not these great men those natural Powers of
judging, of assenting and consenting to the truth, which the others had? was
not their natural courage as great, and woul they not have showed it as much in
other Cases, as these poor people could have done? Yes undoubtedly. In all
other matters they were the wise, those the ignorant, they the bold and the
hardy, those the poor spirited and cowardly: but in this case the wise were
fools, and the courageous mere Dastards. And how was this? those great, those
rich and proud men could not, or would not learn this one lesson, which would
have opened their blind eyes, and have raised their poor Spirits, to that
degree of Boldness, which they beheld in the Disciples of Christ, and wondered
at: How can ye believe (said Christ himself to them) as long as ye receive
Honor from one another, and seek not the Honor that comes from God only,
John 5. c. 44. v.? They loved themselves, and the Praise of men too well, to
approve of any thing that would lessen their Reputation in the least, or bring
them one step lower in the Esteem of the World: and they were too covetous, as
appears from other places of Scripture, to leave all, to follow one that had
not a house to put his-head in. Did thou never observe the monstrous
unbelief of many among us, and the gross Hypocrisy of others? did thou never
observe, what great opposition is made by some men, against some of the
clearest truths of Christianity, who yet seem very fond of other truths, that
are not so clear, and lie not so level to humane capacities? and did thou
never take notice, how strict some men are in some things, who yet allow
themselves in the breach of very plain and very weighty precepts? as for
Instance, the Doctrine of the Trinity we see unanimously acknowledged by many
thousands among us, when the Divine authority of Christ's Ministers, and the
Right of their maintenance meets with many opposers in all places: and some men
can preach and pray from morning till night, and talk Scripture to each other
with much seeming seriousness, when like the Pharisees of old they will embrace
any fair occasion that is offered to devour the House of a poor Widow or
Orphan, or to exalt themselves somewhat higher in the World; And what do
thou think is the Reason of these things? The same without doubt, that hindered
the Jews of old from receiving Christ: and if these truths which they profess
to believe, and these Christian duties which they are constant in, did as much
oppose their worldly Interests, and fleshly Lusts, as the acknowledging of
Jesus to be the Christ, did oppose the Interests and Lusts of the unbelieving
Jews, they would quickly discover the truth of it, by falling away from those
truths and those duties, if not also from the whole Religion. Not that I
believe, that they have been mere dissemblers from their first profession, or
that they are, and have been so zealous in some things merely for the
compassing of worldly Ends, without any conviction of the truth or goodness of
them, (for I doubt not but many of them have meant well from the very
beginning) but, That naughty and corrupt affections, which being unrenounced,
did so fatally prejudice the Jews against the Person of Christ, do as strongly
prejudice them against great part of his doctrine. Those corrupt affections
which they should have renounced at their first setting out, are like a thick
cloud upon the eyes of their minds, not suffering them to discern those truths,
which to resigned men are as manifest as the Sun at noonday, and as a strong
bias upon their Wills, drawing them aside from those good paths, which they
have a desire to walk in. They purpose well in the general, like the Rich man
before spoken of, when he came to Christ, and they do well in those things that
oppose not their inordinate affections; but when they are to learn those
Duties, to which their Lusts will not be reconciled, either they are not able
to understand them, or have not the Power to practice them; as the Wolf in the
Fable, that was set to school to read, could make no word of all the Letters,
but a Lamb, because of his appetite to the flesh of that harmless Creature; so
they can understand, approve, and follow nothing but what they love, and are
inclined to, or however nothing that crosses their Affections and Inclinations.
I will conclude therefore (and I think I have good reason for it) that if we
desire and are resolved to be Christians, we must in the first place renounce
our selves, and entirely put off our carnal Lusts and Worldly affections: Our
Desires and Resolutions will be vain and come to naught, if we fail to Do it.
We may purpose well, and perhaps do many good things, though we do omit it; we
may make a fair Show for a while, and mount up to Heaven in our own thoughts,
and in the opinion of the World; but, like as an unwise Builder, that raises a
very fair structure upwards, not having laid a good and firm foundation, will
in a little time be convinced of this error, by its ruin; so when a time of
trial and temptation comes, our own Fall will show us ours: when the Winds
blow, and Rains fall, and the Floods come, our pretty Frame of Religion will
come to Ruin, and our high raised hopes will perish together with it. Now
after this, I suppose, I need not tell thee that I have insisted so much upon
this Particular with great Reason.

. 2. It remains, That I endeavor briefly to beget a good opinion in thee of
the duty I have been speaking of; to show thee, that it is not such an
unreasonable thing as some men fancy it, to be obliged to it, and that Christ
cannot reasonably be thought a hard Master for laying it upon us. For, surely

1. He that has laid nothing upon us, but what our State and Condition, and
his own Design of Love and mercy toward us, did make necessary, cannot be
judged hard or cruel to us; and has Christ required any thing more in this
matter? No undoubtedly; he could not give us health and life (how much soever
he desired it) without removeing our Diseases: he could not be the Author of
Salvation to us, without taking away that which was our Ruin and Destruction.
And what was our Disease and Ruin. but an inordinate and immoderate Love of
our selves, and our Fellow Creatures, whereby we fell away from God, to be as
Gods our selves, to please our selves, to provide for our selves, to do our own
Wills, and to satisfy our own Desires without restraint or comptrol? Now, what
is it that we would have, when we quarrel with Christ, and call this
Commandment grievous? would we have our health and our desires too? would we
live and dye also? would we serve God a little, and our selves much more? or
would we serve him so far only, as we shall please our selves, and have that be
taken for all the service that we own him? If thou think this to be
unreasonable, as thou can not but do, thou must needs acknowledge it to be
necessary that thou should be taken from thy self, and all worldly things,
that thou might serve thy God. But besides,

2. We cannot reasonably look upon him as a hard Master, who submitted himself
to that which he has imposed upon us, being himself the greatest example of
Self-denial, and Forsaking all, that ever was. What think thou of his
Appearing in our frail flesh, of his low estate in the World, of his Pain and
Travail, of his Thorny Crown and Cross? Was there not Self-denial in all this,
and such as Angels and men may justly wonder and be astonished at for ever? He,
who being in the form of God, thought it no Robbery to be equal with God, made
himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made
in the likeness of a man, and being found in fashion as a man, humbled himself
and became obedient unto Death, even the Death of the Cross. Phil. 2, 6, 7, 8.
He, who might have commanded all the riches, and glory of the World, as being
Lord of all, became poor, that by his poverty we might be made rich, 2. Corinthians. 8.9. He, who made all mankind to serve and please him, Pleased not
himself, but became a servant for our Good, Romans 15. v. 3. He, who could have
had more than twelve Legions of Angels for his Guard Math. 26, 53. yielded his
cheeks to be smitten, his Face to be spit upon, his back to be scourged, his
hands and feet to be nailed to an infamous Tree, and his side and heart to be
pierced by the Vilest Sinners, whom with one word of his mouth he might have
turned into Hell. Thus did our great and good Master deny himself, and forsake
all: and can we poor worthless wretches think it much to deny our Vile selves,
and to forsake those little things, which we call our own, for his sake, and in
obedience to his command? had he dealt with us, as those that once Sat in
Moses's Chair did with their Disciples, laying heavy burdens upon them, and
grievous to be born, which they themselves would not touch with one of their
fingers Math. 23, 4. we might have had some seeming cause of complaint: but,
since he himself has born the burden, which he has laid upon us, yea, and a
far greater, we are most unreasonable people, if we do open our mouths against
him: he is too soft and delicate a servant surely that would fare better than
his Lord, or be exempted from that work, which his Lord disdaineth not to put
his hand unto. But,

3. I beseech thee, Brother, tell me what it is which thou Judge hard and
unreasonable in this Commandment. Is it that we should believe our selves to be
what we really are, and that we should demean our selves in the World
accordingly? Is that we who do own our selves to be nothing of our selves, and
to have nothing of our selves, should be as nothing to our selves, and
challenge no propriety in our Selves, but in Subordination to him of whom we
are, and from whom we have received all? Is it that he who has made us for
himself, and without any other motive than that was in himself, and who has
freely given us all we do possess, will dispose of us and all according to his
Pleasure? Is it that we should prefer him before our selves and his Will before
our own, and be ready and willing to part with all that he has given us, when
ever he is pleased to call for it? Is it that we should be content to receive
Evil from him as well as Good, when he shall see it fit for his own Glory and
our greater Good? I dare say that there is nothing in all this, that thou will
except against; and this is all that is required of thee. But yet further;

4. Suppose it appear after all, that what is here required, is not only just
and reasonable, but hugely Profitable, and advantageous for us; may we not
justly look upon them to be very unreasonable, that do quarrel with it? And
truly thus it is and thus it will appear to be, upon very little consideration;
It is no small advantage, to be at liberty to Obey God entirely, and to be able
to do it, with ease, with delight and pleasure: it is no little benefit to be
out of the Reach of the Devils malice, and of all those Dangerous weapons
wherewith he assaults and destroys poor Souls. And this we shall Infallibly
obtain by the practice and performance of this one Duty. For what is it, that
indisposes us to the service of God, that makes his Righteous and Holy Laws to
be grievous and uneasy to us, but our Taking upon us to be something of our
selves, and to dispose of our selves according to our own wills? What is it
that gives the Devil so much advantage over us, but our disorderly passions and
affections? and whence have all his Temptations their Force and Power, and all
his Artifices their Success, but from our inordinate Love of our selves and
these Worldly things? And therefore when we have put off this Love, and
banished these things our hearts, as we are taught to do, we have Disarmed our
Enemy, or taken off the edge of all his weapons; we have baffled his accursed
policies, and secured our selves from his Devices. Men may talk of riches, and
honors and fleshly pleasures, as long as they please, to those that are dead;
and they may threaten them with reproaches and pains, and other evil things,
till they have wearied themselves, and not find Them moved in the least with
it: and no less unmovable shall we be, to all the temptations of the Devil, if
we be but perfectly mortified and resigned. These are great advantages; but
there is yet one more, no less considerable in the esteem of some men, viz.
that this will raise us up above all the Troubles, perplexities and sorrows of
this miserable World, so that let what will come upon us here, it shall never
be able to hurt us. For whence have all the evil things of the World (as we are
wont to call them) their Sting and edge, but from our unrenounced selves, our
unmortified lusts and passions? we will be something, we will do every thing,
and every thing must be as we will have it; but in the event we find we are
nothing, and that we can do ntohing, and the stubborn things will not comply
with with us; and therefore we are troubled, we are in pain, we are overwhelmed
with grief and sorrow. This is an Evil that has no Remedy but Self-Denial, and
resignation to God; and this is a Remedy that never fails. When we have put off
our selves, as we ought, and disengaged our affections from all earthly things,
and can give God leave to dispose of his own Creatures, and to govern his own
World: then weshall be in Peace, then we shall be happy, and not till then;
then nothing can go against us, because we shall be willing to comply with
every thing. By this time I hope I have perfectly reconciled thee to this Duty,
and that thou art resolved to put it in Practice. It remains now that I show
thee, as briefly as may be, how to do it. And,

. 3. Because thou will certainly meet with many and great difficulties in thy
first Endeavors, and the difficulties will be the more and the greater, by how
much the more thou have loved thy Self, and the World formerly, and have been
accustomed to please thy self, and to indulge thy affections; it willb e
necessary,

1. That thou enter upon the Practice of it, with the strongest convictions
that possibly can be, both of the necessity, and reasonableness of it: and that
thou arm thy self with such considerations as may beat down all oppositiion,
and effectually encourage thee against all the difficulties thou can
encounter with. To this purpose thou may make Use of all that I have already
said, and of many other things, which my Design will not permit me to give an
account of. And after this manner may thou discourse with thy own heart
concerning it: I am told, That I must deny my self, and forsake the World, and
take up my Cross, if I will be a true Christian: I am told it by Christ
himself, and if I do not believe him, why do I call him my Lord, and profess to
trust in him as my Savior? I know that his words have been ocnfirmed, and are
confirmed daily by a thousand Instances: nay, I my self am an unhappy Instance
of the truth of them, having made but little progress in Christian knowledge,
and less in Christian virtue, merely for Want of a serious Regard unto them.
But if I do believe them, why do I not practice accordingly? Does not my
everlasting happiness depend upon my being a Christian indeed; and can I
reasonably stick at any thing that is needful for the securing my self of that?
Is it fit that such a poor derivative thing as I am, should take upon me to be
absolute and independent? What have I done for my self heretofore, and what can
I do for my self hereafter, that I should prefume to please my self, or seek my
self in any thing? I cannot add one Inch to my Stature, I cannot make one hair
white or black, I cannot do my self the least Good, nor remove from my self the
lightest Evil; and shall I take upon me to do my own Will without respect to
him, by whom alone I am, and without whose influence and Blessing I can do
nothing? And what is the World that I should set my heart upon it, and prefer
it before my God and Savior? did my Love of it ever do me any Good; or will it
do me any without God's Blessing, or when I am to leave it that I should cleave
at present so close unto it? I know that it is God alone that give me any
portion in it, that gives me any comfort by it, and I Know that he can deprive
me of both, when he pleases; And there fore I shall be, not only a Rebel, but a
fool if I resign not my self and it to him, and say not, whatever is laid upon
me It is the Lord, let him do whatsoever seems good unto him. Come therefore,
O my heart, let us be no longer Rebels against Heaven, and enemies to our own
Happiness: we are not our own, we are not the Worl's, but we are God's, we are
Christ's, and therefore let God dispose of us as he will, and let him give
those worldly things to whom he pleases, so that we may have his favor, and
enjoy it for ever. O naughty self! how do I detest thee, for taking so mcuh
upon thee, as thou have done hitherto? O vain, O transitory World! I abhor
thee, I renounce thee utterly: court me no more with thy sottish Pleasures,
withthly glittering bravery, with thy deceitful Shows; I am now dying, and I
will be for ever dead unto thee, that I may follow Christ, and live unto my
God. Favor these good desires, favor them with thy Grace, O my god, and
suffer not a Soul, that earnestly aspires toward thee, to fall short of thee.
With these and such like thoughts, thou will do well to enter upon the Practice
of this duty. But then, I advise thee,

2. To do as much as thou can, to keep these and the like thoughts
continually in thy mind. However, sail not to begin every day with them. When
thou first beholdest the light in the morning, after thou have sent up thy
heart to God in some short acknowledgements of his mercy toward thee, tell thy
heart, That thou have by God's goodness another dayadded to thy life, which
thou must employ for him and his service, who has bestowed it on thee, and not
for the pleasing of thy self and the satisfying of thy Lusts; and charge it, as
it will answer for it at the great day, that it take care to do it accordingly.
The like thoughts and resolutions will do well again about noon, and indeed at
any time of the day, and the oftener they return into thy mind, the more easily
and speedily will thou come to that perfect resignation, which thou art
concerned to aim at. But yet further,

3. It will behove thee to be frequent in Exercises of Mortification and
Self-denial. Restrain thy wonted Liberties, and deny thy self thy accustomed
Satisfactions; acquaint thy self sometimes with hardships, and turn not always
away from sufferings, remembering that thou art a Soldier under the Ensign of
the Cross, and therefore must not be nice and tender, soft and delicate.
Mortify thy Senses, and accustom them to those things that are least
agreeable, knowing that there are some offices to be done sometimes by a
Christian, such as visiting poor prisoners, and dressing of poor peoples Sores,
etc. Which men of a nice and squeamish sense will hardly be persuaded to
perform. Mortify thy passions likewise, and keep them strictly within their
bounds; for as he is a beast that is a slave to Sense, so is he a Fool that is
governed by his Passions. In one word, consider thy self well, mark thy Temper,
thy Inclinations and affections, and keep thy self and them under constant
discipline and correction. Have thou a trifling wanton spirit? art thou much
delighted with the Ralleries, Drolleries, Sportings and Jestings of wanton
Fancies and loose tongues? fail not, I beseech thee, to restrain thy
inclinations; avoid the company of light and vain persons, and turn away thy
thoughts from trivial matters, to the concernments of a Soul that must shortly
appear before the Bar of a just and holy God; remembering that the Master whom
thou professest to serve, was a serious, grave, and useful person, and not a
Buffoon, or Stage Player. It was the grief of a devout man many years agone
[St. Bernard] to observe the lightness, laughter, and security of many
Christians, and his continual fear that he should see them forsaken of the
Divine Grace, of which they showed themselves to be unmindful. What Grief, what
Fear, do thou think, would have possessed his heart, if he had lived in this
Age, and had been a witness of our vanity in this kind? we live in a merry
World at present, and nothing is sacred or weighty enough to escape our
Sportings: but believe it, God will shortly spoil our vain mirth, and make us
serious whether we will or not. Art thou soft and slothful, inclined to
sensuality and voluptuousness? rouse up thy self, and be always doing, take up
with coarse Fare, fast often, lie hard, go frequently to the house of Mourning,
and keep him continually in thine Eye, who, after a life of continued travel in
doing Good, had no easier a bed than a Cross to rest upon. Do the Riches of the
World please thee? refuse them when they are offered, or let the hand of
liberality immediately distribute them, to those that want them; and keep in
mind those good men, whom thy Bible tells thee of, who, though they could have
enriched themselves by miracles, yet continued poor, and had not so much as an
house to put their heads in. Do wordly Honors tickle thee, and the Applauses
of men delight thee? Retire from public employments, and hide thy self in the
meanness and obscurity of a Countrey-life; be exact and open in the Practice of
those Virtues which are most unfashionable, and which the generallity of men
have a mean opinion of; and forget not, That there was a person once in the
World, who was able to have governed the whole World, that lead the greatest
part of his Life in the Countrey-Villages, and among poor people, and would not
have his great and mighty works to be publicly spoken of. This is to practice
Self-denial; and by these and the like Practices, thou will in a short time
arrive at that perfect resignation, to which I desire to lead thee. But then in
the last place,

4. Be sure, That in these Practices, and in whatever else thou do, thou
take nothing to thy self; but refer thy self and all to Almighty God. Thou
may begin well, my Brother, viz. in renouncing thy self, and yet may end
ill, viz. in that very self, which thou did at first renounce: and this thou
do, if thou do do these things for the satisfaction of thy self, and
seek thy own Glory in them. Forget not therefore this last advice; it is not
for thy self, but for God, that thou must be thus employed; that thou may be
entirely resigned to God, and be for ever united with God. Thou must be as
nothing to thy self, and the World must be as nothing to thee, that God may be
all in all. Therefore I advise thee in the third place,

CHAP. III.
Sect. 1. Containing a Third Advice, to give up our selves Souls and Bodies
entirely to God, with several Arguments to persuade us to it. Sect. 2.
Containing several Directions how to put this Advice of giving our selves to
God, in Practice.

. 1. TO give up thy self, thy Soul and Body, all the faculties of the one, and
all the members of the other, together with all thou have in the World, wholly
and entirely to God through Christ Jesus, uniting thy self to him in the
Closest manner, and by the strongest bonds that possibly thou can, resolving
to be his, and only his for ever. To make thee capable of doing this, was the
design of my former Advice, and if thou can practice that well, thou will
readily follow this: for those bonds being broken which kept thee from God,
thou will as naturally incline to him, as fire does ascend upwards, when that
which depresses it, or keeps it down, is removed from it; and therefore, the
fewer words may serve to enforce this Advice upon thee. The heads of some few
considerations I shall briefly offer thee, which thy own Thoughts may work
upon, and enlarge as thou see good. In the first place then,

1. Thou must and do acknowledge thy self to be God's Creature. He is the
only Spring and Root of thy Being and Life. And is it not just then, that thou
should be and live to him, and to him alone? Art thou not a very
unreasonable Creature, if thou refusest to be his, by whom alone thou art, and
without whom thou can not be at all? Yes surely.

2. Thou must acknowledge God to be the only Supporter, Preserver, and
Maintainer of thy Life and Being; thou live by him as surely, as the Tree by
its Root, and if he withdraw his quickening Insluence and Power but one Moment,
thou art dead without Remedy. Those Necessaries for the preserving of life,
which the World furnishes thee withal, are all fallen from him; and all the
virtue and efficacy they have for that purpose, is no less from him. It is he
that refreshes thee by Heat and Light, that nourishes thee by Meat and Drink,
that cures thee by Medicine and Physic, and without him thou could have no
Nourishment, no Health, no Refreshment. And with what Reason, then, can thou
withhold thy self from him? Surely with none at all.

3. thou believe God to be thy Savior, i.e. that he has given thee his only
begotten Son to deliver thee from Sin and Death, and to bring thee to
everlasting Life; and that as he in our Nature has offered up himself a
Sacrifice upon the Cross for thy Sins, so he has undertaken to bring back thy
erring and lost Soul to God. And therefore thou art a most unworthy and
ungrateful wretch, if thou will not comply with his gracious Undertaking, but
refusest to be Christ's, that thou may be God's for ever.

4. Thou do believe and acknowledge, that for this End he has taken
Possession of thee by his Holy Spirit, who is continually working in thee, to
dispose thee by putting off thy self, and all selfish Inclinations and Desires,
and by abandoning all that is dear to thee, to offer up thy self, as Abraham
offered up his Isaac, a Sacrifice unto God. And therefore thou can not
without the Guilt of the most abominable Sacrilege, take upon thee to be any
thing, or to do any thing, but for God, and to God. See 1. Corinthians. 6.19, 20.

5. Thou have made a Show, an outward profession of giving up thy self to God,
and being God's long ago, This thou did at thy Baptism, when renouncing
the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, thou did give up thy self to God the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and this profession thou have (probably) renewed
often at the table of the Lord, where commemorating, and giving thanks to God
for the greatest expression of the greatest Love to Man that ever was, thou
did offer and present thy self, thy Soul and Body to be a Reasonable, Holy,
and Lively Sacrifice to the Lord; and thou have seemed to the World to this
very day, to own all this. And therefore, if thou art not, if thou will not be
God's, after all this, by the full consent of thy heart, thou art the falsest,
and vilest Hypocrite upon Earth, and an accursed Traitor to thy great Creator,
to thy Gracious and Loving Savior. To all this thou may add,

6. That this is that Holiness, which the Scriptures so frequently recommend
unto thee, and without which thou can not hope to see the Lord. When things
are separated from common Uses, and are given up to God so, as never to be made
Use of, but for him, or in his Worship and Service, they are called Holy
things; and so indeed they are, so far as things can be: Thus when thou have
separated thy self, taken off thy heart from all created things, and have given
up thy self to God, to be his, and only his, in faithful Service and Obedience
for ever, thou art holy, and not till then; and if thou think otherwise,
thou do dangerously deceive thy self. Add to this,

7. That this is thy perfection, and the greatest perfection thou art capable
of. Thou can do nothing better, than to resign thy self to God; and thou
can not possibly be in any better State, than in a State of pure resignation
to him. And therefore in the last place,

8. Thou may safely believe, that this is thy happiness, and the greatest
happiness thou can attain unto. The truth is, these three words, Holiness,
Perfection, and Happiness, though they differ in sound, are all the very same
in sense and signification. He that says, that the Saints in Heaven are
blessed, says no other thing than this, that they are made perfect; and he
that says, that they are made perfect, says no other, thing than this that
they are fully and completely Holy: and he that speaks this, says no more,
than that they are entirely God's, that they are perfectly disengaged from
every thing that might withhold them in the least from him, and so united to
him, that nothing can separate or dissolve the Union; so that all that I would
now persuade thee to, is but to make thy self as periect, and happy as thou
can be: and methinks in this case it should be no hard matter to prevail
with thee, when thou can not but see thy Interest in that which is
recommended to thee as thy Duty, it is impossible, if thou art the Man I now
suppose thee to be, but thou must yield thy full Consent unto it. And therefore
I leave these things to thy serious thoughts, and proceed to give thee some
Directions how to perform this good and happy Work.

. 2. That thou art concerned to take the greatest Care that may be, to do it
well, I presume I need not tell thee; and therefore, as I do earnestly
recommend the following Directions to thee, so, I hope thou will not sail to
practice them. And because it is a matter of great moment in every thing to
begin well, I advise thee,

1. To separate thy self for some time from the World. Retire into thy Closet,
or into some secret place, where no Eye may see thee, and nothing divert or
disturb thee. And when thou art there, consider, that thou art come thither
about a business of the greatest Importance to thee; thou art to give thy self
to God, to unite thy self most firmly to him; but of thy self, and without
God's special Grace thou art not able to do it: if he does not draw thee, if he
does not overcome thy sorry Heart by the sweet and powerful Influences of his
Love, thou will make but faint and fained Offers of thy self unto him. And
therefore thou must not fail in the first place,

1. To fall upon thy Senses, and with the greatest Reverence and Submission, to
acquaint him with the Desires of thy Soul, and to beg his favorable acceptance
of them, and his Blessing upon them. And if thou know not how to do it
better, thou may make Use of this form of words:

My Lord, and my God, thou know the very bottom of my heart, and my Desires
are not hid from thee: I am encouraged by my own happy experience of thy
Goodness, as well as by thy gracious declarations of thy Will, to present my
self before thee, notwithstanding I know my self to be unworthy of the least
Favor from thee. I am ashamed when I think how I have demeaned my self
hitherto toward thee; and that I have lived so long a Stranger, yea an Enemy
to thee, taking upon me to dispose of my self, and to please my self in the
main Course of my Life, without the least Regard to thee. I abhor my self for
it, and acknowledge that I deserve for ever to be abandoned by thee; but thou
have not dealt with me according to my deserts, blessed be thy Goodness for it;
and therefore, I now desire unfeignedly to return unto thee, and renouncing all
Interest and Propriety in my self, and detesting all my former ungodly
Practices, I desire to give up my self wholly and entirely to thee: I would be
thine, and only thine, in all Love and Service, in perfect Submission and
Obedience for ever; but, I know I am nothing, and can do nothing of my self,
and if ever I am thine, as I desire to be, I must be indebted wholly to thy
Goodness for it. O my God, my Savior, and my Sanctifier, turn not away thy face
from a poor Soul that seeks thee, and places all his Confidence and Comfort in
thee: but as thou have kindled these good Desires in my heart; so favor them
with thy Blessing, and confirm, increase, and satisfy them. Reject not that
poor Gift, which I would make of my self unto thee, and enable me to make it in
such a manner, that it may be pleasing and acceptable in thy sight. Lord hear
me, help me, and show mercy to me, for Christ Jesus's sake, Amen.

When thou have thus offered thy Desires to God, rise from thy knees, and
either walking or sitting, as thou think best,

2. Begin to excite, and stir up thy Soul, to a perfect Surrender of it self,
by the Arguments before laid down, pressing them upon thy self with all they
Might. And that they may have as great an Influence upon thee as is possible,
thou may imagine, that thou hear Almighty God speaking to thee from
Heaven in this manner: Consider thy self, O man, and take notice what thou art,
and what good Things thou do possess; look upon thy body, and all its useful
Members; consider thy Soul, and all its Faculties and Powers, and observe their
several Motions and Operations; and tell me whence thou art, and to whom thou
art endebted for them. Look upon the World that furnishes thee with all things
necessary and fitting for thee; and tell me who was the framer of it, and who
made it useful and serviceable to thee. Can thou deny, that I have done all
this? and wherefore, then, have thou lifted up thy self against me, and
presumed to act, as it thou had no dependence upon me, or obligation to me?
If thou sowest thy seed in thy Field, thou expectest to reap the Crop; if thou
did nourish, and provide for a poor beast, thou think that thou may
use him at thy pleasure; if thou make an Instrument to work withal, thou
challengest a Right to dispose of it; But I have maintained, and preserved a
creature, [hear and be ashamed of thy self] and thou will allow me no Right and
Title to Him and his Service. Tell me O thou unjust, and ungrateful Wretch,
did I ever give thee Liberty to dispose of thy self? did I ever give thee
occasion to think, that I made no reckoning of thee, or that I expected no
acknowledgement from thee? No, wretched creature, thou did know that I made
thee for my self, and that I would not give away my Interest in thee; that I
put a great Value upon thee, and that as I made thee capable of Serving me, so
I expected and desired it from thee: and therefore did I love thee from the
Beginning, and bestowed innumerable Gifts upon thee: I gave thee all things
that were fitting for thee, and assured thee, that I would withhold no good
thing from thee: yea, I gave thee my self in mine own only begotten Son, who
descended out of my bosom to assure thee of my Love, as well as to convince
thee, That thou had deserved my hatred, Thou can rage against a poor
servant that neglects thy Business, and seems to ssight thee; yea, thy poor
neighbor, that has no dependence upon thee, shall feel the effects of thy
displeasure, if he chance to wrong thee: they must seek thy pardon and crouch
before thee, and think themselves beholden to thee, if by so doing they can
make their peace: and yet I have Humbled my self to thee, thou vile worm, and
have not spared my own Son that I might spare thee, and bring thee to a due
sense of thy duty to me. Heaven and Earth can witness for me, that I have
stooped low enough, in desiring the friendship of Rebellious Dust and ashes;
and they shall also witness the Justice of my severity to thee, if so much Love
and Condescension will not work upon thee. Here thou may pause a while, and
observe how thy Soul is affected with these things; and then thou may
imagine again, That thou hear Almighty God speaking further to thee and more
fully relating the wonderful History of his Love in Christ Jesus. And after he
has given thee an account of his mean Birth, of his humble and painful Life,
of his bloody and cruel death, and his Design and End in all this, proceeding
to show thee, with how much Love, and with what tender Regard for thee he left
this World, and ascended to his Father: and how, that after he had done, and
suffered in his own Person, as much as was necessary and fitting for him; he
sent the Holy Ghost to complete the great and good work of thy eternal
Salvation. And then imagine that he tells thee, what that blessed and Holy
Spirit has for his part done for thee, what Gifts he has bestowed, what
Wonders he has wrought, what Arts and Methods he has used, and with what
Goodness and Patience, and Long-suffering, to bring thee to a right
Understanding, and a real sense of all his Love, and of all thy Duty to him;
and to excite, encourage, and enable thee to the performance of it: and in the
End bespeaking thee in this or the like manner: And now, wretch that thou art,
must all this Love be lost upon thee: and must I lose thee for ever, after all
that I have done for thee; will nothing work upon thy hard heart; upon thy
proud and stubborn Will; will nothing conquer the perverseness of thy Spirit?
not the Commands of thy Maker, not the Death of thy Savior: not the good
motions and Inspirations, of thy Sanctifier? Can thou withstand my Power,
that thou art thus obstinate against my Goodness? and if thou will not suffer
me to save thee, do thou think that I am not able to destroy thee? O folish
Creature and unwise! consider these things seriously, and as thou ought;
remember what thou have done, and what unreasonale Courses thou have taken
hitherto, and proceed no farther in thy Folly, but return to that I Love that
calls thee, that entreats thee, that would save thee. Here thou may pause a
little, as before: and if any thing more be necessary, to shame and humble
thee, to soften and melt thee: Thou may turn thy self to consider thy own
Engagements, and to charge upon thy self that monstrous perfidiousness which
thou have, and wilt continue to be guilty of, if thou do now withstand the
Calls of God. And that thy perfidiousness may appear the more detestable, thou
may consider in the last place, what that is which thou have been engaged,
and art now called upon to do, it is not to do any thing unjust; dishonest or
unreasonable: it is not to destroy thy self, or to make thy self miserable: but
on the contrary, it is to do the justest, the most reasonable and the best
thing that thou art capable of doing: it is to return to the Author of thy
Being, and thereby serve the End of thy creation, and consult the only
Happiness, and Rest of thy Soul: it is to unite thy self to the Supreme Good,
to make thy self his, and to make him hine for ever. And is this a thing so
much against thee, that thou need so much invitation and persuasion to it? O
my Soul! my foolish Soul, may thou say, what can thou say for thy self in
this Case? is there any Excuse for thy Folly? any plea for thy Wickedness? no,
far be it from thee to seek for any: let us rather amend what we have done
amiss, and be more wise for the time to come. Happy had we been, if we had
needed from the Beginning, so much invitation to destroy our selves; but since
we could do that upon very little or none at all, let us no longer withstand
this which is so earnest and importunate with us to save our selves. Then
turning thy self to God, (in whose presence thou have been all this while) thou
may speak (as I hope thou will be able with truth to do) in this manner to
him: I am overcome, I am overcome, O God, I can no longer withstand thy mighty
Love; I must, I do yield my self a captive to it. I am thine, I do acknow ledge
by all Right, and I will be thine for ever, by the full consent of my Heart. I
can do no less in Return to that wonderful Love thou have showed me; and I can
do no more. O, let this little that I can do, be accepted by thee, and receive
me for thine own: take possession of me by thy Spirit, and let it preserve me
for ever to thy self, according as I do now sincerely resign up my self, and
all I have to thee. Then,

3. Casting thy self upon the Ground, say thus: and say it with all thy Heart
and Soul:

To God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, my Creator, Redeemer and Sanctifier, do
I give my Self Soul and Body, and all that belongs unto me, to be guided,
governed, and disposed of according to his Will, and to his Honor and Glory,
and may he be a Witness to this my Act, which I promise never to revoke, and
may I never obtain the least Favor from him, if I do it not with with an
upright Heart, and an unfeigned purpose to make it good to my Lives End. Thou
art my Witness, O my God, be thou also my helper with thy continued Grace, and
so shall I be faithful to thee according to my Heart's Desire. Amen, Amen.

But then,

4. As in matters of the World, that which is done in private between Man and
Man, must in some cases receive a further Consirmation, by such Solemnities as
are appointed by humane Laws; so that which thou have done thus between God,
and thy own Soul, must be farther confirmed, and as it were completed, by
those Solemnities which the Laws of God do require; and therefore sail not to
take the first opportunity that is offered thee to go to the Table of the Lord;
and having prepared thy self at home by such meditations as I have before
taught thee, and by reading some good book of the Holy Sacrament, (such as Dr.
Patrick's Christian Saacrifice, which I desire, may find a place, both in thy
Closet and in thy Heart) do thou there renew what thou have done in private,
and as it were in public Court, avow it and consirm it. At that Holy Tale God
will not fail to meet thee, attended with an innumerable Company of Holy
Angels, and he strictly requires and expects it from thee. And therefore, when
thou art at that Table, and beholdest what manner of Love is there showed thee,
and which cannot but draw thy very heart from thee, if thou do consider it
aright, remember what thou art to do, and let thy heart speak in this manner to
Almighty God: There is all the Reason in the World, O Heavenly Father, that I
should give up my self entirely to thee, since thou have not withholden thy
Son, thy only Son from me; there is all the Reason in the World, O my Blessed
Savior, that I should surrender my self, and all I have, into thy hands, since
thou did offer thy self a Sacrifice upon the Cross for me, and do now
offer these Holy Pledges, of the all-sufficient Virtue of that Sacrifice to me:
there is all the Reason in the World, that I should resign my self to thee, O
Holy and Blessed Spirit, since thou do offer thy self to be a Principle of
Holiness and Life in me. And therefore, as I do now accept, with all
thinkfulness, those great and inestimable Favors, and do declare my acceptance
of them in the sight of these thy Servants, and all thy Holy Angels here
present, by receiving those Tokens and Pledges of them, according to thy
Command and Institution; so, do I give up my self and all I have to thee, and
declare it before the face of all these Witnesses; and I earnestly desire, that
even my unworthy self may be accepted through this my poor Gift, the perfect
Sacrifice and Oblation of my dearest Savior, and be sanctified by the Holy
Ghost, and be owned by my God, to the everlasting parise of the Holy, Blessed,
and Undivided Trinity, whose I am, and whose I will be for ever, and ever.
Amen, Amen.

But then,

5. When thou art gone from this holy Table, Retire as soon as possibly thou
can, and whilst these good thoughts are warm in thy breast, into thy
Closet: and there take the Book of thy spiritual Accounts into thy hand, (for I
would not have thee to be without such a Book, for recording these things
wherein the Welfare of thy Soul is greatly concerned, least thou be condemned
by the Care, and exactness of those whom we are wont to call good Husbands, in
Worldly Matters) and with thy pen write thus: In such a Year and such a Months,
and on such a day, I did through God's Grace, with all the Devotion of my
Heart, and Soul, make an entire Surrender of my self, and all things belonging
to me, to Almighty God; protesting and vowing, that he should have the full
guiding, governing, and disposing of me, and mine for ever. And then, that thou
may have a more distinct Understanding of what thou have done, and what thou
art obliged to do for the time to come, thou may under write these following
particulars, viz.

I have given up my self entirely to God; and therefore I must not serve my
self, but Him all the days of my Life.

I have given him my Understanding: and therefore my chiefest Care and Study
must be to know him, his Nature, his Perfections, his Works, his Will: These
must be the Subject of my Meditations night and day; as for all other things
they must be as Dross and Dung to me; and the Knowledge of them must be as loss
for the excellency of the Knowledge of God in Christ, Phil. 3.8. v. I must
believe all his Reelations, and, silencing all the carnal Reasonings against
whatsoever he teaches me, I must rest my self on his veracity, being fully
persuaded that he can neither be deceived himself, nor deceive me. See Romans
4.19, 20.

have given him my Will: and therefore, I must have no Will of mine own:
whatever he wills, I must will also; I must will his Glory in all things, as he
does, and that must be my chief End in every thing: I must prefer it before all
desirable things, and subordinate my own Desires, Delights and Satisfactions
to it: I must say, as the Psalmist did, Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and
there is none upon earth, that I desire besides thee, Psalm. 73.25. I must do
whatsoever God commands me, and forbear whatever he forbids; and I must do it
for this Reason chiefly, because he does command or forbid me: nay, I must
delight to do it, Psalm. 40.8. v. And it must be to me as my meat and drink,
John 4.34. I must consent to suffer whatever he will lay upon me, and though it
may be his Pleasure to lay hard things upon me, and grievous to be born, yet I
must not repine, or murmur, but with Cheerfulness, Alacrity and Thankfulness, I
will submit my self to it. Whatever threatens me, I must say, It is the Lord,
let him do what seems him good, 1. Sam. 3.18. and whatever befalls me, I must
give thanks, for that is his Will concerning me in Christ Jesus, 1 These. 5.18.

I have given him all the Passions, and Affections of my Soul; and therefore he
must dispose of them, govern, and set bounds unto them. he must have my Love,
my Fear, my Delight, my Joy; and nothing in the World must have any Share in
these, or any other of my Affections, but with respect to him, and for his
sake. What he loves, I must love; what he hates, I must hate; what he is well
pleased with, I must rejoice in; what he is grieved with, I must mourn for; the
Objects of his Pity I must have compassion on, and those of his wrath and
Indignation I must be zealous against: and all in such measures, and Degrees as
he is pleased to prescribe me.

I have given him my Body; and therefore, must glorify him with it: I must not
dare to abuse it by Gluttony, Drunkenness, Adultery, Fornication, or any other
Uncleanness: I must look upon it as his Temple, and therefore must preserve it
pure and Holy fit for my God to dwell in. See 1. Corinthians. 6.19. I must not
wrong it by pampering or indulging it; nor by neglecting, nor showing too much
Rigor toward it, in overmuch fasting, watching, laboring, etc. But must keep
it, as far as in me lies, Healthy, Vigorous, active, and fit to do him all
manner of Service that he shall call for.

I have given him my Senses, my Eyes, my Ears, etc. And therefore, to good they
must be always open, but to Evil, and all the Occasions of it, they must be
shut.

I have given him all my Members: and therefore they must be no longer
Instruments of Unrighteousness unto Sin, [ Romans 6.13.] but Instruments of
Righteousness unto God. My tongue must show forth his Praise; my hands must do
his Works; and my foot must carry me with speed unto it.

I have given him not my self only, but also all that do belong unto me; and
therefore my Children my Friends, my Servants must all be his, if I can make
them so.

I have given him all my Worldly Goods; and therefore I must prize them, and
use them only for him: his House, his Priests, his Poor must have their
Portions from me with a willing mind; and though I have no more than
necessaries for my Life, yet I must be content to part with them, when my Lord
shall need them, or command me to resign them.

I have given him my Credit, and Reputation; and therefore I must value it, and
endeavor to maintain it only in Respect to him, as it may do him service, and
advance his Honor in the World.

I have given him my self and all; and therefore I must look upon my self to be
nothing, and to have nothing out of him: he must be the sole Disposer,
Governor, and Guider of my self and all: He must be my Portion, and my All.

And then, in the close thou may add this:

Thus have I given my self to God, and and to all this have I bound my self in
the most solemn manner; and with my own hand do I now testify my full consent
unto it, and I am resolved to make good the Whole, and every part of it, God
assisting me, to my Lives End. I doubt not but I shall meet with many
temptations to the Contrary, I shall be often told of my Singularity and
Preciseness, and some may tell me in kindness, that I do more than is
necessary, and that I must accommodate or fit my self to this or that person,
Company, Thing, Custom, etc. But my Answer shall be to all, I am not my own, I
am not for my self, nor for my Friends, nor for the World, nor for its
Customs; but for my God. I will give to Caesar what I owe to Caesar; and to
God what I owe to God. The Lord be merciful to me his unworthy Servant.

All this I say thou will do well to write in thy Book of Spiritual Accounts;
but if thou can not write sail not to fix it in thy memory; and as often as
thou art called to the table of the Lord, take a View of it, or repeat it to
thy self; and call thy self strictly to as account how thou have made it good,
and how and wherein thou have failed; and give God thanks for what thou have
been able to do, and humble thy self before him for all that thou have omitted,
consessing it with sorrow, and earnestly begging pardon for it, renewing thy
Resolutions and vows, and imploring a greater measure of his grace to enable
thee to do better for the time to come. But did I say, that thou must do this
as often as thou art called to the Table of the Lord? I must tell thee, that
thou should do it oftener: thou should do it once a week at least, upon
the Saturday in the Evening, or early in the morning on the Lord's day; for, so
often at least were the Primitive Christians wont to receive the Holy
sacrament, and that we do it not as often as they did, is not for our Praise or
Commendation; and indeed to put of this, till our usual Times of Communicating,
is to put it off to a time when we can hardly do it well; because many things
will be forgotten by us, or else we shall be overwhelmed with too great a
multitude. There is not one but will find Work enough at the End of one week,
to call to mind, how his heart has been disposed, his tongue employed, and what
good or evil Deeds he has done, with the several Circumstances belonging unto
them, during that time; and how imperfect an Account of these things, then, can
they give to themselves, and to Almighty God, who are to look back a full
Quarter of a Year, and to call all their ways to remembrance? let this
therefore, I pray thee, at least as often as I have said, and though thou
can not be so happy, as to communicate thus often, yet this will in some
measure supply the want of it, and put thee into a better disposition, to give
thy self to God in the Holy Communion, and to unite thy self more firmly to
him. I must confess, I am not able to promise thee, but thou will discern many
failings when thou come thus to examine thy self, though thou have been ever
so careful, to keep close to God, and to demean thy self as God's: but yet, let
not this discourage thee in the least, because thou have to do with a God that
knows thy frailty, and abounds in Mercy and Compassion toward thee; and as
long as thou do not withdraw thy heart from him, nor slack thy Endeavors to
make good thy Resolutions and Vows, thou may rest thy self assured, that
thou shall not want the choicest Tokens of his Love, I mean a daily Supply of
Grace, and strength to obey and please him. Thou may feel thy self at first
to be weak as a little Child; but be not dismayed at it, for thou will find in
a little time, that That Spirit which first breathed into thee this new life,
will preserve and cherish it, and make thee to grow up to a perfect man, unto
the measure of the Stature of the fullness of Christ. Ephesians. 4.13.

Thus have I showed thee, (my dear Brother) how thou may become a real
Christian, i.e. in the Language of the Scripture, a new Creature in Christ
Jesus 2. Corin. 5.17. And let me tell thee for thy Comfort, that when these
things are done, thou may safely account thy self to be one, and all those
Privileges, which the Holy Scripures assure thee do belong to real Christians,
thou may justly challenge as belonging to thy self. Are they one with
Christ? so art thou. Have they the Spirit of Christ? so have thou. Have they
fellowship with the Father and the Son? so have thou. Are they the Children of
God, Heirs of God, and Coheirs with Christ? so art thou. This is an happy and
Honorable Estate, no ambitious Soul can aim at any thing higher, no heart can
desire any thing better. It is that, to which all that call themselves
Christians do pretend; but they, and they only, that have thus resigned
themselves to God, have attained to it. But now I must tell thee, that by how
much the greater thy happiness is in this Estate, by so much the more thou art
concerned to take Care that thou fall not away from it, and to use all
diligence to keep thy self in a firm possession of it; remembering that thou art
not yet in Heaven, where there is no Falling away from God, but in a place of
Manifold Temptations, where many do draw back, and after they have known the
way of Righteousness, do turn from it. 1 Pet. 2.21, for which purpose I must
proceed to give thee some further Directions, but contracting my thoughts as
much as may be, that I may not burden thee with too big a Book.

CHAP. IV.
Sect. 1. Containing the Fourth Advice, To grow in the Knowledge of God and of
the things of God. Sect. 2. Countaining several Directions how to improve in
all Divine Knowledge.

. 1. THou must endeavor daily to grow in the Knowledge of God, and to get more
clear, distinct, firm, well-setled apprehensions of the things of God. The
Reason of this Advice is very plain, viz. That the more thou know of God,
and the more clear they apprehensions of Divine things are, the better thou will love God, and the more closely will thy heart cleave unto him. There are
some things indeed of such a nature, that the less men know them, the more they
esteem and love them: whilst they look upon them at a distanced, and know them
but imperfectly, they seem great and good, worthy of their Esteem and Love; but
when they come to handle them, and know them thoroughly, they are convinced that
they deserve neither. But now the things of God are of another Sort; such is
the Perfection of their Nature, that the more they are unfolded to us, the more
we admire them, and the more strongly do they draw our Souls toward them: and
if there by any men that do not value them, or are not in Lore with them, we
may be confident that they do not know them. Is it I that speak this? or does
not the Scripture also speak the same? Why then does it so often tell us of
wicked men, That they know not God, that they know not the way of the Lord, nor
the Judgments of their God, Jerem. 5.5. and cap. 9.4. v. And what is it, that
St. John means, when he tells us, That by this we know that we know him, if we
keep his Commandments: he that says he knows him, and keeps not his
Commandments, is a Liar, and the truth is not in him, 1 John 2.3, 4. Does not
this imply plainly, that they who know God truly, will obey him, and that the
Reason why they do not love and obey him, is their Ignorance of him, or the
Imperfection of their Knowledge? either they know not God at all, or their
Knowledge is so weak, so slight, so Imperfect, that it makes little or no
Impression upon their hearts: their Conceptions of God are like those Conceits
which we have of some things in our sleep, which either affect us not at all,
or are forgotten by us, as soon as we awake. We believe, and we believe
rightly, That the Saints in Heaven shall never fall from God, but will love and
serve him for ever, without the least Failing or Imperfection: and what is the
Reason of it? Surely it is because they know his as they are known of him 1 Corinthians. 13.12. Or as St. John speaks, they see him as he is, 1 John 3.2. i.e.
they have the clearest, firmest, the most full and comprehensive Knowledge of
him, that Creatures can have, by which they are transformed into his Image, and
made like unto him. He that does know God truly, does also know himself; and he
that does know God and himself truly, cannot but keep himself in a State of
Resignation, and Subjection to God continually. He will feel those Impressions
upon himself, which holy Job did, when God had made himself a little better
known unto him, than he was before, [See Job 38.39.] and will say from the very
bottom of his heart, as holy Job did; Behold I am vile, chap. 40.4. v. he will
know, that it is not for a Worm to contend with the Creator of all things, not
for him that was born like a wild Asses Colt, (as one of Job's Friends speaks)
to presume to find out the Almighty to perfection. He will feel the truth of
what the Psalmist says, Psalm. 9.10. They that know thy Name, will put their
Trust in thee: and will heartily assent to that Saying of a great man, That the
more we reject our selves, Mich. de Montaign.
and commit our selves to God, the better it is for us. He will say as a devout
man once did; What art Thou O Lord, and what am I? He will be continually
admiring his Sovereign Greatness, andwill be no less sensible of his own
worthlesness, and nothingness. He that knows God truly, will also know the
World; and he that knows God and the World aright, will never be drawn from God
by any of the World's Allurements; he will know, that the World is nothing of
it self; And will he set his heart upon that which is not? He will know, that
without God, it can contribute no more to his happiness, than it did to his
Being, which he knows himself indebted only to God for: and can that steal away
his heart from the Author of all Good, which never did, nor can bestow the
least Godd upon thee? How vile does this Earth seem unto us, when we list up
our Eyes and look upon the Heavens? Surely much morevilewill all things be
esteemed by him, whose Soul is possessed with a true Knowledge of the maker of
them. It was therefore a true Saying of a Holy man of old [St. Austin] That no
man loses God, but he that is deceived. And another person many years after
him, is said to speak no worse, when being in an ecstasy, he cried out: O my
God! O my Lord! O the God of my Heart! O that all men did know thee! they would
never offend thee, they would ever love thee. For surely, (as the Author of the
Book of Wisdom tells us) To know God is perfect Righteousness, and to know his
Power is the root of Immortality, Wisd. 15.4. This my suffice to show thee the
Reason of my Advice. Let me now as riesly, direct thee how to practice it.

. 2. To this Purpose let me tell thee,

1. That thou art not concerned to know as much as may be known of God, or as
learned men do know: but only so much as is necessary, or as may be helpful to
keep thee entirely resigned, and obedient to his Will; and therefore thou must
not trouble thy self with those nice and curious Speculations in Religion,
which are of no Use or tendency to this End. That Knowledge, whateyer the
Object of it is, which will not conduce to make thee better, or prevent thy
becoming worse than thou art, is impertinent, useless and unprositable; the
Hunting after it has ruined thousands, but never saved one Soul. Those that
pursue after it, are thus deseribed by St. Paul. 1 Timothy 6.3, 4. They consent
not to wholesome words, and to the Doctrine which is according to Godlyness,
they are proud, knowing nothing, but doting about Questions and strifes of
Words.

2. Though thou art not concerned to know as much as may be known of God, yet
thou must endeavor to know these great and useful things I have spoken of, as
well as possibly thou can; and therefore, thou must not content thy self
with that slight, superficial Knowledge, which the generality of Men have of
them, who rather dream of divine things than know them, but thou must labor
for a clear, distinct apprehension of them, and for a firm and well-grounded
persuasion, both of the Truth and Goodness of them. And to this Purpose, thou
must

3. Apply thy self to the Use of all good Means, and that with great Care and
Diligence; remembering, That if it be Folly to do meaner things slerghtly, (as
certainly it is, because many things many times depend upon our least actions)
to be careless and slight in such a manner as this, can be no less than
Madness. Now the means that you are to use, are these that follow:

1. Rcading the Holy Scriptures, and Hearing them read; this thou art to do
daily; thou must borrow some part of every day (to say nothing here of what
thou art to do upon Holy days) from thy Worldly Employments, to read or hear
them read. Our Blessed Savior bids us Search the Scriptures, because in them
we think we have eternal Life, John 5.39. And St. Paul tells us, that they are
able to make us wise unto Salvation, 2. Tim. 3.15. And if any man's words are of
greater weight with us, than theirs, we do ill deserve the Name of Christians.

2. Reading Good Books; I call those good, which treat of the great things of
God modestly, discreetly, plainly, convincingly, and affectionately: of which
sort I know not many in the World, and therefore thou art to take the best
Advice thou can have, in the choice of them.

3. Hearing of Sermons and good Discourses made by Christ's Ministers, whether
in the Pulpit upon particular Texts of Scripture, or in the desk, as
expositions of some larger Portions of it, or of some of the chiefest Points of
Religion, contained in the Catechism. These Discourses Christ's Ministers are
commanded to make, for the Edification of Christ's Church, [See 2 Timothy 4.1, 2.]
and therefore Christian people must needs think themselves bound to attend unto
them, and they are over wise or over good, that conceit they have no need of
them; I mean, that they are neither wise nor good.

4. Frequent conferring with serious Christians about divine things, which is a
means of Improving Knowledge, that has several Advantages above any other; for
besides this, we shall instruct others as well as our selves, imparting our own
Knowledge to them, whilst we receive of theirs; that which we thus learn, we
apprehend more clearly, and are more deeply affected with, than we are with
that which we receive any other way; and therefore, it is much to be lamented,
that it is no more used by those that call themselves Christians, than we see
it is: and if we may not infer from the neglect of it, that men are not so
knowing in the things of God, as they take upon them to be; I am sure we may
conclude from it, that they are not so good as they ought to be: they seldom
forbear to talk of that which they love, when there is occasion offered for it;
so they would never be silent in these things, if they had that hearty
affection for them, which they ought to have. And as for the common Excuse
among the more serious sort of people, that they would not be taken for
Hypocrites, (as too many in this last Age, among whom this has been in
Fashion, have discovered themselves to be;) it is so far from justifying their
Neglect, that it manifests the naughtiness of their hearts, whilst they show
their selves more careful for their own Esteem among men, than for the Honor
of God, and the great Concerns of their Souls. There would be little or no
Religion seen in the World, if the Abuse of it by Hy pocrites would warrant men
to cast off the Profession of it; and to give any good Reason, why so useful a
part of it, should for that cause be laid aside, whilst they think themselves
concerned to appear Religious in other things, I believe will puzzle the most
subtle among them. There were too many Hypocrites in Holy David's time, and yet
his tongue did not cease to speak of God's Righteousness, and of his praise all
the day long, Psalm. 35, 28. And the Apostles times were not so happy, as to be
without them, and yet They called upon Christians, to exhort one another daily,
Heb. 4.13. And to teach and admonish each other, and that by Psalms and Hymns,
and Spiritual Songs, as well as other ways. Colos. 3.16. Those good men did
never think, that the danger of bemg accounted Hypocrites would discharge them
from Seasoning their Discourses with Salt, or from speaking such things in
their Conversation with each other, as might be profitable, and minister Grace
unto the Hearers, Ephesians. 4.29. and Colos. 6.4. and why we should think, that it
becomes us to use that unprofitable, not to say that corrupt, Communication
which daily proceeds from our Mouths, without having any respect to the
edifying of one another in that which is good, I cannot understand.

5. Meditating frequently upon the good things we read and hear. This is
another means for the improvement of our Knowledge in the things of God, and it
is so necessary, that without it all the rest will avail us but very little;
for this is the chewing, or tather the digesting of what we read and hear: it
is that which implants those notices of things which we have got into our
heads, in our hearts, and makes them to bring sorth those good Fruits which in
their own Nature they are fit to do. Mich. de Montaign
It was a good Observation of a great man some years ago, That in all humane
sects, there were never any, what difficulty or strangeness soever their
Doctrine maintained, but would in some sort conform their Behavior, and square
their Lives unto it; whereas this Divine and Heavenly Institution, which we
pretend to prefer before all Doctrines that ever were in the World, seldom
makes Christians but by the tongue; of which this Reason may be given, as
pertinent to our present business, that those being in Love with their
Doctrines, how absurd soever they were, either because they were of their own
Invention, or because they had their first Inventors in great admiration, did
so exercise their thoughts upon them, that their Souls could not but receive
such Impressions from them, as appeared in their outward Behavior; whereas
most of those that are called Christians, having no such kindness for this
Heavenly doctrine, or the Author of it, do never employ their thoughts about
it; or if they do, it is so seldom, and in so slight, and careless a manner,
that it cannot work any good effect upon them. Did they meditate daily upon it,
as holy David did upon God's Law, Psalm. 119.97. did they examine its truth, did
they weigh its Goodness, did they apply it to themselves, and make trial of its
Force and Power upon their Souls, they would be so fashioned to the Image and
Likeness of it, as to be known by their Lives and Conversations from all other
men. Thou must be frequent then in the Use of this mean, and let no day pass
thee without spending some time in it: and if thou art in such Circumstances at
any time, that thou must either omit to read good Books, or to meditate. I
advise thee to omit that, rather than this: for he that reads but little, and
meditates much, will be a wiser, and better man, than he that reads much, and
meditates none, or but very little.

6. Prayer. This is a means which must accompany all the rest, and ought never
to be omitted; for certain it is, that we can know no more of God, than we are
taught by him; if he do not manifest himself unto us, if he do not enlighten
our Minds, and assist our Endeavors, we shall advance but little by all we can
do. The Psalmist tells us, that it is God that teaches men Knowledge, Psalm.
94.10. and St. Paul tells us, That Wisdom and Knowledge are the Gifts of his
Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.8. and if we desire that Spirit, or those Gifts, we must ask
for them; for, thus did the Holy men of old, as the Scripture assures us, Psalm.
25.4. v. Psalm. 119.66. v. And this the Apostle St. Paul taught us to do, when
he prayed for the Colossians, That they might besilled with the Knowledge of
God, in all Wisdom, and spiritual Understanding; That they might walk worthy
of the Lord, unto all pleasing, being fruitsul in every good Work, and
increasing, in the Knowledge of God. Coloss. 1.9, 10. And then in the last
place,

7. There is another means of improving our Knowledge, of as great Use, though
little thought of, as any of the former; viz. the making a right Use of that
which we know, by applying it to practice, and regulating our Lives and
Conversations according to it: by thus using what we know, we shall come to
know it better, for there is no Knowledge comparable to that, which we call
experimental; and he that tastes how good the Lord is, and how good the things
of God are, which is the word by which the Psalmist expresses this Knowledge
Psalm. 34.8. v. knows them as much better than others do, as they that taste the
sweetness of Honey, know it better than they that have only heard of it.
Besides, by this Use of what we know, we are put into a better disposition to
know those things which as yet we know not; for, as some of the old Heathen
wise men were wont to say, as no eye can behold the Sun, if it has not the
Image of the Sun in it, so no man is capable of understanding the things of
God, but he whose Soul is in some measure sashioned to the likeness of God; and
this is confirmed by a more skilful man in Divine things, than the wisest of
them, I mean St. Paul, who tells us, that the Natural (or animal) man receives
not the things of the Spirit of God, neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned, 1. Corin. 2.14. which assertion is grounded upon this
truth, That there must be some conformity between the knowing faculty, and the
thing to be known, or else there can be no Knowledge; and therefore, if we do
not improve that little Knowledge which we have by the light of Nature,
according to those small Remains of God's Image in us, to the mortifying of our
naughty corrupt affections; and if we use not those external Helps to that
light which God gives, to the spiritualizing of our Minds, we can never truly
understand the things of the Spirit: whereas, doing this, we shall be able to
judge (or to discern them) clearly. And this is that which our great Master
teaches us, John 7.17. where he shows us what we must do to attain a true and
saving Knowledge of his Doctrine; if any man will do his Will, he shall know of
my Doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self. and in
another place, to encourage us to the Practical Use of what we know, he tells
us, He that keeps my Commandments, he it is that loves me, and he that
loves me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him and manifest my
self unto him, John 14.21. v. Thus have I showed thee how thou must endeavor
to improve thy self in the Knowledge of God. I now proceed to give thee some
further Advice.

CHAP. V.
Sect. 1. Containing a Fifth Advice, To live always as in God's Sight; with
the great Usefulness of this, to promote a Holy Life. Sect. 2. Containing some
Directions for the Practice of this Duty of Living always as in God's Sight.

. 1. TThou must live always as in God's Sight, or ( as the Words of the
Psalmist are Psalm. 16.8.) thou must set God always before thee. This is a Rule
of so great Use in a Holy Life, that some spiritual Guides have thought, that
it may serve instead of all other Rules. And truly, if we suppose men to have
that sound Knowledge of God, which I have but now advised thee to seek after, I
know no reason but it may; however, the Usefulness of it must be acknowledged
to be great, and it lies so plain, that many words need not be used to show it
thee; for if clear and sound apprehensions of God's Majesty, of his sovereign
Power, unsearcheable Wisdom, Goodness and Truth will possess our hearts with
Love, and Fear, and bow our Wills to his Obedience, as I have showed thee that
they will: Surely that which will keep those apprehensions always present, and
in Force upon our Minds, (as the Practice of this Rule will do,) will keep us
always resigned and obedient to him. We know by Experience, that the Eyes of
those whom we honor, and in whose Favor we desire to be, have a great
Influence upon us, and make us take heed to our selves, and to all our
Behavior; and therefore, the Masters of Virtue among the Heathens were wont to
advise their Scholars to imagine some excellent person, for whom they had a
great veneration, to be always present with them, as an observer of their
actions. And can the remembrance of God's All-seeing Eye be less powerful with
us, to make us circumspect in our ways, and careful to approve our selves in
all things to him? Can we have a greater Regard to the Eyes of Mortal Men,
whose Favor or good opinion can never stand us but in little stead, than we
have to the Eyes of the Everlasting God, in whose Favor is Life, and in whose
approbation, consists our everlasting happiness? No; it is impossible. I have
thougth on thy name, says the Psalmist, and have kept thy Law. And in another
place, my ways are always before thee, therefore have I kept thy Precepts and
thy Testimonies, Psalm. 119.168. v. It is not unknown that some of the worst of
Men, are sometimes restrained from doing evil, by the thoughts of God's
presence; and the great Care that most of them take to avoid thinking upon God,
is no mconsiderable Argument, that the bearing him always in their Minds,
would prove an absolute Cure to their wickedness: For, wherefore do they put
away the thoughts of him as much as they can, but because they are sensible,
that those thoughts would constrain them to become new men, and to relinquish
those silthy Practices, which they cannot sind in their Hearts to sorsake? It
is a good Story and may sitly have a place here, which we have from one of the
Fathers of the Church if my memory fails me not, of a young man who being
tempted by a wanton Strumpet, seemed to consent to her unlawful Desires, but
required some secret place to content her: She therefore lead hin into a
private Room, and when he excepted against it, as not private enough, she led
him into another, and that not plcasing him, she brought him into the most
secret place in the house, and told him, that it was not possible any Eye
should see him there, or that any should come to interrupt them: But then the
young man putting on a more serious Countenance, demanded of her, Whether she
thought that they could there be concealed from the Eyes of Almighty God? with
which Question, and some short Discourse that was pertinent to it, he did not
only cool her Lust for the present, but converted her altogether from her
filthy Course of Life. Now, if the consideration of God's presence does
sometimes work these good effects upon some of the worst of men, who neither
know him truly, nor love him heartily, and who have been so sar from both, that
they have preferred the poorest Objects of their Lusts before him, how happy
will the effects of it be upon those, who have so known and loved him, as to
renounce both themselves and the World for his sake, who love him as much for
his Goodness as they fear him for his Power; and who had rather dye, than
displease him, not so much because he can punish, as because they know him to
be worthy of all the Love, Service and Obedience, that they can possibly pay
unto him? Surely, as those men cannot but delight to think of him, and cannot
but account themselves happy, that they are always under so good an Eye; so
the remembrance, and consideration of it, must needs keep them constantly
resigned to him, and in all things obedient to his Will. Thus much for the
Reason of my Advice: I proceed

. 2. To direct thee in the Practice of it It must be coonfest, that it will be
a hard matter for some to practice it: those that are Slaves to their flesh,
and to the World, and are not at liberty to think seriously of any thing else,
and whose Consciences are burdened with the Guilt of many Sins, will find it
very difficult, if not impossible, though they be ever so well directed: Such
men must first practice the Duties of Self-denial, and Resignation: But to
those that are rescued from under the Tyranny of those cruel Masters, and are
entirely resigned to God, and united to him by Lore, as I hope thou art,
nothing can be more easy, pleasant and delightful, our Souls willingly
empolying their thoughts upon that which they Love, and gladly embrace ing all
opportunities of being in its presence; and therefore very brief Directions may
suffice thee concerning t, and

1. Let me advertise thee, that the Practice of it must be grounded upon a firm
persuasion of God's Omnipresence, and Omniscience: he fills Heaven and Earth,
as himself thells us Jerem. 23.24. He encompasses them without, and He fills
them within; and as the Author to the Hebrews assures us, all things are naked
and open to his Eyes, chap. 4.13. they pierce to the very marrow of our Bones,
and to the bottom of our Intrails; they accompany all the extravagant wanderings
of our Imaginations, and discover the hidden Images of our memories: they look
through the Closet-Foldings of our hearts, and discern the most subtle Devices
of our Spirits. Now, the firm belief of those things being laid for a
Foundation, thou must accustom thy self.

2. To behold God in every thing; though he is no where to be seen by the Eye,
yet thy mind may perceive him in every place, and in every thing, in the
Heavens above, and in the Earth beneath, and in every part and corner of them:
in the men thou conversest with, and in the beasts thou rulest over; in the
Fouls of the Air, and the Fish of the Sea; in the Grass of the Field, and the
Trees of the Forest; in thy self, and in every thing round about thee; in all
these he may be clearly discerned exerting that Power, Wisdom and Goodness,
which first gave Being to them, in sustaining, preserving and disposing of
them. And does he thus lie open to thee in every thing, and has he made thee
capable of discerning him, and wist thou take no notice of him? far be it from
thee. But then,

3. Thou must not only behold God in every thing, but thou must behold him in
every thing looking upon thee, observing what Regard thou have to him, what
Respect thou bear him, and how thou demeanest thy self before him; as thy
Heart must tell thee wheresoever thou art, and whatsoever thou look upon,
that God is there; so it must tell thee likewise, that there God sees thee.
God is with thee every where, and his Eyes are always upon thee; be thou also
at all times with God, by an actual Remembrance of him, and the Application of
thy mind unto him. The people of Israel committed great wickedness, because
they said in their hearts, God has forsaken the Earth, and the Lord sees not
Ezekiel. 9.9. do thou bring thy heart to tell thee the Contrary in all thy ways,
and that will restrain thee from every evil thing. But then to make this
Practice both more profitable, and more pleasant to thee, thou will do well in
the last place,

4. To accustom thy self to frame some Acts of Love upon every apprehension of
God's presence, and in all Humility of Soul to offer them unto him. As God is
worthy of the greatest Love of our Souls, so in every thing we look upon, he
appears to be so: and therefore it is very fit, that we should express our
selves tob e sensible of it, by some Acts of Love, as often as any thing
presents him to our minds: now these Acts may be made several ways; I will set
thee down some of the chiefest of them, to the end that thou may more
readily lay hold upon all occasions that are offered thee for so good an
Exercise. They may be made,

1. By way of Admiration and Transport. Thus, O God how great is thy Majesty!
how great is thy Goodness toward the Sons of men! what manner of Love is that
wherewiht thou have loved us! O the depth of the Riches, both of the Wisdom
and Knowlede of God! how unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways past
finding out! said St. Paul, Romans 11.33.

2. By way of Esteem and Preference. Thus may thou say, as a devout man was
wont, My God and all things! and as another, None but Christ, None but Christ:
and as the Psalmist, Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon
earth that I desire besides thee, Psalm. 73.25. and again, There be many that
say, Who will show us any Good? but Lord, lift thou up the Light of thy
Countenance upon us, Psalm. 4.6.

3. By way of Protestation, and Resolution. Thus St. Peter thrice to his dear
Lord and Master, Lord thou know that I love thee, John 21.15. Thus the
Psalmist, I will love thee O Lord my strength, Psalm. 18.1. v. and in another
Psalm, I have sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy Righteous
judgments, Psalm. 119.106.

4. By way of Desire and Aspiration. Thus may thou say with a Holy Father,
Let me find thee, O the Desire of my Heart; let me possess thee, O Love of my
Soul! Let me hold thee fast for ever in the very midst of my heart, Oblessed
Life! O Sovereign sweetness of my Soul! [St. August.] or with the Psalmist. As
the Heart pants after the waterbrooks, so pants my Soul after thee O God;
my Soul thirsts for God, for the living God; when shall I come and appear
before God? Psalm. 42.1, 2. When will the Lord call home his baished? when shall
I return to my Father's House?

5. By way of Oblation and Resignation. As thus, Lord I am thine, I am thine by
a thousand Titles, and I will be thine, and none but thine for ever; thine I
am, thine is all I have, and therefore to thee do I resign my seli and all.

6. By way of Humiliation, and Annihilation. Thus good Jacob, I am not worthy
of the least of all thy Mercies Genes. 32.10. and thus Holy Job, behold I am
vile, chap. 40.4. and thus likewise the Psalmist, Lord what is man, that thou
take Knowledge of him, or the Son of man, that make account of him? Man is
like to vanity, his days are as a shadow that passes away, Psalm. 144.3, 4. v.
What art thou O Lord? and what am I? Surely thou art the fullness of Being, but
I am nothing.

7. By way of Confidence and Religance upon God. Thus, can a Woman forget her
sucking Child, that she should not have compassion on the Son of her Womb? yea,
thy may forget, but God will not forget his people. Though my Father and Mother
forsakes me, yet the lord will take me up: though I perish, yet will I trust
in him. He clothes the Lillies of the Field, and seeds the Fouls of the Air,
and will he not feed and cloth me? He has given me his only begetten Son, and
will he not with him give me all things?

8. By way of Benediction and Praise. Thus, Great is the Lord, and worthy to be
praised, yea, his Name is exalted above all Blessing and Praise. All thy works
shall praise thee O Lord, and all thy Saints shall bless thee. Whilst I live,
I will praise the Lord, I will sing Praises unto God whilst I have any Being.

These are some of the ways, wherein Holy men have been wont to express, and
exercise their Love to God, and in some or other of these I would have thee to
be continually exercising and expressing thine, according as occasion is given
thee, or as the things that bring God to hy Mind do direct and lead thee. Thou will not be long accustomed to these Practices, but thou will be sensible of
such Advantage by them, as no words of man can express: thou will perceive thy
heart to be more closely united to God every day than other, and wilt have such
a sense of his Love continually upon thy Soul, as will make all the Changes of
thy Life comfortable, and fill thee oftentimes with joy that can be compared to
none but those of the Saints in Heaven. The truth is, we are never more like to
those blessed Spirits, than when we are thus employed; for what do they but
contemplate the Beauty of his Majesty, and make Acts of Love to him? But here is
the difference, they see him clearly as he is, they behold his unveiled Face,
and consequently exercise their Love with the greatest forvors, and partake of
the highest joys; whereas we, beholding him only in the Glass of his
Creatures, are much more cold in our Love, and therefore less happy in our
joys.

I can foresse but one thing that thou can object against these exercises,
viz. that they will be a hindrance to thy Worldly Business. But this, one Word
may serve to remove; For these being works of the Soul, which is an active and
most nimble substance, and not requiring the help of any Member of the Body,
may be intermixed with all thy ordinary Employments; and if there be any of
such a nature, as will not admit them without some little stop, as requiring a
full application of thy mind; yet that stop will be no hinderance, but rather a
mighty furtherance to them; for whilst thou do thus look up to God upon
whom the success of every thing depends, thou will be able to proceed more
cheerfully in thy Employments, and with greater Vigor, through the confidence
of his Blessing upon all that thou art a doing.

But there is one Advice more, which shall conclude this part, and may supply
all that is wanting in it, viz.

CHAP. VI.
Containing the last general Advice, To commit our Souls to the Care and
Conduct of Spiritual Guides; with proper Directions relating to it.

6. THat thou must commit thy Soul to the Care and Conduct of a spiritual
Guide, for the enforcing of this Advice much might be said, and indeed the
little account that most men make of their spiritual Guides, in this Age,
requires much to be said; but because I have set my self but short bounds, and
because I hope, that thou art well disposed by the foregoing discourses, to
receive good Counsel, I shall be as brief as possibly I can with respect to thy
Good. There are Three or Four things which are well known to Christians, and I
hope they will be readily acknowledged by thee for great truths, which being
well considered by thee, will let thee know both how necessary, and how
beneficial this Advice will be to thee.

1. Thou will acknowledge, that Christ has settled an Order of men, as his
Substitutes upon earth, to take Care of Souls to the end of the World. This we
find him doing immediately before his ascension into Heaven. Thus we read in
St. Matthew's Gospel chap. 21.18, 19, 20. All power is given unto me in Heaven
and in Earth, go therefore, and teach (or disciple) all nations, baptizeing
them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, teaching
them te observe whatsoever I have commanded you, and lo I am with you always
even to the End of the World. And thus we read in the 16. c. of St. Marc. v.
15, 16. Go ye into all the World and preach the Gospel to every Creature: He
that believes and is baptized shall be saved but he that believes not shall
be damned. And thus in the 21. c. of St. John's Gospel, v. 21.22, 23. As my
Father has sent me, so send I you; and when he had said this, he breathed on
them, and says, receive ye the Holy Ghost whosevers Sins ye remit, they are
remitted unto them, and whosoevers sins ye retain, they are retained. That our
blessed Savior said all this to his Disciples, no Christian can doubt and
that, by these words he did commit that Power and Authority to them, which he
had received from his Father, for the Good of men's Souls, is not to be denied,
and if any Question be made, whether this concerned the Apostles only, and was
confined by him to their own persons; it may clearly be resolved by
considering, 1. The importance of those words, I am with you always even to
the End of the World; for how could he be with them to the End of the World, if
we suppose those words to concern their persons only? they might be with him
indeed, but he could not be with them to the End of the World, who were not to
be, or to exercise the Authority given them to the End thereof. 2. By
considering the necessities of the World: for what an unhappy condition would
they be in, who were to live in succeeding Ages, if no provision were made for
their Instruction in the Christian Faith, etc. 3. By considering that the
Apostles, after they had received the Holy Ghost in an eminent and remarkable
manner, according to Christ's promise, did understand the Commission otherwise,
and therefore we find, that they did by Prayer and Imposition of hands, (the
ordinary way of conferring offices among the Jews) confer the like Power upon
others, as they saw good for the edification of the Church: and those persons,
upon whom they conferred this Power, are charged by them to take heed to the
flock, and to feed the Church of Christ, and are said to be called and
appointed thereunto by the Holy Ghost, Act. 20.28. And further, those persons
that were thus ordained by the Apostles, are charged by them to ordain others
in the same way, and directions are given them, what manner of persons they
were to ordain to so great an office. Thus the Apostle St. Paul having put
Timothy in mind of that Sacred office to which he had been ordained by
imposition of hands, 2 Epist. chap. 1. v. 6. and of that form of sound words,
which he had heard from him in Faith and Love v. 13. chargeshim to commit the
same to faithful men, who might be able to teach others also, chap. 2. v. 2.
And the same Apostle tells Titus, to whose Care he had committed the whole
Church of the Island of Creete, that he had left him there, and appointed him
to ordain Elders, i.e. Bishops and Presbyters in every City, chap. 1. v. 5. To
these St. Paul gives directions, how they should behave themselves in the
Church of God, as his expressions are 1 Timothy 3. c. 15. v. Not only as to the
ordaining of others, but likewise in many other things relating to the
edification of the Church, viz. 1. as to preaching, that they should hold fast
that form of Doctrine which they had received, and teach that, and none other,
1 Timothy 6.14. and 2 Timothy 3.14.2. As to the public Worship and Service of God, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3.3. As to Government and Discipline, the holding of
Ecclesiastical Courts, the receiving of Accusations, the conventing of the
accused publicly, the correcting of heretical, and other disorderly persons,
the stopping of their Mouths, and the Excommunicating them or casting them out
of the Church, charging them to prejudge no man's Cause, and to do nothing for
Favor or partiality 1 Timothy 5.19, 20, 21. v. and Tit. 1. c. 11. v. and chap. 3.
v. 10. And so likewise as to the reconciling of Penitents, and restoring them
into the Communion of the Church, and the hopes of Pardon, 1 Timothy 5.22. v. By
all which it appears plainly, that Christ did not commit the Care of those
Souls, which He had redeemed with his most precious blood, to those only, who
were in a particular manner called his Apostles, in the words before set down,
but that he did there settle an Order of men, and give Authority to that Order
in a perpetual succession, to watch over them, and to see that none of them
perish, or fall short of that Happiness, which he designed for them. But,

2. Thou must acknowledge likewise that this Order of men, thus settled by
Christ to take Care of Souls, are authorized and empowred by him to preach the
Gospel, to make known the Love of God, as manifested in Christ to the World; to
receive those that do believe the Gospel into the Covenant of Grace, and
society of Christians, by Baptism; to instruct those, whom they have baptized,
in the Will of God, both publicly and privately, to encourage them in their
Obedience to it; to excite and quicken them when they are dull and slothful; to
reprove and admonish them whtn they do amiss; to restore them when they are
fallen, to comfort them in their Sorrows, to pardon their Sins, to feed them
with the Body and blood of Christ; to pray for them, and bless them in Christ's
Name, to help them all the ways they can in the whole Course of their Lives,
and to assist them in their last Agonies, that so they may finish their Course
with joy. This thou will plainly see if thou will consider, besides the places
of Scripture already mentioned, the following Texts, Act. 20.20, 21, 26, 27,
31. 2 Timothy 4.1, 2. Gal. 6.1. v. Luke 22.19, 20. 1 Corinthians, 11.23, 24. Jam.
5.14, 15.

3. Thou must acknowledge, that Christ has promised to be with those his
Officers, and ministers, and accordingly he has, is, and will be with them in
the Exercise of the several parts of their office to the end of the World, i.e.
He will assist them with special Illumination, Direction, and Power, sufficient
for the dispensation of the Gospel, and the edification of the Church, and
according to the necessities and capacities of the Times wherein they are to
live: he will furnish them with all necessary and requisite Gifts, will
accompany their Endeavors with his Holy Spirit, to make them essectual; will
hear their Prayers, confirm their Censures, protect their persons, etc. This we
are plainly taught in several places of Scripture, besides those already
pointed to. See John 14.16, and 26. Where Christ promises his Apostles a
Comforter to be with them for ever, and to teach them all things. And see
Ephesians. 4. c. Where the Apostles speaking of the several Officers that Christ
has appointed in his Church, and of the Gifts and Graces which he does furnish
them withal, does intimate that these shall be continued in the Church, in such
a manner and measure as is necessary, till we all come (that is, both Jews and
Gentiles) into the Unity of the Faith, and unto a perfect man, unto the measure
of the Statute of the fullness of Christ, i.e. to such prefection in Knowledge,
Wisdom and Good-uess, as that there will be no further Danger of being like
Childrent ossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine, v.
13, 14. And further, thou may observe, That, as they are called the
Ambassadors of Christ, and are said to beseech men in Christ's stead, 2
Gorinth. 5.20. So Christ is said to speak in them and by them, 2 Corinthians. 13.3.
Ephesians. 2.17. And to work mightily and effectually in them, Gal. 2.8. And
further they are said to be Workers together with Christ, 2 Corinthians. 6. v. 1.
And to be Ladbourers together with God, 1 Corinthians. 3.9. God giving the
Increase, whilst Paul Planted, and Apollos watered v. 6, 7. of the same
chapter, and God opening men's hearts, Act 16.14. which are said to be pricked
by the Apostles Preaching, Act. 2.37. Lastly, see Revel. 1.13, 16. where to
denote Christ's perpetual Presence, Assistance, and Protection to thesE his
Ministers or Officers, the appointed Guides, and Governors of the Church,
after all the times of the Apostles, John only excepted, Christ is represented,
though in Glory, yet walking in the midst of the seven Churches of Asia, and
holding the seven Stars, i.e. the Angels or Bishops of those Churches [ v. 20.]
in his right hand.

4. Thou must acknowledge likewise, That, as Christ has appointed an Order of
men, thus to guide and govern his Church, and has charged them to attend unto
it with all their Might, upon pain of answering for those Souls that shall
perish through their Neglect or Default, [See Ezekiel. 34.8, 9, 10. and Act.
20.26, 27.] so he has charged all men to respect them as his Officers, as the
Guides and Governors of their Souls on Earth under him, and to submit
themselves to their Conduct and Government, in all things relating to the
Salvation of their Souls: and this upon Pain of losing all the Privileges,
Advantages, and Benefits, which they can hope for, or pretend to upon the
account of what he has done, and suffered for us. Of this, thou will see no
Reason to doubt, if thou will consider, that this gracious provision which
Christ has made for men's Souls in appointing these Guides and Governors, and
vouchsafing them all necessary assistances for the discharge of their office,
will signify very little, in case men be at liberty to submit to them or not,
and may be saved though refusing to submit to them. But besides this, (to give
thee all the satisfaction that may be in a matter which many are very unwilling
to understand) thou may consider some few places of Scripture, which do
plainly inform us of the Mind of Christ concerning it: [I omit what may be said
out of the Old Testament, and from the Priestly Power and Office under it, (as
I have done all along,) because I design not a full discourse upon those
things.] As God the Father was pleased tod eclare, That he had constituted his
Son Christ Jesus to be the supreme Guide and Governors of Souls, and to charge
all men to hear and obey him, of which we have clear Testimony, Math. 3.17. and
Math. 17.5. So Christ has lest to the World a clear Testimony, that he did
commit the Authority which he had received from his Father, to his Apostles and
their Successors, [ John 20, 21. As my Father sent me, so send I you,] and that
it is his Will, that all must hear and obey them, who will have any Interest in
him, or Benefit by him; so in the places beforementioned Math. 28.19, 20. and
Mark. 16.16. Where, giving Commission to his Apostles to preach the Gospel to
all Nations, and to receive those that should believe, into that Covenant of
Grace, which he had sealed with his blood, by Baptism, he tells them: He that
believes and is baptized, shall be saved; but he that believes not, shall be
damned, i.e. those that do heartily believe that Gospel, which you preach, and
do profess so to do, and do engage themselves to be my Disciples, and to obey
my Commands by receiving Baptism at your hands, and do continue to learn from
you what I have commanded, [compae these words with those in St. Matthew] and
practice accordingly in the whole Course of their Lives, shall be saved; but
those that refuse to do this, shall be damned; to which words if we join those,
which he spoke some time before to his Disciples, when he sent them to preach
to Gospel to the lost Sheep of Israel, Luke 10.16. We shall understand his Mind
more clearly. He that hears you, says he, hears me; and he that despilseth
you, despises me; and he that despises me, despises him that sent me. Where
we see, that as he has given that Authority, which he had received from his
Father, to these his Ministers, so he does require all men to own it, and
submit unto it; and that he will account the Disowning, the Not obeying, the
Rejecting and Despising them in the Exercise of it, as the Disowning, Rejecting
and Despising of himself, and his Authority; and his Father likewise will judge
it to be a Rejecting and Despising him, and his Sovereign Power and Authority.
But this is not all that the Holy Scriptures speak concerning this matter; it
was foreseen by God, how hardly the generality of men would be convinced of
these things, and therefore the Holy Spirit stirred up the blessed Apostles,
frequently to put men in mind of the Authority of Christ's Ministers, and the
Duty that we owe unto them. Thus we find St. Paul telling the Corinthians, That
they are the Ambassadors of Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries of God, and
charging them to esteem them as such, 1 Corinthians. 4.1. v. and we find him
beseeching the Thessalonians to know them that did labor among them, and were
over them in the Lord, and did admonish them; and to esteem them very highly in
Love for their work sake, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13. And the Author to the Hebrews
charges them, to obey them that had the Rule over them, [or their Guides, or
Leaders, so the word signifies] and to submit themselves; and he backs his
Charge with this Reason, That they did watch for their Souls, is those that
were to give account, i.e. they are appointed by Christ to watch for men's
Souls, and they must give Account to him of the Souls committed to their
Charge: and this they can never be able to do with any Comfort, if they will
not obey and submit themselves to them: and this, (he tells them) viz. their
making their Account sad and grievous by their Non-Submission, would be
unprofitable for them. He means more than his words express, according to a way
of Speaking very usual in the Scriptures, i.e. this will be so far from being
profitable for them men, that it will bring the greatest Damage and mischief to
them, viz, the Ruin and perdition of their Souls. I forbear to mention any
more places of Scripture, and I omit to urge the Practice of the first and best
christians, as also the black Characters that are given by some of the Holy
Writers, of those that did slight the Guides and Governors of the Church, and
refuse to submit themselves unto them; because I have promised not to be
tedious.

Now having carefully observed, and seriously weighed these things, give me
leave to put some few Questions briefly to thee. Do thou believe that there
is no need of these Spiritual Guides in the World? if there be no need of them,
why did Christ appoint them? why did He not leave men to themselves in the
Concerns of their Souls, as he has done in those things that concern their
Bodies, and their outward Estates? For, That he has not appointed any Order of
Men, to teach men how to provide for their Bodies, or to increase their
Estates, is confessed by all. Was there need of these Guides for the first
preaching of Christianity to the World, and is there no need of them for the
propagation and maintenance of it in the World? I forbear to press thee with
the Natural Blindness of men's Understandings, with that Inconsideration,
Rashness, Levity, Inconstancy, which is inseparable tof Humane Nature (...)
also with that Averseness to the things of God, and the great Interests of our
Souls, which all men feel, and good men cannot but complain of: We may be
confident, That if Christ had not known, that the World needed spiritual
Guides, He would never have appointed any such, nor have promised them those
Assistances, which thou have now heard of, nor have taken any Care to inform
men of the Duty they do owe unto them; and therefore are not those men too much
puffed up in their fleshly Minds, or too regardless of their Everlasting
Interests, that account these Guides to be of no Use to them; or are wanting in
that Respect for them, and dependence upon them which they ought to have? I
doubt not, but thou will confess it. But further, do thou not understand by
what has been said, that men may receive very great Advantages by their
spiritual Guides, if they please themselves? Surely, those of old, that
received them as the Galatians did, chap. 4.14. as the Angels of God, yea, even
as Christ Jesus, did believe so. Besides, was not the making of this Provision
for the Good of men's Souls, a great demonstration of Christ's Love and Care for
them? and therefore must not they be great despisers of the Love of Christ, and
Enemies to their own Souls, that make little Account of it, and seek no
Advantage by it? or can they with the least shadow of Reason call themselves
Christians, or expect to be Partakers of those Benefits which he has promised
to his faithful Servants, who have no Regard at all to his Ordinances and
Institutions, or no other Regard to them, than as they please their own Humors,
and are agreeable to their Stubborn Wills? I doubt not but thou will answer to
these Demands according to my hearts Desire, and therefore thou can not but
acknowledge, that my Advice is good and useful: That thou commit thy Soul to
the Care and Conduct of a Spiritual Guide. I proceed now to show thee briefly,
how thou must practice this Advice.

The Practice of the former Advice.
1. Thou must make Choice of a good Guide. I call him a good Guide, who having
Authority from Christ, is able to direct thee aright in all the Concerns of thy
Soul; and will be faithful to thee. Christ has no where promised, that none
shall take upon them to be Guides of Souls, but those that have Authority from
him: nor that all those that have Authority from him shall discharge their
Office faithfully. Among his Twelve Apostles there was a Judas, and among the
Seven Deacons ordained by the Apostles, Tradition tells us, there was one that
failed: and in those Writings that we have of some of the Apostles, we find
complaints of some, that loved the World more than Christ, and their own
fleshly Lusts more than the Good of Souls; and St. Peter has told us, that, as
there were of old, false Prophets among God's people, so there shall be false
Teachers among Christians, who through Covetousness, shall with feigned words
make Merchandise of them, 2 Pet. 2.1, 2, 3. And therefore it is no matter of
Wonder, if there be some such among us now; but it ought to be matter of
Caution to thee, with whom thou do trust thy Soul. Thy Soul is a Jewel of
too great Value to be put into the hands of every Pretender, yea, or of every
one whose office it is to take Care of Souls. And those that are ready to
follow the Conduct and Counsel of every one, that will take upon him to be
their Guide or Instructor, are not much less to be blamed, than those that will
commit their Souls to none; and therefore, thou art to take the greatest Care,
and to use the best Skill thou have, in the choice of thy Guide; and because it
is a matter of no little difficulty to make a right Choice, it will not, I
hope, be thought impertinent to give thee some assistance. And

1. I advise thee to betake thy self to thy Closet, and to beg of God to direct
thee in thy Choice. Though thou have ever so much Skill in judging of men, yet
it is possible that in this Case thou may be deceived; and the more thou
trustest to thy own Skill, the greater danger thou art in of being deceived,
God usually suffering those that have a great opinion of themselves, to
misearry in their best Undertakings: and therefore in this, as well as in other
things, thy security lies in an humble Confidence in God's direction, which
thou art to beg of him by fervent Prayer; and though the Blessing be great, yet
thou have no Reason to doubt but thou shall obtain it, if thou do ask
aright; for since he has done so much for thy Soul already, He will not deny
thee any thing, thou may be confident, that he knows to be necessary for its
Welfare and Happiness. If any of you lack Wisdom (says St. James) let him ask
of God, who gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be
given him, chap. 1. v. 5. And what greater Wisdom can thou desire, than
that which may enable thee to choose to good Guide; except it be that which may
enable thee to follow him, when thou have made Choice of him? which thou art
also to ask to God. But then,

2. Though thou must not confide in thy own Skill, but in the Assistance and
Direction of Almighty God; yet, since his Assistance and Direction can be
expected only in a rational way, it will behove thee to make Use of that Skill
which God gives thee; and that, with as much Care, as if thy Success depended
altogether upon it. This, in other matters, thou think thy self bound to do;
and I can see no Reason why thou should not be of the same Mind in this
Case. Thou must therefore look out into the World, and consider, who among
those Guides of Souls that are known to thee, is most fit to be trusted; and if
thou do desire the opinion of some serious and discreet Friends, as thou art
wont to do when thou need a Physician for thy Body, or a Lawyer for settling
thy Estate; I think thou will do very well: only let me caution thee, That thou
do not presume to make Judgment of any one, with whom thou art not thoroughly
acquainted; for otherwise, though it is possible thou may hit right, yet it
is two to one, that thou will be deceived; which will be a fault that will
admit of no Excuse. And the same caution thou art to take in receiving the
judgments of others: which thou will not think to be needless, if thou do
consider, That as some few have a better Repute in the World, than they do
deserve, so others have a worse; and it is commonly observed, that many
excellent men have suffered very much from many, merely because they have given
Credit to the Reports of those who were never intimately acquainted with them,
and yet have presumed to pass their Censures on them. But to help thee as much
as I can in this matter, which is really of very greato Importance to thee, it
will not be amiss to give thee a short Account of the Qualifications and
Properties of a good Guide, referring thee for further Instruction to the
Epistles of St. Paul to Timothy and Titus. And

1. A good Guide is one that has received Authority from Christ, to take Care
of Souls; not immediately from Christ, but mediately, i.e. by imposition of
hands from some Bishop of the Church, who in a constant Succession from the
Apostles of our Lord, had Authority to give it. As for those that pretend to
derive Authority immediately from Christ, thou must look upon them as
Impostors, till they can show those Testimonials of their Authority, which the
Apostles did, viz. the Gifts of Tongues, and Miracles; and if their Learning
and seeming Piety should chance to incline thee to believe otherwise of them,
it behooves thee to call to Mind that Caution which Christ has given thee,
Matthew. 7.15. Beware of false Prophets; which come to you in Sheeps-Cloathing,
but inwardly they are ravening Wolves. And as for those that pretend to
Authority derived by the hands of some of the Inferior Ministers in the
Church, which are now, and have been for many hundred years called Presbyters,
and by that name distinguished from Bishops; thou may upon the same grounds
on which thou have received thy Christianity, believe them to pretend to that
which they have not; for it is certain by unquestionable Records, that for
above fifteen hundred years, there was no such Authority allowed, or
acknowledged in Presbyters, by the Church of Christ: and as for those in this
last Age that did first pretend to this Authority, and did take upon them to
confer it upon others by imposition of their hands, it is certain that all the
Authority they had, or could confer, they received from Bishops, which was only
an Authority to preach the Word, and administer the Sacraments, according to
the Rules of the Gospel and the Canons of the Church, and this in Subordination
to their Bishops; and not an Authority to ordain others in opposition to their
Bishops; and therefore if it be true, That none can give that which they have
not to give, and that none can be presumed to have received that which was
never given them, as certainly it is; thou have great reason to believe that
those persons, whom I now speak of, have no Authority from Christ to take care
of Souls. And then, in the last place, for those that call themselves the
Ministers of Christ, and pretend to have been so by the declared Consent of a
small number of people combined together under the name of a Church; thou
may believe them to be what they call themselves, when they can prove, That
the Apostles of our Lord were the peoples Ministers, and not Christ's; I mean,
That they did receive their Authority from the People, and not from Christ. Now
if these men have no Authority from Christ, they have no Promise of Christ's
presence, assistance and Blessing in those Exercises they take upon them to
perform in his Name; and if they have no Promise of Christ's Presence or
Blessing, thou have no Reason to give up thy self to their Conduct. Thou may
perhaps hear them speak many good things of themselves and their followers, and
make great Boast of the Spirit of Christ; but when thou have impartially
considered, the Heresies, Schisms, Seditions, Tumults, Rebellions, Murders,
Rapines, Perjuries, which they have been the Authors and Promoters of, thou will know how to judge of their great Boasts, and Godly Pretensions. By these
their truits thou may know them. I say no more, nor indeed should I have
said so much, but that the Disorders of the Age do make it necessary to give
thee some little Caution.

2. A good Guide is a man of Knowledge. He is able to teach thee as much as
thou art bound to believe and Practice: his lips preserve knowledge, and his
tongue can show thee right things. He cannot be a good Guide to others, that
has need of a Guide himself. If the blind lead the blind, both will fall into
the Ditch, Matthew. 15.14.

3. He is a man of prudence, and discretion; which appears both by his
conversation, and in the Exercise of his Ministry, fitting his instructions to
the Necessities, and Capacities of his people; He poures not new wine into old
Bottles; He feeds not Children with strong meat, and strong men with milk: He
provides for every one what is fitting for him, and that in due Season.
Indiscretion does oftentimes as much mischief, as the grossest Ignorance.

4. He is humble, meek, and peaceable. So was the great Shepherd and Bishop of
our Souls: He was no Lordly, domineering person; no breaker of the Peace of the
World, or Overturner of Governments: but was a Servant unto all, even to the
meanest of the people: he pleased not himself, but others for their Good, and
submitted himself patiently and quietly to the Authority of the Chief Priests,
and of the Roman Emperor.

5. He is very grave and serious; not out of Soureness or Sullenness of Humor,
but from a real sense of the Sacredness of his Office, the Worth of Souls, and
the Account he must give of them. It is said of a devout man, that when some
desired him to give them a certain Mark, by which they might know a man to be
truly Spiritual, He answered them in this manner, if ye see any one that takes
delight in the common Sportings and Jestings, the Ralleries and Drolleries of
the World, that cannot patiently suffer Contempt and Reproach, take heed that
you believe not that man to be, Spiritual though you should see him work
miracles. This good man was undoubtedly in the right, and I think lie had not
been mistaken if he had omitted the latter part concerning the Not suffering
Contempt, and given the affectation of Wit and Drollery for a sufficient Mark
of a very imperfect Christian; however, it may serve for a Mark to discover a
bad Guide: for if every Christian should be a serious persono, (because Christ
was so) the Ambassadors of Christ should be much more so; their Deportment
should be such as may awe the men they do converse with, and in a silent way
deter them from their Sins; and their persons should speak what the Statue of
Senacherib is said to have done. He who looks to me, let him be Religious.
But though a good Guide be thus grave and serious, yet he is not Crabbed,
Morose, or Cynical; but,

6. Affable and Courteous, and of Sweet and Winning Conversation; he disdains
not to converse with the meanest People, and that freely and cheerfully too;
nor to conform himself to all the innocent Customs of the World, so far as
consists with the Sacredness of his Office, and the Decorum of his Person;
having a due Respect to those, he becomes all things to all men, and though his
Gravity shows him to be an Enemy to their Sins, yet his innocent and cheerful
Complyances, show him to be a Lover of their Persons. There was never any
person more remarkable for this, than our blessed Savior, who though his
gravity was such, that he was never seen to laugh, as we know of, yet was he of
so sweet and benign a Temper, and so courteous and complyant in all his
Carriage and Conversation, that none were ever offended at it; and to his
example does every good Guide of Souls conform himself in this as well as in
other things.

7. He is a man of Courage, he fears not the Faces of the greatest persons upon
Earth, nor is discouraged in the doing of his Duty, by the Thoughts of their
displeasure. He is another John the Baptist in this Respect, who was not afraid
to tell the Tyrant Herod, That it was not lawful for him to have his Brother's
Wife, Mar. 16.18. And like St. Paul, he can be contented, if God will have it
so, not only to be bound, but to dye for the Name of the Lord Jesus, Act. 21.13.

8. He is wholly devoted to the Work that Christ has appointed him to do; it
is his only Business, and sole Care; and as Christ said of himself, that it was
his Meat and Drink to do the Will of his Father, so it is his, to do the Will of
Christ, in taking Care for Souls. he is no Plodder for the World, no Seeker of
the Fleece, no Hunter after preferment; these Worldly things are as Dross and
Dung to him, and he will not sell poor Souls for such Gains.

9. He is a great Lover of Souls, and of much tenderness and Compassion toward
them; he will do any thing, yea, suffer any thing for their Good, and lay down
his Life (if need be) for their sakes; he is grieved for their miscarriages
more than for all worldly things, as Christ was grieved for the hardness of men
hearts, and is better pleased with their well doing, than by the greatest
earthly Prosperity; they are his joy and Crown that do well by his Ministry: he
thinks no Honor greater, and knows no greater joy.

Lastly, He is a man of a Holy Life; his Example teaches us as much as his
tongue, and he is a pattern for his People to walk by. His Conversation is in
Heaven, and he can boldly call upon men to be Followers of him, and to walk as
they have him for an Example. Though he is not without his Failings and
Imperfections, as he is Flesh and Blood, yet no Crimes, or gross Sins, nor any
Indulgeing, or Allowing of himself in the least, can the sharpest and most
malicious Eye behold in him. Thus have I given thee a short account of the
Qualifications of a good Guide. Such a Guide thou may boldly commit thy Soul
to, and if thou will follow his Directions, he will keep thee, through the
Grace of God, from all things hurtful, and lead thee into all things profitable
for thy Salvation.

But there is one thing. That I am concerned in this place to mind thee of,
viz. That, if the Curate of the Parish wherein thou live, be thus qualified,
thou have a Guide provided for thee, and thou must seek no further; for, he
has the Charge of thy Soul committed to him by God, and he must give an
account of it to God, which because he cannot do if another have the Conduct of
thy Soul, thou must not upon any pretense resuse his Conduct, and submit to
another's; besides, in this Case thou can not reasonably expect the Blessing
of God, under the Conduct of another; because, to please thy self thou do
act clean contrary to the Ordinance of God, and preferrest thy own Wisdom,
before the Wisdom of his Providence; besides, thou can not hope to fall
under the Conduct of a good Guide, if thou do reject him, who by the
Appointment of God ought to have the Conduct of thee, because no honest and
prudent Guide will allow of this Practice, or take the Care of any upon him
that belong to another Parish: except it be when the Parish is so unhappy, as
to be under the Conduct of one, that is either grossly ignorant, or notoriously
vicious. What I have said therefore of looking out for a Guide; thou must
understand as meant only, when the Parish to which thou do belong, is in
this unhappy condition. In this Case, (though thou art bound to attend. to the
public Exercise of his ministry, except thou art licensed by him or the
Governors of the Church to do otherwise, and receivest much Benefit by it)
thou art to follow, the Directions before given; but in no other. But to
proceed,

2. In the second place. Being resolved as to the person thou designest for thy
Guide, I advise thee to go to him; and having informed him of thy Desire to
save thy Soul, and to put thy self under his Conduct in Order to it; beseech
him to receive thee into his Care, and to give thee such Directions as he shall
think necessary and fitting for thee; assuring him, that thou will follow them
to the utmost of thy Power, and endeavor to show thy self a good Christian in
submitting thing thy self to him, as to Christ's Minister, and by depending
altogether upon him. And that he may the better judge of the Honesty and
sincerity of thy Heart in what thou tellest him, and know what Directions thou
have most need of; be not ashamed to make thy self fully known to him; tell him
what manner of Education thou have had, what manner of Life thou have lead,
what Convictions thou have had at any time of the evil of Sin, what Resolutions
thou have taken upon those Convictions, how far thou Have made them good, and
wherein thou have failed: acquaint him with thy natural Temper, and thy
acquired Inclinations: tell him, what evil Habits thou have contracted, what
vicious Customs thou have been, or art engaged in, what Temptations thou have
found thy self most obnoxious to, and overcome by, etc. In a word, I advise
thee to open thy very Soul unto him [he will help thee to do it by seasonable
and fitting Questions, if he find thee willing] and conceal not the least thing
from him. Thou would not scruple to discover the State of thy Body to thy
Physician, when thou need his help; why then should thou be shy of
acquainting thy Spiritual Physitain with the State of thy Soul? Art thou more
ashamed of the Diseases of thy Soul, than thou art of the Infirmity of thy
Body? the greater Reason thou have to desire their Cure, and in Order to it to
make them known; will thy Physician keep the infirmities of thy Body secret? no
less safe will the Secrets of thy Soul be in the Bosom of thy Spiritual Guide.
Away then with that imprudent and unseasonable modesty, which will not do thee
the least Good, but may be the Occasion of thy Ruin. Hear what a Heathen man
has said, and blush at the Folly of those that call themselves Christians.
Thou say unto a vicious man, hide thy self with thy Vices, Plutarch.
endure thy pestilent and dangerous Disease, conceal thy Envy and Superstition
as certain Paintings, and beware, that thou give not thy self to such as can
instruct and heal thee. [this is the Advice of the Devil, and his Instruments
upon Earth] but the Ancients exposed their sick men to open View. That such as
passed by, and had been sick of the same Diseases, or had given Ease and Help
thereunto, might signify so much unto the sick man: and they affirmed that the
Art it self, improved by such experience, to have been much bettered thereby
and increased: in like manner it may seem expedient to lay open the Sins of our
Life, and the evil Affections of the Mind, that it may be lawful for any man
considering and beholding the same, to say, Art thou angry? take heed of this;
Art thou vexed with jealousy? do this; Art thou in Love? I my self was so, but
have repented; now, when some men hide their Vices, deny, and conceal them;
what do they but fasten them more thoroughly and surely to themselves? Thus a
Heathen, whose words I do make the greater Account of, because of those of St.
James, chap. 5. v. 16. Confess your Faults one to another, and pray one for
another; which, if we understand, as many are willing to do, of making known
our Sins to our Christian Brethren, that they may the better understand what
Petitions to put up to God in our behalf, they agree exactly with the Heathens
Advice, though it be grounded upon another Motive; but the truth is, the words
are read in some Books thus; Confess your Faults therefore to one another. And
so they plainly refer to the words before, concerning the Elders of the Church,
and their Prayers for the sick, and the Effect of those Prayers, viz. the
Recovery of the sick, and the Pardon of their Sins: and they import not our
making Confession to our Christian Brethren; but, (as men (to use one of the
Fathers words) do not lay open the Difeases of their Bodies to all, Basil.
but to those that are skilful in the Art of Healing) to the Presbyters of the
Church, whose Office it is to minister to the Health of Souls both by their
Prayers and Counsels; and though the words [one to another] seem to make
against this Interpretation, and to imply a mutual Confession to be made by
Christians to each other; yet, if the Use of the Phrase in other places be
considered, and particularly in that of St. Peter, 1. Epist. chap. 5.5. v. All
of you be subject to one another, which must be understood according to the
Reason of the matter there spoken of, not of a mutual subjection, but of a
subjection of all to those that are over them; they will be but of little
weight against it; the whole Context and matter spoken of here, directing us to
this Interpretation, as well as in that of St. Peter. But to let this pass, it
is enough for my present Purpose, that it be granted to be expedient for men in
order to their spiritual Welfare, to confess their Sins to their Christian
Brethren; and if it be so, I think it is not tob e denied, but it is more
expedient for them, to confess to those whose Office it is to pray for them,
and to counsel them, and who have ministerial Authority from Christ to
pronounce the Pardon and Absolution of true Penitents. But to proceed,

3. Having thus acquainted the Spiritual Guide with thy Desires, and having
fully opened thy self unto him, set thy self to receive his Instructions; hear
him, as thou would hear Christ himself, whose Minister he is, speaking to
thee; mark what he says with the greatest Care: if any thing fall from him,
which thou do not fully understand, desire him to explain his Meaning; if
thou do distrust thy Memory, his Instructions being many, desire him to
repeat them: and when he has made an End, give him, together with they Tanks,
thy Promise to follow his Directions, and so begging his Prayers, and his
Blessing in the Name of Christ, take thy leave of him.

4. As soon as thou art gone from him, begin to recollect the good Advices thou
have received, and to practice accordingly; and omit not the Doing of any thing
he has advised thee to. If any thing he has advised thee to, seem hard, or
without Reason, yet reject it not, but consider; That, though thou do not
perceive the Reason why he has laid such things upon thee, yet he may have
seen good Reason for it; thou do not know but it was to try the sincerity of
the profession thou have made to him, and to know the better how to fit himself
to thy necessities hereafter: or it may be, he might (in prudence) design that
thou should not understand the Reason of Some particular Advices, till thou
feel the good Effect of them, and the great Advantages they bring thee, to
dispose thee the more readily and cheerfully to follow him for the Future; for,
finding great benefit in that, in which thou could foresee none, as well as
in that which did promise thee much, as thou can not but think thy self
happy in meeting with such a Guide, in Respect of that which is past, so thou
can not but be mightily encouraged by it, to give him the entire disposal of
thee for the time to come. Be careful then, to observe his Directions in every
thing: remembering, that as a sick man can receive no Benefit by the best
Physician in the World, how well soever he has made him to understand his
Disease, if he puts up his Prescriptions in his Pocket, and makes no further
Use of them; so the Advices of thy Guide (how good soever they may be in
themselves) will be of no Advantage to thee, if thou do not follow them:
nay, let me add, (which thou art concerned to remember,) that thy Case will be
much worse than the Case of such an imprudent person: for, though he is not
like to be benefitted by the Prescriptions of his Physician, yet he can receive
no hurt by his not using them: whereas thou will receive much Damage by
neglecting those that have been given thee; for, besides this, that all
insincere dealing in matters of Religion, and trifling in holy things, if I may
so speak, does in it self tend to harden the heart, and to make thee more
regardless of the great Concerns of thy Soul; it will certainly provoke God to
withdraw his Grace from thee, and to leave thee to fall into that Ruin and
Destruction, which thou art but little afraid of, and take no Care to avoid.

5. Return to thy Guide after some time, and give him an impartial account of
the Use thou have made of his Instructions, and the Benefit thou have received
by them; if thou have failed in any thing, confess it freely, and declare thy
Resolution to do better for the time to come; if thou can say that thou have
failed in nothing give God Thanks, and say as the young man did to our blessed
Savior, Matthew. 19.20. What lack I yet? And then receive his Directions, as
thou did before, and take Care to practice accordingly.

6. Keep a constant Correspeondence with him as long as thou live;
acquainting him from time to time, with the State, and Condition of thy Soul,
with thy Progress in Wisdom and Virtue, with thy Temptations and
Discouragements, with thy Failings and Imperfections, with thy Doubts and
Fears, with thy Joys and Sorrows, and undertake not any thing of moment or
Importance without his Advice and Approbation; thou will quickly be sensible of
such Advantages by this Course, as will effectually encourage thee to proceed
in it. I will not insist upon that Peace and Satisfaction which thou will
constantly enjoy in thyown mind by it, as having not only the Approbation of
thy own Conscience in every thing thou do, but also the Approbation of one
of Christ's Ministers, who is better able to judge of thy Actions, and may be
presumed to judge more impartially than thy self would do. It may suffice to
mention some of those services he will be continually doing thee; he will
instruct thee in what thou art ignorant of, and will either prevent or rectify
thy Mistakes; he will resolve thy Doubts, and remove thy Fears, and case thee
of thy Sorrows: he will restrain thee when thou art too zealous and forward,
and quicken thee when thou art dull and slothful, and refresh and cheer thee,
when thou art a weary; he will restore thee when thou art fallen, and apply the
Promises of the Gospel to thee, and help thee to take Comfort in them; he will
remove many Difficulties out of thy way, and arm thee against Temptations, and
support thee under trials, and be both a Guide and a Guardian to thee in all
the dangerous and troublesome Passages of thy Life; in a word, he will make
thee to understand thy Duty fully, to know what is necessary, and what is
lawful, and what is expedient, and what is seasonable; and help thee to
distinguish between Truth and Falsehood, Reality and Appearance, Good and Evil;
he will excite and stir up thy Will to embrace the one, and refuse the other;
he will moderate thy affections, and keep thy Passions in Order, and preserve
thee in an even, steady Course of well-doing, and at last deliver thee up in
Peace and safety into the hands of the great Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls,
Christ Jesus.

Object. But it may be, thou will meet with some that will ask thee, What
necessity is there for all this? Why may it not be enough for Thy Salvation,
which is enough for the Salvation of most men, who live and dye, and go to
Heaven without all this Trouble, contenting themselves to have a Minister in
their Parish, to hear him preach, and to receive the Sacrament from his hands?
without putting themselves or him to so much trouble concerning their Souls; if
They may be saved without all this ado, why may not Thou? it is not good to
be singular, and they that teach men to be so, are not their Friends.

Ans. To those men, many things may be replied, but it may suffice to offer
these few things to their consideration; we do not take upon us to judge of the
everlasting State of any, we leave that to be manifested in that day, which
shall bring to light the most hidden things: we do not bind men to take this
Course upon pain of everlasting damnation: but surely, every man is concerned
to endeavor to save his own Soul; and, whether the best way to do this, be to
do as the most do, or to do as I have advised thee, do thou judge. Look into
thee World, and observe the daily Miscarriages of those men, whose Practice
thou are urged to approve and imitate; how many of them after many years going
to Church and hearing of Sermons, have no more Understanding in the very
Principles of their Religion, than they had when they were Children, and of
whom we may say as St. Paul did of some, that they are ever learning, but never
able to come to the Knowledge of the Truth; 2. Tim. 3.7. How many are puffed up
with a great opinion of their own Knowledge, that know nothing as they ought to
know, and will never know any thing, because those that should and would
instruct them cannot know their Ignorance till it is too late to give them
Instructions? how many of them become a Prey to Seducers, and drink in damnable
Doctrines, with as much eagerness, as they should do the most saving Truths,
merely because they take upon them to judge of every thing, and will not take
Advice of those whom God has set over them to direct them? How many go
groaning under the Burden of troubled Consciences for many years, and it may
be after all, become desperate, and lay violent hands upon themselves, because
they would not discover their Grief to a Spiritual Physician, who might have
poured Wine and Oil into their Wounds, and have bound them up to their
everlasting Peace and Comfort? how many go on in an evil Course, who might be
persuaded to leave it, but for some Prejudices which they have entertained
either against a good life in general, or some particular duties, or against
some doctrine, which if received would work a Reformation in them; which
Prejudices Christ's Ministers cannot remove, because they know them not. How
many, in a word, that mean well, and make many good promises and resolutions,
are overcome by their Lusts, and the Temptations of the Devil and the world,
merely for want of particular Directions, as to those Lusts, and those
Temptations? These sad Shipwracks, and many more which thou may daily
behold, may convince thee how dangerous it is to go in the common way, and how
much safer it will be for thee to follow the Advice that I have given thee: and
if men will not be persuaded that it is their Duty to do thus, I am sure they
may see that it is so much their Interest, that they cannot despise it without
despising their own Souls. And as for the Imputation of Singularity, which thou
may be threatened with, it is but what the best of Christ's Disciples have
undergone in all Ages, and no good Christian will make any reckoning of it:
Were we to please men, we should have Reason to dread it, but since our
Business is to please God, and to save our Souls, it is no matter what they
either say or think of us. Suppose, my Brother, That Christ had showed himself
as much concerned for the health of our Bodies, or the Increase of our Estates,
as he has done for the Salvation of our Souls; That he had appointed an Order
of Men to teach us how to get money, or to preserve our selves in health and
strength for many years; and had given them as strict a Charge to take Care of
it, and be diligent in it, and had promised them as great assistances to make
them Cares and Endeavors effectual to these Ends, as he has done to the
appointed Guides of Souls; and that he had commanded all men as strictly to
respect them as his Officers appointed to these Purposes; to follow their
Directions, and submit themselves in all things to them, as he has commanded
men to submit to their spiritual Guides. Supposing this, I say, do thou
think that men would behave themselves in that manner toward these good
Friends of their Bodies, as they do to the great Friends and Guides of their
Souls? Would they content themselves to hear them read once or twice a week a
public Lecture of Physic, or good Husbandry? no, no; we should see every man
running to their Houses, and desiring private Conversation with them: we should
hear one Saying, Sir, you take great Pains among us, and read very well and
learnedly; but I am a poor ignorant man, and understand but little, and
remember less, and therefore I pray you to explain and repeat some of those
good things to me, which you speak in public. And, another we should hear
complaining, That he could receive no Benefit by all his Pains, because his
Discourses were not proper for his Case, and therefore, beseeching him to
consider his particular necessities, and to give him Directions suitable
thereunto, etc. This we may well suppose men would do, from what we see them do
now, when they need the Advice of Physicians, and of the men of Skill in
Worldly matters; and we may boldly say, that they would not spare (keeping
still to the former Supposition) to make loud Outcryes against the appointed
Physician, as being false to their Trust, in Case they should refuse to hear
them in private, and refer them to their Public Lectures. Now let any man tell
me, why men do not take the same Course for their Souls, which they would take
for their Bodies and Estates? Will they say that their Souls have not so much
need of the Help of Christ's Ministers, as their Bodies have of the Help of
Physicians; and that they know better how to secure their Spiritual, and
Eternal Welfare, than they do their Temporals? This would betray more stupid
Ignorance, or devilish pride and Self-Conceit, than they will be willing to
discover. Will they say that the Ministers may understand the particular
necessities of every person, and provide for them without their taking the
Course prescribed; and that they may suit their Public Instructions,
Exhortations and Directions to all men's Capacities, how different soever they
are? This will be, to make them more than Prophets, to ascribe a kind of
Omniscience to them, yea, and an Omnipotence too; to make their Sermons, as God
is said by some to have made the Manna in the Wilderness, agreeable to the
Taste of every one; which I suppose no man in his Wits will do. What then is
the Reason of it? for my part, I can give no other than this, That either they
are grossly ignorant, and little better than Beasts in Understanding, or mere
Infidels under the Name of Christians; or if they do in some sort believe the
Gospel, yet their hearts are so engaged to the World, that they cannot have any
serious and Constant Regard to their Immortal Souls.

But, to put an End to this matter, let the Cause of the Common Practice be
good or bad, I am sure the Effects of it are sad, and lamentable; the great
Decay of Christian Piety among us, the great Increase of all manner of
Wickedness, the Multiplying of Errors, Schisms, and Divisions, has no one more
visible Cause than this; and till men be convinced that they own a greater
Respect to their Spiritual Guides, than their Practice carries in it, and will
be persuaded to follow the Advice I have now given them, I cannot hope to see
any Stop put to these Evils. I beseech thee therefore, my Brother, by all that
is dear to thee, not to despise my Counsel. Defer not to make Choice of a
Guide; and when thou have done, be not slack to desire his Advice, nor backward
to follow it; thou may be consident of the Blessing of God in So doing: thy
Guide is particularly concerned to give thee the best Advice he can, and God is
concerned to make it effectual for thy Good, since he has particularly
ordained it for that End.

To these Directions I might add many more, viz.

That thou will do well to endear thy self to thy Guide as much as thou can
that he may take the greater Care of thee, and be more ardently desirous of thy
Salvation; to which Purpose thou may do well to show thy Esteem of him, by a
respectful Carriage before others. Mouns. de Reale.
There was a great and good man once in the World, that would never take place
of a Priest before the people, the Dignity of the Office requiring, as he
believed, and deserving the highest respect; and if any one say, that he was
not of our Church, I answer, the greater Reason have most of us to be ashamd of
our selves, who call our selves reformed, and do worse. And further, thou
may do well to contribute cheerfully, according to thy Ability, toward his
maintenance, if the be not plentifully provided for. The Primitive Christians
are not backward to do this; as thou may perceive by their devoting all that
they had, to the Service of Christ and his Church Act. 4.34, 35. and I wish I
could not say, that the Sacrilege of many that call themselves Christians in
this Age, did not make it in some sort necessary for good Christians to do the
same now.

That thou must keep close to they Guide as long as thou live, and never
change him, if God's Providence does not constrain thee.

That in all thy Intercouse with thy Guide, thou must look beyond him; viz. to
thy God, whose Minister he is, and who guides and blesses thee by his Ministry,
to whom thou must daily address thy self by Prayer for a Blessing upon his
Endeavors, and to whose Goodness and Mercy thou must daily ascribe all the
Benefit thou do receive by them. But I must forbear, having too far exceeded
my Bounds already. I conclude all with the words of our dar Lord and Savior.
Now thou know these things, happy art thou if thou do them. John 13.17.

The End.

