A NARRATION OF THE GRIEVOVS VISITATION, AND DREADFVLL DESERtion of Mr.
PEACOCK, in his last sickness: Together with the sweet and gracious issue, in
his comfortable restoration, to the joy of Gods salvation, before his most
blessed end, and heavenly death, December. 4. 1611.

PSALM. 37.37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of
that man is peace.

PSALM. 37.24. Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down; for the Lord
upheldeth him with his hand.

PSALM. 71.20. Thou which have showed me great, and sore troubles, shall quicken
me again: and shall bring me up again from the depths of the Earth.

PSALM. 102.18. This shall be written for the generation to come, and the people
which shall be created, shall praise the Lord.

LONDON, Printed by R.H. for Robert Milbourn, at the sign of the holy Lamb in
Little Britain. 1641.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
THose four leprous men at the gate of Samaria, 2 Kings 7.3. When they had
eaten, and drunk, and carried away Silver and Gold, and Raiment, from out of
the forsaken tents of the flying Syrians, and had hid the same, their
Conscience eftsoone gave them the check, for so engrossing to their own use,
and particular benefit, what the God of ISRAEL had in mercy intended, and by
miracle provided for that whole City, and Kingdom, Ver.9. Then they said one
to another, WE DO NOT WELL: THIS DAY IS A DAY OF GOOD TIDINGS, AND WE HOLD
OUR PEACE. Even so this Narration of Mr. PEACOCKS Visitation, coming happily
to my hands, and I upon through-reading, and serious perusal thereof, finding
it to set forth a most singular president, and rare example of GODS correcting
Justice, in giving over this dear Saint, his faithful servant, this MAN OF
GOD ( for so a late reverend Divine M. Bolton Instruct* for afflicted consc. p.
84.
worthily enstyleth him) to the buffettings of Satan, terrors of hell,
conflicts of a selfe-accusing Conscience: and likewise to hold forth the tender
mercies, and melting bowels of the LORDS Fatherly compassion, in bringing him
even to the suburbs of bell, the gates of death Psalm. 9.13.
, seemingly yielding him up into the paws and jaws of the devil himself;
and yet then, plucking him as a brand Zech. 3.2.
out of the fire, recomforting his dejected soul, binding up his broken spirit,
pouring in a more precious Balm than that of Ier. 8.22.
Gilead, into his wounded and bleeding conscience; I say hereupon, my thoughts
forthwith suggested this unto me, that I SHOULD NOT DO WELL to conceal any
longer this Mirror of Gods Justice and Mercy, being as well an Antidote against
DESPAIR, that dangerous whirle poole and gulf into which FRANCIS SPIRA seemed
irrecoverably to fall, to sink, and perish in, on the left hand; and also to
be a curb of restraint unto, a warning piece, and counter-poyson against
PRESUMPTION, on the right hand; the Rock that so many millions of men
everlastingly miscarry, and split themselves upon: (for as the women sang of
Saul and David, 1 Samuel 18.7.
that Saul had slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands: so where some
few upon an awakened and rouzed conscience, die despaireingly:) infinite is the
number of presumptuous sinners, who like the Fish in Jordan, friske and play,
and take their pastime in the sweet silver-streames of this life's comforts,
till they be unawares suddenly engulfed into the Dead Sea, arrested by grimme
death, Gods Sergeant; and haled by devils unto the disobedient souls 1 Pet.
3.19, 20.
now in prison, reserved in chains under darkness, Jude 6
unto the judgment of the great day, without bail, or mainprise.

Doubtless whosoever is wise, will seriously and seasonably consider of this
Psalm. 107.43.
, and other like remarkable administrations of divine providence, and being
careful of his own standing in the state of grace, will work out his own
Phil. 2.12.
salvation with fear and trembling. This surely is the use God would have men
to make hereof: not to be a nine-daies wonder, or a naked subject of fruitless
discourse, but to learn righteousness Isa. 26.9.
thereby: for if these things were done in the green tree Luke 23 31.
, what will become of the dry? And if the righteous scarcely be saved 1 Pet.
4.18.
, where shall the ungodly and sinner appear?

It is a fearful thing Heb. 10.31.
(says the Apostle) to fall into the hands of the living God. That Ioh. 1.29.
Lamb of God, our blessed Savior himself, when he stood in our stead upon the
cross, was ready even to sink under that unsupportable weight and burden
Psalm. ^8.4.
of our sins, and the feeling apprehension of his Fathers fierce wrath for
the same, and cries out in that perplexed agony and dereliction, Mat. 27.46.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? O^ the terrors, and
intolerablenesse of a Conscience wounded by sin! The spirit of a man may
sustain Prove. 18.14.
his infirmity, but a wounded spirit who can bear? Not only the desperate
cries of Cain, Judas, Latomus, Bolton. p. 83.
and many other such miserable men of forlorn hope, but also the woeful
complaints even of Gods own dear children, discover the unsupportable
horrors of a galled Conscience, yelling and crying out with the stinging sense
of the arrows of sin Job ^.4.
, the poison whereof drinks up men's spirits. Thus Hezekiah, Isay 38.13. Thus
Job, Job 13.26. Job 6.4.8. Job 7.14, 15. Thus David, Psalm. 32.3, 4. And into
the like depth of spiritual distress three worthy servants of God in these
later times, were plunged and pressed down under the sense of Gods anger for
sin.

1. Blessed Mistress Bretergh upon her last bed was horribly hemmed in with the
sorrows of death, See the discourse of the holy life, and Christian death of
Mistress Katherine Bretergh.
the very pains of hell laid hold on her soul; she said her sins had made
her a prey to Satan, she cried out Woe, woe, woe, A weak, a woeful, a
wretched, a forsaken woman; with tears continually trickling from her eyes.

2 Master Peacock, that man of God, in that his dreadful visitation, and
desertion, recounting some smaller sins, burst out into these words; And for
these (says he) I feel now an hell in my conscience.

But thou shall read more concerning him in the following Narration.

3. What grievous pangs and sorrowful torments, what boiling heats of the fire
of hell that blessed Saint of God John Glover felt inwardly in his spirit (
says Master Fox) no speech outwardly is able to express. Acts Mon. in the
story of Master Robert Glover. page 1557.
Being young (says he) I remember I was once or twice with him, whom partly by
his talk I perceived, and partly by mine own eyes saw, to be so worn, and
consumed by the space of five years, that neither almost any brooking of meat,
quietness of sleep, pleasure of life, yea, and almost no kind of senses was
left in him: upon apprehension of some backsliding, he was so perplexed, that
if he had been in the deepest pit of hell, he could almost have despaired no
more of his salvation.

But yet every one of these three last named was at length blessedly recovered,
and did rise most gloriously out of these desperate conflicts, and extremest
spiritual misery before their end. Hear part of Mistress Breterghs triumphant
songs after the return of her Well-beloved. M. Bolton. ibid. page 85, 86.
O Lord Jesus do thou pray for me? O blessed and sweet Savior, how
wonderful, how wonderful, how wonderful are thy mercies! Lord I feel thy
mercy, and I am assured of thy love, and so certain am I thereof, as thou art
the God of truth, even so sure do I know my self to be thine, O Lord my God,
and this my soul knows right well, etc.

2. This following Narration witnesses with what sweet tranquillity of mind
Master Peacock recounted Gods love, welcomed his presence, when the storm was
once over.

3. Master Glover ( says M. Fox, ibid.) though he suffered many years so
sharp temptations, and strong buffettings of Satan, yet the Lord who
graciously preserved him all the while, not only at last did rid him out of all
discomfort, but also framed him thereby, to such mortification of life, as the
like lightly has not been seen: in such sort, as he became like one placed
in heaven already, and dead in this world, both in word and meditation, led a
life altogether celestial, abhorring in his mind all profane doings.

No arm of flesh, or art of man can possibly heal or help in these
extremest horrors. Heaven and earth, men and angels, friends and physic,
gold and silver, nay, the utmost possibility of the whole Creation must let
this alone Psalm. 49.7, 8.
for ever. An Almighty hand must take this in hand, or else never any cure, or
recovery in this world, or that to come.

Oh therefore let us take the stinges out of our sins betimes, and prevent
the incureablenesse of their horrible wound, by an humble, sincere and
universal turning to the Lord, while it is called To Day Heb. 3.15.
. For assuredly all the sins we have committed in thought, word, or deed, at
any time, in any place, with any company, M. Bolton ibid.
or to which we have been any ways accessory, will one day be stings, and
scorpions to our naked souls: they all are upon record before that high and
everlasting Judge, written by the hand of divine Justice in the book of our
conscience, with a pen of Iron; and there they lie like so many sleeping Lions,
gathering much enraged and desperate poison; that whenever our hearts are
thoroughly rouzed, M. Bolton, page 89.
and finally awaked, they will fly in our faces, tormenting us most ragingly,
and tearing our woeful souls in pieces everlastingly, when there is none to
deliver Psalm. 50.22.


Therefore let us consider often in our saddest thoughts. Consid. 1.
1. Why we came into the world, were fashioned in the womb, and drawn out
thence. 2. Why we were made men and women, in the image of God, reasonable
creatures, and not toads or serpents. 3. Why we were borne and bred up
Christians, in the Sunshine of the Gospel, the glorious light of grace; and
not made Pagans, Turks, Infidels, or borne in the hellish darkness of Popish
Idolatry; but in a Land of righteousness, Where the eyes of the Lord, and the
Sun of righteousness are upon us from the beginning of the year, to the end
of the year Deuteronomy. 11.12.
. Doubtless this is an unspeakable mercy, and was not therefore vouchsafed
unto us, that we should only live to our selves 2 Cor. 5.15.
, carnally and sensually, to eat, and drink, and get gain; but for more
heavenly ends. And therefore as ever we hope with comfort to look the Lord
Jesus in the face at that great day, let us mind the things that concern our
everlasting peace Luke 19.42.
, pursue the one Luke 10.42.
thing that is necessary, and lay up in store for our selves a good foundation
against the time to come 1 Timothy 6.19.
that we may lay hold on eternal life.

Consider that our days are but few Job 10 20.
, we have but a very little time to live here, and upon this span-long life
depends eternity; let us therefore walk with God Genesis 6 9.
, and behave our selves here that we may hold out in the Prove. 16.4.
evil day. It is another place we must all live in for ever: The kingdom of
heaven suffers violence Matt. 11.12.
, and the violent take it by force: Many shall seek to enter in, Luke 13.24.
and shall not be able. What comfort will it one day be to have wallowed in all
sensual pleasures, or lien soaking in luxury and lasciviousness, when we
must ere long lie on our deaths-bed, like wild Isay 51.20.
Bulls in a net. It is good to make hay while the Sun shines, to pray, hear,
read, and repent betimes, to store our selves with Oil Mat 25 10.
before the Bridegroom comes, lest we knock too late, when the door is shut:
As we spend this life, so will it be with us in the life to come; therefore
live well here, that it may be well with us at our latter end Lam. 1.9.
.

3. All the riches, Consid. 3.
honors, and pleasures under the Sun will not avail us Prove. 11.4.
in the day of wrath. It will then no whit profit us, to have gained the whole
Matt. 16.26.
world, if we lose our own souls; to have enjoyed the pleasures of sin Heb.
11.25.
for a season, and to lie weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth in hell
for ever. O that men were wise and would consider this Deuteronomy. 32.29.
, and that they would remember their latter end!

The clearest Sun in the Hemispheare, that shines most gloriously in the
brightest summers day, certainly may (and who sees it not oftentimes)
overcast, and muffled up in dark clouds ere it be night? Who can say, the
weather shall not Luke 12.56.
change with him? May not our sun go down Ier. 15.9. Amos 8.9.
at noone, and set sadly under a cloud? Nay, we must look for changes and
chances in this mortal life ( and therefore daily had need to pray as it is in
our Liturgy) and wait all the days of our appointed time Job 14.14.
, until our last solemn change shall come. Our souls like a Ship at sea,
underfull sail, are all bound for the fair havens Acts 27.8.
of the fortunate Islands, I mean, everlasting blessedness; who knows but
that he may be sore tossed, and rent, and shattered, not able to bear up (...).
Acts 27.15
against the angry surges, yea, and may hardly escape safe to that land of
righteousness Psalm. 143.10.
. And thither also must we arrive through the streights of death; and therefore
that we may look that King of terrors Job 18 14.
undauntedly in the face, it stands us all in hand to watch. Here we may see
the Lords champion, this blessed servant of God in the lists, resisting Heb.
12.4.
unto blood, combating and encountering with most dreadful temptations: whose
turn may be the next, we know not. God may call any of us out unto the duel,
and turn Satan loose upon us, hand to hand: we had need therefore before hand
learn the use of all our spiritual armor Ephesians. 6.
, as Saul taught Judah the use of the bow 2 Samuel 1.18.
. The strength we must stand, and withstand by, is not our own; not from
nature, no nor grace it self; it is God that must teach Psalm. 144.1.
our fingers to fight; he must cover our head in the day of battle Psalm. 140.7.
We are here all militant, and must bid battle, and abide it, or else no
victory. Satan reserves his most dangerous ambushments, and desperate assaults
to the last: Here thou may perceive, how, where, and when he uses most
mortally to strike, and so stand upon thy guard. To keep thy conscience safe,
shot-free, and unwounded, is the maine-service. Herein I exercise my self Acts
24.16.
to have always a conscience void of offense, toward God, and toward men. If
that bird of the bosom sing sweetly in our breast, it makes no matter, what
dirdams and stirs be from the world. Therefore make much of conscience, it
must stand us in stead, and be our best friend another day. Walk in the light
thereof: It is a blessed thing to keep it tender. But alas! how do men muzzle,
stifle, and choke it up? how do they noise and drum in its ears, that the
cries thereof may not be heard, 2 King. 23.10. Ier. 19.2.
as the Idolatrous Jews in the burning of their children to their Idols?

O Brethren ( says Francis Spira) take a diligent heed to your life, Relation
of Francis Spira, page 112.
make more account of the gifts of Gods Spirit than I have done, learn to
beware my misery, think not you are assured Christians because you understand
something of the Gospel; take heed you grow not secure on that ground; be
constant and immovable in the maintaining of your profession, confess even
until death, if you be called thereto: he that loves father, mother,
brothers, sisters, sons, Luke 14.26
daughters, kindred, houses, lands more than Christ, is not worthy of him. page
104, 105.
And in another place, Take heed to your selves, it is no light or easy matter
to be a Christian; it is not baptism, or reading of the Scriptures, or
boasting of faith in Christ (though even these are good) that can prove one to
be an absolute Christian: There must be a conformity in life; a Christian must
be strong, unconquerable, not carrying an obscure profession, but resolute;
expressing the image of Christ, and holding out against all opposition to the
last breath: he must give all diligence by righteousness, and holiness, to
make his calling and election sure: Many there are that snatch at the promises
in the Gospel, as if they undoubtedly did belong to them, and yet they remain
sluggish, and careless, and being flattered by the things of this present
world, they pass their course in quietness and security, as if they were the
only happy men; whom nevertheless the Lord in his providence has ordained to
eternal wrath; as you may see in S. Lukes rich man, Luke 16.
thus it was with me, therefore take heed. Thus he. And that I may keep thee no
longer from this so fruitful a Treatise; Read advisedly this following
Narration, and thou shall reap much good thereby. To which end it is now
published and presented to thy view, by thy wel-wisher in the Lord,

I. C.

MASTER PEACOCKS Visitation.
MAster Peacock the servant of God, in the beginning of his Visitation, for the
space of two weeks and four days, was full of most heavenly consolations,
showing by sweet meditations, and gracious ejaculations, the entertainment he
found with his God in his sickness, with whom he so much desired to be
acquainted in his health.

We are (says one coming to visit him) miserable comforters. Job 16.2.
Nay (says he) you are good, for this is ever the privilege of Gods children,
that their very presence affords comfort.

Sometimes he craved pardon for his actions, and for the circumstances of
them, badly observed.

Otherwhile, he desired to have some matter given him to meditate on; Finally,
he said his hope was firmly settled on the rock Christ Jesus; he hoped that
the Lord would give him a place, though it were in the lowest room of his
Saints, and he thanked God that he had no trouble of Conscience.

The Lord did not suffer Satan to vex him, insomuch, that one seeing his great
comfort, feared lest he would be overtaken with sorrow before his death.

He much rejoiced that the Lord had so disposed of him, that he had seen his
friends in the Country.

Here first was his yielding unto death suspected, and his hoped recovery
doubted.

I thought (said he) I had been in a good estate, but I see it now far
otherwise, for these things my Conscience lays against me.

1. I brought up my Scholars in gluttony. This some endeavored to pull out,
by putting him in mind of, 1. The preventing of many inconveniences. 2. His
well known moderation. 3. The great care he took for good conference when
they were at Table with him. -- But (says he) while I was talking, they did
undo themselves; and further I did unadvisedly expound places of Scripture at
the table many times; and for these now I feel a hell in my conscience. 4.
Again, I have procured my own death by eating and drinking often like a beast,
when I was joysting up and down to my friends in the country: and now I see
before my face those dishes of meat wherewith I clogged my stomach. Well
(says one to him) if all these things that you accuse your self of, were
undone, would you do them again? Nay then doubt not but a reprobate would
desire to be saved, if a desire would serve the turn. Indeed he may have a
desire, but of bare willingness, not with an intent and purpose in using the
means.

Another time, a worthy friend of his, asking him how he did, he cried out,
Sin, Sin, Sin! What? does any lie on your conscience? Yea. What? My
inconsiderateness. I did eat too much of such meat, at breaking my fast such a
morning, (my self being witness of his great abstinence, could not but admire
the tenderness of his selfe-accusing conscience): well (said he) God be
thanked there is no greater; as we must not extenuate our sins, so neither must
we too much aggravate them; Let drunkards and gluttons have those most terrible
horrors. I thank God I never continued in any known sin against my
conscience: He was willing that we should pray with him, Kneeling down he
said, He was then incapable of prayers; Afterward he kneeled down of his own
accord, shortly after he broke out into such speeches, I damnable wretch. Those
are not your words (says one), you cannot deny but you have good experience of
Gods mercy, etc. I cannot. Then be comforted, for, Whom he once loves, he
loves for ever. Yet Satan took such advantage at his infirmities, that though
he could find some comfort, yet no particular assurance; You have lived
profitably, says one. -- I have endeavored. You are now humbled, and the Lord
looks you should ask mercy. Master Dod was sent for, who being come, they
were private awhile; afterward coming unto him again, Master Dod put him in
mind of Gods kindness, whereof he showed him four parts. 1. To take small
things in good part. 2. To pass by infirmities. 3. To be easy to be
entreated. 4. To be entreated for the greatest sin there is now in you; Now for
the image of the old man Adam, sin and sorrow, there shall be in you the image
of the new man, in holiness, and happiness, and righteousness.

The life to come, might be set out by three things; 1. By the estate it self,
happiness, holiness, and glory. 2. By the company, every one shall love you
better than any one, even the best can love you here. 3. By the place. There
are three differences between the afflictions of the good, and bad. 1. From the
cause, for they come to the good from Gods love. 2. In the measure, as far as
they need and are able to bear. 3. In the end, for their good. Of those former
doubts, we after heard not a word from him: upon the Sabbath day he desired to
be alone; after noone he was fearfully troubled, In his countenance appeared
evident tokens of a sorrowful mind, borne up with a weak body; his spirit
was wounded, Satan had foiled him: Those his terrible wrastlings with
temptations, griefs of conscience, and restless terrors, none can
understand, much less express, but he which felt them. Satan had winnowed
him, and showed him nothing but chafe; his tender conscience was grieved with
the fiery darts of the devil, pointed with the edge of sin, and sense of Gods
heavy wrath; as through a false glass, the dazeled eye of his astonished and
amazed soul, could see nothing but hideously-appearing sin, and the terrible
image of death, and damnation: he had drunk deeply of the dregs of hell, his
adversary had represented unto him his own most gracious God as a most severe
Judge, displeased, angry, and chiding with him, yea yielding him up into his
claws, that so by this deadly stratagem, he might take from him all hope of
help that way: and so not only stop the sensible flowing of Gods grace, and cut
the chains of Gods love wherewith he had tied him, and would draw him after
him, but finally break his Christian soul. O that you had seen, and that we
which were present had had eyes to have seen his seeming forlorn soul, with
what barkings of conscience, and with what too heavy burdens of sin, waves of
fearful thoughts, blustering blasts and surging storms of Gods heavy
displeasure; he was tossed, turmoiled, and dashed against rocks of despair,
more then in danger of his souls shipwreck! happy were we, if neither through
frowardness, nor blindness of judgment, we did inconsiderately pass by,
or profanely deride Gods judgments, by thinking that they either happen
casually, or by forgetting of them suddenly. If we could but rightly discern
it, we should find nothing more profitable than to have the image of this
gracious (though now afflicted) soul in our consciences; hereby we may see
that The righteous scarcely being saved, 1 Pet. 4.18.
there is no place for the wicked and ungodly to appear. And truly we may
think, that our God even sent it for our sakes, that we (with whom it is too
usual to dally with God) might know, Heb. 10.31
that it is afearefull thing to fall into his hands. Our faith is tried in
earnest, when as the Lord hides his face from us; for if we love God above
all, it cannot be, but that at the loss of the relish of his favor, or least
taste of his displeasure, our souls should be in bitterness, tormented,
wounded, thrust through, yea and swallowed up with desolation. It is a wonder
to see in the world, how we will ride and run and carefully will seek
physic, and use diet by any means to avoid bodily pain; and how careless we
are of the unprofitable fits of the souls mortal sickness. It is not in our
own power to apprehend grace, when we will; and a harder matter it is than we
can conceive, to lift a poor soul up, that is cast down with the sense of
Gods wrath. If a violent passion may so far transport the mind; what may we
think of this restless trembling, when the soul, after long tossings sees it
self drowned, and overwhelmed with a deluge of sorrow, proceeding from the
everlasting threats of shame and confusion of face, in the presence of the
Almighty? Consider the body, laden with a burden neither portable, nor
evitable; and thence gather the struglings of an overladen soul; Consider a
man ready to fall from an high Tower, to the Earth; and thence gather the
estate of another falling from heaven, with a spiritual ruin into hell.
Consider a child when the mother hides her face from it, and terrifies it
with a bugbeare, and therein take view of the estate of a poor Christian
(whose chiefest happiness having consisted in being joined, and united to his
heavenly Father) having now lost his presence; or being affrighted with the
devil, as if he were ready to lay hands on him. Consider the estate of a
debtor, cast off by his best creditors; and gather that of a Christian being
bankerupt with his God Consider the estate of a man once in favor, afterward
adjudged to death by his Prince, without hope of pardon and repriving; and
gather that of a Christian, who after his citation and arraignment at the
tribunal seat of God, stands condemned, and is wholly deprived of obtaining
pardon, and delivered into the hands of the devil. The Lord needs not to seek
wild beasts to punish us, or such like executioners of his wrath to torment
us, he may find enough within us, all the furies and devils cannot invent a
grievouser torment then a wounded conscience. One by it apprehended, needs not
more accusers or tormentors: his many thoughts of sins (as if he stirred a nest
of Waspes) come buzzing about his ears; and (as a man indebted once laid hold
of,) makes him faster daily. His loving friends may stand by the prison, and
call him, but he being fast fettered can not come forth. You shall see him, now
in his Purgatory (not that Papisticall, sin-satisfying fiction, the Popes
Jayle) but that hot fiery furnace, wherein the Lord tries his metal, whether
it be good or reprobate. And by the way, Suppose he had dyed at the worst, (as
in the Lords justice he might) to the hardening of those that will not be
foftned, as no man should rather judge him by the inch of his death, than the
length of his life; so I for my part, neither did in him, nor do in my self
so much fear his death, as I did and do desire his life. Gods course in
visiting his children is diverse.
You may observe the courses which God takes in visiting his children to be
diverse. Some are comfortable and without any great admixture of discomfort.
Others heavy without horror. Others horrible, yet all in the end gracious But
to leave any further digression, and to come aga^ne to the matter in hand. When
one came unto him he brake out into these words, Oh how sinful, woeful, and
miserable is mine estate, that thus must converse with hellhounds! He being
with those words straightway moved, went to call some of his best able friends
to comfort him; to them he complained, that the Lord had cursed him, Being
demanded how he knew it, he answered, Why the event shows it; It being
replied, how such, and such, were cursed; he answered, I have no grace: how do
you know then that once you had none? I was a foolish, vainglorious hypocrite;
it is against the course of Gods proceedings to save me, he has otherwise
decreed; he cannot. Put your trust in God. I can no more then a horse. Do you
desire to believe? No more then a post, then a horse-shoo. I know you cannot
deny, but you have sought Gods glory. Not sincerely. There is a secret mixture
of pride and hypocrisy in the best. I have no more sense of grace than those
curtains; than a goose; than that block: Let the testimony of your life past
comfort you, especially in the calling of a Tutour. I did the business thereof
perfunctorily, when I handled hard authors, I came often unprepared, and read
shamefully. Be of good courage, and the Lord will comfort your soul. It is
ended, there is no such matter. Why do you think so? You shall see the event.
God will bring it to pass. Tush, tush, trifles; What do you think of your
former doctrine? Very good. Let it comfort you; It cannot. You desire it could.
If it might. There is nothing unpossible to God. Which stands with his decree:
Oh, oh, Miserable, and woeful! the burden of my sin lies heavy upon me, I
doubt it will break my soul. Behold your comforts. Nothing to me; I pray you
hold your peace, do not trouble your self idly; you vex me, your words are as
daggers to my soul. Another time some of the younger sort said, remember Sir
what good counsel you have given us heretofore. These were ordinary. You may
see many others in the like estate. Not such as mine. See David. What do you
speak to me of David? Good Sir endeavor to settle your mind: Yes, to play
with hell-bounds. Will you pray? I cannot. You were wont heretofore. Yes, by a
custom, and for vainglory. Suffer us to pray for you. Take not the name of
God in vain in praying for a reprobate. (There you may see the glory of God
preferred before his own salvation, rather willing to have the means of his
own salvation neglected, than the Lord dishonored.) Suffer us to pray for our
selves. Look to it. You would now show your faculty in praying. Can you say
Amen? No, but in a certain general fashion. One prayed, and in the mean
time, he rested most quietly; and when prayer was ended, I pray you, says he,
go hence to bed, trouble not your selves in vain. Let not the devil delude
you, abusing your mind and tongue, I know you speak not these words. I wonder
that intelligent Scholars should speak this. We are persuaded you are in as
good estate as our selves. One that watched with him asked him, Sir, how can
you discern this change by the absence of God, if you never enjoyed his
presence? I thought I had once, but now I see it far otherwise. But God deals
with you as he did with the Church, Isa. 54.8.
he forsook it a while, and hid his face, but he returned to it again: and
so no doubt the case stands with you. Never add more afflictions to the
afflicted. Oh me wretch! groaning pitifully. Hope no worse of your self
(says one) then we do of you All of us have seen clearly which way your
carriage was still set, after the Spirit; and we are assured you will come to
the Spirit, howsoever you seem to have lost your way. To all particulars he
would answer generally, I do desire grace; I did good outwardly, but all
hypocritically. One asked him, Do you love such a one, his most dear (and
worthy to be dear) friend? Yes. Why? Because of his goodness. Why then you
are Gods child, 1 Ioh. 3.14.
for by this mark we know we are translated from death, etc. Many like
forcible proofs he would put off with his former evasions; and afterward grew
more wary against himself, either loath to grant any thing, or granting it
staggeringly, or (what then?) fearing he should be pressed. He wished that some
were put in mind. 1. For their great care for buildings, and too small care
for Scholars in them 2. Their giving so long leave of absence from the
College, and desired amendment; After noone came a worthy Governor of a
College, in our University; He requested him to be of good comfort, and to
pluck up his spirit. I cannot. Why can you not? Because I have no grace, no
more then a stake. Why think you so? By this affliction. Do you desire grace?
I cannot, (he spoke most strangely) I can as well leap over a Church. But are
you not sorry you cannot desire it? I cannot. Would you not be in heaven? I
would not. One standing by said, the devil would if he could.

By the way you shall have the opinion of a much respected Minister opposite
hereto; which he gave in private. A proud man, (says he) will think scorn to
seek any good from his enemies; so the devils pride will not let him think
himself beholding to God for heaven, if he might get it.

You have (says one) the testimony of faith, you love the brethren? I did not.
Do you not love us? No. The devil now, says he, should be cast into his
streights, if you should grant this. What is it that does most trouble you? I
undertook too much upon me foolishly. I had gotten a little Logic, and Greek,
and meanly instructed in the Rules, did set my self to read to Scholars, and
afterward undertook often business, which distracted my mind and body from
them, I have destroyed a thousand souls. You may see the falsehood of him that
suggesteth this unto you, you never had a thousand, he puts a false glass
before you; the good effects of your pains appears in many of your Scholters;
Oh they were themselves capable. Name one wherein they do not, There is one
(pointing at a Master of Arts then present) he justifi^d his care of him and
thanked God that ever he knew him. It is not so. I did foolishly: You confess
you did foolishly, therefore not of malice. Again, consider what would have
become of them, if you had not taken them. ' Better, far better: All in the
College know to the contrary. But I feel it: It is false, believe not the
devil. It is too true. Then will you make amends? God will give you your
souls desire. Never. Are you sorry that he will not? No. There is no grace in
the soul, it is dead. Such was David's case. What do you compare me with
David? Behold Christ himself. Nothing to me. God can make his death
availeable. He cannot. He is omnipotent. In me he cannot, because it stands not
with his purpose. Whom God loves once, etc. But he never loved me -- You have
tasted of his love. I deceived my self in a certain vainglory; I exposed my
head to many things outwardly only. You could say the Lords prayer, and therein
call him Father. Hypocritically. I was wont to enquire of Master Mason, what
was meant by Abba Father, rather in curiosity, then truly to be edified. God
will give a good issue. Never, I have no sense. We will pray with you. Do not
dishonor God. It is well that you will not have God dishonored; Here he
sticked, saying, I pray you trouble me not with distinctions: Afterward came
one, who with vehement action of body pressed him, and urged him that he would
trust upon God. I cannot (said he) he will not have me saved, his sentence is
passed. Do you desire to be saved? Noe. Do you desire to desire? No. Would
you be damned? No. Look at the sins of other men as great as yours, and yet
they are saved. They were good and godly. They found grace -- Here is the
difference, my sins are horrible; he repeated that toward his Scholars -- All
of us know you took pains. Outwardly. You did your best. No. I see now what
it is, you strictly look back to your own actions, as a Justitiary, who will
none of Gods mercy, and now he has justly met with you: Your judgment is
just: These words affected some strangely. Another willed him to look to it,
It seemed near Popery. Do you hope to be justified by your merits? I fear to
be damned for my sins. The other asked him, whether he could say, Amen. No.
Have you no tongue? What is that to the purpose? Name Jesus, at his name will
fly away, etc. I cannot. If I had your tongue in my hand, I would make you
speak. Turning his speech to a friend present, O (says he) if you did feel my
grief an hour, you would have compassion! The other replied, if you were in
the fire you would wish to get out. I had rather be in the fire than here. I
will pray for you. Sin not. Let the fault be mine. Although my purpose was
barely to relate the passages of this gracious man's visitation, and to refer to
your spiritual eye, what you could find therein, yet let your gentle
construction withold from me the deserved censure of bold blindness, in that
I now and then point at some things which your quick sight may sooner and
better apprehend. The devils malicious policy was so great toward him, in that
he assaulted him most strongly in that, which might and ought to have been his
greatest comfort. Again, I saw the Physicians opinion helped somewhat in bodily
maladies, or diseases; whereas in that his estate, his soul remained (as it
were) incapable of comfort from the souls physician. He much respected some
few, he dolefully poured out his soul into the bosom of a well-willer of his
on this manner. I took upon me too proudly many things, and being negligent,
performed nothing. Cursed be the day when I took Scholars: if I had not taken
them, I had been happy with a good flourish. I was stirring many ways, and in
the mean time left the essence of my calling, teaching of my Scholars. What
(says the other) shall I now do, when I see you thus tossed? Well, I was an
hypocrite, therefore there is no hope of comfort for me in Gods presence, I
have no sense of it. The Sun is in the Firmament, though hid in a cloud. This
comparison agrees not to me. What then would you counsel me to do? Abide
within the bounds of your calling, take not too much on you, and the Lord will
bless you. Will it avail me to hear Sermons? Yes, if you mean to be saved.
What good shall I reap thence? Nothing from the bare hearing. Oh this heavy
lumpish fear has oftentimes shaked me, and now it has broken out! Another
said, You know the poor in spirit are blessed. I am not such. You see you are
empty of all good, you feel the burden. I pray go your ways. He turned his
head aside and stopped his cares. What though you have done but little good, if
you have given but a cup of cold water? He thrusted him away with his foot,
either as some thought being troubled with his shrill voice, or as he replied,
through the devils subtilty. That evening he was grievously afflicted:
suddenly he breaks out, Oh if God! The standers by endeavored to cherish this
good motion, and said unto him, God will give you grace. I doubt it. Then
presently after he uttered this prayer. Oh God, give me a spark of grace, and
enlarge my soul that I may apprehend it. He asked a friend how he might give
satisfaction for some speeches. Master Dod, although he departed on Saturday,
and had then an unfeasonable journey, yet being requested by letters, returned
on Tuesday following. He at the first sight started up as desirous to meet
him. Oh Master Dod (and in friendly sort complained) I have no grace; I will
not (says Master Dod) believe every one that says he has grace, nor every
one that says, he has not any. Answer the devil as Christ did. A man must
not always be lead by sense, let us enquire by the effects, and it may suffice.
A Christian must not always be led by sense.
If you can but find one, even the least, it is enough; You forgive your
enemies, and love them, and would do them no hurt if you can? Yes. Then your
enemies are forgiven. An hypocrite may give alms, and fast; this he cannot
do. That is a small matter. I think it to be a great one, yea such a one as I
had need to pray for. That is put for a reason in the Lords prayer, and if
Christ had thought any more forcible, he would have given it; Sir, that's true
in those that are elected. Do not put an exception, where God has not; I
would not handle you as I do, but that I know your estate. I come hither to
cherish you, you love your good friends? I cannot. Had you rather that bad, or
good should be with you? Good. Yet you say you do not love them. A sow would
be with swine, 2 Cor. 6.14
there is no fellowship between light and darkness; would you believe the
physician, or your self touching the life of the body? The physician. Believe
not your self then now. You are sick, yet shall be restored. It is impossible.
Why so? If you had sinned as much as you could, you could not have sinned as
much as Adam, yet he is in heaven. It repented him. Does it not you? No. Does
your sin, or sickness more trouble you? or had you rather have grace or
health? Grace. Well then. But it cannot be. God will wash you. But I have no
water. God will bring it with him. He has denied it. He has offered it by his
Ministers, which are as the buckets to draw and pour it out. You must not look
now, that God should come to you himself; do you think it a small favor of
God, that so many good friends come to you? God sent none to comfort Cain, and
Achitophel. Think of that saying of Manoahs wife. If the Lord were pleased to
kill us, he would not have received a burnt offering, and a meat offering at
our hands, neither would he have showed us all these things, Judge. 13.23.
etc. Behold the properties of Christ's sheep. First, they are weak. Secondly,
they are sick. Thirdly, broken. Fourthly, driven away. Fifthly, Lost. You are
such. See your comfort. First, he will strengthen. Secondly, heal. Thirdly,
bind up. Fourthly, bring again. Fifthly, he will seek you. You find your
self a great debtor, The Lord has pardoned, only he looks you should come to
him for acquittance: This fight is not yours, but the Lords, put your trust in
him. If you ask me, how may I? 2 Chronicles. 20.20.
It follows, Believe his Prophets, and you shall prosper. You may remember
that Christ did pray for Peter, that his faith might not fail; Luke 22.32
but it failed afterward: How came it to pass? That failing did rather
strengthen it; for whereas he gloried, Mat. 26.33
that if all should forsake Christ, yet he would not, Had he been asked, Do
thou promise this by thine own strength, or by mine? He must here needs have
answered, mine. For otherwise he would have requested his help. This happens
to you, because you credit the suggestions of carnal reason, and not the Word,
rather, Oh, the cunning of the adversary! Deal with him, not by cunning, but
hold him to the Word, seek for strength in God to resist sin. You may see the
Apostles in the tempest, it was from their weakness, that they distrusted, yet
of God they prayed. I cannot pray. Hear what Saint James says, Jam. 5.13.
Is any man afflicted, etc. Afflictions further prayer, but must sickness
hinder? wherefore, behold your friends, whose minds as the Lord has stirred
up to pray for you, so will he stir up himself to hear them; their prayers
are yours: yea, you have the prayers of many which never knew you. And as God
said to Cain, Genesis 4.7.
Sin lies at the door, ready as it were to devour him; so his promised
blessing, does as it were, expect you. If your salvation were now in your own
hands, it is likely you would yield up all, but your name is written in the
heart of Christ. Sir, let me watch with you this night. No. Why? Because it
might hurt me. He fearing the conclusion said, Here is a snatching argument.
Nay rather I will not suffer you, because you would trouble me. In the morning
M. Dod came to him again, and asked him how he did? he answered, Lamentably,
wretchedly, miserably. No stamp of grace in me. Do you desire to be eased?
Infinitely. Oh if God would give me but a drop! I was so foolish, I always
would be doing of something, yet nothing well. I pray you what was the calling
of the good thief upon the Cross? Do you not think that God can put a
distinction betwixt his grace and your corruption? Behold the Church sometimes
hopeless and helpless, as Jonah in that his bed, God sees your thoughts, but
you see not him. But I feel horror. Where misery is, there is grace much
more. Then especially appears the excellency of the physician, when health is
the least hoped. The devil does abuse your mind and tongue against your self:
but doubt not, the Lord will cast down the strong holds of carnal reason:
only do not suppress that grace of God, which although it appear but small,
1 King. 18.44.
as big a cloud as a man's hand, yet it shall be increased, as a mighty rain,
by which your dry soul shall be moistened. Christ rising again from the
dead, did first appear to Mary Magdalen that sinner; Mat. 28. Luke 24. Joh.
20.16, 18.
and after commanded to tell it first to Peter Mark 16.7.
, which had denied him: see there is mercy. The godly in their afflictions do
but forget their comforts; God helps their memory, helps all; the godly
losing the sense of Gods favor, is like to a man that has lost his purse,
which if he could find, he is rich enough; but the wicked cannot be brought to
remembrance, they never knew it. Thus he suffered him to rest a while,
afterward turning, he rested, and others prayed. Then he was asked how he
did? Miserably. Do you not search into the secrets of God? It is too true and
manifest. Sir, do not always be digging at your sin; a wound always
rubbed, cannot be cured; suffer the plaster of the word of God to rest upon
it, that it may be helped. Oh if I had, Oh if it would please God! I had rather
than any thing in this, or twenty thousand worlds besides! He now gives this
good desire unto you, Of our selves we cannot think a good thought; 2 Cor.
3.5. Phil. 2.13.
God gives both the will and the deed: A desire is a sure token. But I cannot
truly desire. You do not desire falsely, and therefore truly. What do you
dissemble? Here is a trick; you must needs distinguish betwixt imperfect
desire, and hypocritical; Would you know whether your desire be true? There
be two signs thereof. First, Constancy; And secondly, a conscionable using
of the means. You have found these in you. Does this argument hold? You do
not feel it, therefore you have it not. I know when you would have denied such
an argument. If that did follow, it should fare well with the reprobate, He
has no sense of the wrath of God, therefore he is not under it. Luke 1.43.
Elizabeth said, Whence is it that the mother of my Lord should come to me? So
say you. Whence is it that so many of the servants of the Lord do come to me?
Surely from their Christian hearts. Truly, I could hardly come to you, but that
I thought I was bound in conscience, because I know you to be the servant of
the Lord. When you were well, if we should have come with proofs out of the
word of God, you would have believed us. Yes. Why not now when your judgment
is blinded? Oh the judgment of God! Call it as He calls it, Correction. Oh
my miserable heart! Oh death! A dead man cannot perceive himself dead, and God
quickneth the dead. Oh if he would enlarge my soul! This desire is good. But it
is without savor. God in mercy will yield you a comfortable relish. Consider
I pray you, whereas you may object, the Lord is strong, and terrible: Exodus 34.6
it follows: Merciful withal. But I am backward in seeking it. He is
gracious, more forward than you can be backward But I have provoked him. He is
slow to anger. But my sins are great. But he is abundant in goodness and
truth; The Lord has promised that He on his part, will be our God, and we on
our part, shall be his people. For a while he commended him to God, shortly
after returning, he prayed with him. Cast your burden upon the Lord. He has
rejected me. Who made you his counselor? Deuteronomy. 29.29.
Secre^ things belong unto God, but revealed things to us: will you make
Almanacks? He does manifest it: Oh my abominable bringing up of youth! he
withal groaned most deeply. If you had done as the justest man, you should
stand need of Christ's merits. I, or another may bring arguments, but it belongs
unto God to fasten them upon the soul: I say to you as Noah said to Japhet,
Genesis 9.2.
God shall enlarge Japhet, etc. What if your sins were as crimson? God can
make them as snow. Isai. 1.18.
That is true of those that are capable. Behold we make your estate our own,
we have part of your sorrow: who has thus disposed our souls think you? God.
And do you think that he which causes us to love you, does not love you
himself? I fear I did too much glory in matters of private service to God.
The nearer we come to God, the more we see our own vileness; This is the use
I make of it. Blessed be God, who has not put our estate in the devils hands,
but kept it in his own. The devil has now removed you, and you think that
all is gone out, but God knows what, and who is his. An artificer can
distinguish dross from metal, and cannot God his from yours? Well, with Job
lay your hand on your mouth, Job 40.4.
and hold your peace: and so good rest have you. Only, consider your comfort,
though it be but small, whence it comes; from Gods word, and servants, no
otherwise. When he returned again, to give and take farewell, he began to
complain, Oh great and grievous! The Lord knows what power he has given
you; A father will put a greater burden, on a stronger son: but see the
difference. First, when an earthly father or Master, sets his servant or son
on work, they must do it with their own strength; but the Lord sets on
work, and gives strength too. Be not discouraged, you are now in your
calling. Oh my soul is miserable! What then: a father loves his son as well
when he is sleeping as waking. Ioh. 14.26.
The holy Ghost calls to remembrance, what you have heretofore taught, and now
heard, and although I shall be absent in body, yet shall I be present in
mind: Be not covetous to seek abundance, by and by. If Jacob could say to
Esau, Genesis 33.10
I have seen thy face, as if I had seen the face of God; much more should you
think so of the children of God. Christ come unto you! I thank God, he has
begun to ease me. He will in his good time. God grant. Thus he took his last
farewell. Although we depart from our friends in the way, yet we shall meet in
the end. One told Master Dod that he had uttered such words, Now the Lord has
made me a spectacle. Whereby he counseled one, that attended him, to be
sparing in admitting comers in, or speakers, lest his brain should be too
much heated. A friend of his coming to him, asked him, Dare you any more
repine against God? Why should I so? God be blessed! It is a sign of grace.
But I have no means. You have had them offered. But not given with effect. They
shall I doubt not. God grant, but I feel it not. He received a letter from a
friend very respectively, and much respected of them both, wherein these words
were written. I heard, I know not how true, that our dear Christian friend
Master Peacock, is in great danger, which has much grieved and afflicted my
soul, and wrung from me very bitter tears; if his extremities be such, his
tentations sure be like to be very sore. Tell him from me, as one who did ever
with dearest loving affection know, and converse with him, that I can assure
him in the word of life, and truth, from a most just and holy God, whose
Minister I am, that he is undoubtedly one of his Saints, designed for
immortality, and those endless joys in another world. When it was read to
him, at these words I can assure him, he said, Oh take heed, take heed. Do you
think that he would or durst assure you, unless he knew upon what grounds? I
deceived my self, now God has revealed more. Another time one requested him
that he would make his friends partakers of the least comfort that the Lord
had bestowed upon him, as they had been partakers of his grief. If I had it, I
would gladly communicate it. Search and take notice of the least. How should I
have any sense? God denies the means. Do you think sense is a fruit of
faith? Yes. At this season, For it was in the deep of Winter, December. 4. 1611.
although though the husbandman has sown much, yet he sees nothing above
ground. Applications do not prove, hold your peace, my soul is broken. Then
the promise is yours. I would gladly ask you one thing. Now you will ask
twenty. Do you seek for grace in your soul? I cannot. How then can you know
whether it be there or not? It is dead. The Lord in whose hands the disposing
thereof is, disposes it for your good and his glory. I thank you. What do you
think of that place? Joh. 20.23.
Whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them. -- You know how far
they may go. The bargain howsoever is not now to be made betwixt God and you.
Shortly after came one whom he much esteemed, Oh I love (said he) your company
for the grace that is in you; and much more to the same purpose. Suddenly after
he breaks out into this ejaculation. Oh God reconcile me unto thee, that I may
taste one dram of grace, by which my miserable soul may receive comfort. One
secretly willed that man to desire him to repeat it again. Do not trouble me
with repetitions. There being a Sermon, he bad them about him to go thither.
After he called one, and asked him, Whether the preacher (being acquainted with
his course of preaching) did use his accustomed divisions. He told one, Satan
had borne him in hand, and had deluded him. To whom the other answered: I hope
that God will restore you as before to glorify him. No, no. Yea, were you
weaker, I would hope notwithstanding. I desire nothing more. God be thanked you
have labored carefully for his glory. I would labor after another fashion. In
the night he prayed, and repeated his Belief, and after, resting a while, he
called those that watched with him. Bear witness that I said not I believe,
but in general, as desiring I might believe. One coming to visit him, asked
him, how is it with you? My mind was grievously possessed with sundry
distractions this night, but I feel my burden now more light, I thank God.
He was put in mind of that, Oh thou afflicted and tossed with tempests, Isai.
54.11. ver. 7, 8, 9.
and not comforted, etc. For a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with
great mercies will I gather thee, etc. He lifted up his eyes. Thereupon he
being askd what the Lord did say to his soul, that had long refused comfort.
Take heed. Be not too bold, look to the foundation: and then he prayed, Lord
give me the comfort of thy deliverance, and forgive me my foolishness, that I
may praise thy name. When he complained of his idle speeches, on the Sabbath
day, One came to him, willing him to put his hand to a certain note of debts.
This is not a day for that, We will go to the Sermon. God speed you. Now you
cannot go to the Church to serve the Lord, I will pray him to come to you.
Amen. He hardly suffered any to stay with him. At evening one did read
something of M. Downehams Warfare, and asked him, Do you think it to be true?
Yes. Therefore you must not trust your sense. What not such as mine are? but I
will not now dispute. When they were helping of him up, and putting on his
clothes, upon some occasion one said unto him to this effect. A child will not
much grieve at the laying aside of an old coat, when he has a new one made:
When you shall put on that, there shall be no longer nakedness, the
resurrection will amend all. To those that die in the Lord. No doubt you will
die in the Lord, having lived in him: I have answered you before. But I would
not believe you in that case. The next day a friend of his being to go out of
the town, asked him, whether he would have any thing with him, for he was to
leave him, and knew not whether he should ever see him again or no. Here
(quoth he) look to your calling, that it be as well inward as outward. He
counseled another, To be stirring for the glory of God. One standing by; he
said, I am thinking how to get grace; Put your trust in God. So I do. I omit to
tell you, how with great patience he continually submitted himself to advise
in any means, for his good; In putting his temporal estate in order; he dealt
mercifully with his poor debtors, yea, with some which were able enough to pay
it. His worthy Patron (for so he often called him) whom for honors sake I
name, Sir Robert Harlo, sent his man to him, with some potable gold, together
with a book which a Doctor had made in praise thereof: coming to him, asking
him how he did, Oh said he, If it would please God that I might live with him!
Anon after, he said to one, I have been thinking of arguments, by which I might
plead my cause with God, and I have found. But what if dying thus, I should be
judged an Apostata. Man is not the judge at whose Tribunal you must stand or
fall. There came in many of our chief fellows. One of them requested him to
make confession of his faith. Willingly, but I will think of it first: Musing
a while, he said, here, Truly my heart and soul have been far lead, and deeply
troubled with tentations, and stings of conscience, but I thank God, they are
eased in good measure. Wherefore I desire that I may not be branded with the
note of a forlorn reprobate, and castaway, such questions, and oppositions,
and all tending thereunto, I renounce. Now help me once, and put me in mind.
What do you think of your former doctrine? Most true, in it have I lived, and
in it will I die. I dealt hypocritically in it. Are you willing to die? Truly,
I will tell you. My Patron who of late sent me potable gold, has taken order,
that J might live with him in the Ministry, but J commit my self to the will
of God. Do you desire the glory of God, and the salvation of your brethren?
What more? Do you forgive all wrongs? Yes, and desire that mine might be
forgiven me. And now I thank you Sir, I remember a thing wantonly done toward
you, (pointing at one present) you sent me a knife for a new years gift; and I
^yed two verses to it, and sent it back. I pray you pardon me it. If in any
thing I have offended by my inconsiderate speeches in the time of my
tentations, I heartily, and humbly ask mercy and forgiveness of God for them
all: You did then (says one) rely upon inherent righteousness, as if you
sought in your self whereby you should be saved. Indeed, we know your
conversation to be unreproveable. No, I dare not affirm it. I trust in
nothing but in the name of Jesus. Have you any certainty in him? I would not he
pressed to a particular assurance, in this grievous agony. We desire you to
inform them, that come to you, of your estate. My unability is great. They
then prayed, giving God thanks, that whereas before they had craved his mercy
for his servant, he had heard them, and manifested to his glory, how he never
forsakes his: and besought him, because he knew the malice of his enemy, to
perfect his good work, and not suffer him to be tempted above his strength.
Now Sir, we tell you one thing for your comfort, we never heard you speak ought
against God or man, throughout the time of your visitation, but wholly against
your self. I have been bold thus to argue with God, if he has showed mercy to
such, and such, why should not I likewise have hope? He complained once, while
he was visiting the sick (in which work many poor souls found the ready
mercifulness of his soul, and now feels a great want) he lighted upon
doubts, that he might more fully satisfy, when the like might be moved, he
studied too earnestly. One brought him a Note-booke which he had lent, he being
always willing to communicate what he had most private: Here is a book
(quoth he) of great pains. To a stranger, a worthy Gentleman, that came to
visit him, he said, The Lord is merciful to me, and I have cause of
rejoicing. Afterward a reverend governor came to him, to whom he complained of
his sin, and misery. You look not (says he) for any thing in your self? No.
You would amend if you had space? Oh if I had, certainly. Think on this, the
Lord has heard the ejaculations of your spirit in your infirmities. So he will
now, If he will be glorified by your life, submit your self to him. Let him
choose for you. My says is weak. All (you know) here, are but in part
sanctified. You desire now notwithstanding, to come to that which is perfect,
for you may see how many have been brought home to the Lord. Some have been
Idolaters: was not Manasseh such a one? 2 Chro. 33.12, 13.
Yes. And behold Gods servants from the beginning of the Bible to the end, have
slipped. Genesis 19.33 35.
Lot had shrewd slips, but yet hear the testimony of the Apostle concerning
him. 2 Pet. 2.7, 8
He was just and righteous, etc You have been weary and heavy laden. Yes. For
such is the end of Christ's coming. Come unto me all that are weary, Mat.
11.28.
etc. Your desire is a token of favor, for by how much the nearer we come to
Christ, the more we thirst. Think now of his loving kindness, he that began,
he will finish, Phil. 1.6.
whom you have served. I did. But with what vile imperfections? It is the
greatest perfection here, to see your imperfections. Shortly after came to him
many young Gentlemen, to whom he said. Live in Gods fear, that you may die in
his favor, otherwise the Ox and the Ass will condemn you. I spent my time
foolishly, and prodigally. You have said and remembered that sufficiently:
remember also Christ, That is true, Christ is to be remembered, and our sins to
be remembered also; Then he told us also that the use of reason did begin to
fail him. The night following (which was Wednesday at night) the Sun of
Righteousness spread gracious beams at his setting, Mal. 4.2.
which were comfortable tokens of a glorious rising. This last Swan-like-Song,
as he uttered it, was penned by some as he uttered it: One comforting him by
his bedside, some two hours or more before his death, he brake out into these
speeches. Quid de salute measentiam, expectatis explicarem? usque adeo indulget
Deus iis, quos semel dilexerit, ut eos nunquam deserat, atque ideo in coelos me
transiturum pro certo habeo; foelicissima sunt ea vincula, in quibus me
confixit Deus meus benignissimus. Do you expect to hear from me, what I
believe concerning my eternal salvation? Truly God does for ever so endearedly
tender, and is so unconceivably merciful to all those whom he has once loved,
that he never finally does forsake them; and therefore I am most assuredly
confident, that I shall depart from hence into heaven. Happy! thrice happy be
those cords of affliction in which my most gracious God has tied and bound me!
One telling him, You have fought a good fight. Expedit, expedit, ut contendam
ad coelum, tollite, tollite, eripite, ut coelum adeam: De^^ indulget
ingenuitati bonorum. It behooves, it behooves me to strive for heaven. Lift me
up, help me out, rid me hence, that I may pass straight to heaven. God
favorably accepts the endeavors of his Saints. Being put in mind of Gods
mercy toward him, he answered, Oh the sea is not so full of water, nor the Sun
of light, as God of goodness: His mercy is ten thousand times more. Being
likewise remembered of Gods goodness toward him, in filling his soul with such
comfort, after so great tentation; he said, I do (God be praised) feel such
comfort from that (what shall I call it?) Agony; says one that stood by: Nay,
that is too little, that if I had five thousand worlds, I could not make
satifaction for such an issue. Being moved to lift up his soul, in token of
thanksgiving to his God, he uttered these words, What should I extol the
magnificence of God, which is unspeakable, and more than any soul can
conceive? Nay rather, let us with humble reverence acknowledge his great mercy.
What great cause have I to magnify the goodness of God, that has humbled,
nay rather, that has exalted such a wretched miscreant, and of so base
condition, to an estate so glorious and stately? The Lord has honored me with
his goodness: I am sure he has provided a glorious Kingdom for me. The joy
that I feel in my soul is incredible. He made like use of that which he
always before taught, touching Justification by imputed righteousness; and
appealing to the knowledge of some there present, what he continually
maintained, in that (says he) I still remain a Protestant. After three
Chapters read to him, in Revel. 19.20, 21. and the eighth to the Romans: Oh
said he, they be glorious comforts! Will you have any more read? Yes, A Psalm
if you please, and named the hundred three and twentieth. One beginning to
read it, he desired that it might be sung. One asking him, will you sing? Yea,
said he, as well as I can. The Psalm being sung, afterward the seventeenth of
S. John was read unto him. One comforting him in applying that in particular,
which Christ in general performed, for the good of the faithful, he said,
Blessed be God! often. I am a thousand times happy, to have such felicity
thrown upon me, a poor wretched miscreant. After a little rest, Lord Jesus
(said he) into thy hands I commit my spirit. Lord receive my soul, Lord lift
thou up the light of thy countenance upon me, and be merciful unto me. Then,
very weak, he repeated the Lords prayer twice, and his Belief once, very
plainly and distinctly, with a strong voice, to the great admiration of the
hearers. And so he slept in the Lord. December 4. 1611.

FINIS.
IMPRIMATUR.

Johannes Hansley,
Martii 14. 1640.

