THE COUNTRY COMMITTEES LAID OPEN.

Wherein is Discovered Their Private ways of getting great store of Treasure
to themselves, to the Impoverishing of the COMMONWEALTH.

Sent in a Letter from a Gentleman of quality, to an Officer of the Army,
desiring Redress.

Published for the good of the Kingdom in general.

Printed. Anno Dom. 1649.

THE Country Committees LAID OPEN.
HONORED SIR:
ACcording to your desires and the duty of an honest man, I have endeavored to
search and find out the corruptions of the Grandees and trustees in those parts
which have tended to the great blemish and prejudice of the Integrity of the
Parliament and Armies proceedings, and to the great oppression of the poor
people. Sr. I formerly gave you intimation in general, the desired particular
whereof I deferred till this time, as well for that the greater affairs of the
Kingdom being then in hand, and I know your leisure would not yet admit to
present them seasonably to the Council of the Army, as also longer time was
advantageous unto me, that I might present unto you a perfect and faithful
account, since now the stumbling block is removed the peoples fears will be
soonest secured, and their love most entirely united unto us, when they see
Justice run with so clear a current on our parts, that their aggrievances
shall be questioned and righted against such (though once trusted, as
Committees or in what Authority soever) who have acted their own wills and
arbitrary Government upon the people, for their own private ends. Sr. I
acquainted you formerly with the Names of the Committees in the several
Divisions in Yorkshire; what I writ then concerning Sir Henry Cholmley, his
actions since have rendered sufficient proof.

For the West Riding J find these men predominant, Sir Robert Barwick, Sir
Edward Roades, Mr. Stockdale, and Mr. ^arrer. The first a mutable man, and to
the judgment of all honest men a meer-time-server, upon every overture
changeable in his Principles, which troubles the well-affected that such an one
should be Chaire-man in their Committee; he being a Lawyer, the place is
serviceable to him to make any business he will (if beforehand he receive a
liking Fee) go well by his opinion. For the second Sir Edward Roades, when he
was made Governor of Cawood Castle under Hotham, he was always subservant to
his selfe-end* and by Plunder to the dishonor of our cause it being the
Original example to others, and the first occasion of Scandal the enemy
everhad, to cast dirt upon our undertakings; Besides this way, to enrich
himself he became Farmer of Delinquents estates (contrary to the Ordinance of
Parliament, that no Committee man should farm Sequestrations at low rates, to
the great loss of the Public. Now in this late War, his associates in the
Committee of the Militia appointed him Colonel (as indeed they preferred none
to chief Commands but their own members, the better to command their own Army
(they terming it so) to fight the Independent, if the Scots had been in a way
succesfull; by which trust he raised horse and money at pleasure without
limitation, having a Major biased for his purpose, and have got clear into
their purses without fighting one stroke 3000. l.

For the third, Mr. Stockdale a person of a boundless avarice (though a
Parliament man) drives on an interest for his own benefit with the Committee,
for there is profit hoped for without acaount, he has much enriched himself
as Treasurer a war, yet besides all this he has received repair for his
losses to a much greater value then ever he sustained, very undeserving of
such respects; for since the time of trial, his Faith could not support his
Courage, but sought for security by shaking hands with Cavaliers, and getting
his goods by them protected, yet upon pretense as his wives Act, who gave forth
she had procured a Protection from Langdale. Judge by this how the good cause
of the Kingdom was discountenanced by him, who should have been one of the
chief Ascertors.

For the fourth, Mr. Farrer one who is no less then the former aiming at his
private interest, has turned his House into the Committee Chamber, making his
place like a trade of benefit, pity he has any Employment of trust, for it
is well known his readiness to comply with the enemy in the beginning of ye
last War, informing daily the other party what passed at their board, and so
zealous for the Scots, that he opposed the reprinting of the Ministers of
Scotland Remoustrance to their Parliament, which was thought a most necessary
thing by the well affected for the satisfaction of the County, that it might
more plain appear, we had a party in Scotland notwithstanding their
threatening Army, it is evident what we might have expected from them (if they
had reached an Opportunity) the major part of the Militia adhering.

For the North Riding, Sir Henry Cholmley, Mr. Henry Darley, Mt. John Wastell,
Mr. Ralph R^mer. For the first, his ways and actions are known unto you
already, and so I leave him to be buried in the ruins of his own disgraces.
For the second, by his power in Sequestration and privilege as a Parliament
man, he has well stopped his Creditors mouths, and offers for the present
15000. l. for a Purchase; if this were well examined no doubt it will appear,
he has been very ingenious for himself in the North, and no less at
Goldsmiths-Hall, by his readiness to serve Delinquents. His trade at
Goldsmiths-Hall* and Habberdashers-hall, and at Committees in the North will
witness his gains, and many frauds he used; having by several Orders from
himself only, taken upon him the whole power of the aforesaid Committees. But
his practices with Sir Hugh Cholmley, whose Prisoner he was, though released
by Contract between themselves; Sir Hugh giving him 200. l. in Gold and four
Horses, which Mr. Darley (most lovingly) shortly after requites; procuring a
Cessation for Sir Hugh in Harvest-time, which he made good use of; for he
victuals the Castle with all Provisions of Beef and Pork carried 300 load of
Corn and Hay from the next adjacent Villages into the Castle. He kept ever
after Iutell^gence by Character with Sir Hugh; and when the Castle came to be
distressed by Sickness and Scurvie, he gave a warrant to John Goures wife to
go into the Castle with as much Medicaments as was more then enough to have
cured all the diseases in the Castle, but was hindered by the then Besiegers.
He has procured 5000. l. for his Fathers and his sufferings, though both of
them before these late times was scarce worth so much; he is a great Enemy to
the Army, and never sent in or appeared at the last Assizes at York;
notwithstanding he is continued a Trustee for the State.

For Mr. John Wastell a man armed Cap-a-pee, a Colonel, a Parliament man, a
Committee man, a Lawyer, a Justice of Peace, a favorite of all sides,
plaufible to all whom he can deceive or make use of by Infinuation, none can
be more properly called a Nuter, or rather a dangerous Actor on all sides; for
it is well known his compliance with all Interests (viz.) the Kings party, for
there a Composition was paid for him to the Lord of Newcastle, and came down
to Hull to complete his peace; but that the Siege then and the success thereof
prevented his former progress. And for the Scots party, his assurings and
affections are plainly visible, he giving them Protections since our victory.
His ways to our own parties appear zealous, but it is time to be cautious
of a man of such sinister dealings; No man yet has been so bold or watchful
to protect Papists and other Delinquents, notorious in so high a manner nor so
open handed for gratuities, that ever I heard of, but only himself; For being
guarded with thus much power he insures all his Actions unquestionable; As
Colonel he inslaves the Country as having imposed taxes beyond all measure
of former Presidents the last raising of his Regiment, having cost the Country
5000. l. (and yet himself never in any Service.) As Parliament man, he
seldom appears, for his gainful trade is in the Country; As Committeeman,
Lawyer, and Justice, what he pleases to conclude, is law.

He made his Brother, and Brother in law Westall and Wadnell, Sequestrators
(though they were then beggars) both which have enriched themselves to
Thousands, he got the Lead Mines at Marryke into his hands, worth clearly in
Rent 1500. l. per annum, which he paid little or nothing for. (Whosoever is the
Miller he will be his Dog;) he is a person dangerous to the State, has got
much by the aforesaid ways, which has much increased his Estate, and one if
further trusted will most assuredly betray the Commonwealth.

For Mr. Rymer, he is Treasurer for that Riding, though his credit could not
secure before these times 20. l. being indeed (as I am informed) worse then
nothing, And the Country accounted it a Paradox, that a beggar should become a
Treasurer; yet notwithstanding his inconsiderablenesse, he is one of the chief
of the Committee, and of himself represents the whole by diverse Orders (he
makes of his own accord,) with the Clerks hand to it, carries the authority
of an Order (as they two compact); make use to impose, grant, receive, or remit
what they please; the like unlimited proceedings are now paralelled (as they
say) in any Committee. Lately made a Justice of Peace, though before so
inconsiderable, that he had not one foot of Land any where, except lately
bought with the States money; His Landlord Sir Edward Osborne would have
declared of this Gent: abilities, by what he was in arreare to him in rent, but
whatsoever he was then, he has thousands now.

For the East Riding* there is Mr. Thorpe the Lawyer, Mr. Christopher Ledgert,
Mr. Richard Darley, with his youngest Brother; in those parts my stay was not
long* but at Hull I met with a Charge which was proved and sworn before Sir
Matthew Boynton and diverse others, then in power to act for the Parliament,
which renders him disaffected; It consists of many Articles, material enough
to forfeit the honor lately conferred upon him, and make him as grand a
Delinquent as any whosoever; No marvel that Committees are so cried forth on
(though very useful in their kind) so long as Vipers are nourished in their
bosom.

For Mr. Ledgers, his actings have not been great at their Board, by reason of
his Martial employments, being a Militia Colonel, chosen as a fit servant for
them. He has obtained 5000. l. for his arreares, though he never did ten
groates worth of service, he was cashiered before upon Jealousy of the
confederacy with Hotham; he is much against the Army, but he is one can do
little hurt; For his valor, or credit, caries little commendations in his
Country. Those that procured him the 5000. l. made him late Colonel, the
Forces raised by him was to put him into a condition to make good terms; for
his Patrons the Darleys, Anlibyes, and Thorp; In case Lieutenant Genesis Cromwell
had been overthrown; then it would have appeared whom he would have fought for;
it were well if these things were timely looked unto; For there were more Birds
of that County, that wore the same feathers, which would all have flowne
together, if any disaster had happened to the Army.

For the two last, I think both Tradesmen (if not broke) their Interest in
their Country is not much more then the air they were borne in; They have
by-friends got to be of the Committee; Mr. Richard was made Treasurer, but
since he became a Member of the House, being for want of constant Residence
incapable of the place; yet loath to part with so sweet a profit, obtained for
a Kinsman to be his Substitute; But the younger Gentleman being none of the
Committee, and therefore not generally resented, by all means he pulls in his
Brother (one would think as by intayle) unto him and his Kindred for ever. Its
easily decerned, there is more in it then a direct benefit, when Treasurers was
never yet called to an Account (their continuance in their Counting tribble
have been so long.) Besides he is much suspected, being both needy and crafty;
Little rumored yet, concerning the Carriage of the other, having but lately
crept into the service. A notable Artist, his original was a cracked Draper*
he seemingly acted for the Parliament, his wife, for the Earl of Newcastle,
with whom she ever held intelligence. At the rendition of York he got
employment, broke all Articles, seized Trunkes, rifled Houses, cut down Woods*
got to be Treasurer, converted the best things to be found for his own use,
got great sums into his own hands of the Publiques, and to shroud himself
from Accounts, and from his Debts which he was very able to pay out of the
Commonwealths money, and to keep Thousands; he combined with one Blackwell
another Associate, to choose him Burgess of New-Malton (it being the clear
right of Old-Malton to elect) though now decayed; Old-Malton having the mother
Church and Priory belonging to it. Neither has there been any Burgess served
in Parliament this 350 years for Malton before this present Parliament, which
was 200 years before any of New-Malton was builded. All his other endeavors
since have tended to get Moneys, cheat the Commonwealth; and how he behaved
himself at the Kings Trial (being in Town all the time, and a Member of it)
is very notorious.

Thus according to my Intelligence, J have presented unto you the cries of the
Country, which I am consident, are not so loud as they would be, being
timorous to be liberal with such Tax-masters, until they may receive some
encouragement from Justice to examine the Complaints.

The relation of the County of Somersetshire Petition, to discover corrupt men
in Authority, (having had so favorable acceptance) persuades their mention in
some like way* These being communicated to the General Council of the Army,
no doubt but some redress will be by their means, afforded; until then,
honest men will be unwilling to act in Committees; by reason of that Ignominy
and reproach, is cast upon them for these men's sakes; So* none but these who
are necessitated to beg employments, are willing to attend the service.

From the Leaguer my Orders were for Lancashire, where I must make some stay,
having some business of this nature; from thence I shall make return, unless
otherwise, ordered to Lnodon where I long to be, for the happiness of yours
and the rest of my Comrades society; hoping that God will give you all wisdom
to carry things righteously, aiming at the great end the glory of God, in all
your undertakings.

FINIS.

