THE ANTIQUITY AND DIGNITY OF PARLIAMENTS.

Written by Sir ROBERT COTTON.



LONDON, Printed for Norman Nelson at Grays-Inne-Gate in Holbourn, Anno Domini
1680.

That the Kings of England have been pleased, usually to Consult in the Great
Council of Marriage, Peace and War, with their Peers and Commons in Parliament.
TO search so high as the Norman Conquest, that is necesary William the
Conqueror.
to lay down the Form and Government of those Times, wherein State Affairs were
led in another Form of public Councils: For the People wrought under the Sword
of the First William, and his Followers, to a subjected Vassallage, and could
not possess in such Assemblies, the Right of their former Liberties, Division
and Power having mastered them, and none of their own Nobility and Heads being
left, either of Credit or Fortunes.

What he retained not in Providence, (as the Demesnes of the Doomsday Book.
Crown) or reserved in Piety, (as the Maintenance of the Church) he parted to
those Strangers that sailed along with him, in that Barque of his Adventure,
leaving the Natives for the most part, Admerus. Huntington.
(as appears in his Survey) in no better condition than Villainage: He
molded their Customs to the manner of his own Country, and forbear to grant
the Laws of holy Edward, so often called for.

To supply his occasions of Men, Money and Provision, he ordered, Ex libro
Feodaris in Scaccio.
that all those that enjoyed any fruit of his Conquest, should hold their Lands
proportionable by so many Knights Fees of the Crown, admitted them to enfeoff
their Followers, with such parts as they pleased of their own Portions; which
to ease their Charge, they did in his and his Sons times, by two Enfeoffments,
Hen. 4. Statut.
the one de Novo, the other de Veteri.

This course provided him the body of the War; the Money Ex libro Rubro Scaccio.
and Provision was by Head-age assessed on the common People, at the Consent of
the Lords, who held in all their Seigniories such Right of Regality, that to
their Vassals, as Paris says, Cronicom de Dnustable.
Quot Domini, tot Tyranni, and proved to the King so great a Curb, and
restraint of Power, that nothing fell into the Care of Benedict Monard in vita
Hen. 2.
his Majesty after, more than to retrench the Force of his Aristocoited, that
was in time like to strangle the Monarchy.

Though others foresaw the Mischiefs betimes, yet none attempted the Remedy,
until King John, whose overhasty Undertaking, brought in these Broyls of the
Barons Wars.

There needed not before this Care, to advise with the Commons in any public
Assembly, when every Man in England, by Tenure, held himself to his great
Lord's Will, whose presence was ever regnized in those great Councils, and in
whose Assent, his dependant Tenant's Consent was ever included.

Before this King's Time then, we seek in vain for any Commons Called; they
were ever Called for making of Laws, but Claus. 6. in Dorso.
not to Consult touching War or Peace: He first, as may be gathered, (though
darkly by the Records) used their Counsels and Assents in the 6th. year of his
Reign.

Here is the first Summons in Record to the Peers or Barons: Tractatur de
magnis and ardinis negotiis: It was about a War of Defense against the French,
and at that time the Commons were admitted. As this time that may fitly be
gathered by this Ordinance, Paris 6. To. 2. in Dorso.
Provisum est communi assensu Archiepiscoporum Commotium, Barronium and omnium
fidelium nostrorum Angliae quod novem Milites per Angliam inveniend. de communi
To. And this was directed to all the Sheriffs in England, the ancient use in
public Laws.

From this there is a break, until 18 Hen. 3. where the next Summons extant is
in a Plea-Roll of that year; but the Ordinances Claus. 49. Hen. 3 in Dorso.
are lost, from thence the Record affords no light, until the 49th. of the same
King, where then the Summons to Bishops, Lords, Knights and Burgesses, are much
in manner, though not in matter, alike to the Use of our Times. This Parliament
was Called to advise with the King, pro pace asseveranda and firmanda, they are
the words; and where Advice is required, Consultation must be admitted.

To this King succeeds Edw. I. his Son a wise, a just, and a fortunate Prince:
In his Reign we have no light of any public Edw. I.
Counsel in this kind, and so along to the 4th. of his Grandchilds Reign, but
what we borrow in the Rolls of Summons, wherein the Form stood various
according to the occasions, until that Ex Rot. Parl. in Archivis London.
grew constant in the form that is now about the entering of Rich. II. the
Journal Rolls being spoiled by the injury of Time, or private Ends.

The King in the 5th. of his Reign, Called a Parliament, and therein advised
with his Lords and Commons, for the suppressing Claus. 5. Edw. I. in Dorso.
I luellin, Prince of Wales; and hearing that the French King intended to some
pieces of his Inheritance in France, summoned a Parliament, ad tractandum,
ordinandum, and favendum cum Praelatis Claus. 7. Edw. I. m. 3. in Dorso.
proceribus and aliis Incolis Regni qualibet hujusmodi Periculis, and
Excogitatis militiis sic abjurand. inserting in the Writ, that that was Lex
justissima provida Circumspectione stabilita; that that which omnes tangit ab
omnibus approbetur, in the 34th. of Claus. 34. Ed. I. in Dorso.
his Reign, super ordinatione and stabiliamento Regni Scotiae, he made the like
Convention.

His Son, the II. Edw. pro solempnitate sponsialum and Coronaronis, Edw. 2.
Claus. 1. 19 m. Claus. 6. 3 m. Claus. 8. 3 m. Claus. 13. m 13. in Dorso.
consulted with his People in his first year; in his 6th. year, super diversis
negotiis Statum Regni and expedtione Guerrem Scotiae specialiter tangentibus,
he assembled the State to advise; the like he did in his 8th. year.

The French King having invaded Gascoigne, in the 13th. year Claus. 16. m. 27
of the Parliament, was Called, super ordinis negotiis statum Ducatus Gasconiae
tangentibus; and in the 16th. to consult, ad refraenandum Scotorum obstinantiam
and malitiam.

Before Edw. III. would resolve in his first year, whether Peace Edw. 3. Claus.
1.
or War with the Scots King, he summoned the Peers and Commons, super
praemissis tractare and Consilium impendere.

The Chancellor, Anno 5. declares from the King the cause of that Assembly,
and that that was to consult and resolve, whether the King should proceed with
France, for the recovery of Rot. Parl 5.
his Seigniories, by Alliance of Marriage, or by War; and whether to redress
the Disobedience of the Irish, he should go thither in person or no.

The year following he re-assembled his Lords and Commons, and requires their
Advice, whether he should undertake the holy Expedition with the French King or
no; the Bishops and Parl. 6 Edw. 3.
Proctors of the Clergy would not be present, as forbidden by the Commons such
Counsels: The Peers and Commons consult, applauding the Religious and Princely
forwardness of their Sovereign to this hard Enterprise; but humbly advise
forbearance this year, for urgent Reasons.

The same year, (though another Sessions,) the King demanding the Advice of his
People, whether he should pass into France, to an Enterview, as was desired,
for the expediting the Treaty of Marriage: The Prelates by themselves, and the
Earls and Barons Rot. Parl. 6 Edw. 3. Sess. 2. m. 6.
by themselves, and the Knights of the Shires by themselves, consult apart,
(for so is the Records) and in the end resolved, that to prevent some dangers
likely to arise from the North, that would please the King to forbear his
Journey, and to draw toward those Parts where the perils were feared, his
presence being the best prevention; which Advice he followed.

In the following Parliament at York, the King shows, how by their former
Advice, he had drawn himself toward the North Parts, and now again he had
assembled them, to advise further for his Proceedings. To which the Lords and
Commons having consulted apart, pray further time to resolve, until a full
Assembly of the State: To which the King granting, adjourneth that Sessions.

At their next Meeting, they are charged upon their Allegiance Rot. 7 Edw. 3.
Sess 2. Parl. 7 Edw. 3. m. 6.
and Faith, to give the King their best Advice. The Peers and Commons
(consulting apart) delivered their Opinions, and so that Parliament ended.

In the 13th. year, the Grandees and Commons are called to consult and advise,
how the domestic Quiet may be preserved, the Marches of Scotland defended, and
the Sea scowred from Enemies: The Peers and Commons (having apart consulted)
the Commons desire not to be charged to Counsel in things, des queux ils neut
pas Cognisaux, answer, that the Guardians of the Shire, assisted by the
Knights, may effect the first, (if Pardons of Felony be not granted) the care
of the Marches they humbly leave to the King and Counsel; and for the safeguard
of the Seas, they wish that the Cinque Ports and Maritime Towns, (discharged
for the most part from many Burdens of Inland Parts) may have that left to
their Charge and Care; and that such as have Lands near the Seacoasts, be
commanded to reside in those Possessions.

The Parliament is the same year re-assembled to advise, De expeditione Guerre
in partibus transmarinis. At this Assembly Rot. Parl. 13 Edw. 3. Sess. 2.
Ordinances are made for provision of Ships, arraying of Men for the Marches,
and defense of the Isle of Jersey, naming such in the Record, as they conceived
for the Employments.

The next year, De la Poole accounts the Expenses of the War; a new Aid is
granted, and by several Committees, (in Parl. 14 Edw. 3. Parl. 15 Edw. 3.
which diverse were named, that were not Peers of Parliament) the safeguard of
the Seas, and defense of the Borders, are consulted of.

In the 15th. year, Assensu Prelatorum, Procerum, and aliorum de Consilio, the
King's Passage into France is resolved of. Parl. 17 Ed, 3.


In Anno 17. Badlesmore, in the place of the Chancellor, declares to the Peers
and Commons, That whereas by their Assents, the King had undertaken the Wars
with France, and that by the Mediation of the Pope, a Truce was offered, which
then their Sovereign forbear to entertain, without their well Allowance.

The Lords apart consult; and also the Commons, returning by Sir William
Trussel, in answer to their Advice and Desire to compose the Quarrel, approve
the Truce, and the Pope's Mediation.

The Pope's Undertaking proving fruitless, and delays to the French advantage,
who in the mean space, (with Scotland and others) practiced to root out the
English Nation; in France, the King again assembled his Parliament the year
following: In which the Peers and Commons, after many days of Deliberation,
resolve to end that, either by Battle or Peace, and no more to trust to the
Mediation of his Holiness.

In the 12th. the Chief Justice Thorpe, declaring to the Peers and Commons,
that the French Wars began by their Advice. Parl. 21 Edw. 3.


First, The Truce, after by their Assents accepted, and now ended, the King's
Pleasure was to have their Counsels in these Prosecutions: The Commons being
commanded, Y ils se devoirent ensemble and si ils assent le devoirent nostre au
Roy and all Grandees de son Counsel, who after four days consulting, humbly
desire of the King, that he would be advised herein by his Lords, and others of
more Experience than themselves in such Affairs.

To advise the King the best for his French Employments, a Parliament Parl. 25
Ed. 3.
was summoned, Anno 25. wherein the King by a more public Dispatch, wills
the Commons to elect twenty four, or thirty, of their House, to consult with
the Lords; these to relate to their Fellows, and the Conclusion in general, by
the Lords to the King.

In the 27th. a great Counsel is assembled, many of the Lay-Peers, Parl. 27 Ed.
3
few of the Clergy, and of the Knights of the Shires, and Burgesses, but one a
piece. This was for the prosecution of the French Wars, when honorable
following. A Truce being offered, the King forbear his Peers and Commons, which
they in Parliament accorded unto before the Pope's Notary, by public Instinct.

The dallying of the French King, in conclusion of Peace, and Parl. 29 Ed. 3.
the falling off of the Duke of Britain, (having wrought his End with France,
by reputation of the English Succor) is the year following declared in
Parliament, and their Advice and Aid required for the King's Proceedings.

In the 36th. year, he Calls his Parliament to consult, whether Parl. 36 Ed.
3.
War or Peace, (by David King of Scots then offered) should be accepted.

In the 40th. year, the Pope demanding the Tribute of King Parl. 40 Ed. 3.
John, the Parliament assembled, when after Consultation apart. The Prelates,
Lords and Commons, advise the denial, although it be by dint of Sword.

In the 43d. the King declared to the Peers and Commons, Parl. 43 Ed. 3
that the French, against the Articles of the Truce, refused payment of the
Moneys, and delivery of the Towns, summoning La Brett, and others of the King's
Subjects in Gascoin, to make at Paris their Appeals, and had forraged his
Country of Poitgers, requiring (in their breach) whether he might not regain
hit style of France.

The Lords and Commons had apart consulted; they advised the King to both,
which he approving, altered the Inscription and Figure of his style.

Two years after, it was declared to the Peers and Commons, Parl 45 Ed 3.
that by their Advice, he had again resumed the style and quarrel of France,
and therefore called their Advice, for the defense of the Realm against the
French, securing of the Seas, and pursuing of the Wars; of which they consult
and resolve to give the King an Aid.

The like Council and Supply was the very next following. Parl. 46 Ed. 3.


In the 50. a Parliament to the purpose of the former two was Summoned; and the
year following the King in Parliament Parl. 46 Ed. 3.
declaring how the French had Combined under hand against him with Spain and
Scotland; required their advice how Peace at home, Territories abroad, Security
of the Seas, and Charge of the War might be maintained.

I have the longer insisted in observing the Carriage of those Times, so good
and so glorious; after Ages having not left the Journal Entries of Parliament
so full, which with a lighter hand I will pass through.

Richard the 2d. his Grandchild succeeded to the Crown and Troubles, having
nothing worthy his great Fortunes but his Rich. 2. Parl. 1. m. 5. a. 6.
Birth: The first of his reign he pursued the steps of his Wise Grandfather,
advising with his Peers and Commons how best to resist his Enemies that had
lately wronged many of his Subjects on the Sea Coasts.

In the second year he again Consulted with his people how Parl. 2 Rich. 2. m.
1.
to withstand the Scots, who then had Combined with the French to break the
Truce.

In the third year calls the advice of his Parliament how to maintain the
Regality impaired by the Popes Provisions, how Parl. 3 Rich. 2. m. 4, 5.
to resist France, Spain and Scotland, that had raised Wars against him, how to
suppress his Rebels in Guzen and Ireland, and to Urban. 6.
defend the Seas.

In the 4th. year of his Reign he calls the like at Windsor; the year
following in a great Council the King having proposed a Parl. 4 Rich. 2. m. 2,
3.
Voyage Royal into France; now called his Parliament to determine further of
that: And that is worth observation, that for the most part, before any
proposition of War or Peace were vented to the Commons; A debate thereof
proceeds in the great Council to shape that fitter for popular advice.

The quarrel with Spain continuing, the Duke of Lancaster offers a Voyage
against them, so the State will lend him Money; Parl. 5 Rich. 2. Sess. (...). a.
after Consultation they grant an Aid, but not to bind them to any continuance
of War with Spain.

In the sixth, the Parliament was called to Consult about the Defense of the
Borders, the Kings Possessions beyond the Seas, Parl. 6 Rich. 2. Sess. 1.
Ireland and Gascoigne, his Subjects in Portugal.

The Lords approve the Dukes intention for Portugal, and the Commons advise
that the Bishop of Norwich having the Croycery, should Invade France.

The same year the State was re-assembled, to consult whether Parl. 6 Rich 2.
Sess. 1. a.
the King should go in person to rescue Gaunt, or to send his Army. The Commons
after two days debate, crave a Conference with the Lords; the effect is not
entered in the Roll, only they by Sir Thomas Fuckering their Speaker, protest,
that Counsels of War did aptly belong to the King and his Lords: Yet since the
Commons were commanded to give their Advice, they humbly wish a Voyage Royal by
the King; if not, that the Bishop of Norwich might, with the advantage of the
Pope's Croycery, be used in that service, who accepted the Charge with ill
success.

Here further the Commons pray, that the King's Uncle should not be spared out
of the Realm, before some Peace was settled with the Scots, and that the Lord
Delaspar, sent with Provisions of Peace from Spain, might first be heard.

The Chancellor, in the 7th year, in the Name of the King, Parl. 7 Rich. 2.
Sess. 4.
wills the Lords apart; and so the Commons do consult, whether Peace or War
with Scotland, or whether to resist or to assail the King's Adversaries of
Spain, France, or Flanders.

Their Opinions are not entered in the Rolls, (an omission usually by the Clerk
his neglect) only their Petition is recorded, that the Bishop of Norwich may
account in Parliament the expense of the Money, and be punished for his faults,
in the service he undertook; both which are granted.

At the next Sessions, the same year, the Commons are willed to advise upon
view of the Articles of Peace with the French, whether War, or such Amity
should be accepted.

They modestly excuse themselves, as too weak to counsel in so weighty Causes:
But charged again, as they did tender the Honor and Right of the King, they
make this Answer, Yils intrudont que astmis services terres y mesne lour liege
anecoit ore per testarior in Guyen si serront tenus del Roy Francois per tril
sernior la villa de Callis and auter terres acquise and conquise des Francois
per les fore neue verroit la Commen y aniuse Aiust fait si autrement preroit
been fair, giving their Opinions rather for Peace than War.

Peace with France not succeeding, the 8th. year the Body of the State was
called to advise, whether the King in his own person, or the sending of Forces
against the French, Spaniard, Flanders and Scotland, should proceed.

The King having assembled at Oxon, his Great Counsel, to advise Claus. 9 Rich.
2.
whether he should pass the Seas or no with an Army Royal; and they not daring
to assent without a greater Counsel, a Parliament, the 10th year, was called,
to have the Advice of the Commons as well as the Lords, how the Realm should be
governed Claus. 10 Ric. 2
in (...) Sovereign's absence.

The Truce with France now near expired; the Parliament Parl. 13 Rich. 2
was called in the 13th. year, to advise upon what Conditions it should be
renewed, otherwise how the Charge of War should be sustained. At this Assembly,
and by consent of all, the Duke of Lancaster is created Duke of Aquitain; the
Statutes of Provisions Rot. Claus. 13 Rich. 2.
now passed; the Commons are named partly in the Letter to the Pope. Boniface 9.


The year succeeding, a Parliament is called, for that the King would have the
Advice of his Lords and Commons for the War Parl. 14 Rich. 2
with Scotland, and would not without their Counsel, conclude a final Peace
with France.

The like Assembly for the Causes, was the year ensuing.

The Commons humbly desire the King, to use a moderation in the Law of
Provision, so that the Statute upon their dislike may again be exempted; and
that to negotiate the Peace with France, the Duke of Aquitain may rather than
another be employed.

To consult of the Treaty with France for Peace, the King in Parl. 17 Rich. 2
the 17th. year calls a Parliament; the Answer of the Lords is left
un-enter'd in the Rolls.

The Commons upon their Faith and Allegiance charged, advise, that with good
moderation, provision may be made for Guyen, an Apendage of the French Crown,
so it trench not to involve the other pieces of the English Conquest. Their
Answer is large, modest, and worthy to mark.

Now succeeded a Man that first studied a Popularity, as needing all to support
his Titles: He in the 5th. year calls a Parliament, Hen. 4. Parl. 5.
to repress the malice of the Duke of Orleans, and to advise for the Wars in
Ireland and Scotland; neither Counsels nor supplies are entered into Roll; and
to resist an Invasion intended by Parl. 6 Hen. 4.
France and Britain, he assembleth the State again.

The like was the two years following for France. In this the Commons confer
with the Lords for Guard of the Sea, and make Parl. 7 Hen. 4. m. 19, 20.
many Ordinances, to which the King assented: The Peace with the Merchants of
Pruce, and the Hanse-Towns, is debated, and a Proclamation published, as they
resolved by the Speaker. The Commons complain of 96 pieces of Ordnance lost in
Guyen the Claus. 7 Hen. 4. (...).
year before; the need of the defense of the Borders, and Guard of the
Seacoasts, to suppress the Rebellion in Wales, and Disloyalty of the Earl of
Northumberland: They humbly desire, that the Prince may be dispatched into
those Parts with speed, and that the Castle of the Key of three Realms, might
be left to the Care of the English, not to Charles Navarr, a stranger, and to
have a diligent Eye of the Scottish Prisoners.

In the 10th. year a Parliament is called, and the Commons commanded to give
their Advice about the Truce of Scotland, Parl. 10 Hen 4.
and preparation against the malice of the French.

His Son, the wise and happy Undertaker, consulteth with the Hen. 5. Parl. 1.
Parliament in his first year, how to cherish his Allies, and restrain his
Enemies. For this there was a select Committee of the Commons, appointed to
confer with the Lords; the matter being entered into scedule touching Ireland,
Wales, Scotland, Calis, N. 9.
Guyen, shipping, Guard of the Seas, and warry provision to repulse the Enemy.

In the 2d. he opens to the Parliament his Title to France, a Parl. 2 Hen. 5
Quarrel he would present to death, if they allowed and aided; death in this
Assembly enacted to all, that either break the Truce, or the King's safe
Conduct.

The year following, Peace being offered by the French King, Parl. 3 Hen. 5
and the King of the Romans, armed to effect the work; the King refused any
conclusion, until he had had thereunto the Advice and Assent of his Lords and
Commons; for which occasion the Chancellor declares it to that Assembly.

In the 4th. and 5th. year, no Peace concluded with France, Parl. 4 and 5 Hen.
5.
he calls the State together to consult about the War, concluding a Treaty of
Amity with Sigismond, King of the Romans, by the allowance of the three
Estates, and enters Articles in the Journal Roll.

The same year, by the Duke of Bedford, in the King's absence, Parl. 5 Hen. 5
a Parliament was called to the former purpose, as appears by the Summons,
though in the Roll omitted.

The like in the 7th. year. Parl. 7 Hen. 5.


The Treaty with France is by the Prelate, Nobles and Commons of the Kingdom,
Rot. Parl. 10 Hen. 5.
perused and ratified, in the 10th. of this King.

This Son, more holy than happy, succeeded, advised in the Hen. 6. Rot. Par. 2
Hen. 6.
2d. year with the Lords and Commons, for the well keeping of the Peace with
France, consulteth with them about the delivery of the Scottish King, and the
conclusion of it is confirmed by common Assent.

And in the third year they are called to advise and consent Rot. Parl. 3 Hen.
6.
to a new Article in the League with Scotland for Charge of Hostages.

And in the ninth year conclude by name of certain persons to 9 Hen. 6
Treat a Peace with the Dauphin of France.

The Treaty of Arras, (whether the Pope had sent as Mediators Eugenius 4.
two Cardinals) not succeeding, the King in Parliament (in anno 1640.) shows
that he must either loose his Title and Kingdom of France, or else defend it by
Force; the best means for prevention whereof, he wills them to advise him.

He Summoneth again the next year the Council, how the Parl 15 Hen. 6
Realm might be best Defended, and the Sea kept Safe against the Enemies.

In the 20th. the Commons exhibit a Bill for Guard of the Parl 20 Hen. 6.
Sea; a certain number of Ships Assess wages, and dispose of Prizes, if any
Fortune; to which the King accords: And that the Gronowayes may be declared
Enemies for Assisting the Turk in the Spoil of the Rhodes Knights; and that the
Privilege of the Prince and Hance Towns may be suspended, till Composition be
made to the English for wronger they have done them. To which in part the King
accords.

The King by the Chancellor declares in Parliament, that the Marriage with
Margaret the King of Sicily's Daughter, was Anno 27 H. 6.
Contracted for enducing the Peace made with the French, to which the Lords
(not by their advice effected) make Protestation, enter it upon the Roll.

The King intending to pass in person into France, then to Anno 25 H. 6.
Treat of Peace with the King, advises with his Lords and Commons in
Parliament; and Letters of Mart are granted against the Britains for Spoils
done to the English Merchants.

The Lord Hastings and the Abbot of Gloucester declared in Parliament the
Preparation of the French, the Breach by them Anno 27 H. 6.
of the Peace, the weak defense of Normandy, and expiration shortly of the
Truce; requiring speedy advice and remedy.

It was enjoined the Parliament to provide for the defense Anno 29 H. 6.
of the Sea and Land against the French.

It was commanded by the King to the States assembled, to Anno 29 H. 6.
advise for the well ordering of his House, payment of his Soldiers at Calice,
Guard of the Seas, Raising of the Siege at Berwick made by the Scots against
the Truce, disposing of the 13000 Soldiers Arrayed the last Parliament,
According of differences amongst the Lords, restraining Transportation of Gold
and Silver, and acquiting the Disorders in Wales; of all which Committees are
appointed to frame Bills.

Edward the 4th. by the Chancellor declares to the Lords and Commons, that
having Peace with the Scots, entered League Ed. 4. Anno 7.
with Spain and Denmark, Contracted with Burgundy and Britain for their Aid,
in Recovery of his Right in France; he had now Assembled them to give their
Advise and Counsel therein proceeding, with a Charge in a second Session again
pressed them.

The like was at another Parliament. Anno 12 Ed. 4.


After this time the Journalls of Parliaments have been either not well
preserved, or not carefully Entered: For I can find of Hen. 7.
this nature no Record, until the first of Hen. the 7th. wherein the Commons,
by Thomas Lovel their Speaker, Petitioned the King to take to Wife Elizabeth
the Daughter of Edward the 4th. to which at their request agrees.

The next is the third of Henry the 8th. in which, from the Hen. 8. Rott. Parl.
3. Hen. 8.
King the Chancellor delivers to the three Estates the Cause of their
Assembly. The first to advise a course for resisting the Invasion of the Scots:
Next how to acquit the Quarrel between the King and the Castiles, and the Duke
of Guilders.

Lastly, for resisting the Pope against Lewis of France, whose Julius 2.
Bull expressing the Injuries done to the Sea Apostolic, was read by the
Master of the Rolls in open Parliament: The Chancellor, Treasurer, and other
Lords sent down unto the Commons to confer thereof.

The last in the 32. where the Chancellor remembering the Rott. 3 Hen. 8 Parl.
many Troubles the State had undergone in doubtful Titles of Succession,
declares that the Convocation had judged void the Marriage with Anne of Cleve;
yet the King would not proceed without the Counsel of the three Estates.

The two Archbishops are sent to the Commons with the Sentence Ex Instrument.
Original.
Sealed, which being read, and there discussed; they pass a Bill against the
Marriage.

In all these passages of public Council, wherein I have been much assisted by
the painful Labors of Mr. Elsing Clerk of the Parliament, I still observe that
the Sovereign Lord, either in best Advice, or most Necessities, would entertain
the Commons with the weightiest Causes, either Foreign or Domestic, to adapt
and bind them so to readiness of Charge; and they as warily avoiding to shun
Expense: Their Modest answers may be a Rule for ignorant liberty to form their
duties, and humbly to entertain such weighty Counsels at their Sovereigns
pleasure; and not out of the wild sin of any Factious Spirits.

I will only add one Foreign Example, to show what use has been formerly made
of pretended Marriages, and of Parliaments to dissolve them, their first ends
served.

Maximilian the Emperor, and Ferdinand of Spain; the one to secure his
Possessions in Italy, the other to secure the Kingdom of Navar: To both which
the French King stood in the way, projecting a Marriage of Charles the
Grandchild with Mary the King of England's Sister: It was embraced a Contract,
per verba de presenti, passed, and a Book published, of the Benefit and Liberty
to ensue the Christian World by this Match.

Upon this ground Ferdinand begins to incite King Henry the 8th. to War in
France; presents him with Succor, designs him Guyen to be the Mark: Dorset is
sent with Men and Munition to join with the Spanish Forces.

Then on the Borders of Navar the noise is, they come to assist Ferdinand in
Conquest of that Kingdom, which (though false) gain such reputation, that
Albird was disheartened, and Ferdinand possessed himself of that which his
Successors since retained, his ends served; the English Army in the depth of
Winter, weak and weather-beaten, are returned fruitless.

Maximilian then allureth the Young and Active King to begin with France on the
other side Turway; and Turway is now the Object whether Henry the 8th. goes
with Victory, but advised with that pittance, makes an end with France, whose
Eye and Heart was set on Maximilian.

A new Bait the Old Emperor casts out to catch the ambitious Young man: He
will needs Resign unto him the Empire, Extract. Original. 15 15.
too heavy for his Age to bear.

The Cardinal Sidanensis is sent over to Sign the Agreement, (which he did) and
France must now again be made an Enemy.

To prevent this danger, France releaseth his Title to Naples and offers his
Infanta Lampsia to Maximilian's Grandchild, Extract. Orig. 15, 16.
Charles of Noyen.

This is acted in the dark; and at Arno the French Commissioners come up the
back Stairs with 60000. and the engrossed Covenants, when they abused the King
of England's Ambassadors; a pace went down the other way. The Lord Cardinal
returns home, meets by the way the fowl play of his Master, and Writ to the
King of England; not in Excuse, but in Complaint, contra per fideam Principium,
an Honest Servant.

Ferdinand and Maximilian dead, Francis and Charles are Competitors for the
Empire.

Henry the 8th. is Courted for his help by both, the one with tie of Alliance
(for the Infanta, Dauphin had offered to Henry the 8th. the other with the
like; the one will make his Daughter Ex Literis Car. Regis Hisp.
a Queen in present, which the Dauphin cannot do; and by his favor an Empress.

To further Francis, was but to win ambition, to prey upon all his Neighbors.
Ex Literis Car. 5 Impr. Orig.


The English is won, and wins for Spain, all the Imperial Wealth, which
Charles (in two Letters I have of his own Hand) then thankfully confessed. From
Aquisgrave he comes Crowned in haste to England; weddeth at Windsor the King's
Daughter; Extract Widosil.
contracteth to join in an Invasion of France; to divide it with his
Father-in-law by the River of Rhodines; and swears at the Altar in Paul's to
keep Faith in all.

Burbon is wrought from France, and enters the Province with an Army, paid
with King Henry's Money; Suffolk passes Ex O^^^. Instr.
with the English Forces by Picardy: But Charles the Emperor, who should have
entered by Gwyen, fails, drawing away Burbon Ex literis Ri^i P^^^. and Joh
Russel.
from a strait siege of Massels, to interrupt Francis, then entered Italy; and
so the Enterprise of France is defeated.

The French King is at Pavy taken Prisoner by Pescaro, led to Extract. Madrid
115. 26.
Genoway, carried into Spain by the Emperor's Galleys, and forced at Madrid to
a hard Bargain, without privity to Hen. 8. or provision for him, who had born
the greater Charge of that War.

Now the Emperor effects that Monarchy, that has ever Ex Rot. Comp. Russello
and Pacis.
since (as some say) infected the Austrian Family of Rome; the fatal old Seat
of Government, must be the Seat of this new Empire; Burbon, and after Moncado,
are directed to surprise it; Angelo, the observant Friar, is sent before; a
Pope confined by Ex Instrum. Carol. 5. Emp. Ex Instrum. Hen. 8. Brian and
Guardian ex literis Frenston Epicond. legate. H. 8. in Hasp. Ex Protestat. Orig.
Tolledo Parl.
the Emperor's Election, who meant (as his own Instructions warrant) to restore
that Right again to the Imperial Throne.

Charles will follow from Batalona with the Army, but before he must call a
Parliament at Tolledo: Here, whether by direction or affection, I dare not
discuss, that Assembly makes protestation against their Master's Marriage with
England, and assigns him Isabella of Portugal for a Wife.

The Instrument is sent, Ex literis Car. Wol. and Grego. Gassalis Infra. and
Sign. Carol. Emp. Quozag. Fiend. Capl suo. Dat. 24 Feb. Ex libro n. n. n. D.
Carer. Ex literis in a Com. Northum Custo March. Scotiae.
signed by the Imperial Notary, to Hen. 8. and Charles bemoaneth the strait he
is forced unto by them: And before all this, he had wrought from Rome a
Dispensation for his former Ally and Marriage, sending not long after Gonsades
Fardinand his Dolphin, to incite the Earl of Desmond in Ireland, and inviting
James the 4th. (by promise of Marriage, to Christian, the King of Denmark's
Daughter, his Niece) to enter the English Borders, to busy the English King,
for asking a strict Account of that Indignity.

Hen. 8. with providence and good success, Extract. Orig. in Archimis Westminster.
Extract Cambreu. 529.
and by the League of Italy, in which he was made Caput Feodoris against the
Emperor; he inforceth him to moderate Conditions, at the Entreaty of Cambray,
1529.

I may end your Honors Trouble with this one Example, and with humble Prayer,
That the Catholic King may either have so much of Princely Sincerity, as not
to intend the like, or my good and gracious Master a jealous Vigilance to
prevent, if he should, etc.

Robert Cotton.

FINIS.

