Cottoni Posthuma: DIVERSE CHOICE PIECES OF THAT Renowned Antiquary Sir ROBERT
COTTON, Knight and Baronet, Preserved from the injury of Time, and Exposed to
public light, for the benefit of Posterity.

By J. H. Esquire

LONDON, Printed for Richard Lowndes at the White Lion in Duck Lane, near
Smith-field, and Matthew Gilliflower at the Sun in Westminster Hall, 1652.

To his worthily Honored Friend, Sir Robert Pie Knight, at his House in
Westminster.
SIR,
THe long interest of Friendship, and nearness of Neighborhood, which gave you
the opportunity of conversing often with that worthy Baronet, who was Author of
these ensuing Discourses, induced me to this Dedicatory Address. Among the
Greeks and Romans (who were the two Luminaries that first diffused the rays of
Knowledge and Civility through these North-west Clymes,) He was put in the rank
of the best sorts of Patriots, who preserved from putrefaction and the rust of
Time, the Memory and Works of Virtuous Men, by exposing them to open light for
the general Good; Therefore I hope not to deserve ill of my Country, that I
have published to the World these choice notions of that learned Knight Sir
Robert Cotton, who for his exact recerchez into Antiquity, has made himself
famous to Posterity.

Plutarch in writing the lives of Others, made his own everlasting; So an
Antiquary while he feels the pulse of former Ages, and makes them known to the
present, renders Himself long-lived to the future.

There was another inducement that moved me to this choice of Dedication, and
it was the high respects I owe you upon sundry obligations, and consequently
the desire I had that both the present, and after times might bear witness, how
much I am, and was

Sir, 3. Nonas April. 1651. Your humble, and truly devoted Servant. James
Howell.

To the Knowing Reader, touching these following Discourses, and their AUTHOR.
THe memory of some men is like the Rose, and other odoriferous flowers, which
cast a sweeter and stronger smell after they are plucked; The memory of Others
may be said to be like the Poppie, and such Vegetalls that make a gay and
specious show while they stand upon the stalk, but being cut and gathered they
have but an ill-favored scent; This worthy Knight may be compared to the first
sort, as well for the sweet odor (of a good name) he had while he stood, as
also after he was cut down by the common stroke of Mortality; Now, to augment
the fragrancy of his Virtues and Memory, these following Discourses, which I
may term, not altogether improperly, a Posie of sundry differing Hours, are
exposed to the World.

All who ever knew this well-weighed Knight, will confess* [what a great Z^l^t
he was to his Country, how in all Parliaments, where he fervid so often, his
main endeavors were to assert the public Liberty, and that Prerogative and
Privilege might run in their due Channels; He would often say, That he Himself
had the least share in Himself, but his Country and his Friends had the
greatest interest in him: He might be said to be in a perpetual pursuit after
Virtue and Knowledge; He was indefatigable in the search and re-search of
Antiquity, and that in a generous costly manner, as appears in his Archives and
copious Library; Therefore he may well deserve to be ranked among those
Worthies -- Quorum Imagines lambunt Hederae sequaces; For an Antiquary is not
unfitly compared to the Ivy, who uses to cling unto ancient fabriques and
Vegetals.

In these Discourses you have
1. A Relation of proceedings against Ambassadors who have miscarried
themselves, and exceeded their Commission. 2. That the Kings of England have
been pleased to consult with their Peers in Parliament for marriage of their
Children, and touching Peace and War, etc. 3. That the Sovereigns Person is
required in Parliament in all Consultations and Conclusions. 4. A Discourse of
the legality of Combats, Duells, or Camp-fight. 5. Touching the question of
Precedence between England and Spain. 6. Touching the Alliances and Amity which
have intervened betwixt the Houses of Austria and England. 7. A Discourse
touching Popish Recusants, Jesuits and Seminaries. 8. The Manner and Means how
the Kings of England have supported and improved their States. 9. An Answer to
certain Arguments urged by a Member of the House of Commons, and raised from
supposed Antiquity, to prove that Ecclesiastical Laws ought to be Enacted by
Temporal men. 10. The Arguments produced by the House of Commons concerning the
Privilege of every Freeborn Subject. 11. A Speech delivered in the House of
Commons Assembled at Oxford in the sirst year year of the last King. 12. A
Speech delivered before the Council Table, touching the alteration of Coin.
13. Valor Anatomized in a Fancy, by Sir Philip Sidney. 14. A brief Discourse
concerning the Power of the Peers and Commons of Parliament, in point of
Judicature. 15. Honesty, Ambition and Fortitude Anatomized, by Sir Francis
Walsingham. 16. The Life and Reign of Henry the Third, complied in a Critical
way.
These Discourses, being judiciously read, will much tend to the enriching of
the understanding, and improvement of the Common stock of Knowledge.

A RELATION OF THE PROCEEDINGS AGAINST AMBASSADORS Who have miscarried
themselves, etc.
IN humble obedience to your Grace's Command, I am emboldened to present my
poor advice to this the greatest, and most important cause that ever happened
in this State, the Quiet of the Kingdom, the Honor of the Prince, the safety
of the Spanish Ambassadors Person exposed hereby to the fury of the People, all
herein involved: A consideration not the least for the reputation of the State,
and Government, though he little deserved it.

The information made to his sacred Majesty by him, That your Grace should have
plotted this Parliament; Wherein if his Majesty did not accord to your designs,
then by the Authority of this Parliament to confine his sacred Person to some
place of pleasure, and transfer the Regal Power upon the Prince: This
Information if it were made by a Subject, by the Laws of the Realm were high
Treason, to breed a rupture between the Sovereignty and the Nobility, either by
Reports or Writings, and by the Common Law is adjudged no less: The Author yet
knowing that by the representing the Person of a soverain Prince he is by the
Law of Nations exempt from Regal trial, all actions of one so qualified being
made the Act of his Master, until he disavow: And injuries of one absolute
Prince to another, is Factum hostilitatis, and not Treason. The immunity of
whom Civilians collect as they do the rest of their grounds from the practice
of the Roman State, deducing their Arguments from these Examples. Titus Livius
2. doc.
The Fabii Ambassadors from Rome were turned safe from the Chades with demand
of justice against them only, although they had been taken bearing Arms with
the Ethrurian their Enemies: The Ambassadors of the Tarquines, Livius.
Morte affligendos Romani non judicarunt, and quanqnam visi sunt ut hostium
loco essent, justamen Gentium voluit. And where those of Syphax had plotted the
murder of Masinissa, Non aliud mihi factum quam quod sceleris sui reprehensi
essent, says Appian: The Ambassadors of the Protestants at the Counsel of
Trent, though divulging there the Doctrine of the Churches, Acta Triden. Council.
contrary to a Decree there enacted, a crime equivalent to Treason, yet stood
they protected from any punishment: So much does public convenience prevail
against a particular mischief; That the State of Rome though in case of the
most capital crime, exempted the Tribunes of the people from question, August.
de legibus Antiq. Roman.
during the year of office: And the Civilians all consent, that Legis de Jure
Gentium indictum est and eorum corpora salva sint, Propter necessitatem
legationis, ac ne confundant jura comercii inter Principes, The redress of such
injuries, by such persons, the example of Modern and best times will lead us
to. Benedict. in vita Hen. 2.
Vivia the Popes Legate was restrained by Henry the Second, for exercising a
power in his Realm, not admitted by the King, in disquiet of the State, and
forced to swear not to act any thing in Praejudicium Regis vel Regni. Record.
in Scaccar. W^st. Claus. Edw. ^.
Hen. 3. did the like to one of the Popes Ambassadors; another flying the Realm
secretly, fearing, timens pelli sui, as the Record says. Edward 1. so
restraining another until he had, as his Progenitors had, informed the Pope of
the fault of his Minister, and received satisfaction of the wrongs. In the year
1523. Lewis de Pratt: Jews in the Paper Chart. 1523:
Ambassador for Charles 5. was commanded to his house, for accusing falsely
Cardinal Wolsey to have practiced a breach between Hen. 8. and his Master, to
make up the Amity with the French King; Sir Michael Throgmorton by Charles the
9. of France, was so served, for being too busy with the Prince of Condy in
his faction. Doctor Man in the year 1567. was taken from his own house in
Madriil, and put under a Guard to a straiter Lodging, for breeding a Scandal
(as the Conde Teri said) in using by warrant of his Place, the Religion of his
Country, although he alleged the like permitted to Ghusman de Silva their
Ambassador, and to the Turk no less then in Spain. In the year 1568. Don
Ghuernon d' Espes was ordered to keep his house in London, for sending
scandalous Letters to the Duke d' Alva unsealed. The Bishop of Rosse in the
year 1571. was first confined to his house, after to the Tower, then committed
for a good space to the Bishop of Ely his care, for meddling with more business
then belonged to the place of his employment: The like was done to Dr. Alpin
and Malvisett the French Ambassadors successively, for being busy in more then
their Masters affairs. In the time of Philip the second of Spain, the Venetian
Ambassador in Madrill, protecting an offender that fled into his house, and
denying the Heads or Justices to enter his house, where the Ambassador stood
armed to vvithstand them, and one Bodavario a Venetian, whom they committed to
Prison, for his unruly carriage, and they removed the Ambassador unto another
house, until they had searched and found the Offender: Then conducting back the
Ambassador, set a guard upon his house, to stay the fury of the people enraged.
The Ambassador complaining to the King, he remitted it to the Supreme Council;
they justified the proceeding, condemning Bodavario to lose his head, and other
the Ambassadors servants to the Galleys, all which the King turned to
banishment, sending the whole process to Inego de Mendoza his Ambassador at
Venice, and declaring by a public Ordinance unto that State, and all other
Princes, that in case his Ambassadors should commit any offense, nnworthily,
and disagreeing to their professions, they should not then enjoy the privilege
of those Officers, referring them to be judged by them where they then
resided. Barnardino de Mendoza, for traducing falsely the Ministers of the State
to further his seditious Plots, was restrained first, and after commanded away
in the year 1586. The last of Spanish Instruments that disquieted this State, a
benefit we found many years after by their absence, and feel the want of it
now by their reduction.

Having thus shortly touched upon such precedent examples, as have fallen in
the way, in my poor observation, I humbly crave pardon to offer up my simple
opinion what course may best be had of prosecution of this urgent cause. I
conceive it not unfit, that with the best of speed, some of the chief
Secretarries were sent to the Ambassador by way of advice, that they
understanding a notice of this information amongst the common people, that they
cannot but conceive a just fear of uncivil carriage toward his Lordship or his
followers, if any the least incitement should arise; and therefore for quiet of
the State, and security of his person, they were bound in love to his Lordship
to restrain as well himself as followers until a further course be taken by
legal examination, where this aspertion begun, the way they only conceived
secure to prevent the danger; this fear in likelihood will be the best motive
to induce the Ambassador to make discovery of his intelligence, when it shall
be required: I conceive it then most fit, that the Prince and your Grace to
morrow should complain of this in Parliament, and leaving it so to their advice
and justice, to depart the House, the Lords at the instant to crave a
conference of some small number of the Commons, and so conclude of a Message to
be sent to the Ambassador to require from him the charge and proofs; the
Persons to be sent, the two Speakers of the two Houses, with some convenient
company of either, to have their Maces and ensigns of Office born brfore them
to the Ambassadors Gate, and then forborne, to show fair respect to the
Ambassadors, then to tell them that a relation being made that day in open
Parliament of the former information to the King by his Lordship, they were
deputed from both Houses, the great Council of the Kingdom, to the which, by
the fundamental Law of the State, the chief care of the Kings safety and public
quiet is committed, they were no less the high Court of Justice, or
Supersedeas to all others, for the examining and correcting all attempts of so
high a nature as this, if it carry truth; That they regarded the honor of the
State, for the Catholics immoderate using of late the Lenity of Sovereign
Grace to the scandal and offense of too many, and this aspersion now newly
reflecting upon the Prince and others, meeting vvth the former distaste (which
all in public conceive to make a plot to breed a rupture between the King and
State, by that party maliciously laid) has so inflamed and sharpened the minds
of most, that by the access of people to Term and Parliament, the City more
filled then usual, and the time it self near May day (a time by custom apted
more to licentious liberty then any other) cannot but breed a just jealousy
and fear of some disorder likely to ensue of this information, if it be not
aforehand taken up by a fair legal trial in that High Court: Neither want there
fearful examples in this kind in the Ambassadors Genoa upon a far less ground
in the time of Parliament, and is house demolished by such a seditious tumult:
The Parliament therefore, as well to secure his Lordships person, followers and
friends, from such outrages, to preserve the honor of the State, which needs
must suffer blemish in such misfortunes, they were sent thither to require a
fair discovery of the ground that led his Lordship so to inform the King, that
they might so thereupon provide in Justice and Honor, and that the reverence
they bear unto the dignity of his Master, may appear the more by the mannerly
carriage of his Message. The two that are never employed but to the King alone,
were at this time sent, and that if by negligence of this fair acceptance,
there should happen out any such disaster and danger, the World and they must
justly judge as his own fault: If upon the delivery of this Message the
Ambassador shall tell his charge, and discover his intelligence, then there
will be a plain ground for the Parliament to proceed in Examination and
Judgment; But if (as I believe) he will refuse it, then is he Author Scandali
both by the Common and Civil Laws of this Realm, and the Parliament may adjudge
it false and untrue, and declare by a public Act, the Prince and your Grace
innocent, as was that of the Duke of Gloucester, 2 Rich. 2. and of York in
Henry the sixth his time, then may the Parliament jointly become Petitioners to
his Majesty, first to confine his Ambasiador to his house, restraining his
departure, until his Majesty be acquainted with his offense, and as well for
security as for further practice to put a Guard upon the place, and to make a
Proclamation that none of the Kings Subjects shall repair to his house without
express leave: And to send withal a Letter, with all speed, of complaint
against him to the King of Spain, together with a Declaration under the Seals
of all the Nobility and Speaker of the Commons in their names as was 44 Hen. 3.
to the Pope against his Legate, and 28 Edw. 1. Requiring such Justice to be done
in this case, as by the Leagues of Amity, and Law of Nations is usual, which if
the King of Spain refuse, or delay, then it it Transactio Criminis upon
himself, and an absolution of all Amity and friendly intelligence, and amounts
to no less then a War denounced. Thus have I by your leave, and command,
delivered my poor opinion, and ever will be ready to do your Grace the best
service, when you please to command it.

THAT THE KINGS OF ENGLAND Have been pleased usually to consult with their
Peers in the Great Council, and Commons in Parliament, of Marriage, Peace, and
War.

Written by Sir Robert Cotton, Knight and Baronet, Anno 1621.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1672.

That the Kings of England have been pleased usually to consult with their
Peers in the Great COUNCIL, etc.
TO search so high as the Norman Conquest, it is necessary to lay down the form
and Government of those times, wherein the state of affairs then lead in
another form of public Councels; for the people brought under by the Sword of
William, William the Conqueror.
and his followers to subjected vassallage, could not possess in such
assemblies the right of their former liberties, Malmsbury.
division and power having mastered them, and none of their old Nobility being
left either of credit or fortune, what he retained not in providence as the
Demesnes of the Crown, or reserved not in piety for the maintenance of the
Church, he parted to those Strangers that sailed along with him in the Bark of
his adventure, leaving the Natives (for the most part) as appears by his
survey in no better condition then Villenage; He molded their Customs to the
manner of his own Country, and forbore to grant the Laws of the Holy Edward so
often called for.

To supply his occasions of men, money, or provisions, he Ordered that all those
that enjoyed any fruit of his Conquest, should hold their lands proportionably
by so many Knights fees of the Crown, and admitted them to infeoff their
followers, Ex lib. feod. in Scacc.
with such part as they pleased of their own portions, which to ease their
charge they did in his and his Sons time, by two infeoffments, the one de novo,
Hen. 1. Ex lib. pub. in Scacc.
the other de veteri; This course provided him the body of his War, the money
and provision was by Hydage assessed on the common people; at the consent of
their Lords, Chron. de Dunstable.
who held in all their Signiories such right of regality, Mat. Paris Benedictus
Monachus in vita Hen. 2.
that to their Vassals (as Paris says) quot Domini tot Tyranni, and proved to
the King so great a curb and restraint of power, that nothing fell into the
care of Majesty after, more then to retrench the force of this Aristocracy that
was like in time to strangle the Monarchy.

Though others foresaw the mischief betimes, Gervas. Dorch. Roger Wend^ver.
yet none attempted the remedy, until King John, King John.
whose over hasty undertakings, brought in those broyls of the Barons Wars.

There needed not before this care to advise with the Commons in any public
assemblies, when every man in England by tenure held himself to his great Lords
will, whose presence was ever required in those Great Councels; and in whose
assent his dependent Tenants consent was ever included.

Before this Kings time then, Claus. 6 Job. in 3. Dorso.
we seek in vain for any Council called, he first as may be gathered (though
darkly by the Record) used their Counsels and assents in the sixth year of his
Reign.

Here is the first summons in Records to the Peers or Barons, Tractaturi de
magnis, and arduis negotiis, it was about a War of defense against the French;
And that the Commons were admitted at this time, may be fitly gathered by this
Ordinance, viz. Provisum est assensu Archiepiscoporum, Comitum, Baronum, and
omnium fidelium nostrorum Angliae, quod novem militis per Angliam inveniend.
decimarum, etc. and this was directed to all the Sheriffs in England, the
ancient use in publishing Laws: Petit. 18.
From this there is a breach until the 18 Hen. 3. Hen. 3.
where the next summons extant is in a Plea Roll of that year, but the
Ordinances are lost: From hence the Records afford us no light until the 49 of
the same King, where then the form of summons to Bishops, Claus. 49. Hen. 3.
in 11. Dors.
Lords, Knights, and Burgesses, are much in manner though not in matter to
those of our times.

This Parliament was called to advise with the King pro pace assecuranda and
firmanda, they are the words of the Writ, and where advice is required,
consutation must needs be admitted.

To this King succeeded Edward his Son, Edw. 1.
a wise, a just, and fortunate Prince, his Reign, and so long to the fourth of
his Grandchild, we have no light of public Councels in this kind, Ex Rot.
Parl. in Archivis London.
but what we borrow in the Rolls of Summons, wherein the form stood various
according to the occasions, until it grew constant in the form it is now, about
the entrance of Rich. 2. The Journal Rolls being spoiled, by the injury of
times or private ends.

This King in the fifth of his Reign called a Parliament, Claus. 9. Edw.1. in
12.
and therein advised with his Lords and Commons for suppressing of Llewellen
Prince of Wales, and hearing that the French King intended to invade some
pieces of his Inheritance in France, he summoned a Parliament, Rot. Parl. Anno
7 Edw. 1.
Ad tractand. ordinand. and faciend. cum Praelatis Proceribus and aliis Incolis
Regni quibuslibet hujusmodi periculis and excogitatis malis sit objurand.
Inserting in the Writ that it was Lex justissima, Claus. 7 Edw. 1. in 3. Dors.
Claus. 34. Ed. 1. in dors.
provida circumspectione stablita: That Quod omnes tangit ab omnibus
approbetur. In 34. Super ordinatione and stabilimento Regis Scotiae, he made
the like Convention.

His Son the second Edward, Edw. 2.
pro solennitate Sponsalium and Coronationis, consulted with his people in his
first year, in his sixth year, super diversis negotiis statum regni and
expeditionem Guerrae Scotiae specialiter tangentibus, Claus, 1 Edw. 2. in 19.
in dors. Claus 6 Ed. 2. in 3. in dors. Claus. 8. in 3. in dors.
he assembled the State to advise; the like he did in the eighth.

The French King having invaded Gascoin in the thirteenth year the Parliament
was called, Claus. 13 E. 2. in 13. in dors. Claus 16. E. 2. in 27. in dors.
super arduis negotiis statum, Gasconiae tangentibus. And in 16. To consult ad
refraenand. Scotorum obstinentiam and militiam.

Before that Edward the 3. in his first year would resolve whether Peace or War
with the Scottish King, Ddw. 3. Claus. 1 Ed. 3. in dors.
he summoned the Peers and Commons, super praemissis tractare and consilium
impendere.

The Chancellor in Anno quinto declares from the King the cause of that
Assembly, Rot. Parl. 5 Edw. 3.
And that it was to consult and resolve, whether the King should proceed with
France for recovery of his Signiories, by alliance of marriage, or by war? And
whether to suppress the disobedience of the Irish, he should pass thither in
Person or no?

The year following he re-assembleth his Lords and Commons, Parl. 6 Ed. 3.
and requires their advice, whether he should undertake the Holy Expedition
with the French King that year, or no? The Bishops and Proctors of the Clergy
would not be present, as forbidden by the Canons such Councels, the Peers and
Commons consult, applauding the Religious and Princely forwardness of their
Sovereign to this holy enterprise, but humbly advise a forbearance this year
for urgent occasions.

The same year, Rot. Parl. 6 Ed. 3. Saff. 2. in 6.
though at another Sessions, the King demanded the advice of his people,
Whether he should pass into France to an enterview as was desired for the
exepediting the treaty of marriage: The Prelates by themselves, the Earls and
Barons by themselves, and the Knights of the Shires by themselves, consulted
apart, for so is the Record; and in the end resolved, That to prevent some
dangers likely to arise from the North, it would please the King to forbear his
journey, and to draw toward those parts where the perils were feared, his
presence being the best prevention; which advice he followed.

In the following Parliament at York the King shows how by their former
advice he had drawn himself toward the North parts, Rot. Parl. 7 Ed. 3.
and now again had assembled them to advise further for his proceedings, to
which the Lords and Commons having consulted apart, pray further time to
resolve, until a full assembly of the State, Rot. Parl. 7 E. 3. Sess. 2. Parl.
7 E. 3. in 6.
to which the King granting, adjourneth that Sessions. At the next meeting,
they are charged upon their Allegiance and Faith, to give the King their best
advice; the Peers and Commons consulting apart, deliver their opinions, and so
the Parliament ended

In the 13. year the Grands and Commons are called to consult and advise how
the Domestic quiet may be preserred, Rot. Parl. 13 E. 3.
the Marches of Scotland defended, and the Sea secured from foreign Enemies;
the Peers and Cammons having apart consulted, the Commons after their desire
not to be charged to counsel in things Des quenx ils mont pas cognizance,
answer, That the Guardians of the Shires, assisted by the Knights, may effect
the first, if pardons of Felony be not granted.

The care of the Marches they humbly leave to the King and his Counsel, and for
the safeguard of the Seas, they wish that the Cinque Ports, and Marine towns,
discharged for the most part from the main burdens of the Inland parts, may
have that left to their charge and care, and that such as have lands near the
Coasts be commanded to reside on those possessions.

The Parliament is the same year reassembled Avisamento Praelatorum, Rot. Parl.
13 E. 3. Sess. 2.
procerum, necnon communitatis, to advise de expeditione guerrae in partibus
transmarinis, at this, Ordinances are made for provision of Ships, arraying of
men for the Marches, and defense of the Isle of Jersey, naming such in the
Record, as they conceive fit for the employment.

The next year De la Pool accompteth in Parliament the expenses of the wars,
Parl. 14. E. 3.
a new aid is granted, and by several Committees in which diverse are named that
were no Peers of Parliament, the safeguard of the seas, and defense of the
borders are consulted of.

In the 15 year, De assensu Praelatorum Procerum and aliorum de consilio, the
Kings passage into France is resolved of. Anno 17. Badlesmere, instead of the
Council declares to the Peers and Commons, That whereas by their assents the
King had undertaken the wars in France, and that by mediation of the Pope a
truce was offered, which then their Sovereign forbore to entertain without
their well allowance; the Lords consult apart, and so the Commons returning by
Sir William Trussel an answer, their advice and desire is to compose the
Quarrel, approve the Truce, and the Popes mediation.

The Popes undertaking proving fruitless, Rot. Parl. 18 E. 3.
and delays to the French advantage, who in the mean space allied with Scotland
and others, practiced to root out the English Nation in France: This King again
assembled the year following, in which the Peers and Commons after many days
meditation, resolve to end it either by Battle or Peace, and no more to trust
upon the mediation or message of his Holiness.

In the 21 year, To. Parl. 21 E. 3.
the chief Justice Thorpe declaring to the Peers and Commons that the French
Wars began by their advice first, the True after by their assents accepted, and
now ended, the Kings pleasure was to have their Counsels in the prosecution,
the Commons being commanded, Que ils se deveroyent trait ensemble and se quils
ensenteroient monstrer au Roy and aux gravitur de son consilio, Who after four
days consulting, humbly desire the King to be advised by his Lords and others,
more experienced then themselves in such affairs.

To advise the King the best for his French employments a Parliament was
summoned Anno 25. Parl. 25 E. 3.
Herein the King for a more quick dispatch wills the Commons to elect 24. or
30. of their house to consult with the Lords, these to relate to their fellows,
and the conclusion general by the Lords to the King.

In the 27 a Great Counsel is assembled, Parl. 27 E. 3.
many of the lay Peers, few of the Clergy, and of the Shires and Buroughs but
one a piece.

This was for the prosecution of the French wars, Parl. 27 E. 3.
when honorable peace could not be gotten; but the year following a Truce
offered, the King forbore to entertain, until he had the consent of the Peers
and Commons, which they in Parliament accorded unto before the Popes Notary, by
public Instrument.

The dallying of the French King in conclusion of peace, Parl. 29 E. 3.
and the falling off of the Duke of Brittany, having wrought his end with
France by reputation of the English succor, is the year following declared in
Parliament, and their advice and aid required for the Kings proceeding.

In the 36. year he calls a Parliament to consult whether war or peace by
David King of Scots then offered, Pa^l. 36 E. 3.
should be accepted?

In the 40. the Pope demanding the tribute of King John, the Parliament
assembled, Parl. 40 E. 3. King John.
where after consultation apart, the Prelates, Lords, and Commons advise the
denial, although it be by the dint of Sword.

In 43. Parl. 43 E. 3.
The King declares to the Peers and Commons, that the French against the
Articles of the Truce, refused payment of the moneys, and delivery of the
Towns, summoning La Brett, and others the Kings Subjects in Gascony to make at
Paris their appeals, and had forraged his of Bontion, requiring, whether on
their breach he might not again resume the style and arms of France.

The Lords and Commons had apart consulted, they advised the King to both,
which he approving, altered the inscription and figure of his Seal.

Two years after it was declared to the Peers and Commons, Parl. 45 E. 3.
that by their advice he had again resumed the style and quarrel of France, and
therefore called their advice for the defense of the realm against the French,
securing of the Seas, and pursuing of the War, of which they consult, and
resolve to give the King an aid; Parl. 46 E. 3.
the like of Council and supply was the year succeeding.

In the 50 a Parliament to the purposes of the other two was summoned; Par. 50
Ed. 3.
and the year following the King in Parliament declaring how the French
combined underhand against him with Spain and Scotland, required their advice,
how Peace at home, the Territories abroad, Security of the Sea, and charge of
the War might be maintained. I have the longer insisted in observing the
carriage of these times, so good and glorious, after ages having not left the
Journal entries of Parliament so full, which with a lighter hand I will pass
through.

Richard, his Grand child succeeded to the Crown, Rich. 2.
and troubles, having nothing worthy his great fortunes, but his great birth;
Par. 1 Rich. 2. in 5 and 6.
the first of his Reign he pursued the Steps of his wise Grandfather, advising
with Peers and Commons how best to resist his Enemies, that had lately wronged
many of his Subjects upon the Sea coasts.

In the second year he again consulted with his people, Parl. 1 Rich. 2 in 7.
how to withstand the Scots, who then had combined with the French to break the
Truce.

In the third he called the advice of Parliament, Parl. 3 Rich. 2. in 4. and 5.
how to maintain his regality, impaired by the Popes provision, how to resist
Spain, France and Scotland, that had raised Wars against him, how to suppress
his Rebels in Guyen and Ireland, and how to defend the Seas.

The like in the fourth year following at Winsor; Par. 4 Rich. 2. n 2 and 3.
the year succeeding at a great Council, Parl. 5 Rich. 2. in 3.
the King having proposed a voyage Royal into France, now called the Parliament
to determine further of it, and it is worthy observation, for the most before
any proposition of War or Peace were vented to the Commons, a debate thereof
proceeded in the great Council to stay it fitter to Popular advice.

The quarrel of Spain continuing, Parl. 5. Sess. 2.
the Duke of Lancaster offered a voyage against them, so that the State would
lend him money, after consultation they granted aid, but not to bind them to
any continuance of Wars with Spain.

In the sixth the Parliament was called, Parl. 6. Rich. 2.
to consult about defense of the borders, the Kings possessions beyond Sea,
Ireland and Gascoyne, his subjects in Portugal, and safe keeping of the Seas;
and whether the King should proceed by Treaty of Alliance, or the Duke of
Lancaster by force; for the Conquest of Portuguall, the Lords approve the Dukes
intention for Portuguall, and the Commons advise, that Thomas Bishop of
Norwich, having the Popes Croiceris should invade France.

The same year the State was re-assembled to consult, Parl. 6 Sess. 2.
whether the King should go in person to rescue Gaunt, or send his Army; the
Commons after two days debate crave a conference with the Lords, the effect is
not entered in the Roll, only they bid Sir Thomas Puckering their speaker
protest, that Counsels for War did aptly belong to the King and his Lords; yet
since the Commons were commanded to give their advice, they humbly wished a
voyage Royal by the King; if not, that the Bishop of Norwich ought with the
advantage of the Popes Croiceris be used in that service, who accepted the
Charge with ill success; he further for the Commons prayed, that the Kings
Uncle should not be spared out of the Realm, before some peace be settled with
the Scots, and that the Lord de la Sparre sent with Propositions from Spain,
may first be heard.

The Chancellor in the seventh year in the name of the King wills the Lords
apart, Par. 7 Rich. 2.
and so the Commons, to consult whether Peace or War with Scotland, or whether
to resist or assail the Kings adventure with Spain, France, or Flanders.

Their opinion is not entered in the Rolls (an omission usual by the Clarks
neglect) only their Petition is recorded, that the Bishop of Norwich may
account in Parliament the expense of the moneys, and be punished for his faults
in the service he undertook, both which are granted.

At the next Sessions the same year the Commons are willed to advise upon view
of Articles of Peace with the French, Parl. 7 Sess. 2.
whether War, or such a Unity should be accepted; They modestly excused
themselves as too weak to consult in such weighty affairs; But being charged
again as they did tender the honor, and right of the King, they make this
answer, Quils intendent que ancunes serm^s and terres que mesme lour Leeige
auroit ^it pur cest accord in Guien si serront tenns dobt Roy Francois par
homage and service mars ne persont uny que lour dit Leeige voiroit assenter
trope legierement de temer dicens Francois pertiel service la villa de Callis
and aultres terres conquises des francoise per lespreneve verroit la comen ense
faest fait si autrement lour perroit bien fair, giving their opinions rather
for Peace than War; Peace with France not succeeding the eighth year, the body
of the State was willed to advise, Par. 8 Rich. 2.
whether the King in his own person, or by sending of forces against the
French, Spain, Flanders and Scotland, should proceed.

This King having assembled at Oxon his great Counsel to advise whether he
should pass the Seas or no, Claus. 9 Rye. 2.
with an Army Royal, and they not daring to assent without greater Counsel.

A Parliament the tenth year to have the advice of the Commons, Par. 10 Rich. 2.
as well as of the Lords was called, and how the Realm should be governed in
their Sovereign his absence.

The truce with France was now expired, Parl. 13 Ric. 2.
the Parliament was called in the 13th to advise upon what conditions it should
be renewed, or otherwise how the charge of the War should be sustained; at this
assembly, and by consent of all, the Duke of Lancaster is created Duke of
Aquitaine, the Statute of provisions now past. Rot. Claus. 13. Ric. 2.
the Commons a party in the Letter to the Pope.

The year succeeding a Parliament is called, Far. 14 Ric. 2.
for the King would have advice with the Lords and Commons for the War with
Scotland, and would not without their Counsels conclude a final peace with
France. The like assembly for the same causes was the year ensuing, the Commons
interesting the King to use a moderation in the Law of provisions, to please at
this time their holy Father, so that the Statute upon their dislike may again
be executed; and that to negotiate the peace with France the Duke of Aquitaine
may rather than another be employed.

To consult of the Treaty with France for Peace, Parl. 17 Ri. 2.
the King in the seventeenth calls a Parliament (the answer of the Lords is
left unentred in the Roll) the Commons upon their faith and allegiance charged,
advised that with good moderation homage may be made, for Guien an appenage of
the French Croine so it trench not to involve the other pieces of the English
Conquest, their answer is large, modest and worthy to be marked.

Now succeeds a man, Henry 4.
that first studied a popular party, as needing all to support his titles.

He in the fifth year calls a Parliament to repress the malice of the Duke of
Orleance, Parl. 5. Hen. 4. Parl. 6. Hen. 4. Parl. 7. and 8. Hen. 4. in 19 and
20.
and to advise of the Wars in Ireland and Scotland (neither Counsels or
supplies are entered in the Roll) and to resist an invasion intended by France
and Britain, he assembleth the State again, the like was the second year
following for France.

In this the Commons confer with, Claus. 7 H. 4.
for guard of the Sea, and make many Ordinances, to which the King assenteth,
the peace with the Merchants of Bruce and Foins is debated, and a Proclamation
published, as they resolved; by the Speaker the Commons complain of 96 pieces
of importance lost in Guien the year before, ln 33.
need of the defense of the borders, and Sea coasts, to suppress the Rebellion
in Wales, and disloyalty of the Earl of Northumberland; In 57.
they humbly desire, that the Prince may be dispatched into those parts with
speed, and that the Castle of Manlion the key of the three realms might be left
to the care of the English, In 59.
and not to Charles of Navarre a stranger, and to have a vigilant eye of the
Scottish prisoners.

In the tenth the Parliament is commanded to give their advice about the Truce
with Scotland, and preparation against the malice of the French,

His Son, Hen. 5.
the wife and happy undertaker, advised with the Parliament in the first year,
Parl. 1 Hen. 5. In 2.
how, to cherish his Allies, and restrain his Enemies; for this there was a
secret Committee of the Commons appointed to conferr with the Lords, the matter
being entered into a schedule touching Ireland, Wales, Scotland, Callis, In 4.
Gunien, Shipping, Guard of the Seas, and War, provision to repulse the Enemies.

In the second he opens to the Parliament his Title to France, Parl. 2 Hen. 5.
a quarrel he would prosecute to death. if they allowed and aided, death is in
his Assembly enacted to all that break the Truce, or the Kings safe conduct.

The year following peace being offered by the French King, Parl. 3 Hen. 5.
and the King of the Romans arrived to effect the work, the King refuses any
conclusion until he had thereunto advice and assent of the Lords and Commons,
for which occasion the Chancellor declares that Assembly.

In the fourth and fifth, Parl. 4 and 5. Hen. 5.
no Peace being concluded with France, he calls the State together to consult
about the War, concluding a Treaty of amity with Sigismund King of the Romans
by allowance of the three Estates, and entered Articles into the Journal Rols.

The same year, Parl. 5 Hen. 5.
by the Duke of Bedford. in the Kings absence a Parliament was called, to the
former purposes, as appears by the Summons, though in the Roll omitted, Parl.
7 Hen. 5.
The like in the seventh.

The Treaty with France is by the Prelates, Nobles, and Commons of the Kingdom
perused and ratified in the 11. of his Reign.

His Son more holy then happy succeeded, Hen. 6. Rot. Parl. 2 Hen. 6.
advises him the second year with the Lords and Commons, for the well keeping
the Peace with France; consulteth with them about the delivery of the Scottish
King, and the conclusion of it is confirmed by common assent.

And in the third year they are called to advise and consent to a new Article
in the League with Scotland, Rot. Pa 3 H. 6.
for change of Hostages.

And in the ninth conclude certain Rot. Pa. 9 H. 6.
persons by name to Treat a Peace with the Dolphin of France.

The Treaty at Arras, whither the Pope had sent as Mediators two Cardinals, not
succeeding.

The King in Parliament, Anno 14. shows he must either lose his Title, Rot.
Parl. 14 Hon. 6.
Style, and Kingdom of France, or else defend it by force, the best means for
the prevention thereof he wills them to advise him.

He summoneth again the next year the State, Rot. Parl. 15 Hen. 6.
to consult how the Realm might be best defended, and the Sea safe kept against
his Enemies.

In the twentieth the Commons exhibit a Bill for the Guard of the Sea, Parl.
20 H. 6.
ascertain the number of Ships, assess wages, and dispose prizes of any
fortune, to which the King accords, and that the Genoways may be declared
enemies for assisting the Turks in the spoil of the Rhode Knights, and that the
privileges of the Pruce and Hans Towns Merchants may be suspended, till
compensation be made to the English for the, wrongs they have done them, to
which the King in part accords.

The King by the Chancellor declares in Parliament Anno 23. Parl. 23 H. 6.
That the Marriage with Margaret the King of Sicils Daughter was contracted for
enducing the Peace made with France, against which the Lords, as not by their
advice effected, make Protestation, and enter it on the Roll.

In the 25. Rot. Parl. 25 Hen. 6. in 3.
the King intended to pass in Person into Franch, and there to treat a Peace
with the King, advises with the Lords and Commons in Parliament, and Letters
of Mart are granted against the Britains, N. 6.
for spoil done to the English Merchants.

The Lord Hastings, Parl. 27 H. 6.
and Abbot of Gloucester declare in Parliament Anno 27. the preparation of the
French, the breach by them of the Peace, the weak defense of Normandy, and the
expiration shortly of the Truce, requiring speedy advice and remedy.

In the 29. Parl. 29 H. 6.
it was enjoined by Parliament, to provide for defense of the Sea and Land
against the French.

It was commanded by the King to the States assembled, Parl. 33 H. 6.
Anno 33. to advise for well ordering of his House, payment of the Soldiers at
Callis, guard of the Sea, raising of the siege of Barwicke made by the Scots
against the Truce, dispoiling of the number of 13000 Soldiers, arrayed the last
Parliament, according of differences amongst the Lords, restraining
transportation of Gold and Silver, and acquitting the disorders in Wales; of
all which, Committees are appointed to frame Bills.

Edward the fourth by the Chancellor declares in his seventh year to the
Edward 4. Parl. 7. E. 4.
Lords and Commons, that having made peace with Scotland, entered League with
Spain and Denmark, contracted with Burgundy and Britany for their aid in the
recovery of his right in France, he had now called them to give their Counsels
in proceeding, which Charge in a second Sessions was again proposed unto them.

The like was to another Parliament in his twelfth year. Parl. 12 E. 4.


After this time their Journalls of Parliament have not been well preserved,
Henry 7. Rot. Parl. 1 Hen. 7.
or not carefully entered, for I can find of this nature no Record, until the
first of Hen. 7. wherein the Commons, by Thomas Lovell their Speaker, Petition
the King to take to Wife Elizabeth Daughter to Edw. 4. to which the King at
their request agrees.

The next is the third of Hen. the 8. in which from the King the Chancellor
declares to the three Estates the cause of that Assembly: Henry 8. Parl. 3 H 8.
The first to devise a course to resist the Invasion of the Scots, next how to
acquit the quarrel between the King of Castile, and the Duke of Geldres his
Allie; lastly for assisting the Pope against Lewis King of France, whose Bull
expressing the injuries done the Sea Apostolic, was read by the Master of the
Rolls in open Parliament; The Chancellor, the Treasurer, and other Lords sent
down to the Commons to confer with them.

The last in the 32d of the same year, Rot. Parl 32. Hen. 8.
where the Chancellor remembering the many troubles the State had undergone, in
doubtful titles of Succession, Ex iustrumen. Orig.
declares, that although the Convocation had judged void the marriage of Anne
of Cleve, yet the King would not proceed, without the Counsel of the three
Estates: The two Archbishops are sent to the Commons with the Sentence sealed,
which read, and there discussed, they pass a Bill against the Marriage.

In all these passages of public Counsels, wherein I have been much assisted
by the painful labor of Mr. Elsings, Clerk of the Parliament, and still
observe, that the Sovereign Lord, either in best advice, or in most
necessities, would entertain the Commons with the weightiest causes, either
foreign or domestique, to apt and bind them so to readiness of charge, and they
as warily avoiding it to eschew expense; their modest answers may be a rule for
ignorant liberty to form their duties, and humbly to entertain such weighty
Counsels at their Sovereigns pleasure, and not to the wild fancy of any
Factious spirit. I will add one foreign example to show what use have been
formerly made by pretending Marriages, and of Parliaments to dissolve them,
their first end served.

Maximilian the Emperor, and Ferdinand of Spain, the one to secure his
possessions in Italy, the other to gain the Kingdom of Navarre, (to both which
the French King stood in the way) projected a Marriage of Charles their
Grandchild, with Mary the King of Englands sister, it was embraced, and a Book
published of the benefits likely to ensue the Christian world by this match,
Tractat. matrimonial. 1510.
upon this Ground, Ferdinando begins to incite Henry the 8th to war with
France, Ex literis orig. legator.
presents him with succors, and designs him Guien to be the mark, and Dorset
sent with men and munition to join with the Spanish forces then on the Borders
of Navarre, the noise is they came to assist Ferdinand in the conquest of that
Kingdom, which though false, gained such reputation, that Albred was
disheartened, and Ferdinand possesed himself of that his Successors since
retained, his end served, the English Army weak and weather-beaten, are
returned fruitless.

Maximilian then allureth the young and active King to begin with France on the
other side, Ex tract. Hen. 8. and Maximilian. 1511.
Turwin and Turney is now the object, whither Henry goes with victory, but
better advised (with that pittance) makes an end by peace with France, whose
aim and heart was set on Millain.

A new bait the old Emperor finds Ex tract. orig.
out to catch the Ambitious young man, he would needs resign unto him the
Empire, too heavy for his age to bear: The Cardinal Sedunensis is sent over to
sign the Agreement, which he did; and France must now again be made an Enemy:
To prevent this danger Francis released his Title to Naples, and offers
Laogitia his Daughter to Maximilians Granchild Charles, Ex tract. orig.
at Noyon this is acted in the dark, and at Arno the French Commissioners came
up the back stairs with 60000 Florins, and they engrossed Covenants, when the
abused King of Englands Ambassador Pace, Ex liiteris Ric. Pace Legate. Reg.
Anglia.
went down the other; the good Cardinal returns home, meets by the way this
foul play of his Master, and writ to the King of England, not in excuse, but in
complaint, Contra perfidiam Principum, Ex literis Car. Sedunensis.
an honest Letter. Ferdinand and Maximilian dead, Francis and Charles are
Competitors for the Empire. Henry the 8th is courted for his help by both; the
one with the tie of Alliance (for the Infant Dolphin had affyed Henry the 8ths
Daughter) the other with the like, Ex literis Carol. Reg. Hisp.
and Daughter, he will make his Daughter a Queen in praesente, which the
Dolphin cannot do, and by his favor an Empress.

To further France was but to win Ambition to prey upon all his Neighbors. Ex
literis, Car. Imperat. original.
the English King is won, and wins for Spain the Imperial wreath, Extract.
Wind. 1522. Ex instru. orig. jurament.
which Charles in two Letters I have of his own hand then thankfully confessed.

From Aquisgrave he comes Crowned in haste to England, wedded at Windsor the
Kings Daughter, contracteth to join in an invasion of France, to divide it with
his Father in Law, by the River of Rodon, and swears at the Altar in Paul's to
keep faith in all.

Bourbon is wrought from France, Ex literis Richardi ^ace, and lohannis Russel.
and enters the Province with an Army, paid with King Henry's money; Suffolk
passes with the English Forces by Picardy: But Charles the Emperor, who
should have entered Guyen-faileth, drawing away Burbon from a straight siege
Marseilles, to interrupt Francis then entered Italy, and so the enterprise of
France is defeated, the French King as it Pavie taken Prisoner by Pescaro, led
to Groan, hurried into Spain by the Emperors Galleys, and forced at Madrid to
a hard bargain; without privity of Henry the 8th or provision of him, Ex tract
Madristensi 526. Ex Rot. Com. Russel and Pace.
who had been at the greater charge of that War. Now the Emperor affects
that Monarchy that has ever since (as some say) infected the Austrian Family.

Rome, the fatal old Seat of Government, Ex iustru. orig. Carol. 5.
must be the Seat of his Empire: Burbon, and after Moncado are directed to
surprise it. Angelo the observant Friar is sent before the Pope, consigned by
the Emperors Election, Ex instru H. 8. Bryano and Gardinen.
who meant (as his own instructions warrant) to restore that right again to the
Imperial Throne.

Charles will follow him from Barcellona with an Army; Ex literis Cuthb Tunstall
Epis Lon-Legat. Hen. 8. in Hispan. Ex protestat. orig. Toledonensi ^arl.
but before, he must call a Parliament at Toledo, whether by election or
affection, I dare not divine, that Assembly makes Protestation against their
Masters Marriage with England, and assign him Isabella of Portugal for a wife,
the Instruments are sent signed by the Imperial Notary to Henry the 8th. Ex
literis Car. Wolsey and Creg. Lusathis. Ex Instru. Signat. Chapter Im. Gonzado
Ferdinand. Capel. suo dat. 24 Feb. ^x lib. N N. N.Dom. Car.
And Charles bemoneth the straight he is forced into by them, but before all
this he had wrought from Rome, a Dispensation for his former out-hand Marriage;
sending not long after Gonzado Ferdinando his Chaplain, to invite the Earl of
Desmon to rebel in Ireland.

And to invite James the First, by promise of a Marriage to Christian of
Denmarks Daughter, Ex literis interce^t. a Com. Northumb. Custo^. March.
Scotiae. Extract. orig. in Arch. Wost. ^x tract. Cambrens. 1529.
his Niece; to enter the English Borders, to busy the English King, for asking
a strict account of that indignity. Henry the 8th with Providence and good
success over-wrought these dangers, and by the League of Italy he forced him to
moderate Conditions at the Treaty of Cambray, 1529. He being made Caput
foederis against the Emperor.

I may end your Honors trouble with this one Example, and with humble prayers,
That the Catholic may have so much of Princely sincerity, as not to intend
the like, or my good gracious Master a jealous vigilance to prevent it, if it
should, etc.

THAT THE SOVEREIGNS PERSON is Required in the Great COUNSELS, OR ASSEMBLIES
OF THE STATE, As well at the Consultations as at the Couclusions.

Written by Sir Robert Cotton, Knight and Baronet.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1672.

THAT THE SOVEREIGNS PERSON is Required in the Great COUNSELS, OR ASSEMBLIES OF
THE STATE, etc.
SInce of these Assemblies few Diaries, or exact Journal Books are remaining,
and those but of late, and negligently entered, the Acts, and Ordinances only
reported to Posterity are the Rolls, this question though clear in general
reason, and convenience, must be wrought for the particular, out of such
incident proofs, as the Monument of Story, and records by pieces leave us. And
to deduct it the dearer down, some essential circumstances of name, time,
place, occasion, and persons, must be in a general shortly touched, before the
force of particular proofs be laid down. Ex Consiliis Reg. Saxon. Cantuar.
Gla^vil. lib. Ely.
This noble body of the State, now called the houses in Parliament, is known in
several ages, by several names Consilia the Counsels in the old times, after
Magnum, Commune, and Generale, Consilium, Curia Magna, capitalis, and Curia
Regis; Leges Etherlredi. Ingulphus.
sometimes Generale Placitum, and sometimes Synodi and Synodalia decreta,
Croylandensis. Registra Monaster.
although as well the causes of the Commonwealth as Church were there decided.
The name of Parliament, except in the Abbots Chapters, not ever heard of until
the reign of King John, and then but rarely. At the Kings Court were these
Conventions usually, Palatium Regale. Westminster.
and the Presence, Privy Chamber, or other room convenient, for the King in
former times as now then used; for what is the presenst House of Lords, but so,
as at this time, and was before the fyring of the Palace at Westminster, about
the seventeenth of Henry the eighth, who then and there recided.

Improbable it is to believe the King was excluded his own Privy Chamber, and
unmannerly for guests to bar him the company, who gave to them their
entertainment. Regist. Eliensis.
It was at first as now Edicto Principis, at the Kings pleasure. Toward the
end of the Saxons; and in the first time of the Norman Kings, Annals
Monasteriorum.
it stood in Custome-Grace, to Easter,Whitsontide, and Christmas fixed. Liber
de Rollo.
The Bishops, Earls, and Lords, Ex more, then Assembled (so are the frequent
words in all the Annalls) the King of course then revested with his imperial
Crown by the Bishops and Peers assembling, Regist. de Wig.
in recognition of their preobliged faith and present service, until the unsafe
time of King John, by overpotent and popular Lords, gave discontinuance to this
constant grace of Kings, Johannes Eversden.
and then it returned to the uncertain pleasure of the Sovereigns summons.
Matthew Paris. Hoveden.
The causes then as now of such Assemblies, were provisions for the support of
the State in Men and Money, well ordering of the Church and Common wealth, and
determining of such causes, Bracton.
which ordinary Courts nesciebant judicare (as Glanvill Glanvill.
the grand judge under Henry the second says) where the presence of the King
was still required, Fleta.
it being otherwise absurd to make the King assentor to the Judgments of
Parliament, and afford him no part in the consultation. The necessity thereof
is well and fully deduced unto us in a reverent monument not far from that
grave man's time in these words, Modus tenendi Parliament.
Rex tenetur omni modo personaliter interesse Parliamento, nisi per Corporalem
agritudinem detineatur. Then to acquaint the Parliament, of such occasion of
either house, Causa est quod solebat Clamor and Murmur esse pro absentia Regis
quia res damnosa and periculosa est toto Communitati Parliamenti and Regni cum
Rex a Parliamento absens fuerit, Nec se absentare debet, nec potest nisi
duntaxat in Causa supradicta. By this appears the desire of the State to have
the Kings presence in these great Counsels by express necessity. I will now
endeavor to lead the practice of it from the dark and eldest times to these no
less neglected of ours.

From the year 720. to near 900. during all the Heptarchy in all the Councels
remaining composed Ex Episcopis, Ex Registris Council. Cantuariae.
Abbatibus, Ex Consilio Withredi Regist.
Ducibus, satrapis, and omni dignitate optimatibus Ecclesiasticis scilicet and
secularibus personis pro utilitate Ecclesiae, and stabilitate Regni
pertractand. Seven of them are Rege praecedente and but one by deputy; and
incongruous it were and almost nonsense, to bar his presence that is president
of such an Assembly.

The Saxon Monarchy under Alfred, Ethelred, Ex Synodis and legibus Alfredi
Ethelredi, Edgari.
and Edgar in their Synods or Placita generalia went in the same practice and
since. Thus Ethelwald appealed against Earl Leofrick From the County and
generale Placitum before King Ethelred and Edgira the Queen, Ex Registr. Elien.
against Earl Goda to Eldred the King at London, Ex Registr. Abigtounessi.
Chronicon de Waverley.
Congregatis Principibus and sapientibus Angliae. Gesta Sancti Edwardi Galice.
In the year 1502. under Edward the Confessor Statutum est placitum magnum
extra Londinum quod Normanni ex Francorum consuetud. Alured. Rivalensis, vita
Edwardi Confessoris.
Parliamentum appellant where the King and all his Barons appealed Goodwin for
his Brother Alureds death, the Earl denied it, and the King replied thus, My
Lords, you that are my liege men Earls and Barons of the Land here Assembled
together have heard my Appeal and his Answer, unto you be it left to do right
betwixt us.

At the great Council at Westminster 1072. Regist. Cantuarien.
in Easter week, the cause of the two Archbishops Lanfrank and Thomas,
ventilata fuit, in praesentia Regis Willielm. And after at Winsor, finem
accepit in proesentia Regis. At the same feast in the year 1081. (the usual
time of such Assemblies) the King, the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Earls, and
chief Nobility of the Kingdom present (for so are the words of the Records) the
cause between Arsast Bishop of Norway, Regist. Sancti Edmundi.
and Baldwyne Abbot of Bury was also argued, Et ventilata in publica jubet Rex
teneri Judicium Causis auditis Amhorum.

The diligence of his Son the Learned Henry the first in executing of this part
of his kingly function is commended to posterity, Walterus Mape de nugis
curialium.
by Walter Mape, a Learned man, trained up, and in favor with Henry the
second, in these words, Omnia Regali more moderamine faciebat, neminem volebat
agere justitia vel pace. Constituerat autem ad tranquilitatem omnium ut diebus
vacationis, vel in domo magna subsidio copiam sui faceret, usque ad horam
sextam, (which was till twelve as we now account) secum habens Comites,
Baronet, Proceres, and Vavasores, to hear, and determine causes, whereby he
attained the surname of Leo Justitiae in all stories, Hen. Huntingdon.
and so out-went in quiet guidance of the State his best progenitors. Malmsbury.
The next of his name that succeeded is remembered every where for his debates
and his disputes he had in person with Thomas the Archbishop, and others of his
part, Vita Tho Cantuar per Fitz-Stephanum. Gesta Hen.2. Benedictio Abb. Authore.
at the great Counsels both at London, Clarendon, and Northampton, for redress
of the many complaints of the Commons, against the outrages and extortions of
the Clergy; one thousand five hundred and fifty seven, Die Penticostis apud
sanctum Edmundum, the same King Diademate Insignitus, Regist. Monast. de Belto.
with the Bishops, Abbots, Earls, and Barons of the Kingdom, sat daily
himself and heard all the debates, concerning the Liberties and Charters of
Battle Abbey. The interlocutory Speeches as well of the King, as Lords and
parties are at full related in a Register of that Church.

The suit between the Church of Lincoln and Saint Albanes, Regist, Lincoln.
in praesentia Regis Henry Archepiscop. and Episcop. omnium Angliae, and
Comitum and Baronum Regni, was at Westminster debated and ended: And had alone
of memory and truth been a protector of the public Records of the State, as
awe of the Clergies sensure was a guard to theirs, in tempestuous times, we had
not been now left to the only friendship of Monks diligence; for example in
this kind. Liber Burtoni ens. Monasterii
At Lincoln the Archbishops, some Bishops, but all the Earls and Barons of
the Realm, una Cum Rege Johanne Congregati ad colloquium de concordia Regis
Scotiae, says the Register of that Church.

This use under King Henry the third, Rot. Clans. Anno 59. E. ^.
needs no further proof, than the Writ of summons (then framed) expressing
that Kings mind and practice; It is Nobiscum and Praelatis and Magnatibus
nostris quos vocari fecimus super praemissis tractare and Consilium impendere,
which word Nobiscum implies plainly the Kings presence; what the succeeding
practice was, from the fifteenth year of the second Edward, the proper Records
of this inquiry (the Journall Books being lost) I am enforced to draw from out
the Rolls of Acts, wherein sometimes by chance they are remembered. Edward the
second was present in Parliament in the fifteenth year of his Reign at the
complaint against the Spencers, Rot. Parl. 15. Edw. 2.
and at the second Parliament that year, for the repeal of that banishment.

In the fourth of Edward the third, the King was present at the accusation of
Roger Mortimer, Rot. Parl. 4. Edw. 3.
but not at the Trial.

And the next year in the treaty of the French affairs. Rot. Parl. Anno 5.
Edw. 3.


In the sixth year Intererat Rex in Causa Johannis de Gray and Willielmi de
Zous. The same year the second day in Parliament, the King was present at the
debate about his Voyage into Scotland.

In the fifteenth year the King in the Painted Chamber sitting with the Lords
in consultation, Rot. Parl. Anno 15. Edw. 3.
the Archbishop after pardon prayed, that for better clearing himself, he might
be tried in full Parliament by his Peers; which was granted.

In the seventeenth in Camera Alba, Rot. Pa^l. Anno 17. Edw. 3.
now the Court of requests, Rex cum magnatibus convenient Communes super
negotiis Regni.

In the tenth of Richard the second, Chronicon Henrici Knighton.
the King departed from the Parliament in some discontent, when after some
time, Lords are sent to pray his presence, and inform his Majesty that if he
forbear his presence amongst them forty days, that then Ex antiquo Statuto,
they may return absque do^igerio Regis, to their several homes.

Henry the fourth began his first Parliament the first of November, Rot. Parl.
Anno 1. Hen. 4.
and was the twenty seventh of the same month at a debate about the Duke of
Brittany, the thirtieth day the Cause of the Archbishop of Canterbury was
before him proposed only.

The third of November he was at the debate, Rot. Parl. Anno 2. Hen. 4.
whether the Commons had right of Judicature yea or no.

On the tenth he was with the Lords in their consultation about the expedition
against the Scots; Rot. Parl. 10. Hen. 4.
the creation of the Duke of Lancaster, and prohibition of a new sect for
entering his Kingdom. Some Ordinances were at this time consulted of before him
about the staple, and the sentence against Haxey after dispute revoked.

This King began his second Parliament, the twentieth of January, Anno 2. Hen.
4. Rot. Parl.
and on the ninth of February was present to make agreement betwixt the Bishop
of Norwich, and Thomas of Erpingham.

On the twentieth day of the same month he was present at Counsel for
repressing the Welsh Rebels; for revocation of stipends, and concerning the
Priors Aliens.

On the 26. they advise before the King of the Cistertians order.

On the second of March of the Statute of Provisions the Keeper of the privy
Seal, of relieving the two Universities.

And on the ninth of March, Rot. Parl. Anno 4. Hen. 4.
they mediate before the King a reconciliation betwixt the Earl of Rutland and
the Lord Fitzwater.

He also began a Parliament in the fifth year upon the fifteenth of January,
Rot. Parl. Anno 5. Hen. 4.
and on the twentieth they advise before the King of guarding the Seas, and the
Welsh rebellion.

On the eighth of February the Earl of Northumberland is charged before the
King, and in his presence, and by his permission, diverse of whom he knew no
harm, were removed from the Court.

The next day at the Petition of the Commons, he took upon him to reconcile the
Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland. And on the two and twentieth of
February of the Earls of Northumberland and Dunbarre.

In a Parliament of 27 of Hen. the 6. Rot. Parl. Anno 27. H. 6.
a Challenge of seat in Parliament betwixt the Earls of Arundell and
Devonshire, was examined and appointed by the KING with the advice of the Lords.

In that great capital cause of the Rot.Parl. Anno 28. Hen. 6.
Duke of Suffolk, the 28 of Hen. 6. I find not the King once present at the
debates, but the Duke appealing from his trial by Peerage, to the King, is
brought from out of the house of Lords to a private Chamber, where the King
after the Chancellor in gross had declared his offense, and his refusal, the
King himself (but not in place of judgment) adjudged his banishment.

By the Rolls of Edward the fourth, Rot. Parl. Anno Edw. 4.
it appears that he was many days, besides the first and last of Parliament,
and there was entered some Speeches by him uttered, but that of all the rest is
most of remark, the reporter then present thus tells it. Registrum Cralanden.
This of the Duke of Clarence and the King, Tristis disceptatio inter duos
tantae humanitatis Germanos, nemo arguit contra ducem nisi Rex, nemo respondit
Regi nisi dux, some other testimonies are brought in, with which the Lords are
satisfied, and so Formarunt in eum sententiam damnations, by the mouth of the
Duke of Buckingham, the Steward of England, all which was much distasted by the
House of Commons.

The Reign of Henry the seventh affords us upon the Rolls no one example. Ex
Chartis Anno 12. H. 7.
The journall Books are lost, except so much as preserves the passages of
eight days in the twelfth year of his Reign; in which the King was some days
present at all debates, and with his own hand the one and thirtieth day of the
Parliament, delivered in a bill of Trade then read, but had the memorials
remained, it is no doubt but he would have been as frequent in his Great
Council of Parliament, Ex Regist. Camera Stellata.
as he was in the Star Chamber, where by the Register of that Court it
appears as well in debate of private causes, that touches neither life nor
Member, as those of public care, he every year of all his reign was often
present.

Of Henry the eighth, memory has not been curious, but if he were not often
present, peradventure, that may be the cause, which the learned Recorder
Fleetwood, Ex Annalibus Fleetwood Recordat. London.
in his preface to the Annalls of Edward the fifth, Richard the third, Henry
the seventh, and Henry the eighth has observed in the Statutes made in that
Kings days, for which cause he has severed their Index from the former: And
much lay in the will of Wolsey, who ever was unwilling to let that King see
with his own eyes.

Edward the sixth, Memorial. E. 6. propria man^.
in respect of his young years may be well excused, but that such was his
purpose it appears by a memorial of his own hand, who proportioning the
affairs of Council to several persons, reserved those of greatest weight to
his own presence in these words. These to attend the matters of State, that I
will sit with them once a week to hear the debating of things of most
importance.

Unfitness by sex in his two succeeding sisters, to be so frequent present as
their former Ancestors, led in the ill occasion of such opinion and practice.

Most excellent Majesty, your most humble servant in discharge of obedience and
zeal, has hastened up this abstract, which in all humility he offers up unto
your gracious pardon. Presumption to enter the Closet of your Counsel is far
from his modesty and duty, what has been your powerful Command, he has made
his Work, what is fit to be done with it, is only your divine judgment. He
dares not say Presidents are warrants to direct; The success (is as worthy
observation) as the knowledge of them, sometimes have made ill example by
extension of Regal power, through ill Counsels with ill success. Some as bad
or worse when the people have had too much of that, and the King too little,
the danger no less. To cut out of either of these patterns to follovv, were
but to be in Love with the mischief, for the example. The clearer I present
this to your Highness, the nearer I approach the uprightness of your heart, the
blessed fortune of your happy Subjects: Pardon, most Sacred Majesty, that I
offer up unto your admired vvisdome, my vveak, but dutiful observations out of
all the former gathering. In Consultations of State and decisions of private
plaints, it is clear from all times, the King not only present to advise and
hear but to determine also, in Cases Criminal, and not of Blood, to bar the
King a part were to exclude him the Star Chamber, as far from reason as
example. The doubt is then alone in Crimes mere Capital; I dare not commend too
much the times that lost these patterns, either for the Causes or Effects; but
vvish the one and other never more. To proceed by public Act of Commons,
Peers, and King, was most usual. Appeals are given by Law of Hen. 4. of this
in now debate, the way I fear, as yet obscure, as great advice to State is
needful for the manner, as for the Justice. The example in the cause of the
Duke of Suffolk, 28 Hen. 6. where the King gave judgment was protested
against by the Lords. That of the Duke of Clarence of Edw. 4. where the Lords
and the high Steward the Duke of Buckingham gave judgment, was protested
against by Commons, in both of these the King was sometimes present, but
which of those may suit these times I dare not guess.

That of Primo Rich. 2. of Gomeneys and Weston, accused by the Commons plaint
for Treason, was tried by the Lords in absence of the King, but sentenced by
the Lord Scroop, Steward for the King. The Accused were of the rank of the
Accusers, Commons and not Lords: How this will make a President to judge in
causes Capital, a Peer of Parliament, I cannot tell. But if I should conceive a
way answerable as well to Parliament as other Courts, if the King and the
Lords were Tryers, and the Commons assenters to the judgment to hear together
the Charge, and evidence; The Lords as does the Jury in other Courts, to
withdraw, to find the Verdict, and then the Steward, for the King, to
pronounce the Sentence. It passes so by way of Act and Course that carries
with it no exception, and likely to avoid all curious questions of your
Highness presence there.

If your humble servant has in this expression of his desire to do you
service, presumed too far, his Comfort is, that where zeal of duty has made
the fault, benignity of goodness will grant the Pardon.

A DISCOURSE OF THE LAWFULLNES OF COMBATS

To be performed in the presence of the KING, or the Constable and Marshall of
ENGLAND.

Written by Sir Robert Cotton, Knight and Baronet. 1609.

LONDON; Printed in the Year 1672.

A DISCOURSE OF THE LAWFULLNES OF COMBATS To be performed in the presence of
the KING, etc. COMBAT.
WHere difference could not be determined by legal proof or testimony, Combat.
Ex lib. 3. Constable. Car. magni de testibus.
there was allowed the party his purgation. Bract. l. 3. c. 18. fol. 137. tit.
Corona.


Which was either Canonical or Legal.


The first by Oath, and called Canonical, because it is Lawful.

The other, which was either Per aquam candentem, ferrum ignitum, or Duellum,
called vulgar, because it was brought in by the barbarous people, without the
pretext of any Law; Leges Lombard. fol. 17. b. Lu^^prand^ Rege. Pr^pter
consuetudin^m gent. legem impiam vitare non possumus.
until the Gothish and Lombard Kings, seeing their Subjects more addicted to
Martial Discipline than to Civil Government, reduced those trialls to Form
and Rule: Which Constitutions are now incorporated in the Civil Law.

From the Northern Nations (of which the Saxons and Normans, or Northmanni are
part) it was brought into this Land, And although it grew long ago, both by the
Decrees of Desiderius Luitprandus, De Papin. Hist. l. 9. c. 11. Lib. 5. Decret.
2. part. ca. 1. qu. 40.
and the Mother Church, discontinued amongst the Lombards, as soon as they grew
Civilized in Italy; yet it continued till of late with us, as a mark of our
longer barbarism: Neither would we in this obey the Sea of Rome; to which we
were in many respects observant children; which, for that in the Duel,
Condemnandus saepe abslovitur, and quia Deus tentatur, decreed so often and
straightly against it.

In England this single Combat was either granted the party by license
extra-judiciall, or legal process. The first was ever from the King, as a
chief flower of his Imperial Crown, and it. was for exercise of Arms
especially.

Thus did Richard 1. Rich. 1. Parl. Anno 20.
give leave for Tournaments in five places in England; inter Sarum and Winton;
inter Stamford and Wallingford, etc. ita quod pax terrae nostrae non
infringetur, nec potestas justiciara minorabitur: For performance whereof, as
likewise to pay unto the King according to their qualities or degrees, a sum of
money proportionable, and that of a good value and advantage to the Crown, they
take a solemn Oath.

The like I find in 20 E. 1. and 18 E. 3. granted Viris militaribus Comitatus
Lincoln, to hold a Just there every year. 20 E. 1. Pat 18. E. 3. in 44. part 2.
Richard Redman and his three Companions in Arms, had the license of Rich. 2.
Hastiludere cum Willielmo Halberton, Pat. part 3. Anno 19. R. 2. m 16.
cum tribus sociis suis apud Civitat. Carliol. Pat. Anno 5. H. 4. m. 8.
The like did H. 4. to John de Gray; and of this sort I find in records,
examples plentiful.

Yet did Pope Alexand. the fourth, following also the steps of his
Predecessors, Innocentius and Eugenius, prohibit throughout all Christendom,
Detestabiles nundinas vel ferias quas vulgo Torniamenta vocant, in quibus
Milites convenire solent ad oftentationem virium suaram and audaciae, unde
mortes hominum and pericula animarum saepe convenient. And therefore did
Gregory the tenth send to Edward the first his Bull pro subtrahenda Regis
praesentia a Torniamentis a partibus Franciae, as from a spectacle altogether
in a Christian Prince unlawful: Lactan. divin. Instit. cap. 6.
For, Gladiatorum sceleribus non minus cruore profunditur qui spectat, quam
ille qui facit, says Lactantius. And Quid inhumanius quid acerbius dici
potest, says Saint Cyprian, St. Cyp. l. 1. Ep. 2.
then when homo occiditurs in voluptatem hominis, and ut quis possit occidere
peritia est, usus est, ars est, Scelus non tantum geritur, sed docetur.
Disciplina est ut primere quis possit, and Gloria quod periunt.

And therefore great Canstantine, Eusebius. in vita Constant. l. 3. Zocomen. l. 1.
c. 8.
as a fruit of his conversion (which Honorius his Christian successor did
confirm) established this edict: l. 2. Cod. and Glad. Ex Cod. Theo^os. l. 5.
c. 26.
Cruenta spectacula in otio civili and domestica quiet non placent: quapropter
omnino Gladiatores esse prohibemus. And the permission here amongst us no
doubt, is not the least encouragement from foolish confidence of Skill, of so
many private quarrels undertaken.

Combats permitted by Law, are either in causes Criminal or Civil, as in
appeals of Treason, and then out of the Court of the Cons^able and Marshal;
F^colinus de Brackland cap. 12. H 1.
as that between Essex and Montford in the reign of Henry the first, for
forsaking the Kings Standard.

That between Audley and Chatterton for betraying the fort of Saint Salviours
in Constant, 2. Part. pat. 8. R. 2. Memb. 8. Rot. Vascon. Anno 9. H. 4.
the eighth year of Richard the second.

And that of Bartram de Vsano, and John Bulmer, coram Constabulario and
Mariscallo Angliae de verbis proditoris, Anno 9. H. 4. The form hereof
appears in the Plea Rolls, ^lacita coram Rege 22 E. 1.
Anno 22. E. 1. in the case of Vessey: And in the Book of the Marshals Office,
in the Chapter Modus faciendi Duellum coram Rege.

In Appeals of Murder or Robbery, the Combat is granted out of the Court of
the Kings Bench. The Presidents are often in the books of Law; and the form may
be gathered out of Bracton, and the printed Reports of E. 3. and H. 4. Bract.
l. 3 c. 21 Anno. 17 E. 3. and Anno. 9 H. 4.
All being an inhibition of the Norman Customs, Ex Consuetud. Duc. Norman.
cap. 68.
as appears in the 68th. chapter of their Customary; from whence we seem to
have brought it.

And thus far of Combats in Cases Criminal.

In Cases Civil, it is granted either for Title of Arms out of the Marshals
Court; Tit. de Equela multri fol. 145.
as between Richard Scroop and Sir Robert Grosvenor, Breve Reg. orig. apud R.
G. C.
Citsilt, and others, Or for Title of Lands by a Writ of Right in the
Common Pleas, the experience whereof has been of late: as in the Case of
Paramour; and is often before found in our printed Reports, Reports Anno 1 H.
6. Dyer Anno 13 Eliz.
where the manner of darraigning Battle is likewise; as 1 H. 6. and 13 Eliz.
in the L. Dyer expressed.

To this may be added, though beyond the Cognizance of the Common Law, that
which has in it the best pretext of Combat; which is the saving of Christian
^loud, by deciding in single fight, that which would be otherwise the effect of
public War.

Such were the Offers of R. 1. E. 3. Rog. ^ovodeden and Adam Merimuth in vita
E. 3.
and R. 2. Rot. Fran. Anno 7 R. 2. m. 21.
to try their right with the French King body to body. Compane de la faughe
Regali and Spagna. f^ 110.
and so was that between Charles of Arragon, Joan. de Molina Chron. de Loy^
Reg. de Aragon. fol. 43. Balla Martini 5. dat in Kal. Maij Anno ^ontific. 8.
and Peter of Terracone for the Isle of Sitilie, which by allowance of Pope
Martin the 4th. and the College of Cardinals, was agreed to be fought at
Burdeux in Aquitain. Wherein (under favor) he digressed far from the steps of
his Predecessors, Eugenius, Innocentius, and Alexander; and was no pattern to
the next of his name, who was so far from approving the Combat between the
Dukes of Burgundy and Gloucester, as that he did inhibit it by his Bull;
declaring therein; that it was Detestabile genus pugnoe, omni divino and humano
jure damnatum, and fidelibus interdictum; And he did wonder and grieve, quod
ira, ambitio, vel cupiditas honoris humani ipsos Duces immemores faceret Legis
Domini and salutis aeternae, qua privatus esset quicunque in tali pugna
decederat: Nam saepe compertum est superatum fovere justitiam; Et quomodo
existimare quisquam potest rectum judicium ex Duello, in quo immicus Veritatis
Diabolus dominatur.

And thus far Combats, which by the Law of the Land, or leave of the
Sovereign, have any Warrant.

It rests to instance out of a few Records, what the Kings of England, out of
Regal Prerogative have done, either in restraint of Martial exercises, or
private quarrels, or in determining them when they were undertaken: And to show
out of the Registers of former times, which what eye the Law and Justice of the
State did look upon that Subject, that durst assume otherwise the Sword or
Scepter into his own hand.

The restraint of Tournaments by Proclamation is so usual, ^lacita anno 29.
and 31 E. 1.
that I need to repeat, for form sake, but one of many.

The first Edward, renowned both for his Wisdom and Fortune, Public fecit
proclamari, and firmiter inhiberi, ne quis, sub forisfactura terrarum and
omnium tenementorum, torneare, bordeare, justas facere, aventuras quaerere, seu
alias ad arma ire praesumat, sine Licentia Regis speciali.

By Proclamation R. 2. forbad any but his Officers, Rot. claus. anno 19 R. 2.
dat. 26 Feb.
and some few excepted, to carry any Sword, or long Bastard, under pain of
forfeiture and Imprisonment.

The same King, Claus in dorso 19 R. 2.
in the 19th of his reign, and upon the Marriage with the French Kings
daughter, commanded by Proclamation, Ne quis Miles, Armiger, seu alius Ligeus
aut Subditus suus, cujuscunque status, aliquem Francigenam, seu quemcunque
alium qui de potestate and obedientia regis existerit, Upon what pretense
soever, ad aliqua facta Guer^ ^rum, seu actus armorum exigat, sub forisfactura
ominum quae Regi forisfacere poterit.

And as in the Kings power it has ever rested no forbid Combats, so it has
been to determine and take them up.

Thus did R. 2. in that so memorable quarrel between Mowbray and Hereford, Com.
St. Alban. 22 R. 2.
by exiling them both. And when Sir John de Anestie, and Tho. de Chatterton,
were ready to fight, candem quaerelam Rex in manum suam recepit, says the
Record.

And De mandato Regis direptum est praelium inter Johannem Bolmer, 2. Pars pat.
anno 8 R. 2. Rot Vascon. anno 9 H. 4. m. 14.
and Bartramum de Vesana in the time of Henry the fourth.

Sir John Fitz-Thomas being produced before the Earl of Gloucester, Deputy of
Ireland, and there Challenged by Sir William deVessy to have done him wrong, in
reporting to the King, that Sir William aforesaid should have spoken against
the King defamatory words, of which Sir John there presented a Schedule:
Placita coram Rege. 22 E. 1.
Willielmus, audito tenore Schedulae praedictae, dementitus est praedictum
Johannem, dicendo; mentitus est tanquam falsus, and proditor, and denegavit
omnia sibi imposita, and tradidit vadium in manum Justiciarij, qui illud ad
misit. Et Praedictus Johannes advocavit omnia and dementitus est simil. dictum
Willielm. Whereupon the Combat was granted, and the time and place enrolled:
but the Process was adjourned into England before the King; who with his
Counsel examining the whole proceeding, and that Quia Willielmus attachiatus
fuit ad respondend. Johanni praedicto super diffamatione principaliter, Rot.
Parl. anno 23 E.1.
and non sit citatus in Regno isto placitare in Curia Regis, placita de
diffamationibus, aut inter parts aliquas, Duellum concedere in placitis de
quibus cognitio ad curiam Regis non pertinet; And for that the Judge, vadia
praedictorum Johannis and Willielmi cepit priusquam Duellum inter eos
consideratum and adjudicatum fuit, quod omnino contra legem est and
consuetudinem Regni: Therefore, per ipsum Regem and Concilium concordatum est,
quod processus totaliter adnulletur: And that the said John and Willlam eant
inde sine die; salva utrique eorum action sua si alias de aliquo in proedicto
processu contento loqui voluerint.

In a Combat granted in a Writ of right, Philip de Pugill, one of the
Champions, oppressus multitudine hominum se defendere non potuit: Whereupon the
People against him in perpetuam defamationem suam in eodem Duello Creantiam
proclamabant, which the King understanding, Assensu Concilii statuit, quod
praedict. Philippus propter Creantiam praedict. liberam legem non omittat, sed
omnibus liberis actibus gauderet sicut ante Duellum gaudere consuevit.

What penalty they have incurred, that without law or license have attempted
the practice of Arms, or their own Revenge, may somewhat appear by these few
Records following

William Earl of Albemarle was Excommunicated Pro Torniamento tento contra
praeceptum Regis. Pat. in dors. 4 H 3. Conc. Trid. Sess 9. Tit Decreta Reform.
Ex Con. Biturien. fol 1022. Claus, anno 3. E. 1. m. 2.
To which agrees at this day for the Duel the Council of Trent, and that held
at Biturio in Anno 1584.

John Warren Earl of Surrey was fined at a thousand marks pro quadam
transgressione in insultu facto in Alanum de la Zouch.

Talbois was committed to the Tower for attempting to have slain the Lord
Cromwell. Parl anno 24 H. 6.


And because Robertus Garvois insultum fecit, and percussit Edwardum filium
Williel. mi, inquisitio facta est de omnibus tenementis and catallis praedicti
Roberti.

Edw. Dallingrige accused by Sir John St. Ledger before the Kings Justices Pr^
venatione, and aliis transgressionibus, answered, that these accusations were
false, and threw down his Glove, and challenged disrationare materias
praedictas versu^ praedictum Johannem per Duellum. Placita de quo Warrant^ anno
8 R. ^. Sussex.
Sed quis contra legem terrae vadiavit inde Duellum, he was committed to
Prison, quousque satisfaceret Domino Regi pro contemptu.

Sir Nicholas de Segrave, a Baron, Challenged Sir John de Cromwell, and,
contrary to the Kings prohibition, because he could not fight with him in
England, dared him to come and defend himself in France: therein (as the Record
says) subjecting as much as in him lay, the Realm of England to the Realm of
France, being stayed in his passage at Dover, was committed to the Castle, and
brought after to the Kings Bench; and there arraigned, before the Lords,
confesled his fault, and submitted himself to the King, de alto and basso:
Wherefore judgment is given in these words, Placita coram Rege Trin. 33 E. 1.
Et super hoc Dominus Rex volens habere avisamentum Comitum, Baronum, Magnatum,
and aliorum de consilio suo, injunxit. eisdem, in homagio fidelitate and
ligeantia quibus ei tenentur, quod ipsi considerent quails poena pro tali facto
fuerit infligenda. Qui omnes, habito super hoc consilio, dicunt quod hujusmodi
factum moeretur poenam amisionis vitae, Whereupon he was committed to the
Tower, and To. Archerd, that attended him into France, was committed to prison,
arraigned, and fined at 200 marks. In the end, and aftermuch intercession, the
L. Segrave was pardoned by the King, but could not obtain his liberty, until he
had put in security for his good behavior.

But this course holds proportion with an ancient law made by Lotharius the
Emperor in these words, De hiis qui discordiis and contentionibus studere
solent, and in pace vivere noluerint, Ex lege Longi bard. 45. circa annum 8^^
and inde convicti fuerint, similiter volumus, ut per fidejussores ad nostrum
Palatium veniant, and ibi cum nostris fidelibus consider^bimus quid de talibus
hominibus faciendum sit.

A BRIEF ABSTRACT Of the Question of PRECEDENCIE BETWEEN ENGLAND AND SPAIN;

Occasioned by Sir Henry Nevill The Queen of Englands Ambassador, and the
Ambassador of Spain, at Calais, Commissioners appointed by the French King, who
had moved a Treaty of Peace in the 42. year of the same QUEEN.

Collected by Robert Cotton Esquire, at the commandment of her Majesty.

Anno Domini 1651.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1672.

A BRIEF ABSTRACT ACT Of the Question of Precedence between England and Spain,
etc. Precedence of the King in respect of place Antiquity as a Kingdom or a
Christian Kingdom.
or Eminency of the Throne Royal
or person Nobility of blood or Antiquity of Government.



Precedencie of England in respect of the Antiquity of the Kingdom.
TO seek before the decay of the Roman Empire the antiquity of any Kingdom is
mere vanity, when as the Kingdoms of Christendom, now in being, had their
rising from the fall thereof; at which instant Vortigern a Native of this Isle,
first established here a free Kingdom four hundred and fifty years after
Christ, and so left it to the Saxons, from whom her Majesty is in descent
Lineal; and it is plain, that as we were later then Spain reduced under the
Roman yoke, so we were sooner infreed.

Subsequence of Spain.
Spain since the dissolution of the Roman Empire entitled no King, till of
late, for Attalaricus from whom they would, upon slender warrant, ground their
dissent, was never styled Rex Hispaniae, but Gothorum, and the Kingdom of
Castile, Rodericus Sanctius. page 312.
wherein the main and fairest antiquity of Spain rested, begun not before the
year of Christ 1017. whereas they were but Earls of Castile before; so that the
Kingdom of the English began (which was always as Beda observes a Monarch in
a Heptarchie) 460. Beda.
years at the least before the Kingdom of Castile or Spain.

Precedence of England in respect of Antiquity of Christian Religion.
JOSEPH of Aramathea planted Christian Religion immediately after the passion
of Christ, Baronius.
in this Realm.

And Aristobulus one of them mentioned by Saint Paul, Dorothaeus.
Romans 6. was Episc. Brittanorum, and likewise Simon Zelotes.

The first Christian King in Europe was Lucius Surius. Beda.


The first that ever advanced the papacy of Rome, Baronius and Donaco
Constantini.
was the Emperor Constantinus born at York. Of whom in the Roman Laws near
his time is written Qui veneranda Christianorum fide Romanum munivit imperium;
And to him peculiarly more than to other Emperors are these Epithitons
attributed, In inscriptionibus antiquis.
Divus Divae memoriae, divinae memoriae orbis Liberator, quietis fundator,
Reipublic. instaurator, publicae libertatis auctor, Magnus Maximus, Invictus;
Restitutor urbis Romae, atque orbis.

And there have been more Kings and Princes of the blood Royal, Easci^ulus
temporis.
Confessors and Martyrs in England, than in any one Province in Europe.

And from Ethelbert King of Kent, (Converted Anno 596) until this day,
Christianity has been without interruption continued.

Subsequence of Spain.
In the time of Claudius, Saint James preached in Spain; but gained only nine
Souls. Tarapha.
So did he in Ireland as Vincentius says; and they cannot count Christian
religion to be then planted in Spain, which shortly after was first tainted
with the heresy of Priscilian, then with Gothish Arianism, and after defaced
with Moorish Mahumetism from 707 years after Christ, Tarapha.
in continuance 770 years, until Ferdinando, King of Arragon and Castilia
utterly expelled the Moors.

Precedence of England in respect of the more absolute Authority Political.
THe Queen of Englands power absolute in acknowledging no superior, nor in
vassallage to Pope or Emperor. Eulogium lib. 5
For that subjection which by King John was made to Inno^entius the third,
after in Parliament, Per praeceptum Domini Papae septimo Julii, Cum fidelitate
and homagio relaxatur omnino.

Sir Thomas Moore in his debellation, says, the Church of Rome can show no
such deed of subjection, neither that the King could grant it of himself. And
Engubinus in his defense of Constantines dodation, Ex legibus Sancti Edwardi.
names not England, Ex legibus Cenuti.
where he recited all the foedary Kingdoms of the Papacy; the Peter Pence were
not duties but Eleemosina Regis, neither the Rome-Scot, but Regis larga
benignitas: Parem non habet Rex Angliae in Regno suo: multo fortius nec
superiorem habere debet says Bracton.

Ipse non debet ess e sub homie, Bracton.
sed sub Deo, and habet tantum superiorem Judicem Deum: Likewise in appointing
Magistrates; pardoning Life, Appeal, granting privileges, taking homage, and
his Jura Majestatis not limited in censu nummorum, Bello judicando, Pace
ineunda.

Eleutherius the Pope 1400 years ago, in his Epistle to Lucius King of
Britain, styled him Vicarius Dei in Regno suo; so is the King of England in
Edgars Laws; and Baldus Baldus.
the Lawyer says, Rex Angliae est Monarcha in regno suo; and Malmesbury,
Malmsbury.
Post conversionem ad fidem tot and tantas obtinuit Libertates quot imperator
imperia.

Subsequence of Spain.
The King of Spain has no Kingdom, but is foedory either to France or Castila,
enthralled by oath of subjection, and vassallage, from King Henry, to Charles
the fifth of France 1369. Ex foedere contracto: And for the Netherlands, there
is homage due to the French King, or the Papacy, as Arragon to Innocentius the
third, by King Peter 1204. confirmed by Ferdinand and Alphonsus 1445. and from
James, by the like oath, 1453.

And to Sardinia and Corsica the King of Arragon, from the Bishops of Rome,
were under oath of subjection invested: Ex formula fiduciae.

The Kingdom of Portugal in vassallage to the Pope under an Annual Tribute.

And the Canaries, Hesperides, and Gorgon Islands subjected to the Sea of Rome,
under the chief Rent of four hundred Florins, by Lewis King of Spain, 1043.

Of both the Indies Alexander did reserve the regalities of Sicilia, Ex
Eug^bino.
the Church is chief Lord.

And Granado and Navarre were made foedary to the Pope, under Julius the second.

Naples at every change sends a Palfrey, as a Heriot, due to the Church of
Rome, and of the Empire he holds the Dukedom of Millaine.

So that it is questionable among Civilians: whether he be Princeps which
holds in feodo all of others.

His absolute authority restrained in Arragon, by Justitia Arragonica. In
Biscay and other places, by particular reservations. And his Jura Majestatis in
Censu Nummorum, Bello judicando, Pace ineunda etc. Limited by the privileges
of the State, as at Brabant and elsewhere in his Spanish Territories; Ex
propriis constitutionibus and privilegiis.

Precedence of England in respect of more absolute authority Ecclesiastical.
HEr Majesty's power more absolute in this (confirmed by ancient Custom and
privilege) than any other Christian Prince. For no Legate de Latere in England,
de jure allowed, Ex Ranolpho N^gro.
but the Archbishop of Canterbury.

If any admitted by courtesy, he has no Authority to hold plea in the Realm,
contrary to the the Laws thereof: Placita 2 Hen. 4. and before he was admitted
and entered the Realm, he was to take oath, to do nothing derogatory to the
King and his Crown. Placita Anno prim^ Henri 7. No man might denounce the Popes
excommunication, nor obey his authority on pain to forfeit all his goods,
without assent of the King or his Counsel. Placita 23 and 34 Edw. Rot. Dunelm.

Henry the First called a Provincial Council, Malmsbury.
so did Canutus and others.

No appeal to Rome without the Kings license: Anno 32 and 34 Edw. 1. Inventure
of Bishops and Churchmen, in the Kings hand. Ex Matt. Paris and Hen. Huntington.

De gestis Pontific. Donelm Placita. 32 Edw. 1. and in the 32 Edw. 3. Where the
reason of the Kings Ecclesiastical authority, to suspend or bestow Church
livings is yielded, Quia reges Angliae unguntur in Capite.

Subsequence of Spain.
The King of Spain can prescribe no custom to prohibit the Popes Legate, nor
uses any Authority Penal over the Clergy; Spain can produce no Example of any
Provincial Council by call of the King For. Bodin lib. 1. cap. 6. toward the
end writes, that the Kings of Spain, Non sine magna mercede impetraverunt
Sixti Pontificis Romani rescripto ne perigrinis sacerdotia tribuerentur.

Appeals from the King to Rome allowed. So the Kings of Spain, have merely no
power Ecclesiastical, having dispoyled himself of all, by inthralling their
Kingdom to the Church of Rome.

Precedence of England, in respect of Eminency of Royal Dignity.
THe Kings of England are anointed as the Kings of France, Ex libro B^rn
wellensis Caenobiae.
who only have their pre-eminence before other Kingdoms declared by miracle, in
the cure of the Regius morbus, which they can effect only; and that of
antiquity: For Edward the Confessor healed many.

2. They are superior Lords of the Kingdom of Scotland and Man, and Vicarii
Imperii; as Edward the third and Oswald entitled Rex Christianissimus: ve.
Peda lib. 2.

3. They are named Filii adoptivi Ecclesiae, Platina.
as the Emperor Filius Primogenitus, and the King of France, Filius natu
minor: vide Platina.

4. They are accounted among Reges super illustres, in this order: Corsettus.
Imperator, Rex Franciae, Rex Angliae and Franciae, vide Corsettus.

5. England in the General Councels at Constance and Pisa, was made a Nation,
when as all Christianity was divided into four Nations, Ex lib. Sacrarum
Ceremoniar.
Itallicam, Gallicam, Germanicam, and Anglicam. Ex lib. sacrarum Ceremoniarum
Ecclesiae Romanae.

6. Whereupon seat accordingly was allowed at the three General Councels, viz.
Constance, Pisa, Sienna, to the English Ambassadors next to the Emperor on the
left hand, and to the King of France on the right hand: which were their
Ancient seats before the Spaniards at Basil 1431. begun to contend for
Precedence.

Where it was in the first Session ordered, that all Legates should hold such
their places, as they had enjoyed heretofore, according to their worth and
antiquity: Yet in the Council of Trent the precedence of France with Spain was
made questionable.

Augustus de Cavalles, as the strongest reason to bar the French Interest,
inferred the Queen of England from her Ancestors, both in respect of
Inheritance, Conquest, and Gift, de jure Queen of France. By which reason when
he does shake or overthrow (as he thinks) the Precedence of France, he does
consequently strengthen the Precedence of England.

And in Treaty between Henry the seventh, and Philip of Castile, 1506 the
Commissioners of England did subsign betore the other, And in the Treaty of
Marriage with Queen Mary, Anno 1553 those of England are first rehearsed. And
at Burbrough Anno 1588. they gave it to her Majesty's Ambassadors.

And yet in respect of the Eminency of this Royal throne, to the Sea of
Canterbury was granted by Vrbane, at the Council of Claremount, Anno 1096. for
ever, the seat in General Council, at the Popes right foot, who at that time
uttered these words; Includamus hunc in orb nostro tanquam alterius orbis
Pontificem Maximum.

Subsequence of Spain.
1. The Kings of Castile are never anointed, neither has the Spanish Throne
that virtue to endow the King therein invested, with the power to heal the
Kings evil: For into France do yearly come multitudes of Spaniards to be healed
thereof.

2. No Kingdom held in fee of him.

3. Spain then not remembered one of the Sons of the Church.

4. The King of Spain placed last after the King of England inter super
illustres, by the said Corsettus.

5.The Kingdom was then comprised under Itallica natio, and no Nation of it
self, as in old it was called Iberia minor, as a member of Italy, Iberia major.
Virgilius.
England being Britannia major. Cosmographia.


At which time the Spaniard contented himself with the place next to the King
of France. Garsius.


Precedence of England before Spain, in respect of the Nobility of Blood.
HEr Majesty in Lineal descent is deduced from Christian Princes for 800 years,
by Ethelbert a Christian 596. and the Matches of her progenitors most Royal
with France, Germany, Spain.

Subsequence of Spain.
For their Antiquity of descent as Kings of Spain is chiefly from the Earls of
Castilia about 500 years since. vide T^rapha.


For they cannot warrant their descent, from Atalaricus the Goth, and as Dukes
of Austria from the Earls of Hapsburgh only about 390 years since.

Their matches anciently for the most part with their subjects, and of late in
their own blood.

Precedence of England, in respect of antiquity of Government.
HEr Majesty having reigned now most happily 42 years.

This we would not have alleged, but that the Spanish Ambassador at Basil,
objected in this respect the minority of Henry the sixth.

Her sex herein nothing prejudicial, when as both divine and humane Laws do
allow it, and accordingly Spain, England, and Hungary, insomuch, that Mary
Queen of the last, was always styled, Rex Mario Hungariae. Vide Tilius. Tilius.


Subsequence of Spain.
The King of Spain yet in the Infancy of his Kingdom.

For the Precedence may be alleged, viz.

The Antiquity of the Kingdom, when as Castile, Arragon, Navar and Portuguall,
had their first Kings about 1025. Anno Christi 1025.


The ancient receiving of the Christian Faith, by Joseph of Aramathea, Simon
Zelotes, Aristobulus, yea by St. Peter, and St. Paul, as Theodoretus, and
Sophrinius do testify.

The Kingdom is held of God alone, acknowledging no superior, and in no
vassalage to the Emperor or Pope, as Naples, Sicilia, Arragont, Sardinia, and
Corsica, etc.

Sir Thomas Moore denies, that King John, either did, or could make England
subject to the Pope, and that the Tribute was not paid (page 296.) but the
Preter-pence, were paid to the Pope, by K. John, by way of Alms.

The absolute power of the King of England, which in other Kingdoms is much
restrained.

England is accounted the fourth part of Christendom; 1415.
For in the Council of Constance all Christianity was divided, in nationem,
viz. Italicam, Germanicam, Gallicanam and Anglicanam, and accordingly gave
voices.

England in the opinions of the Popes is preferred, because in it is contained
in the Ecclesiastical division, two large Provinces, which had their several
Legatinati when as France had scantly one.

The Emperor is accounted major filius Papae, Ann^ Christi.
the King of France filius minor, the King of England, filius adoptivus.

The Archbishops of Canterbury, are accounted by the people, tanquam alterius
orbis Papae, and anointed to have place in General Councels, at the Popes right
foot.

The title of Defensor fidei, as honorably, and as justly bestowed upon the
Kings of England, as Christianissimus upon the French; or Catholicus upon the
Spaniard.

Edward the third, 1338.
King of England, was created by the Emperor, Vicarius Perpetuus Imperii; cum
jure vitae necisque in omnes Imperii; snbditos, and the Kings of England, 1065.
Papae Vicarii, by Pope Nicholas the second, vide COPGRAVE.

Innocentius the fourth, 1246.
the Pope said, vere hortus deliciarum est Anglia, vere pateus inexhaustus ubi
multa abundant, etc.

King Hen. 2. 1185.
elected King of Jerusalem by the Christians.

Richard the first conquered the Kingdom of Cyprus, 1191.
and gave it unto Guy Lusigrian, whose posterity reigned there until of late
years.

Kings of England are superior Lords of the Kingdom of Scotland, and are
absolute Kings of all the Kingdom of Ireland.

England is not subject to Imperial and Roman Laws, as other Kingdoms are, but
retains her ancient Laws, and Pura municipialia.

King Henry the sixth was Crowned King of France at Paris.

The Kings of England did use the style of a Sovereign, viz. Alti conantis Dei,
Largiflua, Clementiae qui est Rex Regum and Dominus Dominorum.

Ego Edgarus anglorum (...) Omniumque Regum Insularumque Oceani Britanici
Circumjacentium, cunctarumque Nationum quae infra came includuntur, Imperator ac
Dominus.

A REMONSTRANCE OF THE TREATIES OF AMITY AND MARRIAGE Before time, and of late,
of the House of AUSTRIA and SPAIN, with the Kings of England, to advance
themselves to the Monarchy of Europe.

Written by Sir Robert Cotton, Knight and Baronet.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1672.

A REMONSTRANCE OF THE TREATIES OF AMITY AND MARRIAGE Before time, and of late
of the House of AUSTRIA and SPAIN, etc.
Most Excellent Majesty,
WE your Lords Spiritual and Temporal and the Commons of your Realm Assembled
in this your Parliament, having received out of your mere grace, your Royal
command, to declare unto your Highness our advice and Counsel, for the further
continuing, or final breaking of the two Treaties between your Majesty, the
Emperor, and the Spanish King touching the rendition of the Palatinate, to the
due and former obedience of your Illustrious Son the Prince Palatine; and that
of Marriage, between the Lady Mary Infant of Spain, and the most excellent
Prince your Son, now Prince of Wales; We conceive it not unfit to offer up to
your admired wisdom and consideration these important Motives that induced our
subsequent advice and resolution.

By contemplation whereof, we assume to our selves that your Majesty apparently
seeing the infinite Calamity fallen of late unto the Christian world, by means
of these disguised Treaties of Amity, and Marriage before time, frequently used
with your progenitors, and now lately with your self by the House of Austria,
and Spain; to advance themselves to the Monarchy of Europe, will graciously be
pleased to accept our humble advice.

Maximilian the Emperor, 1503.
and Ferdinand of Spain uniting by marriage the possessions of the House of
Austria, the Netherlands, Arragon, Castile, Sciciliae, and their new
discoveries, to one succeeding heir, began (though a far off) to see a way
whereby their Grandchild Charles, might become the Master of the Western world,
and therefore each endeavored by addition of Territories, to facilitate that
their desired end.

France was the only obstacle, whose ambition and power then was no less than
theirs; he lay in their way for Gelders, by siding with Duke Charles; for
Navarre, by protecting Albert their King, for their pieces in Italy, by
confederation with the State of Venice; and for Naples and Millain by pretense
of his own. They were too weak to work out their way by force, and therefore
used that other of craft.

Lewis is offered for his daughter Claude the Marriage of Charles their
Grandchild, it is at Bloys accepted, and to them confirmed by oath: the claim
of France to Naples by this released one hundred thousand Crowns yearly, by way
of recognition only to France reserved, who is besides to have the investure of
Millain for a sum of money, which the Cardinal D'amboyes, according to his
Masters Covenant, saw discharged.

Ferdinand thus possessed of what he then desired, and Maximilian not meaning
to strengthen France by addition of that Duchy or repayment of the money,
broke off that Treaty to which they were mutually sworn, affiancing Charles
their Heir to Mary the Daughter of Henry the 7th; to whose son Arthur, 1056.
Ferdinand had married Katharine his youngest daughter.

This double knot with England, made them more bold (as you see they did) to
double with France: but he Prince of Wales his untimely death, and his fathers
that shortly followed, enforced them to seek out, as they did, another tie, the
Spirit and power of Lewis, and their provocations justly moving it: they make
up a second Marriage for Katharine with Henry the eighth, Son of Henry the
seventh; 1510.
and are enforced to make a Bull dated a day after the Popes death to dispense
with it; and consummate per verba de praesenti, by Commissioners at Callis, the
former Nuptuals of Charles and Mary, publishing a Book in print of the benefit
that should accrue to the Christian world by that Alliance.

Henry the eighth left by his father young and rich, is put on by Ferdinand to
begin his right to France by the way of Guyen; 1512.
and to send his forces into Spain, as he did, under the Marquess Dorset, to
join with his Father in Law for that design, by reputation whereof Albert of
Navarre was enforced to quit that State to Spain; who intended as it proved, no
further use of the English Army than to keep off the French King from assisting
Albert, until he had possessed himself of that part of Navarre, which his
successors ever since retain. For, that work ended, the English Forces were
returned home in Winter, nothing having advanced their Masters service.

The next year to assure Henry the eighth, 1513
grown diffident by the last carriage of Maximilian and Ferdinand, whose only
meaning was to lie busying of the French King at home, to make an easy way
abroad to their former ends, project to the English King an enterprise for
France, to which they assured their assistance, by mutual confederacy at
Mecklin; for which Bernard de Mesa, and Lewis de Carror, for Castile and
Arragon, and the Emperor in person gave oath, who undertook, as he did, to
accompany Henry the eighth to Turwyn.

Ferdinand in the mean time dispatching the Viceroy of Naples into Italy, to
busy the French King and Venetian, that the English King with facility might
pursue the conquest of France.

Henry the eighth had no sooner distressed the French King, but Ferdinand,
respecting more his profit than his faith, closed with Lewis, who renounced the
protection of Navarre and Gelders, so be and Maximilian would forsake the tie
they had made with Henry the eighth.

The Viceroy of Naples is instantly recalled from Bressa; a true with Spain
and France concluded; Quintean sent to the Emperor to join in it; Don John de
Manuel, 1514
and Diego de Castro employed to work the Emperor, and Charles the Grandchild
to exchange the marriage of Mary, Henry the eighths Sister, with Reve the
second daughter of the French King: and Lewis himself to take Elanor their
Niece to wife: and to clear all dispute about the conditions, a blanck is sent
from Spain to the French King to over-write what he please.

Henry the eighth perceiving this close and foul play, entertaineth an overture
made by the Duke de Longavil then prisoner in England, for a Marriage of Mary
his Sister with the French King, which effected, the two subtle Princes failed
of their ends.

Lewis dead, 1515
and Francis succeeding, he made his first entrance a league with England, the
recovery of Millane which he did, the protection of his neighbors, and
reduction of the Swisses from the Imperial side, for which he employed to them
the bastard of Savoy.

Maximilian and Ferdinand seeing by this all their new purchases in danger, and
that they had now no disguised marriage again to entertain the credulity of
Henry the eighth, they work upon his youth and honor. The Emperor will needs
to him resign his Emperial Crown; as wearied with the weight of Government and
distraction of Europe, which needed a more active man then his old age, to
defend the Liberty of Subjects, and Majesty of Princes from the Tyranny of
France.

That he had made the way already for him with the Electors; that he would send
the Cardinal Sedunensis, with ample commission into England to conclude the
resignation, which was done. That at Aquisgrave he will meet Henry the eighth,
and there give up his first Crown, from thence accompany him to Rome, where he
should receive the last right of the Imperial dignity, putting Verona into his
protection, then assailed by the Venetians; and giving him the investiture of
Millane in feodo, more Imperiali, then in possession of the French, to tie his
aid the faster against these States.

Hereupon Henry the eighth concluded a defensive league with the Bishop of Mesa
and Count Daciana, authorized Commissioners from the Emperor, Arragon, Castile,
and sends his Secretary Master Pace with money, for Maximilian had already
borrowed and broken to entertain the Swissers into pay and confederacy against
France.

Charles the Grandchild must feign a difficulty to sway his League, until the
Emperor at Henry the eighths cost, was fetched from Germany to the Netherlands
to work his Nephew to it, who in the interim had closely contracted a peace by
the Grandfathers consent with France. No sooner had Maximilian received ten
thousand Florins of the English King to bear his charge, but the Treaty of
Noyon, was closely between him; Arragon and Castile concluded, whereby the ten
thousand Crowns for recognition of Naples was passd from France to the Emperor,
and Charles himself affianced to Loysia the French Kings daughter, and also
darkly carried, that when Master Pace at Agno came down from the Emperor with
his Signature of the confederacy, the French Kings Ambassador went up the back
Stairs, with six thousand Florins, and the transaction of the Pension of Naples
to Maximilian, and there received his confirmation of the Treaty at Novon;
notwithstanding the same day the Emperor looking upon his George and Garter,
wished to Wingfield, Henry the eighths Ambassador, that the thoughts of his
heart were transparent to his Master.

So displeasing was this foul play to the Cardinal Sedunensis, the Emperors
chief Counselor, that he writ contra perfidiam Principum, against the falsehood
of his own Lord, a bitter Letter to the English King; who finding again how his
youth and facility was overwrought by these two old and subtle Princes, his
vast expenses lost, his hopes of France lesned, and that of the Emperor
vanished (for Maximilian is now conferring the Title of Rex Romanorum to one of
his Nephues) concludes, 1518
by mediation of the Admiral of France, a peace with that King; a marriage for
the Dolphin Francis with the Lady Mary, and the re-delivery of Tournay, for a
large Sum of Money.

Not long after Maximilian dies, leaving the Imperial Crown in Competition of
France and Castile. Charles, whose desire was, as his Ancestors, to weave that
vvreath for ever into the Austrian Family, began to fear the power of his
corrivall, with whom the Pope then sided, and the English King stood assured
by the late marriage of their two Children. To draw off the Pope he knew it
was impossible, he was all French. To work in Henry the eighth, he found the
inconstancy of his predecessors, and the new match to lie in the way. To clear
the one, he is fain, in his Letters into England, 1519
to load his two Grandfathers with all the former aspertions, his years, and
duty, then tying him more to obedience then truth: but that he was a man, and
himself now; that mutual danger would give assurance, where otherwise single
faith might be mistrusted; France was in it self, by addition of Britany, more
potent than ever, this man had rejoyned to it some important pieces in Italy,
and should his greatness grow larger up by accession of the Imperial Crown,
how easy were it to effect indeed what he had fashioned in Fancy, the
Monarchy of Europe. As for the young Lady, who was like to lose her husband if
Henry the eighth incline to this Counsel, and assist Castile in pursuit of the
Emperor; he was contented (for Loisia of France, espoused to him by the Treaty
at Noyon, was now dead) to make up the loss of the Lady Mary by his own
Marriage with her; a match fitter in years, for the Dolphin was an infant, as
great in dignity; for he was a King, and might by the assistance of her father
be greater in being Emperor.

Thus was Henry the eighth by fears and hopes turned about again, 1519
and Pacy forthwith sent to the Electors with instructions and money, who so
wrought that Charles was in July chosen Emperor: and that it was by the sole
work of Henry the eighth, himself by Letters under his hand acknowledged. From
Aquisgrave, he comes Crowned the next year for England, 1522
weddeth at Winsor the Lady Mary; concludes by league the invasion of France,
and to divide it with Henry the eighth by the River of Rodon, making oath at
the high Altar at Paul's for performance of both those Treaties.

Hereupon France is entered by the Eng^ish army, and Burbon wrought from his
Allegiance by a disguised promise of this Emperor of Elianor his Sister for
wife, to raise forces against his Master, which he did, but was paid by the
English King.

The French King to carry the wars from his own doors, 1524
makes toward Milan; 1525
whereby Burbon and his forces were drawn out of Province to guard the
Imperialls in Italy.

At Pavie they met, 1526
and the French King was taken prisoner, and forthwith transported into Spain;
where at Madrid the Emperor forced his consent to that Treaty, whereby he
gained Burgundy, and many portions in the Netherlands; leaving Henry the eighth
who had born the greatest charge of all that War, not only there unsaved, but
calling a Parliament at Toledo, takes by assignment of his States, Isabella of
Portugal to wife, procuring from Pope Clement a Bull to absolve him of his
former oaths and Marriage, working not long after by Ferdinandus his Chaplain,
the Earl of Desmond to Rebel in Ireland, and James the fifth of Scotland, by
promise of Marriage with his Niece the daughter of Denmark; to whom he
likewise sent Munition, and money, to busy Henry the eighth at home, that he
might be the less able to requite these indignities he had so done him. And to
show that his ambition was more than his piety, he Ordered by instructions,
first the Duke of Burbon, and after Hugo de Monsado to surprise Rome and the
Pope; sending Angelo an observant Friar thither, whom he had assigned to the
Papal Throne, intending to reduce the choice of the Sea from the Cardinals
again, to the Empire, and there to set up a first Monarchy.

But his design by a needful confederacy, as now of the Pope, French King,
Princes of Italy and others, with Henry the eighth, who was made Caput
faedoris, was to the safety of all Christian Princes, prevented happily, and
he himself reforced at Cambray in the year one thousand five hundred twenty and
nine, to re-deliver the French King, 1529
and many pieces of that Crown he had wrested away by the Treaty of Madrid,
and to sit down with moderate and fair conditions against his will.

His waking Ambition would not long let him rest, but again he plotteth to
break the knot betvveen the French and English Kings.

To work this, he assures, by contract, his assistance in furtherance of
Henry the eighths Title to France; and to make the greater belief, offers a
marriage to the Lady Mary, so she might be declared again Legitimate.

Henry the eighth accords with him, and advances his Army into France,
where he had no sooner recovered Bulleyn, but the Emperor catching advantage
on the French Kings necessities, falls off from his former faith and promise,
making up a peace perpetual with France, 14 September. 154^
whereby all claim from the Crown of Arragon, Naples, Flanders, Arras,
Gelders, and other parts was released, and mutual confederation for
restitution of the Catholic Religion concluded betwixt them both.

Edward the sixth succeeding his Father forbears all Treaties with Spain, but
those of intercourse, persisting as formerly in union with the Princes of
Germany, and his other Allies, preventing those expenses and dangers, which
his Fathers belief and confidence of Spain had tasted of before.

His Sister and Successor Mary, 1558
entertaining that fatal Amity with the Emperor and his son, by Marriage,
embarked her Estate in a dangerous war, whereby the Realm was much
impoverished, and Callice lost.

Her Sister of happy memory succeeding made up that breach, by that threefold
Treaty at Cambray, 1558. Where King Philip as bound in honor, stood bound for
aid in Recovery of Calice; But his own ends by that Convocation served, he
left her after to work out her safety her self alone; yet fearing that a Union
of France and your Realms, in the person of your most virtuous Mother, then
married into France, he under a seigned pretense of Marriage, wrought, by
Caraffa* and his Faction of other Cardinals, a stay of the Popes Declaration
against the Queen of England, more his own fears, than his love procuring it.

Yet the Princely disposition of this Noble Lady, taking those pretenses for
real favors, was not wanting both with her Counsel and Purse; for she
employed many of her ablest Ministers to mediate, and disbursed upon the
assurance of Brabant, and the good Towns of Flanders whose bonds are yet
extant, 1578*
for reduction of those Provinces to his obedience, one hundred and fifty
thousand pounds. 150000 li.


But when she found his aim to be the violating of their ancient liberties, and
in it saw her own danger involved; her Counsel advised her, not to leave the
assistance of those People, France, and those other Princes that lay as her
self in danger, to be swallowed up in his ambitious ends, who, when he intended
the Conquest of her Estate, to blind her with security, presented by Carlo
Lanfranco, 1587
and the Prince of Parma, a Proposition of Peace; graced with as many Arguments
of honest meaning, as his Progenitors had used to her Father, which she
accepted, but not without a prudent suspicion. For when the Treaty was in
height, the brought his invincible Navy to invade the Realm, the success
whereof was answerable to his Faith and Honor, She left not that injury without
Revenge, but forced him in his after Reign, to that extremity, that he was
driven to break all faith with those Princes that trusted him; 1597 25000 Mill.
of Crowns.
and paid for one years Interest, about twenty five thousand Millions of Crowns.

So lovv and desperate in Fortunes your Highness found him, King James, 1603
when to all our comforts you took this Crown; Then from the abundant goodness
of your peaceable Nature, you were pleased to begin your happy Reign with
general quiet, 16^^
and with Spain the first, which should have wrought in noble Natures a more
grateful Recompense than after followed: 1606*
For long it was not before Tyrone was heartned to rebel against your
Highness, and flying, had pension at Rome, paid him from the Spanish Agent. His
son Odonell Tirconell, and others your chiefest Rebels, 1612
retained ever since in Grace and Pay with the Arch-dutchess, at Spains
devotion.

As soon as your eldest Son of holy memory now with God, was fit for marriage,
they began these old disguises, by which before they had thriven so well, etc.

Twenty Four ARGUMENTS, Whether it be more expedient to suppress POPISH
PRACTICES Against the due ALLEGIANCE OF HIS MAJESTY.

By the Strict Executions touching Jesuits and Seminary Priests? OR, To
restrain them to Close Prisons, during life, if no Reformation follow?

Written by Sir Robert Cotton, Knight and Baronet.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1672.

Twenty four ARGUMENTS Whether it be more expedient to suppress POPISH
PRACTICES Against the due ALLEGIANCE To His MAJESTY.
By the Strict Execution touching Jesuits, and Seminary Priests, etc.
I Am not ignorant, that this latter age has brought forth a swarm of busy
heads, which measure the great Mysteries of State, by the rule of their
self-conceited wisdoms; but if they would consider, that the Commonwealth,
governed by grave Counselors, is like unto a Ship directed by a skillful
Pilot, whom the necessities of occasions, and grounds of reason, why he
steereth to this, or that point of the Compass, are better known, then to
those that stand a loof off, they would perhaps be more sparing, if not more
wary in their resolutions; For my own particular I must confess, that I am
naturally too much inclined to his opinion, who once said, Qui been latuit,
been vixit, and freshly calling to mind the saying of Functius to his Friend,
at the hour of his untimely death, Disce meo exemplo mandato munere fungi: Et
fuge seu pestem --

I could easily forbear to make my hand-vvriting the Record of my opinion,
which nevertheless I protest to maintain rather deliberatively, than by the
way of a conclusive assertion; therefore without vvasting precious time any
longer with needless Prologues, I will briefly set down the question in the
terms follovving, viz.

Whither it be more expedient to suppres Popish Practices, against the due
Allegiance to his Majesty, by the strict Execution touching Jesuit^ and
Seminary Priests: Or to restrain them to close Prisons, during life, if no
Reformation follow.

In favor of the first Division.
I.
There are not few, Mercy forerunning the rapine of a milefactor, is an ill
Guardian of a Princes Person.
who grounding themselves on an Ancient Proverb, A dead man bites not, affirm,
that such are dangerous to be preserved alive, who being guilty, condemned, and
full of fear, are likely for purchase of Life and Liberty, to enlarge their
uttermost in desperate adventures, against their King and Country.

II.
No less is it to be feared, A hard hand, suddenly remitted, is seldom by the
rude people interpreted (...) the best sense.
that while the sword of Justice is remiss, in cutting off heinous offenders
against the Dignity of the Crown, the misled Papal multitude, in the interim,
may enter into a jealous suspense, Whether that forbearance proceed from fear
of exasperating their desperate humors, or that it is now become questionable,
Whether the execution of their Priests, be simply for matter of State, or
pretended quarrel for Religon.

III.
And whereas in a remediless inconvenience, There is no hope of Reformation
where there is no Confession of the fault.
it is lawful to use the extremity of Laws against some few, that many by the
terror of the example, may be reformed; what hope can there be that Clemency
may tame their hearts, who interpret His Majesty's grace in transporting their
Priests out of His Realm, to be a mere shift to rid the Prisons of those whom
Conscience could not condemn of any capital crime.

IV.
Neither are their vaunting whisperings to be neglected, While Justice sleeps,
the time serves to sow news, and raise Factions.
by which they seek to confirm the fearful souls of their party, and to
inveigle the ignorant, doubtful or discontented persons: for if the glorious
extolling of their powerful friends, and the expectance of a golden day, be
suffered to win credit with the meaner fort, the relapse cannot be small, or
the means easy to reform the error, without a general combustion of the State.

V.
Let experience speak somewhat in this behalf, Fearful spirits, by sufferance,
grow insolent and cruel.
which has evidently descryed, within the Current of few years, that the
forbearance of severity, has multiplied their Roll in such manner, that it
remains as a Corrosive to thousands of his Majesty's well-affected Subjects.

VI.
To what purpose serves it to muster the names of the Protestants, Union in a
prepared conspiracy prevails more than number.
or to vaunt them to be ten for one of the Roman Faction? as if bare figures of
numeration could prevail against an united party, resolved, and advised before
hand, how to turn their faces with assurance, unto all dangers, while in the
mean time, the Protestants neastling in vain security, suffer the weed to grow
up that threatens their hane and merciless ruin.

VII.
Sometime the Oath of Supremacy choked their presumptuous imaginations; It is
hard to persuade those who by reason of their dependency on the Pope, are
^carce masters of their own Souls.
and yet could not that infernal smoke be smothered, nor the Locusts issuing
thereout be wholly cleansed from the face of this Land. Now that the temporal
power of the King, contained in the Oath of Allegiance, is by the Papal See,
and many of the Adorers thereof, impudently avowed to be unlawful; shall the
broachers of such Doctrine be suffered to live, yea and to live and be relieved
of us, for whose destruction they groan daily?

VIII.
To be a right Popish-Priest, Malis benefacere, tantu^dem est ac bonis inal^
facere.
in true English sense, is to bear the Character of a disloyal Renegado of his
natural obedience to his Sovereign, whom if by connivency he shall let slip, or
chastise with a light hand, what immunity may not traitorous Delinquents in
lesser degrees expect, or challenge, after a sort, in equity and justice?

IX.
If there were no Receivers, Fellowship i^ misery eases grief, and by the
clamor of a multitude, Justice is many times condemned.
there would be no Thieves: Likewise if there were no harbourers of the
Jesuits, it is to be presumed, that they would not trouble this Isle with their
presence, therefore rigor must be extended against the Receiver, that the
Jesuits may be kept out of doors; were it then indifferent justice, to hang up
the Accessory, and let the Principal go free, namely to suffer the Priest to
draw his breath at length, whiles the Entertainer of him under his Roof submits
his body to the Executioners hands? without doubt if it be fit to forbear the
chief, it will be necessary to receive the second offender in, to protection,
wherewith a mischief must ensue of continual expense, and scandalous restraint
of so great a number.

X.
Reputation is one of the principal Arteries of the Commonwealth, which
Maxim, is so well known to the Secretaries of the Papacy, that by private
Forgeries, and public impressions of Calumniations, they endeavor to wound
us in that vital part; howsoever therefore some few of that stamp, being better
tempered then their fellows in defense of this present Government, have not
spared to affirm that Tyranny is unjustly ascribed thereunto, for so much as
freedom of Conscience after a sort may be redeemed for money, notwithstanding
there want not many Pamphleters of their side, It is not good to set price on
that which being sold will bring repentance to the seller.
who approbriously cast in our teeths, the converting of the penalty inflicted
on Recusants,and refusers of the Oath of Allegiance, from the Kings Exchequor,
to a particular Purse, sure we cannot presume, that those Libellers may be
diswaded from spitting out their venom maliciously against us, Wariness is to
be used with those, Quines totam servitutem pati possunt, nec totam Libertatem.
when they shall see their Priests mewed up without further process of Law, for
either they will attribute this calm dealing to the justice of their cause, the
strength of their party, or patience; or that tract of time has discovered out
Laws, importing over much sharpness in good policy to be thought fitter for
abrogation, by Non-usance, than repealed by a public decree.

XI.
Moreover it is forethought, Most men write good Turns in Sand, and the bad in
Marble.
by some, tht if these Seminaries be only restrained, they may prove hereafter
like a Snake kept in the bosom, such as Bonner, Gardener, and others of the
same Livery showed themselves to be, after Liberty obtained in Queen Mary's
time, and if the loss of those Ghostly fathers aggrieve them, it is probable,
that they will take arms sooner, and with more courage, to free the living,
then to set up a Trophy to the dead.

XII.
Howsoever, Fugitives that crave succor use to lie much in favor of their
cause and power.
the Jesuits band is known in their native soil, to be defective in many
respects, which makes them underlings to the Protestants, as in Authority,
Arms, and the protection of the Laws, which is all in all; Relation de Botero.
It is a sig^ when a Faction dares number their side, that there is an opinion
conceived of sufficient strength, to attempt some Innovation. In a
Commonwealth there ought to be one head, for which cause a Prince must be
vigilant, when diverse factions arise that by favoring one, and neglecting the
other, instead of a head of all he become only a member of one Party.
Nevertheless they insinuate themselves to foreign Princes, favoring their
party, with promises of strong assistance at home, if they may be well backed
from abroad; To which purpose they have divided the inhabitants of this realm
into four sects, whereof ranking their troops in the first place (as due to
the pretended Catholics) they assumed a full fourth part to their property,
and of that part again they made a subdivision into two portions, namely, of
those that openly renounced the estabilished Church of England, and others,
whose certain number could not be assigned, because they frequented our
srevice, our sacraments, reserving their hearts to the Lord God the Pope: The
second party they alot to the Protestants, who retain yet (as they say) some
relics of their Church: The third rank and largest was left unto the
Puritans, whom they hate deadly, in respect they will hold no indifferent
quarter with Papistry: The fourth and last maniple they assign to the
politicians, huomoni (say they) senza dio, and senza anima, men without fear of
God, or regard of their Souls, who busying themselves only in matter of State,
Discontented minds in beginning of Tumults will agree, though their ends ^r
diverse.
retain no sense of Religion. Without doubt, if the Authors of this partition
have cast their account aright, we must confess that the latter brood is to be
ascribed properly unto them; A multitude is never united in gross, but in some
few heads which being taken away, converteth their fury against the first
movers of the Sedition.
for if the undermyning of the Parliament house, the scandalizing of the King
in print, who is Gods anointed, and the refusal of natural obedience, be marks
of those, that neither stand in awe of God or conscience, well may the Papists
boast, that they are assured of the first number, and may presume likewise of
the last friendship, when occasion shall be offered; for the preventing of
which combination, Certain Germans in Henry the seconds time calling themselves
Publicans were marked with a hot Iron in the foreheads and whipped, being
thrust out in the Winter, with a Prohibition that none should receive them into
their houses, they dyed of hunger and cold.
it is a sure way, to cut off the heads that should tie the knot, or at least
to brand them with a mark in the forehead before they be dismissed, or (after
the opinion of others) to make them unwelcome to the feminine sex, which now
with great fervency imbraceth them.

These are for the most part Arguments vented in ordinary Discourse, by many
who suppose a Priests breath to be contagious in our English air.

Others there are, who maintain the second part of the Question, with reasons
not unworthy of observance.

In favor of the second Division.
I.
DEath is the end of temporal woes; Rooted suspicion, being violently handled,
grows more wary, but not less obstinate.
but it may in no wise be accounted the Grave of memory; therefore howsoever it
is in the power of Justice to suppress the Person of a man, the opinion for
which he suffered (conceived truly, or untruly in the hearts of a multitude) is
not subject to the edge of any sword, how sharp or keen soever. I confess that
the teeth are soon blunted that bite only out of the malice of a singular
faction, but where Poison is diffused through the Veins of a Commonwealth,
with inermixture of blood good and bad; separation is to be made rather by
patient evacuation, than by present incision; the greatest biter of a State is
Envy, joined with the thirst of Revenge, If conspirators have one sympathy of
mind, the conspiracy is never wholly suppressed, so long as one of them
remains.
which seldom declares it self in plain colors, until a jealousy conceived
of personal dangers, breaks out into desperate resolutions; hence comes it to
pass, that when one male-contented member is grieved the rest of the body is
sensible thereof, neither can a Priest or Jesuit be cut off, without a general
murmur of their Secretaries, which being confident in their number, secretly
Arm for opposition, or confirmed with their Martyrs Blood (as they are
persuaded) resolve by patience and sufferance to glorify their cause, and
merit Heaven. Do we not daily see, that it is easier to confront a private
enemy, than a Society or Corporation? Opinion settled in a multitude, is like
Hydraes heads, which must be cured with scarring and not by le^ting blood.
and that the hatred of a State is more immortal, than the Spleen of a
Monarchy, therefore except it be demonstrated, that the whole Roman City, which
consists not of one brood, may be cut off at the first stroke as one entire
head, I see no cause to think our State secured, by setting on the skirts of
some few Seminaries, leaving in the mean time a multitude of Snarlers abroad,
who already show their Teeth, and only wait opportunity to bite fiercely. I
will not deny, that, what we fear, we commonly hate, provided always, that no
merit has interceded a reconciliation; for there is great difference between
hatred conceived against him that will take away the life, Clemency is a Divine
instinct, and works supernal effects.
and him that may justly do it, and yet in clemency forbears to put it in
effect; for the latter breeds reverend aw, whereas the former subjecteth to
servile fear, always accompanied with desire of innovations, and although it
has been affirmed of the Church of Rome, Gorticii Axiomata Politica.
Quod Pontificium genus semper crudele, nevertheless out of Charity let us
hope, that all devils are not so black as they are painted, some, or perhaps
many of them there are, whom conscience, or in default thereof, pure shame of
the world will constrain to confess that his Majesty most graciously
distinguishes the Theory of Popery; Tacitus in vita Agricol.
from the Active part thereof, as being naturally inclined, Parvis peccatis
veniam, magnis Severitatem commodare, nec poena semper, sed saepius poenitentia
contentus esse.

II.
Mistaking of punishments Legally inflicted, commonly proceeds from fond pity,
or the interest which we have in the same cause; both which beget blind
partiality; admit then, that the Papal side, When Traitors in evils will not
choose the least, it is an argument that they are desperate, and breath nothing
but extremity of mischief.
affecting merit by compassion, may be nearly touched with the restraint of
their Seminaries, it cannot be denied I hope, except they had the hearts of
Tigers, that in humanity they will prefer their ease of durance, before the
rigor of death; and albeit that Parsons, Bellarmin, and the Pope himself,
constrain their spiritual Children, to thrust their fingers into the fire, by
refusing the Oath of Allegiance, notwithstanding we have many testimonies in
judicial Courts, and printed Books, that the greater part of them are of that
Theban hunters mind, who would rather have seen his Dogs cruel acts, then have
felt them to his own cost.

Garnett himself also in one of his secret Letters, It was a precept of
Machivells, to put on the mask of Religion.
that after his death he should not be enrolled amongst the Martyrs, because
that no matter of Religion was objected against him; yet it plainly appeared in
his demeanor, that he would gladly have survived the possibility of that
glory, if any such hopes had remained. Neither is it to be presumed, that being
in Prison, he would ever have conceived that we durst not touch his Reverence,
So it pleased Parsons to cavil, of whom it might be truly spoken, Malus malum
pejorem esse vult, and sui similem.
or that the Law was remiss which had justly condemned him, and left his life
to the Kings mercy. It was the distance of the place and not Parsons that
interpreted the sending over-seas of the Priests to be a greater argument of
their innocence, than of his Majesty's forbearance; For had Father Parsons
himself been Coram nobis, his Song would rather have been of mercy then
justice. It is truly said, that we are all instructed better by examples then
precepts, therefore if the Laws printed, and Indictments recorded, cannot
control the Calumniations of those that wilfully will mistake Treason, for
Religion: By the execution of two or three of that backbiting number, I doubt
not but the question may readily be decided.

-- Namque immedicabile vulnus, Ense recidendum est, Ne pars sincera trahatur.

III.
To dally with pragmatical Papists, especially with those that by their example
and Counsel pvevert his Majesty's Subjects, To bestow benefits on the b^d,
makes them worse and vilifieth the reward of the virtuous.
I hold it a point of mere injustice; For, what comfort may the good expect,
when the bad are by connivency free to speak, and imboldened to put their
disloyal thoughts into execution? For explaning therefore of my meaning, it is
necessary to have a regard unto the nature of the Kings Liege-People, that are
to be reformed by example of justice, and others, Forraigners, who will we,
nill we, must be censurers of our actions; It has been truly observed that the
Nations of Europe, which are most remote from Rome, are more superstitiously
inclined to the dregs of that place, then the nearer neighbors of Italy,
whether that humor proceeds from the Complexion of the Northern Bodies, which
is naturally more retentive of old Customs, than hotter Regions; or that the
vices of the City, seated on seven Hills, are by crafty Ministers of that See,
concealed from the vulgar sort, I list not now to discuss; but most certain it
is, that the people of this Isle exceed the Romans in zeal of their profession;
In so much that in Rome it self, I have heard the English Fugitives taxed by
the name of Pichia pelli Inglesi, Knock-brests, id est, Hypocrites; now as our
Contrymen take surer holdfast of Papal traditions, then others; so are they
naturally better fortified with a Courage to endure Death for the maintenance
of that cause; for this Clymate is of that temperature out of which Vegetius
holds it fittest to choose a valiant soldier, where the Heart finding it self
provided with plenty of blood to sustain sudden defects, Valor is often
overcome by weakness, but being too much prized it turns to unbridled furies.
Is not so soon apprehensive of death or dangers, as where the storehouse of
blood being small, every hazard makes pale cheeks and trembling hands: Angli
(say Ancient writers) bello intrepidi, nec mortis sensu deterrentur; And
thereunto Botero the Italian bears witness in his Relations; Many strangers
therefore coming out of Foreign parts among the rarities of England desire to
see whether Report has not been too lavish, in affirming that our condemned
Persons yield their Bodies to Death with cheerfullnesse, and were it not that
by daily experience we can call our selves to witness of this truth, The best
Laws are made out of those good Customs, whereunto the people is naturally
inclined.
I could produce the Reverend Judge Fortescue, who in commendation of our
English Laws, made suitable (as he well observes) to the imbred Conditions of
the imhabitants of this soil, avoweth, that the English people in trial for
Criminal causes, Use to see men dye with resolution, takes away the fear of
death, for which purpose the Romans used the fights of their Gladiators.
are not compelled by tortures to confess as in other Nations it is used, for
as much as the quality of the English is known to be less fearful of death than
of torments, for which cause if the torments of the Civil Law were offered to
an innocent person in England, he would rather yield himself guilty, and suffer
death, then endure the horror of lingering pains. Insulani plerunque Fures
(says one) and so true it is, that this Country (...) stained with that
imputation, notwithstanding that many are put to death, to the end that others
by their fall, might learn in time to beware; If then it do appear that terror
prevails not, The Heretics called Publicans when they were whipped they took
their punishment gladly, their Captain Gerrard going before them and singing,
Blessed are you when men do hate you. Andromache^. Si vis vitam minitare.
Seneca ^rag.
to keep men from offenses which are condemned by Law, and Conscience, what
assurance can there be to scare those, who are constantly satisfied in their
minds, that their sufferings are either expressly, or by implicitation for
matter of Religion and health of their Souls; in such case to threaten death to
Englishmen, Quibus nihil interest humine sublimi ne putrescant, is a matter of
small consequence, Purpuratis Gallis, Italis, aut Hispanis, ista minitare, to a
settled resolution it boots not to show the dreadful visor of death; Menaces to
prolong a wearisome life, prevail much more in such cases. Rightly did Clement
the eighth consider, Worldly des^res, may be quenched with godly meditations,
our beavenly hopes cannot be abated by earthly punishments.
that by burning two Englishmen in Rome for supposed Heresy, he rather
impaired his Cause than bettered it, insomuch that many present at the resolute
death of Mr. Marsh, who was brought to dust in Campo di Sancta Fiore, spared
not to proclaim himself a Martyr, carried away of his ashes for a Relic, and
wished their souls in the same place with his; which news brought to the Popes
ear, caused him (as it was bruited about Rome) solemnly to protest, that none
of the English Nation should publicly from that time be consumed with fire:
on the other side if we read the Volumes written in praise of their Priests
Constancy, the Martyrology or Callender of Martyrs, and path way of Salvation
as it were, chalked out unto the Papists, by sacrifizing their lives for the
Pope, It is a point of wisdom to maintain the truth with as little disputation
as may be, least a good cause be marred with ill handling.
we shall find that by taking away of one we have confirmed and united many,
whereof I could give particular instance, if I thought any scruple were made in
that point. As for foreign parts which hold with the Papal Supremacy, it is
clear that they will be severe, and partial judges in this cause; for albeit
that here in England, It is well known to all true and loyal Subjects, Truth
seldom prevails with the partiality of the people, which being ignorant is
carried away with the outward semblance of things.
that for matter of Roman doctrine, no man's life is directly called into
question? but that their disobedience in reason of State is the motive of their
persecution; Nevertheless where a great Canker of Christendom is rooted in a
contrary opinion, and things in this world are for the most part esteemed by
outward appearance, this Land cannot escape malicious scandalls, neither shall
there be want of Colleges to supply their Faction with Seminaries; It is hard
to make a rule so general, against which difference of Circumstance may not
except.
Therefore again and again, I say, that if the state of the question were so
set, that it were possible by a general execution of the Priests, and their
adherents, to end the controversy, I could in some sort with better will,
subscribe thereunto; But seeing I find little hope in that course, I hold it
safer to be ambitious of the victory, which is purchased with less loss of
blood; and to proceed as Tully teaches his Orator, who when he cannot
wholy overthrow his Adversary, yet ought he to do it in some part, and with
all endeavor to confirm his own party in the best manner that may be.

IV.
He that forbeareth to sow his ground in expectance of a good Wind or
favorable Moon, commonly has a poor crop and purse; so shall it fare with this
State; if private whisparings of discontented persons, that never learned to
speak well, be too nicely regarded, He that is culumniated by many, is in
danger, first to be suspected by his friends, and shortly to be condemned if
the slandes continue.
yet ought they not to be slightly set at naught, lest our credit grow light,
even in the balance of our dearest friends. The Papisticall Libellers inform
against us, as if we were desirous to grow fat with sucking of their blood, the
very walls of their Seminary College at Rome are bedawbed with their lying
Phansies, and in every corner the Corner-creepers leave some badge of their
malicious spleen against us, crying out of Cruelty and Persecution; but if the
penalty of death be changed into a simple indurance of prison, what moat in our
eyes can they find to pull out? or with what Rhetoric can they defend their
obstinate malapartness, That Counsel takes best effect that is fitted to the
nature of times and persons.
which with repaying us ill for good, deserve to have coals of indignation
poured upon their heads? Visne muliebre Consilium? said Livia to Augustus; Let
severity sleep a while, and try what alteration the pardoning of Cinna may
procure; The Emperor hearkened to her Counsel, and thereby found his Enemies
mouths stopped, and the fury of their malice abated. Some there are perchance
that will term this Clemency innovation; and vouch the President of that City,
which permits none to propound new Laws, that had not a cord about their
necks ready for vengeance, Those Changes of States are safely made, which
reserving most of the Ancient form, betters it and reduces the defects into
order.
if it were found unprofitable; but let such Stoics know, that there is great
difference between the penning of a Law, and advice giving for the manner of
executing it; neither (by their leaves) are all innovations to be rejected, for
divine Plato teaches us, that in all Commonwealths upon just grounds, there
ought to be some changes, and that States men therein must behave themselves
like skillful musicians, Qui artem musices non mutant, sed musices modum.

V.
That an evil weed grows fast, The Church is most zealous, when Persecution
is fresh in memory; when those times are forgotten, we gr^w to loath that which
we enjoy freely.
by the example of the new Catholic increase, is clearly convinced; but he
that will ascribe this generation simply to his Majesty's heroical virtue of
Clemency, argues out of fallacy, which is called Ignoratio Elenchi; was not
the zeal of many cooled toward the last end of Queen Elizabeth's Reign? has
not the impertinent heat of some of our own side bereft us of part of our
strength, and the Papacy with tract of time gotten a hard skin on their
Consciences?

Parva metus primo, mox sese attollit in altum? But if we will with a better
insight behold how this great quantity of spaun is multiplied, we must
especially ascribe the cause thereof to their Priests, who by their deaths
prepare and assure more to their sect, than by their lives they could ever
persuade; It were incivility to distrust a Friend, or one that has the show of
an honest man, if he will frankly give his word, or confirm it with an Oath,
but when a Protestation is made upon the last gasp of life, it is of great
effect to those that cannot gainesay it upon their own knowledge.

The number of Priests which now adays come to make a Tragical conclusion is
not great; In this case the ^uestion is not so much of the truth of it, as who
shall be Judge, and what Censure will be given.
yet as with one Seal many Patents are sealed; so, with the loss of few lives
numbers of wavering spirits may be gained, Sanguis Martyrum, Semen Ecclesieae;
And though those Priests having a disadvantagious cause, are in very deed but
counterfeit shadows of Martyrs unto a true understanding, yet will they be
reputed for such, by those that lay their Souls in pawn unto their Doctrine,
with whom if we list to contend by multitude of voices, we shall be cried down
without all peradventure, for the gate of their Church is vvide, and many
there are that enter thereinto.

VI.
By diverse means it is possible to come to one and the self same end; seeing
then that the sum of our vvell-vvishing is all one, namely that Popish
Priests may have no power to do harm, it is not impertinent to try sundry
paths, In the first 11 years of Q. Eliz. it was rasier to subdue Popery, than
now, for then they feared to irritate the State, not knowing how far severity
might extend, now knowing the worst, they are resolved Agere and ^ati ^ortia.
which may lead us to the perfecting of our desires. Politicians distinguish
inter rempublicam constitutam and rempublicam constituendam, according to the
several natures whereof Statists art to dispose of their Counsels and
Ordinances; were now the Rhemists and Romulists new hatched out of the shell,
the former course of severity might soon bury their opinions with their
persons, but since the disease is inveterate, variety of medicines is
judicially to be applied. The Romans did not punish all crimes of one and the
selfsame nature with extremity of death; for some they condemned to perpetual
prison; and others they banished into an Island or some remote Country; even
in the case of Religion they were very tender to dip their fingers in blood;
for when Cato was Consul, (and it seemed good unto the Senate to suppress
with violence the disordered Ceremony of the Bacchanalls, brought by a strange
Priest into the City) he withstood that sentence, alleging that there was
nothing so apt to deceive men as Religion, which always pretends a show of
divinity: and for that cause, it behoved to be very wary in chastising the
professors thereof, lest any indignation should enter into the peoples minds,
Vulgu^ est morosum animal, quod facilius duci, quam cogi potest.
that somewhat was derogated from the Majesty of God. Others (more freely)
have not spared to place Relgion, (I mean that Religion which is ignorantly
zealous) amongst the kinds of Frenzy, which is not to be cured otherwise than
by time given to divert, or qualify the fury of the conceit, Tantum Religio
potuit suadere malorum.

VII.
Howsoever in valuing the power of a City or strength of arguments, Many
P^rtizans encourage the faint^hearted, and when an one my cannot prevail
against number, his thoughts are not how to offend, but how to make a safe
retreat.
quality and vvorth is to be preferred before number; nevertheless where the
uttermost of our force is not known, it imports much to have it conceived; That
the multitude stands for us, for doubts and suspicions cast in an enemies way
evermore makes things seem greater, and more difficult than they are indeed;
we have by Gods mercy the Sword of justice drawn in our behalf, which upon
short warning is able to disunite the secret underminers of our quiet; we have
a King zealous for the house of the Lord, More Priests may be shut up in a year
than they can make in many.
who needs not to fear less success in shutting up of Priests, than our late
Queen had, in restraining them in Wisbich Castle, where lest their factious
Spirits should grow rusty, they converted their Cancer to fret upon themselves,
and vomitting out Gall in Quod-libets, showed that their disease was chiefly
predominant in the spleen; what tempests they have raised in their College at
Rome, De^s^re of in^^ovation is ^^sh and con^entions* and therefore can hardly
agree of a head.
their own books, and many travelers can witness; the storm whereof was such,
that Sixtus Quintus complained seriously of the vexation which he received
oftener from the English Scholars, then all the Vassals of the Triple Crown; and
untruly is the Magistrate noted of negligence or overmuch security, that lays
wait to catch the Foxes, and the little Foxes which spoil the Vineyard, T^^ce
is always to be wished Provided that under the canker thereof, there be not a
mischief entertained worse than War if self.
though afterward without further punishment he reserve them to the day
wherein God will take account of their Stewardship; for if Aristotle's City,
defined to be a society of men assembled to live well, be the same which in our
Law, has reference to the maintaining of the people in Peace, so long as we
taste of the sweet of a peaceable Government we cannot say but that we live
well, and that the City consisting of men and not of walls is happily guided.

VIII.
An Oath is a weak bond to contain him that will for pretended conscience sake
hold not faith with heretics, An oath is of force, so long as it is thought
lawful, when that opinion is crazed, it does more hurt then good.
or by absolution from a Priest thinks himself at liberty to fly from any
promise or protestation whatsoever; therefore when I remember that Watson the
Priest, notwithstanding his invectives against the Jesuits, gained liberty to
forge his traitorous inventions, and had others of his society in the complot,
I judge if safer to make recluses of them, than to suffer such to dally with us
by books, and some idle intelligences cast abroad only as a mist to bleare our
eyes. But how shall we find the means to apprehend those disguised Romanists
that borrow the shape of Captains, Merchants, Gentlemen, Citizens, and all
sorts of people, and by equivocation may deny themselves to be themselves? In
answer to this question, I will first show the reason why they are not pursued
and taken, and hereafter make an overture how they may be bolted out of their
hutches; the nature of Man howsoever in hot blood, it be thirsty of revenge, in
a cold temper it has a kind of Nausea as I may call it, or a distaste of
taking away the lives, One man in another beholds the Image of himself, and
there by grows compassionate and sen^^ible of that which may fall to himself.
even of the Nocent, insomuch that in all Sises and Sessions, an offender can
hardly be condemned, whom the foolish pity of man will not after a sort
excuse, with laying some imputation on the Judge, part on the Jury, and much on
the Accuser; and such is their blind affection, that the prisoner who perhaps
was never recommended for handsomeness, will be esteemed of them, for one of
the properest men in the company; from hence it comes that the name of
Sergeant, or Pursevant is odious, and the executioner, although he be the hand
of justice, is esteemed no better than an enemy of mankind, and one that lost
honesty and humanity in his cradle; Reverend Master Fox was wont to say, that
spies and accusers were necessary members in a Commonwealth, and deserved to
be cherished, but for his own part he would not be any of that number, or wish
his friends to affect such employments; and albeit that the Law permits, What
men do unwillingly is never done effectually.
and commands every man to apprehend a felon, do we not see commonly very many
content to stand by and look on while others perform that office? likewise it
is evident, that if such as are tender of their reputations, be very scrupulous
personally to arrest men, for civil actions of debt, they will be more
unwilling instruments of drawing their bodies to the Rack or the Gallows,
especially when there is any color of Religion to be pretended in their
defense; the diversity of men's faces is great, but the difference of their
minds in this case is more variable, wherein the meanest have thought as free
as the highest; besides this, there are too many of the blind commonalty
altogether Popish, though indeed they make honorable amends for their treason;
verily I know not what misguiding of the mind it is, that makes men forecast
the possibility of alteration in matters of Relgion, When many tumultuous
persons assault, there will be a fray.
and for that respect they are exceeding backward in discovery, and laying
hands on Seminaries, yea and are timorous in enacting sharp Laws against them,
as those that silently say amongst themselves, Sors hodierna mihi, cras erit
illa tibi.


Some also survive? Who, remember that in Queen Mary's time, the Protestants
alleged a Text, that the tares should not be plucked up before harvest, nay
shall I speak a buggs word, there is no small number that stand doubtful
whether it be a grateful work to cross Popery, or that it may be done safely
without a foul aspersion of Puritanism, or a shrewd turn of their labors, at
some time or other, by which unhappy ambiguity it comes to pass, that these
Animalia Amphibia (the Priests I mean) that prey on the Souls and bodies of
either sex, Virtue neither praised nor rewarded waxes cold.
unatached, revell where they list, though they be more seen than a man dancing
in a Net; how much fitter were it for us courageously to invite them to our
party, by preaching or confuting them by writing, and unto the State wherein we
stand, wisely to apply the saying of the Assirian King to his Soldiers, You
are fools (quoth he) if there be any hope in your hearts to redress sorrow by
flight, or rather endeavor to make them fly that are the causers of your
grief, assuring your selves, that more perish in flight, then in the Battle,
even as many seeking to meet the Papists half way discomfort our own party.

IX.
It follows now (according to the Method prescribed) that an overture be made
to get the Jesuits and their shadows the Priests, An ill name given to a good
thing discourageth men from meddling with it.
into possession; it has been heretofore recited, that the unwelcome name of a
bloud-sucker, a busie-body, or a Puritan, has been shrewd Scar-crowes unto
many honest minds; by abrogating therefore of those or such like imputations
many will be stirred up to undertake the apprehending of the adversaries unto
the truth, especially when for their pains and time employed, they shall
deserve and have the title of good Patriots, dutiful Subjects, Wise men do
forecast how to do most with least noise.
and zealous Christians; how ready is every common person to carry a malefactor
to the stocks, rather then unto the Jail or execution? and doubtless they will
be no less forward to attach a Priest, when they are assured that the worst of
his punishment shall be a simple restraint within the walls of an old Castle. A
certain kind of people there is, with whom money plays a more forcible Orators
part, then any persuasion of the dutiful service which they owe to the
Commonwealth, these men will not be negligent to give intelligence, and also to
procure it faithfully; Provided that reward may help to line their threadbare
purses, and exempt them from need to sell liberty unto Seminaries; and where
assurance of gain is propounded for discovery, what master or housekeeper
will trust his servant with keeping of his Priest, or sleep quietly while he
is engaged to the danger of a Mercenary? I remember that in Italy it was often
told me, That the bountiful hand of Sir Francis Walsingham made his
Intelligencers so active, that a Seminary could scarcely stir out of the gates
of Rome without his privity, which success by mediation of gold may as readily
be obtained from Syvill, ^^^^dolid, Doway, (...) Paris, and any other places,
and by forewarning given of their approach, they may be waited for at the
Ports, and from thence soon conveyed to a safe lodging. But whence shall the
stream flow that must feed this bounty? it is a doubt easily satisfied, if
some thousands of Pounds out of the Recusants penalties be reserved in stock,
and committed by his Majesty unto the disposition of zealous distributers, who
will not be afraid to conclude Perdat fiscus, Particular officers must be
appointed, what is to all is commonly performed by none.
ut capiat Christus; neither need we seek any further succor to repair
decayed Castles, and therein to defray the charge of the Priests, with a sure
guard to keep them, than the aforesaid forfeitures that by the Justice of the
Law may be collected; which course if every it come happily to be entertained,
and that Recusancy cease to be an ignominious prey to the subject, the
proceedings for Religion shall be less blamed, and perhaps altogether unjustly
accused by any graceless Gretzerus or Cacodaemon Johannes, tincting their pens
in Gall and Vinegar; for besides occasion of Calumniation given by suits of
that nature, it is evident that many Recusants that would be indicted for the
King, and the effecting the Project aforesaid, shall escape without punishment,
and be borne out against the power of a private person; begging to no other
purpose, The service done for the Kings proper use, has his Warrant and
Countenance, but when a private man has the gain, neither reward^^r bearing
out can be expected; and by consequence Recusants are free.
than has heretofore been used: and albeit the penalty be rated at 20 l. a
month, yet was it never the Lawmakers intent, that such as were not able to
pay so great a sum, should go scot-free, but that according to the proportion
of their ability, they should do the penance of their Purses, whereas now if
the voice of the people (which is said to be the voice of God) is to be
credited, the poorer sort is skipt over, as if they owed no souls to God, nor
duty to their Sovereign. A poor Man (says one) is to be pitied, if he offend
through necessity, but if he do amiss voluntarily, he is more severely to be
chastised, for so much as wanting friends, and means to bear him out, if
shows that this fault proceeds from presumption.

X.
Let us now pre-suppose, that all the whole Regiment of Jesuits of Seminaries
were lodged in safe custody, may we then persuade our selves, that Popery will
vanish like a dumb show; I am clearly resolved that though it receive a great
eclipse, notwithstanding without other helps the Kingdom of Antichrist will
only be hidden, as a weed that seems withered in the Winter, and is ready to
sprout out with the Spring. Temporal arms are remedies serving for a time,
Medicines that work in the spirits of men, are of greater force, and cure more
surely then outward Plasters.
but the Spiritual sword is permanent in operation, and by an invisible blow
works more than mortal man can imagine. The word of God carries this
two-edged weapon in his mouth, which is to be used by faithful Ministers of
the Church, whom pure zeal, without respect to worldly promotion, or persons,
ought to encourage: Of Judges the Scripture says Estote fortes; and daily we
see, that sitting in their judicial seats, God inspireth them with greater
courage, than when, as private persons, they are to give their opinions; no
less is the power of the Holy Ghost in his servants, Speech is the interpreter
of the mind, therefore who so uses in Divine matters to speak reservedly, and
in a double sense, he will be s^spected to have a double heart, and unfit to
teach them that trust him not.
that out of the Pulpit are to deliver his Embassage; let them therefore not be
dismayed to speak out plainly, and tell the truth, without running a middle
course between heat and cold, unprofitable discanting upon the Scripture, with
an Old postile, or for want of better matter waste the poor time shut up in an
hourglass, with skirmishing against the worthy Pillars of our own profession:
Rumor which is ever ready to take hold of evil, has raised a secret, though
(as I hope) a causless suspicion, that there should be some combination
underhand, by changing the state of questions, to put us in our old days to
learn a new Catechism, and when they have brought us out of conceit with the
Reverend Interpreters of the Word, to use us then as the Wolves (mentioned in
Demosthenes Apology) handled the Shepherds when they had delivered up their
Dogs. Most sacred was that Speech of our gracious King concerning Vorstius, He
that will speak of Canaan, let him speak the language of Canaan. How can we
draw others to our Church, if we cannot agree, where, and how to lay our
foundation? or how may we cleanse the Leprous disease of dissension, which the
Papists which are least assured to themselves, A good Pust^^ is the Physician
of the Soul, and ought to apply his doctrine according to the tenderness or
hardness of the Conscience* for want of which discretion some men's zeal has
done hurt.
and most doubtful of their Salvation, are not ashamed to ascribe unto many of
us? I would not have Ministers indiscreet like Dogs to bark against all,
whether they know or know them not, I like better the opinion of Aristotle, who
advises those that stand in guard of a place, to be cursed only to such as are
about to endammage the City: If Pursevants or other Civil Officers, would learn
to keep this rule, they might go about their business with much credit. The
imagined fear of inviting the Romish Faction by force to deliver their Ghostly
Fathers out of Prison, moves me not a whit; for I cannot believe that they
esteem them at so dear a price, as they would run the hazard, by freeing
others out of hold, to put themselves into their places. Some will say that a
man of Straw is a head good enough for a discontented multitude; That the
Papists are very chollerique it appears sufficiently by their writings, yet it
has pleased God to send those cursed Cowes short horns; that when they should
not find a man of sufficiency to serve their turn, False miracles and lying
news are the food of superstition, which by credulity delude ignorant people
they were feign to do homage to Garnetts straw, forgetful as they are that
such stubble cannot endure the trial of fire: But unto us, that ought to be
Doers, as well as Professors of the Gospel, let this remain as a memorable
Theorem; Religion is the Mother of good order, Good order is the cause of
prosperous Fortune, and happy Success in all Counsels, and enterprises,
Therefore in what estate soever there wants good order, it is an evident
Argument that Religion goes backward.

XI.
I have ever held it for a kind of Injustice to omit the execution of mean
Laws, God which is the great Lawmaker, by his Laws prevents sins, to the end
punishments may be inflicted on it justly; as to avoid Idolatry, he forbids
making of Images; He that cannot live chaste, let him marry, etc.
made to prevent the effects of Idleness, and then to apply main extremity of
the sword, when the proling habit gotten by that vice comes to light; no less
is the course uncharitable (with pardon for this presumption be it spoken) when
we spare them that have no Religion at all, and censure those that can give an
account of somewhat tending to that purpose. He that is in misery must be born
withal if he speak miserably, and when the child from his mothers breast has
sucked nothing but Popery, a man had need to be angry with discretion if he
hear him speak in the voice of a Papist. God calls some by miracle, but the
ordinary means is his Word; if that means in any place of this Land be
wanting, of what Religion is it likeliest the people will be? I suppose that
few men will gainesay my assertion, that outward sense will direct them to
Popery, which is fuller of Pageants than of spiritual doctrine; and what is
the cause that after so many years preaching of the Gospel, the Common people
still retain a scent of the Roman perfume? the Cause is for that the formal
obedience of coming to Church has been more expected than the instruction of
private families, A man is said to know so much as he remembers, and no more;
and we remember best, what we learn in our youth, therefore if we will be wise
when we are old, we must be taught when we are young.
public Catechizing is of great use, but the first Elements thereof are to be
learnt at home, and those things which we learn from our Parents, stick more
surely in our minds; what was the cause why the Spartans continued their
Government so many Revolutions of times, without mutation? Histories record,
that learning their Country Customs from their Infancy, they could not be
induced to alter them; And in this our native soil we perceive, Out of
Oeconomicall Government, the diversity of States grow, and such as a ^rinces
house, is the State of the Commons for the most part: by which reason a Prince
may be the Survey of his House, have an aim how the Commonwealth is affected.
that the Common Laws which rely on ancient Customs, are better observed than
late Statutes, of what worth soever they be: So does it fare with the poor
people, which being once seasoned with the old dreggs of Papisme, will hardly
be drawn from it, till the Learning of the true Faith be grown to a Custom. I
will prescribe no order nor Officers, to effect this; but I suppose that the
ancient laudable course, by the Bishops confirmation, will not be sufficient to
fulfill so great a task, the Minister must and ought to be the Principal and
immediate hand to give assistance to so gracious a work; and in case any be
defective in their duty, the Reverend BISHOPS may take notice thereof in their
several Visitations.

Perhaps it will be thought a hard task to constrain old people to learn the A.
B. C. of their Christian belief, By the Laws there were Tything men, who gave
account for ten houholds: Some such Officers might be good in this case: for I
hold the breaking of the breaking of the Sabbath to be the ruin of our
Religion.
but how hard soever it be, I hold it no incivility to prepare people of all
ages for the Kingdom of Heaven. By the order contained in the Book of Common
Prayer, on Sundays and Holidays, half an hour before evensong the Curate of
every parish ought to examine children sent unto him, in some points of the
Catechism; and all Fathers, Mothers, Masters and Dames, should cause their
Children, Servants, and Prentises, to resort unto the Church at the time
appointed, there to hear and be obediently ordered, by the Curate, until such
time as they have learnt all that in the said Book is commanded, and when the
Bishops shall appoint the Children to be brought before them, for their
Confirmation, the Curate of every Parish shall send or bring the names of those
Children of his Parish which can answer to the questions of the Catechism; It
were fit also that they learnt how to distinguish the common grounds of
Propery, whereby the Priests deceive poor people.
and there ought none to be admitted to the Holy Communion, until such time as
he can say his Catechism, and be confirmed, Many times I have stood amazed,
to behold the Magnificence of our Ancestors buildings, which their Successors
at this day are not able to keep up, but when I cast mine eyes upon this
excellent Foundation laid by the Fathers of the CHURCH, and perceive their
Children neglect to build thereupon, with exceeding marvel, I rest almost
besides my self, for never was there better ground-plot laid, which has been
seconded with less success: It was not the Bull of Pius Quintus on the Bishop
of Londons Doors, or the forbearing to hang up Priests that have wrought this
Apostasy, but the Idleness and insufficiency of many teachers, He that knows
not the true cause of an evil, cannot help it but by Change, which is a
dangerous guide of a State.
conspiring with the peoples cold zeal, that has been the Contriver of this
Webb. Until the eleventh year of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, a Recusants name
was scarcely known, the Reason was because that the zeal begotten in the time
of the Marian Persecution was yet fresh in memory, and the late Persecutors
were so amazed with the sudden alteration of Religion; that they could not
choose but say, Digitus Dei est hic. In those days there was an emulation
between the Clergy and the Laity; and a strife arose whether of them should
show themselves most affectionate to the Gospel; Where good men are afraid to
call a vice by the Proper name, it is a sign that the vice is common, and that
great persons (whom it is not safe to anger) are infected therewith.
Ministers haunted the Houses of worthiest men, where Jesuits now build their
Tabernacles; and poor Country Churches were frequented with the best of the
Shire; the Word of God was precious, Prayer and Preaching went hand in hand
together, until Archbishop Grindai^s disgrace, and Hatefields hard conceit of
Prophesying brought the flowing of those good graces to a still water; the name
of a Papist smelt rank even in their own nostrills, and for pure shame to be
accounted such, they resorted duly both to our Churches and Exercises; ^e
Schism. Anglicano and vis. M^n. Eccles.
but when they saw their great Coriphaeus Sanders had slily pinned the names of
Puritans upon the sleeves of the Protestants that encountered them with most
courage, and perceived that the Word was pleasing to some of our own side, they
took heart at grass, to set little by the service of God, and duty to their
Sovereign.

Therewith start up from amongst us, Some think that if these men's zeal h^d by
order been put to employ it self otherwise, and a task set them to do some
good and memorable thing in the Church, they might have been reformed, or made
harmless by diversion.
some that might have been recommended for their zeal, if it had been tempered
with discretion, who forerunning the Authority of the Magistrate, took upon
them in sundry places and publicly to censure whatsoever agreed not with
their private conceits, with which gross humors vented in Pulpits and
Pamphlets, most men grew to be frozen in zeal, and in such sort benumbed, that
whosoever (as the worthy Lord Keeper Bacon observed, in those days) pretended
a little spark of earnestness, Headstrong Papists are not easily subdued, yet
must they not be suffered to grow to a Faction, Discretio pro lege discernere
quid sic res* must lay the burden in the right place.
he seemed no less than red fire hot, in comparison of the other. And as some
fare the worse for an ill neighbors sake, dwelling beside them, so did it
betide the Protestants, who seeking to curb the Papists, or reprove an idle
drone, were incontinently branded with the ignominious note of Precisian, all
which vvind brought plenty of water to the Popes Mill, and there will most
men grind where they see appearance to be well served.

XII.
If without great inconveniency, Without Reformation in this point. Popery will
still increase, but as all virtuous enterprises are difficult, so is this most
intricate.
the Children of the Papists could be brought up out of their Company, it were
a happy turn, but I find it to be full of difficulty; there is provision made
to avoid Popish Schoolmasters, but there is no word against Popish
School-mistresses, that infect the silly Infants while they carry them in their
arms; A wise householder will cast up his reckonings to see what loss or
profit he has made in a year
which moves me to suppose that the former proposition to examine how Children
and servants are brought up, and truly to certify the list of the
Communicants and Recusants, will be the readiest means to let his Majesty know
the yearly increase or decrease of the Church in every Diocese. And whosoever
shall send his Children, or any of his Majesty's Subjects to be placed in
Monasteries or Seminary Colleges, or Popishly to be brought up in foreign
parts, I think that for punishment both one and the other worthily might be
diffranchised of the privilege due to English men, so far forth as any good
by the Laws may descend to them, but not to be exempted from the Penalties
thereof in the regal jurisdiction of the Crown. I know well that
contradiction is odious, and makes a man seem ambitious to be though tmore
understanding than others, Cuevara Epist. Aure^.
in which case the Spaniard uses only to (...) me (...) presumptuous, whom he
would call fool, if civility would bear it; but in my defense, I hope it shall
suffice again to revive my former protestation, that I discourse by the way of
Proposition, rather than arrogantly of defining any thing, The Law which took
immediate notice of an offense* gave a quick redress, and corrected the poor
as well as the rich.
with pardon therefore may I be permitted to say, that the first easy Law of
twelve pence, inflicted on him that could not give a reasonable excuse for his
absence from Church on Sundays, was one of the best ordinances that has
hitherto been enacted; but while we sought to make new Statutes, savouring of
more severity, we neglected the old, and were loath to execute the new, for it
is a certain rule, that whosoever in policy will give liberty, and yet seem to
suppress a crime, Sharp Laws that stand upon a long process, after a manner
seem to dispe^ce with the vice.
let him procure sharp Laws to be proclaimed, which are necessary only for
some times, and rare occasions, to be put in execution, but not to be an
ordinary work for every day of the week; daily use likewise teaches us, that
it is less grievous to punish by an old Law than by a new, for so much as
truth it self seldom gets credit without proof, and it is hard to free the
people of suspicion, that new Laws are not rather invented against the
particular persons and purses of men, than against their corrupt manners; by
force of which reason I am induced to conceive, that the old use of the Church
contained in good nurture, The allegiance to God ought to precede the temporal
obedience, for if the first may be obtained, the second will follow of it self.
and Ecclesiastical censures, will much more prevail to muzzle Popery, than
any fresh devises whatsoever; neither do I think it blameworthy to affirm,
that our Cause has taken harm by relying more on the temporal than the
spiritual Arms, for while we trusted that capital punishments should strike
the stroke, we have neglected the means which would for the most part have
discharged the need of such severity; the Oath of Allegiance is not offered
generally to servants and mean people, who if they had taken the Oath, by
absolution of a Priest might recoyle from it, or change their opinion at
leisure, without any ready means to discover their Legerdemaine, that Oath I
fear will not be often pressed, and to them that shift from place to place,
how can it be tendered? the principal Papists now cover themselves in the crowd
of the multitude, but if we can discover the affection of the multitude they
will easily be unmarked, This course will discover more than the Oath of
Allegiance, and prevent many from falling off by reason of the quick discovery.
and being singled out rest ashamed of their nakedness (which under correction
of better judgment) may be effected, if every new commer to inhabit in a Town,
and servants newly entertained, within a week or fourteen days, be caused to
repair to the Minister, there in presence of the Churchwardens and other
honest men, to subscribe unto such brief and substantial Articles concerning
faith and allegiance as shall be according to Gods word and justice ordained to
distinguish the sheep from the Goats; in foreign Countries every host is bound
to bring his guest before an Officer, there to certify his name, with the
occasion of his Coming, and intended time of aboade in those parts, and in
case he stay longer, he must again renew his license; so curious and vigilant
are they also to keep their Cities from infection, So long as houses and
lodgings in London are let to Papists; the Priests will be received, and from
thence shall the Country be infected.
that without a Certificate witnessing their coming from wholesome places, they
may not escape the Lazaretto; no less ought we to be watchful to prevent the
contagion of our Souls, than the other Nations are of their bodies. Every thing
is hard and scarcely pleasing in the beginning, but with time some such course
may be readily put in execution, which I propound rather as matter for
betterheads to work on, than peremptorily to be insisted on in the same terms;
but lest any charge me with temerity, that where I desire to know the
multitudes inclination, by the means aforesaid, I satisfy my self with their
Parrats language, pronouncing it knows not what, I think it not impertinent to
put them in mind, that heretofore I have required instruction, both precedent
and subsequent, If we can prevent the increase of Papists, those that now live
must either be reformed, or in time yield to nature, and then shall a new age
succeed of Christians, by education made Religious.
and am ever of the mind, that though all this cannot be done at once, yet it
is necessary always to be doing our best; knowing, that not to go forward in
Religion, is the ready way to go backwards; it is not the outward obedience of
coming to Church, that discovers the inward thought of the heart, it is the
confession of the tongue that must utter those secrets, and where the Curates
are insufficient, or the Parish great, I wish they had Catechists to assist
them, maintained by the purses of the Recusants, which pension being collected
for Gods cause, will free us of scandal, though it grieved them to pay the
spiritual Army waged against their own stratagems; surely by giving them way
in petty matters, they are grown to be very masterfull in their party. Plato
affirms that the popular State proceeded from the License which the people
took to make immoderate applauses in the Theaters, when as by arrogating that
immunity without controllment, in presence of their Governors, and perceiving
the Nobility to join with them in the same passions, they thought their heads
as worthy to govern, as any of those were made out of the same mould: In like
manner while we suffer ignorance openly to maintain such petty glimps of Popery
as are thought to be searce worthy to be looked at, The br^achers of a bad
cause being touched in Conscience, at the first move slowly, but if they
prevail they grow tyrannous beyond measure.
in small matters run an indifferent course, which neither makes sure friends
nor feeble foes, unawares they take the Bridle from us, and eat out Religion,
as it were by an insensible Gangrena: Principiis obsta, sero medicina paratur
Cum mala per-longas invaluere moras.
For by sufferance of breaking small laws people are boldned to set the greater
at naught.

To comprehend all things in a Law which arc necessary to the reformation, I
neither hold it profitable nor expedient, yet it is discretion to provide for
the most important, smaller matters whereof the Laws speak not are to be
commended to the discretion of Parents, Ministers and other Reverend persons,
who by example and advice may prepare younglings by education and Custom to
obey the Laws, especially such as are in high place ought in this behalf to be
like Caesar's wife, Non, solum Crimine, Most men will affect to be such as the
highest Trusts, and Favors.
sed etiam Criminis suspitione vacare, and with such circumspection to behave
themselves, that the world may conceive, in requiring obedience to God, and
their Sovereign, A great man is an Idol in the eyes of mean People, and draws
many t^ imitate his actions.
that they hold the multitude rather for companions than slaves; If great men
take another way, they may seduce many by example, though by words they
express not their concealed opinions, T^ce and leq^re said God to Moses, it is
the speech of the heart, which utters more than letters, or sillables. And in
our common Laws it is held maintenance, when a great person only by his
presence countenanceth a cause; neither let us secure our selves with this
argument, The Papists are pliable in small matters, Ergo, they will yield in
greater; And because they took no Arms in 88. therefore it were needless
curiosity to suspect them now: for who knows not that small baits are used to
take the greatest Fish, Vt cum esca una etiam hamus devoretur. Wariness is the
sinews of wisdom, and nothing is more dangerous than to be secure in matters
of State. Few Laws well executed are better than many.
Therefore for the Laws already made, I wish that the most effectual of them
which least concern life, may be executed; for better it were not to make them,
than by neglect to set them at liberty: Seeing that many offenses there are
which men would abstain from, if they were not forbidden, but when a strict
Commandment is avoided without punishment, thereout springs an unbridled
license and hardly to be reformed by any rigor.

To conclude, I say freely, that whosoever ends his days by a natural death, he
shall be subject to many men's dooms for every particular offense; But when for
Religions sake a man triumphs over the sword, that one eminent Virtue razeth
out the memory of other errors, and places him that so dies in Paradise, A
Crown of Glory once attained, has power to dispense with former faults*
(if common opinion may be lawfully vouched) which glory having many followers
and admirers, makes even dull spirits to affect their footsteps, and to sell
their lives for the maintenance of the same cause. I need not Envy the name of
a Martyr to the Jesuit; for his cause if it be rightly weighed, will blanch
that title; but I desire to have all those Lineaments defaced, which may
compound that counterfeit Image; in prosecuting of which purpose, if I have
failed in my advice, and by confused handling, intricated the question, I
humbly request, that a wise man's verdict may mitigate the heaviness of the
censure.

It is neither good to praise bad Counsels, He Counsels best, that prefers the
Cause of God, and the Commonwealth before any particular.
because of their good success, nor to condemn good Counsels, if the event
prove not Fortunate, lest many be animated to advise rashly, and others
disheartened to Counsel gravely.

Illi mors gravis incubat qui notus nimis omnibus ignotus moritur sibi.
August 11. Anno Domini 1613.
THE MANNER AND MEANS HOW THE KINGS ENGLAND Have from time to time SUPPORTED
And repaired their ESTATES.

Written by Sir ROB. COTTON Knight and Barronet, Anno nono Jacobi Regis Annoque
Domini 1609.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1672.

The Manner and Means how the KINGS OF ENGLAND Have from time to time SVPPORTED
AND REPAIRED THEIR ESTATES.
THe Kings of England have supported and repaired their Estates,

First, by an Annual proportioning their Issues, and Expenses, with their
certain and Casual Revenues.

And that either by Advice of their PRIVY COUNCEL, or by PARLIAMENT*


Secondly, by abating and reforming the Excess of household, etc.

Thirdly, by raising of Money, and improving the Revenues of the Crown.

First, for proportioning of the Issues, etc.

Henry 4. Anno 12. When the Revenue and profits of the Kingdom, Hen. 4. Ex
rot. orig. interacta Council. Hen. 4.
together with the Subsidy of Wool, and Tenth of the C lLergie, amounted to no
more then 48000l. of which 24000 marks were allotted for expense of House; most
of the rest to the Guard of the Sea, and defense of this Kingdom, the Realm
of Ireland, and Dominions in France: In this estimate the profits by Wards and
Marriage, was but 1000 l. And then an Ordinance was made by the King, Prince,
and all His Counsel there named in the Roll.

The like was Anno 11. when for the charge of house was appointed 16000 l. and
7000l. to the City of London, in discharge of the Kings debt to them.

Henry 5, Hen. 5. Ex rot. in actis Council. anno 2. Hen. 5. in Fin.
Anno 2. did the like as his Father, entering upon the Roll as an Ordinance in
future, that the Treasurer of England, or the Exchequer shall Annually make
declaration of the state of their Office, and the Revenue of the Realm,
together with the charge of the Kings House, Chamber, Wardrobe, Garrisons,
Navy, and Debts.

Anno 3. Henry 5. the like Assignments were made proportionable to the Revenue
which in the great Custom of Woolls, Ex rot. orig. an. 3 Hen. 5.
the petty Custom, Tunnage and Poundage, revenue of Wales, and the Duchy of
Cornwall, the Hamper, the accounts of Sheriffs, Escheators, the Exchange of
Bullion, and the benefit of Wards and Marriage (then rated at but one thousand
marks apiece) rose not to above 56966. l. And being at such time as he
undertook the Conquest of France.

Anno 9. Ex ordinat. anno 9. Hen. 5.
Henry 5. the revenue of the Kingdom amounting to 55743. l. 10. s. 10. d. was
so by the King with advise of his Counsel ordered, as before.

And by this Record it appears, that that Clerks of the Navy, and not the
Treasurer was the Officer only for that place.

Henry 6. anno. 12. in Parliament, Hen. 6. Ex rot. Par. anno 12. Hen. 6. n. 24.
Cromwell then Treasurer, delivering up an Account of the Exitus and introitus
of the Exchequer, settled the Estate of his expense, of which there was allowed
for his house 16978. l. and to his Chamber and Wardrobe 2000 l. The rest to
defray the debts and necessary occasions of the State.

Queen Elizabeth anno 12. Queen Eliza.
At which time besides the Wards and Duchy of Lancaster the profit of the
Kingdom was 188197. Ex comp. Din Burghley Thesaur.
l. 4. s. the payments and assignments 110612. l. 13. s. of which the Household
was 40000. l. privy Purse 2000.l. Admiralty 30000. l. which by an estimate 1.
May, anno 1604. was 40000. l. And is now swollen to near 50000l. yearly by the
error and abuse of Officers.

SEcondly, by abating and reforming the Excess,

1. Of Household.

2. Of Retinue and Favorites.

3. Of Gifts and Rewards.

First, for abating and reforming the Excess of Household, either, by Parliament
or Council Table.


1. By Parliament.
Anno 3. Edw. 2. Ex Angl. M. S. folio 29.
Edward 2. An Ordinance was made prohospitio Regis, in ease of the people
oppressed with Purveyance by reason of the greatness thereof; and the motive of
that ordination was, A l'honneur de Dieu, et a honneur, et profit de saint
Eglise, et a l'honn^ur de Roy et a son profit, Ex libro. Do. Aula Regis.
et au profit de son peuple, selon droit et resonel serment que le did nostre
Signeur le Roy fist a son Coronement. And about this time was the King's house
new formed, and every Officer limited his charge and salary.

Anno 36. Edw. 3. Rot. Pa^l. anno 36. Edw. 3 Rich. 2. Rot. Parl. 1. Ric. 2.
Edward 3. the household was reformed at the petition of the People.

Anno primo Richard 2. the household was brought to such moderation of expense,
as may be answerable to the revenues of the Crown. Rot. Par^an. Rich. 2. Rot.
4. Parl. an. 5. and 6. Rich. 2.
And a Commission granted at the Petition of the Commons to survey and abate
the household; which not taking desired effect, Anno 5. the Commons petition
that the excessive number of menial servants may be remedied, or otherwise the
Realm will be utterly undone, and that his household might not exceed the
ordinary revenues of the Realm.

Anno 4. Hen. 4. Rot. Parl. an. 4 7 and 11. Hen. 4.
Henry 4. The People crave a reformation of the Kings house. And Anno 7. that
he would dismiss some number of the retinue; since it was now more chargeable,
but less honorable then his progenitors; and that the Ancient Ordinances of
the household, in ease of the people might be kept, and the Officers of the
household sworn to put the ordinances and statutes in due execution, and so
consider the just greifs of his subjects by unjust Purveyance contrary to the
statute. That hereafter vous poiez vivre le voz biens propres en ease de vostre
peuple, Ex Ordinat. in Rot. Act. C^nc^l. an. 11. H^n ^: marked ^R
which the King willingly does, as appears by an ordination in Council,
whereby the charge of the household is limited to 16000 Marks.

Annis 12. Hen. 6 Rot. Par an. 2. 18. Hen. 6.
and 18. Henry 6. The charge of the Kings house is reduced to a certainty, and
lessened by petition and order in Parliament.

Anno 12. Edw. 4 Ex. rot. Parl an. ^2. Edw. 4.
Edward 4. The King promises to abate his household, and hereafter to live upon
his own: So settling a new forms his Court which is extant in many hands, Ex
lib. ordin. Hospitii temp. Edw. 4.
intuled, Ordinations for the Kings house.

And to ease the charge of the Kings house, the Queens have allowed a portion
of their jointure suting to their own expense to the Treasurer of the household.
Rot. Par. an 27. Edw. 3..7. Hen. 4. n. 3. Mich. recep. 27. Hen. 6. n. 9.
Thus did Philip the wife of Edward 3. and likewise Henry 4. wife anno 7. And
Henry 6. wife allowed 2000. l. a year out of her Estate.

2. Excess of the household abated and reformed by the Councel-Table.
Edward 2. Edw. 2. Ex Aula Regis fact. temp. Ed. 2.
caused his household to be certain in allowances, making thereof a book by way
of ordinance, which is called Aul. Regis.

Henry 4. Hen. 4. Act. council. 8. Hen. 4. marked P. P.
causes his Son the Prince, and the rest of his Council, to ordain such
moderate governance of his house, that may continue au plaisir de Dieu et du
peuple.

Henry 6. Hen. 6.
anno 27. reduced his charge of house to 12000. l. whereof 2000. l. was out of
the Queens jointure.

Edw. 4. Ed. 4. Ex lib. ord. tem. Ed. 4
anno duodecimo reformeth it again, and publishes a book of orders for their
better direction. Ordinat. Car Woolsey Hen. 8.
Which after Cardinal Woolsey for the more honor and profit of the King
amendeth, and that still remains the groundwork of the present government:
Which being now so much corrupted, it may seem fit, either to put down the
Tables, and leave all attendants to allowance of money, as France and Spain
does, or else ^y setting up the Hall again, reduce the household to the best,
first, and most magnificent order. So all things being spent in public, will
be to the Kings honor, and the secret waste by Chamber, diet, and purloining,
prevented to the Kings benefit. For there is never a backdoor in Court that
costs not the King 2000. l. yearly, and few mean houses in Westminster, that
are not maintained with food and firing, by the stealth of their
Court-Instruments.

By abating and reforming the excess of Retinue and favorites.
Thus did Henry 2. Hen. 2. Ex Gervas. Doro. bern.
with William de Ipre Earl of Kent, a Netherlander, and all his Countrymen and
followers; when they grew heavy and a burden to this State, unable to foster
more then her own natural children.

Thus Richard 1. Rich. 1. Ex Richardo canonico in vita Rich. 1.
did with Otho Earl of York, and all the Bavarians, although he was the son
of his Sister, taking from him that Earldome, for that the People opposed it,
and giving him in exchange the title of Poictife.

Thus Henry 3. Hen. 3. ex lib. Sect. Albani and Will. Rishang. and lit. Baron.
Papae.
did with his half-brethren the Earl of Pembroke, and the Bishop of Winchester,
and all the Poictons theit followers.

Thus did Edward 2. Edw. 2. Ex ordina. 3 Ed. 2. in li. legum manuscript fol.
285.
by this Ordinance, Que tout le lignage Sire Pieres de Gaveston soit entirement
ouste de estre entoines le Roy et de son service. Item Burgois de Til soit
ouste et son fias que est mereschal del' Eschequer. Item que Bertram Assabi et
son Friar et ceux de Gascoigne, et Aimyrick de Friscomband soint oustre et ses
terres prises en le main le Roy.

Thus Richard 2. Rich. 2. Ex rot Parl. an. 10. Rich. 2.
did with the Bohemians anno 10. by an Act of Parliament at the petition of the
people surcharged.

Thus Henry 4. He. 4. Ex rot. Par. an. 7. and 1^. Hen. 4.
did likewise with the Gascoignes and Welsh overburthening and impoverishing
the King and Realm with perpetual suits, so that in Courts (as the Record
says) there were ne ad mill substance des persons vaylantes et suffesants:
Si Besoigne seroit mes de Rascaile pur la grendre part.

By abating and reforming the excess of Gifts and Rewards.
Hence was it that the wisdom of former time, Rich. 2. Rot. Par. an 21. Ri 2.
an. 2 4 and 5. Hen. 4. n 9.
foreseeing the mischief that the open hand of the Sovereign may bring, the
State made a Law 21. Richard 2. that whatsoever comes to the King by
Judgment, Escheate, Forfeiture, Wardship, or any other ways,, shall not be
given away, and that the procurer of any gift, shall be punished.

This the Parliament continued 7. Henry 4, Hen. 4. Rot. Par. an. 7. H.
until the King were out of debt, making frustrate the grant, and ordaining a
penalty of double value to every mover or procurer of any such.

The like anno 11. Rot. Par. ann. 11. H. 4. n. 23.
Henry 4. And that no petition for any thing should be delivered the King, but
in the presence of the Council, who might examine it, least the King's wants
should light upon the Commons.

And to keep the hand of Henry 6. Hen. 6. Pars. Parl. 2. an. 25. Hen. 6. m. 24.
from wasteful giving, the Council induced him to convey to the Arch Bishop of
Canterbury and others, all profits, by Wards, marriages, reliefs, escheats and
forfeitures, to defray the charge of his house.

It is one of the greatest accusations against the Duke of Somerset, Ex rot.
Parl. an. 28. Hen. 6.
for suffering the King to give away the possessions and profits of the Crown
in manner of a spoil: for so are the words of the Record.

And it was made the first and chiefest Article to depose Richard 2. Rich. 2.
Ex rot. Par. an. 1. Hen. 4
for wasting and bestowing the lands and revenues of the Crown upon unworthy
persons, and thereby over-charging the Commons by exaction.

THirdly, Raising of money, and, improving the Revenues of the Crown.

Either by the Grant of the Subject, Or Power absolute in the Sovereign.


1. Grant of the Subject, which is General, as in Parliaments, Or Particular by
Lones Compulsive Or Benevolent.



General, Ex lib. rub. in Secto
as in Parliaments, wherein they give the King part of their own, by way of
Retribution only; as

For Defense of the State.
Hence grew the Scutage granted to Hen. Ex Jo. Eversden.
2. Richard 1. Ex hist. Roffens.
John, and Henry 3. to Edward 1. diverse Fifteens and Tenths for his wars
against the Scots and Welshmen. Ex rot. Parl. temp. Ed. 3. Ex rot. Par. annis.
2, 3, 5. Rich. 2. Rot. Parl. 8, 9. Hen. 4.
The Subsidy of Woolls and other Contributions to Edward 3. for his Wars: And
the like granted to Richard 2. annis 2. 3. 7. so they may be employed in the
Wars: and particular Treasurers to account in Parliament. So in the 8. and 9.
of Henry 4. on the like condition.

Tunnage and Poundage begun the 45. Edward 3. had hence its original; and
therefore 13. Ex Rot. Parl. an. 13. Hen. 4. and 1. Hen. 5.
Henry 4. and 1. Henry 5. they are granted so in express words; and that they
proceed of good will, and not of duty. Presidents of this nature are plentiful
in all the Rolls.

For maintenance of Religion and the Church.
As in the Year 1166. to Henry 2. was given twelve pence in the pound: Ex
Benedict-Monacho in vita Hen. 2. Ex Adam. Merioneth ex Rot. Par. anno 4. Rich.
2.
and in the 18. Edward 1. a fifteenth was granted to expel the Jews. And Anno
4. Richard 2. a tenth of the Clergy, and a fifteenth of the Commons, for his
help to suppress the Wicklivian heresy.

For support of the Laws and liberty of the Commonwealth.
So did the State to Henry 3. Ex Rad. cogshal. Ex hist. Roffen. Rot. Par. an.
23. 3 and 7. Hen. 4. Ed. 1. 13. Ed.
anno 27. for confirmation of the great Charter, for the like anno 15. was
granted 29. Edward 1. and 13. Edward 3. and 7. Henry 4. That the Laws may be
executed against Purveiors.

For redress of the Agrievances.
As in the 15. Rot. Par. anno 15. Ed. 3. n. 16.
Edward 3. so that the King would perform their petitions, or else they held
themselves not bound to pay the ninth they had given.

The like was the 7, Ex rot. Par. an. 7 8, 9, 10. 11. Rich. 2. Ex rot. Par. an.
4. and 7 Hen. 5. rot. Par. 7. Edw. 4.
8, 9, 10. and 11. Richard 2. The 10. and 15. granted the 4. and 7. of Henry 5.
is upon condition, that the King laid no impositions upon the State. And 7.
Edward 4. the State releiveth the King, so he will promise to live hereafter
upon his own, and not burden the State, the which he there protests to
perform.

And it is to be observed that to improve the grants of Subsidies to the
extremest Ex original.; an. 3 Rich. 2.
value, there were new Commissioners appointed to survey and advance men's
fortunes above the estimate of the former taxes, and Commissions have been
granted out, as 3. Richard 2.

Or to enable him out of his own by an Act of Resumption of Lands, offices,
annuities.
Thus did Henry 3. Rot. ordinat. an. 5. and claus. an 9 and 10. Edw. 2. Rot.
Par. an. 1. Rich 2. Rot. Parl. an. 1, 2, and 6. Hen. 4.
anno 6. and Edward 2. anno 5. to 9. and 10. by an ordination of the Prelates,
Earls and Barons.

All grants made by Edward 3. to unwornthy persons, Richard 2. resumed anno
primo, and by Henry 4. anno. 6.

All Pattents for life or years since 4. Edward 3. were resumed.

At the petition of the people Hen. Ex Rot. Par. an. 1. and 2. Hen. 5.
revokes all grants out of the principality made to unworthy persons, and all
annuities out of the customs of wools, deducting out 10000. l. a year out of
all other annual pensions ratably, leaving the remain, if any, to the
Pattentees.

Hen 6. Rot Par. anno 28, 29, 3. Hen. 6.
annis 28. 29. 33. resumeth in England all Lands, offices, liberties and grants
from annis primo, and the like anno 21. in Ireland.

So did Edward 4 annis 4. Ex act. Cons. an. 21. Hen. 6. Rot. Par. an. 2 Hen. 7.
7. 12. And Henry 7. anno 2. resumed all grants made by Edward 4. or Richard 3.

Particular by Lones Or Benevolences. Voluntary, Or Compulsive.



First upon Lones voluntary, as upon assurance of Bond of the Nobility.
So was William de la Poole bound for Edward 3. Rot. Parl. an 13 Ed. 3. act.
council. 20. 22 Hen. 6.
anno 13. in great sums, and the.Duke of Gloucester anno 20. Henry 6. and the
Cardinal pawned Ws silver Vessels for Henry 6. debt.

Upon pawn of Jewels.
Thus did Henry 3. Claus. an. 26. Hen. 3.
anno 26. to the Archbishop of York, and when his own were at gage, he took
Aurum et Jocalia faeretri sancti Edwardi Confessor. and pawned them.

Edward 1. Clau. 29. Ed. 1.
employed one Andevar ad jocalia sua impignoranda.

Edward 2. Rot. fran. an. 9. Edw. 2.
pawned his Jewels to the Lord Beaumont.

Edward 3. Comune insc. 30 Edw. 3.
pawned Magnam Coronam Angliae to Sir John Wessingham for 8. years.

Richard 2. Parl. anno 7. Rich. 2.
pawned vasa aurea et diversa jocalia to Sir Robert Knolls.

Henry 4. Invadiavit tabellam et tresellas suas argenteas de Hispania.

Henry 5. Parl. anno 5. Hen. 5.
pawned his great Crown to the rich Bishop of Winchester.

Henry 6. Par. an. 10. 12. 29. Hen. 6.
to the same man then Cardinal pawned many parcels of his Jewels in the 10, 12.
and 29. of his reign, and the like to many others.

And the late Queen to ease her people did the like with her Jewels in the
Tower, besides the often morgage of her land.

Lones voluntary upon Assignments of Customs and Subsidies.
So did Cardinal Beauford lend 10000. Act. council. an. 22. Hen. 6.
l. to Henry 6. anno 22. upon security of the Customs of London and
Southampton, the King indenting to turn the course of most trade thither. Ex
billa sign. an. 15 Hen. 6. and 12. Edw. 4.
And Henry 6. anno 15. and Edward 4. anno 12. did secure their debts by
assignment over of the next Subsidy or aid that shall be granted from the
Church or Laity to them, being a devise in truth to draw on a supply the sooner
from the State.

Lones voluntary upon the Great Seal or the Privy Seal.
The Great Seal, under which they should have without paying Fee a Patent
sealed for repayment of their dues by a day certain. Rot. original. an. 33.
Hen. 4. marked B* B.


The Privy Seal, which is of late the most in use; and it is worthy of
observation to see the willingness of former times in respect of these.

In the 13. Rot. act. conc. 13. Hen. 4.
of Henry 4. there is a Roll entitled les nomes de ceux que ont da prester an
Roy les somnes escrits. The Archbishop of Canterbury lent 1000. Marks, the
Bishop of Lincoln as much, Rot. act. council. 13. Hen. 4.
the Bishop of Norwich 600. l. the Bishop of London 500. Marks, the Bishop of
Bath 400 Marks, the Lord Privy Seal 200. l. the Clerks of the Chancery 1000.
Marks.

Particular Grants of the Subject by Lone compulsive.
So were the Merchants of Florence, Ex ordinat. Council. an. 3. Hen. 5. marked
N. N.
Venice and Luke, compelled by an order in Council 3 Henry 3. because they had
by grace et sufferance du Roy graunts, privileges et reportants grand lucre
pour le exercise de leur Merchandre en le Angle terre. And the persons that
refused to lend were committed to the Fleet, neither were the English more
free, in anno 30. Henry 6. diverse being enjoined to attend the Councel-table,
or else to pay the demanded Lone.

In the time of Henry 8. Ex instruc. Comiss. 14. Hen 8. Ro^ Parl 12. Rich. ^.
anno 14. of his Reign he exacteth by way of Lone, ten pounds in the hundred of
all goods, jewels, utensils and land, and according to the extremest rate
revealed by Oath of the possessors. Notwithstanding there is a Law 2. Richard,
2. that none shall be denied in demand of any Lone, his reasonable excuse.

Particular Grants of the subjects by contribution or Benevolent gifts.
These were of old usual and free, Ex Charta Episcop. Cant. To. claus. 29. Edw,
1. claus. 35 Edw. 3 Ex insruct. original 20. Hen. 6.
and therefore called Liberalitas populi, by Richard 1. and Curialitas, by Ed
1. Ed. 3. Henry 4. and Henry 5. confessed to proceed ex spontane voluntate, nec
de jure vendicare potest. Yet did Henry 6. anno 20. in an instruction to
Commissioners employed in procuring a Benevolence, say, that for so much as by
the Law he might compel all his Subjects, and at their own charge to attend
his; yet he was contented to spare such as would but contribute as much after
his degree and reputation as two days in his personal service would stand him
in, thereby implying a necessity in them to give, to escape a further expense.

This Law, Ex act. Pa^l. an. 3. Mariae.
upon which Henry 6: grounded himselfa was by a Statute in Queen Mary's time
repealed. And that since repealed this last year, has made are reviving of the
former, whereby the King is readmitted into his old advantages, and the subject
in the former mischief. Ex instructione original. 17. Hen. 8.
And Henry 8. anno 17. Although he entituleth the benevolence he sought with no
other style then an amicable grant, yet he threatened the refusers with
convention before his Council, imprisonment, and confiscation of Goods.

THe Kings raise money, and improve and revenues of the Crown, By power
absolute in the Sovereign, in disposing, 1. Lands, 2. Merchandise. 3.
Regalities.


1. Lands, as by selling; which has been often the old, if they were not of
the Ancient demeasne-land, which our forefathers held impious to alienate from
the Crown, and those were such Lands as go under the title of Terra Regis, Lib.
Domesday.
in the Book of Domesday, and were the Lands of Edward confessor: of other
Lands I never observed question, neither do ever find that Acts of Resumptions
ever reached to Lands that were sold for valuable consideration.

By passing in Fee-farm, except places of the Kings Residence, Parks, spacious
Wastes or Forests, all the Lands of the the Crown, which remain either in the
annexation, custody lands, or Queens jointure, and exceed not yearly 32000. l.
These, although largely estated out in several natures, some for lives, some
for years, will one with the other be advanced to a treble rent, which
amounting to 96000. l. leaving an annual improvement of 64000. And if the offer
be not made restrictive for the new Tenant, there is no doubt but his Majesty
shall find ready and hearty undertakers amongst the Gentry and Nobility too,
who have any place of Residence near any his Majesty's Manors; and the Kings
security the better, since their abilities will settle the Pre-farm rent upon
more Land then the purchase.

If any shall object against this, a loss by Fines and Profits of Courts, a
prejudice in not serving necessity (as of late) by sales or diminution of
Regalities in seizure of so many Royalities. It may be answered to the first,
that the casual profits of Courts never defrayed to the present Officers their
fees and expenses; and this appears from a collection made the 44. year of
the late Queen, where the total issue of such certain charge exceeded the
receipt of such chances above 8000. l.

To the second, if looking upon the several rates of the Kings Lands, exposed
to Fee-farm sales, we find some at 50. other at 21. years as to the late
contracters, and make out of these extremes a medium of the largest 40. years,
and set on the other side the Common and current estimate for dead Rents 15.
years purchase: We must find, that 50 l. Land sold un-improved respectively to
the like trebled by a Feefarm, will be 250. l. loss to his Majesty in the sale.
As for Regalities, though it may add somewhat to a Subject, in increasing such
his petty command, it can nothing to a Sovereign, whose transcendent power
drowned in it all such subordinate dependances and regards. But if we consider
besides the former improvement, the increase of casual advantage, and
diminution of certain charge, we shall have just cause not to continue this
course; for if the Commissioners in this business, may be ordered by
instruction to reserve upon every Manor of above 30. per Annum, a tenure in
Knight Service by half a Fee, and of above 50. l. in Capite by an entire Fee,
and of the purchase to pay his Rent into the receipt himself half yearly, and
strike there his Tally: the former will advance the revenue accidental of the
Crown in Wardships, primier seisin, alienation and aides; and the latter cut
off at once so many their unnecessary Receivers, Auditors, Stewards, Bailiffs
and Clerks, as stand the King in yearly above 12000. l. As for other dues or
casual Revenues, which now fall under the charge of these Officers, the
Collection and payment may be as it has been with the rest from the time of
Henry 2. until of late days laid on the Sheriffs of the Shire, and all the
accounts left to the 2. Auditors of the press to draw up, and Clerk of the Pipe
to enter in Magno rotulo as in former time, for it must seem strange to all men
of judgment, that it should be with those Officers (who had their beginning
but since the 25,year of Henry 8. by addition of his new revenue of 150000. l.
from the suppressed Monasteries) otherwise then with all things in nature, and
reason, Cessante Causa cessat effectus, not to be discontinued, when as all
Crown-annexed lands that gave them their just employment, are for the most part
passed from the Sovereign into the subjects possession.

Besides this of the general disposing in Fee-farm, there has been a project
in particular to infranchise the Copyholders in the several Manors, which I
should hold to be of more prejudice to his Majesty then the others, bringing
with it all the former inconveniences, loss of Fines, Regalities, and
advantages of sale, and being without many of the advantages, as Wardships,
Primiers Seisein, alienation and aids; for no man will buy quillets but in
soccage, and discontinuance or Officers, who must still remain, though they can
bring the King but little benefit.

Kings raise money, and improve their Revenues, by Farming out for years,
Lands, casualties, or wastes.
As in the 7. Rot. Parl. an. 7. Hen. 4.
Henry. 4. the State held it more just to help the King out of his own, then to
burden the Commonwealth, and therefore gave way by Parliament to the King to
improve up his Lands, though in Lease provided that the Leassee should have
refusal of the bargain if he would. Rot. fin. an. 2. Edw. 2. Rot. ^arl. an. 15.
Edw. 2.


Edward 1. anno 2. granted a commission to farm out all such wastes, Quod
absque iniuria alterius fieri potest. And in anno 15. asserted a great part of
his Woods for rent, and disforrested in most Counties of England for a sum of
money they gave him.

And it was not the least of charitable thrift in the King, Rot. claus. an. 7.
Edw. 2.
to reduce much of his waste to habitation of Christians, especially the remote
Forests, which would increase many thousand Families for his service, and
bring many thousand pounds to his Coffers.

But in the carriage of this business there must be much caution to prevent
commotion, for in them there are many that have right of common sans nombre.
And the resolution in agreement with them must be sudden, and confident, for
multitudes are jealous and inconstant. And the instruments to effect this, must
be such as are neighbors, interessed and popular, not strangers; And the first
demise to the inhabitants, and at under and easy values.

Kings raise money, and improve the Revenues of their Crown, by manuring of
Lands.
Thus did Henry 3. anno 13. in removing out of most of his Parks as Gillingham,
Rot. claus. an. 13 Hen 3. memb. 10.
Brigstock, Cliff, Woodstock, Haverel, etc. all men's Cattle pro bobus, pro
Lardaria Regis in Parcis praedictis impinguendis.

And Edward 1. Rot. fin. 2 and 3 Edw. 1.
commanded all the Escheators in England. Excolere seminare and appropriare ad
maximum Regis proficuum ownes terras, quae regi and coronae suae devenerint per
mortem aliquorum vocationem Episcopatium, etc.

KIngs raise money and improve the Revenues of their Crown By Merchandise 1.
Trading themselves. 2. Licencing others to trade in Commodities, 3. Improving
Customs. Lawful or unlawful.



1. Trading themselves.
Thus did Edward 1. Rot. valcon. 22. Edw. 1.
anno 22. seize into his hands all the Wools in the Kingdom, as the Merchants
were lading them in the Ports, giving them security of payment at a long day,
and a short price, and then transporting them to his own best and readiest sale.

Thus did Edward 3. Rot. Alinaig. 12. Edw. 3.
anno 12. with all the Tin.

And Henry 6. Act Council. an. 10. Hen. 6.
anno 20. by advice of his Council took up by way of purveyance great store of
Grain, and transported it into Gascoigne, where by reason of a dearth, the
price was extreme. In anno 31. he arrested all the Tin in Southampton, and sold
it to his own present use: and in the year following using the advantage of the
Statute, which bound all men to trade the staple Commodities to no other place
but Call^ce, vented himself many Sacks of Wool to other Ports of better
advantage.

And the late Queen anno 1567. Warrant. sub private. sigill. an. 9 Eliz. Reginae.
causes by warrant of Privy Seal a great proportion of Beer to be purveyed,
transported and sold to her use beyond the Seas.

KIngs raise money and improve the Revenue of their Crown

By licencing others to trade Commodities. Lawful Or Unlawful.


1. Lawfully, but solely.
Thus did Henry 6. Rot. Parl an. 29. Hen. 6. n. 15.
by approbation of Parliament, with all the trade of Allome, for two years
granted to the Merchants of Southampton for 8000. 1. And again for the like sum
to those of Genoway.

2. Unlawful or Prohibited.
Thus did many of the Kings, Rot. claus. an. 19. Hen. 3. Rot. Parl. 15. Rich. 2.
(after such time as the heavy burden of imposition began in the miserable
necessity of Henry 3. called then by no better name then Maltolt) and continued
until the 15. year of Richard 2. by diverse intermissions, for then I find the
last petition of many in Parliament against it, was altogether taken away. For
when Richard 2. and his Successors found the Revenue lessened, by the
importunate cry of their People, whereby impositions were laid aside, they
began to advise another supply out of the unbounded power of supposed
prerogative, and finding a greedy desire of one Merchant to prevent another of
his market (restrained by that Act or Statute, which tied them to one time, and
to one Port Callaice, for all staple commodities) they used to sell Licenses
with a clause of Non obstante of any statute, whereby they dispensed with
multitudes, to trade with what commodities and to what places they would.

To the Merchants of Newcastle Richard 2. Ex billa signat. an. 20. Rich. 2.
gave leave to carry wool-fells etc. to any other Port besides Callaice, upon
condition that they should pay for them Custom and Subsidy according Le sage
discretion de vouz ou de vostre sage Counceil.

To diverse Citizens of London, Henry 4. in the like sort dispenceth for great
quantity of Tin for seven years, paying 400. 1. yearly above the usual
Custom.

Henry 6. Ex petit. an. 5. Hen. 6.
annis 5. 21. 30. renews to the Town of Newcastle the same license they had
anno 20. Richard 2. and grants 600. sacks of Wool to Benedict Benoni Merchant
of Florence, Ex act. Council.
with non obstante any statute or restraint: In this year such Licenses were so
frequent, that the Town of Callaice complained in Parliament of their decay
thereby; yet without relief as it seems. For the same King anno 36. gives
leave to Lawrence Barbarico to transport from London to Cicester 12000. sacks
of Wool to what Ports he list: And Edward 4. anno 10, borrowing 12000, Ex billa
original. an. 10. Edw 4.
l. of diverse Merchants, permits them non obstante any Law to carry any
staple commodities to the Straits of Morocco until they were satisfied their
sum.

Henry the 7. raises much money, by giving leave to many Merchants to trade
inward and outward Commodities prohibited, Ex lib. comp. inter Hen. 7. and
Dudley.
as to Alonso de Burgues great proportions of Ode Anno 6. and to a multitude of
others all kind of grain and other forbidden things, as in annis 20, 21, 22.

KIngs raise money and improve the Revenues of the Crown, by improving customs.

By 1. Farming out of Ships. 2. Raising the book of Rates. 3. Farming the
Customs.


1. Farming out of Ships.
To the Merchants, and taking security of them, either to bting in or carry out
yearly as much Commodities, as shall yield the King in Customs the sum agreed
on, or else to make it up out of their own money.

Thus did Henry 7. Ex lib. Hen. 7.
many years, not only with his Ships, but with diverse stocks of money.

2. Raising the Book of Rates.
This was in some sort done Consensis Mercatorum by Edward 1. Rot. Almaign. 3.
Edw. 3 Rot. claus. 29. Ed. 1. Ex tract. Bruxelles.
and Edward 3. and again in Henry 8. time, of which the house of Burgundy
complained, as against the treaty of intercourse; and of late so stretched, as
it is feared it will prove the overthrow of trade: neither do I find this
course at any other time.

As a branch of this, may aptly fall out the benefit Princes made by a
prerogative power of imposing inward and outward upon Commodities, over and
above the ancient Custom of Subsidy. The first that used this course after
the Statute was settled, from a King of voluntary government after the Conquest
(when as Kings ruled more by the edge of the Sword then by rule of Law) was
Henry 3. Magna Charta 30.
about the entrance of his Reign; But finding it to be an apparent overthrow of
Commerce and Trade, and against the great Charter; made proclamation anno 16.
Dor^. clau. an. 16. Hen. 3. n* 20.
in all Ports of England that all Merchants might come faciendo rectas et
debitas consuetudines, nec sibi timeant de malis toltis, for it had no better
name then Maletolts. Statut. an 25. Ed. 1.


Some impositions being laid by Edward 1. he in anno 25. takes them away, with
promise that neither he nor his Successors should do any such thing without
assent of the Parliament, Rot. Parl. 31. Edw. 1. cap. 1. and 2.
granting in anno 31. to the Merchants many immunities, as release of prisage,
for which they requite him with some increase of Customs, but not as imposed
by his own power: For he in anno 34. declares that no tallage or aid should
be levied without the assent of Parliament, nor nothing to be taken of Woolls
by color of Maletolt.

In Edward 2. time, it appears that levying of new Customs and raising of
old, was the destruction of Traffic, and therefore repealeth all Maletoltes,
only in anno 11, 12. Rot claus. an. 11. Edw. 2.
takes by way of Lone, and with leave of the Merchants, some former increase
upon Wools, ascribing nothing to any supreme power to impose.

The like did Ed. the 3. Rot. fin. 1. Ed. 3. Statute 2. Ed. 3. cap. 9. Rot Par.
6. Ed. 3. tat. 11. Ed. 3. cap. 1.
anno 1. confirming in anno 2. the great Charter for free traffic: but having
about anno quinto granted certain Commissions for a new kind of raising
tallage, the People complained the year following, whereupon he repealed the
said Commissions, and promises never to assess any, but as in time of his
Ancestors. After in anno 11. by reason of a Statute then made (restraining all
men upon pain of death for transporting any Wools without license from the King
and Council) Edward the third made great advantage by selling of Dispensations
of that Law, and grounded upon it many impositions; but it grew so heavy upon
the People, To. Almaign. 12. Edw. 3. memb. 22. indors.
that their discontentments so far increased, that the King was enforced to
cause the Archbishop of Conterbury to persuade them to patience by his Godly
exhortations, yet notwithstanding he continued by gentle intermissions the
advantage he had by that late undecimo, taking an improvement of Custom for
opening the passage that thereby was shut in anno 13. Stat. 1^. Ed. 3. Rot.
Parl. 1. Edw. 3. Stat. 14. Edw. 3.
until the same year the State made purchase of their former freedom, and
discharge of the Malotolt, by granting the tenth sheafe and fleece etc.

And thus it continued all his reign, being a time of great necessity and
expense by reason of his Wars, he sometimes taking an advantage either to raise
an imposition, or else to gain aid from the People in discharge thereof, they
continually urging the injury in barring them their birthright: And the King
on the other side the greatness of his own occasions, and it may be gathered by
Record, that thus it held on until the 15. Richard 2. in which year is the last
petition against impositions, generally grounded in likelihood from the Kings
power in restraining or permitting trade all the time after; Licencegranted by
Henry 4. Henry 5. Henry 6. to many Merchants with non obstante any statute.
though licenses with non obstante were ordinary, yet were they to private
persons and for particular proportions of Commodities, whereby the Kings
succeeding raised no less benefit then by sale of any general permission. To
this of imposition I may add the rule I find, anno 12. Henry 6. Ordinat. Council
an. 12. Hen. 6.
made in Council, that the value of all goods for the payment Subsidy, shall
be rated of Commodities domestique as they may be sold between Merchant and
Merchant: And if foreign, then so it shall appear upon Oath of the Merchant or
his Factor, they stood them in at the first; Merchants.
and the general Maxim which limits all regal advantage upon trade of
Merchants is, ut Causa honesta sit et necessaria, ratio facilis, tempus idoneum.

3. Farming out of Customs.
So did Edward 3. with the new and old Customs at London for 1000. Clau. anno.
5. Edw. 3. Original. 17. Edw. 3 rot. 2.
Marks monthly to be paid unto the Wardrobe. The like he did anno 17.

Richard 2. anno 20. lets out for term of life the Subsidy of Cloth in
diverse Countries.

And Edward 4. anno 1. the subsidy and usuage of Cloth.

Thus did Henry 8. with his Customs, and since his time, the late Queen, and
our now Sovereign Master; and it was so then in use in the best governed State
Rome, which let out portions and decim's to the Publicans.

KIngs raise money, and improve the Revenues of the Crown.

By Regalities; 1. Temporal, as for Liberties. Penalties of Laws, Letters of
Favor.
2. Mixed.


Liberties.
In granting, restraining or renewing them. It is a course usual, that Kings
have raised in money by calling in question the Charters and Liberties of
Corporations, Leets, Free-Warrens, and other Royalties.

Thus did Richard 1. Ex Rod. cogshal.
proclaiming, Quod omnes chartae et confirmationes, quae prioris sigilli
impressione roberaverint, irritae forent nisi posteriori sigillo roborentur.

And Henry 3. anno 10. enjoined all qui suis volebant Libertatibus gaudere, ut
innovarent chartas suas de novo Regis sigillo, getting money thereby.

Edward 1. by diverse Commissions with articles (called Articuli de Ragman)
annexed to them, Rot. Ragman. an. 7 Ed. 7. Rot. Quo warranto 8. Ed. 3.
called in question about anno 70. all the liberties and freedoms of England;
Gilbert de Thorneton his Attorney putting information by Quo warranto against
all persons, as well bodies Politic as others; whereby they were enforced anew
to renew their Charters and Fines for their Liberties.

The like was in anno 13. Rot. Warranto 13 Edw. 3.
Edward 3. in whose time anno 9. all clauses of allowances by Charter of
Amerciaments, Fines, etc. imposed by the Kings Ministers upon any of the
Tenants, of other men were adjudged void, and the penalties made payable to the
Kings Officers, unless they made a new purchase of their Liberties. And this
was one of the usualest and easiest means to raise money from the People;
because it lights only upon the best abilities. And if there were now but
20. l. taken of every Corporation; of every person that holds by Charter his
Liberties 5.l. for renewing them: and of every one that claims by
prescription 10. l. for purchase of a Charter, all which would be easy and
acceptable, it would amount to above 100000. l.

For penal Laws that have been sometimes but with ill success wrought upon.

When Richard 2. Instructio original. 22. Rich. 2.
anno 22. began this course, appointing in all his Commissions and
instructions, Bushey only to be of the Quorum for compounding with the
Delinquents, it wrought in the affection of his People such distaste, that it
grew the death of the one, and deposition of the other.

No less fatal was the like to Empson: Process con. Dudley an. 1. Hen. 8.
and there is no string will sooner j^rre in the Commonwealth then this, if it
be generally touched.

For Letters of Fav^^^.
Either for mitigation of dispatch of Justice.

Of the first sort there be many found in Henry 6. and Edward 4. time,
sometimes of protection, although by course of the Common Law none are
warrantable but to such as are going in obsequium Regis, or ibidem moraturi,
sometimes freeing men from Arrests by calling them up to appear before the
Kings Council: Sometimes in causes highly criminal releiving the Prisoner, in
commanding the Judges to make stay of all proceeding upon supposal of indirect
practices until the King was better informed.

Of the second sort there are many in Henry 7. time, Lib. aquitanc. inter Hen.
7. and Dudley.
where the King has taken money for writing to the Judges of Assize his
Letters of Favor.

For Offices.
Thus did King John with the Chancellor-ship, selling it for term of life to
Gray for 5000. Marks: diverse offices now in the gift of the Master of the
Rolls were engaged to the Chancellor and Treasurer of England, as are to be
found in Record of Henry 4. Henry 5. and Henry 6. to be passed by warrant of
the Kings hand, and upon some consideration. And Henry 7. renewed this course,
using Dudley as his instrument to compound with Suitors of those and any other
places.

And by that Record we find the Chancellor, the Chief Justice, the Keepers of
most of the Records, the Clerks of the Assizes and Peace, the Masters of his
Game and Parks, and what else carrying either profit or reputation, paid to the
King some proportion of money for their places. Neither is this different from
the course of other States. For in France Lewis 12. Emilius in vita Lewis 12.
called the Father of his Country, did so with all Offices not being of
Judicature, which his Successors did not forbear. In Spain it is usual, and
Vasqui the Spanish Advocate defends the lawfulness of it: V^s. cap. 40. ex
instructione Caroli 5. to Ph. l. 2.
And Charles the fifth prescribes it to his Son, as a rule in his last
instruction, drawing his ground of reason and convenience, from the example and
practice of the Sea at Rome. The like might be of all inferior promotions that
are or may be in the Kings gift, whether Ecclesiastical or Temporal, if they
were after the true value in profit and reputation listed into ranks,
according to the several natures of their employments respectively.

For Honors.
And that either by Power legal or Election.

Of the first it is only in respect of Land, whereby every man is to fine when
the King shall require, that has ability to be made a Knight and is not, of
this sort there be plenty of Examples.

The other out of choice and Grace, as Hugo de Putiaco Bishop of Durham, was by
King Richard 1. created Earl of Northumberland for a great sum of money: And I
doubt not but many of these times would set their ambition at as high a price.
And for his Majesty now to make a degree of honor hereditary, as Barronets,
next under Barons, and grant them in tail, taking of every one 1000. l. in
fine, it would raise with ease 100000. l. and by a judicious election be a
means to content those worthy persons in the Commonwealth that by the
confused admission of many Knights of the Bath held themselves all this time
disgraced.

For the Coin and Bullion.
By which although some Kings out of a last shift, have seemed to relieve
themselves, yet was it in truth full of danger and distrust to the
Commonwealth; being an assured token of a bankrupt state: and to the Prince in
conclusion, of most disadvantage. For the Revenues of the Crown being commonly
uncertain Rents, they must in true value, howsoever in verbal sound, be abated
to the proportion that the Money shall be abased. And every man will rate his
Commodity in Sale, not according to the account of pence or pounds, but to the
weight of pure Silver contained in the current money. As for example, That
which was before the dec^ying of the Coin worth five shillings the pouud
weight, will (if the allay be to the half) be held at ten shillings; and so in
every proportion respectively. For money is not merely to be esteemed in
respect of the Sculpture or Figure; but it must value in pecunia quantum in
massa: And Silver is a Commodity as other Wares, and therefore holds his
estimation as they do according to the goodness. And the Lord Treasurer
Burleigh in Anno 1561. when the current of State-Councel affected an abasement
of Coin, after a grave deliberation advised the Queen from it, and never would
give way to any such resolution in his time. But that benefit which truly the
King might more make of Bullion then now he does, is to erect again Cambium
Regis his own exchange. An office as ancient as before Henry 3. and so
continued unto the middle of Henry 8. the profit of it being now engrossed
among a few Goldsmiths, and would yield above 10000. l. a year if it were
heedfully regarded, and then should the King himself keep his Mint in continual
work, and not stand at the devotion of others to supply Bullion, and should
never want, the materials, if two things were observed: The one to permit all
men bringing in Bullion, to trade outward the value thereof in domestic
Commodities at an abated Custom.

The other to abate the mighty indraught of foreign manufactures, and
unnecessary Wares, that the outward trade might over-balance the inward, which
otherwise will (as it has done) draw on this desperate consumption of the
Commonwealth: Which anno 27. Edward 3. was otherwise, for then the Exitus
exceeded the Introitus by far, and in the last times of the late Queen as in
anno 1573. For at this time the unmeasurable use of luxurious Commodities was
brought in (as Wines, Ex Scacar inter rememb. Regis 27. Ed. 3.
Spices, Silk, and fine Linnens, etc.) for of the latter sort of above ten
groats the Ell there is above 360000. l. yearly spent, which is half the value
of our cloths transported, makes the State to buy more then they do sell,
whereas a good Father of a family ought to be vendacem and not emacem. Besides
the condition of our People is now such, that the greater part neither get nor
save, which in a private house is an apparent argument of ruining, and must be
no less in a Commonwealth. And it is observed generally, that hence the want
of Bullioin now is such, that there is not money in Specie sufficient to pay
the lenders their principal, so that usury is paid for money upon supposition,
and not really.

If then his Majesty shall be pleased by advise of his Council, to advantage
himself any otherwise by coinage, it will be safer to do it upon a simple
metal, then by any implyant or beater suite, which well governed States both
modern and ancient used: For Rome in her increase and greatest pitch of glory
had their money aere argento, auro puto puro, and so have all the Monarchies
absolute at this day in Christendom. And I believe it may be wrought to his
Majesty of good value, and to the State of much ease, if it may be put in
practice with discreet caution and constant resolution; for the danger only
may be in the venting of the quantity, which may clogge the State with useless
money, or extension of the example, which may work in by degrees an embasement
of Bullion.

The proportion that I would hold beneficial and safe, should be in the Mass,
at first 120000. l. by which his Majesty should gain 10000. clearly: the
increase annual 12000. l. in which his Majesty should gain 1000. And the
limitation, that none be enforced to take any but in sums under 20 s. and
then but the twentieth part proportionably.

Against this some may object, that it will either not advantage the King so
much as it projected, either from the difficulty in venting, or facility in
Counterfeiting, or else prejudice the estate with a worthless money.

The benefit to the King will easily fall out, if he restrain Retailers of
victual and small Wares from using their own tokens, for in and about London,
there are above 3000. that one with another cost yearly 5. l. apiece of leaden
Tokens, whereof the tenth remains not to them at the years end, and when they
renew their store, which amounts to above 15000. l. And all the rest of this
Realm cannot be inferior to the City in proportion. And the form and figure
may with an Engine so subtly be milled, that the charge will prevent all
practice of false play.

For the prejudice since London, which is not the 24. part of the People of the
Kingdom, had in it found above 800000. by a late inquiry by order of the late
Queen, and so falls out to be 2 d. a person, in the entire state it may
nothing, either of loss by the first uttering being so easy, nor burden any
with too great a Mass at a time, since continual use will disperse so small a
quantity into so many hands. But on the other side will be to the meaner sort
(except the Retailers that made as much advantage formerly of their own Tokens,
as the King shall now) of necessary use and benefit: For the buyers hereafter
shall not by tied to one Seller and his bad Commodities, as they are still,
when his tokens, hereafter made current by authority, shall leave him the
choice of any other Chapman; and to the Poor in this time of small charity, it
will be of uch relief; since men are like to give a farthing Alms, that will
not part with a greater sum.

Besides, it cannot but prevent much waste of Silver, that is by the minting
pence and half pence occasioned, there will be no cause hereafter to cut any
Bullion into proportion so apt for loss: what that has been may be
conjectured, if we mark but of the great quantities from the penny downward
since Henry 8. time stamped, how few remain: whereas of all the Coins from
three pence upward which are manual, plenty pass still in daily payment.

Regalities mixed.
As for restitution of the temporalities of Abbots and Bishops.

For which Henry 7. received great sums.

Corrodies in Cathedral Churches.
And having in every Cathedral and Collegiate Church, as incident to his Crown
a Corradary, made money of it, at the highest rate he could.

Vacancy of Bishoprics.
The benefit at the vacancy of any Bishop some Kings have used to their best
advantage, making a circular remove of as many as in reputation and profit was
inferior to the place void.

Concurrent Jurisdiction as the Pope had in former times.
Besides, there are two of no mean commodity.

The one is grounded upon a concurrent Jurisdiction with every Ordinary in the
Diocese, which the King by having the power Papal in that point invested in
him by Act of Parliament, may exercise by his Commission, or otherwise remit to
the Ordinary for some valuable respect.

Thus did Cardinal Woolsey with Warham the Archbishop, Ex composit. original.
inter Ca^d. Woolsey, and Archiep Cant dated 14. Hen. 8.
and all other the Bishops of the Kingdom, after he had got his Legative
power. And this if it were put in practice would draw to the King 20000. l. in
his Coffers.

Tenths of the Church Lands now in the Laity.
The other is the short account yielded the King of such Ecclesistiacal tenths
and duties, as were often or Annually paid unto the Pope in former times, and
now by Statute invested in the Crown: for in former times the Sea of Rome
received them not, as only out of the mere Spiritualities, but also from out of
all the Temporalities of Spiritual persons; which Land being now divided from
the Church into the hands of the Laity; yet ought they to pay this duty, since
they were settled in the Crown by a former Law, and no subsequent ever has
discharged them.

AN ANSWER TO CERTAIN ARGUMENTS Raised from Supposed Antiquity, And urged by
some MEMBERS of the lower HOUSE of PARLIAMENT, To prove that Ecclesiastical
Laws, Ought to be Enacted by Temporal Men.

Written by Sir ROB. COTTON Knight and Barronet.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1672.

AN ANSWER TO CERTAIN ARGUMENTS Raised from Supposed Antiquity, And urged by
some Members of the Lower House of PARLIAMENT, To Prove that Ecclesiastical
Laws Ought to be Enacted by Temporal Men.
WHat, besides self-regard, or siding faction, has been the main reason of the
lower Lay-house labor in Parliament, to deal with Laws of the Church, the
milder Members have yielded a Right which they would maintain by former
Presidents, raising the same from 1. Primitive use. 3. Reasons out of President.
2. Middle practice. 3. Interrupted continuance.


Professing the same by the Laws of 1. The Roman Empire. 1. Imperial
constitutons.
2. The Saxon Kings. 2. Saxonlaws.
3. The English Parliaments so to do. Acts in Parliament



Which since it may raise a prejudice to the Church's peace, or to the
Sovereign's power, unopposed; I will make way (in a word or two) to the better
answer of some other Pen. What they say is not to be denied, that in course of
civil Laws under the Christian Emperors, there be often constitutions
Ecclesiastical; and in the Councels of the Church (frequent) the Sovereign's
power, and sometimes the presence of lay-Ministers; yet may their assertion
admit to the first, this answer of Justinian; Justinian.
Principes, Sapientes, Episcoporum monita, pro fide and Religione Christiana,
Leges Synodicis Canonibus conformes edidere, recte judicantes, Sacerdotum
Sanctiones merito Majestatis Regiae nuturoborari. So that those decrees of the
Civil Laws, Tripartita Historia.
will prove but confirmative of former Canons, as may be gathered by that of
Volentinian and Martian. Emperors, who wrote unto Paladius, their Praefectus
Pratorii, that all constitutions, that were against the Canon of the Church
should stand void. And to the second, that their presence was to dignifie, and
not to dispute; the direction proves, Distinct. 196. 1.
that the Emperor Theodosius gave to Candidianus an Earl, by him to the
Ephesian Council sent; Non ut Quaestiones seu Expositiones communicaret, cum
sit illicitum quia non fit in ordine sanctissimorum Episcoporum, Ecclesiasticis
tractatibus intermisceri. And Valentinian the elder, though petitioned by the
Bishops to be present at their Synod, Nicep. lib. 11.
said; Sebi, qui unus e Laicorum numero esset, non licere hujusmodi negotiis se
interponere. And by the Council of Carth. and Affrican, Council. Ca^^h. Affric.
likewise it appeared; that even Princes would intermeddle with these matters;
but Saepius rogati ab Episcopis. And the Emperor Gratian taught, as Zozimus
Zozimus.
says, Omnes Laicos nihil potestatis inres Ecclesiasticas posse sibi
vindicare. And the former Emperor. enacted; In causa Ecclesiastici alicujus
ordinis cum judicare debere, qui nec manner impar est, nec jure dissimilis,
Ambros. l 5. Ep. 32.
Sacerdotes de Sacerdotibus judicare. According to that Saying of Constantine
the Great; Russ^us Ec. clef. hist. l. ^.
Vos enim a Deo nobis dati estis Dii, and conveniens non est ut homo judicet
Deos. Thus then stood the practice of the primitive Church; which when it was
in those times otherwise, as under Constantius the Arrian, Athanas. says of
him; Haereseos veneno imbutos milites, Athan. Epist ad solit. vitam agent.
Sicarios, Eunuchos Comites, faciebat Sacerd. Judices, and cogebat umbratiles
Synodas, quibus ipse cum monstris illis praesiperet. Whereas otherwise that
Emperor, even in the height of Pagan Greatness, Dionysius H^lic^rn.
ascribed to their Pontifices and Sacerdotes in Common Right, Propter
Religionem comitia habere propria, and that Stabili Sententia rarum erat, quod
tres Pontifices communi decreto statuissent

The second Objection. Ecclesiastical Laws enacted in Parliament.
To the second, as it is in the former true, that many Canons of the Church are
interlaced with the Commonwealths, although the Saxon Laws, Saxon Laws.
and that the establishment should be by Parliament, which they infer out of
the Frontispian, of Inas Statutes in these words: Ego Inae Rex, ex tractatione
Episcoporum, Leges Inae.
et omnium Aldermannorum meorum, and seniorum sapientu^ Regni mei, and
confirmatione Populi mei; do ordain etc. Yet may receive this answer. First,
that the Commons did but confirm and not dispute; which to this day is in their
summons comprised only ad consuet udinen. But whosoever shall collate the
transcript copy with the original, called Textus Roffensis, will find these
ordinances, Textus Roffensis.
not called Leges but Synodalia, and almost all by the King and Churchmen
only made. Neither was it new in this Isle that Priests directed alone the
government, when as the best Record of our eldest memory says, that the
Druides, (a religious Pagan order) not only divinis intersunt, Religiones
interpretantur, but de omnibus (as Caesar says) controversis publicis
privatisque confirment, sive de heridet amento, sive de finibus, and praemia
and paenas constituunt. And if any, sive privatus, aut populus decreto eoru^
non stererit, sacrificiis interdicunt. And this excommunication amongst them,
was paena gravissima. Neither did the times of Christianity here bereave the
Church of all such will. For in the Saxon time they intermedled in the framing
of the Temporal Laws, and ought, as appears by an Ordinance of that time de
Officiis Episcopi: Cum seculi judicibus interesse ne permittent si possint,
Leges Regum Saxorum.
ut illinc aliqua pravitatum germina pullulaverint. And surely, since these
time until of late, the inferior Ministers of the Church, Eulogium. All the
Clergy members of Parliament proved by Record.
as well as Bishops, had suffrage in Parliament. For John de Rupescissa (a story
as old as King John's time) says, Anno 1210. Convocatum est Parliamentum
Londoniae, Presidente Archiepiscopo cum toto Clero. and tota secta Laicali.
Rot. Parl. 18. Edw. 3.
And in the 8. of Edward the 3. the Members of Parliament defective in their
appearance, the King charge the Archbishop to punish the defaults of the
Clergy, as he would the like touching the Lords and Commons. And in third of
Richard the second, Rot. Parl. an. 3. Rich. 2.
against a Petition in Parliament contradicting Provisions, the Prelates and
whole Clergy, make their protestations; And to a demand of the Lay-Commons, for
the King's aid the year following, Rot. Parl. an. 4. Rich. 2.
the whole Clergy answered, that they used not to grant any but of their free
will. And in the eleventh of the same King, Rot. Parl. an. 11. Ri. 2. 11. ^
the Archbishop of Canterbury made openly in Parliament a solemn protestation
for himself, and the whole Clergy of his Province, entered by word; the effect
whereof was, That albeit they might lawfully be present in all Parliaments, yet
for that in those Parliament matters of treason were to be entreated of,
whereas by the Canon law they ought not to be present, they therefore absented
themselves, saving their liberties therein otherwise.

And in the 21. Rot. Parl. an. 21. Rich. 2. n. 9. and 10.
of Richard the 2. for that diverse judgments were heretofore undon; for that
the Clergy were not present; the commons prayed the King, that the Clergy
would appoint some to be their common Proctor, with sufficient authority
thereunto. The Bishops and Clergy therefore being severally examined,
appointed Sir Thomas Piercy their Proctor to assent as by their Instruments
appears.

And the same year, Rot. Parl. an. 21 Rich. 2. n. 51.
upon the devise of Sir Thomas Bussey, most of the Bishops and Lords were
sworn before the King again, upon the Cross of Canterbury, to repeal nothing
in this year enacted. So did sundry the Proctors of the Clergy, and most of the
Commons, by holding up one of their hands, affirmed that they the same would do.

In the judgment of the Duke of Norfolk, 2. Ric. 2. n. 58.
and Earl of Warwick the same year, the name and assent of the Procurator of
the Clergy alleged. 1. Hen. 4.
And in the first of Henry 4. the Bishop of Assaph, for Archbishop and
Bishops; the Abbot of Glassenbury, for all Religious Persons; the Earl of
Gloucester, for Dukes and Earls; the Lord of Barkley, for Barons and Barronets;
Sir Thomas Irpingham Chamberlain, for Batchelors and Commons of the South; Sir
Thomas Gray, for Batchelors and Commons of the North; Sir William Thirming and
John Mekham Justices, for the whole Estates, came to the Tower to King Richard
to whom Sir William Thirming, for and in the name of them all, pronounced the
sentence of deposition, and the words or resignation of homage and loyalty.

And when it was enacted anno 6. Henry 6. by the King, Rot. Parl an. 6. He. 6.
n. 27.
Lords Temporal and Commons, that no man should contract or marry himself to
any Queen of England, without the special license and assent of the King, on
pain to lose all his Goods and Lands; The Bishops and all the Clergy to this
Bill assented, so far as it was not against the Law of God. And thus far for
answer to the second part.

The third Reason. Ecclesiastical Laws enacted in Parliament.
The last, which they granted from Presidents, Parliaments since the Conquest,
they infer out of the Phrase, and out of the practice; The first by these
words: Rex Wintoniae celebravit magnum Concilium coram Episcopis, William
M^lmesbury.
Comitibus, and Baronibus, mistaking the word, as intending a Provincial Synod,
whereas it was in those days equal and usual for their Parliament, that French
Phrase never having admission in that sense here until the time of Henry 2.
Lib. Ecclesiae Cantuar.
and then but rarely. That great assembly being formerly instiled Magnum
Consilium; and until of late often enjoyed the same name. And this is evident
out of the words of Benedictus Abbas in the life he wrote of the 2. Vita Hen. 2.
2. Henry; Circa festum sancti Pauli, venit Dominus Rex usque Northampton, and
magnum ibi celebravit Consilium de Statutis Regni sui coram Episcopis,
Comitibus Baronibus terrae suae, and per Consilium Militum and hominum suorum.
Here the intent manifests the nature of that assembly, and the fuller, in
that the same Author in the same year, says, that Richardus Cantuar.
Archiepiscopus, and Rogerus Eboracensis cum Sufraganeis suis congregatis apud
Westmonasterium in Capella Monachorum infirmiorum tenuerunt Consilium; or their
convocation; which had been needless if in their first, they might have done
their Church-affaires.

Here might I enter into a large and just discourse, as well of the authority
as antiquity of their Convocation or Synod Provincial, no less ancient, Beda.
as Beda mentions, then in the year 686. when Austin adjutorio Regis, etc.
assembled in Council the Britain Bishops; from which unto this day there is
successive Record of Councels or Convocations, Provincial Consitutions.
less interrupted then of Parliament.

Practice.
Now touching our practice to ordain in Parliaments Laws Ecclesiastical,
either mere or mixed, although it be by Record evident, yet must it admit this
difference: First, that it sprung not from our dispute, or desire, Rot. Parl.
but solely from the Petitions of the Church, as usual is in all the Rolls of
Parliament, receiving their distinct Title from those of the Commons. And this
they did to add Seculare Brachium to their former Cannons, too weak to reach
to corporal punishments; as in the fifth of Richard 2. when to suppress the
Schisms, the Clergy became in Parliament the Petitioners to the Kings Laity;
Claus. 5. Rich. 2.
where these words of their assistance are, excluding the Commons from any
Power of advice: Habita prius bona and matura deliberatione de communi Consilio
ipsius Archiepiscopi, Suffraganeorum suorum, aliorumque Clericorum, super quo
idem Archiepiscopus supplicavit, ut pro debita castigatione illorum qui
conclusiones Schismaticas praedicare voluerint, animo obstinato dignaremur
apponere brachium Regiae potestatis ^idem. Charae ^ntiquae B. B.
And this aid was in order in the Conquerors time; who by edict commanded,
that every Marshal, Episcope and Deo faceret rectum secundum Canones and
Episcopales leges. Which if he does not, after excommunication, Fortitudo et
Justitia Regis adhibeatur. And this even in the Primitive Church, was thought
convenient: because as Saint Ambrose says, for the like intent, to the Emperor
Valentinian; Ambrosi^s.
Non tantas vires sermo mecus habiturus est pro Trinitate bellum gerens,
quantum edictum tuum. Hence it is that at this day, the King's authority is
annexed ever to the Convocation; as in the ancient Church were the like decrees
of Kings; as those of Eruigius ratifying the twelfth Council of Toledo. Nemo
illiciator vel contemptor vigorem his Institutionibus subtrahat, Council. 11.
Toletan.
sed generaliter per cunctas Regni nostri provincias hoec Canonum instituta
nostrae gloriae temporibus acta, et autoritatis debitae fastigia praepollebunt,
and irrevocabili judiciorum exercitie prout constituta sunt in omnibus Regni
nostri Provinciis celebres habebuntur. Si quis autem haec instituta contemnat,
contemptor se noverit damnari sententia; Id est, ut juxta voluntatem nostrae
gloriae, et excommunicatas a nostro caet^resiliat; and in super decimam partem
facultatis suaefisci partibus sociandam, amittat. But that the Church-laws ever
moved from the Lay-members, I take it as far from President, as it is besides
nhe nature of their Commission: The Bishops and Clergy being only called in
the Writ to that service, the word being, ^d consentiendum. Writ of summons
Rot. claus. an. 22. Rich. 2. ^. 7.
to come in fide and delectione, ad declarandum Consilium and avisamentum, and
ad consentiendum iis quae tunc de avisamento and assensu Cleri nostri (and not
the Commons) cotigerit affirmari. But if any shall object unto me, that many
Laws, as that of the Supremacy in Henry 8. time, had first the ground in
Parliament; it is manifested, Archivis. Archiepis.
by the dates of their Acts in convocations, that they all had properly in that
place the first original. And that this was the use of old, nothing will leave
it so clear, as to observe the fruitless success of the Laity, in all their
endeavors to establish Ecclesiastical Laws; And this I will manifest by the
Kings answer out of Record, so far as the Rolls of Parliament will admit me,
successively. Until the 11. of Edward the first, Rot. Patl. 18. Edw. 1.
there is no Record extant; but in that the Commons petition to the King, that
a Law may be made against Usurers; Usurie.
The King gave answer, that it must be remedyed, coram Ordinariis. And when
they desired remedy, Vex^tion by Ord^naries.
de multimodis injustis vexationibus eis factis per Officiales and alios
ministros Ecclesiae; The King replied; Cancellarius emendat in temporalibus;
Archiepiscopus faci^t in spiritualibus. From hence there is a lack of Record
near to the 8. Rot. Parl. 8. Edw. 3.
of Edward 3. In which Parliament the Commons desire an Act to restrain the
Clergy in their trivial citations; Citations.
whereunto they received from the King but this answer only; That the King
will charge the Bishops to see it remedyed. And the first of Richard the 2.
Rot. Parl. an. 1. Rich. Pecuniarie pains. 5. Rich. 2. Ecclesiastical Courts.
preferring the like petition against corruption of Ordinaries, to do according
to the Laws of Holy Church. And in the fifth of the same King, they complain
against abuses in Ecclesiastical Courts. Respons. The King will charge the
Clergy to amend the same.

And in the 15. year, when they required an Act to declare the age of the
titheable Wood; Tithes.
they had for answer, The King would move the Bishops for order between this
and the next Parliament.

And in the 17 of Richard 2. 17. Rich. 2. n. 43.
when they petiotioned for a residing learned Ministry, so as the Flock for
want might not perish; Learned Ministry.
they had replied, That the King wills the Bishops to whom that Office
belongs, to do their duties.

Henry the 4. in his second year, Rot. Par. an. 2. Hen. 4. ^. 44.
desired by the Lords and Commons to pacify the Schism of the Church;
Answers, he will charge the Bishops to consider the same. And in his fourth
year, being importuned for an Act for residency of Ministers; 4. Hen. 4.
replied Le Roy command an Prelates et perentrecy ils empurvoient de remedy.
And in the eleventh of the same King, to the like petition; 11. Hen. 4.
Respons: Ceste matiere appartient a St. Eglise et remede en la darraine
Convocation.

In Parliament under the 5. Rot. Par. an. 1. Hen. 5.
Henry and his first year, the King answers the Commons petition, against
oppressing Ordinaries; If the Bishops do not redtess the same, the King will.

And in Anno 3. Rot. Par. an. 3. Hen. 6.
Henry 6. to a Petition that Non-Residents should forfeit the profit of their
living; gave answer, that he had delivered the Bill to my Lord of Canterbury,
and semblably to my Lord of York; charging them to purvey means of remedy.

And in the year following, Rot. Parl. an. 4. Hen. 1.
to a petition that Patrons may present upon Non-Residencie; Respons: There is
remedy sufficient in the Law spiritual.

Since then it is plain by these rehearsed answers, that from the Conquest,
they have received but weak admittance: And by the edict of the first King
William in these words, Chartae A^iquae B. B.
a sharp restraint; Defendo et mea authoritate interdico, ne ullus laicus homo
de legibus quae ad Episcopum pertinent se intromittat. And that the Saxon
Synodals, Leges Saxon.
are rather Canon-Laws, then Laymens Acts. And the practice of the primitive
Church, if well understood, but a weak prop to their desire, It may not seem
distastful from the King (walking in the Steps of his Ancestors, Kings of this
Land) to return (as formerly) the Commons desires to their proper place, the
Church-mans care. And to conclude this point in all Parliaments, as Martian the
Emperor did the Chalcedon Council; Council. Chale.
Cessat jam profana contentio; nam vere impius and sacrilegus est, qui posttot
sacerdotum sententiam, opinionisuae aliquid tractandum reliquit. And with the
Letter of Gods Law; Levit. 14.
Qui superbicrit nolens obedire sacerdotis imperio, ex decreto Judicis morietur
hono.

THE ARGUMENT Made by the COMMAND Of the House of COMMONS (Out of the Acts of
Parliament, and Authority of Law expounding the same) at a CONFERENCE with the
LORDS, CONCERNING THE LIBERTY of the person of every FREEMAN.

Written by Sir ROB. COTTON Knight and Barronet.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1672.

THE ARGUMENT Made by the COMMAND Of the House of COMMONS (Out of the Acts of
Parliament, and Authority of Law, expounding the same) at a Conference with the
LORDS, Concerning the Liberty of the person of every FREEMAN.
My LORDS,
Upon the occasions delivered by the Gentlemen, your Lordships have heard, the
Commons have taken into their serious consideration the matter of the personal
liberty: and after long debate thereof of on diverse days, as well by solemn
Arguments as single proportions of doubts and answers, to the end no scruples
might remain in any man's breast unsatisfyed; They have, upon a full search and
clear understanding of all things pertinent to the question, unanimously
declared, That no Freeman ought to be committed, or detained in Prison, or
otherwise restrained by the command of the King, or the Privy Council, or any
other, unless some cause of the commitment, deteinor, or restraint be
expressed, for which by Law he ought to be committed, detained or restrained:
And they have sent me with other of their Members to represent unto your
Lordships the true grounds of such their resolution, and have charged me
particularly (leaving the reasons of Law and Presidents for others) to give
your Lordships satisfaction, that this Liberty is established and confirmed by
the whole State, the King, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons,
by several Acts of Parliament, the authority whereof is so great, that it can
receive no answer, save by interpretation or repeal by future Statutes: And
those that I shall mind your Lordships of, are so direct to the point, that
they can bear no other exposition at all; and sure I am, they are still in
force.

The first of them is the grand Charter of the Liberties of England; first
granted 17. Johannis Regis, and revived 9. Hen. 3: and since confirmed in
Parliament above 30. times. The words are these* cap. 29. Nullus liber homo
capiatur vel imprisonetur, aut disseisetur de libero tenemento suo, vel
Libertatibus, vel liberis consuetudinibus suis, aut ut lagetur, aut exuletur,
aut aliquo modo d^struatur: nec super eum ibimus, nec super eum mittemus, nisi
per leg ale ^udiciu^ parium suorum, vel per legem terrae. These words Nullus
liber homo, etc. are express enough. Yet it is remarkable, that Matthew Paris
(an Author of especial credit) does observe fol. 432 that the Charter 9. Henry
3. was the very same as that of the 17. of King John (in nullo dissimilis are
his words) and that of King John he sets down verbatim fol. 342. And there
the words are directly, Nec ^um in carcerem mittemus: and such a corruption as
in now in the point might easily happen betwixt 9. Henry 3. and 28. Edward 1.
when this charter was first exemplified: but certainly, there is sufficient
left in that which is extant to decide this question: for the words are, that
no Freeman shall be taken or imprisoned but by the lawful judgment of his
Peers (which is by Jury; Peers for Peers, ordinary Juryes for other, who are
their Peers) or by the Law of the Land: Which Law of the Land must of necessity
be understood to be of this notion, to be by due process of the Law; and not
the Law of the land generally: otherwise it would comprehend Bondmen (whom we
call Villains) who are excluded by the word liber: For the general Law of the
Land does allow their Lords to imprison them at their pleasure without cause,
wherein they only differ from the Freeman, in respect of their persons, who
cannot be improsoned without a cause. And that this is the true understanding
of these words, per legem terrae, will more plainly appear by diverse other
Statutes that I shall use, which do expound the same accordingly. And though
the words of this grand Charter be spoken in the third person; yet they are not
to be understood of suits betwixt party and party; at least not of them alone,
but even of the Kings suits against his Subjects, as will appear by the
occasion of the getting of that Charter; which was by reason of the differences
between those Kings and their People; and therefore properly to be applied unto
their power over them, and not to ordinary questions betwixt Subject and
Subject.

Secondly, the words per legale judicium parium suorum immediately preceding
the other of per legem terrae, are meant of trials at the Kings suit, and not
at the prosecution of a Subject. And therefore if a Peer of the Realm be
arraigned at the Suite of the King upon an Indictment of murder, he shall be
tried by his Peers; that is by Nobles: but if he be appealed of murder by a
Subject, his trial shall be by an ordinary Jury of 12. Freeholders, as
appears in 10. Edward 4 6. 33. Henry 8. Brook title trials 142 Stamf. pleas
of the Crown lib. 3. cap. 1. fol. 152. And in 10 Edward 4. it is said, such is
the meaning of Magna Charta. By the same reason therefore, as per judicium
parium suorum extends to the Kings suit; so shall these words per legem terrae.
And in 8. Edward 3. rot. Parl. m. 7. there is a petition, that a Writ under the
privy Seal went to the Guardian of the Great Seal, to cause Lands to be seized
into the Kings hands; by force of which there went a Writ out of the Chancery
to the Escheator, to seize against the form of the Grand Charter, that the King
or his Ministers shall out no man of Freehold without reasonable Judgment,
and the Party was restored to his Land; which shows the Statute did extend to
the King. There was no invasion upon this personal Liberty until the time of
King Edward 3. which was eftsoon resented by the Subject: For in 5. Edward. 3.
cap. 9. it is ordained in these words: It is enacted, that no man from
henceforth shall be attached by any accusation, nor fore-judged of Life or
Limb, nor h^s Lands, Tenements, Goods nor Chattels seized into the Kings hands
against the form of the great Charter and the Law of the Land.

25. Edward 3, cap. 4. is more full; and does expound the words of the grand
Charter; and is thus: Whereas it is contained in the great Charter of the
Franchises of England, that none shall be imprisoned nor put out of his
Freehold, nor of his Franchise nor free Custom, unless it be by the Law of the
Land. It is accorded, assented and established, that from henceforth none shall
be taken by Petition or Suggestion made to our Lord the King, or to his
Counsel, unless it be by Indictment or Presentment of his good and lawful
People of the same Neighborhood where such deeds be done, in due manner, or by
process made by Writs Original at the common Law, nor that none be put out of
his Franchises nor of his freeholds, unless he be due brought in answer, and
forejudged of the same by the course of the Law, and if any thing be done
against the same, it shall be redressed and holden for none.

Out of this Statute I observe, that what in Magna Charta and the Preamble of
this Statute, is termed by the Law of the Land, is by the body of this act
expounded, to be by process made by Writ Original at the Common Law; which is a
a plain interpretation of the words, Law of the Land, in the Grant Charter. And
I note that this Law was made, upon the Commitment of diverse to the Tower, no
man yet knows for what.

28 Edward 3. cap. 3. is yet more direct; (this liberty being followed with
fresh Suit by the Subject) where the words are not many, but very full and
significant: That no man, of what Estate or condition soever he be, shall be
put out of his Lands or Tenements, nor taken, nor imprisoned, nor disinherited,
nor put to death, without he be brought in answer by due process of the Law.
Here your Lordships see, the usual words, of the Law of the Land, are rendered
by due process of the Law.

36. Edward. 3. Rot. Parl. n. 9. amongst the Petitions of the Commons one of
them (being translated into English out of French) is thus. First, that the
great Charter, and the Charter of the Forest, and the other Statutes made in
his time, and in the time of his Progenitors, for the profit of him and his
Communalty, be well and firmly kept, and put in due execution, without putting
disturbance, or making arrest contrary to them, by special command, or in other
manner.

The Answer to the Petition, which makes it an Act of Parliament, is: Our Lord
the King, by the assent of the Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons, and the
Communalty has ordained and established; that the said Charters and Statutes
be held and put in execution according to the said Petition. It is observeable
that the Statutes were to be put in execution according to the said Petition?
which is, that no Arrest should be made contrary to the Statutes, by special
command. This concludes the question, and is of as great force as if it were
printed. For the Parliament-Roll is the true warrant of an Act, and many are
omitted out of the Books that are extant.

35. Edward 3. Rot. Parl. nu. 20. explaineth it further. For there the Petition
is: Item, as it is contained in the grand Charter and other Statutes, That no
man be taken or imprisoned by special command without Indictment or other
process to be made by the Law upon them, as well of things done out of the
Forest of the King, as for other things; That it would please our said Lord;
to command those to be delievered, that are so taken by special command,
against the form of the Charters and Statutes aforesaid.

The Answer is, The King is pleased, that if any man find himself greived, that
he come and make his complaint, and right shall be done unto him.

37. Edward 3. cap. 18. agrees in substance when it says, Though that it be
contained in the great Charter, that no man be taken, nor imprisoned, nor put
out of his Freehold without process of the Law: Nevertheless diverse People make
false Suggestions to the King himself; as well for malice or otherwise, whereof
the King is often grieved, and diverse of the Realm put in damage, against the
form of the the said Charter, wherefore it is ordained that all they which make
suggestions, shall be sent with the same suggestions before the Chancellor,
Treasurer and his grand Council; and that they there find Surety to pursue
their suggestions: and incur the same pain that the other should have had if he
were attainted, in case that his suggestion be found evil; and that then
process of the Law be made against them, without being taken and imprisoned
against the form of the Charter and other Statutes. Here the Law of the Land in
the grand Charter is explained to be without process of the Law.

42. Edward 3. at the request of the Commons by their Petitions put forth in
this Parliament, to eschew mischief and damage done to diverse of his Commons by
false Accusers, which oftentimes have made their accusation more for revenge
and singular benefit than for the profit of the King or of his People; which
accused persons, some have been taken and sometime caused to come before the
Kings Council, by Writ or otherwise, upon grievous pains against the Law, It is
assented and accorded for the good governance of the Commons, that no man be
put to answer without presentment before Justices or matter of Record, or by
due process and Writ original according to the old Law of the Land: and if any
thing from henceforth be done to the contrary, it shall be void in the Law and
holden for Error.

But this is better in the Parliament-Roll, where the Petition and Answer
(which make the Act) are set down at large 42. Edward 3. Rot. Parl. n. 12. The
Petition Item, because that many of the Commons are hurt and destroyed by false
Accusers, who make their Accusations more for their revenge and particular
gain, than for the profit of the King or his People: And those that are
accused by them, some have been taken, and others are made to come before the
King's Council, by Writ or other Command of the King, upon grievous pains,
contrary to the Law. That it would please our Lord the King, and his good
Council, for the just Government of his People, to ordain, that if hereafter
any Accuser purpose any matter for the profit of the King, that the matter be
sent to the Justices of the one Bench or the other, or the Assizes, to be
enquired and determined according to the Law; and if it concern the Accuser or
Party, that he take his Suit at the Common Law, and that no man be put to
answer, without presentment before Justices, or matter of Record, or by due
process and Original Writ, according to the ancient Law of the Land; and if any
thing henceforward be done to the contrary, that it be void in Law, and held
for error. Here, by due process and Original Writ according to the ancient Law
of the Land, is meant the same thing as per legem terrae in Magna Charta. And
the abuse was, that they were put to answer by the Commandment of the King. The
King's answer is thus. Because that this Article is an Article of the Grand
Charter: The King will that this be done as the Petition does demand. By this
appears that per legem terrae in Magna Charta is meant by due process of the
Law.

Thus your Lordships have heard Acts of Parliament in the point. But the
Statute of Westminster the first cap. 15. is urged to disprove this opinion,
where it is expressly said, that a man is not replevisable who is committed by
command of the King. Therefore the command of the King without any cause
showed, is sufficient to commit a man to Prison. And because the strength of
the Argument may appear, and the answer be better understood, I shall read the
words of that Statute, which are thus: And forasmuch as Sheriffs and others,
which have taken and kept in Prison, persons detected of Felony, and oftentimes
have let out by Replevin, such as were not replevisable; because they would
gain of the one party, and grieve the other. And forasmuch as before this time
it was not certainly determined what persons were replevisable, and what not,
but only those that were taken for the death of a man, or by commandment of
the King, or of his Justices, or for the Forest; it is provided, and by the
King commanded, that such Prisoners as before were outlawed, and they which
have abjured the Realm, Provers, and such as be taken with the manner, and
those which have broke the Kings Prison, Theives openly defamed and known, and
such as be appealed by Provers, so long as the Provers be living, if they be
not of good name, and such as be taken for burning of Houses feloniously done,
or for false money, or for counterfeiting the Kings Seal, or Persons
excommunicate taken at the request of the Bishop, or for manifest offenses, or
for treason touching the King himself, shall be in no wise replevisable, by the
common Writ or without Writ. But such as be Indicted by Larceny, by Inquests
taken before Sheriffs or Bailiffs by their Office, or of light suspicion, or
for petty Larceny, that amonnteth not above the value of 12 d. if they were not
guilty of some other Larceny aforetime, or guilty of receipt of Felons, or of
commandment or force, or of aid in Felony done, or guilty of some other
Trespass for which one ought not to lose Life or Member; and a man appealed by
a Prover; after the death of the Prover if he be no common Thief, nor defamed,
shall from henceforth be let out by sufficient Surety, whereof the Sheriff will
be answerable, and that without giving ought of their Goods. And if the Sheriff
or any other let any go at large by Surety, that is not replevisable, if he be
the Sheriff, Constable, or any other Bailiff of Fee which has keeping of
Prisons, and thereof be attained, he shall lose his Fee and Office for ever.
And if the Undersheriff, Constable or Bailiff of such as has Fee for keeping
of Prisons, do it contrary to the will of his Lord, or any other Bailiff being
not of Fee, they shall have 3. years imprisonment, and make a fine at the
King's pleasure. And if any withold Prisoners replevisable after they have
offered sufficient Surety, he shall pay a grievous amerciament to the King; and
if he take any Reward for the deliverance of such, he shall pay double to the
Prisoner, and also shall be in the great mercy of the King. The answer is, it
must be acknowledged, that a man taken by the command of the King is not
replevisable, for so are the express words of this Statute, but this makes
nothing against the Declaration of the Commons: for they say not, that the
Sheriff may Replevin such a man by Surety, Scilicet Manucaptores: but that he
is bayleable by the Kings Court of Justice: for the better apprehending
whereof, it is to be known, that there is a difference betwixt Replevisable,
which is always by the Sheriff upon Pledges or Sureties given, and Baileable
by a Court of Record, where the Prisoner is delivered to his Bail and they are
his Jailors, and may imprison him, and shall suffer for him body for body, as
appears 33. and 36. Edward 3. in the title of Mainprise, plit. 12, 13. where
the difference betwixt Bail and Mainprise is expressly taken. And if the words
of the Statute it self be observed, it will appear plainly that it extends to
the Sheriffs and other inferior Officers, and does not bind the hand of the
Judges. The Preamble, which is the Key that opens the entrance into the
meaning of the Makers of the Law) is: Forasmuch as Sheriffs, and others, which
have taken and kept in Prison persons detected of Felony. Out of these words I
observe, that it nominateth Sheriffs; and then if the Justices should be
included, they must be comprehended under the general word, Others; which does
not use to extend to those of an higher rank, but to inferiors: For the best,
by all course is first to be named; and therefore if a man bring a writ of
Customs and Services, and name Rents and other things, the general words shall
not include homage, which is a personal service, and of an higher nature; but
it shall extend to ordinary annual services, 31. Edward 1. droit 67. So the
Statute of 13. Elizabeth cap. 10. which beginning with Colleges, Deans and
Chapters, Parsons and Vicars, and concludes with these words, and others (and
others having spiritual promotions) shall not comprehend Bishops, that are of
an higher degree, as appears in the Archbishop of Canterbury his Case
reported by Sir Edward Cook lib. 2. fol. 466. And thus much is explained in
this very Statute, to the end when it does enumerate those were meant by the
word other, namely Undersheriffs, Constables, Bayliffes. Again, the words are
Sheriffs and others, which have taken and kept in Prison. Now every man
knows, that Judges do neither arrest nor keep men in Prison; that is the
office of Sheriffs, and other inferior Ministers; Therefore this Statute meant
such only. and not Judges. The words are further, that they let out by replevin
such as were not replevisable. This is the proper language for a Sheriff: Nay
more express afterward, in the body of the Statute: That such as are there
mentioned, shall be in no wise replevisable by the common Writ (which is de
homine replegiando, and is directed to the Sheriff) nor withour Writ (which is
by the Sheriff, Ex Officio) But that which receives no answer, is this: That
the command of the Justices (who derive their authority from the Crown) is
there equalled as to this purpose with the command of the King; and therefore
by all reasonable construction, it must needs relate to Officers that are
subordinate to both, as Sheriffs, Undersheriffs, Bayliffes, Constables, and the
like: and it were an harsh exposition to say, that the Justices might not
discharge their own command; and yet that reason would conclude as much. And
that this was meant of the Sheriffs and other Ministers of Justice, appears
by the Recital of 27. Edward 3. cap. 3. and likewise by Fleta, a Manuscript so
called, because the Author lay in the Fleet when he made the Book. For he Lib.
2. cap. 52. in his Chapter of Turns, and the Views of the hundred Courts in the
Country, and sets down the Articles of the charges that are there to be
enquired of; amongst which, one of them is, De replegialibus injuste detentis
and irreplegialibus dimissis; which cannot be meant of not bailing by the
Justices. For what have the inferior Courts of the Country to do with the
Acts of the Justices? And to make it more plain, he sets down in his Chapter
(that concerns Sheriffs only) the very Statute of West. 1. cap. 15. which he
translates verbatim out of the French into Latin, save that he renders, Taken
by the command of the Justices thus, Per judicium Justitiariorum, and his
Preface to the Statute plainly shows that he understood it of Replevin by
Sheriffs: for he says, Qui non debent per plegios dimitti, qui non declaret
hoc Statutum; and per plegios is before the Sheriff. But for direct authority,
it is the opinion of Newton Chief Justice, 22. Henry 6. 46. where his words are
these: It cannot be intended but the Sheriff did suffer him to go at large by
mainprise: for where one is taken by the Writ of the King, at the commandment
of the King, he is replevisable; but in such Cases his Friends may come to the
Justices for him if he be arrested, and purchase a Supersedeas. This Judge
concludes, that the Sheriff cannot deliver him that is taken by the command of
the King, for that he is irreplevisable, which are the very words of the
Statute: but says he, his Friends may come to the Justices, and purchase a
Supersedeas. So he declares the very question, that the Sheriff had no power,
but that the Justices had power to deliver him who is committed by the Kings
command, and both the ancient and modern practice manifests as much. For he
that is taken for the death of a man, or for the Forest, is not replevisable
by the Sheriff; Yet they are ordiuarily bayled by the Justices, and were by the
Kings Writs directed to the Sheriffs in the times of Edward 1. and Edward 2.
as it appears in the close Rolls, which could not be done if they were not
baileable: and it is every days experience that the Justices of the Kings
Bench do bail for murder, and for Offenses done in the Forest; which they
could not do, if the word Irreplevisable in Westminster l. were meant of the
Justices as well as the Sheriffs.

For the Authorities that have been offered to prove the contrary, Object.1.
they are in number three. The first is 21. Edward 1. rot. 2. in Scrin. which
also is in the book of Pleas in the Parliament at the Tower fol. 44. It is not
an Act of Parliament, but a Resolution in Parliament, upon an Action there
brought, which was usual in those times. And the Case is, that Stephen Rabab
the Sheriff of the County of Leicester, and Warwick was questioned for that he
had let at large, by Sureties, amongst others, one William the Son of Walter
le Persons, against the will and command of the King, whereas the King had
commanded him by Letters under his Privy Seal, that he should do no favor to
any man, that was committed by the command of the Earl of Warwick, as that man
was: Whereunto the Sheriff answered, that he did it at the request of some of
the King's Household upon their Letters. And because the Sheriff did acknowledge
the receipt of the King's Letters, thereupon he was committed to Prison,
according to the form of the Statute.

To this I answer, that the Sheriff was justly punished, for that he is
expressly bound by the Statute of West. 1. which was agreed from the beginning.
But this is no proof that the Judges had not power to bail this man.

The next Authority is 33. Object.2.
Henry 6.in the Court of Common Pleas, fol. 28. b. 29.where Robert Poynings Esquire
was brought to the Bar upon a Capias, and it was returned, that he was
committed per duos de Concilio (which is strongest against what I maintain) pro
diversis causis Regem tangentibus, And he made an Attorney there in an Action:
Whence it is inferred, that the Return was good, and the Party could not be
delivered.

To this the answer is plain. First, Resp.
no Opinion is delivered, in that Book, one way or other upon the Return,
neither is there any testimony whether he were delivered or bailed, or not.

Secondly, it appears expressly that he was brought thither to be charged in an
Action of Debt at another man's Suit, and no desire of his own to be delivered
or bailed: and then, if he were remanded, it is no way material to the question
in hand.

But that which is most relied upon, Object.3.
is the Opinion of Stanford in his book of the Pleas of the Crown Lib. 2. cap.
18. fol. 72. 73, in his Chapter of Mainprise, where he recites the Chapter of
West. 1. cap. 15. and then says thus: By this Statute it appears, that in 4.
Causes at the Common Law a man was not replevisable; to wit, those that were
taken for the death of a man, by the command of the King, or of his Justices,
or for the Forest. Thus far he is most right. Then he goes on and says; As
to the command of the King; that is understood of the command by his own mouth,
or his Council, which is incorporated unto him and speak with his mouth; or
otherwise every Writ of Capias to take a man (which is the Kings command) would
be as much. And as to the command of the Justices, their absolute commandment;
for if it be their ordinary Commandment, he is replevisable by the Sheriff, if
it be not in some of the Cases prohibited by the Statute.

The answer that I give unto this is, that Stamford has said nothing whether a
man may be committed without cause by the Kings command, or whether the Judges
might not bail him in such Case; but only that such an one is not
replevisable; which is agreed; for that belongs to the Sheriff: and because no
man should think he meant any such thing, he concludes his whole sentence
touching the command of the King and the Justices, that one committed by the
Justice's ordinary command is replevisable by the Sheriff; So either he meant
all by the Sheriff; or at least it appears not that he meant, that a man
committed by the King or the Privy Council, without cause, is not baileable by
the Justices: and then he has given no opinion in this Case. What he would
have said, if he had been asked the question, cannot be known: Neither does
does it appear by any thing he has said, that he meant any such thing as would
be enforced out of him.

And now, my Lords, I have performed the command of the house of Commons, and
(as I conceive) shall leave their Declaration of personal liberty an ancient
and undoubted truth, fortifyed with seven Acts of Parliament, and not opposed
by any Statute or Authority of Law whatsoever.

The Objections of the Kings Council, with the Answers made thereunto at the
two other conferences touching the same matter.
IT was agreed by Master Attorney General, that the seven Statutes urged by the
Commons were in force, and that Magna Charta did extend most properly to the
King, But he said, that some of them are in general words, and therefore
conclued nothing; but are to be expounded by the Presidents, and others, that
be more particular; are applied to the suggestions of Subjects, and not to the
Kings command simply of it self.

Hereunto is answered, that the Statutes were as direct as could be, which
appears by the reading of them, and that though some of themspeak of
suggestions of the Subjects, yet others do not; and they that. do, are as
effectual; for that they are in qual reason; a commitment by the command of the
King being of as great force when it moves by a suggestion feom a Subject, as
when the King takes notice of the cause himself; the rather, for that Kings
seldom intermeddle with matters of this nature, but by information from some
of their People.

2. Master Attorney objected, that per legem terrae in Magna Charta (which is
the Foundation of this question) cannot be understood for process of the Law
and Original Writ: for that in all Criminal proceedings no Original Writs is
used at all, but every Constable may arrest, either for felony, or for breach
of the Peace, without process or Original Writ: And it were hard the King
should not have the power of a Constable: and the Statutes cited by the Commons
make process of the Law, and Writ Original to be all one.

The Answer of the Commons to this Objection was, that they do not intend
Original Writs only by the Law of the Land, but all other legal process which
comprehend the whole proceedings of Law upon the cause; other then the trial by
Jury, per judicium parium, unto which it is opposed. Thus much is imposed ex vi
termini, out of the word process, and by the true acceptance thereof in the
Statute have been urged by the Commons to maintain their declaration; and most
especially in the Statutes of 25. Edward 3. c^ p. 4. where it appears, that a
man ought to be brought in to answer by the course of the Law, having made
former mention of process made by Original Writ. And in 28. Edward 3. cap. 3.
by the course of the Law, is rendered by due process of the Law. And 36. Edward
3. Rot. Parl. nu. 20. the Petition of the Commons says, (...)
that no man ought to be imprisoned by special command without Indictment, or
other due process to be made by the Law. 37 Edward 3. cap 18. calls the same
thing process of the Law. And 42. Edward 3. cap. 3. styles it by due process
and Writ Original; where the Conjunctive must be taken for a Disjunctive; which
change is ordinary in exposition of Statutes and Deeds to avoid inconveniences,
and to make it stand with the rest, and with Reason, and it may be Collected,
that by the Law of the Land in Magna charta; by the course of the Law in 2 5.
Edward 3. by due process of the Law in 28. Ed. 3. other due process to be made
by the Law 36. Edward 3. process of the Law 37. Edward 3. and by due process
and Writ Original 42. Edward 3. are meant one and the same thing; the latter of
these Statutes referring always to the former; and that all of them import any
due and regular proceeding of Law upon a cause, other then a trial by Jury. And
this appears Cook 10. 74. in the case of the Marsha^^^c; and Cook.1.99. Sir.
James Bagg's case, where it is understood of giving jurisdiction by Charter or
Prescription, which is the ground or a proceeding by course of Law; and in
S^ld^rs Notes ou (...) fol. 29. where it is expounded for Wager of Law, which
is likewise a TRIAL at Law by the Oath of the party, differing from that of
Jury: and it does truly comprehend these and all other regular proceedings in
Law upon cause, which gives authority to the Constable to arrest upon cause;
and if this should not be the true exposition of these words (per legem terrae)
the King's Council were desired to declare their meaning; which they never
offered to do; And yet certainly, these words were not put into the Statute,
without some intention of consequence.

And thereupon M. Sergeant Ashley offered an interpretation of them thus;
namely, that there were diverse Laws of this Realm; As the Common Law; the Law
of the Chancery; the Ecclesiastical Law; the Law of Admiralty or Marine Law;
the Law of Merchants; the Martial Law; and the Law of State: And that these
words, (per legam terrae) do extend to all those Laws.

To this it was answered, That we read of no Law of State, and that none of
those Laws can be meant there, save the Common, which is the principal and
general Law, and is always understood by way of Excellency, when mention is
made of the Law of the Land generally; and that though each of the other Laws
which are admitted into this Kingdom by Custom or Act of Parliament, may
justly be called a Law of the land; yet none of them can have that preheminency
to be styled the Law of the Land; and no Stature, Law-book, or other Authority,
printed or unprinted, could be showed to prove that the Law of the Land, being
generally mentioned, was ever intended of any other Law than the Common Law
(and yet, even by these other Laws a man may not be committed without a cause
expressed) but it stands with the Rule of other legal expositions, that per
legem terrae, must be meant the Common Law, by which the general and universal
Law by which men hold their Inheritances, and therefore if a man speak of
Escuage generally, it is understood (as Littleton observes plt, 99.) of the
uncertain Escuage, which is a Knight^s serviec tenure for the defense of the
Realm by the body of the Tenant in time of War; and not of the certain Escuage
which gives only a contribution in money, and no personal service. And if a
Statute speak of the King's Courts of Record, it is meant only of the four at
Westminster by way of Excellency: Cook. 6. 20. Gregory's case. So the
Canonists, by the Excommunication, if simply spoken, do intend the greater
Excommunication; and the Emperor in his Institutions, says, that the Civil Law
being spoken generally, is meant of the Civil Law of Rome, though the Law of
every City is a Civil Law, as when a man names a Poet, the Grecians understand
Homer, the Latinists Virgil.

Secondly, admit that per legem terrae extend to all the Laws of the Land; yet
a man must not be committed by any of them, but by the due proceedings that are
exercised by those Laws, and upon cause declared.

Again it was urged, that the King is not bound to express a cause of
imprisonment; because there may be in it matter of State not fit to be revealed
for a time, least the Confederates thereupon make means to escape the hands of
Justice: and therefore the Statutes cannot be intended to restrain all
Commitments, unless a cause be expressed; for that it would be very
inconvenient and dangerous to the State to publish the cause at the very first.

Hereunto it was replied by the Commons, That all danger and inconvenience may
be avoided by declaring a general Cause; as, for Treason; for suspicion of
Treason, Misprision of Treason, or Felony, without specifying the particular;
which can give no greater light to a confederate then will be conjectured by
the very apprehension or upon the imprisonment, if nothing at all were
expressed.

It was further alleged, that there was a kind of contradiction in the
Position of the Commons, when they say, that the party committed without a
cause showed, ought to be delivered or bailed; bailing being a kind of
imprisonment, delivery a total freedom.

To this it was answered, that it has always been the discretion of the
Judges to give so much respect to a commitment by the Command of the King or
the privy Council, (which are ever intended to be done on just and weighty
causes) that they will not presently set him free, but bail him to answer what
shall be objected against him on his Majesty's behalf: But if any other
inferior Officer commit a man without cause showed, they do instantly deliver
him as having no cause to expect their pleasure; so the delivery is applied to
an imprisonment by the command of some mean Minister of justice; bailing when
it is done by the command of the King or his Council.

It was urged by Master Attorney, That bailing is a grace and favor of a Court
of Justice, and that they may refuse to do it. This was agreed to be true in
diverse cases, as where the cause appears to be for felony, or other crime
expressed; for that there is another way to discharge them in convenient time,
by their trial; (And yet in those cases the constant practice has been,
anciently and modernly to bail men) but where no cause of the imprisonment is
returned, but the command of the King, there is no way to deliver such persons,
by trial or otherwise, but that of Habeas Corpus, and if they should be then
remanded, they may be perpetually imprisoned, without any remedy at all, and
consequently, a man that had committed no Offense might be in worse case then a
great Offender; for, the latter should have an ordinary trial to discharge him,
the other should never be delivered.

It was further said, that though the Statute of West. I. cap, 15. as a
Statute, by way of provision did extend only to the Sheriff; yet the Recital in
that Statute, touching the 4. Causes wherein a man was not replevisable at
Common Law (namely those that were committed for the death of a man; by the
command of the King, or the Justices, or for the Forest) did declare that the
Justices could not bail such an one, and that Replevisable and baileable were
Synonyma, and all one. And that Stanford (a Judge of great authority) does
expound it acordingly; and that neither the Statute not He say replevisable by
the Sheriff, but generally without restraint; and that if the Chief Justiee
committed a man, he is not to be enlarged by another Court, as appears in the
Register.

1. To this it was answered; First, that the Recital and Body of the Statute
relate only to the Sheriff, as appears by the very words.

2. That Replevisable is not restrained to the Sheriff; for that the word
imports no more, that a man committed by the Juftice is baileable by the Court
of the King^s Bench.

3. That Stamford means all of the Sheriff, or at the least he has not
sufficiently expressed that he intended the Justices.

4. It was denied that Replevisable and Baileable are the same: For, they
differ in respect of the place where they are used, Bail being in the King's
Courts of Record, Replevisable before the Sheriff. And they are of several
Natures, Replevisable being a letting at large upon Sureties; Bailing, when one
Traditur in ballium, and the bail are his Jaylors, and may imprison him, and
shall suffer body for body; which is not true of replevying by Sureties. And
Bail differs from Mainprize in this, that Mainprize is an undertaking in a
sum certain, Bailing to answer the condemnation in civil Causes, and in
criminal body for body.

And the Reasons and Authorities used in the first conference were then
renewed, and no exception taken to any, save that in 22. Henry 6. it does not
appear that the Command of the King was by his mouth (which must be intended)
or by his Council (which is all one, as is observed by Stamford) for the words
are, that a man is not replevisable by the Sheriff, who is committed by the
Writ or Commandment of the King.

21. Edward 1. Rot. 2. dorso was cited by the Kings Counsel, But it was
answered, that it concerned the Sheriff of Leicestershire only; and not the
power of the Judges.

33. Henry 6. the King's Attorney confessed was nothing to the purpose; and yet
that Book had been usually cited by those that maintain the contrary to the
declaration of the Commons; No.
and therefore such sudden opinion as has been given thereupon is not to be
regarded, the Foundation failing.

And where it was said, that the French of 36. Edward Rot. Parl. n. 9. (which
canreceive no answer) did not warrant but what was enforced thence; but that
these words, (Sans disturbance metter, ou arrese fair,and l'encontre per
special mandement on en autre manner) must be understood, that the Statutes
should be put in execution without disturbance or stay; and not that they
should be put in execution without putting disturbance or making arrest to the
contrary by special command, or in other manner. The Commons did utterly deny
the interpretation given by the Kings Council; and to justify their own, did
appeal to all men that understood French, and upon the seven Statutes did
conclude, that their Declaration remained an undoubted truth, not controuled by
any thing said to the contrary.

The true Copies of the Records not printed which were used on either side in
that part of the deba e.
Inter. Record. Domini Regis Caroli in Thesaurar. recep. (...). sui sub
Custodia Domini Thesaurar. and Camer. ibidem remanen. videlicet Plac. coram
ipso Domino Rege and Concilio suo ad Parliamentum su^m post Pasc. apud London
in Ma^erio Arch^^piscopi Ebor. Anno Regni Domini Regis Edwardi 21. int. al.
sic. continetur ut sequitur.
Rot. Secundo in Dorso.
STephanus Rabar. Vic. Leicester.
Vic. Leic. and War. coram ipso Domino Rege and ejus Concilio arrenatus and ad
rationem positus de hoc quod cum Johan. Boutet^urte, Edw. Del Hache, and W.
Havelin nuper in bal. ipsus Vic. per Dominum Regem fuissent assignat. ad Goales
Domini Regis deliberand. idem Vic. quendam Wi^hel. de Petling per quendam
Appellatorem ante adventum eorum justic. ibidem appellatorem and Captum vivente
ipso Appellatore usque diem de liberationis coram eis sact. dimisit per
plevinam contra formam Statuti etc. Et etiam quendam Radum de Cokehal, qui de
morte horninis judicatus fuit, and per eundem Vic. Captus, idem Vic. per
plevinam dimisit contra formam Statuti, and etiam eundem Radum fine ferris
coram eisdem Justic. ad deliberationem praed. produxit contra consuetudinem
Regni. Et sci. quendam Wilh. fllium Walteri la person, qui per praeceptum Com.
War. Captus fuit, per plevinam contra praeceptum Domini Regis, cum idem Dominus
Rex per literas suas sub private. sigillo suo eidem Vic. praecepit quod nulli
per praecept. praed. Com. War. capt. aliquam gratiam faceret etc. Et super hoc
praefat. Johannes Botetourte, qui praesens est, and qui fuit primus Justic.
praedictorum praemissa recordatur. Et praedicuts Vic. dicit quoad praedictum
Wilh. de Petling, quod ipse nunquam a tempore Captionis ipsius Wilh per praed.
Appellat. dimissus fuit per plevinam aliquam ante adventum praedictorum Justic.
Imo dicit quod per dimidium Annum ante adventum eorundem Justic. captus fuit
and semper detent. in prisona absque plevina aliqua quousque coram eis damnat.
fuit. Et quoad praedictum Radum been cognoscit quod ipse dimisit eum per
plevinam, and hoc been facere potuit ratione and authoritat. Officii sui, eo
quod capt. fuit pro quadam simplic. transgr. and non pro aliqua felon. pro qua
replegiari non potuir. Et quoad tertium, videlicet Wilh. silium person, been
cognoscit quod ipse Captus fuit per praecept. praed. Com. War. and quod dimisit
eum per plevinam; Sed dicit quod hoc fecit ad rogatum quorundam de hospitia and
cur. Domini Regis etc. qui eum inde specialiter rogaverunt per literas suas. Et
super hoc idem Vic. quaesit. per Dominum Regem quis eum rogavit and literas
suas ei direxit,and ubi literae illae sunt, dicit quod Walt. de Langton eum per
literas suas inde rogavit; Sed dicit quod literae illae sunt in partibus suis
Leic. Et super hoc idem Vic. profert quoddam brev. Domini Regis de private.
Sigillo eidem Vic. direct. quod testatur quod Dominus Rex ipsi Vic. praecepit
quod omnes illos trangressores contra pacem and de quibus. Com. War. ei scire
faceret, caperet. and salvo custodiret absque aliqua gratia ei faciend. Et quia
praed. Justice. express recordatur quod ipse and socii sui per bonum and
legalem inquis. de Militibus. and al. liberis. hominib. eis fact. invenerunt
quod praedictus Gulielmus de Petlenge dimissus fuit per plevinam per mag-num
tempus ante adventum eorund. Justic. usque adventum eorund. and per Vic. praed.
and etiam quia praed. Vic. cognoscit quod praedictus Rad. dimissus fuit per
plevinam per ipsum, un. and hoc dicit quod been facere potuit eo quod captus
fuit pro levi transgr. Et per Record. ejusdem Justic. comp. est quod captus
fuit pro morte hominis, quod est contrarium dec. praedicti vic. and scil. quia
idem vic. cognovit quod recepit literam Domini Regis per quam Rex ei praecepit
quod nullam gratiam faceret illis qui capti fuerunt per praeceptum praedicti
Com. Et idem Vic. contra praeceptum illud dimisit praedictum Wilh. filium
Walteri per plevinam, qui captus fuit per praeceptum praedicti Com. prout idem
Vic. fatetur. Et sic tam ratione istius transg. quam aliarium praedictarum
incurrit in poenam Statuti, cons. est quod praedictus Vic. Committatur prisonae
juxta formam Statuti etc.

Ex Rot. Paliamenti de Anno Regni Regis Edwardi tertii Tricesimo quinto n. 9.
PRimerement que le grande Charter, and la Charter de la Forreste, and les
autre Estatutes faits en son temps, and de ses progenitors pur profit de luy
and de la come, soient bien and ferment gardes, and mis en due execution sans
disturbance mettre ou arrest fair, and l'ccontre per special mandement ou en
autre manner.

Respons.
Nostre Sr. le Roy per assent de Prelates, Domines, Comites, Barons and la
Come ad ordeine and estabili que les dits Charters and Estatutes soient tenus
and mis en execution selon la dit Petition.

Nu. 2.
Item come ilsolt contenus en lagrand Charter et autres Estatutes que null homme
soit pris nemy prisoner per especial mandement sans Enditement aut autre due
process affair per la ley, et sonent foitz ad estre et uncore est, que plusurs
gentz sont empeschez, pris et imprisone sans Enditement ou autre process fait
per la ley sur eux, sibien de chose fait horse de la Forest le Roy come per
autre cause que plese a nostre dit Sr. comander et deliver ceux que sont issint
pris per tiel especial mandement contre la form des Charters et Estatutes
avanditz. Respons.

Il plest au Roy, and sinulse sent greve vingne and face la pleinte, and droit
luy sera fait.

33. Parl. Anno 42. Edward 3. n. 12.
Item pur ceo que plusours de vostre Come son tamerce and disturbes per faulx
accusors quenx font lour accusements plus pur lour vengeances and singulers
profits que pur le profit de Roy ou de son peuple, et les accuses per cux
ascuns ont est pris and ascuns sont fair ven. deuteronomy le Conceil l^ Roy per brief
on autre mandement de Roy sub gra^de pain encountre laley, Plese a nostre Sr.
le Roy and son Counceil pur droit gouvernment de son peuple ordeign que si
desire ascun accusors purpose ascun matire pur prosit du Roy que cele matire
soit mander a ses Justices del'un Bank ou del'autre, ou d' Assizes dent
enquere and terminere selonque laley, and si le touch lai onsour ou party eit
sa so^t a la come ley, and que null home soit mis a respondre sans presentment
deuteronomy Justices, ou chose de Record, ou per due process et brief original, s^lon
l'ancient ley de la terre, and si rien desire enovant soit fait a l'enco^tre,
soit void en ley, and tenu pur Error. Respons.

Pur ceo que ceste Article est Article de la grande Charter le Roy voet qne ceo
soit fait come la Petition demand.

Ex Rot. Claus. Anno Regis Edwardi primi primom. 1.
Thomas de Clirowe de Blechweth captus and detentus in prisona North. De
ponend. per Ballium.
pro transgr. Forest. habet literas Rogero de Clifford Justic. Forest. citra
Trentam quod ponatur per ballium, dat. apud S. Martium Magnum London 20. die
Octobris.

M.7.
Stephanus de Li dely captus and detent. in prisona Regis pro trans. per ipsum
fact. in ha. Regis de Lyndeby habet literas. Regis Galfrido de Nevil Justic.
ultra Trent. quod ponatur per Ballium.

M.9.
Thomas Spademan captus and detent. in prisona Oxon. pro morte Wilh. Win. unde
rectat. est and habet literas Regis Vic. Oxon. quod ponatur per ballium. ibidem.

Gulielmus de Dene, Mathaeus Crust, Roger de Bedell, Gulielmus Halfrench,
Robertus Wyant, Alex. Horeux, Henric. de Shorn, Nicholaus de Snodilond,
Turgisius de Hertfield, Robertus de Pole, and Richardus Galiot capti and
detent. in prisona de Cantuar. pro morte Galfridi de Catiller unde appellat.
sunt, habent literas Regis Vic. Canc. quod ponantur per ballium Dat. etc, 23.
die Martii.

Claus. Anno secundo Edwardi primi M. 12.
Rex Rogero de Cliffi Justic. Forest citra Trent. Mandamus yobis quod si
Robertus Unwyne captus and detent. in prisona nostra de Aylesburie pro transgr.
Forrestae nostrae, invenerit vobis duodecim probos and legales homines de
balliva vestra qui manucapiant eum habere coram Justic. rostris ad plac.
Forest. cum in part etc. ad stand. inde rect. tunc apud Robertum si secund.
assiam. Forreste fuerit repleg. praedictis 12. interim tradit. in ballium sicut
praedictum est. Et habeatis nomina illorum 12. hominum and ho. bre. Dat. 27.
die Februarii.

Clauso Anno secundo Edwardi primi. M. 14.
Vnwynus de Boycot, Deponend. p^^ ballium.
Gaf. de Wykenn and Hugh de Stowe detent. in prisona Regis de Aylesburie pro
trangressione Venationis habuer. bre. direct. Regis de Clifford Justic. Forest
quod secundum assiam Forest fuerint repleg. ponantur per ballium usque
adventum Justic. Regis ad plac. Forreste cum in parts illas venerit. Dat. apud
Codington 28. die Decembris.

M. 15.
Gilbertus Conray de Kedington, and Hugh le Tailour de Kedington capti and
detent. in prisona de secundo Edwardo pro morte Edwardi Butting, unde rectati
sunt, habuerunt literas Regis Vic. Suff. quod ponantur per ballium.

Clauso Anno 3. Edwardi primi. M. 11.
Galfr. de Hayerton captus and detent. in prisona Regis Ebor. pro morte Ade le
Clerc. unde rectatus est, habet literas Regis Vic. Ebor. quod ponatur per
ballium. Dat. apud W. 15. die Junii.

M. 20.
Robertus Belharbe capt. and detent. in prisona Regis de Newgate pro morte
Thomae Pollard. unde rectat, est, habet literas Regis Vic. Midd. quod ponatur
per ballium. Dat. 28. die Februarii.

Clauso Anno quarto Edwardi primi. M. 5.
Mand. est Rad. de Sanadwico quod si Gulielmus de Pattare and Johannes filius
ejus, Walterus Home, Walt. Jorven, Henricus Pothe and Gulielmus Cadegan capti
and detent. in prisona Regis de secundo Brianello pro trans. Forest unde
rectati sunt, invenerunt sibi duodecim probos and legales homines de balliva
sua, viz. quilibet eorum duodecim qui eos manucap. habere coram Justic. Regis
ad plac. Forest. cum in parts ill. venerent, ad stand. inde recto, tunc ipsos
Willhelmum, Johannem, Walterum, Walterum, Henricum and Willh. praed. duodecim.
scil. secundum assiam Forreste fuerint repleg. tradat in ballium ut praedictum
est, Et habeat ibi nomina illorum duodecim hominum, and hoc. bre. T. Rege apud
Bellum locum Regis 29. die Augusti.

Clauso Anno quarto Edwardi primi. M. 16.
Henricus filius Rogeri de Ken de Cottesbrook, Deponend. Par. ballium.
captus and detent. in prisona nostra North. pro morte Simonis le Charetter
unde appellatus est, habet literas Regis Vic. North. quod ponit. per ballium.

Clauso Anno quinto Edwardi primi. M. 1.
Mand. est Galfrido de Nevil Justic. Forreste ultra Trent. quod si Walter de la
Grene captus and detent. in prisona de Not. pro trans. Forreste invenerit sibi
duodecim probos and legales homines qui eum manucapiant etc. ad stand. inde
rect. secundum assiam Forreste Regis, tunc ipsum Walterum praedictis duodecim
tradat in ballium sicut praedictum est. Dat. decimo sexto die Novembris.

M. 2.
Thomas de Upwel and Jul. uxor ejus capt. and detent. in prisona de VVynbole
pro morte Stephani Southell unde rectati sunt habuer. liter. Vic. Norff. quod
ponantur per ballium. Dat apud Rocheland 28. die Septembris.

Clauso Anno sexto Edwardi primi. M.
Bilherus Pesse captus and detent. in prisona Regis de Norwich pro morte Jul.
quond. uxoris suae unde rectatus est, habet literas Vic. Norff. quod ponatur
per ballium, T. Rege apud VVestmonast. 12. Novembris.

M. 4.
Mandat. est Vic. Not. scilicet quod si Thomas de Cadrte rectatus de transg.
Forest quam fecisse dicebatur in Forresto de Shirwood, invenerit sibi sex
probos and legales homines de balliva sua qui eum Reg. ad stand. rect. coram R.
cum R. inde manucap. habere coram Rege ad mand. verse. eum loqui voluerit, tunc
praed. Tho. praed. sex hominib. tradat in ballium juxta manucaptionem
supradictam. Dat. decimo quinto die Decembris.

M. 4.
Thorn. Burell Capt. and detent. in prisona Regis Exon. pro morte Galf.
Giffarde unde rectat. est, habet litteras Vic. Devon. quod ponatur per ballium.

Clauso Anno 3. Edwardi secundi. M. 13.
Adem le Piper Capt. and detent. in Jail Regis Ebor. pro morte Henr. Adam
deponend. in ball.
le Simer de Escricke unde rect. est, habet literas Regis Vic. Ebor. quod
ponatur per ballium usque ad prim. assiam. T. Rege apud Westminster. septimo die Febr.

M. 14.
Margareta uxor VVilh. Calbot capta and detent. in Jail Regis Norwic. pro
morte Agnetis filiae Wilh. Calbot. and Martil. soror. ejusdem Agnet. unde
rectata est, habet literas Regis Vic. Norff. quod ponatur per ballium. T. Rege
apud Shene 22. die Jan.

M. 18.
Johannes Friar Capt. and detent. in Jail Regis Exon. pro morte Ade de Egelegh
unde rectat. est, habet literas Regis Vic. Devon. quod ponatur per ballium. T.
Rege apud Westminster. 8. die De^embris.

Clauso Anno quarto Edwardi Secundi. M. 7.
Robertus Shereve capt. and detent. in Jail Regis de Colcestr. pro morte
Robertile M^igne unde in^i^tat. est, habet literas Regis Vic. Essex, quod
ponatur in ballium usque ad pri. assiam. Dat. 22. die Maii.

M. 8.
VVilh. filius Rogerile Fishere de Shurborne capt. and detent. in Jail Regis
Ebor. pro morte Roberti le Monnour de Norton unde rectatus est, habet literas
Regis Vic. Ebor. quod ponatur per ballium usque ad pri. Assiam, Dat. 25. Die
April.

Clauso Anno quarto Edwardi secundi. M. 22.
Thom. Else de Stamford capt. and detent. in prisona Regis Lincoln. pro morte
Michael. filii VVilh. de Foderingey unde rectatus est, habet literas Regis Vic.
Linc. quod ponatur in ballium usque ad pri. Assiam. T. Rege apud novam West.
octavo die Septembris.

Patent. Anno octavo Edwardi pars prima membr. 14.
Rex omnib. ad quos etc. Salutem. Sciatis quod cum Georgius De Rupe de Hiber.
Pro Georgio de Rupe.
defunctus pro eo quod ad Parliamenta apud Dublin in Hibern. Ann. Regni Domini
Edwardi nuper Regis Angl. praec. nostrivicesimo, and Anno Regni nostri secundo
tenta, non venit prout summonitus fuit, ad ducentas marcas amerciatus fuisset
ut accipimus, Ac Johannes filius praedicti Georgii nobis supplicaverit ut
habito respectu ad hoc quod praedictus pater suus se a Parliamentis praedictis
causa in obedientiae non absentavit, per quod ita excessive amerciari deberet,
Velimus concedere, quod amerciamenta illa quae ab ipso Johanne ad opus nostrum
per summonitionem Sccii nostri Dublin jam exigunt, just moderentur. Nos
volentes cum eodem Johanne gratiose agere in hac part, Volumus and concedimus
quod december librae tantum de praedictis ducentis marcis ad opus nostrum ex
causis praemissis leventur; Et praefatum Johannem de toto residuo earundum
ducentarum marcarum tenore praesentium quietamus. In Cujus. etc. T. Rege apud
Novum Castrum super Tynam.

Per Petitionem de Concilio apud Novum Castrum super Tynam.
Et mandat. est Thomae and Camerar. de Sccio. Dublin quod praedictas december
libras de praedictis ducentis marcis de praefato Johanne ad opus Regis levent,
and ipsum Johannem de toto residuo inde addict. Sccam. exonerari and quietum
esse fact. T. ut supra.

Per eandem Petitionem
Patent. vicesimo septimo Edwardi tertii pars prima membr. 13.
Rex omnibus ad quos etc. Salut. Sciatis quod de gra. Pro Iacobo de Audele de
non veniendo ad Parliamenta.
nostra speciali Concessimus pro nobis and hered. nostris dilecto, and fideli
nostro Iacobo Daudle de Helegh quod ipse ad to tam vitam quietus sit de
veniendo ad Parliamenta and Conciiia nostra and hered. nostrorum ac etiam ad
congregationes Magnatum and procerum ad mandata nostra vel heredum nostrorum
ubicunque faciend. Ita quod idem Jacobus, quoad vixerit ra^ione non adventus
sui ad Parliamenta, Concilia, seu Congregationes hujusmodi, seu Personalis
Comparationis in eisdem per nos vel heredes nostros aut ministros nostros
quoscunque non impetatur, occasionetnr aliqual. seu gravetur. Concessimus
insuper pro nobis and ^ered. nostris praefato jacobo quod ipse toto tempore
vitae suae ad laborand. de guerra in servitiis nostris vel hered. nostrorum seu
ad homines ad arma, hobelarios, vel sagitarios in hujusmodi servitiis ex nunc
inveniend. extta Regnum nostrum Angl. nisi cum Regale servitium nostrum aut
heredum nostrorum summonitum fuerit, contra voluntatem suam nullatenus
Compellatur, nec ea de causa aliquali er impetatur, Ita semper quod idem
Jacobus cum hominibus ad arma and aliis armatis pro defensione Regni nostri
Angl. infra idem Regnum quoties aggressus inimicorum nostrorum aut aliud
periculum vel necessitas eidem Regno immineant una cum aliis fidelibus nostris
ipsius Regni proficiscat. and homines ad arma, hobelar. and sagittar. juxta
statum suum sicut Caeteri de eodem Regno ea de causa invenire teneatur. In
Cujus rei etc. T. Rege apud West. 20. die April.

per ipsum Regem.
Patent. 42. Edwardi. 3. part. secunda mem. 13.
Rex omnibus Ball. Pro Roberto de Insula milite de nonv^ endo ad Parliament.
and fidelibus suis ad quos etc. Salutem. Sciatis quod de gra. nostra speciali
concessimus pro nobis and hered. nostris dilecto and fideli nostro Roberto de
Insula mil. fill. and heredi Johannis de Insula, quod idem Robertus ad totam
vitam suam hanc habeat libertatem, videlicet, quod ad Parliamenta seu Concilia
nostra vel hered. nostrorum ex quacunque causa venire minime teneatur. Et quod
ipse in aliqua Jurata, attincta aut magna Assisas nos vel heredes nostros
tangent. aut aliis Juratis, attinctis aut assizis quibuscunque non ponatur etc.
Et ideo Vobis mandamus quod praedictum Robertum contra hanc concessionem
nostram non molestetis in aliquo seu gravetis. In Cujus etc. T. Rege apud West.
24. die Novembr

per breve de privato Sigillo.
Pat. 34. Henric. sext. membr. 23.
Rex omnibus ad quos etc. Pro Rich. Duce Ebor. de tenend. Parliamentum nomine
Regi^.
Salut. Sciatis quod cum pro quibusdam arduis and urgentibus negotiis nos
statum and defensionem Regni nostri Angl. ac Ecclesiae Anglicanae
contingentibus, quoddam Parliamentum nostrum nuper apud Palatium nostrum West.
teneri, and usque ad duodecim. diem hujus instantis mensis Novembr. ad idem
Palatium nostrum adjornari and prorogari ordinaverimus, quia vero dicto
Parliamento nostro propter certas justas and rationabiles causas in persona
nostra non potuetuerimus interesse, Nos de circumspectione and industria
Carissimi Consanguinei nostri Rich. Ducis Ebora. plenam fiduciam reportantes,
eidem Consanguineo nostro ad Parliamentum praedictum nomine nostro tenend. and
in eod. procedend. and ad faciend. omnia and singula quae pro nobis and per nos
pro bono regimine and gubernatione Regni nostri praedicti ac aliorum Dominorum
nostrorum eidem Regno nostro pertinent. ibidem fuerint faciend. nec non ad
Parliamentum illud finiend. and dissolvend. de assensu Concilii nostri plenam
tenore praesentium Commisimus potestatem. Dantes ulterius de assensu ejusdem
Concilii nostri tam universis and singulis Archiepiscopis, Episcopis,
Abbatibus, Prioribus, Ducibus, Comitibus, Vice-comitibus, Baronibus and
Militibus cum omnibus aliis quorum interest ad Parliamentum nostrum praedictum
conventur. scilic. tenore praesentium firmiter in mandatis quod eidem
Consanguineo nostro intendant in praemissis in forma praedicta. In Cujus etc.
T. Rege. apud West. II. die Novembr. Per breve de privato Sigillo and de dat.
praedict. etc.

Pat. 24. Henric. 6. memb. 19. pars prima.
Rex omnibus Balliis and fidelibus suis ad quos etc. De non veniend. ad Parlia.
Lovel.
Salut. Sciatis quod cum ubi VVilh. Lovell miles ad Parliamenta and Concilia
nostra ad mandatum nostrum, venire teneatur, hinc est quod idem VVilhelmus, ob
diverse. infirmat. quibus detinetur, absque maximo corporis sui periculo ad
Parliamenta and Concilia praedicta laborare non sufficit, ut informamur. Nos
praemissa, ac bona and gratuita servitia quae idem VVilh.tam patri nostro
defuncto quam nobis in partibus transmarinis impendit, and nobis in in Regno
nostro Angl. impendere desiderat Considerantes, de gratia nostra speciali
Concessimus eidem VVilh. quod ipse durante vita sua per nos vel hered. nostros
ad veniend. ad Parliamenta seu Concilia nostra quaecunque tent. sive in
posterum tenen. contra voluntatem suam non arctetur nec Compellatur quovis
modo, Sed quod ipse ab hujusmodi Parliamentis and Conciliis in futur. se
absentare possit licite and impune, aliquo Statuto, Actu, Ordinatione. sive
Mandaro inde in Contrarium fact. ordinat. sive provis. non obstant. Et ulterius
volumus, and eidem Wilhelmo per praes. Concedimus quod absentatio hujusmodi non
cedat ei in damnum seu prejudicium quoquo modo, Sed quod praes. Carta nostra de
exemptione, per praefatum Wilh. seu alium quemcunque nomine suo in quibuscunque
locis infra Regnum nostrum Angl. demonstrat. super demonstratione illa eidem
Wilh. valeat and allocetur, Proviso semper quod idem Wilh. ad voluntatem suam,
and heredes sui loca sua in Parliamenta and Conciliis praedictis habeant and
teneant, prout idem Wilh. and antecessores sui in hujusmodi Parliamentis and
Conciliis ab antiquo habuerunt and tenuerunt, Concessione nostra praedicta non
obstante. In Cujns. etc. T. Rege apud West. quarto die Febr.

Per breve de privato sigillo and de data praedicta authoritate Parliamenti.
Clauso Anno 27. Henric. 6. m. 24. dorso.
Rex dilecto and fidel. suo Hen. summonit. Parliamenti.
Bromflete Militi Baroni de Vescy Salutem. Quia and Volumus enim vos and
heredes vestros masculos de Corpore vestro legitime exeuntes Barons de Vessey
existere. T. Rege apud West. 24. die Januar.

Pat. 34. Henric. sext. membr.13.
Rex concessit Hen. Bromflete militi domino Vessey qui senio and tantis
infirmitatibus detentus existit, Pro Henrico. Dom. Vessey de exemptione.
quod absque maximo Corporis sui periculo labor. non sufficit, quod ipse
durante vita sua ad personalit. veniend. ad person. Regis, per aliquod breve
sub magno vel privato sigillo, aut per literam sub sigillo Signeti Regis, vel
per aliquod ad aliud mandatum Regis vel hered. suorum seu ad aliquod Concilium,
sive Parliamentum Regis vel hered. suorun ex nunc tenend. nullatenus arctatur
neque compellatur Contra voluntat. suam etc. T. Rege apu^ West. 13. die Maii.

Per ipsum Regem de dat. praedicta auctoritate Parliamenti.
A SPEECH Delivered in the Lower House of PARLIAMENT Assembled at OXFORD: In
the first year of the Reign of KING CHARLES, I.

By Sir ROBERT COTTON Knight and Barronet.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1672.

A SPEECH Delivered in the Lower House of PARLIAMENT Assembled at OXFORD: In
the first year of the Reign of King CHARLES.
Mr. SPEAKER,
ALthough the constant VVisdome of this House of Commons did well and worthily
appear in censuring that ill advised Member the last day, for trenching so far
into their ancient Liberties, and might encourage each worthy Servant of the
public here to offer freely up his Council and opinion: Yet since these
VValls cannot conceal from the Ears of captious, guilty and revengful men
without, the Council and debates within: I will endeavor, as my clear mind is
free from any personal distaste of any one, so to express the honest thoughts
of my Heart, and discharge the best care of my trust, as no person shall justly
tax my innocent and public mind, except his Conscience shall make him guilty
of such Crimes as worthily have in Parliament impeached others in elder times.
I will therefore, with as much brevity as I can, set down how these disorders
have by degrees sprung up in our own memories; how the Wisdom of the best and
wisest Ager did of old redress the like. And lastly, what modest and dutiful
course I would wish to be followed by our selves in this so happy Spring of our
hopeful Master. For ( Mr. Speaker) we are not to judge, but to present: The
redress is above ad Querimoniam Vulgi.

Now ( Mr. Speaker) so long as those attended about our late Sovereign Master,
now with God, as had served the late Queen of happy memory, debts of the Crown
were not so great; Commissions and G^ants not so often complained of in
Parliaments; Trade flourished; Pensions not so many, though more then in the
late Queens time: for they exceeded not 18000. l. now near 120000. l. All
things of moment were carried by public debate at the Council Table; No honor
set to sale; nor places of Judicature. Laws against Priests and Recusants were
executed: Resort of Papists to Ambassadors houses barred and punished; His
Majesty by daily direction to all his Ministers, and by his own Pen declaring
his dislike of that Profession: No wastful expenses in fruitless Ambassages,
nor any transcendent power in any one Minister. For matters of State, the
Council Table held up the fit and ancient dignity. So long as my Lord of
Somerset stood in state of grace, and had by his Majesty's favor the trust of
the Signet Seal; he often would glory justly, there passed neither to himself,
or his Friends any long Grants of his Highness Lands or Pensions: For that
which himself had, he paid 20000. l. toward the Marriage-Portion of the King's
Daughter. His care was to pass no Monopoly or illegal Grant, and that some
Members of this House can witness by his charge unto them. No giving way to the
sale of Honors, as a breach upon the Nobility (for such were his own words)
refusing Sir John Roper's Office, then tendered to procure him to be made a
Baron. The match with Spain, then offered (and with condition to require no
further toleration in Religion then Ambassadors here are allowed) discovering
the double dealing and the dangers, he dissuaded his Majesty from; and left him
so far in distrust of the Faith of that King, and his great Instrument
Gondomar, then here residing, that his Majesty did term him long time after a
Juggling Jack. Thus stood the effect of his power with his Majesty when the
Clouds of his misfortune fell upon him. What the future advices led in, we may
well remember. The marriage with Spain was again renewed: Gondomar declared an
honest man: Popery heartened, by admission of those unsure, before conditions
of Conveniencie. The forces of his Majesty in the Palatinate withdrawn, upon
Spanish faith improved here and believed; by which his Highness Children have
lost their Patrimony, and more money been spent in fruitless Ambassages, then
would have maintained an Army fit to have recovered that Country. Our old and
fast Allies disheartened, by that tedious and dangerous Treaty: And the King
our now Master, exposed to so great a peril, as no wise and faithful Council
would ever have advised. Errors in Government, more in misfortune by weak
Councels, then in Princes.

The loss of the County of Poyntiffe in France, was laid to Bishop Wickham's
charge in the first of Richard the 2. for persuading the King to forbear
sending aid when it was required: a Capital crime in Parliament. The loss of
the Duchy of Maine was laid to Dela Poole Duke of Suffolk 28. Henry 6. in
single and unwisely treating of a Marriage in France.

A Spanish Treaty lost the Palatinate: Whose Council has pronounced so great
power to the Spanish Agent (as never before) to effect freedom to so many
Priests as have been of late, and to become a Solicitor almost in every
Tribunal or the ill-affected Subjects of the State, is worth the enquiry.

What Grants of Impositions before crossed, have lately been complained of in
Parliaments? As that of Alehouses, Gold-Thred, Pretermitted Customs, and many
more; the least of which would have 50. Edward 3. adjudged in Parliament an
heinous crime, as well as those of Lions and Latymer.

The Duke of Suffolk in Henry 6. time, in procuring such another Grant in
derogation of the Common Law, was adjudged in Parliament.

The gift of Honors kept as the most sacred Treasure of the State, now set to
sail, Parliaments have been Suitors to the King to bestow those Graces; as in
the time of Edward 3. Henry 4. and Henry 6. More now led in by that way only
then all the merits of the best deservers huve got these last 500. years. So
tender was the care of elder times that it is an Article 28. Henry 6. in
Parliament against the Duke of Suffolk, that he had procured for himself, and
some few others, such Titles of Honor; and those so irregular, that he was the
first that ever was Earl, Marquess, and Duke of the self same place. Edward the
first restrained the number, in policy, that would have challenged a Writ by
Tenure: and how this proportion may suit with profit of the State we cannot
tell. Great deserts have now no other recompense then costly Rewards from the
King; For, we now are at a vile Price of that which was once inestimable. If
worthy Persons have been advanced freely to places of greatest trust, I shall
be glad. Spencer was condemned in the 15. of Edward 3. for displacing good
Servants about the King, and putting in his Friends and followers, not leaving,
either in the Church or Commonwealth, a place to any, before a Fine was paid
unto him for his dependence. The like in part was laid by Parliament on De la
Poole. It cannot but be a sad hearing unto us all, what my Lord Treasurer the
last day told us of his Majesty's great Debts, high Engagements, and present
wants: The noise whereof I wish may ever rest enclosed within these Walls. For,
what an encouragement it may be to our Enemies, and a disheartning to our
Friends, I cannot tell. The danger of those, if any they have been the cause,
is great and fearful. It was no small motive to the Parliament, in the time of
Henry 3. to banish the Kings half-Brethren for procuring to themselves so large
proportion of Crown Lands. Gav^ston and Spencer for doing the like for
themselves, and their followers in Edward the 2. time, and the Lady V^ssy for
procuring the like for her Brother Beaumont, was banished the Court. Michael de
la Poole was condemned the 20. of Richard 2. in Parliament, amongst other
Crimes, for procuring Lands and Pensions from the King, and having employed the
Subsidies to other ends then the grant intended. His Grandchild, William Duke
of Suffolk, for the like was censured 28. Henry 6. The great Bishop of
Winchester, 50. Edward. 3. was put upon the Kings mercy by Parliament for
wasting in time of Peace, the Revenues of the Crown, and gifts of the People,
to the yearly oppression of the Commonwealth. Offenses of this Nature were
urged to the ruining of the Last Duke of Somerset in Edward 6. time. More
fearful Examples may be found, too frequent in Records. Such Improvidence and
ill Council led Henry the third into so great a strait, as after he had pawned
some part of his Foreign Territories, broke up his House, and sought his Diet
at Abbeys and Religious houses, engaged not only his own Jewels, but those of
the Shrine of Saint Edward at Westminster, he was in the end (not content, but)
constrained to lay to pawn (as some of his Successors after did) Magnam
Coronam Angliae, the Crown of England. To draw you out to life the Image of
former Kings extremities, I will tell you what I found since this Assembly at
Oxford, written by a Reverend man twice Vice Chancellor of this place: his
name was Gascoign; a man that saw the Tragedy of De la Poole: He tells you that
the Revenues of the Crown were so Rent away by ill Council, that the King was
enforced to live de Tallagiis Populi: That the King was grown in debt quinque
centena millia librarum: That his great Favorite, in treating of a Forrieign
Marriage, had lost his Master a Foreign Duchy: That to work his ends, he had
caused the King to adjourn the Parliament in Villis and remoti partibus Regni,
where few People, propter d^fectum hospitii and victualium could attend, and by
shifting that assembly from place to place to inform (I will use the Authors
words) illos paucos qui remanebunt de Communitate Regin, concedere Regi
quamvispessima. When the Parliament endeavored by an Act of Resumption, the
just and frequent way to repair the languishing State of the Crown (for all
from Henry 3. but one, till the 6. of Henrry 8. have used it) this great man
told the King it was ad dedecus Regis, and forced him from it: To which the
Commons answered, although vexati laboribus and expensis, Quod nunquam
concederent taxam Regi, until by authority of Parliament, r^su^eret actualiter
omnia p^rtinentia Coronae Anglioe. And that it was magis ad dedecus Regis, to
leave so many poor men in intolerable Want, to whom the King stood then
indebtad. Yet naught could all good Council work, until by Parliament that bad
great man was banished: which was no sooner done; but an Act of Resumption
followed the inrollment of the Act of his Exilement. That was a speeding
Article against the Bishop of Winchester and his Brother, in the time of Edward
3. that they had engrossed the person of the King from his other Lords. It was
not forgotten against Gaveston and the Spencers in Edward 2. time. The unhappy
Ministers of Richard 2. Henry 6. and Edward 6. felt the weight to their Ruin
of the like Errors. I hope we shall not complain in Parliament again of such.

I am glad we have neither just cause or undutiful dispositions to appoint the
King a Council to redress those Errors in Parliament, as those of the 42. H. 3.
We do not desire, as 5. H. 4. or 29. H. 6. the removing from about the King of
evil Counselors. We do not request a choice by name, as 14. E. 3. 3. 5. 11. R.
2. 8. H. 4. or 31. H. 6. nor to swear them in Parliament, as 35, E. 1. 9. E. 2.
or 5. R. 2. or to line them out their directions of rule, as 43. H. 3. and 8.
H. 6. or desire that which H. 3. did promise in his 42. year se act^o^nia per
assensum Magnatum de Concilio suo electorum, and sine eor assensu nihil. We
only in loyal duty offer up our humble desires, that since his Majesty has
with advised Judgment elected so wise, religious and worthy Servants to attend
him in that high imployemnt, he will be pleased to advise with them together, a
way of remedy for those disasters in State, led in by long security and happy
peace, and not with young and single Council.

A SPEECH Made by Sir ROB. COTTON

Knight and Baronet, before the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable
PRIVYCOVNCEL, At the Council Table: being thither called to deliver his Opinion
touching The ALTERATION OF COIN.

2. Sept. Annoque Regni Regis Caroli 2.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1672

A SPEECH Touching the ALTERATION OF COIN.
My LORDS,
SInce it has pleased this Honorable Table to command, amongst others, my
poor Opinion concerning this weighty Proposition of money, I must humbly ctave
pardon; if with that Freedom that becomes my duty to my good and gracious
Master, and my obedience to your great command, I deliver it so up.

I cannot (my good Lords) but assuredly conceive, that this intended Project of
enhauncing the Coin, Honor Justice and Profit
will trench both into the Honor, the Justice, and the Profit of my Royal
Master very far.

All Estates do stand Mag is Fama quam Vi, Honor
as Tacitus says of Rome: and Wealth in every Kingdom is one of the Essential
marks of their Greatness: and that is best expressed in the Measure and Purity
of their Moneys. Hence was it, that so lohg as the Roman Empire (a Pattern of
best Government) held up their Glory and Greatness, they ever maintained, with
little or no charge, the Standard of their Coin. But after the loose times of
Commodus had led in Need by Excess, and so that Shift of Changing the Standard,
the Majesty of that Empire fell by degrees. And as Vopiscus says, the steps by
which that State descended were visibly known most by the gradual alteration of
their Coin, And there is no surer Symptom of a Consumption in State then the
corruption in money.

What renown is left to the Posterity of Edward the first in amending the
Standard, Edw. 1.
both in purity and weight from that of elder and more barbarous times, must
stick as a blemish upon Princes that do the contrary. Hen. 6.
Thus we see it was with Henry the sixth; who, after he had begun with abating
the measure, he after fell to abating the matter; and granted commissions to
Missenden and others to practice Alchemy to serve his Mint. The extremity of
the State in general felt this aggrievance, besides the dishonor it laid upon
the person of the King, was not the least advantage his disloyal Kinsman took
to ingrace, himself into the Peoples favor, to his Sovereign's ruin.

When Henry the 8. Hen. 8.
had gained as much of Power and Glory abroad, of Love and Obedience at home, as
ever any; he suffered Shipwreck of all upon this Rock.

When his Daughter Queen Elizabeth came to the Crown, Queen Eliz.
she was happy in Council to amend that Error of her Father: For, in a Memorial
of the Lord Treasurer Burliegh's hand, I find that he and Sir Thomas Smith (a
grave and learned man) advising the Queen that it was the honor of her Crown,
and the true wealth of her Self and People, to reduce the Standard to the
ancient purity and p^rity of her great Grandfather King Edward 4. Edw. 4
And that it was not the short ends of Wit, nor starting holes of devises that
can sustain the expense of a Monarchy, but sound and solid courses: for so are
the words. She followed their advise, and began to reduce the Moneys to their
elder goodness, stiling that work in her first Proclamation Anno 3. A Famous
Act. The next year following, having perfected it as it after stood; she tells
her People by another Edict, that she had conquered now that Monster that had
so long devoured them, meaning the Variation of the Standard: And so long as
that sad Adviser lived, she never (though often by Projectors importuned) could
be drawn to any shift or change in the Rate of her moneys.

To avoid the trick of Permutation, Coin was devised, as a Rate and Measure of
Merchandise and Manufactures; which if mutable, no man can tell either what he
has, Iustice^.
or what he owes, no contract can be certain, and so all commerce, both
public and private, destroyed; and men again enforced to Permutation with
things not subject to wit or fraud.

The regulating of Coin has been left to the care of Princes, who are
presumed to be ever the Fathers of the Commonwealth. Upon their honors they
are Debtors and VVarranties of Justice to the Subject in that behalf. They
cannot, says Bodin, Bodin.
alter the price of the moneys, to the prejudice of the Subjects, without
incurring the reproach of Faux M^nnoyeurs. And therefore the Stories term
Philip le Bell, for using it, Falsificateur de Moneta. Omnino Monetae
integritas debet queriubi vultus noster imprimitur, says Theodoret the Gothe
to his Mint-Master, Theoderet the Gothe.
Quidnam erit tutum si in nostra peccetur Effigy? Princes must not suffer
their Faces to warrant falsehood.

Although I am not of opinion with Mirror des Justices, Mirror des Justices.
the ancient book of our Common Law, that Le Roy ne poit sa Money Empeirer ne
amender sans l'assent de touts ses Counts, which was the greatest Council of
the Kingdom; yet can I not pass over the Goodness and Grace of money of our
Kings: Edw. 1. and 3.
(As Edward the 1. and the 3. Henry the 4. Hen. 4. and 5.
and the 5. with others, who, out of that Rule of this Justice, Quod ad omnes
spectat, ab omnibus debet approbari, have often advised with the people in
Parliament, both for the Allay, Weight, Number of pieces, cut of Coynage and
exchange;) and must with infinite comfort acknowledge, the care and Justice now
of my Good Master,, and your Lordships Wisdoms, that would not upon information
of some few Officers of the Mint, before a free and careful debate, put in
execution this Project, that I much (under your Honors Favor) suspect, would
have taken away the Tenth part of every man's due debt, or Rent already
reserved throughout the Realm, not sparing the King; which would have been
little less then a Species of that which the Roman Stories call Tabulae novae,
from whence very often seditions have sprung: As that of Marcus Gratidianus in
Livie, who pretending in his Consulship, that the Current money was wasted by
use, called it in, and altered the Standard; which grew so heavy and grievous
to the People, as the Author says, because no man thereby knew certainly his
Wealth, that it caused a Tumult.

In this last part, Profit.
which is, the Disprofit this enseebling the coin will bring both to his
Majesty and the Commonwealth, I must distinguish the Moneys of Gold and
Silver, as they are Bullion or Commodities, and as they are measure: The one,
the Extrinsick quality, which is at the King's pleasure, as all other measures,
to name; The other the Intrinsic quantity of pure metal, which is in the
Merchant to value. As there the measure shall be either lessened or enlarged,
so is the quantity of the Commodity that is to be exchanged. If then the King
shall cut his shilling or pound nominal less then it was before, a less
proportion of such Commodities as shall be exchanged for it must be received.
It must then of force follow, that all things of necessity, as Victual,
Apparel, and the rest, as well as those of Pleasure, must be inhaunced. If
then all men shall receive, in their shillings and pounds a less proportion of
Silver and Cold then they did before this projected Alteration, and pay for
what they buy a rate inhaunced, it must cast upon all a double loss.

What the King will suffer by it in the Rents of his lands, is demonstrated
enough by the alterations since the 18. of Edward the 3. when all the Revenue
of the Crown came into the receipt Pondere and Numero, after five groats in the
ounce; which since that time, by the several changes of the Standard is come
to five shillings, whereby the King has lost two third parts of his just
Revenue.

In his Customs, the best of rate being regulated by pounds and shillings, his
Majesty must lose alike; And so in all and whatsoever moneys that after this he
shall receive.

The profit by this change in coynage, cannot be much, nor manent. In the other
the loss lasting, and so large, that it reaches to little less then yearly to
a sixth part of his whole Revenue: for hereby in every pound tale of Gold there
is nine ounces, one penny weight, and 19 grains loss, which is 25 l. in
account, and in the 100 1. tale of Silver 59 ounces, which is 14 l. 17 s. more.

And as his Majesty shall undergo all these losses hereafter in all his
receipts; so shall he no less in many of his disbursements. The wages of his
Soldiers must be rateably advanced as the money is decreased. This Edward the
third (as appears by the account of the Wardrobe and Exchequor) as all the
Kings after were enforced to do, as often as they lessened the Standard of their
moneys. The prices of what shall be bought for his Ma^esties service, must in
like proportion be inhaunced on him. And as his Majesty has the greatest of
Receipts and Issues, so must he of necessity taste the most, of loss by this
device.

It will discourage a great proportion of the Trade in England, and so impair
his Majesty's Customs. For that part (being not the least) that pays upon
trust and credit will be overthrown; for all men being doubtful of diminution
hereby of their personal Estates, will call their moneys already out, and no
man will part with that which is by him, upon such apparent loss as this must
bring. What danger may befall the State by such a sudden stand of Trade, I
cannot guess.

The moneys of Gold and Silver formerly coined and abroad, being richer then
these intended, will be made for the me part hereby Bullion, and so
transported; which I conceive to be none of the least inducements that has
drawn so many Goldsmiths to side this Project, that they may be thereby
Factors for the strangers, who by the lowness of minting (being but 2 s. Silver
the pound weight, and 4s. for Gold; whereas with us the one is 4. and the other
5 s.) may make that profit beyond sea they cannot here, and so his Majesty's
mint unset on work.

And as his Majesty shall lose apparently in the alteration of moneys a 14. in
all the Silver, and a 25. part in all the Gold he after shall receive; so shall
the Nobility, Gentry, and all other, in all their former settled Rents,
Annuities, Pensions and loanes of money. The like will fall upon the Laborers
and workmen in their S^^tute-wages: and as their receipts are lessened hereby;
so are their Issiues increased, either by improving all prices. or
disfurnishing the Market, which must necessarily follow. For if in 5. Edwardi
6. 3. Mariae, and 4. Elizabethae, it appears by the Proclamations, that a
rumor only of an alteration caused these Effects, punishing the Author of such
reports with imprisonment and pillory; it cannot be doubted but the projecting
a change must be of far more consequence and danger to the State, and would be
wished that the Actors and Authors of such disturbances in the Commonwealth,
at all times hereafter might undergo a punishment proportionable.

It cannot beheld (I presume) an advice of best judgment that lays the loss
upon our selves, and the gain upon our enemies: for who is like to be in this
the greater Thriver? Is it not usual, that the Stranger that transporteth over
moneys for Bullion, our own Goldsmiths that are their Brokers, and the
Foreign Hedgeminters of the Netherlands (which terms them well) have a resh
and full Trade by this abatement? And we cannot do the Spanish King (our
greatest enemy) so great a favor as by this, who being the Lord of this
Commodity by his W^st- Indies, we shall so advance them to our impoverishing;
for it is not in the power of any State to raise the price of their own, but
the value that their Neighbor Princes acceptance sets upon them.

Experience has taught us, that the enfeebling of coin is but a shift for a
while, as drink to one in a dropsy, to make him swell the more: But the State
was never thoroughly cured, as we saw by Henry the eighths time and the late
Queens, until the coin was made up again.

I cannot but then conclude (my honorable Lords) that if the proportion of
Gold and Silver to each other be wrought to that parity, by the advice of
Artists, that neither may be too rich for the other, that the mintage may be
reduced to some proportion of Neighbor parts, and that the Issue of our Native
Commodities may be brought to overburthen the entrance of the Foreign, we need
not seek any way of shift, but shall again see our Trade to flourish, the Mint
(as the pulse of the Commonwealth) again to beat, and our Materials, by
Industry, to be a mine of Gold and Silver to us, and the Honor, Justice and
Profit of his Majesty (which we all wish and work for) supported.

The Answer of the Committees appointed by your Lordships to the Proportion
delivesed by some Officers of the Mint, for inhauncing his Majesty's moneys of
Gold and Silver. 2. September 1626.
The first part. The Preamble.
WE conceive that the Officers of the Mint are bound by Oath to discharge
their several duties in their several places respectively. But we cannot
conceive how they should stand tied by oath to account to his Majesty and your
Honors of the Intrinsic value of all Foreign coyns, and how they agree with
the Standard of the State (before they come to the Mint) for it is impossible
and needless: In the one, for that all Foreign States do, for the most part,
differ from us and our money infinitely amongst themselves: In the other; it
being the proper care of the Merchants, who are presumed not to purchase that
at a dearer rate then they may be allowed for the same in fine Gold and Silver
in the coin of England, within the charge of coynage. And therefore needless.

To induce the necessity of the Proposition, they produce two instances or
examples; The one from the Rex Doller, and the other from the Royal of Eight;
wherein they have untruely informed your Honors of the price and value in our
moneys, and our Trade of both of them. For whereas they say, that the Rex
Doller weighs 18. penny weight and 12. grains, and to be of the finest at the
pound weight, 10. ounces, 10 pence weight, does produce in exchange 5. s. 2. d.
farthing of sterling moneys. We do affirm that the same Dollar is 18. d. weight
18. grains, and in fineness 10. ounces 12. d, weight, equal to 4. s. 5.d.ob. of
sterling moneys, and is at this time in London at no higher price, which is
short thereof by 13. grains and a half fine Silver upon every Dollar, being 2.
d. sterling or thereabout, being the charge of coynage, with a small recompense
to the Gold^ Smith or Exchanger, to the profit of England 3. s. 6. d. per
Centum.

Whereas they do in their circumstance averr unto your Honors, that this
Dollar runs in account of Trade amongst the Merchants as 5. s. 2. d. ob.
English money: It is most false. For the Merchants and best experienced men
protest the contrary, and that it pas^eth in exchange according to the
Int^insick value only 4 s. 5. d. ob. of the sterling money, or near
thereabouts, and not otherwise.

The second instance is in the Royal of Eight; affirming that it weighs 17.
penny weight, 12. grains; and being but of the fineness of 11. ounces at the
pound weight, does pass in Exchange at 5 s. of our sterling moneys, whereby we
lose 6.s. 7 d. in every pound weight. But having examined it by the best
Artists, we find it to be 11. ounces, 2. d. weight fine, and in weight 17.
penny weight, 12. grains; which does equal 4. s. 4. d. ob. of our sterling
moneys, and passes in London at that rate, and not otherwise, though holding
more fine Silver by 12. grains and a half in every Royal of Eight, which is
the charge of coynage, and a small overplus for the Goldsmiths gain. And
whereas they say, that the said Royal of Eight runs in account of Trade at 5
s. of his Majesty's now English money; the Merchants do all affirm the
contrary, and that it passes only at 4 s. 4. ob. of the sterling moneys, and
no higher ordinarily.

And it must be strange (my honorable Lords) to believe that our Neighbors
the Netherlanders, would give for a pound tale of our sterling Silver, by what
name soever it passes, a greater quantity of their moneys in the like
intrinsic value by Exchange; Or that our Merchants would, knowing, give a
greater for a less to them, except by way of usance. But the deceit is herein
only, that they continually varying their coin, and crying it up at pleasure,
may deceive us for a time, in too high a Reputation of pure Silver in it, upon
trust, then there is, until a trial; and this, by no Alteration of our coin,
unless we should daily, as they make his Majesty's Standard uncertain, can be
prevented, which being the measure of Lands, Rents and Commerce amongst our
selves at home, would render all uncertain, and so of necessity destroy the use
of money; and turn all to permutation of such things as were not subject to
will or change.

And as they have mistaken the ground of their Proposition; so have they, upon
a specious show of some momentary and small benefit to his Majesty, reared up a
vast and constant loss unto his Highness by this design, if once effected. For,
as his Majesty has the 1argest portion of any both in the entrances and
issues; so should he by so enfeebling of his coin, become the greatest loser.

There needs no other instance then those degrees of diminution from the 18. of
Edwards, 3. 18. Edw. 3.
to this day; at which time the Revenue of the Crown was paid after five Groats
the ounce (which is now five shillings) which has lost his Majesty two thirds
of all his Revenue; and no less has all the Nobility, Gentry, and other his
Majesty's landed Subjects in proportion suffered. But since, to our great
comfort; we heard your Honors the last day to lay a worthy blame upon the
Mint-Masters, for that intended diminution of the Goldcoyn done by them without
full warrant; by which we rest discharged of that fear: We will (according to
our duties and your Honors command) deliver humbly our opinion concerning the
reduction of the Silver money now current to be proportionably equivalent to
the Gold.

The English sterling Standard, which was no little honor to Edward the first,
that settled it from an inconstant motion, and laid it a ground that all the
States of Europe after complied to bring in their account, which was of Silver
an 11 to one of Gold, the Kings of England for the most part since have
constantly continued the same proportion: and Spain, since Ferdinand, who took
from hence his Pattern, have held and hold unchangeably the same unto this day:
but since with us, a late improvement of Gold has broke that Rule, and cast a
difference in our Silver of six shillings in the pound weight; we cannot but in
all humility present our fear, that the framing, at this time of an equality,
except it were by reducing the Gold to the Silver, is not so safe and
profitable as is proposed by those of the Mint.

For whereas they pretend this, Our richness of our Silver will carry out what
now remains: We conceive (under favor) it will have no such effect, but
clean contrary. For all the current Silver now abroad has been so culled by
some Goldsmiths, the same either turned into Bullion, and so transported, that
that which now remains will hardly produce 65. s. in the pound weight one
with another; and so not likely, for so little profit as now it goes, to be
transported. But if the pound sterling should be as they desire, cut into 70.
s. 6 d. it must of necessity follow, that the new money will convert the old
money (now current) into Bullion; and so afford a Trade afresh for some ill
Patriot Goldsmiths, and others, who formerly have more endamaged the State by
culling, then any others by clipping; the one but trading in pounds, the other
in thousands; and therefore worthy of a greater punishment. And we cannnot but
have just cause (my Lords) to fear that these bad members have been no idle
instruments, for their private benefit, to the public detriment, of this new
project, so much tending to enfeebling the sterling Standard:

We further (under your Lord ships favors) conceive, that the raising of the
Silver to the Gold, will upon some sudden occasion beyond Sea, transport our
Gold, and leave the State in scarcity of that, as now of Silver.

And to that Objection of the Proposers, That there is no Silver brought of
late into the mint; The causes we conceive to be (besides the unusual
quantities of late brought into the mint in Gold) one the overballasing of late
of Trade; the other, the charge of coynage. For the first, it cannot, be but
the late infection of this City was a let of exportation of our best commodity,
Cloth, made by that suspected in every place. To this may be added the vast
sums of money which the necessary occasion of war called from his Majesty to
the parts beyond the Seas, when we had least of Commodities to make even the
balance there. And lastly, dearth and scarcity of corn, which in time of
plenty we ever found the best exchange to bring in silver. And therefore, since
by Gods great Favor the Plague is ended, and general Trade thereby restored,
and more of Plenty this year, then has been formerly these many years, of
corn, we doubt not but if the Ports of Spain were now as free as they were of
late, there would not prove hereafter any cause to complain of the want of
Bullion in the State.

The second cause, that the mint remains unfurnished; will be the charge of
coynage, raised in price so far above all other places, constraining each man
to carry his Bullion where he may receive by coynage the less of loss. And
therefore if it may please his Majesty to reduce the prices here to the Rates
of other of our Neighbor Countries, there will be no doubt but the Mint will
beat as heretofore.

Questions to be proposed to the Merchants, Mint-Masters, and Goldsmiths,
Concerning the Alteration of the Silver Moneys.
1. Whether the Englist moneys now current are not as dear as the Foreign of
the Dollar and Real of 8. in the intrinsic value in the usual exchanges now
made by the merchants beyond-Seas?

2. Whether this advancing will not cause all the Silver-Bullion, that might be
transported in mass or Foreign coin, to be minted with the King's stamp
beyond sea, and so transported, and his Mint thereby set less on work then now?

3. Whether the advancing the Silvercoyn in England will not cause a
transportation of most of that that is now current to be minted in the
Netherlands, and from them brought back again, whereby his Majesty's Mint will
fail by the exported benefit?

4. Whether the advancing the Silver coin, if it produce the former effects,
will not cause the Markets to be unfurnished of present coin to drive the
exchange, when most of the old will be used in Bullion.

5. Whether the higher we raise the Coin at home, we make not thereby our
Commodities beyond sea the cheaper?

6. Whether the greatest profit by this enhauncing, will not grow to the ill
members of the State, that have formerly culled the weightiest pieces, and sold
them to the stranger-Merchants to be transported?

Certain General Rules collected concerning Money and Bullion, out of the late
Consultation at Court.
GOld and Silver have a twofold estimation: in the Extrinsick, as they are
moneys, they are the Princes measures given to his people, and this is a
Prerogative of Kings: In the Intrinsic they are Commodities, valuing each
other according to the Plenty or scarcity; and so all other Commodities by
them; And that is the sole power of Trade.

The measures in a Kingdom ought to be constant: It is the Justice and Honor
of the King: for if they be altered, all men at that instant are deceived in
their precedent contracts, either for Lands or money, and the King most of all:
for no man knows then, either what he has or what he owes.

This made the Lord Treasurer Burleigh in 73. 1573.
when some Projectors had set on foot a matter of this nature, to tell them,
that they were worthy to suffer death for attempting to put so great a
dishonor on the Queen, and detriment and discontent upon the People. For, to
alter this public measure, is to leave all the Markets of the Kingdom
unfurnished; and what will be the mischief, the Proclamations of 5. Edwardi 6.
3. Mariae and 4. Elizabethae, will manifest; 5. Edw. 6. 3. Mariae. 4. Eliz.
when but a Rumor of the like produced that effect so far, that besides the
faith of the Princes to the contrary delivered in their Edicts, they were
enforced to cause the Magistrates in every Shire respectively to constrain the
people to furnish the Markets to prevent a mutiny.

To make this measure then, at this time short, is to raise all prizes, or to
turn the money or measure now current into disise or Bullion: for who will
depart with any, when it is richer by seven in the hundred in the Mass, then
the new moneys; and yet of no more value in the Market?

Hence of necessity, it must follow, that there will not in a long time be
sufficient minted of the new to drive the exchange of the Kingdom, and so all
Trade at one instant at a stand; and in the mean time the Markers unfurnished:
Which how it may concern the quiet of the State, is worthy care.

And thus far as money is a measure.

Now, as it is a Commodity, it is respected and valued by the intrinsic
quality. And first the one metal to the other.

All commodities are prized by Plenty or scarsity, by dearness or cheapness,
the one by the other: If then we desire our Silver to buy Gold, as it late has
done, we must let it be the cheaper, and less in proportion valued; and so
contrary: for one equivalent proportion in both will bring in neither. We see
the proof thereof by the unusual quantity of Gold brought lately to the Mint by
reason of the price; for we rate it above all other Countries, and Gold may be
bought too dear. To furnish then this way the mint with both, is altogether
impossible.

And at this time it was apparently proved, both by the best Artists and
Merchants most acquainted with the Exchange, in both the examples of the
Mint-masters, in the Rex Dollar and Real of Eight, That Silver here is of
equal value, and Gold above, with the foreign parts in the intrinsic; and
that the fallacy presented to the Lords by the Mint-Masters, is only in the
nomination or extrinsick quality.

But if we desire both, it is not raising of the value that does it; but the
ballasing of Trade: for buy we in more then we sell of other Commodities, be
the money never so high prized, we must part with it to make the disproportion
even: If we sell more then we buy, the contrary will follow:

And this is plain in Spain's necessities: For should that King advance to a
double rate his Real of 8. yet needing, by reason of the barrenness of his
Country, more of Foreign Wares then he can countervail by Exchange with his
own, he must part with his money, and gains no more by enhauncing his Coin,
but that he pays a higher price for the Commodities he buyeth; if his work of
raising be his own. But if we shall make improvement of Gold and Silver, being
the staple Commodity of his State; we then advancing the price of his, abase to
him our own Commodities.

To shape this Kingdom to the fashion of the Netherlanders, were to frame a
Royal Monarch by a Society of Merchants. Their Country is a continual Fair,
and so the price of Money must rise and fall to fit their occasions. We see
this by raising the Exchange at Franckford and other places at the usual times
of their Marts.

The frequent and daily change in the low Countries of their moneys, is no such
injustice to any there as it would be here. For being all either Mechanics or
Merchants, they can rate accordingly their labors or their wares, whether it
be coin or other Merchandise, to the present condition of their own money in
Exchange.

And our English Merchants, to whose profession it properly belongs, do so,
according to the just intrinsic value of their Foreign coin, in all barter of
Commodities, or exchange, except at Usance; Which we, that are ruled and tied
by the extrinsick measure of moneys, in all our constant Reckonings add Annual
bargains at home, cannot do.

And for us then to raise our coin at this time to equal their proportions,
were but to render our selves to a perpetual incertainty: for they will raise
upon us daily then again; which if we of course should follow, else receive no
profit by this present change, we then destroy the Policy, Justice, Honor and
Tranquillity of our State at home for ever.

THE DANGER WHEREIN THIS KINGDOM NOW STANDS, AND THE REMEDY.

Written by Sir ROB.COTTON Knight and Baronet.

LONDON, Printed in the year 1651.

THE DANGER Wherein this Kingdom now stands, and the REMEDY.
AS soon as the house of Austria had incorporated it self into the house of
Spain, and by their new Discoveries gotten to themselves the Wealth of the
Indies; they began to affect, and have ever since pursued a fifth Monarchy.

The Emperor Charles would first have laid the foundation thereof in Italy, by
surprising Rome. But from this he was thrust by the force and respect of
Religion, Henry the 8. being made Caput foederis against him.

He then attempted it in High-Germany, Practicing (by faction and Force) to
reduce those petty States to his absolute power. In this Henry the 8. again
prevented him, by tying the Lutber an Princes under his confederacy and
assistance.

His Son, the second Philip, pursued the same Ambition in the Nether Germany,
by reduction whereof he intended to make his way further into the other. This
the late Queen of England interrupted, by siding with the afflicted people on
the one part, and making her self Head of the Protestant League with the
Princes on the other side; drawing in, as a secret of State, the Countenance of
France, to give the more reputation and assistance to them, and security to it
self,

Spain seeing his hopes thus fruitless by these Unions and sleights, began
first, to break (if he might) the Amity of France and England: But finding the
common danger to be as fast a Tie, he raises up a party in that Kingdom of
his own, by the which the French King was so distressed, that had not the
English Council and Assistance relieved him, Spain had there removed that next
and greatest obstacle of his ambition.

His Council now tells him, from these examples, that the way to his great work
is impassible so long as England lies a let into his way; and advises him,
that the remove of that obstacle be the first of his intents. This drew on
those often secret practices against the person of the late Queen, and his open
fury in 88. against the Body of the State: For which she (following the advice
of a free Council) will never after admit of Peace, winning thereby the hearts
of a loving people, who ever found hands and money for all occasions at home,
and keeping sacredly her Alliances abroad, secured her confederates, all her
time, in freedom from fear of Spanish slavery; And so ended her old and happy
days in great Glory.

Spain then, by the Wisdom and power of that great Lady, dispoiled so of his
means to hurt, though not of his desire, makes up, with her peaceful Successor
of happy memory, the Golden League, that (disarming us at home by opinion of
Security, and giving them a power in our Council by believing their friendship
and pretended marriage) gave them way to cherish amongst us a party of their
own, and (bereaft of power abroad) to lead in jealousy, and sow a division
between us and our confederates; by which (we see) they have swallowed up the
fortune of our Master's brother, with the rest of the Imperial States,
distressed the King of Denmark by that quarrel, diverted Sweden's Assistance
by the wars with the Pole, and moving of him now with the offer of the Danish)
Crown: And now (whether from the Plot, or our Fatality) it has cast such a
bone between France and us, as has gotten themselves (by our quarrel of
Religion) a fast confederate, and us a dangerous enemy: So that now we are left
no other Assurance against their Malice and ambition, but the Nether-lands;
where the Tie of mutual safety is weak'ned by daily discontents bred and fed
between us from some ill-affected to both our Securities; that from the
doubtfulness of friendship as now we stand. we may rather expect from our own
domestic faction, if they grow too furious, they will rather follow the
example of Rome in her growing; that held it equally safe, honorable, and more
easy, dare Rege^^, the sub^ugare Provincian; considering the po^er they have
their hands, then to gi^e any friendly Assistance to serve the present
condition of our State. You may see therefore in what terms we stand abroad;
and I fear me, at home, for resistance in no better State.

There must be, to withstand a Foreign invasion, a proportion both of Sea and
Landforces; for to give an enemy an easy passage, and a port to relieve him
in, is no less then to hazard all at one stake. And it is to be considered,
that no march by land, can be of that speed, to make head against the landing
of an enemy, nor no such prevention as to be Mr. of the Sea. To this point of
necessary defense, there can be no less then 240000. l.

For the landforces; If it were for an jOffensive war, the men of less
livelihood were the best spared, and were used formerly to make such war,
purgamento Reipublicae, if we made no further purchase by it. But for safety of
a Commonwealth, the Wisdom of all times, did never interest the public cause
to any other then such as had a portion in the public adventure. And that we
saw in 88. when the ear of the Queen and Council did make the body of that
large Army, no other then of trained bands, which with the Auxiliaries of the
whole Realm, amounted to no less then 24000.men. Neither were any of those
drawn out from forth their Countries, and proper habitations before the end of
May, that there might be no long aggrievance to the public; such
discontentments being ever to us a more fatal Enemy then any Foreign force.

The careful distribution and direction of the Sea and Landforces, being more
fitting for a Council of War, then a private Man to advise of, I pass over; yet
shall ever be willing and ready (when I shall be called) humbly to offer up
such observations, as I have formerly gathered by the former like occasions of
this Realm.

To make up this preparation, there are requisite two things: Money and
affections; for they cannot be properly severed. It was well and wisely said,
by that great and grave Councellor the Lord Burleigh in the like case to the
late Queen: Win hearts, and you may have their hands and purses; And I find of
late, that diffidence having been a defect in the one, it has unhappily
produced the other.

In gathering then of money for this present need, there are required three
things: Speed, Assurance, and Satisfaction. And the way to gather (as others in
the like cases have done) must be by that path, which has been formerly called
Via Regia, being more secure and speedy: For, by unknown and untroden ways, it
is both rough and tedious, and seldom succeeds well This. last way, although
it took place as it were by a supply at first, and received no general denial;
yet since it has drawn many to consider with themselves and others of the
Consequence, and is now conceived a pressure on their liberties and against
Law, I much fear, if now again it be offered, either in the same face, or by
Privy Seal, it will be refused wholly. Neither find I that the restraint of
those Recusants has produced any other effect then a stiff resolution in them
and others to forbear. Besides, though it went at the first with some
assurance; yet when we consider the Commissions and other forms incident to
such like services, as that how long it hangs in hand, and how many delays
there were, we may easily see, that such a sum by Parliament granted, is far
sooner and more easily gathered.

If any will make the successes of times to produce an inevitable necessity to
enforce it levied (whether in general) by excise, or imposition, or in
particular upon some select persons (which is the custom of some Countries) and
so conclude it (as there) for the public State, Suprema lege) he must look for
this to be told him: That seeing necessity must conclude always to gather
money, as less speedy or assured then that so practiced (which cannot be fitter
then by Parliament) the success attends the humors of the heedless multitude,
that are full of jealousy and distrust; and so unlike to comply to any unusual
course of Levy, but by force: which if used, the effect is fearful, and has
been fatal to the State; whereas that by Parliament rests principally on the
regal person, who may with ease and safety mould them to his fit desire, by a
gracious yielding to their just Petitions.

If a Parliament then be the most speedy, assured, and safe way; it is fit to
conceive, what is the safest way to act and work it to the present need.

First, for the time of the usual Summons, reputed to be 40. days, to be too
large for the present necessity; it may be by dating the Writ lessened; since
it is no positive law; so that a care be had that there may be one County day,
after the Sheriff has received the Writ before the time of sitting.

If then the sum to be levied be once agreed of, for the time there may be in
the body of the Grant an Assignment made to the Knights of every County
respectively, who (under such Assurance) may safely give Security
proportionable to the Receipts, to such as shall in present advance to the
Public service any sums of money.

The last and weightiest consideration (if a Parliament be thought fit) is, how
to remove or comply the differences between the King and Subject in their
mutual demands. And what I have learned amongst the better sort of the
Multitude, I will freely declare; that your Lordships may be the more enabled
to remove and answer those distrusts, that either concern Religion, Public
safety of the King and State, or the just liberties of the Commonwealth.

For Religion ( a matter that they lay nearest to their conscience) they are
led by this gro^^d of jealousy to doubt some practice against it.

First, for that the Spanish match, which was broken by the grateful Industry
of my Lord of Bucking* out of his Religious care (as he there declares) that
the Articles there demanded might lead in some such sufferance as might
endanger the quiet, if not the State of the reformed Religion here: Yet there
have (when he was an Actor principal in the Conditions with France) as hard, if
not worse (to the preservation of our Religion) passed then those with Spain.
And the suspect is strengthened by the close keeping of this Agreement in that
point there concluded.

It is no less an Argument of doubt to them of his Affections, in that his
Mother end others, many of his Ministers of near employment about him, are so
affected.

They talk much of his advancing men Papistically devoted; some placed in the
camp, of nearest service and chief Command: And that the Recusants have gotten,
these late years, by his power, more of courage and assurance then before. If
to clear these doubts (which perhaps are worse in fancy then in truth) he took
a good course, it might much advance the Public service, against those
squeymish humors that have more violent passion then settled judgment; and are
not the least of the opposite number in the Commonwealth.

The next is, The late misfortunes and losses of Men, Munition, and honor in
our late Undertakings abroad: Which the more temperate spirits impute to want
of Council, and the more sublime wits to practice.

They begin with the Palatinate, and by the fault of the loss there, on the
improved credit of Gondomar, distrusting him for the staying of supplies to Sir
Horace Vere, when Colonel Cecill was cast on that employment, by which the
King of Spain became Master of the King's Children's Inheritance.

And when Count-Mansfield had a Royal Supply of Forces, to assist the Princes
of our part, for the Recovery thereof: either plot or error defeated the
Enterprise from Us, to Spains great advantage.

That Sir Robert Mansfield's expedition to Algiers, should purchase only the
security and guard of the Spanish Coasts. To spend so many hundred thousand
pounds in the Cales Voyage, against the advice of Parliament, only to warn the
King of Spain to be in a readiness, and so to weaken our selves, is taken for
such a sign of ill affection to him, amongst the multitude.

The spending of so much Munition, Victuals, and Money in my Lord Willoughbie's
journey, is conceived,an Unthrifty Error in the Director of it to disarm our
selves in fruitless Voyages, nay, to some ( overcurious) seems a plot of
danger, to turn the quarrel of Spain (our ancient enemy) that the Parliament
petitioned and gave supply to support, upon our Ally of France: and soon after,
a new and happy Tie gave much talk that we were not so doubtful of Spain as
many wish; since it was held, not long ago, a fundamental Rule of Their
security and Our's, by the old Lord Treasurer Burleigh: That nothing can
prevent the Spanish Monarchy, but a fastness of the two Princes, whose Amity
gave countenance and courage to the Netherlands and German Princes to make head
against his Ambition. And we see, by this disunion a fearful defeat has
happened to Denmark and that party, to the great advantage of the Austrian
Family.

And thus far of the Waste of public Treasure in fruitless Expeditions: An
important cause to hinder any new supply in Parliament. Another fear that may
disturb the smooth and speedy passage of the King's desires in Parliament, is
the late waste of the Kind's Livelihood; Whereby is like (as in former times)
to arise this Jealousy and fear: That when he has not of his own to support
his ordinary charge (for which the Lands of the Crown were settled unalterable,
and called Sacrum Patrimonium Principis) that then he must of necessity rest on
those Assistances of the people which ever were only collected and consigned
for the Commonwealth. From hence is is like, there will be no great labor or
stiffness to induce his Majesty to an act of Resumption; since such desires of
the State have found an easy way in the will of all the Princes from the third
Henry to the last. But that which is like to pass deeper into their disputes
and care, is the late pressures they suppose to have been done upon the public
liberty and freedom of the Subject, in commanding their Goods without assent
by Parliament, confining their persons without especial cause declared; and
that made good against them by the Judges lately; and pretending a Writ to
command their attendance in a Foreign War: All which they are likely to
enforce, as repugnant to many positive laws, and Customary Immunities of this
Commonwealth.

And these dangerous distrusts, to the people are not a little improved by this
un-exemplified course (as they conceive) of retaining an Inland Army in
Winterseason, when former times of greatest fear, as 88. produced no such; and
makes them (in their distracted fears) to conjecture (idly) it was raised
wholly to subvert their fortunes to the will of power, more then of Law; and so
make good some further breaches upon their liberties and freedoms at home,
rather then defend us from any force abroad.

How far such jealousies, if they meet with an unusual disorder of lawless
Soldiers, or an apt distemper of the loose and needy multitude, which will
easily turn away upon any occasion in the State that they can side withal, to a
glorious pretense of Religion and public safety, when their true intent will
be only Rapine of the rich, and ruin of all, is worthy a provident and
preventing care.

I have thus far delivered (with that freedom you pleased to admit) such
difficulties as I have taken up amongst the multitude, as may arrest, if not
remove Impediments to any speedy supply in Parliament at this time. Which how
to facilitate, may better become the care of your Lordships Judgments, then my
Ignorance. Only I could wish,that to remove away a personal distaste of my Lord
of Buckingham amongst the People, he might be pleased (if there be a necessity
of Parliament) to appear a first Adviser thereunto: and what satisfaction it
shall please his Majesty, of grace, to give at such time to his people (which I
wish to be grounded by President of his best and most fortunate Progenitors,
and which I conceive will largly satisfy the desires and hopes of all) If it
may appear in some sort to be drawn down from him to the People, by the zealous
care and industry that my L. of Buck has of the public unity and content; by
which there is no doubt that he may remain, not only secure from any further
quarrel with them, but merit an happy memory amongst them of a zealous
Patriot. For to expiate the passion of the people at such a time with sacrifice
of any his Majesty's Servants, I have ever found it (as in E. the 2. R. the 2.
and H. 6.) no less fatal to the Master, then the Minister in the end.

VALOR ANATOMIZED IN A FANCY.

By Sir PHILIP SIDNEY. 1581.

LONDON, Printed in the year 1672.

VALOR ANATOMIZED IN A FANCY.
Valor toward Men, is an Emblem of Ability; toward Women, a Good quality
signifying a better. Nothing draws a Woman like to it. Nothing is more
behoveful for that Sex: for from it they receive Protection, and in a free way
too, without any danger. Nothing makes a shorter cut to obtaining: for a Man of
Arms is always void of Ceremony, which is the Wall that stands betwixt Piramus
and Thisby, that is Man, and Woman: For there is no Pride in Women but that
which rebounds from our own Baseness (as Cowards grow Valiant upon those that
are more Cowards) So that only by our pale asking we teach them to deny; and by
our shamefacedness we put them in mind to be modest. Whereas indeed it is
cunning Rhetoric to persuade the hearers that they are that already which the
world would have them to be. This kind of Bashfulness is far from Men of
valourous disposition, and especially from Soldiers: for such are ever men
(without doubt) forward and Confident, losing no time left they should lose
Opportunity, which is the best Factor for a Lover. And because they know Women
are given to dissemble, they will never believe them when they deny. Certainly
before this age of Wit and wearing Black, brake in upon us, there was no way
known to win a Lady, but by Tilting, Turneying, and Riding to seek Adventures
through dangerous Forests: In which time these slender Striplings with little
Legs were held but of Strength enough to marry their Widows. And even in our
days, there can be given no reason of the inundation of Servingmen upon their
Mistresses, but only that usually they carry their Masters Weapons, and their
Valor. To be accounted handsome, just, learned, and well favored, all this
carries no danger with it. But it is better to be admitted to the title of
Valiant acts: at least that imports the venturing of Mortality; and all Women
delight to hold him safe in their Arms who has escaped thither through many
dangers. To speak 2t once; Man has a privilege in Valor. In Clothes and good
Faces we do but imitate Women; and many of that Sex will not think much (as far
as an answer goes) to dissemble Wit too. So then these neat Youths, these Women
in Men's Apparel, are too near a Woman to be beloved of her; they be both of a
Trade, but he of grim aspect, and such a one a Lass dares take, and will desire
hint for Newness and Variety. A Scar in a Man's face, is the same that a Mole is
in a Woman's, and a Mole in a Woman's is a jewel set in White, to make it seem
more white. So a Scar in a Man is a mark of honor, and no blemish, for it is a
Scar and a blemish in a Soldier to be without one. Now as for all things else
which are to procu^e love, as a good Face, Wit, Clothes, or a good Body; each
of them (I must needs say) works somewhat for want of a better; that is, if
Valor corri^e not therewith. A good Face a^aileth nothing; if it be on a
Coward that is bashful, the utmost of it is to be kissed; which rather increases
than quen^beth Appetite. He that sends her Gifts, sends her word also, that
he is a Man of small Gifts otherwise; for wooing by signs and tokens, implies
the Author dumb. And if Ovid (who writ the Law of Love) were alive, as he is
extant, and would allow it as a good diversity; then Gifts should be sent as
Gratuities; not as Bribes; and Wit would rather get promise, than Love. Wit is
not to be seen, and no Woman takes advice of any in her Loving, but of her own
Eyes, or her Waiting Woman: nay, which is worse, Wit is net to be felt, and so
no good Bedfellow. Wit applied to a Woman makes her dissolve her simperings,
and discover her Teeth with Laughter; and this is surely a purge for Love: for
the beginning and original of Love is a kind of foolish Melancholy. As for the
Man that makes his Tailor his Bawd, and hopes to inveagle his Love with such a
colored Suit, surely the same man deeply hazzards the loss of her Favor upon
every Change of his Clothes. So likewise the other that Courts her silently
with a good Body, let me tell him that his Clothes stand always betwixt his
Mistress eyes and him. The Comeliness of Clothes depends upon the Comeliness of
the Body, and so both upon Opinion. She that has been seduced by Apparel, let
me give her to wit, that men always put off their Clothes before they go to
bed; and let her that has been inamoured of her Servants Body, understand,
that if she saw him in a skin of Cloth (that is, in a suit made to the pattern
of his body) she would discern slender cause to Love him ever after. There are
no Clothes fit so well in a Woman's eye, as a Suit of Steel, though not of the
fashion: and no man so soon surpriseth a Woman's Affections, as he that is the
subject of Whisperings, and has always some 20 stories of his own
Achievements depending upon him Mistake me not, I understand not by Valor one
that never fights but When he is backed by Drink or Anger, or hissed on by
Beholders; nor one that is desperate, nor one that takes away a Servingmans
Weapons, when perhaps they cost him his quarters wages; nor one that wears a
privy Coat of defense, and therein is Confident: for then such as make Bucklers
would be accounted the very scum of the Commonwealth. I intend one of an even
Resolution, grounded upon Reason, which is always even; having his Power
restrained by the Law of not doing Wrong.

Philip Sidney.

Wooing-stuff.
FAint Amorist: what, do thou think
To taste Loves Honey, and not drink
One dram of Gall? or to devour
A world of sweet, and taste no sour?
Do thou ever think to enter
The Elisian fields that dar^st not venture
In Charons Barge? a Lovers mind
Must use to sail with every wind.
He that loves, and fears to try,
Learns his Mistress to deny.
Does she chide thee? it is to show it,
That thy Coldness makes her do it;
Is she silent? is she mute?
Silence fully grants thy Suit;
Does she pout, and leave the room?
Then she goes to bid thee come;
Is she sick? why then be sure,
She invites thee to the cure;
Does she cross thy suit with No?
Tush, she loves to hear the woo;
Does she call the faith of man
In question? Nay, 'uds-foot, she loves thee than;
And if e're she make a blot.
She Is lost, if that thou hit'st her not.
He that after ten denials,
Dares attempt no farther trials,
Has no warrant to acquire
The Dainties of his Chaste desire.
Philip Sidney.

Sir Francis Walsingham' s ANATOMIZING Of Honesty, Ambition, and Fortitude.


Written in the year 1590.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1672.

Sir Francis Walsinghams ANATOMIZING Of Honesty, Ambition, and Fortitude.

WHat it is directly that I will write, I know not: For, as my thoughts have
never dwelt long upon one thing; and so my Mind has been filled with the
Imagination of things of a different nature: So there is a necessity that this
Offspring of so un-composed a Parent must be mishaped, answerable to the
Original from whence it is derived. Somewhat I am resolved to write, of some
Virtues, and some Vi^es, and some indifferent things. For, knowing that a Man's
life is a perpetual Action, which every moment is under one of these three
heads; my Imaginations have ever chiefly tended to find cut the Natures of
these things, that I might, (as much as my Frailty (the inseparable companion
of Man's nature) would give me leave) wear out this Garment of my Body, with as
little Inconvenience to my Soul as I could, and play this Game of Conversation
(in which every one (as long as he lives) makes one) with the reputation of a
fair Gamester, rather than of a cunning one.

And first I will write of Honesty; not in its general sense (in which it
comprehends all Moral Virtues) but in that particular in which (according to
our phrase) it denominates an Honest man.

Honesty is a quiet passing over the days of a man's life, without doing Injury
to another man.

There is required in an Honest man, not so much to do every thing as he would
be done unto, as to forbear any thing that he would not be content to suffer;
For the Essence of Honesty consists in forbearing to do ill: And to good Acts
is a proper Passion, and no Essential part of Honesty. As Chastity is the
Honesty of Women, so Honesty is the Chastity of Man. Either of them once
impaired is irrecoverable. For a Woman that has lost her Maidenhead, may as
easily recover it, as a Man that has once taken liberty of being a Knave can
be restored to the title of an Honest Man. For Honesty does not consist in the
doing of one, or one thousand Acts never so well; but in spinning on the
delicate Threads of Life, though not exceeding Fine, yet free from Bracks, and
Stains. We do not call him an Honest man, but a Wotthy man, that does brave
eminent Acts: But we give him the title of an Honest man, of whom no man can
truly report any ill.

The most eminent part of Honesty is Truth: not in Words (though that be
necessarily required) but in the Course of his Life; in his Profession of
Friendship; in his Promise of Rewards and Benefits to those that depend upon
him; and grateful acknowledging those good turns that he receives from any man.

The greatest Opposite to Honesty is Falsehood; and as that is commonly waited
upon with Cunning and Dissimulation, so is Honesty with Discretion and
Assurance.

It is true, that Custom makes some apparently false; some through Impudence,
and too much use; and other some for want of Discretion, which if they had had,
should have been employed in Covering it. And there be some, in whom (though it
be impossible Honesty should be a Fault in Society) their indiscreet managing
of it, makes it holden for a thing that is merely a Vice, a wonderful
troublesome Companion.

An Honest man is as near an Aptitude to become a Friend, as Gold is to become
Coin: he will melt with good Offices well done, and will easily take the
stamp of true Friendship; and having once taken it, though it may be bended
and bruised, yet still will keep his stamp clean without Rust or Canker, and is
not ashamed to be enclosed in it, but is contented to have all his glory seen
through it only.

It is of it self a Competent Estate of Virtue, able to supply all necessary
parts of it to a Man's own particular, and a Man that is born to it, may raise
himself to an eminency in all Virtues; though of it self it will not furnish a
Man with the abilities of doing any glorious thing. It is pity that Honesty
should be abstracted from the luster of all other Virtues. But if there be such
an Honesty, the fittest Seat for it is the Country, where there will be little
need of any greater Ability, and it will be least subject to Corruption. And
therefore, since it is the Foundation upon which a man may build that part of
his life which respects Conversation, he that builds upon it (let his actions
be never so mean) shall be sure of a good, though not of a great Reputation;
whereas letting it perish, let the rest of the Building of his life be never so
eminent, it will serve but to make the ruin of his good Name more notorious.

Of Ambition.
LOve, Honor, and Praise are the greatest Blessings of this world: All other
Contents reflect primarily upon the Body: and please the Soul only because
they please some one or more Senses. But those therefore only delight the
Senses, because the Soul by discourse was first pleased with them. For in it
self there is more Music in a railing Song, thrust upon a good Air, than in
the confused Applause of the multitude. But because the Soul, by Discourse,
finds this Clamor to be an argument of the estimation which those that so
Commend it have of it, it likes it self better, and rejoices the more init
self, because it sees other men value it. For there are two ways of proving;
the one by Reason, and the other by Witness; but the more excellent Proof is
that of Reason: For he that can by Reason prove any thing to me makes his
knowledge mine, because by the same Reason I am able to prove it to another:
But if 20. men should swear to me they saw such a thing, which before I did not
believe; it is true, I should alter mine opinion, not because there appeared
any greater likelihood of the thing; but because it was unlikely that so many
men should lie: And if I should go about to make others of the fame opinion, I
could not do it, by telling them I knew it, or I saw it; but all I could say,
were, I did believe it; because such and such men told me they saw it. So in
the Comfort a man takes of himself (which grows out of the consideration of how
much it self deserves to be beloved) a virtuous wise fellow will take enough
Comfort and Joy in himself (though by Misfortune he is troubled to carry about
with him the worlds Ill Opinion) by discoursing that he is free from those
Slanders that are laid upon him, and that he has those Sufficiencies and
Venues which others deny. And on the contrary side, he without deserving it
(having the good Fortune to be esteemed and honored) will easily be drawn to
have a good Opinion of himself; as, out of Modesty, submitting his own Reason
to the testimony of many witnesses.

Ambition in it self is no Fault; but the most natural Commendation of the
Soul, as Beauty is of the Body: It is in Men, as Beauty is in Women. For, as
to be naturally exceeding handsome, is the greatest Commendation of that Sex,
and that for which they most desire to be Commended; so that Ambition by which
Men desire Honor the natural way (which consists in doing honorable and good
Acts) is the root of the most perfect Commendation that a Moral Man is capable
of.

Those only offend in their Ambition, who out of the earthliness of their
minds dare not aspire to that true Honor which is the estimation of a man,
being as it were the Temple wherein Virtue is inshrin'd; And therefore settle
their minds only upon attaining Titles and Power; which at the first were, or
at least should be the Mark whereby to distinguish men according to the Rate of
their Virtues and sufficiencies; but are now only Arguments of a Man's good
Fortune, and effects of the Princes favor.

It is true that Power is a brave addition to a worthy Man; but a Fool, or a
Knave that is powerful, has (according to the degree of his Power) just that
advantage of a virtuous prudent man, that Adam, before he fell, had of the
Angels that stood; an Ability to do more ill.

As for Titles (which at first were the marks of Power; and the Rewards of
Virtue) they are now (according to their name) but like the Titles of Books,
which (for the most part) the more glorious things they promise, let a Man
narrowly peruse them over, the less substance he shall find in them. And the
wooden Lord is like the Logg that Jupiter gave the Frogs to be their King; it
makes a great noise; it prepares an expectation of great matters, but when they
once perceived it unactive, and senlesly lying still, the wiser sort of Frogs
began to despise it, and (in fine) every young Frogling presumed to leap up and
down upon it.

Some few there are, who (least the species of our ancient worthy Lords should
be lost) do preserve in themselves the will and desire, since they want the
means, to do brave and worthy Acts. And therefore I say, let a Man by doing
worthy Acts deserve honor, and though he do not attain it, yet he is much a
happier man than he that gets it without desert. For such a man is before hand
with Reputation; and the world still owes him that honor with his deserts cry
for, and it has not paid; Whereas that man that has a great Reputation,
without deserving it, is behind-hand with the world; and his honor is but
lent, not paid; And when the world comes to take account of its Applause, and
finds his Title of Merit (by which he pretends to it) weak and broken, it will
recall it is Approbation, and leave him by so much the more a notorious Bankrupt
in his good Name, by how much the Estimation of his Wealth that way was the
greater.

Of Fortitude.
FOr a Man to be completely happy there is required the Perfection of all
Moral Virtues; And yet this is not enough; For, Virtues do rather banish
Misfortunes, and but show us Joy, than establish Felicity: Which is not only
an utter Alienation from all Affliction, but an absolute Fullness of Joy. And
since the Soul of Man is infinitely more excellent than any thing else it can
meet withal in this World, nothing upon Earth can satisfy it, but in the
enjoying of the greatest Abundance of all delights that the most nimble witted
Man can frame to himself; For that his Soul will still have a further Desire,
as unsatisfied with that it enjoyes. (Therefore the Perfection of Happiness
consists in the Love of God; which is only able to fill up all the Corners of
the Soul with most perfect Joy; and consequently to fix all its desires upon
those Celestial Joys that shall never be taken from it. But this, as it cannot
be obtained by Discourse, but by unfeigned Prayer, and the Assistance and
Illumination of Gods Grace; So is it not my purpose to prick at it. And for
that part of Felicity which is attained to by moral Virtue, I find that every
Virtue gives a Man Perfection in some kind, and a degree of Felicity too: viz.

Honesty, gives a Man a good Report;

Justice, Estimation and Authority;

Prudence, Respect and Confidence;

Courtesy, and Liberality, Affection, and a kind of Dominion over other Men.

Temperance, Healthy.

Fortitude, a quiet Mind, not to be moved by any Adversity, and a Confidence
not to be Circumvented by any danger.

So that all other Virtues give a Man but an outward Happiness, as receiving
their Reward from others; only Temperance does pretend to make the Body a
Stranger to Pain, both in taking from it the Occasion of Diseases, and making
the outward Inconveniences of Want, as Hunger and Cold, if not delightful, at
least suffareble.

Fr. Walsingham.

A Brief DISCOURSE Concerning the Power of the PEERS AND COMMONS OF PARLIAMENT
In point of JUDICATURE.

Written by Sir Robert Cotton, at the request of a Peer of this REALM.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1672.

A Brief DISCOURSE Concerning the POWER Of the PEERS, etc.
SIR, To give you as short an account of your desire as I can, I must crave
leave, to lay you, as a ground, the frame or first model of this State.

When, after the Period of the Saxon time Harold had lifted himself into the
Royal Seat, the great Men, to whom but lately he was no more than equal either
in fortune or power, disdaining this Act of Arrogance, called in William, then
Duke of Normandy, a Prince more active than any in these Western Parts, and
renowned for many Victories he had fortunately achieved against the French
King, then the most potent Monarch of Europe.

This Duke led along with him to this work of Glory, many of the younger Sons
of the best Families of Normandy, Picardy, and Flanders, who as Undertakers,
accompanied the Undertaking of this fortunate Man. The Usurper slain, and the
Crown by War gained; To secure Certain to his Posterity what he had so suddenly
gotten, he shared out his purchase, retaining in each County a portion to
support the Dignity Sovereign, which was styled Domenia Regni, now the ancient
Demeans; And assigning to others his Adventurers such portions as suited to
their quality and expense, retaining to himself dependency of their personal
service (except such Lands as in free Alms, were the portion of the Church)
these were styled Barons Regis, the Kings immediate Freeholders; for the word
Baro imported then no more.

As the King to these, so these to their followers sub-divided part of their
shares into Knights Fees; and their Tenants were called Barons Comites, or the
like; for we find, as the Kings write in their Writs, Baronibus suis and
Francois and Anglois; the Sovereigns Gifts, for the most part, extending to
whole Counties or Hundreds, an Earl being Lord of the one, and a Baron of the
inferior Donations to Lords of Townships or Manors. AS thus the Land, so was
all course of Judicature divided; even from the meanest to the highest portion,
each several had his Court of Law, preserving still the manner of our Ancestors
the Saxons, who jura per pagos reddebant; and these are still termed Court
Barons, or the Freeholders Court, twelve usually in number, who with the Them
or chief Lord were Judges. The Hundred was next; where the Hundredus or
Aldermanus, Lord of the Hundred, with the chief Lords of each Township within
their limits judged.

Gods People observed this form in the public, Centuriones and Decani
judicabant plebem onni tempore. The County or generale placitum was the next;
This was, so to supply the defect, or remedy the Corruption of the Inferior,
Vbi Curiae Dominarum probantur defecisse, pertinent ad Vicecomitem
Provinciarum. The Judges here were Comitos, Vicecomites, and Barons Comitatus
qui liberas in eo terras h^bent.

The last and supreme, and proper to our question, was Gener ale Placitum apud
London, Vniversalis Synodus, in Charters of the Conqueror, Capitalis Curia, by
Glanvile. Lib. Ep. Glanvile.
Magnum and Commune consilium coram Rege and Magnatibus suis. In the Rolls of
Hen. the third, it is not stative, but summoned by Proclamation; Edicitur
generale placitum apud London, says the Book of Abingdon; whither episcopi,
Duces, Principes, Satrapae, Rectores, and Causidici ex omni part confluxerunt
ad istan Curiam, says Glanville, Causes were referred propter aliquam
dubitationem quae emergit in Conitatu, cum Comitatus nescit dijudicare. Thus
did Ethelweld Bishop of Winton transfer his Suit against Leoftine from the
County, ^d generale placitum, E^b Sancti Etheldredi Epise.
in the time of King Ethildred: Queen Edgin against Goda from the County
appealed to King Etheldred at London, Congregatis principibus and sapientibus
Aogliae. A Suit between the Bishops of Winton and Durham, in the time of Saint
Edward, Coram Episcopis and Principibus Regni in praesfentia Regis, ventilata
and finita. In the 10. year of the Conqueror, Episcopi, Comites, and Barons
Regia potestate e diversis Provinciis ad universalem Synodum pro causis
audiendis and tractandis convocati, says the Book of Westminster, and this
continued all along in the succeeding Kings Reigns until toward the end of
Henry the third.

As this great Court or Council consisting of the King and Barons, ruled the
great affairs of State, and controlled all inferior Courts, so were there
certain Officers, whose transcendent power seemed to be set to bound in the
execution of Princes Wills; as the Steward, Constable, and Marshal, fixed upon
Families in Fee for many Ages: They as Tribunes of the People, or Ephori
amongst the Athenians, grown by an unmannerly Carriage, fearful to Monarchy,
fell at the Feet and mercy of the King, when the daring Earl of Leicester was
slain at Eversham. This Chance, and the dear experience Henry the third himself
had made at the Parliament at Oxford in the 40. year of his Reign, and the
memory of the many streights his Father was driven unto, especially at
Runnymead near Stanes, brought this King wisely to begin what his Successors
fortunately finished, in lessening the strength and power of his great Lords.
And this was wrought by searching into the Regality they had usurped over their
peculiar Sovereigns (whereby they were (as the Book at St. Albans terms
them) Quot Domini tot Tyranni) and by weakening that hand of power which they
carried in the Parliaments, by commanding the service of many Knights,
Citizens, and Burgesses to that great Council. Now began the frequent sending
of Writs to the Commons, their assents not only used in Money, Charge, and
making Laws (for before all Ordinances passed by the King and Peers) but their
consent in Judgments of all natures, whether Civil or Criminal. In proof
whereof I will produce some few succeeding Presidents out of Record.

When Adomar that proud Prelate of Winchester, Eliber Sancti Albans fol. 20^
Anno 44, ^. 3.
the Kings half Brother, had grieved the State with his daring power, he was
exised by joint sentence of the King, the Lords, and Commons; and this
appears expressly by the Letter sent by Pope Alexander the fourth
expostulating a revocation of him from Banishment, because he was a Churchman,
and so not subject to Lay Censures. In this, the Answer is, Si Dominus Rex and
Regni majores hoc vellent, meaning his revocation, Communitas tamen ipsius
ingressum in Angliam jam nullatenus sustineret. The Peers subsign this Answer
with their names, and Petrus de Montford vice totius Communitatis, as Speaker
or Proctor of the Commons; For by this style Sir J. Tiptoft Prolocutor
affirms under his Arms the Deed of entaile of the Crown by King Henry 4.
Ch^rtaorig. sub^i,ill Ann. 8. H. 4. apud Rob. Cotton
in the 8. year of his Reign, for all the Commons.

The Banishment of the two Spencers in 15. E. 2. Praelati Comites and Barons
and les autres Peers de la terre and Commons de Roialme, Rot. Parl. am.o 15
E.2.
give Consent and Sentence to the Revocation and Reversement of the former
Sentence; the Lords and Commons accord, Rot Parl.anno 16. E.2.
and so it is expressed in the Roll.

In the first of Edward the third, Rot. Parlanno 1. E. 3. n. 11.
when Elizabeth the Widow of Sir John de Burgo Complained in Parliament, that
Hugh Spencer the younger, Robert Baldock, and William Cliffe his Instruments,
had by duress forced her to make a writing to the King, whereby she was
dispoiled of all her inheritance, Sentence was given for her in these words.
Pur ceo que avis est al Evesques Counts and Barons and autres Grandes and a
tout Cominalte de la terre, que le dit escript est fait contre ley, and tout
manner de raison si fuist le dit escript per agard delparliam. dampue elloques
al livre ala dit Eliz.

In the 4th. of Edward 3. it appears by a Letter to the Pope, that to the
Sentence given against the Earl of Kent, the Commons were parties as well as
the Lords and Peers; for, the King directed their proceedings in these words;
Comitibus, Magnatibus, Baronibus, and aliis de Communitate dicti Regni as
Parliamentum illud congregates iu^unximus, ut super his discernerent and
judicarent quod ratione and justitiae conveniret, habere prae oculis, solum
Deum qui cum concordi and unaenimi sementia tanquam reum criminis laesoe
majestatis morti abjudicarent ejus sententia, etc.

When in the 50th. Parl. Anno (...) Ed: 3.
of E. 3. the Lords had pronounced the Sentence against Richard Lions.
otherwise than the Commons agreed; they appealed to the King, and had redress,
and the Sentence entered to their desires.

When in the first year of R. 2. Parl. 1. R. 2. n. 38, 39.
William Weston, and John Jennings were arraigned in Parliament, for
surrendering certain Forts of the Kings, the Commons were parties to the
Sentence against them given, as appears by a Memorandum annexed to that
Record.

In I H. 4. although the Commons refer by protestation, Parl. 1. H. 4.
the pronouncing the sentence of deposition against King Richard the Second,
unto the Lords, yet are they equally interessed in it, as appears by the
Record, for there are made Proctors or Commissioners for the whole Parliament,
one Bishop, one Earl, one Abbot, one Barronet, and Two Knights, Gray and
Erpingham, for the Commons; and to infer, that because the Lords pronounced the
sentence the point of Judgment should be only theirs, were as absurd, as to
conclude that no authority was left in any other Commissioner of Oyer and
Terminer than in the person of that man solely that speaks the Sentence.

In the Second of Hen. Ho^. Parl. An. ^. H. 5.
the 5th the Petitions of the Commons imports no less than a Right they had
to act and assent to all things in Parliament; and so it is Answered by the
King. And had not the Journal Roll of the Higher House been left* to the sole
entry of the Clerk of the upper house, who, either out of neglect to observe
due form, or out of purpose to obscure the Commons right, and to flatter the
power of those he immediately served, there would have bin frequent examples of
all times to clear this doubt, and to preserve a just Interest to the
Commonwealth. And how conveniently it suits with Monarchy to maintain this
form, lest others of that well-framed body, knit tinder one head, should swell
too great and monstrous, it may be easily thought. For, Monarchy again may
sooner groan under the weight of an Aristocracy, as it once did, then under a
Democracy, which it never yet either felt or feared.

R: C: B.

FINIS.

