THE TOMBSTONE, AND A RARE SIGHT.

LONDON, Printed by Tho: Roycroft, for Edw: Dod, and Nath: Ekins, and are to be
sold at the Gunn in Ivy Lane, 1653.

THE TOMBSTONE, OR, A broken and imperfect Monument, of that Worthy Man (who
was just and perfect in his Generations;) Mr. JOHN CARTER, Pastor first of
Bramford, and last of Belsted in SVFFOLK.

Erected above eighteen years after his decease:

BY His unworthy Son JOHN CARTER, Preacher of the Gospel, and as yet
sojourning in the City of NORWICH.

PROVE. 10. 7. The memory of the Just shall be blessed.

London, Printed in the Year, 1653.

HERE under this stone lies hid a Rich treasure, The Precious Dust of that
holy man, that burning, and shining Light Mr John Carter: first Pastor of
Bramford, and afterward of Belsted in Suff: With Esther, his Faithful
Consort, both of them Waiting for a blessed Resurrection.

2 Timothy 4. 7. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have
kept the Faith.

8. Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, which the
Lord, the righteous Judge shall give me at that day: and not to me only; but
unto them also that love his appearing.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, And that both by the first, and also by the second
Birth: To the truly Noble, Worthy, and Religious Lady, the Lady FRANCES
HOBARTE.
Madam,
ATYS, the Son of Croesus the Rich King, was dumb in his Childhood, and so
continued many years: he was never heard to speak a word, till Cyrus entered
Sardis, and then, the Child seeing a common Soldier running upon his Father
with a drawn sword to kill him, brake forth into violent and articulate speech,
O man, kill not Croesus! So that he, who till that time lived mute to himself,
then became a clear speaker for the saving of his Father.

This, Madam! in a sense, is my very case. I had thought to have been mute in
this kind for ever, and never to have spoken again by my Pen in Print. Though
many, and amongst the rest, even your Honor have endeavored often to persuade
me to make some poor pieces of mine public: But bring sensible of mine own
weakness, I stood out, and was resolved forever to forbear. For Iam a Child,
and cannot speak; at least, not with that skill, and energy that the
Printing-presse calls for: Yet now at last seeing my precious Father his name
in hazard (not of being stained, its not capable of that; Nor of being utterly
forgotten, for his name is written in the Book of Life, with Golden letters,
and his praise shall be for ever in the Gospel; but that his remembrance amongst
men (after this Generation) might have been cut off by devouring time; to save
the memory of my Father alive, I break silence.

I annex to his life, a piece of mine own. The reason why I do so, and why I
put forth this Sermon rather then any other, it is not for any worth that I
apprehend in it, but because I had a special calling to it: So soon as it was
preached, the Major with the Aldermen, and some Ministers came to me, and with
great earnestness, desired me to print the Sermon, that so they might again
see what they had already heard. I did not yield to them at that time. But now
seeing that God has within these fow days stirred up my Spirit, to do
something whereby I might honor my Father, before I go hence to meet him in
another, and a better Country, I remembered my Friends request, and did resolve
to answer their desires, according to my poor ability, though some few years
after.

Why I presume to tender this homely piece to your Honor, I shall humbly give a
short account; Partly for my Fathers sake. Joseph, to honor his good old
Father Jacob, brought him, and set him before the King. Give me leave also,
Elect Lady! to bring my Reverend Father into your Honors presence: It will be
some grace to him on Earth; and had your Ladyship known him, you would have
honored him.

Also, because the Subject is so suitable to your Honor all the way. Your
Ladyship loves the sweet perfume of the dead Saints. And as for the Lion, it is
the Ensign of Nobility, and Magnanimity; and your Honor bears the Lion in your
own Coat of Arms. But as for the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, you bear him in
your heart, and embrace him with the Arms of your precious faith. My Nail, and
Wheel, I presented to your Ladyship out of duty and gratitude only. The
Subject of those worthless papers, did not so aptly close with your Honors
condition; they did more immediately concern the Magistracy. But in this work
of mine, my whole design is to exalt the Lord Jesus Christ; I set him up
before you as an Ensign; which I know your Honor will with all cheerfulness
follow.

Yet further, your Honor cannot be ignorant of the frame of my spirit that as
the blessed Apostle Paul said concerning his Corinthians, so I of your
Ladyship. Madam! you are in my heart; Christ lives in your Honor, and where so
much of Christ appears, who can but give Honor?

Finally, As Saint Paul writ to Philemon, Thou owe to me even thine own
self; In a like phrase I may speak to your Ladyship; Iowe even mine ownself
to your Honor, which I would have acknowledged to the whole world, and made it
out in some particulars; but that I fear (such is your humility and goodness)
your Ladyship would not have resented it well. Accept, I beseech your Honor!
this poor Present, with the same Candor it is offered. And be assured, Madam!
that I am,

As Your Honors humble Servant, So Your Ladyships faithful, and constant
Orator at the Throne of Grace: And So shall continue, whilst he has a heart,
or a tongue to pray, JOHN CARTER.

TO ALL HIS WEL-BELOVED NEPHEWS, AND NIECES: Even all the Remnant that are yet
surviving of his Fathers House.
WHen Saint Paul called to remembrance the unfeigned faith that dwelt in the
Grandmother Lois first: He was easily persuaded that the same dwelt in
Timothy the Grandchild also. So truly, when I consider the unfeigned faith
and holiness, that dwelt first in your good aged Grandfather, and
Grandmother; I cannot but conceive some hope, that there is some measure of
the same faith, and sanctity even in you.

Now to the end that any of you, who (being of the elder sort) have received
any Godly Principles, immediately from your Grandfather and Grandmother, when
they were amongst the living, That you, I say, may the better retain those
godly Instructions to the end; And that you may teach them to your Children,
and Childrens. Children, I do here send you your Reverend, and Pious
Grandfather, in some measure revived.

It is, I confess, but an imperfect and blind delineation of so deserving, and
perfect a man. Consuming time has worn off much of his orient luster: yet
there is so much remaining, as has a great deal of beauty in it, enough to
refresh your memories. Here, take him for your pattern; Be ye followers of
God, of Christ, and of your good Grandfather also as dear Children, and tread
in his steps.

It was the saying of a learned and godly Divine unto his children, when he was
at the point of death. How will you look me in the face, before the dreadful
Tribunal of Jesus Christ, if any of you appear before me then, in an
unregenerate condition? How will any of you look your Venerable Grandfather in
the face at that terrible day; If you be found in any Error, Heresy, Schism,
or inordinate walking, as becomes not the Gospel of Jesus Christ? It is our
great honor that we had such a holy root, such a Father of our Family: It will
be our greatest shame, a blot never to be wiped out, if any of us shall
degenerate. This was the Brand and Ignominy of multitudes of the Jews; they
boasted, and said, We have Abraham to our Father: but Christ said to them
again, Ye are of your Father the Devil, for the lust of your Father ye will
do. These things I write, not that I suspect you, much les condemn you, (Of
many of you I am confident) but in tenderness of love to warn you, and excite
you to walk accurately. The blessing of my Fathers God be upon you al.

Accept in good part this poor remembrance, from

Your Affectionate Uncle, JOHN CARTER.

To his wel-beloved Countrymen, the Inhabitants of BRAMFORD, AND BELSTED in
Suffolk.
EVen Nature teaches us Nescio qua natale solum dulcedinecunctos ducit, and
immemores no^ sinit esse sui.
to love dearly the Land of our Nativity. I cannot but wish well to that
place, and people where I drew my first breath; viz. Bramford: as also to that
place, and people where my good Father finished his course, and breathed his
last: viz. Belsted. To both those places, and peoples I send Salutations. But
that is not my main design.

Brethren! My hearts desire, and prayer to God for you, is, that you may be
saved. The means of Salvation you enjoyed a long time, under the Ministry of
yout Ancient Pastor, my dear Father, Mr. John Carter. He appeared to you all
that while, as that bright Star, Matthew. 2. By his light, and motion, by his
Doctrine, and Conversation, he guided you to Christ. He so long as he was in
his Tabernacle of Clay, was not negligent to put you always in remembrance of
those things which concern your everlasting peace. That which I drive at, is,
Now that he has put off his Tabernacle, now in his stead to admonish you.
Remember therefore Revel. 3. 3.
how you have received, and heard, and hold fast, and repent. Remember how he
was an example 1 Timothy 4. 12.
of Beleivers, in word, in conversation, in Charity, in Spirit, in faith, in
purity. Consider, how shall you escape, if you neglect so great Salvation: Will
it not be more tolerable for the Land of Sodom, in the day of Judgment then for
you? Now for the eternal good of your Souls, here I send nou your old Pastor
again. I confess his livelie voice, that cannot be recalled, but his life and
example I endeavor to revive again. The rich man in Luke 16. 30.
Hell spoke thus; Father Abraham! If one were sent to my Fathers house, from the
dead, they would repent. I commend unto you your ancient spiritual Father, in
some sort raised from the dead. Now look to your faith, look to your
repentance, look to your holy walking; else his Ministry will rise up in
judgment against you. For he being dead, yet speaks. O that you would now so
conform to his Doctrine, and practice, that when he, and you shall stand
together at the last day, before the great Shepherd of the Sheep: He that had
the rule over you, might be able to say with joy; Lord here I am, and the
Children which thou have given me.

This is, and shall be the prayer of him that is

Your wel-wishing Friend, and Countryman, JOHN CARTER.

TO HIS REVEREND BROTHER, AND Fellow Laborer in the Lords Vineyard, Mr. Samuel
Clark, Pastor of Bennet Fink, LONDON.
Worthy SIR,
THAT which Naomi spoke to Ruth concerning Boaz; He has not left off his
kindness to the living, and to the dead: It is fully verified of your self;
you cease not to show kindness to the living, and to the dead. To the living;
by your preaching and Ministry, you make Saints daily. To the dead Saints you
show kindness, by perpetuating their Names, to their honors, and the good of
many. And herein you are a great gainer; you shine your self, by making others
shine. Amongst the rest of those that honor you, I am one, though I never saw
your face, otherwise then in the Frontispice of your learned Books.

In your first part of the marrow of Ecclesiastical History, We had
information, that you did resolve to add a second part; and to put in the Lives
of such godly Divines, and others, as were eminent in these latter times, if
you were furnished with faithful information. Hereupon, diverse did set upon me
with very great importunity, to write the life of my dear Father, and to send
it up to you. Truly, Worthy Sir! I was desirous of the thing, but durst not
undertake the work: I was sensible of mine own weakness; and also that his
sayings, and doings had so far slipped the memories of this Generation, that I
should have brought to light such an imperfect thing, as rather would have been
a blemish to so eminent a Saint, then an honor. Hereupon, I laid all thoughts
aside of meddling, or attempting such a thing. I knew that he is glorious in
heaven, and on the Earth too, so far as his name is spread.

Now, good Sir! let me be bold to give you a short account of my self. Some
few days since, I went about to make a new Diary for my self. I was desirous
in the first place, to set down some passages of my Father, for mine own
satisfaction, and use. I began so; and before I was aware, it amounted to so
much, as I thought better that published, then nothing at all: and at the last
my Spirit grew restless; I could not satisfy my self, till I had digested it
into some order, and made it public. And now, Sir, here it is; I present it to
your judicious view: accept it in good part from a mere stranger. Because it
was so short, therefore I joined it to a weak and unworthy piece of mine own,
to make it a Book.

My humble request to you, worthy Sir, is this, that (though I slipped the last
opportunity, yet) if you shall set forth any more lives; or if you shall have a
new Impression of any of the former: that you would extract so much of my
precious Fathers life, as you shall judge fit, and place it where you please, in
your Ecclesiastical History. Your Monuments will be lasting in after ages,
when my poor Pamphlet will be worn out with time. Pardon my boldness: The
Lord strengthen out your days, for the good of his Church, and the honor of
his Saints.

Your most observant Friend, and Brother, that truly honors you, JOHN
CARTER.

THE LIFE OF Mr. JOHN CARTER, Pastor of Bramford in Suffolk.
MAster John Carter, my dear Father of blessed memory, and now a glorious
Saint in Heaven, was borne at Wickham in Kent near Canterbury, about the year
of our Lord 1554.

He was descended but of mean Parents, (yet religious, and of good repute) not
able to maintain him, at the University, wholly at their own charge. One Mr.
Rose, a rich man in Canterbury (as my Father has told me) Surely, taking
notice of his piety, in those his tender years, and of his studiousnesse, and
proficiency in all Learning, beyond the pitch of a Grammar Scholar, and finding
him hopeful, likely to prove a precious instrument in the Church of Christ;
took him into his care, and disbursed monyes from time to time (as was
needful) for his maintenance in Cambridge. He was of Clare Hall: Pupil to
Doctor Byng the famous Civilian, Master of that House: (whose Son, Doctor
Robert Byng, a learned and worthy Gentleman, was my Tutor afterward in the
same College) when he was first admitted into the College, he was presently
taken notice of, to be of singular learning, and ripeness for one of his
years. He had, with the rest of his year, a Theme given him to make. The
Thesis was, Frugalitas virtutum maxima.

When the young Scholars brought in their Themes, the Lecturer took them, and
read them; and when he came to Carters Theme: he stood a little at a stand: at
last, says he before them all: here is the best Theme that I ever read: and
gave him money, commended, and encouraged him: and always after had a careful
eye over him: and sought opportunities to do him good.

After my Father had taken his degrees, Bachelor, and Master of Arts: His
Tutor Doctor Byng (out of his singular love to him, and respect to his
learning, and piety) gave him a Chamber in his own lodgings, where he continued
a year or two, which made much to the completing of him for the work of the
Ministry. And all that while he continued a gremiall in the bosom, and Lap of
his Mother the University, he had constant meetings with diverse of his famous
contemporarys, and that weekly: Doctor Chaderton, Doctor Andrews (afterward a
Prelate) Master Culverwell, Master Knewstubs, etc. and diverse others, whom God
raised up, and fitted to send forth into his Harvest, to gather his Corn, then
ripe for the Sickle, into his Barn. At their meetings they had constant
exercises. They prayed together: they bent themselves to the study of the
Scriptures: one was for the original Tongues, another task was the
Grammatical interpretations; another for the Logical Analyze: another for the
true sense, and meaning: another to gather Doctrines. Thus led they their
several employments; till at last, they went out like Apollos, eloquent men,
and mighty in the Scriptures. And the Lord was with them. They brought in a
great Harvest into God's Barn.

He would not run before he was sent: he would not enter upon the exercise of
the holy work of the Ministry, till he had, not only an inward calling, but
also an outward: viz. an assignation, approbation, and solemn admission, by
the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. When he was ordained, the Bishop
(who in those days was primus Presbyter, or praeses) going about to oppose
him: asked him this question: Have you read the Bible through? Yes, said he: I
have read the old Testament twice through in the Hebrew: and the New Testament
often through in the Greek: and if you please to examine me, in any particular
place, I shall endeavonr to give you an account. Nay, said the Bishop, if it be
so, I shall need to say no more to you. Some words of Commendation, and
encouragement he gave him. This passage I had from my Fathers own mouth.

An. 1583. The Vicaridge of Bramford in Suffolk near Ipswich fell void. Mr. Rose
of Canterbury, before mentioned, procured the presentation of it for my Father,
from the Dean, and Chapter of Canterbury. The salary was only twenty Marks per
Annum at first: afterward the Church raised it to twenty pounds per Annum, and
that was the most that ever he had there.

He accepted of it: and being settled in it, he set himself to do the work of
Christ faithfully, with all his might, as a workman that needs not to be
ashamed.

Every Lord's day he preached twice very powerfully, and Catechized the younger
sort. He preached a Lecture every Thurseday; to which multitudes from Ipswich
and other adjacent places did resort. And God gave such success to his
Ministry, that from time to time, many were gathered in to Jesus Christ. There
are many precious Christians that remain unto this day, that acknowledge their
conversion was by Mr. Carter's Ministry.

Before Sermon he prayed very short: and ever in the same words. After Sermon
he was large, and full, and expressed himself with great variety, and
fervency: and always closed with Christ's Prayer.

He was very diligent in visiting the sick: especially the poor. He never went
to the house of a poor creature, but he left a Purse-Almes, as well as a
spiritual Alms of good Heavenly advice, and Prayer. No poor body ever came
to his door that went away empty. And this my dear Mother would see to as
carefully as himself.

The Milk of his Cows he gave to the poor of the Town every Saturday throughout
the whole year. I am confident he gave more to the poor every year, then the
Revenue of his slender Vicaridge came to in all.

Yet God so blessed him, that whilst he was in Bramford, he quickly paid Mr.
Rose of Canterbury, all the money he laid out toward his education in
Cambridge: and before he left Bramford, he purchased about twenty pounds per
Annum. God's blessing only makes rich.

He brought up both my elder and only Brother, and my self, at the University
in a good fashion: and for my self, I must acknowledge, beyond my desert, or
rank.

He was Orthodox and sound in his judgment: an able and resolved Champion
against all manner of Popery and Arminianisme; as also against Anabaptisme, and
Brownisme, that then did begin to peep, and infest the Church: and to tear the
Seamles Coat of Christ.

He was always A Nonconformist, One of the good old Puritans of England. He
never swallowed any of the Praelaticall Ceremonies against his Conscience. He
was often in trouble by the Bishops; but God ever raised him up friends that
brought him off. He was of a peaceable Spirit; and never censured any that were
conformable, if he judged them conscientious, and saw any thing of God in them.

At his first coming to Bramford he saw the travel of his Soul: he had a
plentiful Harvest! many Souls were added to the Church daily by his powerful
Ministry, and holy life.

But after many years the people were glutted with Manna, and began to loath
it; there grew a great decay in their first love.

About the year 1615. or something before, there arose up a Generation of
malignant men, haters of a faithful, and painful Ministry, and of the power
of Godliness.

These were of the Gentry, and chief of the Parish: these rose up against my
Reverend Father, pressed him to conformity, complained of him to the Bishop,
and threatened that they would make him conformable, or else out him.

At this very juncture of time, the Rectory of little Belsted fell to be void:
a very small Village, some three miles from Ipswich, a solitary place: the
means better then Bramford: yet short of a competency for such an eminent
pillar of the Church; some 50, or at most 60 pounds per Annum.

The Patron Mr. Blosse became a Suitor to my Father to accept of it. He refused
it again, and again. His resolution was to endure persecution at Bramford, to
grapple with all difficulties, and dye there, rather then to remove. But the
providence of God overruled him. At Bramford he saw he must be outed: Mr.
Blosse would take no denial: he found favor in the eyes of the Bishop; and
was instituted without subscription, or any ceremonies: and then at last, God
taking him by the hand, and pulling him whether he would or no, he removed from
Bramford (after some 34 years service in the work of the Ministry) to Belsted
Parsonage, where he continued eighteen years, before God caused him to rest
from his Labors. In all that time he discharged his holy Function just as he
did at Bramford; and though his Congregation there were but small, yet he had
many Fish that came to his Nett, from Ipswich, and other adjacent Towns,
destitute of faithful Shepherds: So that his latter Crop in Gods
harvest-field was very considerable.

Little Belsted was a Tusculanum to him; where in his age he had much secret
and sweet Communion with God, in the house, and with Isaac in the fields; a
beginning of that glorious communion he now enjoys with God in the mountains of
Spices.

He being dead, yet speaks; his Works praise him in the gates. From the Press
we have had his learned, and pithy Commentary on the Sermon of Christ in the
Mount: And two short, but substantial, solid, and profitable Catechismes. One
Milk for Children. The other, Winter evenings communication.

His pains in the study of the Revelation were indefatigable. He writ much in
a little room. But these Labors of his never yet saw the light. Many Ministers
that conversed with him privately, did light their Candles at his.

For his carriage and deportment in his Family, it was very religious. He had
the Morning and the Evening Sacrifice; his house was a Church. Twice a day he
had Scripture read, and after the Psalm or Chapter were ended, he would ask
of all his Children and Servants, what they remembered; and whatsoever sentences
they rehearsed, he would speak something to them that tended to edification.
For his habit, and my dear Mothers apparrelling, it was very plain, and
homely; of the old fashion, yet very cleanly and decent; insomuch that all that
came to the house would say, they had seen Adam and Eve, or some of the old
Patriarchs.

And in all his House there was nothing but honest plainness. He was such an
one as Jacob, (...) a plain, sincere, I had almost said, a perfect man: I am
sure a true Nathanael, in whom was no guile.

He never used Plate in his house, but Vessels of Wood, and Earth: Pewter and
Brass were the highest Metals for his utensils. All the days of his
housekeeping he used constantly at his Table a little wooden Salt, which with
age was grown to be of a duskish black, which was much taken notice of by all
comers.

He never feasted, but always had wholesome, full, and liberal diet in the
house. And all fared alike: He, and my Mother, never thought his Children, and
Servants, and poor folks, did eat enough.

The righteous man is merciful to his Beast: he was careful even for the
bruit Creatures, that they should be fed to the full. All his Cattle were like
the first Kine that Pharaoh saw feeding in the Meadow, they were fat-fleshed,
and well-favoured; in so much that I have heard some godly people say merrily,
If they would be a Cow, or a Horse, or a Hogg, or a Dog, they would choose Mr.
Carters house.

He had a sharp wit: and was sweet, mild, and pleasant in his conversation;
yet not any of his most facetious passages, that did not savor of holiness.
His discourse was ever heavenly, and his eyes, almost, ever lifted up to
Heaven. he did not eat, or drink, without praising God with his mouth and
eyes; his whole conversation was in Heaven.

Besides his Family prayers, and duties, he prayed constantly in his Closet,
whenever he went into his study, and before he came out to Dinner or Supper.
He prayed very loud, and mostly very long. For the extension of his voice (I
conjecture) he had a double reason; one, that by his earnest speech he might
quicken up his own heart and devotion: the other, that he might be a pattern
of secret prayer to his Children and Servants. And I never heard him close any
prayer, without the Lords Prayer.

And I know his ground: he judged his own best prayers imperfect, and Christ's
prayer most perfect, and comprehensive.

That you may the better be satisfied concerning his sense and judgment in
this matter, I will here transcribe one passage out of his Printed Commentary
upon the sixth of Matthew, v. 9. Where after he has set forth the excellency
and perfection of Christ's Prayer: he adds, He now directs us to the right
performance (Viz. of the duty of prayer) After this manner pray ye. Or as
Saint Luke sets it down, [When you pray, say] Not binding us strictly to use
these words always, and none other, but to use the matter, manner, and like
affection. But as for them who cannot so well enlarge their suits in other
words, or for those also, who can, and do it, yet remain still unsatisfied, as
not having done it sufficiently (and who can do it sufficiently?) the Lord has
left this most excellent help, to use the very words of this divine prayer, as
the most worthy Servants of God ever have done: And learn we here by the way,
what an absolute necessity lies upon us (which ought to be our greatest glory
and comfort) to pray in these words, or in this manner: For it is the
undispensable Commandment of our Lord Christ. After this manner pray.

Thus far he.

He had a special dexterity in comforting afflicted consciences, resolving
doubts, and answering questions. When some came to him (not long before he left
this Earth) and told him of the tyranny of the Prelates, how it heightened every
day, of their persecuting conscientious Ministers, of their Innovations, and
the Book of Liberry for sports on the Sabbath day, tending to the fearful
profanation thereof; He used these expressions: I have had a longing desire to
see, or hear of the fall of Antichrist: But I check my self. I shall go to
Heaven, and there news will come thick, thick, thick.

When others came to him, and pressed him with importunity, to tell them his
judgment concerning the future state of the Church; saying to him, That he had
traveled much in the Revelation, and they were persuaded, God had revealed
something more then ordinary to him: What do you think? Shall we have Popery
once again, or no? He answered, You shall not need to fear fire and faggot
any more, but such dreadful divisions will be amongst Gods people, and
professors, as will equalize the greatest persecutions.

A man met him near his house, and called to him. O Mr. Carter! what shall I
do? My Wife is entering into her Travel, and I think she will dye with very
fear. Says he to the man, Make haste, run to your Wife, and tell her I am
going to my Closet as fast as I can to pray for her; bid her not faint, but be
of good comfort: The man ran to her, and told her what had passed. Presently
her fears vanished, God gave her strength, she was delivered immediately, and
very safely; and her Husband came back to my Father (as I remember before he
came out of his Closet) to tell him what God had done.

Another time a poor man met him by the way, and cried to him piteously, Mr.
Carter! What shall become of me? I work hard, and fare hard, and yet I cannot
thrive, I continue bare, and know not how in the World to live. He answered
him, You want one thing; I will tell you what you shall do, Work hard, and
fare hard, and Pray hard, and I warrant you thrive.

There dwelled in his Parish a Tanner, a very godly man, and one that had much
communion with my Father: This man, as he was very busy tawing of a Hide with
all his might, not so much as turning aside his head any way; My father coming
by accidentally, came behind him, and merrily gave him a little clap upon the
back; he started, and looking behind him suddenly, blushed. Sir, says he, I
am ashamed you should find me thus. To whom my Father said again, Let Christ
when he comes find me so doing. What? says the man, doing thus? Yes, says my
Father to him, Faithful in the duties of my Calling.

Being at Dinner in Ipswich, at one of the Magistrates houses; diverse other
Ministers being at the Table: One amongst the rest (who had years enough, and
learning enough to have taught him more humility) was very talkative, bragged
of his parts and skill; and made a challenge: He said to them, Here are many
learned men; do any of you propound any question in Divinity or Philosophy, and
I will dispute with you, and resolve and satisfy you fully. All the Table (but
he himself) were silent a while. Then my Father (when he saw no body else
would speak) said to him (calling him by his name) I will go no further then my
Trencher to puzzle you. Here Is a Sole: Now tell me the reason why this Fish,
always living in the salt water, should come out fresh? My Gentleman could not
say any thing to it; and so he was laughed, and shamed out of his vanity.

A certain man came to him, and made his moan: Says he, I have lost the
greatest Friend I had in the World; I had in a manner my livelihood from him.
My Father answered him, When the Fountain dryes up in one place, God will open
it in another.

To me he said once, John! God has always brought water for me out of the
hard flinty rock: Those covetous, hard-hearted men who have been enemies to my
person and Ministry, have many times come in, and given me countenance and
maintenance.

My elder, and only dear Brother (a blessed Instrument in the church of
Christ) being dead: my Father took care of his eldest Son; he sent him to
Cambridge, and walking with him toward the Stable, took his last leave of him
in these words, in Latin, Cave, mi fili, fastum, ignaviam, Antichristum: i. e.
My Son, beware Pride, Sloth, Antichrist.

He would say, a Traveller must have a Swines belly, an Asses back, and a
Merchants purse: Meaning, to fare with all diet, to bear all injuries, and to
provide for vast expenses. We are Pilgrims, and Travelers here, and we must
prepare for Want, Wrongs, and spoiling of our Goods.

It may well be said of him, Semper erat, ubi non erat: His heart was where his
head is, and where now his soul is; in Heaven.

His whole life was nothing else but a Communion day. I have often thought that
old Jacob lived in him. I am sure the spirit of God breathed as much in him, in
his words, writings (holiness dropped from his Pen in every ordinary Letter
that he writ) in his actions, Soliloquies, as in any man of later times. He was
always distilling precious precepts, exhortations, instructions, consolations,
into those with whom he had to converse.

A godly Woman told me once, That she had been servant to a religious
Gentleman, to whose House my Father did often resort; and that she was won to
Christ at first by the heavenly speeches, and sweet principles which dropped
from him, as she was warming his Bed, and waiting upon him in his Chamber.

A man he was most just and exact in his dealings: he put a clause into his
Will for the careful payment of his debts: And when my Sister Eunice, and I
(his Executors) enquired, we could find nothing that he owed, except to the
Smith for shooing of a Horse or two.

In his Library, I found two or three Books (I believe not one of them worth a
groat) upon which he had written. This Book is borrowed of such an one: Let it
be restored; or if the Owner cannot be found, allow something to the poor for
it, and that liberally.

Once being in a journey many miles from home, in changing a piece of Gold at a
Shop, he took a half crown piece in stead of a shilling; neither he nor the
Shopkeeper minded it: As soon as he came home, he found that he had taken a
half crown for a shilling: He could not rest, but next day he took a long
journey on purpose to that Town, to carry back that half crown again.

He was of a sweet, mild, and gentle nature, and of a gracious spirit: A
loving and faithful Husband, and an indulgent Father; if he failed in any
thing, it was in his carriage to his Servants; for truly he did not carry
himself as a Master to Servants, but as a familiar friend to his friends. He
would make them to sit down with him, and drink to them at meat.

He, and my Mother were married together well-nigh sixty years; and I am
confident in all that time, there never was a distastefull word between them.
And indeed, how could there be? He lived with her as a man of knowledge; he
was a wise, faithful, and tender guide; and she was humble and meek, did
reverence, and highly esteem him: Every word he spoke was an Oracle to her,
and her will ever closed with his Judgment.

He lived to eighty years of age: When I (the youngest of nine, and the
unworthiest of all) was born, he was forty years of age. He called me the Son
of his age, yet lived to see me forty years old before he dyed.

He was much and frequent in secret fasting: And when he kept a day, he told
none of the house of it, save my Mother only (who would not eat that day that
he fasted, but oft-times she was with him in his retyring Chamber, to join with
him in prayer) yet all the Family knew it, because at night he supped not; but
only had a Toste, and a draught of ordinary Beer to sustain nature.

On the Sabbath day he never had any thing roast to Dinner, because he would
have none detained at home from the public Ordinances. The Pot was hung on,
and a piece of Beef and a Pudding in it; that was their constant Lord's Day
Dinner for well-nigh sixty years.

His Church at Belssed stood in a very solitary place: He always kept a Key of
it, and would often resort thither all alone. A Gentleman once espying him
going to the Church-ward on a private day, hid himself till my Father was
past, and in the Church; then he came close up to the Church wall, desirous to
peep in at some Window to see what he did, and to listen him, if he said any
thing. And the Gentleman told me, the last time I was at Belsted, that he
prayed, then read a Chapter, and after that prayed largely, and very heavenly,
as if he had been in his Family, or in the public Congregation.

He vigorously held on the course of his Ministry to the last. It may be said
of him, as of Caleb, and Joshua; he was as fit for Service in Gods
Harvest-field at fourscore, as he was at forty.

Some abatement of bodily strength there was, as old Age did steal upon him:
After his afternoon Sermon on the Sabbath, he would be something faint; and
commonly when he came home, he would call for some comfortable Draught; and
when he had lifted up his eyes to Heaven, and taken it, he would say to them
about him, these are Crutches to shore up a ruinous house.

But in his Intellectuals, and Spiritual strength, there was no failing. I
cannot but here intersert a Passage that now comes in my mind.

Old Mr. Benton of Wramplingham in Norffolke, a holy man of God, being upon
occasion in Suffolk, in those parts, could not but give a visit to his old
friend Mr. Carter of Belsted. Being with him, he heard him discourse with holy
Gravity, and a mixture of all kind of Learning, Solidity, and Wit; he stood
amazed, and said, Mr. Carter! I see you are like the Palm, and Cedar, that
bring forth more Fruit in your Age. I thank you (said my Father) for telling of
me what I should be.

And now the time of his departure was at hand. Some fortnight, or three weeks
before his translation, there appeared some decaies in his Body, and his memory
did a little fail. He would sometimes (but very rarely) call to go to Sea, and
to his better Country. Yet he sat up from morning to night, and walked commonly
up and down the Room, and never failed the performance of Prayer, and other
Family duties; and so as none could discern any considerable defect in his
spiritual, or natural strength. Only this, when he had done, he would
presently call to begin again; and say, Daughter Eunice, (for my Mother being
dead about two years before, she was the stay of his house, and staff of his
Age) shall we not go to Prayer? and when she should answer him, you have been
at Prayer already, and you are weary; he would answer, I fear we have not done
what we should do.

It was an ordinary, yea, a constant passage in every Prayer, that God would
vouchsafe a merciful, and easy passage out of this life; And most graciously
did the Lord answer it.

Febr. 21. 1634. being the day before the Sabbath, in the Evening he calls very
earnestly for Paper, Ink, and two Pens: for by Gods grace, says he, to morrow
I will Preach twice: But God knows, he was not in a fit condition for Study:
yet with that resolution he went to Bed, and God gave him some rest that night.
In the morning upon the Sabbath Day, he did rise out of his Bed, as he used to
do, came out of his Bedchamber into the Hall, and after Prayer he called for
his ordinary Breakfast, before he went to the Church, (for still he held his
resolution of Preaching) which was an Egg; he took it in his hand, but alas it
would not down.

Eunice! says he, I am not able to go to Church yet; I prithee lead me to my
Bed, I will lie down a little, and rest me. So he arose up out of his Chair,
and walked, she supporting of him. And when he came to the Parlour-door, before
he put his foot over the Threshold, Oh Eunice! says he, what shall I do? Put
your trust, says she, in that God of whom you have had so much experience, who
never yet did leave you, nor forsake you.

He said, The Lord be thanked.

So he gathered up himself, went to the Beds-side, sat down upon it, and
immediately composed himself to lie down: He lifted up one of his Legs upon
the Bed, without any great difficulty, laid down his Body, and rested his head
upon the Pillow: My poor Sister stood by, expecting still when he should lift
up his other leg; she thought he had been fallen asleep: And she was not
mistaken; so it was, it proved his last sleep, and before she could discern any
change in him, his Soul had taken its flight to Heaven, even into the Arms
and Embraces of his blessed Savior, whom he had faithfully served.

He intended a Sabbaths Labor for Christ, and Christ gave him rest from his
Labor; even the rest of an eternal Sabbath.

When my Sister began to speak to him, and lift him, she found that his breath
was departed, and yet no change in his Countenance at all: his eyes, and his
mouth continuing in the same posture they used to be in his sweetest sleeps.

Thus the Lord gave unto his faithful Servant, the desire of his Soul; such
an easy passage, that his death could not be discerned from a sweet natural
sleep.

Not many days before he dyed, he called my Sister: Daughter, says he,
remember my Love to my Son John, I shall see him no more in this life; and
remember me to the rest of my Children, and Family, and deliver this message to
them all from me.

Stand fast in the Faith, and love one another. This was the last message that
ever he sent.

He ended his life with a Doxology, breathing out his last, with these words;
The Lord be thanked.

When he had thus yielded up his spirit into the hands of his heavenly Father,
my Sister Eunice dispatched a Messenger to me to Norwich: For so he had given
order before he dyed, that his body should not be put in the Coffin till his
Son John came. God carried me through the journey in hard weather: and through
his good providence, I arrived at Belsted early on the Tuesday. And going to
the house of mourning, I found the body of my deceased Father still lying upon
the Bed. They uncovered his face: Sweetly he lay, and with a smiling
countenance, and no difference to the eye between his countenance alive and
dead, save only that he was wont to rejoice and bless me at my approach, now
he was silent.

I fell upon his face, I confess, and kissed him, and lift up my voice and
wept, and so took my last leave of him, till we meet in a better World.

In the afternoon, February 4. 1634. at his interring, there was a great
confluence of people from all parts thereabouts, Ministers and others, taking
up the words of Joash the King of Israel: Oh my Father! my Father! the Chariots
of Israel, and the horsemen thereof! Old Mr. Samuel Ward, that famous Divine,
and the glory of Ipswich, came to the Funeral, brought a mourning Gown with
him, and offered very respectively to Preach his funeral Sermon, now that such
a Congregation were gathered together, and upon such an occasion.

But my Sister and I durst not give way to it: For so our Father had often
charged us in his life time, and upon his blessing, that no Sermon should be at
his buryall. For, said he, it will give occasion to speak some good of me that
I deserve not, and so false things will be uttered in the Pulpit.

Mr. Ward rested satisfied, and did forbear: But the next Friday at Ipswich,
he turned his whole Lecture into a Funeral Sermon for my Father, in which he
did lament, and honor him, to the great satisfaction of the whole Auditory.
Gloria fugientes sequitur.

Glory is like a shadow; follow it, and it will fly away: fly from it, and it
will follow.

For humility he was most eminent. Humble in his habit, humble in his
company: for though his gifts called him before great men, yet his most
ordinary converse was with those of inferior rank, in whom he saw most of the
power of Godliness.

He writ very much; but he left nothing behind him, save what is Printed: and
his Exposition of the Revelation; and a Petition to King James for the taking
away of burdensome Ceremonies out of the Church: nothing else but a few broken
Papers, which, I suppose, he looked upon as Waste paper. Surely, he burnt the
rest, when he saw his appointed time draw near, merely out of a low opinion of
himself and gifts.

He baulked all things that might tend to outward pomp, and ostentation: He
would have no Funeral Sermon: He gave order to be buried, not in the Church,
but in the Churchyard: where he and my sweet Mother, that glorious Pair, lie
interred together, without so much, or rather so little as a poor Gravestone
over them.

He had learned of Christ to be meek, and lowly in heart; he was humble in his
life, and humble in his death; and now the Lord has highly exalted him.

He kept a constant Diary, or day-book, in which he set down every day Gods
extraordinary dispensations, his own actions, and whatsoever memorable things
he heard or read that day.

He cast up his accounts with God every day; and his sins were blotted out,
before he was called to his last reckoning: His day of refreshing is come, he
rests from his Labors.

Plus vivitur exemplis, quam praeceptis, says Seneca: Examples of the dead are
Sermons for the living. And though when I first set Pen to Paper, I intended
only to recollect some of his doings and sayings (now eighteen years after
his decease) for my own memory, instruction, and comfort; yet I cannot but
conceive, that the example of this holy man of God, if it be communicated, may
be useful and profitable to the Church of God.

He was a true child of Abraham; and the blessing of Abraham fell upon him, I
will bless them that bless thee, says the Lord; and I will curse them that
curse thee. Not long since I was at Bramford; there dwells an ancient
Gentleman, one of great quality, my friend, and my Fathers old friend; he spoke
thus to me: Mr. Carter! I have now lived to see the downfall of all your
Fathers opposers, and enemies. There is not one of them, but their Families are
scattered, and ruined. Let the Enemies of Gods faithful Messengers hear, and
fear, and do no more wickedly.

I cannot but add one thing more; It may be truly said of him, and his
faithful Yoke Fellow, as it is written of Zacharias, and Elizabeth: They were
both righteous before God, walking in all the Commandments, and Ordinances of
the Lord, blameless. I dare say, the World will testify, that neither of them
did ever do that thing that was unjust, or evil, or scandalour, or uncomely,
their Enemies being Judges. They were as to men without blemish, their life was
a sweet savor, and they went out of this life as a fragrant perfume.

I confess I have drawn his life very imperfectly. I must say as the Queen of
Sheba; the one half has not been told you. It will not be long before the
Lord Jesus Christ shall open the Books at the last, and great day, then, and
there you shall read his complete Story.

Prove. 10. 7. The Memory of the Just is, and shall be blessed.
Reader,
IT is said of Christ's sayings, and doings; that if they should be written
every one, the World it self could not contain the Books. Far be it from
me to attribute so much to my worthy Father. Yet this much I am certain of,
that there are many things in his Life, and those of very great concernment,
which have slipped me. Therefore I leave these ensuing Pages vacant, that so as
thou remembrest any of his holy sayings, and doings, not mentioned before, thou
may write them down, for thine own benefit, and the good of others.

Isa. 58. 1. Lift up thy voice like a Trumpet.

Joh. 19. 14. Behold your King!

1 Cor. 1. 23. We preach Christ crucified.

Joh. 1. 29. Behold the Lamb of God.

Revel. 13. 8. The Lamb slain from the foundation of the World.



A RARE SIGHT. OR, THE LION: Sent from a far Country, and presented to the
City of NORWICH; in a Sermon upon the Solemn Guildday, June 18. 1650.

By JOHN CARTER, Preacher of the Gospel; And as yet Sojourning in the City of
NORWICH.

Joh. 1. 21. Sir! We would see Jesus.

LONDON, Printed in the year 1653.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Mr. WILLIAM BARNHAM, Major of the City of NORWICH; As
also to Mr. Barnard Church, who with much Honor managed the chief Place of
Magistracy in the said City, the last year, JOHN CARTER. Humbly presents this
rare Sight,
AS a Testimony of his respect, love and thankfulness to them, for all their
undeserved Favor, and faithfulness. As also because they have a just claim
thereunto. Mr. Matthew Lyndsey, who deceased in the midst of his Majoralty
1650. had the true right to it. The Sermon was preached at his request, and at
his Inauguration. He dying, it descends by Inheritance upon these his
Successors.

The Sight is very rare indeed, but very poorly, and meanly set forth; Such as
it is, the unworthy Author humbly tenders to them, with apprecation of all
Grace, Honor, and Happiness.

A RARE SIGHT, OR THE LION.
REVEL. 5. 5. Behold, the Lion of the Tribe of Judah!
AT great Solemnities, and extraordinary confluences of people, it is the
ancient use, and custom, to bring out strange sights, and show farrfetched
Rarities.

This is a solemn day; the Cities great anniversary Feast, for the
Inauguration of the chief Magistrate: Here Is much concourse from several
parts. I shall therefore at such a time as this, being called to stand in the
midst of such a multitude; produce my Spectacle, and present to your view,
the godliest sight, that ever Heaven or Earth afforded; a stately, and a
generous Lion from a far Country. Behold the Lion of the Tribe of Judah.

Concerning which, I shall propound two things to your observation, the parts
of the Text. 1. The Trumpet Sounded: (...) Behold. 2. The Sight or Show
presented.


A rare, and strange Living Creature described from His 1. Species, kind.
(...) A Lion. 2. Original, pedigree, and Country: the most noble, and best
bred Lion in the WORLD.
(...). Of the Tribe of JVDAH.

These are the parts, and particulars of the Text. But I will not tie my self
strictly, and punctually to these: or at least, I will lay them aside a while:
and according to my plain, and usual way, I shall concerning this Little, yea
this great portion of Scripture, dispatch these four things.

1. I will speak something of the sense, and meaning of the words.

2. I will give you the sum, and substance of all, in one general
proposition, in one plain doctrine.

3. Then, in the third place, I will return to the parts and particulars: I
will review, search, and examine them, for such special observations, and
Instructions, as may be profitable: besides the main, and general doctrine.

4. And last of all, I will (as God shall enable me) endeavor to make
profitable use, and application of all.

I stand here by call, and commission from God. Its my duty to lift up my voice
like a Trumpet to Usher in this rare spectacle: Exodus 3. 3.
and it is required of you, that with Moses, you will now turn a side, and see
this great sight.

Let him that has an ear, hear, and let him that has an Eye behold. And let
the Eye of the God of Heaven be upon us all for good: and let the Lion of the
Tribe of Judah be with us, and help us and bless us, Amen.

1. And first I am to open and expound the Text.

Behold!] This demonstrative, has singular weight, and moment. Aliquid
repentinum, et insperatum demonstrat. It points to something that is sudden,
unexpected, unhoped for: something that is rare, excellent, and admirable. It
has here in this place a two fold use.

1. To excite, and stir up attention, and intention: it calls for your ears,
and eyes.

2. To command. Thus Christ made use of it. It was his word of command. He said
unto them In his Doctrine, Hearken, Behold. I command you to attend.

So here: it is the sounding of the Trumpet: it invites, it commands you all to
fix your Eyes upon this rare, and excellent sight which is now coming forth.

Behold then! But first, I pray, before you look for the Lion, Lift up your
eyes a little higher, to the first Verse. There you shall see A Throne set in
Heaven, and one sitting upon that Throne, in great glory, c. 4. 2.
Majesty, and brightness. That is -- God the Father! In his right hand he
holds a book, written within, and on the backside, and sealed with 7. Seals V.
I.

Q. What Book may this be?

A. It is none other but this Book of the Revelation.

Would you know the Contents of this Book? It is a Propheticall-Historicall
Decretall.

Not only decreed, but as it were engrossed in the Court-Roules of Heaven: It
was a great Roll written on both sides for the multitude, and variety of
matters, as containing a complete History of the Church unto the Worlds end:
and therefore took up both sides of the Book, Volume, or Roll.

It contains the decrees, Counsels, and will of God, concerning the future
state, and government of the Church. It contains great Mysteries; Of the
Kingdom and Tyranny of Antichrist: of the persecutions, troubles, and
afflictions of the Church in all Ages, till Christ shall come the second time,
and deliver up the Kingdom to God even the Father. It foreshews the patience,
and constancy of the faithful; the utter ruin of their Enemies: and their
eternal glory, and faelicity at the general judgment, and Consummation.

These Mysteries are written in a Book. i. e. in Gods eternal Praescience,
Providence, and Decree.

But this Book is clasped up and sealed. 1. For matter most excellent, and
Divine: kept secret from the knowledge of al creatures: and with seven Seals:
most surely as mysteries of the greatest moment, Worth and Certainty.

Therefore behold: verse. 2. A strong Angel proclaiming with a land voice: Like
a Herald or Officer. Who is worthy, for the excellency of his person, or for
his deserts, To open the Book, and to loose the Seals thereof? To disclose
these secret decrees, and counsels of God: to dive into these most deep
mysteries, that he may make them know to the Church of God in all ages?

Who? O it is a hard, and difficult matter to open the Book, and to loose the
Seals. Verse 3. None in Heaven. No Angel. None in Earth: No Saint living. None
under the Earth. No Saint departed, whose body is underground: or more
generally, no creature in Heaven, Earth, or Sea, was able to open the Book, to
read, understand, or divulge it; Neither to look thereon. To have any thing at
all to do with it.

Alas! alas! This is a sad thing! Behold verse 5. John the Divine weeps much,
Because no man was found worthy to open, and to read the Book, etc. He wept
much, to see himself, and others, deprived of so deep, so sweet, and so
excellent Mysteries; but especially to think, that God should be deprived of
the glory of them. What then? Shall the Church never know the Contents of that
Book?

Yes; yes, it shall. Behold, in the fifth verse a word of Consolation. One of
the Elders says unto me, weep not. One of the body, of the Council of State;
one of the Assessors, one of the glorified Saints; representing all the
faithful; one, to whom the secret of the Lord was revealed. He said to John,
weep not. q. d. This is thine infirmity; what have thou forgotten? Art thou a
Master, and Teacher in the Church of God, and do thou not remember, that
great Prophet, the only begotten Son of God, which is in the bosom of his
Father; who from the beginning of the World unto the end of it, ever leads
the Church into all needful Truths? Weep not then so much, cheer up thy
Spirits. Order is taken for the opening, and revealing of the Book.

Behold! behold! Lift up thine eyes now; do not discover a rare Sight? a
Lion! Behold! That Lion of the Tribe of Judah, the root of David, he has
prevailed to open the Book, and to loose the seven Seals thereof.

I have now brought you down to my Text: your eyes are by this time upon the
rare Sight, and I shall endeavor to keep them fixed there from henceforth.

The words read, are nothing else but an Elegant, Metaphorical description of
him, who can, and only can open, and reveal the Decrees, Counsels, and will
of God to the Church.

Behold! with admiration, and joy, this is the Lion. I find in the Scripture a
threefold Lion. 1. Of the Forest. 2. Of the Internal Pit. 3. Of the Tribe of
Judah.

1. A Lion of the Forest, Jer. 5. 6. bred in the Woods, and Deserts. This is a
rare, and Noble Creature, the chief among Beasts; this is properly called a
Lion.

2. The Lion of the Infernal Pit; that is, the Devil, called so by way of
similitude; because he is like a Lion. In the Hebrew, (...) a Lion, springs out
of the root (...) decerpere to pluck, rent and tear. Such is the Devil, 1
Pet. 5. 8. Your adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lion, walks about seeking
whom he may devour.

3. The Lion of the Tribe of Judah. What is he? Indeed it is a Male, a Noble,
Generous, and Famous Lion: Yet not a Beast, (as some blasphemous Heretics have
spoken, horresco referens, in these leprous times) no! here we must leave the
Letter, and understand it Metaphorically. It is a Lion not to be found amongst
men, (mere men) nor Angels. Would you know certainly who it is? The next verse
will tell you. Behold! there you shall see standing in the midst of the Elders
A Lamb, as it had been slain, this is the Lion; for verse 9. you shall find,
it was this Lamb, who was worthy to take the Book, and to open the Seals
thereof. Here the Lion, Isa. 11. 6.
and the Lamb meet in one; plainly therefore, The Lion, or the Lamb, is he
that was slain, and has redeemed us to God by his own blood, even the Lord
Jesus Christ, the root of David. He, and none other is the Lion of the Tribe of
Judah.

Of the Tribe of Judah. viz. Of the Posterity of Judah; which excelled all the
other Tribes in Courage, Dignity, and Renoune.

You must conceive, that here is an allusion to the Armoriall Ensign, or Arms
of that Tribe.

The Lord commands the children of Israel, Number. 2. 2. Every man shall pitch by
his own Standard, with the Ensign of their Father's house: far off about the
Tabernacle of the Congregation shall they pitch. All the while they travailed
in the Wilderness, they pitch their Tents as an Army, round about the
Sanctuary in a Square. The Israelites consisted of twelve Tribes. And these
were divided into four Regiments: Ezekiel. 48. 20. Revel. 21. 16.
To each Regiment three Tribes, of which every one had a particular Standard or
Banner, differing in color, and form, and in the Ensign a Coat of Arms.

In the front were Judah, Issachar, and Zabulon.

In the Rear Ephraim, Benjamin, and Manasses. Ainsw. Number.


In the North-wing, Dan, Aser, and Naphtali.

In the South-wing, Reuben, Simeon and Gad.

Judah carried a Lion in his Standard: Reuben a Man-drake, Ephraim an Ox, and
Dan an Eagle.



Judah carried a Lion in his Standard. The occasion of this Coat of Arms you
have, Genesis 49. 9. Viz. Jacobs blessing. Judah is a Lions Whelp. And here you
have the original of Arms; GOD was the first King of Heralds: He commanded
them; also the antiquity and use.

Arms were tokens, or resemblances, signifying some Act, or Quality of the
Bearer. In their Banners, Shields, or Targets they did engrave, emboss,
embroyder, or depict some Beast, Bird, Fish, or other thing, whose nature and
quality did best quadrate with their own. There was a kind of sympathy between
the Arms, and their bearers, to note their quality, and disposition. Such
Arms were remunerations for Service, bestowed by Kings, Emperors, and their
Generals: Hereditary Testimonies of their glorious Merits.

This armoriall Ensign, the Lion, was given to Judah, to show, 1. The Courage
of that Tribe above the rest; and 2. That it should be the governing, the
Law-giving Tribe, 1 Chronicles, 5. 2. For Judah prevailed above his Brethren, and of
him came the chief Ruler. And 3. That God had decreed Monarchical Government
for that people, when they should be settled in a perfect state. And 4. That
(David as the Type, and afterward) at the fullness of time, the Lord Jesus
Christ the Antitype, should be born of that Tribe according to the flesh, and
lineally descended, through the Loins of many Kings, Successive one to
another, as to his humane Nature. And so came forth the Famous Lion of the
Tribe of Judah. For it is evident that our Lord sprang out of Judah. Heb. 7. 14.

And thus you have the sense, meaning, and exposition of the words.

2. I shall now in the second place, give you the sum, and substance of all in
one general proposition, which I will give you in no other terms then the
very words of the Text.

The Lord Jesus Christ is the Lion of the Tribe of Judah. For the evidence and
demonstration Doct.
of this Thesis, I will lay it out unto you in three Branches.

1. That the Lord Jesus Christ is a Lion. 2. That he is the Lion. 3. That he is
the Lion of the Tribe of Judah.
Branch. 1. The Lord Jesus Christ is a Lion.
The truth of this, with the reason, I will give you both together. It is both
prophesyed, and typified, Genesis 49. 9. Judah is a Lions Whelp. Judah! this cannot
be meant of the person of Judah, that is certain: for he crouched, and bowed
down to Joseph his younger Brother, and dyed in Egypt.

Therefore it must be understood first, Number. 24. 9
of the posterity, of the Tribe of Judah. The Offspring of Judah shall be a
Lion's Whelp: but for what cause is he so described? Propter dignitatem Regiam.
The Lion is Rex quadrupedum: The noblest of all fourefooted creatures: and the
King of all beasts. Pro. 30. 30. 31. A Lion, and a King put together. In the 8,
9, and tenth Verse of that 49. cap. of Genesis you have a graphicall description
of the Kingly power and Sovereignty that should be in the Tribe of Judah many
Generations after: showing, that Judah shall meet with many potent, and
implacable enemies to conflict withal: that he shall conquer and subdue them
all. Ver. 8. Thy hand shall be in the neck of thine Enemies. Ver. 9. From the
prey, my Son thou art gone up. 1. Judah shall tear his Enemies in pieces, as a
Lion rents his prey. He stouped down, he couched as a Lion, and as an old
Lion. That notes a full victory over all his Enemies: The Lion's couching is
not for fear, but because he has conquered his prey, and scattered all
opposition; and now, lies down by it in triumph, feeding and resting himself
in peace. So shall Judah tread on the neck of all his enemies, and sit down in
peace. But to raise it to the height, it signifies, that Judah shall be the
Kingly Tribe, in which should be the Regal power. 1 Chr. 5. 2. Judah prevailed
above his Brethren, and of him came the chief Ruler. This signified, Verse. 8.
Thy fathers Children shall bow down before thee. Verse. 10. The Scepter shall
not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh
come: And this was fulfilled in David first, and in Solomon.

But though the Prophecy were in part fulfilled in the temporal Kingdom of
Judah, yet chiefly all is verified in Christ; and it has its complement in the
Kingdom of Christ, and is interpreted, and fully fulfilled in my Text. Jesus
Christ is the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, which words are nothing but a
Periphrasis, an elegant metaphorical description of the Kingdom of Christ:
Jesus Christ is a Lion; that is, Jesus Christ is a King: Christ a King.

Promised, Jerem. 23. 5. Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that I will
raise unto David a righteous branch, and a King shall reign and prosper, and
shall execute judgment and justice in the Earth.

Born. Matthew. 2. 2. Where is he that is born King of the Jews?

Proclaimed, Zechariah 9. 9. Rejoice greatly, Oh Daughter of Zion, shout oh
Daughter of Jerusalem! Behold thy King comes unto thee: he is just, and having
Salvation, etc. Inaugurated, Matthew. 21. 5. Crowned, Psalm. 21. 3. Thou set a
Crown Leo Coronatus.
of pure Gold on his head. Cantic. 3. 11. Go forth ye Daughters of Zion, and
behold King Solomon. That is, Jesus Christ, with the Crown wherewith his Mother
Crowned him in the day of his Espousals. Revel. 6. 2 He had a Bow, and a Crown
was given him. Cap. 19. 12. On his head were many Crowns. And verse 16. Thus
runs his royal Title, Leo regnans
KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS.

He was qualified with all Kingly graces, and gifts. He was anointed a King:
The (...) Psalm. 45. 7. God, thy God has anointed thee with the oil of
gladness above thy fellows. Of old they did anoint their Kings; but Christ
had an Unction above all other Kings. Saul had a Vial of oil poured on his
head; Jehu 1 Samuel 10. 1. 2 King. 9. 3. 1 Samuel 16. 13.
a box of oil, David a horn of oil: every one had their measure: But Christ
was anointed, not with material oil, as they, but with the Holy Ghost, and
that with all fullness: God gave the Spirit unto him, non ad mensuram, Not by
measure. (...)
He was anointed within, and without, (...)
all over.

1. Within, his inward Unction was with Kingly graces. There are certain gifts,
and qualifications requisite for the discharge of the Kingly Function; without
which no Monarch can weild the Scepter happily. 1. Strength and Courage: the
King must be a mighty and a valiant man to defend his people, and fight their
Battles. 2. Wisdom, and understanding, to discern between good and bad, and to
judge his people, 1 King. 3. 9. 3. Justice, Prove. 16. 12. The Throne is
established by righteousness. 4. Mercy, Prove. 20. 28. Mercy and truth preserve
the King, and his Throne is upholden by mercy. All these were eminently, yea
infinitely in Jesus Christ; and therefore he was meet to be a King. He was a
Lion.

1. The Lion is strongest among Beasts, Prove. 30. 30. Courageous, and
Magnanimous. So Jesus Christ, he excelled all others in power, might, and
courage. The Government is upon his Shoulder. And he is called the mighty God.
Isa. 9. 6. All power is given him in Heaven, and Earth Matthew. 28. 18. He is the
Almighty. Rev. 1. 8. Christ is the generous Lion of undaunted Courage, and
invincible strength, to grapple with the Hunters, and savage Creatures.

2. The Lion is an Emblem of Wisdom, as well as of Strength, a Creature that
has great Sagacity. Strange things are written of the wisdom and policy of
the Lion, (by, and by you shall meet with some of them.) He is crafty in
waiting for the Prey, watching his opportunities, Psalm. 10. 9. He lies in wait
secretly, he lurketh in his Den. He is subtle in deceiving the Hunter: When he
is hunted, sometimes Gesner.
he goes forward, sometimes backward, and sweeps out his footsteps that are
from the Hunter, with his tail, that no track of his may be found. Whence it
became a Proverb, Leonis Vestigia quaeris.

In this grace also Christ excelled all others. Solomon was famous for wisdom,
(for he had sought it of God) for there was none like him before, nor after.
But behold! 1 King. 3. 12.
here is a greater then Solomon, a wiser then Solomon; the Lord Jesus Christ.
In him are hid the treasures of Wisdom, and Knowledge, Col. 2. 3. And wisdom
(for Government) is better then Strength.

3. In the Lion is observed strict Justice. Non punit ultra condignum; If any
one hit him, or throws a dart at him, and hurts him not, the Lion will only
rush against him that struck the blow, and throw him down, but not hurt him: If
any wound the Lion, and draw blood, the Lion will turn again, and tear him,
but not to death; but if any kill the Lions Whelp, the Lion will slay him.

In this grace of Justice Christ excelled all others. He shall order his
Kingdom, and establish it with Judgment, and with Justice for ever. Isa. 9. 7.
He loves righteousness and hates wickedness. Psalm. 45. 7. A Scepter of
righteousness is the Scepter of his Kingdom. Heb. 1. 8. He is Melchesidec,
King of righteousness, Heb. 7. 2.

4. In the Lion also is clemency, and mercy. He is benevolent to mankind,
spares them that prostrate to him, and will not hurt Women, nor little Children.

And in this grace also Christ exceeded all others, Matthew. 21. 5. Behold! the
King comes unto the Meek, and sitting upon an Ass, and a Colt, the fool of an
Ass.

Isa. 42. 2. He shall not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in
the street. 3. A bruised Reed shall he not break, and the smoking Flax shall
he not quench.

He wept over Jerusalem, and had compassion Luke 19. 41. Matthew. 9. 36 Heb. 2.
17.
on the multitude. He was a faithful, and a merciful high Priest; And he was
a faithful, and a merciful King. See the oil with which he was inwardly
anointed, poured upon his head altogether, Isa. 11. 2. And the Spirit of the
Lord shall rest upon him, the Spirit of wisdom, and understanding, the Spirit
of Counsel, and might, the Spirit of Knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord.

Here are his Kingly graces, his Lion-like qualifications, whereby he was
fitted to weild the Kingdom. No man, Angel, nor Arch-angell; none in Heaven,
and Earth, can be found meet to under-go this Office, only Jesus Christ,
God-man could bear it.

You have seen how the Lion, Messiah the Prince, was anointed within.

Now secondly, I will make out his Title to the Crown: He had an external
Unction, he was anointed a King. The ancient anointing of Kings, was an
outward manifestation, and declaration to the whole World, of their undoubted
Right, and Title to their Kingdoms; it was also a public Assignation.

And this external Unction had Jesus Christ; not with material oil, but he
had a full, and undoubted right to the Government: He was no usurper, he had a
solemn calling from God the Father to this Office; and from him he derived a
threefold right.

The Kingdom was his.

1. By Assignation from the Father, Psalm. 2. 6. I have set my King upon my holy
Hill of Zion. Act. 2. 36. Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly,
that God has ^ade that same JESUS who was crucified, both LORD, and CHRIST.

2. By inheritance, Psalm. 2. 7. I will declare the decree: the Lord has said
unto me, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. Heb. 1. 2. God has
appointed him heir of all things. Even the wicked Husbandmen acknowledged thus
much, This is the heir, Mat. 21. 38.

3. By free Donation, Psalm. 2. 8. Ask of me, and I shall give thee the Heathen
for thine Inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession.

By this time, the first branch, or Proposition is true and evident. Christ is
a Lion, that is, A King. Therefore as after the anointing of Jehu, they blew
with Trumpets, and proclaimed, saying, Jehu is King: So here, having seen the
anointing, I blow the Trumpet, and proclaim, Behold, Christ is King: Behold,
Christ is King.

Branch 2. The Lord Jesus Christ is (...), The Lion.
The Lion of Lions; The most excellent Lion, the only Lion. Christ is a (...)
King, and there is no King but Christ. (...), Isa. 43. ^. (...).
I am the Lord, and beside me there is no Savior. The chief Priests said, We
have no Joh. 19. 15.
King but Caesar. Christians must say, We have no King but Christ.

But happily, some will object, Are there Ob.
not many other Kings? Were there not Kings of Israel and Judah? Had not Egypt
their Pharaohs, and the Philistims their Abimelechs? Do we not read in Dan. 2.
32.
Daniel, of the head of Gold? the Silver breast and arms? the Brass belly and
thighs? the Iron Legs? the four ancient and famous Monarchies? Did we never
hear of the Emperors of the West? And are there not many Kings at this very
day, in the World? What, is there but one Lion in the Forest?

I answer with Saint Paul, There are 1 Cor. 8. 50.
Lords many: many Kings: And Saint Peter mentions, The King as supreme, and
that as an Ordinance. But such a King as the Lord Jesus Christ is not in the
whole World. And I will show you some differences between Christ the King, and
all other Kings.

1. Christ is the only absolute, supreme, sovereign, independent King; the
only Lord Paramount: all other Kings have but a derived, delegated power from
him. Pro. 8. 15. By me Kings reign (says the Lord Jesus, the wisdom of the
Father) and Princes decree Justice. All other Kings are but subordinate,
Viceroys, Lord-Deputies.

2. All other Kings are men, mere men; Jesus Christ is God and man; as he is
the man Christ Jesus, so he is God over all, 1. Tim. 2. 5. Romans 9. 5.
blessed for ever. No other King God-Man, but he.

3. In regard of bounds: all other Kings, they have Dominion only over some
part, and a little part of the World: Indeed there have been Monarchs that have
styled themselves Emperors of the World; but they were mistaken two ways:
First, in their times scarce half the habitable part of the World was
discovered: Secondly, Had they had all they laid claim to, it was but to the
lower and baser part of the World, the Earth: But the Lord Jesus Christ has an
universal Kingdom. Psalm. 72. 8. He shall have Dominion from Sea to Sea, and
from the River unto the ends of the Earth. v. 9. They that dwell in the
Wilderness shall bow before him, and his enemies shall lick the dust. v. 10.
The Kings of Tarshish, and of the Isles shall bring presents; the Kings of
Sheba, and Seba shall offer gifts. v. 11. Yea, all Kings shall fall down before
him, all Nations shall serve him. He is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; yea,
he is King of Heaven and Earth, and of all things in them. There is no
universal King but he.

4. In respect of duration: All other Kings are men that dye, and their
Kingdoms have their fatal periods: few Kingdoms continue above five hundred
years: We use to say, So many years reigned the Chaldeans and Babylonians; so
many the Medes and Persians, so many the Graecians, and so many the Romans
(that I meddle not with the fatal mutations in our Nation.) The Lord often
speaks to earthly Kings in his wrath, The Lord has rent 1 Samuel 15. 28.
the Kingdom of Israel from thee; says Samuel to Saul: even this day he has
done it, and has given it to a neighbor of thine, that is better then thou.
And this was the Writing that was written concerning Belshazzar, Thy Bingdome
is divided, and given to the Medes and Persians.

But unto the Son; unto the Lord Jesus Christ, the Father says, Thy Throne O
God is for ever and ever. God the Father speaks concerning his Son, as Jupiter
is brought in speaking of the Romans: His ego nec metas rerum, nec tempora
pono, Imperium sine fine dedi.

His seed will I make to endure for ever, Psalm. 89. 29. 36. 37.
and his Throne as the days of Heaven. His Throne shall be as the Sun before
me. It shall be established for ever as the Moon: and as a faithful witness
in Heaven. SELAH.

The Angel Gabriel was sent from God to the Virgin Mary, with this Oracle,
Thou shall conceive, and bringforth a Son: and Luke 1. 31. 32. 33.
shall call his name Jesus. He shall be great, and the Lord God shall give unto
him the throne of his Father David. And he shall raig^e over the House of David
for ever, and of his Kingdom there shall be no end. Jesus Christ is the Lion.
The Lion is a Creature (as Pliny writes) that lives long to an incredible age,
but Christ is the Lion that never dies. And there is no eternal King but
Christ.

You have the second Branch or Proposition: I pass to

Branch 3. Jesus Christ is the Lion of the Tribe of Judah.
First, And according to the Letter, He was King of Judah. He had a just right,
and title to the temporal Crown and Kingdom. He was of the Seed of David
according to the flesh; lineally descended Romans 1. 3.
from his loins, and by undoubted succession the King and Prince, being of the
Kingly race. This will appear by the Genealogies. Saint Matthew, chap. 1. sets
down the Pedigree of Joseph, the Husband of Mary, his supposed Father. He
descended from David through the loins of Solomon. Saint Luke, chap. 3. 23.
describes the Pedigree of the Virgin Mary his Mother that bare him; she
descended from David through the loins of Nath^n.

The Husband and Wife were both of the same Family; and therefore Christ had a
title to the temporal Kingdom, Crown, and Dignity, both by the Fathers and
Mothers side. Heralds came from the East to proclaim him King there, saying,
Where is he that is borne King of the Jews? For we have seen his starr in the
East, Matthew. 2. 2. This Pilate subscribed, and would not revoke it, Jesus of
Nazareth the King of the Jews.: He was a Lion true bred.

But as for this temporal Kingdom and Dominion over Judah and the other
Tribes, our Lord Jesus Christ would not meddle with it. He had indeed, jus ad
rem: but would never take possession. They would have taken him by force to
make him King, Joh. 6. 15. but he perceiving it, departed, and hid himself in
a Mountain. He departed from his own right: abdicated the earthly Kingdom,
and would not meddle with it.

Therefore secondly, By the Tribe of Judah, we must understand the same thing
that is signified by Mount Sion, and the City of the living God: and, the
heavenly Jerusalem, Heb. 12. 22. And what is that? Verse. 23. will tell you, The
general assembly and Church of the first borne, which are written in Heaven.
The whole company of the Elect, who are ordained to life eternal.

Christ is the King of his Church, and the Church is Christ's Kingdom: The
Elect, the company of true Believers are his subjects, and none else. Psalm. 2.
6. I have set my King upon my holy hill of Sion: that is, over the Church. As
Pharaoh made Joseph Governor over all his House, so God the Father made his
Son Jesus Act. 7. 10.
Christ King, and Governor of the house of God; that is, the Church of God.
This Nathanael confesses in his little Creed; John 1* 49. Thou art the son of
God: thou art the King of Israel: His peculiar jurisdiction is over the Church,

Quest. But is not Christ a great King over all the Earth? Psalm. 47. 2.

Answ. Christ has a twofold Kingdom.

1. Regnum potentiae: his Kingdom of power; by which, as God, together with
the Father, and the holy Ghost, he powerfully rules over all Creatures in
Heaven and Earth. And so all Men and Women in the World are his Subjects; yea,
whether they will or no.

2. Regnum gratiae, The Kingdom of grace: Whereby as Mediator, he calls and
governs his Church and chosen: And in regard of this latter he is said
properly, and peculiarly to be the King of his Church, and of his Church only.

Thus you have seen:

1. That Christ is a Lion, a King. 2. That he is the Lion, the only King. 3.
That he is the Lion of the Tribe of Judah.
Now attend to the reason of all together. Why must the Lord Jesus Christ be
such a Lion? such a King?

He must be a Lion, a King, because he is Mediator of his Church. This great
and Reason.
high office of a King was so necessary, that the Church could never have been
saved, except Christ had born it.

A Mediator is for the reconciling of parties that are at variance: and he
that undertakes the work, must be in grace and favor with both parties, and he
must deal, not only between, but with both parties; with the party offended,
and the party offending. Here the parties at odds, are God and Man. God is the
party offended, Man is the party offending: You know how the quarrel began;
man by transgressing against the Commandment, and eating of the prohibited
Tree, highly provoked God: here came in the enmity, and man cast under Genesis 3.
an eternal ^curse; and must have remained under the sentence of death for
ever, without a Mediator to take up the quarrel, and make peace. The Lord
Jesus Christ undertakes this office. There is one 1 Timothy 2. 5.
Mediator between God and man: the man Christ Jesus. He therefore must deal and
negotiate with both parties; and to this end he puts himself upon a threefold
office, of a Prophet, Priest, and King.

1. And first he deals with the party offended; with God for men. This he
does in his Priestly office. Every high Priest Heb. 5. 1.
says the Apostle, is taken from among men; is ordained for men [(...)] in
things pertaining to God; that he may offer gifts and sacrifices for sin. Here
you see, he deals with God, on the behalf of men offending, and how? by
offering sacrifices: that is, by way of satisfaction. The sentence was our,
That day thou eatest, that day thou sinnest, thou shall dye certainly. Gods
justice now could not be satisfied, nor any reconciliation made without death;
no nor without the death of such a person as was without sin, without any
exception; yea such a person as must be God as well as man, because the
satisfaction must be infinite. Jesus Christ is willing (Oh the infinite grace
of the Lord Jesus Christ!) to negotiate in this great business with his
Father: and on man's behalf he does three things. 1. He suffers whatsoever man
should have suffered, to satisfy God and acquit sinful man. They write of the
Lion, that he always has a quartain ague: I am sure Jesus Christ, the Lion of
the tribe of Judah, he had a quotidian for us. He was a man of sorrows, well
acquainted with grief, from his birth to the Cross: Yea, he dyed a bloody and
a most accursed death, to appease the wrath of God, and slay the enmitty. And
Ephesians. 2. 16.
here the Lion becomes a Lamb; brought as a Lamb to the slaughter: and is the
very Isa. 53. 7.
Lamb mentioned in the next Verse, which stood in the midst of the Elders, as
it Rev. 5. 6.
had been slain. Thus he satisfies.

A second business he does for man, is, as a Priest, to pray, and intercede
to, and with his Father, that his Sacrifice may be availeable, and effectual
to the salvation of his Church. I pray (says Christ) for these with me now,
and for all them also Joh. 17. 20.
that shall believe on me.

Thirdly, He does engage to his Father, that all that the Father has given
him, shall believe. That he will work faith in them by his Spirit, John 6. 3.
All that the Father gives me, i. e. all the Elect, shall come to me, i. e. they
shall believe. Thus Christ is an agent for man with God. And in this Priestly
office, he purchased his Kingdom: Therefore, says God the Father, will I
divide him a portion with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the
strong; because he has poured out his soul unto death; and he was numbered
with the transgressors, and he bare the sins of many, and made intercession for
the transgressors.

Again secondly, it is necessary, that he deal and negotiate on Gods part,
with men; and this he does as a Prophet. King.


1. As a Prophet: He is sent out of the bosom of his Father unto men, to open
the Book, Revel. 5. 7. 9. to declare and Joh. 1. 18.
make known the secret counsel and will of God concerning the great work of
redemption: what a new contract is drawn up between the Father and the Son;
what Jesus Christ has done for man; how he has satisfied his debt, which he
was not able to pay, and how God has accepted of it, for all those that do
believe in him. The sum of which negotiation you have, John 6. 40. And this is
the will of him that sent me, that every one that sees the Son (i. e.
believes on him) may have everlasting life: and I will raise him up at the
last day.

2. As a King: To impute and apply that great benefit of Redemption to man, and
to make it effectual: And to accomplish this, he must be a Lion, he must be a
King, and that for these causes.

1. To gain and gather his Kingdom: To gain them first into the Kingdom of
grace, and at last to gather them into the Kingdom of glory. Now to effect
this, he must be a Lion, a potent King; for he must conquer before he can
reign, yea he must make a double conquest. 1. He must conquer his subjects;
he finds them all Enemies at first, all Rebels: it is truly said of all the
Children of Adam: This people has a revolting and a rebellious heart. Now
these rebellious hearts Christ must subdue, and bring into subjection, making
them a believing, a loving, a willing people. Christ cannot gain a Subject
into his Kingdom but he must first conquer. 2. He also must conquer another
Lion, the Enemy-Lyon: he is described by Saint Peter, Epist. 1. chap. 5. Verse.
8. Your adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lion walks about seeking whom he
may devour. In the paws of this Lion are all men and women in the World by
nature. The Prince of the power of the air, that evil Spirit works in the
Children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2. The Lion of the Tribe of Judah, must
conquer that roaring Lion the Devil, before he can gather a Kingdom, and
reign.

Quest. But how does he conquer the Devil? how does he conquer his Subjects?

Answ. He conquered the Devil, as he was God, by force and might, by his
infinite power. As man and Mediator, he conquered him by his blood, by the
merit and efficacy of his passion. He took part of our flesh and blood, that
through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the
Devil. And deliver them who through fear of death, were all their life time
subject to bondage, Heb. 2. 14, 15. He spoiled Principalities and Powers, he
made a show of them openly, tryumphing over them in it: that is, in or upon his
Cross, Col. 2. 15. Faith sees Christ upon the Cross, as sitting in a
tryumphall Chariot. Duo (says Origin) in cruce affixi intelliguntur: Christus
visibiliter, sponte sua, ad tempus: Diabolus invisibiliter, invitus, in
perpetuum.

He conquers the rebellious hearts of his Subjects; and gathers together into
one Joh. 11. 52.
Kingdom, the Children of God that were scattered abroad, by his voice,
Scepter, and Sword.

By his voice. The Lioness, as the learned Vocation.
write, brings forth her Whelps dead, and so they continue three days: then
the other Lion does set out his voice, and roar over them, and then they revive
and live. Christ is the Lion, his people are his Whelps: They are all
still-borne: Dead Ephesians. 2. 1:
in trespasses and sins. Christ lifts up his voice, and roares in the
Preaching of the Gospel, by which he recovers the life of his people. Verily,
verily, I say unto you, says our blessed Savior, Joh. 5. 25. The hour is
coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God; and
they that hear shall live.

By his Sceptor: And that is the same, even the Preaching of the Gospel, Psalm.
110. 2. The Lord shall send the Rod, or the Scepter, of thy strength: that is,
the Ministry of the Gospel, out of Zion: and by it, thou shall rule in the
midst of thine Enemies: Those that were enemies, by that spiritual Scepter,
thou shall make them loving Subjects, and a willing people, verse. 3.

By his Sword: And that is the same still, the Preaching of the Gospel. This is
the sharp two-edged Sword that went out of Christ's mouth. Revel. 1. 16. this
is quick and powerful, and sharper then any two-edged Sword, peircing even to
the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, joints and marrow. This is the
two-edged Sword in the Psalm. 149. 6.
hand of the Saints; which binds Heathen Kings in Chains, and Nobles in
fetters of Iron: That is, the Gospel brings Heathen Princes and people into
subjection to the Lord Jesus Christ. This is that Sword of the spirit, even,
the Word of God, spoken of by Ephesians. 6. 17.
Saint Paul: And there you have the consummation of the conquest: Yes, when the
spirit seconds the Word, when the holy Ghost carries it home to the heart. Thus
the Lion, the King, the Lord Jesus Christ conquers, thus he calls his subjects
together into one Kingdom, by the Word outwardly Preached to the ear, and by
the spirit effectually working upon the heart; moving, and sweetly persuading
it to obey the calling of Christ.

2. Christ must be a Lion, a King, to govern his subjects, his Church: Without
Government no Society can stand; when there was no King in Israel, every Judic.
17. 6.
man did what seemed good in his own eyes: and all things went to wrack.
Christ must be a King, to give Laws: So Christ: There is one Lawgiver: even
this Lion: and to Jam. 4. 12.
rule, so Christ; he rules in the hearts of his people, and governs them by his
spirit, They are led by the spirit of God, as Rom 8. 14.
many as are the sons of God. Judah, that is, the Lion of the Tribe of Judah,
is his Psalm. 60. 7.
Lawgiver: And he does not only give Laws, but (that which no King nor
Potentate else in the World can do) he puts his Law in their inward parts, and
writes it in their hearts, Jer. 31. 33.

3. Christ must of necessity be a Lion, a King, to protect and defend his
Church, people, subjects. The Lion will stand to the defense of his young ones,
even to the death; and having the prey in his paw, the more any offer to take
it from him, the faster he holds it: So the Lion of the Tribe of Judah.

The Kingdom of Christ is ever beset with Enemies, The Heathen rage, the
people conspire: the Kings of the earth set themselves, Psalm. 2. 1, 2, 3.
and the Rulers take Counsel together, against the Lord, and against his
anointed: against his Christ. They have, not only, flesh and blood, but
Principalities and Ephesians. 6. 12.
Powers also; the Rulers of the darkness of this World, and spiritual
wickedness in high places, to wrestle withal. And therefore without a strong
Protector, this kingdom would soon be dissolved and laid desolate. Now the
Lion of the Tribe of Judah, the Lord Jesus Christ undertakes the protection of
it. He will create upon every dwelling place of mount Zion, and upon her
Assemblies, a cloud, and a smoke by day, Isa. 4. 5.
and the shining of a flaming fire by night: for upon all the glory shall be a
defense. And the Gates of Hell shall not prevail Matthew. 16. 18
against it.

4. The Lord Jesus Christ must be the Lion, the King, to exercise judiciary
power, to execute judgment.

To bring Malefactors to condign punishment, to destroy the implacable Enemies
of his Church and Kingdom. He is therefore a Lion, and a Bear too, Hos. 13. 7.
Therefore will I be unto them as a Lion, as a Leopard by the way will I observe
them. Verse. 8. I will meet them as a Bear that is bereaved of her Whelps, and
will rent the Caul of their heart, and there will I devour them like a Lion:
the wild beast shall tear them. Luke 19. 27. But those mine enemies that would
not that I should reign over them, bring hither and slay them before me.

He also must be a Lion, a King, to distribute rewards to his good and
faithful Subjects. The Lion does tear in pieces enough for his Whelps, and
strangled for his Nah um. 2. 12.
Lyonesses, and filled his holes with prey, and his dens with Ravine: So the
Lord Jesus, Divides the spoil with the strong. He spoiled Isa. 53 2. Psalm. 68.
18.
Principalities and Powers. He ascended up on high, he led Captivity captive,
and gave gifts to men, Ephesians. 4. 8. As a King he will, he will enrich his
subjects with grace here, and glory hereafter: he will reward his followers,
not for their merits sake, but for his mercies sake. He will say to one, Well
done thou good servant, because Luke 19. 17. 19.
thou have been saithfull in a very little, have thou authority over ten
Cities: And to another, Be thou also over five Cities. And they that follow him
in the Regeneration, Matthew. 19. 28. 29.
when Christ the King shall sit in the throne of his glory; they also shall sit
upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. And every one that
has forsaken houses, or Brethren, or Sisters, or Father, or Mother, or Wife,
or Children, or Lands, to become his subjects, shall receive an hundred fold,
and shall inherit everlasting life.

Thus have you the general Doctrine.

3. Before I come to make application of it, I will address my self to my
third task, and return to the parts of the Text, and take a review of them;
and speak something to them, and observe something from them distinctly and
very shortly. The parts you may remember are two.

1. The Trumpet sounded. 2. The sight, or show presented.
1. For the first: The Trumpet sounded. Behold! This demonstrative, as it
points to some admirable thing, so it is a word of command. Here

Observe, It is the duty of every Christian to behold the Lord Jesus Christ. As
Saint John the Divine is here called upon to behold; so is every one enjoined
to eye the Lion: that is, the Lord Jesus: John the Baptist calls as much upon
his Disciples, to behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the
World, John 1. 29. Even Pilate could call unto the Jews, saying. Behold your
King! John 19. 14.

But why must we always set our eyes Reason
upon Christ? There are many reasons: I will fasten only upon one, namely, We
must always behold him, that we may imitate and follow him. Behold thy King,
Zech. 9. 9.
says the Prophet Zechariah, how he comes, he is just, meek, and lowly. And
why must we thus behold him? Christ himself will give you the reason, Matthew.
11. 29. that you may learn of him to be meek and lowly in heart. I have given
you my example, says the Lord Jesus, John 13. 15. that you should do as I have
done to you. Judah had a Lion in their Standard, and that they were to follow.
Jesus Christ is our Standard, The root of Iesse: i. e. Christ, springing out of
David's stock, shall stand for an Ensign of the people. Luke 2. 34. Behold,
says Simeon, this Child Jesus, is set (...), for a Banner, which shall meet
with contradiction: a military sign. It is our duty to follow our Ensign, and
that is a Lion.

2. You have heard the Trumpet sounded: I will now lead you to the second part
of the Text, Viz. The sight, or show, The Lion of the tribe of Judah: and why
of the Tribe of Judah? The Apostle shall give you the reason clearly, Heb. 7.
14. For it is evident that our Lord sprang out of Judah.

Observe then, the Pedigree of this Lion. He came out of the loins of Judah,
the fourth Son of Jacob, and was born in that Tribe. In the words next
following my Text, Christ is called the root of David: which metaphorical
expression does imply two things.

1. That Christ indeed is David's root, David sprang from him. David in spirit
Matthew. 22. 43.
called him Lord, and he might also call him Father, for Jesus Christ is the
everlasting Father, Isa. 9. 6. All things were made by him, and without him was
not any thing made, that was made, John 1. 3. Even David had his original from
him.

Secondly, and most properly, the meaning is, that David was the root of
Christ: that is, Christ sprang from David. God raised up Christ out of the
decayed House of David, by his mighty arm. So plainly Isa. 11. 1. There shall
come forth a Rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a branch shall grow out of his
roots.

You have both together, Revel. 22. 16. I am (says Christ) the Root, and the
Offspring of David. I bear David, in regard of my Deity: and I come of David,
in regard of my Humanity: The whole amounts to thus much, That Christ is Man.
He is God of the substance of his Father, begotten before the Worlds: and Man
of the substance of his Mother, borne in the World: Of a reasonable soul, and
humane flesh subsisting. Jesus Christ our Lord was made of the Seed of David,
according to the flesh, Romans 1. 3. He took our flesh, he took all our
infirmities, sin only Heb. 4 15.
excepted.

4. I have by Gods gracious assistance finished the Doctrinall part: I enter
now upon my fourth and last task, but not the least: It is, to make
application. Put all together that I have spoken, and it will be profitable. 1.
To instruct. 2. To convince. 3. To exhort. 4. To comfort. I shall prosecute
these distinctly: the Lord order and direct my tongue, and rightly dispose your
hearts for the obedient receiving of the word. Behold, and hearken.

And first it will serve for our Instruction. 1.


From all that has been said, we may gather diverse (...): Corollaries,
Consectary conclusions; as additions for our better information, concerning
this Lion, this King.

Obs. 1. Quale Regnum.
What manner of Kingdom, the Kingdom of Christ is: A Spiritual, not a
temporal Kingdom.

The Conquest of temporal, and earthly Kings, is of Countries, Cities,
Castles, Navies. The Conquest of Christ our King, is of the hearts of his
people; he brings them into subjection. The Rule of Temporal, and Earthly
Kings, is over the bodies, and goods of their Subjects. But Christ's Throne is
set up in the Souls of his people; by his Spirit he rules in the inward man.
Temporal Kingdoms are obtained, and defended by force of Arms, carnal
Weapons, the Arm of flesh; but Christ's Kingdom is won, and maintained by
Spiritual Weapons; the Word, and Spirit. For the Weapons of our Warfare are not
carnal, but mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds, casting
down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against the
Knowledge of God, and bringing into Captivity every thought to the obedience of
Christ. 2. Cor. 10. 4. 5. Christ himself renounceth all temporal, and earthly
Dominion. Thus Jesus answered Pilate: My Kingdom is not of this World; if my
Kingdom were of this World, then would my Servants sight, that I should not be
delivered to the Jews; but now is my Kingdom not from hence, Joh. 18. 36. In
respect of Dominion, Right, and Title; all the Kingdoms of the World are the
Lord Jesus Christ's. He has jus ad rem: But in regard of Possession, and use,
he abdicates all. He never owned any temporal Possessions: When they would
have come, and taken him by force, to make him King, he departed alone
himself, and hid himself in a Mountain, Ioh. 6. 15.

The more is their folly, that by being Subjects of Christ's Kingdom, expect
chiefly temporal good things, Riches, Honors, and Pleasures. So the Jews,
they always dreamed of a worldly Kingdom, and yet expect a Messiah to come
with outward Pomp, and worldly Glory. Yea the very Apostles were nibling at
this. Act. 1. 6. Will thou at this time restore the Kingdom to Israel? And the
Mother of Zebedees Children lingered after this: Grant that these my two Sons
may sit, the one at thy right hand, and the other on thy left, Matthew. 20. 21.
in thy Kingdom. She means a temporal Kingdom: But what says Jesus Christ
to her? Ye know not what you ask; are you able to drink of the Cup that I
shall drink of, and to be baptized with the Baptism that I am baptized with?
Can you drink of a cup of deadly Wine, with me? Can you endure to be plunged
over head, and ears, in a flood of Afflictions? This you must look for in my
Kingdom: Riches, and Honors, and Offices, these are not the good things of
Christ's Kingdom; no, no. The Kingdom of God, is not meat, and drink, but
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17.

2. Against the Chiliasts, or Millenaries: That the 1000 years reign of the
Saints upon the Earth, is but a mere dream, a falsehood, a gross error. They
fancy to themselves, that a 1000 years before the general resurrection, Christ
in his humane nature shall come to Jerusalem, where he was crucified: that all
the Martyrs, and Saints departed of the old and new Testament shall rise in
their Bodies: and that they, and all the liviug Saints shall reign with him 1000
years. They shall subdue with bloodshed all wicked Princes, and disobedient
Nations. They shall live without any disturbance from any enemy without, or
within.

That they shall all live without sin, and without Ordinances: that they shall
pass these 1000 years with all manner of earthly delights, begetting many
children, eating and drinking, and making merry. This error, (first set a foot
by that Arch-heretick Cerinthus) I will not enter the lists to encounter it, I
will not meddle with the controversy. I shall only speak a word, if it may be,
to shame the fautors of this fond fancy. What, a Saint? and so addicted to
carnal pleasures? Did Christ ever enjoy such an earthly Kingdom? Alas, alas!
The Foxes have holes, and the fowls of the Air have nests, but the Sun of man
had Matthew. 8. 20.
not where to lay his head. He contemned these low things. And what must the
Saints his followers look for upon earth? Christ himself shall tell them: If
any man Matthew. 16. 24.
will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross, and follow
me. Christ went through this World bearing the Cross; and shall the Saints
look to wear Crowns here below? The generous Lion will not eat any dead
thing, or stinking carcass, only what is living, and sweet: he takes his prey
and eats it whilst it bleeds, and trembles. These earthly things, riches,
honors, pleasures, are but dead things, stinking carkases. Surely all those
whose hearts and affections feed upon them, they are not right whelps of the
Lion of the Tribe of Judah.

If you be not ashamed of the love of the World, The lust of the flesh, the
lust of the 1 John 2. 16.
eyes, and the Pride of life; The worlds Trinity, Pleasures, profits,
preferments; Yet be ashamed to affect a temporal reign, because Christ
renounced it. I shall say no more to them that expect such a carnal reign
with Christ on earth, but what Saint Augustine says to the Theife upon the
Cross, in his elegant Prosopopoeia, Lord, says the Malefactor to Jesus,
remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom? Luke 23. 42.
Kingdom, says Augustine, Quid Regium vides? What royalty, Oh! wretched man,
do thou behold? what Crown do thou see, but a Crown of Thorns? what Robe?
what Purple? but a Common Soldiers Matthew. 27. 29.
tattered Red-coat? what Scepter but a Reed? what homage, but the mocks and
taunts of the raging multitude? what throne but the Cross? what guard, but the
barbarous executioners?

Here Is Christ's reign upon earth; he reigned in suffering, he conquered by
dying, he tryumphed in the Cross: go thou and be content to do likewise.

Obser. 3. The Lord Jesus Christ is the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, the King of
his Church.

Then, the government of the Church is Monarchical. This is the happiness of
the Church: Monarchy is the best Government, and Christ is the best King: And
no King of the Church but Jesus Christ. God has put all things under his feet,
and gave him to be the head over all things to the Church, which is his body,
Ephesians. 1. 22, 23.

Here at one blow, off goes the triple Crown. The Popes Kingdom is
overthrown, and the High Priest of Rome, the Universal Bishop is deposed; if
the Pope be King, then there are two Kings of the Church, and Jesus Christ is
not THE Lion, the only King.

Bellarmine grants it, that Christ is the only King, and Monarch of the
Church, which does spiritually and invisibly govern it: yet says he, the
Church being corporal and visible, it stands in need of some one to be the
visible and highest judge to decide controversies, to compose all strifes about
Religion, to ordain all inferior Officers, Bishops, Pastors, etc. To contain
them in their duties, and keep them in unity; and the visible government of the
Church must be Monarchical. The Church of Rome has found out other Lions,
besides the Lion of the Tribe of Judah. They usually called their Popes Leones.
In 440. they had their Leo Magnus, and ten since him have borne the same name.
But the Pope must change his kind, and be content to be another Beast. A
roaring and a devouring Lion we will allow him to be, who rents and tears the
Saints of God. But Christ is the only Lion of Judah, the only King of his
Church.

That there is a visible, and external government of the Church, distinct from
the Political, by the word and discipline we affirm: But Jesus Christ has
ordained it, not Monarchical, but Aristocraticall, Matthew. 18. 17. Acts 20. 17,
28. 1 Timothy 5. 17. It must be governed by the Bishops, Pastors, Teachers,
Elders, and Deacons; in the several Precincts. The whole world is too large a
Dioces for any one mortal Creature to take care of. The care of all Churches
is beyond the strength of any one man. Only the Lion of the Tribe of Judah can
open the Book, and read it to all Churches: He only can rule, and govern all
Churches. Christ himself is present to all his Churches; namely, by his
Spirit, which is more to the advantage of all Churches, then his bodily
presence would be, Ioh. 16. 7. And therefore none of the Churches stand in need
of the Pope, to give Laws to them, or to govern them. He is an Usurper, and
must down; Christ is the Lion, the only King of the Church.

Observe. 4. Christ is the Lion of the Tribe of Judah; that is, lineally
descended from the Patriarch Judah. That may seem strange; why should not the
Messiah have sprang rather out of Reuben? Because he was the firstborn: Judah
was the fourth Son of Jacob. The reason hereof Genesis 35, 22, 23, etc.
you have, Gen, 35. 22. Reuben went and lay with Bilhah his Fathers Concubine.
He committed this foul sin, and Israel heard it: And for this cause he
disinherited Reuben, and the blessing of the Birthright fell upon Iudahs head.
He became the Lion; the Sovereignty and Princedome was his. Observe then, Sin
disinheriteth: See this, Heb. 12. 16. Least there be any fornicator, or
profane person, as Esau; who for one morsel of meat, sold his Birthright,
17. For ye know that afterward when he would have inherited the Blessing, he
was rejected. Here you have 2 distinct examples to confirm this truth. First,
the Fornicator, namely Reuben, who defiled his Fathers Concubine, and for that
was disinherited. Secondly, Esau was the firstborn, yet lost the Inheritance,
the Lordship, and Dominion, because of his profaneness; For the sentence was
passed from the mouth of God: The Elder shall serve the younger, Genesis 25. 23.

Happily, some vile, and desperate Sinners will make nothing of this. Tush, say
they, let them look to this that are borne to Lands, and great Possessions;
our Fathers have not a penny to leave us, we have no Inheritance to loose:
What, no Inheritance? Then are you Bastards and not Sons. Then God is not your
Father; all the true Children of God have a twofold Inheritance. The grace,
favor, and blessing of God in this life, and eternal glory in the life to
come. They be Heirs of God, Romans 8. 17.
and joynt-heires with Christ. But to the ungodly the Lord says: Know ye,
that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God: Be not deceived,
neither Fornicators nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers
of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor
revilers, nor extortioners, shall ever inherit the Kingdom of God.

Observe. 5. For our instruction: How miserable, deplorable, and desperate our
condition is by nature: so lost, as that nothing in Heaven or Earth could
recover us, but the power, strength, wisdom, goodness, and courage of such a
Lion as the Lion of the Tribe of Judah. We are all borne dead (as you have
heard) and should never have revived, if this Lion had not roared over us. We
are blind by nature: The natural man receives not 1 Cor. 2. 14.
the things of the spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither
can he know them: He is ignorant of God and of Christ, and of the will of God
concerning man's salvation: and in that ignorance must have perished
everlastingly, if the Lion of the Tribe of Judah had not opened the Book, and
unloosed the Seals thereof. No man has seen God at any time, the only
begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him, Ioh.
1. 18. We were all by nature under the guilt of sin, under the wrath of God: we
could never have been acquitted, we could never have been reconciled, but must
have lain under Gods fierce anger for ever, if the Lion of the Tribe of Judah
had not stepped in between the party offended, and the party offending, and
made peace: For Jesus Christ is our peace. And to effect this, the Lion was
forced to change his Kind, and to become a Lamb: a true Paschall Lamb, and
to be sacrificed for us. I beheld, says Saint John, verse 6. and lo! in the
midst of the Throne and of the four Beasts, and in the midst of the Elders
stood a Lamb as it had been slain. Behold the Lamb of God, which takes away
the sin of the World, Joh. 1. 29. For he is our peace, having abolished in his
flesh the Enmity. And that he might reconcile Ephesians. 2. 14, 15. 16.
both unto God, in one body by the Cross, having slain the Enemy thereby.

We were in the Jaw, and Paw of the 1 Pet. 5 8.
roaring Lion: who could have snatched us out of his Fangs? We had been the
Bondslaves of Satan for ever: we had been Captives in the Prison, in the
Dungeon of Hell for ever; we had been utterly devoured, if the Lion of the
Tribe of Judah had not conquered the Lion of the infernal Pit. But when he saw
that there was no man, and wondered that there was no Intercessor, therefore his
arm brought Salvation unto him, and his Righteousness it sustained him. O the
depth of our misery, in our natural, in our lost condition!

Observe. 6. That from Genesis to the Revelation, the Church of God gives the
same coat: viz. The Lion: the Arms were given, Genesis 49. 9. And the same
Ensign is advanced here again in the Text more plainly. The Jews, and the
Gentiles have all the same Christ. One, and the same Lion. Jesus Christ is the
Lion of the Tribe of Judah: And he is the Lion of the Gentiles also; Jews, and
Gentiles are all under one Prophet, Priest, King, and Captain. All that are
saved, from the beginning of the World, to the end thereof, they obtain
Salvation by Jesus Christ. There was never any way of Salvation but one. The
ancient Patriarchs, and Prophets: the ancient Jews were all Christians; when
Moses was persecuted in Egypt, he bore the reproach of Christ, Heb. 11. 26.
When the Israelites sinned in the Wilderness, they tempted Christ, 1 Cor. 10.
9. The Prophets from the beginning preached Christ, and Salvation by the
Messiah only. Christ began at Moses, and went through all the Prophets, and
expounded unto them in all the Scriptures: viz. Of the old Testament, the
things concerning himself, Luke 24. 27. All the Jews believed in the same
Christ that we do. There is one, and but one faith, Ephesians. 4. 4. And they were
all saved by the same faith, in the same Christ; who was revealed by Oracles
from Heaven, foretold, and prophesied by the Prophets, typified in the
Sacrifices. Though Christ were not manifested in the flesh, till the fullness
of time; though he was crucified in the last age of the World, yet the virtue
of his death was effectual, and available for the Salvation of all the Elect,
from the beginning of the World, to the end thereof; Jesus Christ is the same
yesterday, and to day, and for ever, Heb. 13. 8. He is the Lamb slain from
the foundation of the World, Revel. 13. 8. The old people, and the new people,
they are all of one House, and Family, and so have all one coat of Arms; The
Lion of the Tribe of Judah. All this Saint Peter shortly concludes in the
Counc(...) Jerusalem. But we believe, that through the grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, we shall be saved even as our Fathers were. Act. 15. 11.

Observe. 7. The Lion is a growing creature. Christ's Kingdom is a growing
Kingdom. This is to be noted from Genesis 49. 9. to which this Text relates. The
Patriarch Jacob there uses three several words, to signify three degrees of
the Lions growth. 1 (...) Catulus a Lions Wh^* 2. (...) Leo perfectus; a Lion
in full st(...)gth, he couched as a Lion. 3. (...) Leo Major, as an old Lion.
Those several words do set forth the beginning, Progress, and complement of
Christ's Kingdom. Of the increase of his Government, and peace there shall be
no end. Esa. 9. 7. The bounds of Christ's Kingdom seemed at first but small.
In Judah was God known, his name was great in Israel: In Salem was his
Tabernacle. Psalm. 76. 1. Salvation was of the Jews only: John 4. 22. They were
a very small people in comparison of the rest of the Nations of the World. But
afterward Christ coming in the flesh, he brings light to the Gentiles. And
all the Luc. 2. ^32
ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God. Psalm. 98 3. Christ is
the stone which is cut out with out hands: (which being at first but small)
became a great Mountain, and filled the whole earth. Dan. 2. 34. 35.

These Observations I have propounded to you for instruction, and information.
Now I shall pass on to

The second Use, of Reprehension, and that
1. OF all those that do not bow down, and prostrate before this Lion of the
Tribe of Judah. Such as receive not the Lord Jesus Christ to be their King, but
reject him. That say, as those Ephraimites, Hos. 10. 3. We have no King,
because we fear not the Lord. Or, as those malignant Citizens, that hated
Christ, and sent him this message: We will not have this man to reign over us.
Luke 19. 14. or in the Language of those Heathen Kings, and mutineers. Psalm. 2.
2, 3. That take Counsel together against the Lord, and against his Anointed,
his Christ, saying, Let us break their bonds in sunder, and cast away their
cords from us.

But are there any such? so desperately rebellious? Let that be tried. The
design of a reprehension is not to charge at all adventure, but to convince,
There goes more to make a subject of Christ's Kingdom, then a naked, and
formal profession. All men, and Women in the world are under Christ's Kingdom
of power, and that Whither they will or no. But the question is, art thou a
subject of Jesus Christ in the Kingdom of grace? I will give you some signs
of trial, whereby you may prove that. Knowledge. All that Sign. 1.
are the Subjects of Jesus Christ, they know their King: As it shall be at
Christ's second coming against men: Every eye shall see him. Revel. 1. 7. So is
it in the Kingdom of grace, when Christ comes into men: every eye sees him.
They know Christ their King: his Natures, Person, Offices, Laws, his graces,
and excellencies. No ignorant person is Christ's subject. God delivers those,
from the power of darkness. 1. Of Ignorance, whom he has translated into the
Kingdom of his dear Son. Col. 1. 13.

Go no further then this Character, and alas! how few Subjects has Christ? how
many are there that know nothing of Christ more then his bare name, Jesus* That
they can swear by: use it for a Charm, and bow to it; put of the Hat, and make
a leg, ot a curt'sy. But ask them any thing of his Person, Offices, Laws,
of his Incarnation, Passion, Resurrection, Union with Christ, etc. and they
have nothing to answer, but as Nabal did to David's servants: -- Who is David,
and who 1 Samuel 25. 10.
is the Son of Jesse? who is Christ? who is the Son of David, who is the
Son of Iesse? They know him not.

Loyalty: Fidelity, Syncerity: to give Sign 2.
him the whole heart.

It stands in Renouncing all other power, Serving of him, and none else, Loving
of him with all the heart, and trusting in him in Kissing the Son, Psalm. 2.
12.

But alas! what abundance of disloyalty is there? how little true faith? It
has been formerly observed, that many were sworn servants to the King of
England, that yet underhand were Pensioners to the King of Spain. So are there
multitudes who took Iuramentum fidelitatis, the oath of Allegiance, and
fidelity to Christ the Lion, the King, in their Baptism: but they are
Pensioners to the Devil: they serve him wholly, by sinning, Lying, Swearing,
Killing, Stealing, Sabbath-breaking, Adultery, etc. There are disloyal wives,
whorish women: who as they they sit at table, will look their Husbands in the
face, and smile: and at the same instant tread upon the Toe of their Adulterous
Lovers. So may the Lord, who is the Husband of the Church, complain: as Ezekiel.
6. 9. I am broken with their wherish heart, which has departed from me; and
with their eyes which go a whoring after their Idols. They seem to fix their
Eyes upon Christ: yet run after their Covetousness, and sinful pleasures:
contrary to the faith which they have plight with Christ, whom they call
Husband.

Honor, and fear. Honor the King. 1 Pet. 2. 17. My Son fear God, and
Sign 3.
the King. Prove. 24. 21. Here is the Character of a good subject, to honor,
and fear his Prince.

Quest. But whereby is this Honor, and fear manifested?

Answ. By service, and obedience. Serve the Lord with fear. Psalm. 2. 11. They
that dwell in the Wilderness shall bow before him. All Nations shall serve
him. Psalm. 72. 9. 10. According to this Rule, come to the trial of your selves
and alas, how few are there that are true, and faithful Subjects to the Lord
and King Jesus Christ? how few bow to this Lion? Do not the most say? if not in
down right Language, yet in their practice, do they not speak as Pharaoh? Who
is the Lord that I should obey his voice? I know not the Lord, Exo. 5. 2.
neither will I let Israel go.

May not the Lord write it before them in Esa. 30. 8, 9.
a Table, and note it a Book: that this is a rebellious people? They many of
them know the Laws of their Prince, and yet transgress against them, and walk
contrary. Christ says, thou shall not be angry with thy Brother rashly: but
they will continue malicious, and revengefull. Christ Matthew. 5. 22.
says, Thou shall not look upon a Woman to lust after her: but they have eyes,
and Verse. 28.
hearts full of Adultery. Christ says: swear not at all: but they upon every
light Verse. 34.
occasion, upon no occasion, blaspheme the name of God, and take it in vain.
Christ says: Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them
Verse. 44.
that hate you; but they continue full of malice, returning rebuke for rebuke,
curse for curse, wrong for wrong, evil for evil. Christ says, He that will be
my Disciple, let him Deny himself: they make self their Matthew. 16. 24.
God. Christ says; Let my Disciple take up his Cross, and follow me: They
say, as the reviling Passengers! if thou be the Matthew. 27. 39, 40.
Son of God, come down from the Cross, free us from the Cross, or we will not
follow thee? Christ says, Learn of me to be meek, and lowly, but they are
fierce, and proud. Christ commands faith, and love: These are the two great
Gospell-Lawes; 1 John 3. 23.
but the most of the Children of men are full of unbelief, and haters of the
Brethren. O, what a little Kingdom is Christ's Kingdom!

Sign. 4. Faithful payment of Tribute; as Augustus Caesar, so the Lion of the
Luke 2. 1.
Tribe of Judah, Christ, the King of his Church, does lay Taxes upon all his
Subjects. And it is the Character of a right Subject, to render Tribute, to
whom Tribute Romans 13. 7.
is due, and to give to Caesar, the things which are Caesar's. And according to
this rule, how small is Christ's Kingdom in comparison? There is a Tribute of
our time due to him; every seventh day is his: but alas! How many profane
persons give away that day to the Devil? Yea (which is more sad) how many are
there in these days, that mask under the name, and shape of Saints, that deny
this Tribute altogether, and maintain it, that there is no such day due to
Christ at all now under the Gospel: The morality of the Sabbath is gone, every
day is a Sabbath, no day is a Sabbath. This is the Doctrine of Devils, and
Rebels against Jesus Christ. There is a tribute to go out of our time every day
we live. There is a certain Kingdom (I remember not the name of it at present)
in which there is sometimes (but rarely) a Fish taken; which by reason of the
greatness, and excellency, and rarity, is the Kings Right, and Royalty, and
therefore called the Kings Fish. The King always gives the bulck and body of
this Fish to those that catch it; but he reserves to himself Capita, and
Caudas, the heads, and the tails, as a tribute, and acknowledgment, that all
was his, and due to him. In like manner, precious time, it is all Christ's own,
all due to him: yet he gives his Subjects the body of time; the body of the
week, the body of the day: he reserves to himself only capita, and caudas,
the ends of time, the Morning, and the Evening, and what other convenient time
may be redeemed, these are his tribute: But how few pay this Little faithfully?
How few, who give to Jesus Christ a Morning Sacrifice? How few with Isaac, go
out to meditate in the Evening? How rare is it, to find a man, that with
David, will pray, and cry aloud, Evening, and Morning, and Psalm. 55. 17.
at Noon.

There is a Tribute due to Christ our King, out of our Estates; and here the
poor Members of Jesus Christ are his Receivers. Withhold not good from them to
whom Prove. 3. 27.
it is due. The poor are (in a sense) owners of some thing in our hands, we
are but stewards under Christ, to distribute to them. I persuade my self, this
kind of tribute, I mean Alms, is as unjustly, and brokenly paid in this City,
and in this whole Nation, as it is in any part of the Christian World: and
this, I fear, Christ's Collectors, and Receivers will witness against this
hard-hearted Generation.

There are extraordinary Taxes, upon extraordinary occasions; you are pretty
well acquainted with them. Such there are in the Kingdom of Christ; in times
of trouble, and persecution, Christ calls for thy Goods, Liberty, Life, for thy
dearest blood. Tell me, art thou willing to part with these, when Christ
requires them? Sign. 5.


A good Subject will fight for his King: If my Kingdom were of this World,
says Christ, then would my Servants fight, that I should not be delivered to
the Jews, Joh. 18. 36. But alas! alas! how few Champions has the Lord Jesus
Christ? Nebuchadnezzar made a Degree, that every People, Dan. 3. 29.
Nation and Language, which speak any thing amiss, against the God of
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, shall be cut in pieces, and their houses be
made a dunghill: But now Heretics that speak amiss of God, and of Christ, and
of the Scriptures; and most horrid Blasphemers do swarm; and are, I had almost
said, tolerated, and cherished. Who fights against them? Who opposes them? Who
contends for the Jude. 2.
faith, for the truth, and for the honor of Jesus Christ? To endeavor the
increase, and honor of his Kingdom. In the multitude Sign. 6.
of people is the Kings Honor, Prove. 14. 28. He that is a right and faithful
Subject, will endeavor with all his might to bring in Subjects to the Kingdom
of Jesus Christ. I will put you upon examination now. Let Magistrates ask their
own hearts, whether they in their places by executing Judgment, do seek to
lessen Satan's Kingdom, and to enlarge the Kingdom of Christ. Let Ministers
ask their own hearts, whether they in their places, by preaching, and
practice, by life, and Doctrine, do endeavor to lessen Satan's Kingdom, and
advance the Kingdom of Jesus Christ. Let Parents, and Masters ask their own
hearts, whether they in their places do endeavor by private inflructing of
their Families, to bring their Children, and Servants, and all committed to
their charge, out of the Devils Kingdom, into the Kingdom of Jesus Christ.
Andlet all that are before me this day, ask their own hearts, whether they do
(outof a zealous desire of the increase, and honor of Christ's Kingdom)
incessantly pray, that all those that are held in captivity under Satan, under
chains of darkness; that the Lord would translate them out of the Kingdom of
darkness, Col. 1. 13.
into the Kingdom of his dear Son. Do they daily pray, thy Kingdom Come?

7. For a ful-do. And not so much a new sign, as the sum of all before: Is
sin? Is Satan cast out? Has Jesus Christ his Throne in thy heart? Does he rule
in thee altogether? art acted, not by Satan, not by the World, not by the
Flesh, but by the Spirit of Jesus Christ; then thou art his Subject.

But they that are not ruled, and governed by Christ, by his word, and Spirit,
they reject Christ, and say, we will not have this Lion, this King to Reign
over us. These are under another King; Sin Romans 6. 12.
reigns in them, and they have a King over them indeed; it is the Angel of
the bottomless Pit, whose name is Abaddon, and Apollyon, Revel. 9. 11. The
Devil is their King, and they are his Vassals. These lie under the wrath of
God: And how dreadful that is, Solomon will tell you; The Kings wrath is as
the roaring of a Lion, but his favor is as the dew upon the grass, Prove. 19.
12. And do they say? we will not have this King to reign over us; they shall
be subject at the long-run; if they will not bend in time, they shall be
broken; if they will not come into the Kingdom of grace, they shall be subdued
by the Kingdom of his power. I have sworn by my self, says the Lord; the
word is Romans 14. 11.
gone out of my mouth in righteousness, and shall not return, that to me every
Knee shall bow, Isa. 45. 23. They that here will not kiss his golden Scepter,
shall at the last, and dreadful day, be dashed in pieces with his iron Rod.
Then shall he say to his mighty Angels: Those mine Enemies that would not that
I should Reign over them, bring hither, and slay them before me, Luke 19. 27.
Those that in time will not prostrate to this Lion of the Tribe of Judah, he
will be to them at last, a fierce, and furious Lion; and will rent, and tear
them to pieces, when there is none to help.

Reprehens. 2. Is Jesus Christ the Lion of the Tribe of Judah? This checks not
only the arrogance and boldness, but also the madness and folly of all such
as provoke this Lion, and rise up against him. There are such, fighters against
God, who oppose themselves, and exalt themselves above Act. 5. 39. 2 These. 2. 4.
all that is called God. This is Antichrist. And as Saint John speaks in his
first Epistle, Chap. 2. 18. Even now there are many Antichrists, whereby we
know that it is the last time. Not only that Antichrist, the great Revel. 17.
Whore of Babylon, sitting upon seven Mountains, with a Golden cup in her
hand, full of abominations and filthiness, and drunken with the blood of the
Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus. But all Heretics and
Blasphemers that rise up against this Lion, Viz. Such as rise up against the
very person of Christ, some against his Divinity, others against his Humanity,
and many against whole Christ: Such as rise up against the Scriptures of God,
crying them down for a mere humane invention; such as rise up and fight
against the truth of Christ, the Gospel of Christ, all the Ordinances of
Christ, the Government of Christ. These my Beloved! Christ's Gospel, Truth, and
Government, are his Scepter: The rod of his strength, which he sends out of
Zyon: Psalm. 110. 2. Revel. 1. 16.
These are the sharp two-edged Sword which comes out of the mouth of Christ,
whereby he conquers and rules in the midst of his enemies: And all such as
oppose the truth, Ordinances, and Government of Jesus Christ, they set up their
power against the power of Christ; they draw out their, Sword against Christ's
Sword. Against these the Lion of the tribe of Judah will roar, yea he will
tear them in pieces.

But especially he will be feirce and terrible against them that hurt, and kill
his Whelps. But who are the Whelps of this Lion? The old Patriarch Jacob shall
tell you: Judah is the Lions Whelp, Genesis 49. 4. Judah: that is, the Church and
people of God: The anointed of the Lord, his Prophets, and his Saints, Psalm.
105. 14, 15. And here I may turn my reprehension into lamentation: Oh God! the
Heathen are come into thine inheritance, thy holy Temple Psalm. 79. 1.
have they defiled, they have laid Jerusalem on heaps. The blood of thy Saints
have they shed like water round about Jerusalem. We Verse. 3.
are become a reproach to our neighbors, a scorn and derision to them that are
round about us. The Lord has sent Prophets, and wise men, and Scribes, and
some of them have they killed, Matthew. 23. 34.
and crucified, and some of them have they scourged, and persecuted from City
to City.

I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for
the Revel. 20. 4.
word of God: and which had not worshipped the beast, neither his Image,
neither had received his mark upon their foreheads, or in their hands.

But it may be said, as the King answered Ester, Who is he? and where is he
that Hester. 7. 5. Verse. 6.
durst presume in his heart to do so? And Ester said, The Adversary and Enemy
is this wicked Haman. He was a great Favorite, politic, and potent; and he
presumed upon his own greatness. So may I say, the Adversaries and Enemies
that have done these things, are a wicked Generation; but how dare they do
these things? How dare they not? They are great in power, and riches, and
strength, able to crush all that stand in their way; they are politic and
crafty, who can overreach them? they stand strong, and who can bring them
down? They have said, We will prevail, who is Lord over Psalm. 12. 4.
us?

But can they prevail against the Lion of the tribe of Judah, whose Whelps
they have injured and killed? Let me tell these deceitful and bloody men, two
or three things.

1. That there is no creature more tender of their young ones, then the Lion:
the Lion will defend his Whelps from injury till he fall down dead; I have
read so much in approved Authors.

2. Let me tell them, they are indeed Lions themselves, base savage Lions of
the Forest. David's cruel Persecutors were gaping, ravening, and roaring Lions.
Nero was a Lion, and such are all Tyrants. Psalm. 22. 13. 2 Timothy 4. 17.
But the Lion of the Tribe of Judah is stronger then they: He is the strongest
among Lions: and a King against whom there is no rising up, Prove. 30. 30, 31.
He is a fool that will contend with one that is mightier then himself,
Eccles. 6. 10.

3. Let me tell them yet further; the Lion may seem to sleep a while, even
whilst his Whelps suffer; but he will rouse up and roar. Some write, that
the Lion never sleeps, but often seems to sleep when he is most awake. I am
sure the Lion of the Tribe of Judah does neither Psalm. 121. 4.
slumber nor sleep: He may seem to sleep, but he will awake as one out of
sleep, and like a mighty man that shouteth by reason of Wine: And he will smite
his Enemies in the hinder parts; he will put them to a perpetual reproach,
Psalm. 78. 65, 66

4. And lastly, let me tell them a Story which I have read in a learned and
approved Gesner de Quadruped.
Author, which he relates, and affirms to be true: his end is to prove, as the
strength, so the wisdom of the Lion, above other creatures.

A Lion and a Lioness, having Whelps, went both out to hunt for prey: In their
absence a Bear entered their Den, tore and killed the young Lions, not able to
defend themselves; soon after the old Lion, with the Lioness, returned to
their Den, and finding their young ones slain, they were filled with bitter
grief and great rage: out they go together to find out the Enemy, and be
revenged; they quickly espied the Bear, yet bloody, and pursued it: The Bear,
to escape their fury, climbed up into a tree, and so got out of their reach for
the present: The Lyonnesse stood still at the root of the tree: the other Lion
went away, and ranged up, and down in the Mountains; till at last, he came
where a man was hewing of wood. He makes to the man; the poor man in fear let
fall his Hatchet, and began to run away; after hastens the Lion, gets to him,
casts his tail round about him like a Girdle, embraced him and licked him; and
by the strength of his tail pulled him (led him, says my Author) whither he
would or no: First he brought him to his Hatchet, and pointed to it with his
foot, to have the man take it up: he understood not the Lions language: the
Lion then took up the Hatchet in his own mouth, and so carried it, leading the
man into his Den. There he laid down the Hatchet a while, looked upon the man,
and then looked upon his murdered Whelps, made piteous moan, and then wound
his tail about the man again, took up the Hatchet in his mouth, and (having
showed him that doleful sight) led him directly to the tree where the Bear was
on the top, and the Lioness standing at the root. The Lion looks up, showed
him the Bear; and then the man began to suspect, that it was the Bear that had
done the wrong to the Lion: He takes his Axe, heweth the tree, down falls the
Bear, and the Lion and his mate fall upon him, and tare him to pieces: that
done, the Lion carried the man, with the Hatchet, just to the place where he
found him, and there left him unhurt, to hew wood again.

This is credibly related: I will not warrant the Story to be Gospel, but I
will warrant the application to be no less. Tyrants and Persecutors, that
murder the Whelps of the Lion of the tribe of Judah, that massacre the Saints
of Christ, are usually called Bears in holy Writ. Dan. 7. 5.


For their security and safety they climb up their tree; and their tower is
the arm of flesh: their greatness, their multitudes, their amunitions, their
military skill, their riches, their friends The rich man's wealth is his strong
City, and as a high wall in his own conceit, Prove 18. 11. They think in their
ruff and gallantry, that none can pluck them down; they vaunt, who shall us
control! How soon can the Lion of the Tribe of Judah fetch Hewers out of the
Mountains, and hew down their Tree wherein they trusted, and tear them in
pieces, when there shall be none to help? Jesus Christ can soon call in
Carpenters, to Zech. 1. 20. Verss. 1
cut and saw of the horns which have scattered Judah, Israel, and Jerusalem.

And he will certainly do it. I will pass their doom (yet not I, but the Lord)
and so leave them. Therefore the Lord will be unto them as a Lion, as a
Leopard by the way he will observe them: He will meet them as a Bear that is
bereaved of her Whelps, and will rent the Caul of their heart, and there will
he devour them like a Lion, the wild Beast shall tear them. Hos. 13. 7. 8.

From hence I shall slip to the third Use: Use. 3.
viz.

Exhortation; And here I sound the Trumpet again: Behold!

Christo Duce Sequimini.


Behold! the Lion of the Tribe of Judah! The Lion couchant was the Ensign of
Judahs Tribe, and Family. And the Lord Jesus Christ, the Lion of the Tribe of
Judah, is the Ensign of his Church. And in that day, there shall be a root of
Jesse, which shall stand for an Ensign of the people: to it shall the Gentiles
seek, Isa. 11. 10. Behold this Child, the Child Jesus, is set (...) for a
Sign, or Banner, for many in Israel, for the Church.

Then follow, follow your Captain, your Ensign. Eye him by knowledge, by faith
walk after him: tread in his steps, imitate him. Christ is now lift up, here he
stands Judic 7. 17.
as Gideon, and says to you all, Look upon me, and do likewise: Or as
Abimelech, Judic. 9. 48.
what you have seen me do, make have, and do as I have done.

And here I must crave liberty to branch out my Exhortation: and that I may, as
a faithful Steward, divide to every one in Gods house their part, and portion;
I shall direct my Exhortation

1. To the New-elect, and the other Magistrates. 2. To the Ministers of the
Gospel. 3. And lastly, to all promiscuously.
My first address is to the New-elect, 1.
whose Inauguration we celebrate, and who this day enters upon the chief place
of Magistracy in this City; and also to the rest of the Magistrates present,
whether of the City or Country, that in his charge they may hear theirs.

Worthy Praetor, you are ascending this day to the highest place of Government
in this place, where God has laid out the bounds of your Habitation. Behold
the Lion of the Tribe of Judah: Behold your King, the Lord Jesus Christ; and
follow him, step after step: Be you a Lion also. Judah the Prince, and
Governor was 1 Mac. 3. 4.
a Lion. Judas Macchabeus, that Worthy, he, in all his acts, was like a Lion,
and like a Lions whelp roaring for his Prey. The Roman Emperors, and Bishops,
were called Leones, Lions. Many Kings, and Commonwealths have the Lion for
their Arms. This was symbolized by the steps 2 Chronicles. 9. 17. 18. 19.
of Solomon's Throne: The King made a great Throne of Ivory, and over-laid it
with pure Gold: And there were six steps to the Throne, and stays on each side
of the sitting place, and two Lions standing by the stays; and twelve Lions
stood there, on the one side, and on the other, upon the six steps. And even
you also give for you City Arms, a Lion, with your Castle.

Matthew. 8. 34.


The Lion is a rare Creature, not bred in many places; neither shall we see in
the Commonwealth many Lions: indeed many bear in their Banners and
Escoucheons the Lion, but in their Administration they perform none of those
things, which are propounded in the Lion.

Be you a Lion, let the rest be Lions; carry your selves like Lions. Let me
speak to you, as the Prophet did to the Altar, Isa. 29. 1. O Ariel, Ariel; that
is, Leo Dei, the Lion of God, so was the Altar called, because fire came down
from Heaven suddenly, as a Lion out of his Den, and consumed the Sacrifice. Let
fire come down from Heaven upon your heart, even the fire of true love to God,
and zeal for God. Aristotle attributes to the Lion a round face. and makes it
to represent the Sun, the shaggy hair not being unlike the glorious rays. Be
you also like the Sun, arise, and shine. Let your light so shine before men,
that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father, which is in
Heaven, Matthew. 5. 16. And this you shall do, if you will take forth these
following, and short Instructions.

1. Behold! behold the Lion of the Tribe of Judah. Eye Christ in all your
Government; go forth in the strength of Christ, and follow him step, after
step. Ever think with your self, how Christ would govern if he were in my
room. He loved righteousness, and hated wickedness. A Scepter Psalm. 45. 7.
of righteousness, is the Scepter of his Kingdom, Heb. 1. 8. He defends the
poor, and fatherless; he does Justice to the afflicted, and needy: He delivers
the poor, and needy, and rids them out of the hand of the wicked. Follow,
follow your Ensign.

2. Jesus Christ is the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, the King of his Church;
that is his charge, as Mediator. Follow your Banner; be a Lion in the Church:
Put forth your greatest power, lay out your chiefest care for the Church of
God, defend the Ministers, and people of God, let not them be made a prey,
provide faithful Pastors for every Flock: Pastors according to Gods own heart,
which may feed the people with Jer. 3: 15.
knowledge, and understanding. Christ's first care was to open the Book. Bring
into the City such able Divines, as may open Gods Book, and declare the will,
and counsel of God concerning man's Salvation. Give to faithful Ministers
countenance, and maintenance. O Norwich if thou perishest, it is thine own
fault: Can you spend so much upon Gorgeous Raiment? So much upon Sumptuous
Feasts? So much for State; and no man says, who shall open the Book to us? who
shall unloose the Seals thereof? What shall I part with all, to sit under a
Soule-saving Ministry? Christ was King of Mount Zion. Let your main Psalm. 2. 6.
care be of the Church; Be a nursing Father, be all nursing Fathers to the
Church. Isa. 49. 23.


3. Jesus Christ was a Lion, be you so, in the City, in the Country, in the
Commonwealth: be a Lion, be Lions.

Not in all things, I pray, take heed of that. In some respects, you must
strive to be unlike to Lions, viz.

1. The Lion has a fair outside. His Coat is Or continually, of yellow
color, and shines like Gold; but what is his inside? He has interiora Canis,
Entrals like a Dog. Take heed of base Hypocrisy: to Gesner.
carry a fair face, a glorious outside to Godly Ministers, and Godly People;
and yet within to retain a dogged heart to them. Take heed, of being a Saint
in the Congregation: and a Devil in thy Family, and with thy Private, and
familiar Associates.

2. The Lion is stately, Majestical, comely in his fore-parts, but he
degenerates toward his hinder parts; the more backwards, the more uncomely. So
Magistrates ordinarily, in the former part of their year, their Government is
comely, very commendable, they show some zeal for God; they roar against the
Sins, and Scandals of the City: against Alehouses, profanation of the Lords
day, and contempt of the word: but the hinder part of their year is often very
ugly; they are remiss in punishing sin, and in the administration of Justice.
They may be said to be like the Month of March: they come in like a Lion, and
go out like a Lamb; they are just like the year; when the Sun enters into Leo,
in July, then the season is hot, and vigorous, but afterward the year
declines altogether, to an Autumn first, and then to a cold Winter. Even so,
too too many Magistrates, at their first coming to a place, they show some
heat of zeal for the best things, but in a little time they decline in all
goodness. I have seen some Magistrates at their first coming into the place,
have roared as Lions against scandalous Ministers; and silly dumb, or at least
unprofitable Ministers, and have threatened to cast them out of the City, and to
get able, and godly Ministers into their room. But I have observed to the end
of the year, and what then? Truly some of the most godly, and able Ministers,
they have worried, but the scandalous, and unprofitable, still continued in
their places, as they were. Well, some Magistrates, if they be Lions, they are
like that Lion, in the 1 King. Chap. 13. verse 28. The Lion slew the Prophet
indeed, but had not eaten the Carcass, 1 King. 5.
nor slain the Ass. So there are too many that make away with the faithful
and true Prophets of the Lord; but they meddle not with the Carcass, nor with
the Ass.

Some have been better to meet (viz. At their first coming on, then to follow
(viz. after their going off.) But as for you, whom God has lifted up to the
chief place of Magistracy in this City, be you better to follow then to meet:
leave a good example, and let your last works be Revel. 2. 19.
more then your first.

3. The Lion has a foul mouth and a stinking breath, and a harsh tongue, like
a Cat, or rather like a fire: Far be it from you to be like the Lion in these:
Take heed of a foul mouth, let your very language be clean and holy: Let your
speech be always with grace, seasoned with Salt, that Col. 4. 6.
you may know how to answer every man: Light speech, vain speech, rotten
speech, is a sign of a rotten heart; a stinking breath comes from putrified
entrails. The words of a Magistrate will be watched, and his ordinary
discourses will be a great ornament, or a great deformity to him. And take heed
of a harsh tongue, I know you will meet with many provocations in your
administration of Justice; yet strive against anger and choler, and let your
tongue be smooth. Let all bitterness and wrath, and clamor, and evil
speaking, be put away Ephesians. 4. 31.
from you, with all malice. They are Lions of the Forest that have such foul
mouths, and harsh tongues: But learn you of the Lion of the tribe of Judah:
full of grace are his lips. Learn of him, for he is Psalm. 45. 2. Matthew. 11.
29.
meek and lowly in heart.

4. The Lion never seizes upon any, except he be hungry or angry: and then
they spare neither men women nor children; but satiati, innoxy; But when their
bellyes are full, they do no more hurt. I fear too many Magistrates are such
Lions, if they be angry at any man's person, they will seize upon him and punish
him severely for a small fault; but another Delinquent of a greater magnitude,
being their friend, shall go Scot-free: And are there not hungry Lions? Yes
surely, and when they are hungry they will range about, and roar against
Swearers, disorderly houses, and prophaners of the Sabbath by buying and
selling; but when they have gotten a prey, a few Barrells of Beer, or Runlets
of Wine, or Capons, or bread in secret, Prove. 9. 17.
when they are satisfied with some pretty handsome Bribe, they can be as quiet
as Lambs: But far be it from you to be such a Lion: Be you a hater of
covetousness, to do the will of God faithfully, and enjoy the light of his
countenance, let that satisfy Psalm. 4. 6:
you.

They write that in some Regions there are black Lions to be seen; too many
such I fear have been seen in our City: I beseech God, I beseech you, that we
may see no more of them.

I have showed you wherein you ought not to be like Lions: I shall endeavor
next to show you wherein you are to be like Lions. Be like the Lion of the
tribe of Judah in all things; yea, be like the ordinary and common Lion in
these following properties, qualities, and deportments.

1. The Lion is vigilant, a waking and a watchful creature: The names in the
Hebrew and Greek import so much: (...) of (...) Videre, (...) of (...), Video.
The Lion is of sharp sight, and sleeps with his eyes open: Herein be you like
the Lion; yea, be like the Lord, whose eyes run too and fro throughout the
Zach. 4. 10.
whole earth: Let your eye be every where, as far as it can possibly reach;
have your eye about in the Church, mark what is done there: Let your eye be
about in the Market, to see what measures and weights and wares are there: Let
your eye be about upon the Sabbath days, in the streets and open places, to
take notice how the day of the Lord is profaned: Let your eye be about in
every Inn and Alehouse to observe what disorders are there: Make use also of
the eyes of others that will be faithful: How can you ever reform what is
amiss, if you do not know and see what is out of order. The Lion of the tribe
of Judah, is (...), 1 Pet. 2. ult.
Visitator: I will English it in Daniels words, A watcher, and a holy one: Be
you so. Dan. 4. 13.


2. Justice appears notably in the Lion, in distributing, and in punishing.

The Lion is very just in distributing the Prey, he does not feed one, and
leave the rest hungry: but the Lion does tear in pieces Nah 2. 12.
enough for his Whelps: for every Whelp enough, and also for his Lyonesses.

The Lion is also just in punishing, Nunquam se vindicat ultra modum, so they
write: He does never take revenge beyond the measure of the injury he has
received: if any man throw a dart at him, and yet hurt him not; the Lion will
throw him down that threw the dart, but not hurt him; if any man wounds the
Lion, the Lion will wound him, and no more hurt; if any man kill a Lions Whelp,
the Lion will kill him.

And herein be you a Lion: All Magistrates! be you Lions, learn
righteousness, to execute judgment and justice. It is said of the Lion of the
Tribe of Judah, The Scepter of his Kingdom is a right Heb. 1. 8.
Scepter, or a Scepter of righteousness.

Be just in your distributions, Viz. of your favors and rewards; ever
countenance and cherish those that are good, and fear God: let your frowns be
upon those that do evil. It is observed of the Lion that he is benign to
men, but fierce against beasts; be you so. To men, First to such as are good,
extend your favor, but to Beasts, to a beastly generation, be severe. For
Rulers are not a terror to good Romans 13 3. 1 Pet. 2. 14. Dan. 6.
works, but to the evil. Governors are sent of God, for the punishment of
evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well. The Lions in the Den will
teach you what to do, not to hurt Daniel, but to fly upon false witnesses, and
persecutors of the servants of the Lord; to roar and be terrible unto them.

Be just in punishing offenders, to correct in a proportion: If the wicked man
be worthy to be beaten, the Judge shall cause him to lie down, and to be
beaten before his face, according to his fault in a certain number, Deuteronomy. 25.
2. that is according to the proportion of his sin. They were to moderate the
punishment according to the nature of the trespass, and the Delinquents
ability to bear the stripes. Eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot
Exodus 21. 24, 25.
for foot. Burning for burning, wound for wound, stripe for stripe. The Law of
retaliation is an exact law: God does all his works of Justice, as well as his
works of power, in number, weight, and measure. Learn Justice of the Lion.

3. The Lion is eminent for mercy: For mercy, in giving: the Lion is liberal
in giving, it eats not the prey alone, but divides it to other creatures which
cannot hunt for themselves: Also for mercy, in forgiving: The Lion spares all
that prostrate and bow to him. The Lion of the tribe of Judah is gentle and
merciful: Behold Matthew. 21. 5.
thy King comes to thee, he is meek: Be you also merciful.

Show mercy in giving, distribute liberally to the necessity of the Saints of
Christ. The Lion of the tribe of Judah: what did he give to relieve, and save
your Souls? He gave himself. The bread that I will Joh. 6. 51.
give, is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the World. Has Jesus
Christ given his flesh, and blood for you, and to you, and will not you give
common bread to his poor Members, to comfort their bodies, in these pinching
times?

Show mercy in forgiving. Parcere prostratis scit nobilis ira Leonis. Tu
quoque, fac simile.

The Lion did not tyrannize over the 1 King. 13. 28.
Carcass when it was down, nor tear the Ass being an innocent thing. The
Ruler must have mercy, to show compassion to the oppressed, to use mildness,
and lenity to penitent Offenders, to remit, and (...)
mitigate the rigor of the Law.

Parcere subjectis, as well as Debellare superbos.

You should consider, that even you are not without your Infirmities. All
Authors agree in this, that the Lion has a continual Fever, a quartain Ague.
The reason they give is this; God has so provided, because he is a fierce
Beast: and if he had no Infirmities of his own, he would not only insult over,
but devour also all the Beasts of the field. So also God has provided, that
the best Christians, and the highest in place, shall ever have some
Infirmities, and Fraileties, which may temper, and allay their severity against
others. Be not so hot in the Execution of Justice, as to rent, and tear every
Delinquent, that has, perhaps, failed in some petty matters. Consider your own
Infirmities. Brethren! If any man be overtaken in a sault, Gal. 6. 1.
ye which are spiritual restore such an one, in the spirit of meekness,
considering thy self, least thou also he tempted. The Lion Heb. 2 17.
of the Tribe of Judah was made like unto his Brethren. God only knows how
soon you your own selves may stand in need of mercy: and that, not only from
God, but even from men also. What you would that men should do to you, the same
do to them. This is Christ's golden Rule: And know, yea and remember it too,
That he Jam. 2. 13.
shall have Judgment without mercy, that has showed no mercy.

4. Have an especial care of your train: I mean your Associates, your
Counselors, your Officers that attend upon you: Exodus 18. 21. Psa. 16. 3.
Psalm. 101.
set them be such only as fear God, love the truth, and hate Covetousness.
Let your delight be in the Saints, and such as be excellent. Do not vouchsafe
to know a wicked, deceitful, proud, lying person. Let your eyes be upon the
faithful of the Lord, that they may dwell with you; who so walk in a perfect
way, let them serve you. And I shall endeavor to persuade you to the greater
care herein, for your Credits sake. Index animi Plin.
cauda, the motion of the Lions tail, shows what is in the Lions mind. When
his mind is quiet, his tail moves not at all; but when you see him wag his
tail, as a Dog when he fawnes, it shows great affection cauda blandiri.
to some Creature before him: when you see him beat the earth, and his back
violently with his tail, it discovers anger, wrath, and that he is about to do
some mischief. Just so it is with a Magistrate: people will judge the motion
of his heart to be such as the motion of his Viz. of his Train, his familiars,
and followers: If his Train moves Heavenward, they will conceive that he does
so too; if his Train wag, and fawn, if they show respect, and love to godly
Ministers, and godly people, they will think that he himself loves the Saints.
But if the tail of the Lion strikes against godly Ministers, and the power of
Godliness; and fawn upon ill-affected, and disorderly persons, all men will
say, he is a Malignant, what ever he pretends; we may see the motion of his
heart, by the motion of his Train.

For the Cities sake, have a care of your train: There is nothing more
mischeivous about the Lion then his tail; it being very long and very strong:
I have been told of the Lions in the Tower, that though they have been within
their Grate, yet they have put out their tail at one of the open places, and
done much hurt to a by-standing Spectator: So it may be with you, O Magistrate!
O Magistrates! you may be in your houses, in your Courts of Justice, when your
train may be abroad doing mischeife: They may do disservices in checking and
snibbing godly Ministers, and godly people, and cherishing and heartning the
ill-affected and disorderly: They may be seducing; and although they be your
Servants, yet they may be the Devils agents. Behold, the great red Dragon;
Revel. 12. 4
that is, either the Devil himself, or else some eminent instrument of the
Devil: his tail drew the third part of the stars of Heaven, and did cast
them to the Earth: that is, brought them down from minding heavenly truths,
and heavenly things, to mind Diabolical errors, and earthly things. The
Prophet that teaches lies, he Isa. 9. 15.
is the tail: So are Incendiaries: The Foxes they are indeed crafty and subtle
for themselves, and greedy of prey; yet I conceive that of themselves they are
not Incendiaries; but yet you know if they have a firebrand in their tail,
they will set the whole field on fire, and cannot help it.

Yea have a care of your train, for your own souls sake, least you be drawn
away your selves to that which is not good. Many creatures are guided by their
tail and train: and so are Lions, I fear, too often. Rehoboam was a stately
Lion, but he forsook his old train, the counsel of the 1 King. 12. 8.
old men; of the grave, wise, religious, experienced Counselors of State, and
got him a new train: He consulted with the Upstarts, the young men that were
grown up with him. And this was the ruin of ten parts of his Kingdom. Hear,
and fear, and beware: let the Lion look to his tail.

5. The Lion is eminent for Courage, and Magnanimity: A Lion is strongest
amongst Beasts, and turns not away for any. Be you so, be a Lion. Give me
leave to speak to you, as the Lord spoke to Joshuuh; when he entered upon his
place to be Lord-Generall, Jos. 1. 18.
under the Lord of Hosts. Be strong and of a good Courage, be not afraid,
neither be thou dismayed. For the Lord thy God is with thee wheresoever thou
go. Be valiant for the Lord, be not Cowed, nor over-crowed. They write that
there is a bastard, adulterate race of Lions, which are begotten of the Female
Libbards, which are degenerate, heartlesse, and cowardly; they will shake, and
tremble at the sight of fire, at the sight of a white Cock, and great
Cocks-comb, and at the crowing of a Cock, at the noise of empty Chariot-wheels.
And if I be not mistaken, such a Brood have I seen both here, and otherwhere. I
cannot but remember the Praelaticall Persecution (not so many years ago.) The
word given to the Magistrates, was. Stand out against superstitious
innovations, stand for your godly conscientious Ministers. Alas! alas, say
they, what would you have us do? My Lord Bishop will be angry with us; the King
will be informed of us, we shall run into danger: and upon this account you let
in all Popish trash, and packed away your most faithful Ministers. Any base
thing that is imposed upon the City by great ones, is it not received? Who
amongst you will strike down a disorderly Alehouse; if the Brewer that serves
it be an Alderman, or a rich man, or a Friend? How many are there of you (some
few there are, I confess, and but a few) that dare countenance a godly
Presbyterian Minister, or an Orthodox Divine? O no, the times will not bear
it: So they might quickly be out of favor indeed. Who dare adventure to punish
sin, adultery, drunkenness, swearing, Sabbath-breaking: if it dwell in the
house of a great man, or a great-friended man? Are these Leonem larva terres.
Lions, that will be scared with Vizards, and Hobgoblins? These are the
bastard brood of Lions. Hearts, and Hares, timourous above other Creatures. The
generous Lion has sharp teeth, crooked, and sharp Tallons. But as for these
they will neither bite, nor scratch. In one respect your City Arms do very
well befit you. It is a Lion with a Castle over it. Many of you can be Lions,
very Courageous, so long as you have a Castle over you, protection, and
countenance; but take away the Castle, and who will expose himself to danger?
What a sordid thing is this? There is a Lion couchant, indeed, but that is not
the posture of fear, but of triumph; having conquered first, and now lies
down by the Prey. But never yet did I read of a Lion Crouchant, or current. It
is worthy the observing in the generous Lion, that he will run apace through
the Woods, and range swiftly through the forest after the prey; but when he is
pursued and chased by hunters, he composeth himself, and is passant
altogether, keeping his pace, and turns not his head a side for any, but
walks on, as scorning, and contemning all danger. Remember that of Solomon, The
wicked flee, when no man pursues, but the righteous are bold as a Lion, Prove.
28. 1.

6. There be three things which go well, yea four, which are comely in going.
The Prove. 30. 29. 30.
Lion is the first, and chiefest of them: The Lion has a stately gate,
majesticall, orderly, and resolute: he turns not aside his head for the
greatest that he meets, not for the vast Elephant, he will dye before he will
degenerat into a disorderly pace. And herein, give me leave to exhort you to
walk as the Lion walks. How is that? First, in regard of your whole
Conversation; let your going be stately, not with proud fantastical
affectation, but humbly (an humble gate is a stately gate) soberly, holily,
with all Gravity: walk as the Lion of the Tribe of Judah: be you holy, as he is
holy. Only (says Saint Paul) Let your Conversation be such as becomes the
Gospel of Christ. Phil. 1. 27.
Take heed that you do no uncomely thing, that you set not a step awry: Have a
suitable carriage, and deportment, both to the profession of Christianity, and
also to your place of Eminency. Will it become a chief* Magistrate to walk
with vain Persons? to walk to scandalous houses? to walk on in any sin.
When one profer'd unto Scipio a beautiful Harlot, he said to him, Vellem, si
non essem Imperator, were I not a Governor, I would. Let all that are before
me this day take forth this Lesson, let your Conversation be such as becomes
the Gospel of Christ: move in a higher Sphere then the men of the World. Let
your Conversation be in Heaven. Walk like Angels: They Phil. 3. 20. Ezekiel. 1.
12. Revel. 1. 6.
went every one strait forward; whether the Spirit was to go, they went.
Remember you are Kings, Christ has made us so. Then let your going be
King-like. A King may be known by his Majesticall gate, and deportment. What
manner of men were they, Judic. 8. 18.
said Gideon to Zebah, and Zalmunna, whom ye slew at Tabor? And they answered,
as thou art, so were they; each one resembled the Children of a King. Finally
Brethren, Phil. 4. 8.
whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things
are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever
things are of good report: if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise,
think of these things.

And as I call upon you, to walk as the Lion, stately, gravely, and holily in
your whole course of life: So let me exhort you, without offense, more
particularly, to walk as Lions, even in regard of outward state, and pomp. The
Lion is the King of Beasts, and is of a comely, and stately presence, adorned
with shaggy locks, bushy hair, a golden and bright shining Mane which crowns
his head, and as Robes do cloth his neck, back, shoulders, and legs: and
truly the Lion would be a great deal more contemptible, if he were barbe'rd,
and shaven. I say, be Lions; Keep your hair, and skin; maintain your power,
and state, and the Ensigns of your Authority. King Agrippa came to the
Judgment Seat with great Act. 25. 23.
Pomp. And there is good use of these trappings to the common people, Ad
populum phaleras. These procure some reverence, awe, and terror in the people.
And I do the rather insist upon this, because I see there is an
Anabaptisticall, Enthusiasticall, levelling Generation, start up; who attempt
very subtlely, Leonem radere, to barb, and shave the Lion: to overthrow all
Magistracy. And they do not go about directly, but slily, and with wiles. They
would persuade you at first, only to lay aside your Robes, and your
Solemnities, as either being superstitious, or else not agreeable to the
simplicity of the Gospel. Have you not lately been preached out of your
Scarlet Gowns? and have you not very obediently left them off many times? Do
they not inveigh against all manner of Solemnity upon this very day of
Inauguration: well, what will the end be? If they can but once shave off the
Lions majestic hair, and flay of his skin: it will be a poor contemptible
Carcass that is left. I dare say, though outward state, and Pomp be but a
Complement, yet take that quite away, and the very Magistracy will soon
follow. Maintain your State and Power. It is observable in the Lion, that when
he walks upon stony, rocky, and rough places, that he contracts and pulls up
his Tallons, to preserve them; for if they should be broken, he could never
after seize upon his Prey* Your Power, and the Ensigns of your Authority, are
your Tallons: be careful to preserve them, else evil doers will contemn you;
and you will never be able to give them so much as a scratch.

7. Know where your strength lies. The Lions strength is in his head, and in
his breast chiefly. And there lies your strength, a good head, and a good
heart, make a good Magistrate. Labor therefore for a good head; for knowledge,
and a good understanding. Hearken to the word of the Lord: This book of the Law
shall not depart out of thy mouth, but thou shall meditate therein day, and
night; that thou may observe to do according to all that is written therein;
for then thou shall make thy way prosperous, and then shall thou have good
success. And above all, labor to have a good heart, an honest heart, a
sanctified heart, an obedient heart. Such a heart as David had; even an heart
according to Gods own heart. Which that you 1 Samuel 13, 14.
may attain unto, do as Solomon did, pray, pray. Go unto the Lord, and say, And
now oh Lord, my God, I thy Servant am in the midst of thy people, which thou
have chosen, a great people: Give therefore thy Servant an understanding heart,
to judge thy people, that I may discern between good, and bad: For who is able
to judge this thy so great a people? 1 Kin. 3. 8. 9.

Bear away with you these few words of Exhortation; and that you may the
better remember them, I shall present all before your eyes in a little Emblem.
I am Gods Herald, and I will give you a Coat of Arms, an Escoucheon, which if
you will own, you will show your self a generous Lion.

You shall bear, not Or, or argent: No no; you must not be carried away with
Silver, or Gold, or such earthly, and transitory things; but you shall bear
Azure, blew, caelestiall: Have your Conversation in Heaven.

Let your charge be a Lion: Now, as for the posture of your Lion, I have spent
some serious thoughts.

It must not be a Lion dormant. I beseech you do not sleep, neither at the
Church, nor on the Bench.

It were a shame to have it, either crouchant, or fugient. Never yet was seen
such a Coat, as a Lion current. To flee is a reproach: do not flee away, do not
turn your back on Gods truth, on Gods cause, and Gods people; and all for
cowardly fear: stand to the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, to the last drop of
blood.

Neither should the Lion be over- rampant: Rampant shows his gesture in
seizing on the Prey. The Prey that a Magistrate pursues, are evil doers.
Pursue this Prey, be rampant, but not over- rampant, not over-rigorous; mingle
mercy with Justice in your Government. Be not righteous overmuch, Eccles. 7.
16.

I had thought a Lion passant might have done well. The passant Lion shows
but half his face as he passes by: this posture shows much confidence, and
resolution: It shows also much moderation. Be you passant toward the
faithful Ministers, and Servants of God: if for conscience, and pure
conscience, they cannot swallow all things imposed by the State, pass by it,
connive; do not turn your head aside to tear, and destroy a man, that is
precious in Gods sight; only because he will not sin against his Conscience.
The Prelates were Lions indeed, but not passant: and therefore the Lord has
passed over them, even over their fair Hos. 10. 11.
neck, and brought them low.

The Lion therefore which I shall commend to you, and charge your Shield
withal, is passant guardant: The Lion passant guardant shows his whole face;
which notes not only Courage, and Resolution, but Vigilance also, and
circumspection. Before this Lion is a flame of fire: behind him an empty
Chariot, the wheels rattling: over his head a white Cock, with a great red
Comb, and crowing: under him Dogs opening their mouths against him, and
barking. Yet he keeps on his way undaunted, not changing his pace, or turning
his head aside for fear of any. And the word,

Non retrogradior.


So go on, oh you Lions of our Forest, you Magistrates of this City And more
especially you that are this day to be a Lion ascendent, to rise up to the
chief place of Magistracy. Be faithful, and zealous for the Lord.

Be vigilant in your great Office, not dormant; be salient, nimble, active, and
industrious. Be just in dispencing punishments, and rewards. To wicked, and
obstinate Offenders be rampant; and divide the Prey in a just manner:
distribute rewards, and praises to every one that does good, according to the
proportion of their deserts.

Be merciful in giving, and in forgiving. And to the Conscientious, that
cannot swallow every Imposition, be passant, go by and let them alone.

Lion! look to thy tail; take heed of a secret malignant train.

Be bold as a Lion, Courageous, let nothing turn you away from God, from the
truth of Christ, from his Ministers, and Servants.

Walk stately; let your whole Conversation be humble, sober, grave, holy, and
as becomes the Gospel: And maintain your State, and Power, and Ensigns of
your Authority. You are a Lion, let no Anabaptisticall shavers flay off your
skin, and cut off your hair. Know where your strength lies, labor for a good
head, and a good heart; then in the end you shall Couch with honor, and be Leo
quiescens.

You shall rest from your Labors, and your works shall follow you. Revel. 14.
13.


Now the Lion of the Tribe of Judah strengthen you with his might, protect you
with his power, guide you with his wisdom, embrace you with his mercy; and
give you rest, and reward in the latter end. Amen.

Exhortation 2.
To the Ministers of the Gospel. One of the Elders sounds the Trumpet in the
care of John the Apostle, and Evangelist; calls upon him to behold, to eye this
Lion of the Tribe of Judah. q. d. I charge you to mark this Lion well: And why?
Even that he may compose himself to the example of this great Prophet in all
things; in the execution of his Ministerial Function. Ministers must be Lions.
It is an old conceit: and constat ex pictura, sed non ex Scriptura. That the
four living wights, cap. 4. 7. did represent the four Evangelists. Matthew
was the Man, Luke the Ox, John the flying Eagle, and Mark the Lion. It is
certain, that those Creatures import the properties of Angels, and are Revel.
2. and 3.
Symbols, as of Magistrates, so of Ministers. The Ministers of the Gospel are
Angels, and they must be Lions too. In all things comfortable to the Lion of
the Tribe of Judah.

1. The Lion of the tribe of Judah came and took the Book out of the right
hand of him that sat upon the throne, Verse. 7. So the Minister of the Gospel,
he must take the Book in his hand: The Book of God, the holy Scriptures: he
must deliver nothing to the people, but what he finds in that Book: thence he
must fetch the will and counsel of God. Search the Scriptures, John 5. 29.
Hold fast the form of sound words, which thou have heard from me, 2 Timothy 1.
13. The Minister must take what Saint Paul writes, what the Spirit of God holds
forth in the holy Bible. There is a numerous generation now in these days,
that cast the written word aside, and pretend altogether to inspirations and
revelations; the Spirit, the Spirit. To these I say no more but this, if they
have any inspirations or revelations contrary to the Book that Christ took into
his hand, I believe verily they are from the Spirit; but it is from the evil
Spirit, from the Devil.

2. The Lion of the tribe of Judah, when he had taken the Book, he opened it,
and loosed the Seals thereof. So the Minister of the Gospel, when he has
taken the Book, he must open it: And when does he take the Book? When a
Minister is ordained, and set apart by the imposition 1 Timothy 4. 14.
of hands, and sent to do the work to which God calls him, a Bible is given
into his hand by the President of the Presbytery: And then, and not till then,
he takes the book, and having taken it he must open it; that is, he must
expound it, and apply it: So Ezra the Scribe, he took the book of the Law, and
opened it in the sight of all the people: He read in the book Nehem. 8. 5. 8.
distinctly, he gave the sense, and caused them to understand the reading. And
just so the great Master of the Assemblies, the Prophet and Doctor of his
Church: He came Luke 4. 16, 17, 18, 20.
to Nazareth, went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath day, and stood up to read:
And there was delivered unto him the book of the Prophet Esaias. And when he
had opened the book, he read his Text out of Isa. 61. 1. And then he closed the
book, and preached unto the people, showing how that Scripture was fulfilled
that day, and making all plain and clear. Saint Paul gives Ministers their
charge, 2 Timoth. 4. 1. I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ,
who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing, and his Kingdom. V.
2. Preach the Word, be instant in season, out of season: reprove, rebuke,
exhort with all long suffering and doctrine. Ministers are Lions, Lions must
not be mute.

3. The Minister must be a Lion, bold and courageous in the execution of his
office. This he must look for, to meet with great opposition, and especially
from the great men of the World, if he shall rebuke them and tell them of their
sins plainly: But the Minister of Christ must not fear the faces of men; but
with liberty and freedom of speech utter the message of the Lord, And keep
nothing of Gods Act. 20. 27.
counsel back. He must lift up his voice like a Lion, and roar in the ears
of Kings, Potentates, and the greatest Statesmen. The Lion must roar, though
the Dogs bark, and the Wolves howl, and all the Beasts of the Forest do yell
and grin. A soule-searching Ministry is gall and wormwood to unreformed
persons. Ministers that cast the Pearls of reproves before Dogs and Swine,
must expect that such brutish creatures will fly in their faces, and if it be
in their power, will rent and tear them. But what says the Lord? Thou shall
go to all that I shall send thee; and whatsoever I command thee, thou shall
speak. Be not afraid of their faces, for I am with thee to deliver thee, Jer.
1. 7, 8. Make thy face strong against their faces, and thy forehead strong
against their foreheads, Ezekiel. 3. 8. Ministers must have undaunted resolutions,
ahd be as bold as Lions.

4. Ministers of the Gospel must not forget the stately gate of the Lion: The
Lion is comely in his going. Ministers should be careful above all others, to
walk as becomes the Gospel of Christ: A holy walking, that is the comely
walking. I beseech you behold how the high Priest is adorned, and how he walks:
He had a plate of pure Gold upon his forehead, and upon that Plate was
engraven, Exodus 28. 36. Exodus 23. 30.
HOLINESS TO THE LORD. Upon his Brestplate the URIM and the THUMMIM, Viz, the
light of knowledge, and the perfection of holiness; these were upon Aarons
heart, when he walks, when he goes in before the Lord. He had a Robe down
to his feet, and toward the bottom, beneath upon the hemme of it a golden
Bell, and a Pomegranate, a Golden Bell, and a Pomegranate round about. Exodus
28. 34.
The golden Bell signifies the sound of pure Doctrine, and the Pomegranate a
sweet, and savoury fruit, notes that holiness of Conversation that was in the
High Priest: view him well, and you see him adorned with holiness Cap a pe,
from head to foot. It is the duty of Ministers, Vivere concionibus, and
concionari moribus, to live Sermons, Melius docemur vita quam verbo, Examples
prevail more with men then Precepts. In all things show thy Tit. 2. 7.
self a Pattern of good Works (says Paul to Titus) in Doctrine,
uncorruptnesse, gravity, sincerity. In the frame of the Temple upon the
borders, were painted, and engraven 1 King 7. 29.
Lions, Oxen, and Cherubims: To show what kind of persons they ought to be, who
serve in Gods house. As Angels for knowledge, to dive into the Mysteries of the
Gospel; laborious and painful as the Ox. They must be Lions also for
courage, and boldness, and they must be comely in their going, their
Conversation must be holy, and lovely.

I shall commend at this time but one thing more to my Brethren of the
Ministry, and that is Prayer: Let us be much, and earnest in Prayer. Alas! we
shall never be able to open the Book, except the Lion of the Tribe of Judah
help us, verse 4. John wept much, because none was found worthy to open the
Book, and to read it; We must weep, and pray, pray, and weep, that we may be
enabled to open the Book: For there are sublime things in the Book, and hard
to be understood. Alas our hearts will fail us, and we 2 Pet. 3. 16.
shall be afraid of the faces of men, if the Lion of the Tribe of Judah do not
strengthen us, and put Courage into us, and keep up our Spirits; to him
therefore we naught to make our Addresses. Yea, in this let me beg help for my
self, and others: wel-beloved, I speak to you all that are before me this day,
in the words of Saint Paul, Ephesians. 6. 18. Pray always, with all prayer, and
supplication of the Spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance, and
supplication for all Saints. 19. And for me, and for all the faithful Ministers
of the Gospel, that utterance may be given unto us, that we may open our
mouths BOLDLY, to make known the mystery of the Gospel.

Exhortation. 3.
I pass on now to the third Exhortation, and that is to all in general, men,
women, and young ones. And there are various, and sundry duties which I shall
endeavor to persuade you to.

And first, Is Jesus Christ the Lion of the Tribe of Judah? Then prostrate, bow
to B^e Subjacts.
this Lion, tremble at his voice. Is Christ the King of his Church and People;
then come all in, shake off all other yoakes; Satan's Dominion, and Sins Reign:
and list under this King, be his Subjects, kiss his Scepter and kneel to him,
know your King; be loyal to him, give him your whole heart, honor, fear, and
obey him. give to Caesar that which is Caesar's, pay him all his Tribute; of
time, of your Estates, of every thing. Fight for him; contend for the faith,
the truth, the honor of Jesus Christ: Let the Lord Jesus Christ have a Throne
in all your hearts; say, We have no King but the Lord Jesus Christ.

To move you hereunto, consider the excellency of this Kingdom, above all
other Kingdoms in the World.

It has the best King, He is fairer then Psalm. 45. 2.
the Children of men. He is the supreme, the absolute King of himself, all
other earthly Kings are but Viceroys, Lord-deputies. All other Kings are but
mere men, he is God, and man; all other Kings have but a little piece of earth
to set their feet upon: he is the great Monarch of Heaven and Earth; all other
Kings wear but a corruptible 1 Cor. 9. 25.
Crown, but his Kingdom endures for ever. Such a King, there is not another.
What the Queen of Sheba said of Solomon, the Type, has its Complement, and
perfection in Jesus Christ: Happy are the Servants, and Subjects of this King.
1 King. 10. 8. 9.
Blessed be the Lord thy God, Oh thou Lion of the Tribe of Judah! which
delighted in thee, to see thee on the Throne of Israel, because the Lord loved
his Israel for ever; therefore made he thee King. It has the best Situation, I
have set my King upon my holy Psalm. 2. 6.
hill of Zion. There is the nether Zion, and the upper Zion, both pleasant. Of
the nether, or lower Zion (the Pilgrim Church upon Earth) it is said;
Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole Earth is Mount Psalm. 48. 2. 3.
Zion, the City of the great King. And what is the beauty thereof? The presence
of God dwelling in the midst his people, and protects them. God is known in her
Palaces for a Refuge Of the upper Zion (the triumphant Church in Heaven) it is
said, Ye are come unto Mount Zion, and unto the City of the living God, the
heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels, to the general
Assembly, and Church of the firstborn which are written in Heaven; and to God
the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus.
Heb. 12 22, 23, 24.

It has the best Laws. What Nation is Deuteronomy. 4. 8.
there so great, that has Statutes, and Judgments so righteous, as all this
Law which I set before you this day? Deuteronomy. 4. 8. In the Laws of other
Kingdoms, in humane Laws, there is the wisdom of men; but in Christ's Laws
there is the wisdom of God. Humane Laws may be unjust, Christ's Laws are all
righteous, and holy. The Laws of other Kings may be burdensome, and
tyrannical, Christ's Yoke is ever easy. Matthew. 11. 29. Psalm. 19. 7.
All other Laws are imperfect, but Christ's Law is perfect, converting the
Soul. Other Kings they can write their Laws in Tables, and hang them up upon
(...)sts, and Pillars, but they cannot sway the hearts of their Subjects to
obedience: but Christ puts his Law in their inward parts, and writes it in
their hearts. Jer. 31. 33. Yet more; In this Kingdom are the best Honors,
Preferments, Dignities, and Privileges. There are all Favorites, they have
ever the Kings mouth, and ear: They stand before him and hear him speak to
them in the Gospel, and by the secret whisperings of his Spirit in their
Souls. And he always holds out the Golden Scepter to them; his ear is ever
open to Ester. 5. 2.
their Prayers: And is it a small thing to be Favorite to such a King? In the
light of the Kings Countenance is life, and his favor is as the latter rain,
Prove. 16. 15.

They are, and shall be all Kings. They are already Kings in a state of grace:
Christ has made us Kings, Revel. 1. 6. And they have a better Kingdom in
reversion, they shall be Kings in the Kingdom of glory. Fear not little
Flock, it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom. Luke 12. 32.

Come in then, all you that are yet under the tyranny of the roaring Lion;
follow the Lion of the Tribe of Judah: And that you may (...)o so, hearken to
the voice of his Heralds; he sends them abroad to invite into his Kingdom:
The ministers of the Gospel are his Messengers, by them he sends forth the rod
of his strength, Psalm. 110. 2.

Pray, pray, Thy Kingdom come, Matthew. 6. 10. You have taken the Oath of
Allegiance, and Supremacy already, all of you have put your Seal too in your
Baptism; Now take heed that you revolt not, come and join to the Tribe of
Judah: The Trumpet is blown, now look to it; who is of the Lords side?

2. Is Jesus Christ the Lion of Judah, the anointed King of his Church? Then
be exhorted, in the next place, to partake of his Anointing; take you also
Kingly honor, be you all Kings. The men of Judah, 1 John 2. 27. Be Kings.
yea and the women too, even the whole Tribe were Lions. Behold the people
shall rise up as a great Lion, and lift up himself as a young Lion; he shall
not lie down, until he eat of the Prey, and drink the blood of the slain.
Numb, 23. 24.

And here I shall give you a Commission to be as bold as Apame, the Kings
Concubine, in the Apocryphal book, She 1 Esdr. 4. 30. 31.
took the Crown off the Kings head, and put it upon her own; yet in the mean
season the King gaped, and gazed on her, and still grew more fond. Do you so,
take the Crown of Christ, and put it on; not to depose him, but to communicate
with him in his Kingly Office, yea in all the parts of it. For this Lion of the
Tribe of Judah has made us Revel. 5. 10.
unto our God Kings, and we shall reign on the Earth, as you have it in the
10. verse.

Do you communicate with Christ, in the business of Vocation; he gains and
gathers his Subjects by calling them in: Do you so; let Ministers of the
Gospel in their holy Function, and let every man and woman in their private
Station, endeavor to gain, and gather Subjects out of Satan's Kingdom into the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ: Do what thou can to make thy Flock, to make thy
Children, to make thy Servants, to make thy Friends the Subjects of the Lion of
the Tribe of Judah. Let the Minister do this by preaching, the private person
by education, instruction, and all by Prayer for those under their charge. When
thou art converted, strengthen thy Brethren, Luke 22. 32.

Communicate also with Christ, in the work of ruling: rule well in your
several charges: Let the Elders rule well their Flocks; Let the Householders
keep good 1 Timothy 5. 17.
rule in their Houses and Families; and in especial manner set up Christ's
Government in your hearts; rule your unrulely Passions, and Perturbations, and
keep them in good order.

Again, Christ as a King protects his Church, his Subjects. He is a shield to
them that trust in him. Communicate with him Prove. 30. 5.
in this part of his Kingly Office also: Be every one of you, according to your
power and places, a defense, and a countenance to the true, and poor people of
God; Magistrates by their Authority, and all people by their Purses and
Prayers; let them be as the clefts of the Rock, for Christ's Song. 2. 14.
chased Doves to hide and shelter in. And you must be Kings for War: Christ had
many sharp, and sore Conflicts: you also must fight, and be ever in the field;
you must take up Arms against Satan, against sinful lusts that fight against
the 1 Pet. 2. 11.
Soul. You must war against your own corrupt wills, and carnal reasons; yea,
you must fight against self, dearest self. If any man will come after me
(says our King, and Captain) let him deny himself, and take up his Cross and
follow me, Matthew. 16. 24. Beat down rebellious and stirring Affections.
Exercise judiciary power, destroy your Malefactors; slay, mortify your members
which are upon the earth, fornication, Col. 3. 5.
uncleanness, inordinate affections, evil concupisence, and covetousness.

Once more, Communicate with Christ in his Kingly Office, in respect of his
triumph and Royalty. When he had conquered, When he ascended up on high, he led
Captivity Captive, and gave gifts unto 2 Samuel 24. 23.
men, Ephesians. 4. 8. Araunah gave as a King: Christ has made you Kings, you
partake of his Anointing, give gifts unto men: give Alms, spiritual Alms,
corporal Alms; This is a Character of a spiritual King. He has dispersed
abroad, he has given to the poor: his righteousness endures for ever, his
horn shall be exalted with honor, Psalm. 112. 9.

Thus let me persuade you to be Kings; For if you partake of his Anointing in
grace, you shall also reign with him in glory. There are multitudes that will
not strike a stroke for Christ, but let the strong man go away withal. But as
for you my beloved, be as the Tribe of Judah, Lions, Kings. Ephraim compasses
me about with lies, and the house of Israel with deceit, says the Lord; But
Judah yet rules with God, and is faithful with the Saints, Hos. 11. 12.

3. Jesus Christ is the Lion, because King, and Governor of his Church. So all
other Kings, and Magistrates, they are Lions; Hieroglyphically represented by
that generous, and magnanimous Creature. Are they Lions? then be exhorted to
prostrate to them also. The Prince of the Tribe of Judah is a Lion: then, his
Fathers Children shall bow down before him, Genesis 49. 8.

Let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers, Romans 13. 1. Give to Caesar
the Matthew. 22. 21.
things that are Caesar's; Honor, Obedience, and Tribute. Submit your selves to
every ordinance of man, for the Lords sake; whether it be to the King as
supreme; or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him, for the
punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well. Fear God,
honor the King, 1 Pet. 2. 13. 14. 17. Couch to the Civil Magistrate. The
Donatists, and their Successors, Anabaptists, and Libertines take away all
Magistracy out of the World; they are Children of Belial, that will not be
subject to any Yoke. Though some of them be constrained to acknowledge
Magistracy under the old Testament, yet they maintain it unlawful among
Christians, under the new Testament. But you have heard it from Christ's own
mouth, and Paul's Pen, That Magistracy is a Gospel Ordinance, and a great
blessing. Take away Magistracy, and the World will soon ruin. I exhort you
therefore, that first of all, Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving
of thanks he made for all men, for Kings, and for all that are in Authority,
that we may lead a godly, and peaceable life, in all godliness, and honesty, 1 Timothy 2. 1. 2.

4. Christ is the Lion: thereby is signified his Prophetical office, as well
as his Kingly. He shall roar like a Lion: Says the Prophet Hosea: cap. 11.
10. That is, says the gloss: Christ shall cause the sound of the Gospel to
sound all the world over. All God's faithful Ministers are Lions also. Then be
exhorted to hearken to the Prophets of the Lord, when they speak in the name of
the Lord: I say to thee, the Lion of the Tribe of Judah roares in thine ears.
The Lion has roared: what is that? The Lord God has spoken. Amos 3. 8. who will
not fear, who will not tremble?

You shall meet with a remarkable story in the first Book of the Kings, cap.
20. 35. One of the Prophets said unto his Neighbor in the word of the Lord:
Smite me I pray thee: a strange command, one would think: and the man refused
to smite him. q. d. I will obey you in something else, but not in this. What
says the Prophet to him: because thou have not obeyed the voice of the Lord,
behold, as soon as thou art departed from me, a Lion shall slay thee. And as
soon as he was departed from him, a Lion found him, and slew him. Did the Lord
show this severity, for not obeying one word spoken in his name by his Prophet,
and that so unusual a command: what shall the end of those be that contradict
the Prophets of the Lord? that speak in the language of those, Ierem. 44. 16.
As for the word that thou have spoken unto us, in the name of the Lord, we will
not hearken unto thee. What shall the end of those be, of all those, that in
these days hate, despise, and contemn the Ministers of the Gospel? yea, and
the very office of the Ministry, and make it their design to root it out. I
fear, I fear, my beloved! that we may read England's doom. 2 Chronicles. 36. 15.
And the Lord God of their Fathers sent to them by his Messengers, rising up
betimes, and sending: because he had compassion on his people, and on his
dwelling place. 16. But they mocked the Messengers of God, and despised his
words, and misused his Prophets: until the wrath of the Lord arose against his
people, till there was no remedy: if the Lion of the Tribe of Judah be not
hearkened unto, nor regarded when he roares in the preaching of the Gospel: he
will soon roar against those Rebels in fury, and rent them in pieces, and
there shall be none to help.

5. Jesus Christ is the Lion of the Tribe of Judah; that is, lineally descended
out of that Tribe, from the loins of the Patriarch Judah. Then be exhorted to
have respect to that Tribe; love, and honor the Jews: What a dear love had
Saint Paul to his Countrymen! He calls Christ to witness, that he had great
heaviness; and continual sorrow in his heart. That he could wish himself
accursed from Christ for his Brethren, his Kinsmen according to the flesh. And
why? Because they are Israelites, and the adoption, and the glory, and the
Covenant pertains to them. But especially, because of them, as concerning the
flesh, Christ came. Do you love the branch, and will you not love the root? yea,
though it be but the root of his humanity?

Ob. But some will say, the Jews did crucify the Lord of life, and therefore
deserve to be detested. And do we not say well, we hate such a one, as we hate
a Jew?

Answ. Take heed of malice, and bitterness against that Nation. They did slay
the Messiah the holy one, its true; but they did it ignorantly in unbeleife;
and therefore Christ prays for them, Father, forgive them, for they know not
what they do, Luke 23. 34.

And they have suffered abundantly for their sin; as their wickedness was
exceeding great, so the Lord has been very severe to them. The blood of Christ
lies heavy upon them, and upon their Children: They are scattered in all
Lands, and are for a reproach, and a hissing unto this day. But has God cast
off his people? God Romans 11. 1.
forbid. God will deal more favorably with the Jews. afterward. They have
fallen by the edge of the Sword, and are led away Captive into all Nations, and
Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles, til the time of the Gentiles be
fulfilled, Luke 21. 24. Now they are trodden under foot, but its only for a
time. They are, as you see, miraculously preserved in all Countries, though
hated, and oppressed: And God will not forget his Covenant made with Abraham,
and his friend so many ages since. It is not for nothing, that Christ is styled
the glory of the people Israel. Luke 2. 32.

And doubtless they shall have a glorious Restoration. As for the dream of
another temporal, pompous Monarchy on Earth, I leave it to the fanaticall
Millenaries; but that there shall be a spiritual conversion of the Jews,
which shall exceed in glory, I conceive it to be most plain. The Redeemer shall
come to Zion, and unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob, says the
Lord: As for me, this is my Covenant with them, says the Lord; My Spirit that
is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out
of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy Seed, says the Lord, from
henceforth, and for ever. Isa. 59. 20. 21.

For I would not Brethren, says Saint Paul, that ye should be ignorant of
this Mystery, that blindness in part is happened to Israel, until the
fullness of the Gentiles be come in, and so all Israel shall be saved: As it is
written, there shall come out of Zion the Deliverer, and shall turn away
ungodliness from Jacob. Romans 11. 25. 26. Since therefore, they are broken off
but for a time, since we look for their restoration, and that ere long there
will be one Sheepfold under one Shepherd, since we hope to meet a^remnant of
them, according to the Romans 11. 5.
election of grace (as God shall call) in the Kingdom of Glory: Let us do
nothing to exasperate them, and so to hinder their Conversion, but let us love
them, as the root of the Lion of the Tribe of Judah; and pray for them, that
God would persuade Shem to dwell in the Tents of Japhet.

6. Behold, Here I sound the Trumpet yet again: Behold! and in the sixth place
I shall endeavor to quicken, and stir you up to behold the Lion of the Tribe
of Judah. My last word of Exhortation is, to persuade you to eye the Lord Jesus
Christ with all diligence, and intention.

Look upon him, that you may imitate, and conform your selves to him in all
things. As I have observed it in the Limner when he draws a Picture; his eye
is ever and anon upon the Person whose similitude he takes: a line, and then a
look, and all, that he may draw it to the life. So ought you ever to eye
Christ, set his example before you continually, that you may be so many living
Representations of Christ; that all that behold you, may say, that Christ
lives in you. The Lion was Judahs Ensign, which they followed in their
war-fare; Jesus Christ is our Ensign, and Banner: Follow, follow your Colors.

Follow the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, in His Kingly Virtues, Graces. Stately
Deportment.


1. In his Kingly Graces; Learn of me, says Christ, that I am lowly and meek,
Matthew. 11. 29.

He is wise, and be you renewed in knowledge, in wisdom according to his
Image, Col. 3. 10.

He is strong as a Lion; be you so: Be strong in faith, Rom 4. 20. Be strong in
the Lord, and in the power of his might, Ephesians. 6. 10.

He is just, and merciful, I will put them he together. And herein he is a
pattern to thee: He has showed thee, oh man! what is good, and what does the
Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly
with thy God, Micah 6. 8. Put on therefore (as the elect of God, holy, and
beloved) bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness,
long-suffering. Forbearing one another, and forgiving one another. Coloss. 3.
12. 13.

2. Behold, follow the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, in his stately Deportment,
walk as he walks; the Lion has a comely gate: Let your whole practice be
conformable to the example of Christ, I have given you an example, that you
should do as I have done, Joh. 13. 15. Let us walk honestly, says Saint Paul,
Romans 13. 13. The (...). composite.
word signifies decently, composedly. How is that? verse 14. By putting on the
Lord Jesus Christ. 1. By expressing the life of Christ in your lives. Christ is
represented to you here, as your King, and Captain: behold your King, and as
you see him do, so do you. In every Action set Christ before your eyes; and
ever think with your selves, how would Jesus Christ act if he were in my room.
Art thou a Magistrate, and going to the Bench: think thus with thy self, how
would Christ proceed in executing Judgment if he were in my room? Art thou a
Minister, and going into the Pulpit? think with thy self, how would Christ
preach of this subject if he were in my room? Art thou a Tradesman, a
Husbandman, a Servant, a Child? Think with thy self, how would Christ carry
himself in my Calling, in my Relation? Art thou to treat with thy Adversary
about reconciliation? think with thy self, how would Christ temper himself?
how has Christ carried himself to us when we were Enemies? You are Romans 5. 10.
now going from hence to a sumptuous Feast; oh! think with your selves, what
would Christ do if he were at the Table? in what measure would he eat, and
drink? what divine, and holy discourse would he have? When you are at your rich
Dishes, and full Cups: Behold! the Lion of the Tribe of Judah. Do all things
according to the pattern showed thee in the Mount, Heb. 8. 5. Do not feed your
selves without fear. Chrysostom wishes that people at their Feasts, and Cups
would think of Hell, and fear. The Lion trembles at fire: Herein be Lions,
think of the fire of Hell, and be afraid.

Yet further, the Lion loves, and frequents the tops of Mountains: So did the
Lion of the Tribe of Judah, often, Luke 6. 12.
very often; whole Nights together he was in the Mountains praying: Mount
Olivet was his Chapel of ease, his Oratory. Follow the Lion to the Mount, be
much in retirement, in secret prayer, and communion with God.

One thing more let me commend to you, and then I shall cease exhorting. The
doleful times call for it; the Lion is compassionate and liberal: he will
distribute of his Prey not only to his Whelps, but Gesner.
also to Beasts of another kind, if they be hungry. So the Lion of the Tribe
of Judah, he is a compassionate King, and a merciful High Priest: he went
about doing good, healing diseases, visiting the Matthew. 4. 23. Matthew. 14. 15,
16, etc.
sick, feeding the people, thousands of them that were ready to faint in the
Wilderness. Herein I beseech you, behold the Lion of the Tribe of Judah! When
you are full, distribute of the Prey to those that are hungry, and for whom
nothing is prepared, you that are now ascending to the highest Seat of
Authority in this City, and the rest of the Magistrates, I beseech you have
compassion of the poor: Look into the poor ruinous dismal Towers, and Cottages;
mark the many pale and wanne faces, and the trembling hands, think of the
hungry and almost-starved multitude: In the name of the Lion of the Tribe of
Judah, take care for them; let something be distributed amongst them, to
refresh their bowels. I, but perhaps you will say, you talk of Cost, and this
will ask a deal of labor, and take us off from our worldly Affairs; be it
so, let me tell you in answer to your Objection, your labor shall not be in
vain, your cost shall not be lost: what you do for the poor Members of Christ,
Christ takes it as done to himself. The King shall say, in as much as you have
done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me,
Matthew. 25. 40. The Lion is the most grateful Creature in the world: And here
give me leave to insert a Story, both for the remarkablenesse of it, and also
for the aptness of it. (as I apprehend) to our present purpose: A. Gell. Noct.
At. Relates the story from Appion Polyhister: Who did affirm to him, that in
the City of Rome he saw the thing with his own eyes, he was a Spectator. There
were in Rome many monstrous and savage Beasts: Above all the rest there was one
Lion, who for vast magnitude, incredible strength, dreadful roaring, long, and
bushy hair waving about his head, neck, back, and legs, was terrible to
behold, and struck the Beholders with amazement. A Consul's Servant, whose name
was Androdus for an offense was brought forth to this Lion, either to fight
with him, and conquer him, or else to be torn in pieces by the Lion, and
nothing else could be expected. When this fierce Lion saw Androdus afar off,
he made a sudden stand, as it were in admiration! afterward by little, and
little he comes on to the man, tanquam noscitabundus: as if he thought he knew
him, and were desirous to know him more perfectly. Then he wags his tail after
the manner of a fawning Dog, rubs his body against the body of Androdus (who
was almost dead for fear) and gently strokes his thighs and hands with his
tongue: Upon this kindness of the Lion, Androdus begins to recover his Spirit,
and fixing his eyes upon the Lion, he, and the Lion, as knowing one another,
began to renew acquaintance, and rejoice, and play together.

Hereupon there was a strange admiration, and shout. Androdus was called before
Caesar; and the cause enquired why the most fierce, and barbarous of all the
Lions, should spare him, and none else. Then Androdus gave a full account of
the whole matter. I was a Servant, says he, to a Proconsul, a Lord-deputy in
Africa; there having hard use, and continual stripes from my Master. I was
forced to run away. Wandering in solitudes, that I might not be found again by
my Master: about Noontide in a hot scortching day, I entered a Cave for
coolness; presently after, this very Lion came into the same Den with a
halting, and bloody foot, sighing, and moaning, and as begging pity. At the
first sight of the Lion I was terrified; but the Lion soon espying me in a
corner of his Den, came toward me in a peaceable manner, held up his wounded
foot, showed it me as craving my help: I pulled out of the plant of his foot,
a great Stirpem ingentem.
thorn, or shiver that stuck in it, nipped out the blood and corruption,
cleansed the wound, and healed it. The Lion finding ease, and cure by my
industry, rested his foot in my hand. And from that day I lived three years in
that Den, with this Lion: and we had the same diet. For when the Lion had
hunted, and caught his Prey, he would bring the fattest, and loveliest pieces
to me; and because I wanted fire, I roasted them against the Sun, dried them,
and eat them. But growing weary of that kind of life with the wild Beast; when
on a day, the Lion was gone out after Prey, I left the Den, and ran away: and
after some three days wandering, I was taken by the Soldiers, and brought to
Rome to my Master; he presently condemned me to be thrown to this Lion. And I
understand, that as soon as ever I was parted from the Lion, the Lion also was
taken in his ranging abroad, and brought to Rome: and now shows me this
kindness for his cure. Appion said, he heard Androdus make this relation. It
was soon published abroad: and all the men petitioned Caesar that the man might
be pardoned, and set free, and that the Lion might be given to him. And upon
the request of the people, it was granted. Afterward, says Appion, we saw
Androdus leading the Lion about the City by a small Cord, from Tavern to
Tavern: the people gave him money, and all as they met him, would say, Hic est
Leo, hospes hominis, Hic est homo, medicus Leonis. Here is the Lion the man's
Landlord, and here is the man, the Lions Surgeon.

The Story has been something long, I will give you the Application short and
quick: The man plucked a thorn out of the Lions foot, the Lion gave the man
his life for a reward: And will not the Lion of the Tribe of Judah do more then
a Lion of the Forest? Do thou see in any of Christ poor Members, a thorn? a
thorn of extreme poverty, and want? a thorn of misery, that they are ready to
perish? Pull out the thorn, ease them, help them, refresh their bowels: Christ
will give you life, even eternal life for your reward. He will feed and
protect you here, and glorify you hereafter.

Here what this Lion, this King, this Jesus will say to you when he shall come
in his glory. Come ye blessed of my Father, receive the Kingdom prepared for
you from the foundation of the world: For I was an hungered, and you gave nee
meat, I was thirsty, and you gave me drink, I was a stranger, and you took me
in, naked, and you clothed me, I was sick, and you visited me, I was in prison,
and you came unto me, Matthew. 25. 34. 35. 36. Blessed are the merciful, for
they shall obtain mercy. Matthew. 5. 7. You have heard the word of Exhortation;
now follows the fourth, and last.

Use 4. Of Consolation, Jesus Christ is the Lion of the Tribe of Judah; the
Almighty, and eternal King of his Church. This opens a wels-spring of comfort
to all the Lions true-bred Whelps, to all the Subjects of Christ's spiritual
Kingdom. Psalm. 97. 1. 8.
The Lord Jesus Christ reigns, let the Earth rejoice, let the multitude of
the Isles be glad thereof. Zion heard, and was glad, and the Daughters of Judah
rejoiced, because of thy judgments, oh Lord. Various, and manifold are the
Consolations, I will propound them to you, that your joy may be full, and as
shortly as is possible, because I hasten to a conclusion, and desire not to
trespass too much upon your patience.

Consel. 1. Against all the Churches Enemies. The Church, and people of God,
may always sing that Psalm: O Lord how are my Foes increased? And especially
Psalm. 3.
at this time. Now doubtless, Rome, and Hell, all Jesuited spirits, all
Heretics, and Sectaries (who love to fish in troubled waters) are busily
plotting the overthrow of our Religion, and Peace: But this is the comfort, the
Church is not without a King, a p^^ent King: For the Lord Jesus Christ is our
Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King, he will save us, Isa.
33. 22.

He may seem a Lion dermant for a season, he slept till the tempest was very
high, Matthew. 8. 24. But the Lion is awake, even when he seems to sleep. He
that keeps Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep. Psalm. 121. 4. The Lord
shall awake as one out of Psalm. 78. 65. 66.
sleep, and like a mighty man that shouteth by reason of Wine; and he shall
smite his Enemies in the hinder parts, and put them to a perpetual reproach.
All attempts against the Church are vain. The Gates of Hell shall not prevail
against it: The Lord Jesus Matt. 16. 18.
Christ will be a Lion to them, and rent, and tear Zions Enemies in pieces,
and there shall be none to help. For he must reign till he has put all
Enemies under his feet, 1 Cor. 15. 35.

Consol. 2. Against our ignorance and blindness: The poor Christian complains
as Agur, Prove. 30. 2. Surely, I am more brutish then any man, and have not the
understanding of a man. 3. I neither learned wisdom, nor have the knowledge of
the holy. And for this he weeps, and laments: But hear what the Elder says,
Weep not, behold the Lion of the Tribe of Judah has prevailed to open the
Book, and to loose the seven Seals thereof. The Lord Jesus Christ is
appointed of God, to reveal the decree, the whole will, and counsel of God
concerning man's Salvation. He is made unto us wisdom, 1 Cor. 1 30. No man has
seen God at any time: the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the
Father, he has declared him, John. 1. 18. There followed great joy, Songs,
and Music in Heaven, when the Lion of the Tribe of Judah had taken the Book;
and undertaken to open it.

Consol. 3. Against all our spiritual Enemies, the Enemies of our Salvation:
Sin, Death, the Devil. The Lion of the Tribe, of Judah (...), Vicit, he has
overcome, and prevailed; He has vanquished Death, Hell, and all the power of
the Adversary. The Lion of the Tribe of Judah has spoiled the roaring Lion,
that walks about, seeking to devour us. He overcame in dying, and so
obtained high Dignity, and became Lord of all. Now he coucheth as a Lion, and
none can drive him from his Prey, which he caught out of the Dragons Paws.
Saint Paul is Herald to the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, proclaims his
Victory, and declares him Conqueror, with a word of triumph, and solemnity.
Death is swallowed up in Victory: Oh death! where is thy Sting? Oh Grave where
is thy Victory? The Sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law.
But thanks be to God, which gives us Victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. 1
Cor. 15. 54, 55, 56, 57. All the strength of death and the Devil, was from
sin, but Christ has taken that quite away. Here in this verse John hears of
Christ as a Lion, but in the next verse he sees him as a Lamb slain,
sacrificed: and he is the Lamb of God, which takes away the sin of the world,
Ioh. 1. 29. He made peace by the blood of his Cross.

Consol. 4. Against Defects, wants of righteousness. Alas, says the poor
Creature, without holiness no man shall see the Heb. 12. 14.
Lord: And I have no righteousness, or at least very imperfect, none that will
justify. It is true Christian, if thou speakst of thine own righteousness
inherent, and actual; its at the best but as a short Garment, and a spotted
Cloth. Woe be to them that have no other Robe to cover them. But look up, and
behold the Lion of the Tribe of Judah: He has a Golden Skin to cover thee
withal. I will tell you a piece of Herauldry: There are used in Arms Colors,
and Furs. Furs are the Skins of certain Beasts stripped from their bodies,
and artificially trimmed for adorning of Garments for Kings, and great men. The
Lion is Iudahs Arms; The Lion of the Tribe of Judah is the Churches Ensign,
and Shield. Jesus Christ will give thee Colors, and Furs. Colors, he will
make the white by increasing in the more, and more the grace of Sanctification.
And he has Furs for thee too; his own Skin, his own Righteousness to cover
thee, to justify thee withal. Jesus Christ is made unto us Righteousness and
Sanctification, 1 Cor. 1. 30. Have thou nothing in thy self? there is enough
in Christ.

Consol. 5. Against all afflictions and troubles that the Children of God meet
withal here: Poverty, Persecution, and the like. Art thou in great streights?
Yes, perhaps thou will say, but alas, I cannot pray; yet be of good comfort,
Jesus Christ at the right hand of his Father, does pray, and make continual
Intercession for thee. He is of the Tribe of Judah: And you know that Judah was
an Intercessor for his Brother: Judah said, oh! do not Genesis 37. 26.
slay our Brother. And herein a Type of Christ, The Lion of the Tribe of Judah
making continual intercession for his Brethren. Art thou poor, and know
not where to get bread? Jesus Christ is thy King, and he is a Lion, and will
tear in pieces enough for his whelps, and distribute Nah. 2. 12.
it to his hungry ones.

Do thy afflictions and troubles continue? it is but for a time, it can be no
longer then this transitory life continues, and then Christ will glorify
thee, he will give you the Kingdom.

Here you have had great consolation from Christ's Kingly Office; against the
implacable Enemies of the Church: against blindness and ignorance, against all
Spiritual Adversaries of our Salvation, Sin, Death, the Devil; against wan^s
and defects of righteousness; against all afflictions and miseries of this
life.

Ob. But happily, some will say, is Christ able, and willing to do all this for
his people?

Answ. To this I answer, and that shall be

Consol. 6. He is able to do it, for he is a Lion: The strongest. The Alpha,
and Omega, the beginning, and the ending: which is, and which was, and which is
to come, the Almighty. He is also willing; for this end he was sent, and for
this purpose he took our Nature, and came into the World: he is our bone, and
our flesh. The Lion of Judic. 9. 2.
the Tribe of Judah our Kinsman, our Brother, our Husband.

Ob. But alas, will some poor Christians say, all these things may belong to
others; but we are not qualified, we are not prepared, and therefore not
capable of these great Prerogatives.

Answ. To this I shall answer with a Caution, with a limitation: The
Consolation does not belong to all, only to the Lions whelps, only to the
Tribe of Judah; only to such are true and faithful Subjects of the Lion, of
the King Christ Jesus. And who are they? I will tell you shortly, such as
believe and repent, and this I shall add as a seventh Consolation. Do thou
believe in the Lion of the Tribe Consol. 7.
of Judah? in Jesus Christ? be of good comfort, Sin, and Satan shall never hurt
thee. To him, to the Lord Jesus Christ give all the Prophets witness, that
through his name, whosoever beleiveth in him, shall receive remission of sins.
Act. 10. 43. Pliny writes, that if any one be anointed with the blood of a
Lion, or the fat, the bitings of no venomous Creature can hurt him. If thy
Soul be anointed with the blood of the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, sin cannot
sting thee, and the bitings of the old Serpent cannot harm thee.

Do thou find wants and defects in thine own righteousness? yet do thou
believe in the Lion of the Tribe of Judah? Be of good comfort, he has
Righteousness enough to justify thee. I read, that Garments wrapped up in the
Golden Skin of the Lion, are safe from Moths. Art thou by faith, wrapped up in
the glorious Robe of Christ's Righteousness? Be of good comfort, the Moths, and
defects of thy Sanctification shall not prejudice thy justification, for thou
shall stand before the Judge of all the World: Not having thine own
Righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through the faith of
Christ. Phil. 3. 9.

Again, Do thou repent unfeignedly of all thy sins, and transgressions? be
of good comfort, the Lion of the Tribe of Judah will have mercy upon thee. They
say, if the Lyonnesse defile her self, and commit adultery with the Libbard,
the Lion will not accompany with her suddenly; but if she go and wash her in
the water, the Lion will receive her again. So the Lion of the Tribe of Judah.
Have thou defiled thy self with sin? look that Christ shall stand aloof off,
till thou wash thy self in a bath of penitential tears, and then he will
receive thee to Communion again. Wash you therefore, and make you clean,
repent, Isa 1. 16.
and be converted, and your sins shall be blotted out, when the times of
refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord. Act. 3. 19. Solomon tells
us, that a living Dog is Eccles. 9. 4.
better then a dead Lion. But I say unto you, my Beloved, that a dead Lion is
better then all the World besides. Christ crucified is this dead Lion;
unspeakable are the Consolations that spring out of the dead Tree of the
Cross. Here is Sampsons Riddle declared; Out of the Eater came forth meat, and
out of the strong came forth sweetness: what is sweeter then honey? and what
is stronger then a Lion? Judic. 14. 14. 18. Christ crucified is sweet. Christ
crucified is sweet, Christ crucified is sweetest of all.

Thus have you heard the Trumpet sounded: The rare Sight has also been
presented to your view. And by this time, verily, you think it is high time
that I should dismiss you; I will have done by and by, yet I must take a
little liberty more.

As the Trumpet sounded when this glorious Show was first brought in, so now at
the close I sound the Trumpet once more. Behold, behold, behold!

I come to that which has been my design, and which I have driven at all this
while; viz. To exhalt Jesus Christ. Here in my Preaching I lift up an Ensign
to the people: I lift up the Lion of the Tribe of Judah in this Standard. And
I, if I be lifted up from the earth, says Christ, will draw all men unto me. I
lift up the Lion of the Joh. 12. 32.
Tribe of Judah before you, that I may draw all your eyes and all your hearts
to him. Eye Christ, know Christ, gaze continually upon Christ; and why? for
this end, that you may be drawn to love, admire, and adore the Lord Jesus
Christ. My Beloved, My heart is inditing of a good Psalm. 45. 1. 2. 4. 8.
matter, I will speak the things which I have made touching the King. I will
sound forth the Praises of the King, of Christ, the blessed King of his Church.
Thou art fairer, oh King! then the Children of men, grace is powered into thy
lips. Thou art full of Majesty, truth, meekness, and righteousness, all thy
Garments smell of Myrhe, and Aloes, and Cassia. Jesus Christ is the chiefest
among Song. 5. 10. 11. 16.
ten thousand. He is the GOLDEN LION. His head is like the most fine Gold, his
Locks are bushy. (So is the Nobleness, generousnesse, and stateliness of the
Lion discovered, by his shaggy hair, covering his head, neck, and shoulders.)
His mouth is most sweet, yea, he is altogether lovely. The tongues of men, and
Angels cannot express the excellency of Jesus Christ in himself; therefore
love, admire, adore him.

Yet eye him a little further, and behold what he is relatively, in relation to
us, and then you will see much more to endeare you to him. Behold, he is not
only a Prophet, but your Prophet, not only a Priest, but your Priest: Not
only a King, but your King. Behold, your King; And what is he to you? what!
Rejoice oh daughter Zach. 9. 9.
of Zion; Behold, thy King comes unto thee, he is just, and having Salvation.
He brings Salvation along with him for thee, if thou believe in him, and
receive him. He is our Mediator, our Redeemer, our Savior: He has called us
with a holy calling, out of the Kingdom of darkness, into his holy, and
heavenly Kingdom. He has given us divine Laws, and rules us with the Scepter
of the Gospel, and with his holy Spirit. He is the Cloud, and the Isa. 4. 5.
defense of his Church: A shelter to it against all Enemies, spiritual, and
corporal. He will utterly subdue all the Enemies of the Church, of his people,
and he will certainly glorify them, and receive them into an everlasting
Communion with himself, and make them all Kings. O then, let Christ be
precious to you all, believe in him, love him, honor, and reverence him. This
is my aim (the Lord give me the desire of my heart herein) to kindle in all
your hearts a greater flame of love to the Lord Jesus Christ. Antoninus
Caracalla, Romans Imp. had a Lion, to which he gave an honorable name, he
nourished it, and doted on it. He would not only kiss his Lion in public,
but he did admit it to his Table, and his Bed: yet doubtless his Lion was not
without his stinking breath, and deformities. How much more should you set your
hearts on the Lion of the tribe of Judah, whose mouth is most sweet, and who is
altogether lovely. Psalm. 2. 12.


I will do but one thing more. The chief Magistrate has had his Shield: Now I
will give to every one in the Assembly an Escoucheon, a Coat of Arms; That you
may behold it afterward, and view it for ever. Ever gaze upon it, to engage
your hearts more, and more to Jesus Christ. I will give you the Arms of Judah.

The Beleiver must bear Mars, that is red. The charge must be a Lion, Sol;
that is, Gold: The Sun of Righteousness is the Golden Lion, in a red field, a
field of blood. To speak plain English, the Beleiver must ever bear in his
heart the memory of Christ crucified.

But as for the posture of the Lion in your Banner, or Shield: Let me tell you,
the Lion of the Tribe of Judah has gone through all postures, for your sakes,
for your Salvation.

He was conceived in the Womb of the blessed Virgin. Then he was a Lion Latent:
She brought forth her firstborn Son: Christ in his Birth was a Lion Issuant.
Luke 2. 7.
In his whole life he was a Lion Salient. Behold, he comes leaping upon the
Mountains, skipping upon the Hills. Cant. 2. 8. It was his meat, and drink to
do his Fathers will, and to finish the work of our Salvation.

He was a man of sorrows, persecuted, and pursued: and when he was chased, he
was a Lion Passant, he went on, and turned not his head a side for any.

In his Prophetical Office he is a Lion Rugient, he roares in the Preaching of
the Gospel.

In his Priestly Office, upon the Cross, he was a Lion Combatant, he
encountered the Enemies of our Salvation. He spoiled Col. 2. 15.
Principalities and Powers, he made a show openly, triumphing over them in his
Cross. He was laid in the Grave, there he was a Lion Dormant, quiescent, yea,
to speak properly, in the Grave he was a Lion Couchant; when he had conquered,
he laid down and rested by the Prey, and all the Powers of Hell trembled; he
couched down, as a Lion Triumphant.

In his Resurrection, and going to his Father, He was a Lion Ascendent.

At his second coming in glory to judge the World, he shall appear a Lion
Rampant. Then shall he rent, and tear in pieces his Enemies, and the Enemies
of his People. Then shall he divide the spoil, distribute the Prey amongst his
Whelps: Isa. 53. 12.
as a King he shall give Gifts to his People, and glorify them for ever. Sum
up all. He was conceived for us, born for us, lived for us, suffered for us,
rose again for us, ascended for us; sits at his Fathers right hand to make
Intercession for us, shall come again to glorify us. And how should all this
work upon us? should not our hearts burn within us? should they not be in^^^med
with singular love to the Lion of the Tribe of Judah? Should not every one of
our Tongues be a Trumpet to found forth ^he praises of our King? Let us (...)
fulfill the Prophecy of the good old Patriarch Jacob: Genesis 49. 8. Judah! thou
art he whom thy brethren shall praise. In the Hebr. there is an elegant
paranomosia. (...) which makes it more emphaticall. Let us therefore join with
the four living Wights, with the 24. Elders, withal the heavenly Quire. Let
us take our Harps, and our golden Vials full Verse. 8.
of Odours, and sing a new Song: Thou art worthy oh Lion of the Tribe of Judah,
to receive glory, and honor, and power. Thou art worthy oh Lamb of God, which
were slain, to receive glory, and honor, and praise. For thou art worthy to
take the Book, and to open the Seals thereof: For Verse. 9.
thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy blood: And have made us
unto our Verse. 10.
God Kings, and Priests.

ono To THeo Doxa
Emblematic representation of the Lion of Judah All Glory to the LION of the
Tribe of Judah.
Sing Praises to our KING, sing Praises.

FINIS.

