THE Country-mans Complaint, AND Advice to the KING.
WE only can admire those happy times
Of Innocence, unskilled in Laws and Crimes;
When Gods were known by Blessings, ownd by Prayer,
And 'twas no part of Worship for to swear:
Clearer than Fountains, and more free than those,
Impartial Truth they all to each disclose.
To hear and to believe were strictly joined,
And Speech thus answered what it first designed.
But Oh unhappy state of Humane kind!
Naught dreadful now our Awe, or Faith can bind.
Vows and Religions are but bare pretense,
Oaths are found out to shackle Innocence,
And Laws must serve a perjured Impudence.
Tumults address for Blood, Witness for Hire deceives,
And Judge is forced to Sentence what he never believes.
All Truth and Justice, blushingly withdraw,
Leaving us nothing but the Form of Law:
Whereby Rogues profligate and hardened in their Vice
Proscribe all Loyal men, as factions raise their price.
Poor Land! whose Folly to swift Ruin tends,
Despised by Foes, unaided by its Friends.
In vain does Heaven her Fiery Comets light,
We stifle the Evidence, and still grope in night:
Baffled by Fools, betrayed by perjured Knaves,
Rather than Subjects, we'll be branded Slaves:
And by a vain pursuit of airy Bliss,
Forfeit substantial real Happiness;
Change Monarchy (from all oppression free)
Religion, and its Native Purity,
True Freedom, without lawless Liberty:
For thousand Masters, worst of Tyranny,
For frantic Zeal, formal Hypocrisy,
For License to rude rabbles, Hell and Slavery.
And all this wrought by old known Cheats and Rooks,
Gods! to be twice Cajoled by Cants and Looks!
Sots, orse than Brutes, to run into that Net
We see, and know for our destruction set!
To the KING.
ARise, O thou once Mighty Charles, arise,
Dispel those mists that cloud thy piercing Eyes;
Read over thy Martyred Father's Tragic Story,
Learn by his Murder, different ways to glory.
How fatal it is, by him is understood,
To yield to Subjects, when they thirst for Blood,
And cloak their black designs with Public Good.
As thou art God-like by thy Pity, show
That thou art God-like by the Justice too:
Lest we should count thy greatest Virtue, Vice,
And call thy Mercy, servile Cowardice.
Of old, when daring Giants skal'd the Sky,
The King of Gods never laid his Thunder by,
To hear Addresses for their Property.
But quelled His Rebels by a stroke Divine,
And left example how to deal with Thine.
Printed in the Year, 1681.


