THE HISTORIES OF THE LIVES AND REIGNS OF HENRY THE THIRD, AND HENRY THE
FOURTH. Kings of England.

Written by Knights.
Sr. ROBERT COTTON, And Sr. JOHN HAYVVARD,


London, printed for William Sheares, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Bedford-Street, in Cove^-garden near the new Exchange, at the sign of the
Bible, An 1642.

A SHORT VIEW OF THE LONG REIGN OF KING HENRY the third.
WEaried with the lingering calamities of Civil Arms, and affrighted at the
sudden fa^l of a licentious Sovereign, all men stood at gaze, expecting the
event of their long desires (Peace) and issue of their new hopes (Benefit.) For
in every shift of Princes there are few, either so mean, or modest, that
please not themselves with some probable object of preferment. Hist. Minor.
Man. Paris.
To satisfy all, a child ascends the throne, mild and gracious, but easy of
nature, whose Innocence and natural goodness led him safe along the various
dangers of his Fathers Reign: Happy was he in his Uncle the Earl of
Pembrooke, the guide of his infancy, and no less then for thirty years after,
whilst De Burgo, that fast servant of his Fathers against the French, both in
Normandy and England, with By god Earl of Norfolk, and others of like gravity
and experience did manage the affairs. Few and no other were the distempers
then in State, but such as are incident to all, the Commons greedy of liberty,
Matthew. Paris. Hist. Major.
and the Nobili^y of Rule, and but one violent storm raised by some old and
constant followers of his Father, Fulco de Brent de Fortibus, and others, men
that could only thrive by the Wars, misliking those days of sloth (for so
they termed that calm of King Henry's Government;) and the rather because the
Justice of quiet times urged from them to the lawful owners, such Lands and
Castles, as the fury of War had unjustly given them, for finding in the
uprightness of the King, that power of protection should not be made a wrong
doer, they fell out into that rebellion, that with it, ended their lives and
competitours, professing that those their swords that had set the Crown upon
their Sovereigns head, Hist. S. Albani.
when neither Majesty nor Law could, should now secure those small pittances to
their Masters, when Majesty or Law would not. Dangerous are too great benefits
of Subjects to their Princes, when it makes the mind only capable of merit,
nothing of duty. No other disquiet did the State after this feel, but such as
is incident in all, the malice to Authority: Good and great men may secure
themselves from guilt, but not from envy: for the greatest in trust of public
affairs are still shot at by the aspiring of those that deem themselves less
in employment then they are in merit. These vapors did ever and easily vanish
so long as the helm was guided by temperate Spirits, and the King tied his
Actions to the rule of good Council, and not to young, passionate, or single
advise.

Chron. de Dunest ^oan. de Wallingford.
Thirty years now passed, and all the old guides of his youth now dead, but De
Burgo, (a man in whom nothing of worth was wanting but moderation,) whose
length of days giving him the advantage of sole power, his own Ambition and
age gave him desire, and Art, to keep out others, which wrought him into the
fatal envy of most, and that increased in the Title of Earl, and great
Offices the King then gave him. Time by this, had wrought, as in it self, so
in the hearts of the people, a Revolution, the afflictions of their Fathers
forgotten, and the surfeit of long peace; perchance having let in some abuses;
from hence, the Commons to whom days present seem ever worst, commend the
foregone ages they never remembered, and condemn the present, though they knew
neither the disease thereof, nor the remedy.

To these idle and usual humors, Chron. d^ Litchfield.
fell in some of the young and noble Spirits, warm and over-weaning (who being
as truly ignorant as the rest) first by sullying the wisdom of the present,
and greatest Rulers, (making each casual mishap their errors:) seem to
decipher every blemish in Government, and then by holding certain imaginary
and fantastic forms of Commonwealths, flatter their own belief and
ability, that they can mold any State, to these general rules, which in
particular application will prove idle and gross absurdities.

Next confirmed in their own worth by Sommery and Spencer, Gua^* de Coven.
they take it a fit time to work themselves into action, and imploym^nt, a
thing they had long desired, and now (though unwilling to seem so) do sue
for; and doubtless, the furthest of their aim was yet, to become quiet
instruments in serving the State, if they had been then held fit and worthy.

But the King taught by the new Earl, That Consilia senum hastas juvenum esse;
and that such wits, (for so they would be styled) were N^vandis quam gerendis
rebus aptiores; fitter in being factious to disorder, then to settle affairs,
either denied or delayed their desires; for wise Princes will ever choose their
Instruments Par negotiis, and not supra, Creatures out of mere election, that
are only theirs, otherwise, without friends or power.

Mat. Paris. Hist. Minor.
Amongst this unequal medly, there were of the Nobility, Richard Earl of
Pembrooke, Gloucester, and Hartford, darlings of the multitude; some for the
merit of their Fathers, whose memories they held sacred, as Pillars of public,
liberty and opposers of encroaching Monarchy at Run^meed the Armies met. And of
the Gentry, Pitz-Geffeory, Bardolph, Grisley, Chron. ^^^tri Pecta^vien.
Maunsell and Fitz-Iohn, Spirits of as much Acrimony and Arrogant spleen, as
the places from whence they were elected, Camp, Court, or Country, could
afford any: These by force would effect what the other did affect by cunning;
but all impatient, to see their ends thus frustrate, and that so long as the
King followed the direction of the Earl of Kent, they had small hope of their
desires, they made often meetings; and as one says of them, Mat. Paris.
Clam and nocturnis colloquis aut flexum in vesperum die.

In the end, Sommery and Spencer, two that were far in opinion with the rest,
Gentlemen, by Foreign education and employment, more qualified then usually
men of these times; and that set upon their own deserts; the best places when
the Stream should turn, (which one of them, Spencer, did unworthily obtain,
for he died in actual Rebellion, Iust^ciarius Angliae, against his master)
advised that the best means to remove that great and good obstacle, the Earl
of Kent, out of the way of their advancement, was by sifting into his actions,
and siding with his opposite. Peter Bishop of Winchester, (an ill man, but
gracious with the King) making still their ends, that the worthiest being
driven out by the worst, they shall either be able to mate him with his own
vice, which will be ever more visible, as he is more potent, and so remove
him at pleasure; or else give over the King to such Ministers, to their bad
desires, as loosing him the hearts of his people, might smooth them away to
their bad desires, Cicero in Cattal. sive Orat. prima.
Honores quos quieta Reipublica desperant, perturbata consequi se posse
arbitrantur. Thus, Counsel heard, approved and put in practice, the corrupt,
and ambitious Bishop is easily ensnared to their part, by money and opinion, or
increase of power.

Articles are in all have forged, and urged against the Earl, as sale of
Crown land; wast of the Kings Treasure; and lastly, (that which these
doubtful times held capital) his giving allowance to any thing that might
breed a rupture between the Sovereign and the Subjects, as he had done in
making way with the King, to annihilate all Patents granted in his nonage, and
enforced the Subject to pay as the record says, Non juxta singulorum
facultat^m* Lib. Bermonsey vit^ Ahhatis Albani.
sed quicquid Iustitiarius aestimabat.

Well? he cleared himself of all, but the last, and did worthily perish by
it; for acts that fill Princes Coffers, are ever the ruins of their first
Inventers; bad times corrupt good Councels, and make the best Ministers, yield
to the lust of Princes, therefore this King cannot pass blameless, that would
so easily blemish all former merits, of so good a servant, for that wherein
himself was chief in fault.

But Princes natures are more variable, and sooner cloid then others, more
transitory their favors, and as their minds are large, so they easily
over-looke their first election, tying their affections, no further then their
own satisfactions.

The Bishop now alone manageth the State; chooses his chief instrument, Peter
de Rivallis, a man like himself; displaceth his natives, and draws Poictions
and Brittons into Offices of best trust, and benefit; and the King into an
evil opinion of his people. For nothing is more against the nature of the
English, then to have Strangers rule over them: of this man's time, Wendover, an
Author then living, says, Iuditia commutuntur injustis Leges ex legibus Pax
discordantibus justitia injuriosis. Thus the plot of the tumultuous Barons went
clear, and had not the discreeter Bishop calmed all by dutiful persuasions,
Regis Roffen.

Annalis de ^ly.


and informing the King that the support of this bold man's power (whose
carriage before had lost his Father, Normandy the love of his people, and in
that his Crown) would by teaching the son to reject in passion the just
petitions of his loyal Subjects, (as of late the Earl of Pembrooke his Earl
Marshall of England the due of his Office) drive all the State into discontent
by his bad advise, and corrupt manners, doubtless the rebellious Lords had
ended this distemper, as their design was, in a civil War.

Denials from Princes must be supplied with gracious usage, that though they
cure not the sore; yet they may abate the sense of it; but best it is, that all
favors come directly from themselves; denials and things of bitterness from
their Ministers.

Thus are the Strangers all displaced and banished, Claus. anno 37. H. 3. M.
26. Chron. Hall.
Rivallis extortions ransackt, by many strict Commissions of enquiry; the
Bishop sent away disgraced, finds now that Nulla quae sita scelere potentia
diuturna; and that in Princes favors there is no subsistence between the
highest of all, and precipitation. The Lords still frustrate of their malicious
ends, began to sow of these late grounds of the peoples discontent, Querelas
and ambiguos de Principe sermones and quoque alia turbamenta vulgi, and took
it up a fashion to endeare and glorify themselves with the senseless
multitude, by depraving the Kings discretion, and Government, whose nature too
gentle for such insolent Spirits, was forced (as Trevet says) to seek as he
presently did, advise and love amongst strangers, seeing no desert could
purchase it at home, all bore themselves like Tutors and Controllers, few like
Subjects and Councillors. God we see holds the hearts of Princes, and
sends them such Councillors as the quality of the Subject meriteth.

For Mountford a Frenchman became the next Object of the Kings delight, Chron.
Litchf.
a Gentleman of choice blood, education, Mat. Paris, Roger Wend^ver.
and feature, on this man's content, the heady affection of the Sovereign did
so much Doat, that at his first entrance of Grace, in envy of the Nobility,
he made him Earl of Leycester; and in no less offense of the Clergy, by
violating the rites of the holy Church, gave him his vowed, veiled sister to
wife: More of Art then usually some have deemed this act of the Kings, making
the tie of his dependancy, the strength of his assurance, so both at his will.

Mountford made wanton thus with dalliance of his Master, Chron. Joan. Sulgrave.
forgets moderation, for seldom discretion in youth attends great and
sudden fortunes, he draws all public affairs into his own hands, all
favors must pass from him, all preferments by him, all suites addressed to
him, the King but as a cipher set to add to this figure, the more of number.
Great is the Sovereigns error, when the hope of Subjects must recognize it
self beholden to the servant, which ought immediately to be acknowledged,
from the goodness and good election of himself: Though Princes may take above
others some reposefull friend, with whom they may participate their nearest
passions; yet ought they so to temper the affairs of their favor, that they
corrupt not the effects of their principalities.

At this the great and gravest men began to grieve, knowing the unworthy
without honor, or merit, thus to deal alone in that which should pass
through their hands, and to leap over all their heads, to the greatest Honor
and Offices, and therefore run along with the then rising grace of the Kings
half brethren, (though strangers) hoping thereby to devide that power, which
otherwise they saw impossible to break.

Chron. Re^ding.
Leycester confident of his Masters love, and impatient to bear either rival
in favor, or partner in rule, opposes them all, but finds in his ebb of
favor, the Fortune of others, and that this King could ever as easily
transfer his fancy, as he had settled his affection. Great we see must be
the art and cunning of that man, that keeps himself a sloate in the stream
of Sovereigns favor, since the change of Princes wills, which for the most
part are full of fancy and soon satiate are hardly arrested: Who so would
effect this* must only attend the honor and service of his Master, and
dispoiled of all other respects, transform himself into his inward
inclination and work into necessity of employment, by undergoing the Offices
of most secrecy, either of public service, or Princes pleasures; he must also
beat down Competitours of worth by the hands of others, conceal his own
greatness in public, with a fained humility, and what impotency or Government
he affects, let it rather seem the work of others, out of convenience,
then any appetite of his own.

Now were the raines of rule, by this advantage, H. Knighton. Moh. Leycest.
taken by the rebellious Lords, and put alone into the hands of the Kings half
brethren: Adam, Guido, Godfray, and William, himself as before; Et magna
Fortu^a licentiam tantum usurpans: For to act his own part, he was ever
wier-drawne when he had such worthy servants as would often for his Honor urge
it. For these Masters, (as Wallingford terms them) Tanta ela^i jactantia quod
nec sup riorem sibi intelligunt, nec parem mellitis and mollitis adulationibus
animum Regis pro libito voluntatis a ratione tramite declinantes; do alone
what they list. They fill up the place of Justice and Trust, with their
Contrymen, strangers exact of whom, how, and what they please, wast the
Treasure and Crown lands on themselves, and their followers; set prices on all
offenses, and rain the Law within the rule of their own Breasts. Will. de
Risharger.
The usual reply of their servants, to the plaints of the Kings Subjects,
being Quis tibi rectum saciet? Dominus rex vult; quod Dominus meus vult; these
Strangers seemed in their Lawless carriage not to have been invited, Lib.
Monastery Rams^y.
but to have entered the state by Conquest: The great men they enforced not to
obey, but to serve, and the mean to live so as they might justly say, they had
nothing; yet least the King should hear the groans of his people, and the
wickedness of his Ministers, which good and able men would tell him, they
bar all such access: Suspicion being the best preserver of her own deserts;
aims at these, who has more of virtue then themselves, as fearing them most.
Thus is the incapacity of Government in a King, when it falls to be a prey to
such Lawless Minions, the ground of infinite corruption in all the members of
the State; all take warrant gener^lly from Princes weaknesses, of licentious
liberty and greatness, makes profit particularly by it, and therefore give way
to increase ill, to increase their gains.

A Famine accompanies these corruptions, and that so violent, Claus. anno 42.
Hen. 3.
that the King is enforced to direct Writes to all the Shires, Ad pauperes
mortuos sepelicendos famis media deficientes: Chro. London.
Famine proceeds, Fames praecessit and secutus est gladius tam terribilis ut
n^mo inermis secura possit, Provincias peragare: For all the Villages of the
Kingdom were left a prey to the lawless Multitude: Who Per diversas parts
itinerantes velut per Consentum aliorum, (as the Record says) did imply that
the factious Lords suspected by the King, had given some heat to that
commotion; Seditious Peers bringing ever fuel to such popular fires.

Neither was the Church without a busy part in this Tragic work; Will. de
Risharger.
for Walter Bishop of Worcester, and Robert of Lincoln, to whom Mountford and
his faction, Prae cordialiter adhaerebant were far engaged. In such designs,
Churchmen are never wanting, and the distaste of the present Government, (as
well in the Church as in the Commonwealth) will ever be a knot of strength
for such unquiet Spirits, who as well frame to themselves some other form of
Government; then the present in the Church, as in the temporal state, as that
which with the giddy multitude wins best opinion, and did at this time fitly
suite the peoples humors, so much distasting the new Courts of the Clergy,
their pomp, their greediness, and the Popes extortions.

A fair pretext was it to those factious Bishops, to use their bitter pens and
speeches, so far against Religious Orders, Ceremonies, and State of the
Church, that one of them incurred the sentence of Excommunication at Rome, and
Treason at home; for he enjoined the Earl of Leycester, Mat. Paris.
In remissione peccatorum ut causam illam (meaning his Rebellions) usque ad
mortem assumeret, asserens pacem Ecclesiae Auglicanae nunquam sine gladio
materiali posse firmari. Will. de Risharger.
It was not the best Doctrine that this man could plant, by liberty or war,
when the first Church rose by fasting and prayer.

True Piety binds the Subject to desire a good Sovereign, but to bear with a
bad one, and to take up the burden of Princes with a bended knee, rather in
time so to deserve abatement, then resist authority.

Churchmen therefore ought not always to lead us in the rule of Loyalty, but
a knowledge of our own duties, in difficult points of Religion, where an
humble ignorance, is a safe and secure knowledge, we may rely upon them.

To suppress these troubles, and supply the Kings extremity, a Parliament was
called, Barth. Coron.
much to the liking of those Lords* who as little meant to releeve the King, as
they did to acquiet the State, Chron. Norwic. Chron. Worc.
their end at that time being only to open at home the poverty of their
Master, to lessen his reputation abroad, and to brave out their own passions
freely, whilst those times of liberty permit.

Here they began to tell him he had wronged the public State, in taking to
his private election the Justice, Chancellor, M. Paris.
and Treasurer, that should be only by the Common Council of the Realm,
commending much the Bishop of Chicester, Wendover.
for denying delivery of the great Seal, but in Parliament where he received
it.

They blame him to have bestowed the best places of trust* Wallingford.
and benefit in his gift on Strangers, and to leave the English unrewarded,
Paris.
to have undone the trade of Merchants, by bringing in Maltolts and heavy
customs, Will de Risharger.
and to have hurt the Common liberty, by non obstantes in his Parents, to make
good Monopolies for private favorites.

That he has taken from his Subjects. Chron. S. Albani.
Quicquid habuerunt in esculentis and poculentis Rust^coruin enim ^ques bigas
vina victualia ad libitum caepit.

That his Judges were sent in circuites, under pretext of Justice, to fleece
the people, Causis fictitiis quascunque poterant diripuerunt.

And that Sir Robert de Purslowe had wrong from the Borderers of his Forest,
under pretense of en^rochments or assarts, great sums of money.

And therefore, they wonder, that he should now demand relief from his so
pilled and polled Commons, Gual* de Covenary*
who by their former extremities; Et per auxilia priu^ data ita depa^perantur,
ut nihil aut parum habeant in bonis. And therefore advised him, that since his
needless expense, Postquam regni caepit esse dilapidatur, Will de Risharger.
was summed up by them to above 800000. l. It were fitting to pull from his
favorites, who had gleaned the Treasure of his Kingdom, and shared the old
Lands of the Crown, seeing one of them there, whom the Lords described to be
Miles litteratus, or Clericus militaris, who had in short space from the
inheritance of an acre, Chron. Litchf.
grown to the Possession of an Earldom; and Mansel another inferior Clarke
that (besides 50. promotions with the cure of souls) rose to dispend in
annual revenue 4000. marks, Hist. Minor. Will. de Risharger. Epist. Robert.
Lincoln.
whereas more moderate Fees would have become a penman, no better quallified
then with the ordinary fruits of a writing School; yet if a moderate supply
would suite with the Kings occasions, they were content to perform so far
relief in Obedience, as the desert of his carriage should merit toward them:
And so as the Record says, Matthew. Paris.
Dies datur suit in tres septimanas ut interim Rex excessuos suos corrigeret,
and Magnates voluntati ejus obtemperarent.

At which day upon new grant of the great Charter, Regis Roffen.
admittance to his Council of some persons elected by the Commons, and promise
to rely upon his Natives, and not Strangers; Johan. de Wallingford.
for advise hereafter; they spare him such a pittance as must tie him to their
Devotion, for a new supply.

Thus Parliaments that before were ever a medicine to heal up any rupture in
Princes fortunes, are now grown worse then the mallady, since from thence more
malignant humors began to reign in them, then well composed tempers.

The King by this, experienced of the intents of his rebellious Lords, Chron.
de Litchf.
and finding that the want of Treasure was the way whereby they inthralled his
Majesty, begins now to play the good husband closes his hand of wast, and
resolves himself (too late) to stand alone, such experience is pernicious to
the private, and dangerous to the public good of a State, when it never
learnes to do, but by undoing, and never sees order, but when disorder shows
it. Yet still* alas, such was his flexibility, when he came to be pressed by
his French Minions, that he could not hold his hand any longer, from their
vast desires, and endless wast. So that an Author then living, says, it
became a byword, Our inheritance is converted to Allien^, and our houses to
Strangers. Followers to a King excessive in gifts, are excessive in demands,
and cut them not out by reason, but by example: Favors p^st are not accounted,
we love no bounty but what is merely future; the more that a Prince weakeneth
himself in giving, the poorer he is of friends: For such prodigality in a
Sovereign, ever ends in the rapine and spoil of his Subjects.

Yet before the King would again submit himself, as he had the last
Parliament, to so many brave and strict inquiries of his disloy^ll Subjects,
he means to pass through all the shifts, that extremity of need, with
greatness of mind could lay upon him. He begins first with sale of Lands,
and then of Jewels, Claus anno 46. and 47. Hen. 3.
pawneth Gascoyne, and after that, his Imperial Crown, and when he had
neither credit to borrow, (having so often failed, the trust he had made,
Claus* anno 37. Hen. 3.
) nor pawnes of his own, he then lays to pawn the Jewels and Ornaments of
St. Edwards Shrine; and in the end, not having means to defray the diet of his
Court, was enforced to break up house, (and as Paris says) with his Queen
and Children, Cum Abbatibus and Prioribus satis humil^ter Hospitia qua sivit
and prandia.

This low ebb, which again the Kings improvidence had brought him to, gave
great assurance to the Rebellious Lords, that they should now at the last, have
the Sovereign power, left a prey to their ambitious designs, and to bring it
faster on, they desire nothing more, then to see the Kings extremity.
Constrain a Parliament, for at such times, Princes are ever less then they
should be, Subjects more.

Will. de Rishanger.
To hasten on the time, and adapt the means, there are sown certain seditious
rumors, that the Kings necessity must repair it self upon the fortunes and
blessings of his people, that having nothing of his own left, he might and
meant to take of others: For Kings may not want, as long as the Subjects have
means to supply.

This took fire just to their minds, and wrought a little moving in the State,
which doubtless had flamed higher, if the King had not assuaged it by
Proclamations, wherein he declared, Quod quidam malivoli sinistra
praedicantes, Claus. anno 9. ^ib. 3.
illis falso suggesserant, illum velle eos indebite gravari, ac jura and
liber^atos Regni subvertere, and per suggestiones illas dolosas and omnina
falsas eorum corda a sua maledictione, and fidelitate averterent, but desires,
that, Hujusmodi animorum suorum perturbationibus ne finem adhiberent; for that
he was ever ready to defend them from the oppression of the great Lords, Et
omnia jura and consuetudinis eorum debitas bonas, and consuetas, in omnibus and
per omnia ple^ius observare, and that they may rest of this secure: D^
volun^a^e sua libera litteras suas f^cit patentes. But seeing still, that
Majesty and right subsist not without means and power, and himself had of
neither, so much as would stop the present breach in his own wants, or his
Subjects loyalties, he flies to the bosom of his people, for relief and
Council.

At Oxford they met in Parliament, Parl. Ox^on.
where his necessity, met so many undutifull demands, that he was forced to
render up to their Rebellious will, his Royal power.

Here the Commons knowing that, Quum elegere inceperunt, they were Loco
libertatis, stood with the King to have the managing of the State, Matthew.
Paris. Chron. Worc.
put to the care of twenty four, whereof twelve by their election, (whereto
they look strictly) and the other by him, who in all things else, was left a
Cipher, and in this, whether by fear, or remissenes, filled up his number with
Mountford, Chron. Lit^hf.
Gloucester, and Spencer, which besides the weakening of his own part, won to
those his late opposites, an opinion of great interest they had got in his
favor, he now has left neither election of public office, nor private
attendants, his half brethren and their followers, he must dispoile of all
fortune, and exile by prescription under his own hand, commanding his writs,
Pro transportatione fratrum suorum, to be directed to the Earls of Hartford
and Surrey, and not to pass either their Money, Arms, or Ornaments, Nisi in
forma quam dicti Comites injunxerent, and after their departure enjoined the
men of Bristoll, Claus. a^^no 49. Hen. 3.
that they should not permit any Strangers, Sive propinquos Regis applicare in
portu, but so to behave themselves therein, that as well the King, Quam Magates
sui eos merito d^beant c^mm^ndare.

Thus we see, how easily men's estates do change in a moment, and how hard it
is to make use of all things ill gotten.

Richard elect of the Empire, the Kings full brother, and then beyond Sea, must
be wrought by letter, as his free desire to confirm by oath those former
restrictions of regal power; Chron. S. Albani.
which though performed, yet would the Lords suffer neither the one or the
other, to enter Dover Castle (the key of the Kingdom) which they had
furnished, Regis Roffen.
as most of the other Fortes of reputation in the Realm with Guardians of
their own, sworn respectively to the State; and then taking the like
assurance of all the Shrieffes, Bailiffes, Coroners, and other public
Ministers, searching the behavior of many by strict Commission upon oath, Rot.
in Scrio. Will. de Rishanger.
to win opinion in show among the Vulgar, who groaned under their late
Extortions, whereas their end was truly, as it after proved, by displacing the
faithful servants of the King, to open a way, to their own dependants.

Thus changing sole power into the rule of many, and those by popular election,
made the State believe, that this form of limited policy, they had utterly
suppressed the mind of man, for ever dreaming more upon the imaginary humors
of licencious Sovereignty: But it fell out nothing so, for now every man
began to estimate his own worth, and to hammer his head on every design,
that might enlarge his power and command.

Then began the great men to rent from the body of the Crowns, and regal
Signiories, all such royal Suitours as neighboured any of their own seats,
Scacar.
whereto they enforce their service, and so (as the Record says) Ad sectas
indebitas, and servitutes intollerab^les subditos Regis compulerunt: Thus
raising mean manners to become great Honors, and renting a sunder the regal
Justice, they made themselves of so many Subjects whilst they lived in duty,
Totid^m Tiranni (as the book of Saint Albans says) when they had left their
loyalty, Magnas induxerunt Magnates Regni, Rot. ^egi^ in Sc^^a. 56. H. 3.
super subditos Regis servitutes and oppressiones, which they bore patiently;
for excess of misery having no ease but Custom, made men willing to lay the
foundation of servitude by the length of sufferance, which found no ease or
end, until the quiet of this Kings reign.

Mountford, Gloucester, and Dispencer, Wallingford.
the heads of this Rebellious design, having by the late provisions drawn to
the hands of the twenty four Tribunes, of the people, the entire mannaging of
the Royal State, and finding that power too much di^perced, to work the end
of their desires, forced again the King to call a Parliament, where they
delivered over the authority of the twenty four unto themselves, and create a
Triumvirate, Will. de Risha^ger.
non constituenda Republicae causa, as they first pretended, for their own
ends, Chron. de Dunst.
and so in the interest of some private contented, the public was stayed; but
to make a speedier way to one of them as it fatally did, to become Dictator
perpetuus: Ambition is never so high, but she thinks still to mount, that
station which seemed lately the top, is but a step to her now, and what before
was great in desiring, seems little being once in power.

These three, elect nine Councillors, and appoint, Quod tres ad minus
alternatim semper in curia sint, Ord^^at. inter Rec. Land.
to dispose of the custody of Castles* Et de aliis Regni negotiis, the chief
Justice, Chancellor, and Treasurer, with all offices* Majores and minores,
they reserve the choice of to themselves, and bind the King to this hard
bargain upon such strong security* that he is contented under the great
Seal, and Oath, to loose to them the knot of Regal duty, whenever he
assumeth to himself his Regal dignity, Liceat omnibus de Regno nostro contra
nos, Chron. Origin. sub ^^gillo.
in surgere and ad gravamen nostrum opem and operam dare at si nobis in nullo
tenerentur. This prodigy of fortune of whom she had set a pitiful example of
her inconstancy* finding no part of his Sovereignty left, but the bare Title,
and that at their leave, beggeth succor from Vrbane the fourth, against his
disloyal Subjects.

The Pope by his Bull cancelleth his Oath, and contract, and armed him with
Excommunications against all those that return not with speed, to their due
and old obedience, since promises made by men, which cannot say they are at
liberty, are weak, and force has no power to make just interest.

The Lords on the other side, Chron. Luchf. Will. d^ Risha^ge^
that had imped their wings with Eagles feathers, and liked no game now, but
what was raked out of ^he ashes of Monarchy, made head against their
Sovereign, and to mate him the better, called in aid, some French forces: Thus
the Commonwealth turned again her sword into her own bowels, Chr. Britanniae.
and invited her ancient Enemy, to the funeral of her liberty, so that it was
a wonder, she should not at this time pass under a foreign servitude. Chron.
Dunst.
And though these men were more truly sensible of their own disgrace, then of
others misery: Yet found they no better pretext for private interest then that
of the public.

And therefore at the entry of this War, they cried liberty, although when
they came near to an end, they never spoke word of it.

At Lewis the Armies met, where the King endeavors a reconciliation, but in
vain, Will. de Risharger.
for persuasions are ever unprofitable, when Justice is inferior to force.

The sword decides the difference, and gave the two Kings, and their eldest
Sons Prisoners. The person now as well as the regal power, thus in the hands
of Mountford and Gloucester, found neither bound of security, nor expectation of
liberty, but what the emulous competition of greatness (which now began to
break out between these mighty Rivals,) gave hope of, for Leycester meaning
by engrossing from his partner, to himself, the person of the King, and to his
followers the best portion of the spoil, to draw more fruit from this
advantage, then it should in fellowship yield, dissolved the knot of all their
amity.

Thus equal Authority with the same power, is ever fatal (we see) to all
great actions: For to fit minds to so even a temper, that they should not have
some motions of dissenting is impossible.

Mountford having thus broken all faith with his confederates, and duty to his
Sovereign, left the path of moderation and wisdom, to come to the King, by
that of pride and distrust. To him, he tells, that his arms and ends had no
other object ever but order of the State, and ease of the people, that he did
not in this, carry affection against duty, but well knew how to reine his
desires, to his just power, and so no less to his Majesty's content, if he
would be ruled; which was to command the Fortes and Castles of his now
opposite Gloucester, and the rest into his hands. It was hard to this King thus
to take a Law from his inferior, but necessity in Sovereign affairs does
often force away all formality; and therefore this poor Prince, who now at the
Victors discretion, seemed to have been only raised to show the inconstancy
of fortune and vanity of man, suited himself with incomparable wisdom
according to the necessity of the time; Neither did humility wrong Majesty,
when there was no other means to contain Spirits so insolent, but
dissembling. He therefore summoneth in his own person the forts of his
fastest friends, to yield to his greatest enemies. This he enters in show as
his lodging, but in effect his prison, and saw himself forced to arm against
his friends, and to receive now Law from him, to whom he lately thought to
give it. Thus Leycester is become a darling of the Common rout, who easily
change to every new Master, but the best durst not sail along his fortune, by
the light of his glory: Crystal that fairly glistereth does easily break,
and as the ascent of usurping royalty is slippery, so the top is shaking, and
the fall fearful. To hold this man then at the entry of his false felicity
fully happy, was but to give the name of the Image, to the mettle that was not
yet molten, for by this, the imprisoned Prince was escaped, and fast assured of
Gloucester, by the knot of his great mind, and discontent, and both with the
torn remainder of the loyal Army united, and by speedy march arrived unlooked
for, near Evesham, to the unarmed troops of the secure Rebels, whom they
instantly assailed, for it was no fit season to give time, when no time did
assure so much, as expedition did promise.

Dispencer and other Lords of that faction, made toward the King, with the
best speed for mercy, but could not break out, being hurried along the storm
of the giddy multitude.

Public motions depends on the conduct of Fortune; private on our own
carriage, we must beware of running down steep hills, with weighty bodies, they
once in motion, Suo feruntur pond^re, stops are not then voluntary; but
Leycester at that instant with the King, and out of the storm might have
escaped, if his courage and hope had not made him more resolute by misfortune,
so that he could neither forsake his followers, nor his ambition; thus making
adversity the exercise of his virtue, he came and fell.

The King by the blessed Fortune freed, and obeyed, began to search the
ground of his former misery, and why that Virtue and Fortune that had so long
settled and maintained under his Ancestors the glory of his Empire, had cast her
in his time off, and conspired with her Enemies, to her almost ruin, as if the
Genius of the state had quite forsook her; Here he finds his wastfull hand
had been too quick, both over the fortunes and the blessings of his People,
the griping Avarice of his Civil Ministers and lawless liberty of his
Martial followers, Rot. part. 53. H. 3. M. 51. Rishanger.
the neglect of grace, and breach of his word, to have lost his Nobility at
home, and necessity, his Reputation abroad, by making Merchandise of peace, and
war, as his last refuge; so leaving his old Allies became enforced to betake
himself to persons doubtful, or injured, and that by giving over himself to
a sensual security and referring all to base greedy and unworthy Ministers,
whose Councels were ever more subtle then substantial, he had thrown down
those pillars of soveraignety, and safety, Reputation abroad, and Reverence at
home.

Io. Tuxeter, Mon. Bury.
He now therefore making sweetness and clemency the entrances of his regained
Rule for the faults of most of the late Rebels he forgot, a gracious kind of
pardoning, not to take knowledge of offenses, others he forgot, that they
might live but to the glory of his goodness, Rot. Cart. 51.52. Hen. 3.
for the fewer killed, the more remains to adorn the Trophee.

Tyrants shed blood for pleasure, Kings for necessity, yet least his Justice
and power might too much suffer in his grace and mercy, some few he punished
by small fines, Claus. 52. H. 3. M. 29.
some by banishment, as the two guiltless, yet unpittied Sons of the
Arch-traitour. Treason so hateful is to the head, that it draws (we see in
this,) the carriage of the innocent children into an everlasting suspect, and
what is suspicion in others is guilt in them: Upon the constant followers of
his broken fortunes he bestowed, but with a more wary hand then before the
forfeiture of his enemies: Immoderate liberality he had found but a weak
means to win love, for it lost more in the gathering then it gained in the
giving. This bounty bestowed without respect, was taken without grace*
discredited the receiver and detracteth from the judgment of the giver, and
blunted the appetites of such, as carried their hopes out of virtue and
service: Thus at last, Chron. Dunst.
he learned that reward and reprehension justly laid, do balance Government,
and that it much imports a Prince, the hand to be equal that holds the
scale.

In himself, he reformed his natural errors, Princes manners, though a mute
Law have more of life and vigor then those of letters, and though he did
sometimes touch upon the verge of vice, he forbore ever after to enter the
circle.

His court wherein at this time, the ^aults of great men did not only by
^pprobation, but Imitation receive true comfort, and authority; for their
crimes now became examples, and customs, he purged very judiciously and
severely, since from thence proceeds either the regular or irregular condition
of the Common state.

Expense of house he measures by the just Rule of his proper revenew,
Ordinat. author. Reg. aulae. Glaus. 53. Hen. 3. Rishanger.
and was heard often to say, that his excess of wast before had been an issue
of his Subjects blood, the insolency of his Soldiers made lawless by the late
liberties of Civil arms, he spends in foreign expedition. Having seen
that the quiet Spirits underwent all the former Calamities, and the other never
were satisfied but in the misery of Innocents, and would, if they had no
enemies abroad seek out at home, as they had done before.

The rigor and corruption of his judicial Officers he examineth, Pat. 53.
and 54. Hen. 3. Comment. de Trail. b^ston.
and redresseth by strict Commission; For the sense of their severity, became a
murmr of his own cruelty.

The seats of Judgment and Council, he filled up with men nobly borne. For
such attract with l^sse offense, the Generous spirits to respect and reverence.
Their Abilities he measures not by favor, or by Private Information, as
before, but by public voice, for every man in particular may deceive and be
deceived, but no man can deceive all, nor all one.

And to discover now his own Capacity, and what part he means to bear
hereafter in all deliberate Expeditions, he sits himself in Council
daily, and disposes affairs of most weight in his own person. For
Councillors be they never so wise or worthy, are but as accessaries, not
principals, in sustentation of the State; their Office must be subjection, not
fellowship, in considerations of moment, and to have ability to advise, not
authority to resolve.

For as to live, the Prince must have a particular soul so to rule his proper
and interne Council; without the one he can never be truly man, without the
other, he shall never be securely a Prince; for it offends as well the
Minister of (merit) as the people to force obedience to one incapable of his
own greatness, or unworthy of his fortunes. This wonderful change to the
general State (so hopeless lately to recover her former liberty, they sought
now for nothing but the mildest servitude) brought them home again with
admiration to his devotion and their own duty.

He that will lay (we see) the foundation of greatness upon popular love,
must give them ease and Justice, for they measure the bond of their obedience,
by the good always that they receive.

Barth. Co^on. Chron. Norwic.
This peace attended ever after his age and hearse, and he happily lived to
fashion his Son and Successor, and to make him Partner of his own
experience and authority; whose own hard education training him from that
intemperance, which makes men inferior to beasts: framed him to affect glory,
and virtue* which made him superior to men. So that all the Actions of his
future Reign were exact grounds of Discipline, and Policy; for his best
successor to rule by after, who as he was the first of his name since the
Conquest, so was he the first that settled the Law and State, deserving the
Style of Englands Justinian, and freed this Kingdom from the wardship of the
Peers, showing himself in all his Actions after, capable to Command not the
Realm only, but the whole World.

Thus do the wrongs of our Enemies more then our own discretions, make us
sometimes both wise and for^unate.

FINIS.
THE HISTORY OF THE LIFE AND REIGN OF HENRY THE FOURTH. King of England.

Written by Sr. JOHN HAYVVARD, Knight, and Doctor of Law.

London, Printed for William Sheares, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Bedford-^treet, in Covengarden near the new Exchange, at the sign of the
Bible, An. 1642.

Illustrissimo and Honoratissimo ROBERTO Comiti Essexiae and Ewe, Comiti
Marescallo Angliae, Vicecomiti Herefordiae, and Bourchier: Baroni Ferrariis de
Chart^ey, Domino Bourchier and Loven* Regiae Majestatis Hippocomo: Machinarum
bellicarum praefecto: Academie Cantabrigiensis Cancellar^o: O^dinis Georgianii
Equiti a^^^ato; Serenissimae Domino Reginae a sanctioribus Consiliis; Domino
meo plurimum obse^vando.
A (...): Optimo and Noblissimo (inquit Euripides) ex qua sententia tu primus
ac solus fere occurrebas (illustrissime comes) cujus nomen si Henrici nostri
fronti radiaret, ipse and laetior and tutior in vulgus prodiret. Magnus
siquid^mes, and presenti juditio, and futuri temporis expectation: in quo,
veluti recuperasse nunc oculos, caeca prius fortuna videri potest; Dum cumulare
honoribus eum gisti, qui omnibus virtutibus est insignitus. Hunc igitur si
laeta front e^cipere digneris, sub nominis tui umbra (tanquam sub Ajacis
clipio Teucer ille Homericus) tutissime latebit. Deus opt. max. celsitud nem
tuam nobis, reique publicae diu servet incolumen: quo nos viz* tam fide quam
armis potenti tua dextra defensi* ultique, diutina cum securitate tum gloria
perfruamur.

Honori tuo deditissimus. I. HAYVVARD.

A. P. To the Reader.
AMong all sorts of humane Writers, there is none that have done more profit,
or deserved greater praise, then they who have committed to faithful records
of Histories, either the Government of mighty States, or the lives and acts of
famous men: for by describing the order and passages of these two, and what
events has followed, what counsels they have set forth unto us, not only
precepts, but lively patterns, both for private directions and for affairs of
State: whereby in short time youngmen may be instructed; and old men more fully
furnished with experience then the longest age of man can afford. And therefore
Cicero reports that L. Lucullus, when he went from Rome to make war
against Mithridates, was altogether unskilful in Military services: yet in the
time of his Navigation he so exercised himself, what with conference, and
what with reading of Histories, that when he came into Asia, by the judgment
and confession of that great King, he was preferred before all the Commanders
that were before him. Hereupon when Alexander Severus did deliberate of any
weighty matter, he would especially take advise of men skillful in Histories,
and not without good cause: for if (as Afranius says) experience has begot
wisdom, and memory as a Mother has brought it forth; who are to be better
accounted then they whose memory is as it were a rich store house, of the
experiences not of one age or Country, but of all times and of all Nations.
And therefore it is no great marvel that Zenobia, who after the death of her
Husband Odonatus took upon her the State, not only insulted upon the
Romans, but held the Arabians, the Sarizens, the Armenians, and other fierce
and intractible people, in such obedience, that although she were both a woman
and a Barbarian, yet they never stirred against her: for she had perfectly
read the Roman History in Greek, and also had her self abridged the
Alexandrian and all the Oriental Histories, whereby she attained the highest
pitch both of wisdom and authority: for examples are of greater force to
stir unto virtue, then bare precepts, insomuch as Cicero said, that nothing
could be taught well without example. Therefore the Lacedaemonians (as Plutarch
writes) did use upon festival days to present unto their Sons certain
d^unken slaves whom they called (...): that by view of the vice, they might
learn to avoid it; and Hismenias the Th^bane, would show to his Scholars,
musicians of all sorts good and bad, instructing them to follow the one and not
the other. And this is that which the Apology tells of a certain
Countrey-woman, who being hard favored, and fearing least she should bring
forth children like her self, got many fair and beautiful pictures, which
she did daily and steadfastly behold: the meaning whereof is, that by setting
before us the acts and lives of excellent men, it is the readiest way to
fashion our qualities according to the same.

Hereupon Cicero does rightly call History the witness of times, the light of
truth, the life of memory, and the messenger of antiquity. Hereby we are armed
against all the rage and rashness of Fortune: and hereby we may seem (in
regard of the knowledge of things) to have traveled in all Countries, to have
lived in all ages, and to have been conversant in all affairs. Neither is
that the least benefit of History, that it preserves eternally, both the glory
of good men, and shame of evil. Some Philosophers do deny, that glory is to
be desired: for virtue (say they) is a reward unto it self, and must not be
respected for the vain and titular blastes of glory: yet in writing these
things, they affect that especially, which they especially deprave. And indeed
there is no man has so horny hart-strings, (as Persius speaks) who is not
tickled with some pleasure of praise, again there is no man of so flinty a
forehead, who is not touched with some fear of infamy and shame. Do we
think that the valiant soldier thinks no toil too tough, but boldly
adventureth the hazard of all happes, because he is weary of his life? death
comes by nature to all men alike, only with difference of memory with
posterity.

And I would think that Cities at the first were builded, Laws made, and many
things invented for the use of men, chiefly for desire of glory: which humor
except the old Governors of Commonwealths, had thought necessary, they would
never have fostered it as they did, with Garlandes, Statutes, Trophies and
Triumphs, in which notwithstanding it is but temporary and short; but in
Histories of worth it is only perpetual. This Cicero perceiving he dealt
with Lucejus to commit his actions to the monuments of his writings: and Pliny
the younger did wi^h that he might be mentioned in the Histories of Cornelius
Tacitus, because he did foresee that they should never decay.

But these are such as are not led away with a lust, either to slatter or to
deface, whereby the credit of History is quite overthrown. Yet the endeavor
to curry favor, is more easily disliked, as bearing with it an open note of
servility; and therefore* Alexander when he heard Aristobulus read many things
that he had written of him far above truth, as he was sailing the flood
Hidaspis, he threw the book into the River, and said, that he was almost
moved to send Aristobulus after for his servile dealing; but envious carping
carries a counterfeit show of liberty, and thereby finds the better
acceptance.

And since I am entered into this point, it may seem not impertinent to write
of the style of a History, what beginning, what continuance, and what mean is
be used in all matter, what things are to be suppressed, what lightly
touched* and what to be treated at large: how credit may be won, and
suspicion avoided: what is to be observed in the order of times, and
description of places, and other such circumstances of weight; wh^t liberty a
writer may use in framing speeches, and in declaring the causes, counsels,
and events of things done: how far he must bend himself to profit: and when
and how he may play upon pleasure, but this were too large a field to enter
into: therefore least I should run into the fault of the Mindians, who made
their gates wider then their town, I will here close up, only wishing that
all our English Histories were drawn out of the dross of rude and barbarous
English: that by pleasure in reading them, the profit in knowing them, might
more easily be attained.

THE HISTORY OF THE LIFE AND REIGN OF KING HENRY the fourth.
THe Noble and victorious Prince, King Edward the third, had his fortunate gift
of a long and prosperous reign over this Realm of England, much strengthened
and adorned, by natures supply of seven goodly Sons. Edward his eldest Son,
Prince of Wales, commonly called the Black Prince: William of Hatfield: Lyonel*
Duke of Clarence: John of Gaunt, Duke of Lanca^^er: Edmund of Langley, Duke of
York: Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of Gloucester: and William of Windsore. These
Sons, during the life of their renowned Father, were such ornaments and such
stays to his estate, as it seemed, no greater could be annexed thereunto. For
neither armies, nor strong holds are so great defenses to a Prince as the
multitude of children: Fortes may decay, and forces decrease, and both decline
and fall away, either by variety of fortune, or inconstancy of men's desires:
but a man's own blood cleaves close unto him; not so much in the blisses of
prosperity, which are equally imparted to others, as in the Crosses of
calamity, which touch none so near, as those that are nearest by nature. But
in succeeding times, they became in their offspring, the seminary of division
and discord, to the utter ruin of their families, and great wast and weakening
of the whole Realm: for they that have equal dignity of birth and blood, can
hardly stoop to terms of sovereignty, but upon every offer of occasion will
aspire to endure, rather no equal then any superior, and for the most part,
the hatred of those that are nearest in kind, is most dispitefull and deadly if
it once break forth. The fear of this humor caused Romulus, to imbrew the
foundations o^ the City and Empire of Rome* with the blood of his brother
Remus. According to which example, the Tyrants of Turkey, those butchers of
Satan, do commonly at this day begin their reign, with the death and
slaughter of all their brethren

Prince Edward the thunderbolt of War in his time, dyed during the life of
his father. And although, he was cut off in the middle course, and principal
strength of his age, yet in respect of honor and fame, he lived with the
longest, having in all parts fulfilled the measure of true Nobility. He left
behind him a young Son called Richard, who after the death of King Edward,
was crowned King in his stead, and afterward dyed childlesse.

William of Hatfield King Edwards second Son, dyed also without issue,
leaving no other memory of his name, but the mention only.

Lionel Duke of Clarence, the third Son of King Edward, was a man of comely
personage, of speech and pace stately, in other qualities of a middle
temperature, neither to be admitted nor contemned, as rather void of ill
parts, then furnished with good. He had issue Philip his only Daughter, who
was joined in marriage to Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March: Who in the
Parliament holden in the eight year of the reign of King Richard, was in the
right of his Wife, declared Heir apparent to the Crown, in case the King
should die without Children; but not many years after he dyed, leaving issue
by the said Philip, Roger Mortimer Earl of March. This Roger was slain in the
rude and tumultuous Wars of Ireland, and had issue Edmund, Anne, and Elinor,
Edmund and Elinor died without issue. Anne was married to Richard Earl of
Cambridge, Son to Edmund of Langley Duke of York, the fifth Son of King
Edward. Of these two came Richard Plantagenet Duke of York: who by the right
devolved to ^im from his Mother, made open ^laime to the Crown of England,
^which was then possessed by the fa^ily of Lancaster) first by Law, in the
^arliament holden the thirtieth year ^f the Reign of King Henry the sixth:
where either by right or by favor, ^is cause had such furtherance, that after
King Henry should die, the Crown ^as entailed to him, and to the Heirs (...)
his blood for ever. But the Duke ^^patient to linger in hope, chose ra^^er to
endure any danger, then such (...): Whereupon he entered into (...) soon
after, against King Henry (...) the field. But being carried further (...)
courage, then by force, he could (...) through, he was slain at the battle
of Wakefield, and left his title to Edward his eldest Son: who with
invincible persistance did prosecute the enterprise, and after great variety of
fortune at the last achieved it.

John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, the fourth Son of King Edward the third,
was a man of high and hardy Spirit, but his fortune was many times not
answerable, either to his force or to his forecast. He had two Sons Henry
Earl of Derby (of whom I suppose chiefly to treat) and John Earl of Somerset.
This John was Father to John Duke of Somerset, who had issue Margaret,
Countess of Richmond mother to the Noble Prince, Henry the seventh.

Henry Plantagen^t Earl of Derby was likewise by his Mother Blanch, extracted
from the blood of Kings, being descended from Edmund, the second Son of King
Henry* the third: by which line, the Duchy o^ Lancaster did accreve unto his
house. He was a man of mean stature, well proportioned, and formally compact,
of good strength and agility of body, skillful in arms, and of a ready
dispatch: jointly showing himself both earnest and advised in all his actions.
He was quick and present in conceit, forward in attempt, courageous in
execution, and most times fortunate in event. There was no great place of
employment and charge, which he would not rather affect for glory, then refuse
either for peril, or for pains; and in service he often proved himself not
only a skillful Commander by giving directions: but also a good Soldier in
using his weapon, adventuring further in person sometimes, then policy would
permit; his expenses were liberal and honorable, yet not exceeding the
measure of his receipts; he was very courteous and familiar respectively
toward all men* whereby he procured great reputation and regard, especially
with those of the meaner sort: for high humilities take such deep root in the
minds of the multitude, that they are more strongly drawn by unprofitable
courtesies then by churlish benefits. In all the changes of his estate, he was
almost one and the same man: in adversity never daunted, in prosperity never
secure: retaining still his Majesty in the one, and his mildness in the other:
neither did the continuance of his reign bring him to a proud po^t and stately
esteeming of himself, but in his latter years he remained so gentle and
fair in carriage, that thereby chiefly he did wear out the hatred that was
borne him, for the death of King Richard. He could not lightly be drawn into
any cause, and was stiff and constant in a good: Yet more easy to be either
corrupted or abused by flattering speeches, then to be terrified by threats.
To some men he seemed too greedy of glory, making small difference of the
means whereby he attained it: and indeed this honor in noble minds is* most
hardly overruled, and oftentimes it draws even the wisest awry. But before I
proceed any further in describing either the qualities, or acts of this Earl,
I must write something of the Reign of King Richard the second, his Cousin
German: so far forth as the follies of the one, were either causes or
furtherances of the fortunes of the other.

Richard Son to Edward Prince of Wales, a little before deceased, was after
the death of King Edward the third, crowned King over this Realm of England,
in the eleventh year of his age: at which years the mind of man is like to
the potters earth, apt to be wrought into any fashion, and which way soever it
hardneth by custom, it will sooner break then bend from the same. Now the
governance of the King at the first was committed to certain Bishops, Earls,
Barons, and Justices. But either upon nicenes to discontent the King, or
negligence to discharge their duty, every one was more ready with pleasant
conceits to delight him, then with profitable counsel to do him good: for
smooth and pleasing speeches need small endeavor, and always finds favor:
whereas to advise that which is meet, is a point of some pains, and many times
a thanklesse office. Hereupon two dangerous evils did ensue; flattery brake in,
and private respects did pass under public pretenses.

In the third year of his Reign* it was thought meet that this charge should
be committed to one man, to avoid thereby the unnecessary wast of the Treasure
of the Realm, by allowing yearly stipend unto many. So by the whole consent
of the Nobility and Commons assembled together in Parliament, this office was
deputed to Lord Thomas Beauchampe Earl of Warwick, and a competent pension was
assigned him, out of the Kings Exchequer for his pains. But the King being now
plunged in pleasure, did immoderately bend himself to the favoring and
advancing of certain persons, which were both reproveable in life, and
generally abhorred in all the Realm, and this was the cause of two great
inconveniences: for many young Noblemen and brave Courtiers, having a nimble
eye to the secret favors and dislikes of the King, gave over themselves to a
dissolute and dishonest life, which finds some followers when it finds no
furtherancers, much more when it does flourish and thrive: the King also by
favoring these, was himself little favored and loved of many: for it is
oftentimes as dangerous to a Prince, to have evil and odious adherents, as to
be evil and odious himself. The names of these men were Alexander Nevill,
Archbishop of York, Robert Veere, Earl of Oxford: Michael Delapoole
afterward Earl of Suffolk, Robert Trisilian, Lord chief Justice, Nicholas
Brambre, Alderman of London; and certain others of no eminency, either by
birth or desert, but obsequious and pliable to the Kings youthful humor.
These were highly in credit with the King: these were always next unto him,
both in company and counsel: by these he ordered his private actions: by
these he managed his affairs of state: he spared neither the dignity nor
death of any man, whose authority and life withstood their preferment. In so
much as in the fifth year of his reign, he removed Sir Richard Scroope, from
being Lord Chancellor of England, (to which office he was by authority of
Parliament appointed,) because he refused to set the great Seal, to the grant
of certain Lands, which had wantonly passed from the King: alleging for his
denial, the great debts of the King, and small demerites of the parties, upon
whom the King might cast away and consume, but spend in good order he could
not; advertising him also to have respect, that riote did not deceive him under
the term and show of liberality: and that gifts well ordered procure not so
much love, as placed without discretion, they stir envy. This Chancelour was
a man of notable integrity and diligence in his office, not scornefully turning
away from the ragged coat of a poor suppliant, or pale face of a sickly and
feeble limmed ^u^er, holding up their simple soiled bills of complaint, nor yet
smothering his conscience with partial maintaining of such as were mighty: but
being alike to all, he was soon disliked of those that were bad.

In the eight year of this Kings reign, the destruction of the Duke of
Lancaster was intended likewise upon the like dislike: the plot was laid by
Justice Trisilian, offenses were devised, Appellours appointed, and Peers
named; he should have been put under arrest suddenly, and forthwith
arraigned, condemned, and executed. But the Duke upon privy intelligences of
these contrivances, fled to his Castle at Pomfret, and there made preparation
for his defense against the King. So this matter began to grow to a head of
division, which the Common people at that time very busily, desired and fought:
but the Kings Mother traveling incessantly between the King and the Duke;
(notwithstanding she was both corpulent and in years) labored them both to a
reconcilement: the King, with regard of the dangerous and discontented times:
the Duke, with respect of his duty and faith: and so partly by her entreaty and
advise, partly by their inclination bending to the safest course, all apparancy
of displeasure on the one part, and distrust on the other, was for that time
laid aside.

The same year, Michael Delapoole was made Chancellor of England, and created
Earl of Suffolk: and Robert Veere Earl of Oxford, was created Marquess of
Dublin, being the first man within the Realm that was enobled with that title.
But as they grew in honor, so did they in hate: for many Noblemen did
infinitely stomach their undeserved advancements, and with these the favor of
the People generally went: but the Kings intemperate affection was peremptory
and violent, not regarding envy until he could not resist it.

The year next following, Robert Veer^ the new Marquess, was created Duke of
Ireland. This year, the Knights and Burgesses of Parliament, put up many
complaints against the Earl of Suffolk, upon which they desired his answers
and trial: namely, how he had abused the King in taking of him to farm all
the profits and revenues of the Crown: how wantonly he wasted the treasure of
the land in riotous liberality, and unnecessary charges: how deep he had
dived into the Kings debt: how careless and corrupt he was in his office: how
greatly he had both deceived and discredited the King in certain dealings and
accounts particularly expressed: with diverse other imputations touching
dishonor and dishonesty, both in private action and in office. This Earl was
a Merchants Son in London, and growing mighty on the sudden, he could not
govern himself in the change: but prosperity laid open the secret faults of
his mind, which were suppressed and cloaked before: and serving a weak Ruler
in great place, with an ill mind, he made open sale of his Princes honor. Yet
the King was willing, either secretly to dissemble, or openly to remit these
offenses: and so passed them over with a short audience (as his manner was in
matters of greatest weight) and without examination, showing himself neither
grieved at the faults, nor well pleased with the complaint. Afterward a
Subsidy was required: but answer was made that this needed not, since the Kings
wants might be furnished with the debts which were owing him from his
Chancelour: neither was it to any purpose, so long as the money should be
ordered by such persons as before it had been, and that that time was like.
Then were the matters against the Lord Chancellor again set on foot, and the
King persuaded that it was neither honorable nor safe to bear him out; that to
private men it was sufficient if themselves abstain from wrong, but a Prince
must provide that none do wrong under him: for by maintaining, or wincking at
the vices of his Officers, he makes them his own, and shall surely be
charged therewith when first occasion does serve against him. At the last, upon
instant importunity of both Houses, the King did consent, that a commission
should go forth to certain Noblemen, giving them authority to hear and
determine all matters which were objected against the Lord Chancellor: and
then was a Subsidy granted, with exception, that the money should be expended
by the Lords, to the benefit and behalf of the Realm. The King did further
demand, that the Heirs of Charles Bloyes, who made claim to the Duchy of
Britain, should be sold to the Frenchmen for thirty thousand marks, and the
money granted to the Duke of Ireland, for recovery of those possessions which
the King had given him in Ireland: this was likewise assented unto, upon
condition, that before Easter the next ensuing, the Duke should depart into
Ireland, and there remain: at so high a price did they value the riddance of
him out of the Realm.

The charge of the Subsidy money, was committed to Richard Earl of Arundell.
Commissioners for the Earl of Suffolk were appointed, Thomas Duke of
Gloucester the Kings Uncle, and the said Earl of Arundell: but during the time
of their proceeding, the King kept all off, in places far distant: either to
manifest thereby the descent of his mind, or to avoid the grief which his
neerenesse would increase: And now was the Chancellor left unto himself, to
answer to those demeanours, wherein he made the Kings blind favor his
privilege and protection, supposing never to see the same either altered or
overruled. In the end, being convict of many crimes and abuses, he was
deposed from his office, his goods were confiscated to the Kings Exchequer, and
himself was adjudged worthy of death: Yet was execution submitted to the Kings
pleasure, and under sureties he was permitted to go at large. At the same
time, John Foorde Bishop of Duresme, another of the Kings dainties, was removed
also from being Lord Treasurer of England, he was a man of little depth,
either in learning or wisdom, but one that had the Art of seeming, in making
the best show of whatsoever he spoke or did: and rising from mean estate to
so high a pitch of honor, he exercised the more excessively his riot,
avarice, and ambition, not able to moderate the lusts and desires which former
want had kindled.

When this business was blown over, the King returned again to London, and
did presently receive the Earl of Suffolk, with the Duke of Ireland, and the
Archbishop of York, to greater grace and familiarity then at any time before.
These Triumvirs did not cease to stir up the Kings stomach against those
Noblemen, whose special excellency had made matter of ^ame and regard: partly
for the disgraces which they had received, partly upon malicious emulation, to
see the other so favored, and themselves so odious, and that their private
choler and ambition might bear some show of public respect, they suggested
unto the King, that he was but half, yea not half a King in his own Realm,
but rather the shadow and picture of a King: for if we respect (said they)
matters of state, you bear the sword, but they sway it, you have the show, but
they the authority of a Prince, using your name as a color and countenance to
their proceeding, and your person as a cipher, to make them great, and be your
self nothing. Look to the duty of your Subjects, and it is at their devotion:
so that you can neither command nor demand any thing, but with such exceptions
and limitations as they please to impose: come now to your private actions,
your liberality (the greatest virtue in a Prince) is restrained, your expenses
measured, and your affections confined, to frown and favor as they do
prescribe. What Ward is so much under government of his Guardian? Wherein will
they next, or can they more abridge you? Except they should take from you the
place, as they have done the power of a Prince: and in this we think, they
may justly be feared, having so great might joined with so great aspiring
minds. For power is never safe when it does exceed: and ambition is like the
Crocodile which grows so long as he lives: or like the Ivy, which fastening
on the foot of the tallest Tower, by small, yet continual rising, at length
will climb above the top, it is already grown from a spark to a flame, from
a twig to a tree, and high time it is, that the increase were stayed:
oftentimes such overruling of Princes have proceeded to their overthrowing,
and such cutting them short has turned to cutting them off, their minds are
suspicious, their power dangerous, and therefore the opportunity must be
prevented.

The Kings own weakness made him apprehensive, and framed his mind to a
vain and needless fear: but chiefly he was moved at the removing of his
Chancellor and Treasurer out of their offices, and of the Duke of Ireland out
of the Realm, supposing it a restraint to his Princely power, that he might
not absolutely and in things give or forgive as his pleasure served. When these
privy incensers perceived the Kings humor once sharpened, they so plied him
with plausible persuasions, that (although he was naturally of no cruel
disposition, as wanting courage) yet they drew him to many violent and indirect
courses, partly upon negligence to search out the truth, partly upon delight to
be flattered and smoothly used, neither did they long defer their devises:
and first it was appointed, that the Duke of Gloucester, and certain others of
that part, should be invited to a supper within London, and there suddenly
surprised and made away. Sir Nicholas Brambre, who the year before had been
Major of London, and in whom abundance of wealth supplied the want of honest
qualities, was a busy agent in this butcherly business: but Richard Extone
the Major of the City, that year, discovered the practice by whom the Duke was
warned both to avoid the present peril, and afterward to be wary of the like.

The year next following, Richard Earl of Arundel, and Thomas Mowbray Earl
of Nottingham, had the conduct of a Navy committed to their charge: in this
voyage they took above a hundred sail of the enemies ships, fraughted with
wines, and well appointed for fight: they also relieved and fortified Breast,
and took two forces which the Frenchmen had raised against it. The Earls so
behaved themselves in this service, that they grew to a very great estimation,
both for courtesy among their Soldiers, and for courage against their
enemies: and their actions were the more famous, by reason of the unfortunate
sufficiency of other Commanders, by whose either rashness or cowardice, many
good Soldiers were daily defeated, and every year made notorious, by one
loss or other. Yet notwithstanding all their good labor and luck, they were
at their return, entertained by the King, with great strangenes, both of
countenance and speech. Who was so unable to dissemble his dispight, that he
could hardly defer it, until the heat of the honor and love which they had
won, were somewhat abated. So much are men more inclinable to revenge
displeasure, then reward desert: for it is troublesome to be grateful, and
many times chargeable: but revenge is pleasant, and preferred before gain.

About the same time, Robert Duke of Ireland forsook the company of his
lawful wife, whose Mother Lady Isabel, was Daughter to King Edward the third,
and instead of her, he took unto him a base Bohemian, a Taverners Daughter.
The King little regarded this indignity done unto his Cousin, and in so great
confusion of the state, let it pass unreproved, as overshadowed with greater
vices: but the Duke of Gloucester her Uncle, took it in high disdain, as
injurious to the Royal blood, and did attend upon occasion to work revenge,
this was not secret from the Duke of Ireland, who likewise bent all his devises
to bring the Duke of Gloucester to his overthrow. The Duke of Gloucester did
prosecute his enmity openly and manlike: the Duke of Ireland closely, and
therefore the more dangerously. The Duke of Gloucester was greater in blood, the
Duke of Ireland in favor; he being Uncle to the King, this bearing himself
as the Kings fellow. The Duke of Gloucester pretended for the State, the Duke of
Ireland for the King: and much private malice did pass under these public
shows: but in opposition of such equal powers, there is many times small
difference in harm.

And now was Easter past, the Term assigned to Duke Robert Vicere for his
departure into Ireland: and least his stay might breed some stir within the
Realm, he still busied himself in preparation for his journey, and at last
(although it were long) made a solemn show of setting forth. The King went in
great state to accompany him to his shipping; and the Earl of Suffolk with
Justice Trisilian, and the residue of that faction, either for favor followed,
for or fear durst not stay behind. So they passed together into Wales, and
(whether upon levity the Kings mind changed; or whether it was so contrived at
the first to draw themselves more separate from the Lords,) there the Dukes
journey was at an end. Then they entered into Counsel which way the Lords might
best be suppressed: many devises were deeply debated, all pleased without
respect either of danger or disgrace: but few stood with likelihood of event to
their desires, and therefore none was finally concluded. After long time thus
frivolously spent, they left Wales, and came to the Castle of Nottingham, where
the King caused the high Sheriffs of all the Shires in the Realm to be
called before him, and demanded of them, what strength they could make on his
part against the Lords, if need should require: their answer was, that the
Common people did so favor the Lords, and were so well resolved of their love
and loyalty toward the King, that it was not in their power to raise any great
power against them Then they were commanded that no Knights nor Burgesses
should afterward be chosen to any Parliament, but those whom it pleased the
King to appoint: whereto they said that it was a hard matter in those times of
jealousy and suspicion, to bereave the people of their ancient liberty, in
chosing Knights and Burgesses for the Parliament, some few other matters being
either unreasonably required, or obtained to small end, the Sheriffs were
licensed to depart. Then were assembled Robert Trisilian, chief Justice of the
Kings Bench, Robert Belknape, chief Justice of the Common Pleas, John Holte,
Roger Stilthrope, William Burgh, Knights and Justices also of the Common Pleas,
men learned in one rule chiefly, without difference of truth or falsehood, to
please those in highest places, intituling that wisdom, which indeed was but
baseness and feebleness of mind: these were charged by the King upon their
faith and legeance, to make true and full answers to those questions following.

1 First, Whether the Statute, Ordinances, and Commission, made and set forth
the last Parliament, (whereby was meant the commission against Michael
De-la-poole Duke of Suffolk) did derogate from the Royal prerogative of the
King.

2 Item, They who procured the said Statute etc. to be made and set forth, how
are they to be punished?

3 Item, How are they to be punished, who provoked the King to consent to the
premises?

4 Item, What punishment have they deserved who compelled the King to consent
to the said statute, etc.

5 Item, How are they to be punished, who resisted or let the King in
exercising his Royal power, by remitting any penalties or debts whatsoever?

6 Item, When a Parliament is assembled, and the affairs of the Realm, and
the cause of assembling the Parliament, by the Kings commandment declared, and
common Articles limited by the King, upon which, the Lords and Commons in the
said Parliament should proceed: if the Lords and Commons will proceed upon
other Articles, and not upon the Articles limited by the King, until the King
has first given answer to the Articles propounded by them, notwithstanding
that the contrary were enjoined by the King, whether in this case the King
ought to have the rule of the Parliament, and so to order the fact, that the
Lords and Commons should first proceed upon the Articles limited by the King,
or that they should first have answer of the King, upon the Articles propounded
by them, before they proceed any further?

7 Item, Whether may the King when he please dissolve the Parliament, and
command the Lords and Commons to depart or no?

8 Item, Since the King may at his pleasure remove any of his Officers and
Justices, and punish them for their offenses: whether may the Lords and Commons
without the Kings will, accuse his Officers and Justices in Parliament for
their offenses, yea, or no?

9 Item, What punishment have they deserved, who moved in Parliament, that the
statute whereby King Edward Carnarvan was deposed should be brought forth, by
view whereof, the new statute ordinance and commission aforesaid were framed?

10 Item, Whether the judgment given in the last Parliament holden at
Westminster, against Michael Dela-poole Duke of Suffolk, was erroneous and
revocable; yea, or no?

These questions, or rather quarrels were drawn by John Blake a Counselor at
the Law, by direction of Justice Trisilian, whilst the King made his stay in
Wales: to the which the Justices aforementioned, some in discharge of their own
malice, and some to satisfy the minds of other, made answer as follows.

To the first, that they did derogate from the Prerogative of the King, because
they were against his will.

To the second and third: that they are to be punished by death, except it
pleases the King to pardon them.

To the fourth and fifth: that they are worthy to be punished as Traitors.

To the sixth: that whosoever resists the Kings rule in that point, deserves
to be punished as a Traitor.

To the seventh, that the King may at his pleasure dissolve the Parliament, and
whosoever shall afterward proceed against the Kings mind, as in a Parliament,
he is worthy to be punished as a Traitor.

To the eighth, that they cannot, and whosoever does the contrary he deserves
to be punished as a Traitor.

To the ninth, that as well the Motioner as also the Bringer of the said
statute to the Parliament, are worthy to be punished as Traitors.

To the tenth, they answered: that the said judgment seemed to them erroneous
and revocable in every part. In witness whereof, the Justices aforesaid, with
John Locktone, the Kings sergeant at Law, have subscribed and set their seals
to these presents, etc.

When these bloody sentences of death and treason, were under general and
large Terms thus fastened upon the Lords, the King supposed his attempts
against them, whether by violence, or by color of law sufficiently warranted:
but his power both ways, as it was terrible against weak resistance, so
against such mighty defendants it was of small force to effect that which he so
much affected. Yet he did not omit his first endeavor: and first accounting
the Lords as condemned persons, he made division of their Lands and goods
among those that he favored. Then he waged Soldiers to be in a readiness
for his assistance, and sent the Earl of Northumberland to arrest the Earl of
Arundel, at his Castle in Reygate, where he then lay. But the Earl of
Arundel, either upon advertisement, or suspicion of the Kings mind, banded
himself so strong, that when the Earl of Northumberland came unto him, he
dissembled his intent, and left his purpose unperformed. Thus were these
proceedings of the King, as now in Council, so afterward in event, not much
unlike that which the Fable tells of a certain hunter, who first sold the
skin of the bear, and then went about to take her: but when he came within
the forest, either by unskilfulnesse or misadventure, he not only missed his
pray, but fell himself into danger of the beast.

The Duke of Gloucester having secret intelligence of the Kings displeasure, and
of his drift, sent the Bishop of London to persuade the King to entertain a
more favorable opinion of him: making faith to the Bishop, with a solemn
oath, that he never intended any thing to the prejudice of the King, either in
person or state. The Bishop not unskilful to join profitable persuasion, with
honest, declared to the King, that his displeasure against the Lords was not
grounded upon just desert, but either upon false suggestions of their enemies,
or erroni^us mistaking of some of their actions: how desirous they were of his
grace and favor: how faithful and forward they promised to persist in all
dutiful service: how honorable this agreement would be to the King: how
profitable to the Realm: and how dangerous to both, if these troubles might
increase. The King seemed to give good ^are and credit to the Bishops speech:
but Michael Delapoole, a turbulent man, and against quiet counsel obstinately
contentious, standing then by the King, soon stiffened his mind against all
impression of friendship. Hereupon contention did arise between the Bishop and
the Earl, and brake forth violently into heat of words. The Earl applied to
the Lords those objections wherewith great men are usually charged: sparing no
spite of speech, and using all art to aggravate matters against them. The
Bishop replied, that the Earl was thus fiercely bent, not upon his own
necessity, nor love to the King; but only to satisfy his bloody and ambitious
humor, wherein he was so immoderate that rather then the Lords should not be
destroyed, he would overwhelme them with the ruins of the State, for tumults
might indeed be raised by men of little courage, but must be maintained with
the hazard, and ended with the loss of the most valiant; that neither his
Counsel in this matter was to be followed, being the principal firebrand of
the disturbance, nor his complants against any man to be any thing regarded,
being himself a condemned person, and one that held both his life and honor
at the pleasure of the King. At these words the King was exceedingly wroth, and
charged the Bishop with menacing and threats to avoid his presence. When the
Duke of Gloucester had knowledge hereof, he signified the danger to the Earls
of Arundel, Warwick, and Derby, advising them to take arms, and unite
themselves for their common defense: for in so doubtful and suspected peace,
open war was the only way of safety. These three Earls were the chiefest
strength to the side, but the Duke bare the most stroke, because he was most
bold, and his greatness almost obscured the names of the rest. On the other
side, the King thinking separate dealing the only way to weaken a confederacy,
endeavored to prevent the Lords in joining of their forces* and to that end
he sent a strength of men with charge, either to set upon the Earl of Arundel
where he did lie: or to intercept him in his passage toward the Duke. But the
Earl had traveled all the night before their coming, and so happily escaped
to Haringey park, where he found the Duke, and the other Earls, with a
sufficient company, as well to make attempt, as to stand upon resistance.

When the King heard hereof, he was disturbed and distracted in mind, being
now in choice either to relent, or to resist, whereof he much disdained the
one, and distrusted the other. His followers also was divided in Counsel: some
fretting at the disgrace, and some fainting at the danger. The Archbishop of
York persuaded the King, that occasion was now offered to show himself a King
indeed, if he would muster a Royal army, and by maine might beat down the
boldness of this presumption. N^hil dictu facilius, said another: This is more
readily devised then done: the army against us is mighty, and the Commanders
are great men, both for courage and skill, and greatly favored of the Common
people: whereby that which is accounted so ready pay, may chance to prove a
desperate debt. Therefore it were better with some yielding to enter into
conditions of quiet, then by standing upon high points of honor to hazard the
issue of a battle, wherein the King cannot win without his weakening, nor
loose without danger of his undoing. There was then in presence, a certain old
Knight, called Sir Hugh Linne, a good soldier, but a very mad-cap, and one
that lived chiefly upon the liberality of Noblemen; by vain jestes, affecting
the grace of a pleasant conceit: of him the King demanded in mirth, what he
thought best to be done? Sir Hugh swore, swownes and snailes, let us set upon
them, and kill every man and mothers child; and so we shall make riddance of
the best friends you have in the Realm, this giddy answer more weighed with
the King then if it had been spoken in grave and sober sort: and thus it often
happens, that wisdom is the more, sweetly swallowed when it is tempered
with folly, and earnest is the less offensive, if it be delivered in jest. In
the end, the devise of raising arms was laid aside, not as displeasing (being
so agreeable to former proceedings, but as despairing to prevail thereby; and
the Archbishop of Canterbury, with the Bishop of Ely being Lord Chancellor,
were sent unto the Lords, to understand the cause of their assembly: answer was
made, that it was for the safety of themselves; the honor of the King, and the
overthrow of them which sought the overthrow of both. At the last it was
concluded by mediation of the Bishops, that the Lords should come before the
King at Westminster, upon promise of his protection, and there have audience
concerning their griefs: the Bishop of Ely also making private says, that he
would discover any danger that he could discrie, a little before the time they
should come, the Bishop of Ely sent word of an await that was purposed to be
laid for them, at a place called the Mewes, near London; advising them either
to make stay, or to come prepared: but rather to make stay, least further
provocation might make reconcilement more hard, hereupon they came not at the
time appointed, and the King marvailing at their sailance, enquired the cause
of the Bishop of Ely: who answered, that the Lords found want of true meaning,
and that they neither did, nor durst repose assurance to the Kings word, which
they saw to be used as a means to entrap them, the King made the matter very
strange unto him, affirming with an oath that he was free from deceit, both in
consent and knowledge: and in a great rage, he commanded the Sheriffs of
London to go to the place, and slay all those whom they found there in wait.
Whether this was but a countenance of his, or whether he was not privy to the
practice, it is not assuredly known, and indeed, the matter was not false, but
the place mistaken: for Sir Thomas Trivet, and Sir Nicholas Brambre had
assembled many armed men at Westminster, with direction to assault the Lords at
their best advantage: but perceiving their deceit to be discovered, they
dissolved the company, and sent them secretly away to London.

Then the Lords, upon new faith for their security, came to the King at
Westminster, and yet in faith they brought security with them, such troops of
men, as in a place where they were so entirely favored, was able to defend
them, in any sudden tumult or danger: the King upon their coming entered into
Westminster Hall, apparelled in his Royal robes: and when he was placed in
his seat, and had composed himself to Majesty and State, the Bishop of Ely,
Lord Chancellor, made a long Oration to the Lords in the Kings name. Wherein
he declared the heinousness of their offense, the greatness of their peril,
how easy a matter it had been for the King to have levied a power sufficient
to destroy them; and yet for the general spare of his Subjects blood, and in
particular favor to the Duke and other Lords, he made choice to encounter and
overcome them, rather by friendship then by force: and therefore was willing,
not only to pardon their riot, but also to hear their griefs, and in a
peaceable and quiet manner to redress them. The Lords alleged for causes of
their taking arms, first the necessity of their own defense: secondly the
love both of the King and of the Realm, whose fame and fortune did daily
decline, by means of certain Traitors, who lived only by the dishonours of
the one, and decays of the other, those whom they challenged for Traitors,
were Robert Veere Duke of Ireland, Alexander Nevill Archbishop of York,
Michael De-la-poole Earl of Suffolk, Robert Trisilian Lord chief Justice;
Sir Nicholas Brambre, and certain others, somewhat secreter, but nothing
better: and to justify this appeal, they threw down their gloves, and
offered themselves to the trial by combat. The King replied, that oftentimes
the causes of actions being good, yet, if the means want moderation, and
judgment, the events prove pernicious: and therefore, though these complaints
were true, yet were these courses not tolerable, which did bear an open face
of rebellion, and by licentiousness of the multitude, might soon have sorted
to such an end: for it is more easy to raise the people, then to rule them:
whose fury once stirred, will commonly be discharged some ways. But (said
he) since we have broken this broile, we will not by combating give occasion
of a new: but at the next Parliament (which he appointed should begin the
third day of February then next ensuing) as well you, as they, Crostino
Purificationis.
shall be present, and justice indifferently done unto all. In the mean time,
he took all parties into his protection, that none should endanger or
endammage another: desiring the Lords to bear in mind, that as Princes must
not rule without limitation, so Subjects must use a mean in their liberty.
Then he caused the Duke and the Earls, which all this time kneeled before
him, to arise, and went with them into his private Chamber, where they talked a
while, and drunk familiarly together, and afterward, with a most friendly
farewell he licensed them to depart. They of the contrary faction were not
present at this meeting, and if they had, it was thought, that the presence of
the King should little have protected them.

This act of the King was diverse ways taken: some judged him fearful; others
moderate, rather in sparing the blood of his Subjects. The Lords were very
joyful of his good will and favor, which as by base or bad means they would
not seek, so being well gotten, they did highly esteem. Yet they thought it
the safest course, not to separate themselves, suspecting the mutability of the
King, and the malice of their enemies, of whom they knew neither where they
were, nor what they did intend: and being men of great wealth, and great power,
and greatly bent to hurtful practices, they were feared not without a cause:
for the Duke of Ireland, either by setting on, or sufferance of the King, was
all this time mustering of Soldiers out of Ch^shire and Wales, where he
gathered an army both for number, and goodness of men sufficient, if another
had been general, to have maintained the side.

When the Lords were advertised hereof, they divided themselves, and beset all
the ways by which the Duke should pass to London; determining to encounter
him, before he did increase his power, and countenance his actions with the
puissance or name of the King. At the last he was met by the Earl of Derby,
at a place called Babbelake near to Burford: and there the Earl put his men
in array, resolving with great boldness to hazard the battail^, his Soldiers
also were full of courage and heart, disliking nothing more then delay, as a
loosing of time, and a hinderance to the victory* but the Duke, being a man not
fit for action, yet mutinous, and more apt to stir strife, then able to stint
it: upon news of an enemy would presently have fled. There was then in the
army a principal Commander, one Sir Thomas Molineux, Constable of Ch^shire, a
man of great wealth, and of good proof in service, upon whose leading all that
Country did depend: he persuaded the Duke, that this was but a part of the
forces that were against them, and led only by the Earl of Derby, a man of no
special name (at that time) among the Lords, and if they could not bear
through that resistance, it was but in vain to attempt any great atchevement
by arms. Hereupon the Duke stayed his steps, but his faint Spirits were moved
by this speech, rather to desire victory then to hope it: his soldiers also
were dull, silent, and sad, and such as were readier to interpret, then to
execute the Captains commandment. So they joined battle, but scarce ten
ounces of blood was lost on both sides, before the Duke of Ireland set spurs
to his horse, and forsook the field. His soldiers seeing this, threw away
their unfortunate weapon^, more for indignation then for fear, ruffling their
ranks, and yielding to the Earl the honor of the field. Sir Thomas Molineux
in flying away, was forced to take a River which was near, and as he was
coming forth again, a certain Knight, whose name was Sir Thomas Mortimer,
pulled off his helmet, and stabbed him into the brains with his dagger. The
rest submitted themselves to the discretion of the Victorers, making them Lords
over their life, and death: but their yielding was no sooner offered, then it
was accepted, the Earl presently commanding that none should be harmed, but
those that did make resistance, or bear armor: The soldiers also being
willing to show favor toward their Contrymen, as led into this action,
partly upon simplicity, partly to accompany these which came upon fear. Then
the Gentlemen were still retained in the Earls company, the common Soldiers
were dispoiled of their armor only, and so returned again to their peaceable
business at home. And this was the first act whereby reputation did rise to
the side, and the greatness began, whereunto the Earl afterward attained.

The Duke of Ireland, at the beginning of his flight, was desirous to have
passed the River which ran by: and coming to a bridge, he found the same
broken: from thence he posted to another bridge, which he found guarded with
Archers. At the last, his fearfulness being feared away (as nothing makes
men more desperate upon a doubtful danger, then fear of that which is
certain) he adventured to take the stream; in the midst whereof he forsook
his horse and swam to the other side, and so by benefit of the night es^aped,
and flied into Scotland: and shortly after passed the Seas into Flanders, and
from thence traveled into France: where the continual gall of his grief
soon brought his loathed life to an end. His horse was taken with his
brestplate, his helmet and his gauntlets, whereupon it was generally supposed
that he was drowned; and (as in great uncertainties it often happens) some
affirmed that they saw his death, which men either glad to hear, or not
curious to search, did easily believe: whether this were thus contrived of
purpose, or fell so out by chance, it was a great means of his escape, by
staying the pursuit after him, which otherwise had been made. His coach also
was taken, and certain of the Kings letters found, wherein he desired the
Duke to come to London with all the speed and power he could make, and he
would be ready to die in his defense; so unskilful was he in matter of
government, that to pleasure a few, he regarded not the coffeehouse of all
the rest.

The Earl of Suffolk, upon this accident, shaved his beard, and in base and
disguised artire fled to Calis, and either for fear, or for shame, never after
returned into England: he was a cruel spoiler, and a careless spender, in
War contemptible, in peace in-supportable, an enemy to all Counsel of
others, and in his own conceit obstinately contentious; of a good wit, and
ready speech both which he abused, to the cunning commending of himself, and
crafty depraving of others: he was less loved but better heard of the King,
then the Duke of Ireland: the more hurtful man and the more hateful: the Duke
being charged with no great fault: but only the Kings excessive favor, in
their course of good and bad fortune, both of them were famous alike. Also the
Archbishop of York, Justice Trisilian, and others of that faction, ran every
man, like connies to their covert; Yea, the King betook himself to the Tower
of London, and there made provision for his Winter abode; having all his
courses now crossed, first rashness in taking arms, and afterward by cowardice
in maintaining them.

The Earl of Darby signified this success to his associates by letters, yet
without any vanting or enlarging Terms: his speeches also were moderate,
rather extenuating his fact then extolling it, but by stopping his fame, it
much increased when men esteemed his high thoughts by his lowly words, and his
conceit in great exploits, by his contempt of this. Then the Lords met, and
marched together toward London, whither they came upon Saint Stephens day,
having almost forty thousand men in their army, and first they showed
themselves in battle array, in the fields near unto the Tower, within the
view of the King: afterward, they took up their lodgings in the Suburbs, the
Major and Aldermen of the City came forth, and gave liberal allowance of
victual to the soldiers, offering unto the Lords entertainment within the
City, but they did not accept it.

Now this discord seemed to draw to a dangerous distr^ction of the
Commonwealth; the vanquished part being full of malice, and the Conquerours of
presumption: the one wanting power, the other right to command and rule. The
Archbishop of Canterbury, and certain others of the neutrality, fearing the
sequel, persuaded the King to come to a treaty with the Lords: but he made
show of very light regard of all these dealings; let them stay (said he)
until they have wearied themselves with maintaining this multitude, and then I
will talk further with them. When the Lords understood the drift of his
devise, they beset the Thames, and all other passages, and protested, that they
would not depart until they had talked with him to his face The King having
neither strength to resist; nor scope to escape, consented to a treaty, and to
that end desired the Lords to come to him into the Tower: but they refused that
place of meeting, upon fear of false measure, until the King permitted them
to search as diligently, and come as strongly, as they thought it meet. So they
came unto the King well guarded, and after a few could kindn^sses, and strange
salutations, they laid before him, his proceedings against them at Nottingam;
his letters which he sent to the Duke of Ireland contrary to his word, for the
raising of arms against them: his agreement with the French King, for the
yielding up of Calis and other strong holds which he possessed in those parts:
with diverse other points of dishonorable d^aling and negligent government.
What should the King then have said or done? all these matters were so evident,
and so evil, that there was no place left either for denial or defense.
Therefore ingenuously, first with silence and patience, afterward with tears
he confessed his errors. And certainly, the stiff stomach of the Lords
relented more to these luke warm drops then they would have done to his Cannon
shot.

Then it was agreed, that the next day the King should meet with them at
Westminster, and there treat further, both of these, and other necessary
affairs of the Realm. So the Duke, and the rest of the Lords departed, except
the Earl of Darby, who stayed supper with the King, and all that time stayed
him in his promised purpose: but when he was also gone, some of the secret
Counsailours, or Corrupters rather, and Abusers of the King, whistled him in
the ear, that his going to Westminster was neither seemly nor safe, and would
cause not only to his person present danger and contempt, but also both
abasement and abridgement to his authority afterward: The Kings mind was soon
changed; but the Lords being now stirred, and feeling the Kings hand weak to
govern the bridle, became the more vehement, and sent him word, that if he
did jeofaile with them, and not come according to appointment, they would choose
another King, who should have his Nobility in better regard. This peremptory
message so terrified the King, that he not only went to Westminster, but
suffered the Lords to do there even what they would. So they caused him much
against his liking, to remove out of the Court, Alexander Nevill, Archbishop of
York, John Foord, Bishop of Durisme, Friar Th^mas Rushoke, Bishop of
Chichester, the Kings Confessor: Likewise they removed the Lord Sou^^, the
Lord Haringworth, Lord Burnel, Lord Beaumount, Sir Albred Veere, Sir Bald^wine
Bereford, Sir Richard Alderbury, Sir John Worth, Sir Thomas Clifford, and Sir
John Lovell, taking sureties, for their appearance at the next Parliament. Also
certain Ladies were expelled the Court, and put under sureties: to wit, the
Lady Mowen, the Lady Moling, and the Lady Ponings, which was the wife of Sir
John Worth. Furthermore, they arrested Simon Burly, William Elinghame, John
Salisbury, Thomas Trivet, James Berneis, Nicholas Dagworth, and Nicholas
B^^mbre Knights, Richard Clifford, John Lincoln, and Richard Motford,
Clearkes, John Beauchampe the Kings Steward, Nicholas Lake, Deane of the Kings
Chapel, and John Blake Counceller at the Law: all these were committed to
diverse Prisons, where they were forth-comming, but not coming forth, until
the Parliament next following.

After the feast of the Purification, the Parliament began at London, 1388.
(and yet the King used many means, either to dash or defer the same) to
which the Lords came, attended with the number and strength of a full army,
upon color to repress any riot^ that might happen to arise: but in truth,
that by this terror, they might draw the whole manage of affairs unto
themselves. This assembly continued until Whitsuntide next following, with
very great fear of some men, and hope of others, and expectation of all. Herein
was Justice Trisilian, by counsel of the Lords, against the Kings mind,
condemned to be drawn and hanged: which judgment was presently executed upon
him: the like sentence and execution passed upon Sir Nicholas Brambre, Sir John
Salisbury, Sir James Barneis, John Beauchampe, the Kings Steward, and John
Blake Esquire, who had framed the Articles which were exhibited against the
Lords at Nottingham. Also the Justices who gave their judgment concerning
those Articles, Robert Belknape, John Holt, Roger F^lthrope, and William
Burghe, were condemned to perpetual exile: and yet they did not enterpose
themselves, but intermeddle by constraint. Sir Simon Burly was also beheaded,
who was Keeper of Dover Castle; and had conspired to deliver the same unto the
Frenchmen: he was infinitely ^aughty and proud, equal to the meanest in
virtue and wisdom, but in bravery and train inferior to no Duke, Diverse
other were either put to death, or banished, and some (as it happened when the
reine of fury is at large) without any great cause. The Earl of Derby
furthered no man's death, but labored very instantly for the life and liberty
of many, in so much as hot speeches did arise between the Duke of Gloucester and
him: whereby he purchased a favorable opinion among those of the contrary
part, having caused the death of no man, but only in the field. Then was an
oath exacted of the King, to stand to the Government of the Lords: and also a
note was taken of all the Subjects within the Realm, to be true and faithful
unto the King. The King in taking this oath of the Lords, bewrayed his inward
conceit by his open countenance, looking pleasantly on those he favored* and
angerly on those whom he hated: by which untimely discovery, he made them
more heedefull, and himself more hateful: which were occasions afterward,
both to prevent the revenge, which he much desired and to procure the
mischiefs which he little feared. Lastly, a subsidy was granted: and so the
King coming, as it were, to a capitulation with the Lords, he to have the
name of a King, and they the Authority and Majesty, the contention for that
time ceased.

All this was done in the 11. year of the Kings reign, 1389.
he being yet under age, and in Government of others. But the year following,
he began to take upon him more liberty and rule: and upon extreme disdain,
that both his pleasure and his power were by the Lords thus restrained, he did
ever after bear a hard mind against them. And first he assembled them in the
Council Chamber, and there demanded of what years they took him to be: they
answered, that he was somewhat above one and twenty; then (said he) I am of
lawful age to have the regiment in mine own hand, and therefore you do me
wrong to hold me still under government, as though the condition of a King
were harder then of a Subject. This the Lords were neither willing to grant,
nor able to deny, and therefore they either kept silence, or spoke little to
the purpose. Well (said the King,) since I am no longer an infant, I here
renounce your rule, and take upon me such free administration of the Realm,
as the Kings thereof my Predecessors heretofore have lawfully used. Then
presently he began his Phaetons flourish, and commanded the Bishop of Ely,
being Lord Chancellor, to resign his Seal; which the King received, and put
up, and therewith departed out of the Chamber: but soon after he returned
again, and delivered the same to William Wickam Bishop of Winchester,
constituting him Lord Chancellor thereby. Many other officers he likewise
deposed; and placed new in their room; partly to manifest his authority, and
partly to satisfy his displeasure. Also he removed the Duke of Gloucester, the
Earl of Warwick, and many others from his Privy Council, and took those in
their places, which more regarded the humor of the King, but less his honor.

Soon after, it was suggested to the King, that the Duke of Glocecester was
gathering forces against him: but upon examination there was found not only no
truth, but no show or color of any such matter. The Duke would not quietly
have disgested the raising of these reports* but the King, whether upon a
general delight, to be tickled in the cares with such tales, or upon
particular desire to have some quarrel against the Duke, charged him to
silence.

In the 13. year of the reign of King Richard, 1390.
the Citizens of Genu^ desired his aid, against the Barbarians of Afrike, who
with daily incursions infested and spoiled all the Sea coasts and Islands of
Italy, and France, which fronted upon them. The King sent a choice company of
Soldiers, under the conduct of Henry Earl of Derby; who behaved himself in
this charge with great integrity and courage, inciting his men, the good by
praise, the bad by example, rather then reproof, as more ready to commend the
virtues of the one, then to upbraid the vices of the other. And first he
passed into France, and there joined himself to certain French forces
appointed likewise for this service: then with might and minds united, they
sailed together into Africa. At their arrival, the Barbarians were ready in
arms to keep them from landing: but the Earl commanded his Archers to break
through and make passage, despising the enemy, whom he knew to be weak and
unskilful in service, and not to have that advantage in place, which he had
in men: the Frenchmen also sharply set in, and seconded the English: and so
whilst both companies contended, the one to be accounted a help, and the
other to seem to need no help, the enemies were forced to fly, and leave the
shore unto the Christians. In this conflict, three Dukes of the Barbarians and
above three hundred Soldiers were slain, and in the flight, four Dukes were
taken, and a great, yet uncertain, number of Common people. Then the
Christians marched directly toward Tunis, the head City of that Country: this
they besieged, and in short time took; chiefly by the prowess of the English
soldiers, who first scaled the Wales, and reared thereon the Earls banner.
When they were entered the Town, the Englishmen bent their endeavor, to the
housing of their enemies, and beating down of such as made resistance, but the
Frenchmen straight ways turned to their lascivious pleasures: so that there
was presented a spectacle, both pitiful and shameless: in one place
butchering of men, in another rioting with women: here streams of blood, and
heaps of slaughtered bodies, hard by dissolute and licentious wantonnesses in
some, all the miseries of a cruel war, and the looseness of a secure peace*
Here were slain and taken above four thousand Barbarians: the Kings brother
also was slain: but the King himself fled into the Castle, which was strongly
scited, and well fortified and furnished with men. The Christians laid siege to
this Castle the space of five weeks, during which time, they lost many of
their men, yet not by sword, but by sickness: the Barbarians also were
distressed with want of victual, having but little provision, and many
unprofitable mouths to consume it: hereupon they sent unto the Christians, to
desire peace, offering them a great sum of money, to depart out of their
Country: this the Christians accepted, upon condition that they might also
freely carry with them, all their pray and Prisoners; and that the Barbarians
should from thence forth surcease from making spoil, upon any of the coasts of
Italy, or France. Thus had this voyage a prosperous and speedy end: the only
service (as I suppose) which the English and Frenchmen performed together,
without jotte of jarre. And yet the Earl abused not the fortune of this
success, to vain vanting, or braving in words, but moderately imparted to the
rest, the honor of the exploit: so by valiantly performing his charge, and
sparingly speaking thereof, his glory increased, without bit of envy.

In the fifteenth and sixteenth years of the reign of King Richard, 1392.
1393.
certain causes of coffeehouse did grow, between the King and the
Londoners, which set the favor of the one, and the faith of the other, at
great separation and distance: One was, for that the King would have borrowed
of them a thousand pounds: which they feeling much, and fearing more the Kings
daily exactions, did not only deny, but evil entreated a certain Lumbard,
who offered to lay out the money.

Another grief was thus occasioned: One of the Bishop of Salisburies servants,
named Roman, meeting in Fleet Street with a Bakers man, bearing horse-broad,
took a loaf out of his basket: and by rude demand of the one, and rough
denial of the other, chollar so kindled betwixt them, that Roman brake the
Bakers head. Hereupon the Neighbors came forth, and would have arrested the
Bishops lusty yeoman: but he escaped, and fled to this Bishops house. The
Constable followed peaceably, and demanded a quiet delivery of the Offendour:
but the Bishops men shut the gates against him, that no man could come near.
Then much people flocked together, threatening to break open the gates, and
fire the house, unless Roman were brought forth unto them: What (said they)
are the Bishops men privileged? or is his house a Sanctuary? or will he
protect those whom he ought to punish? if we may be shuffled off in this
sort, not only our streets, but our stops and our houses shall never be free
from violence and wrong. This we will not endure: we cannot: it stands not
us in hand. Herewith they approached the gates, and began to use violence:
but the Major and Sheriffs of the City, upon advertisement of this tumult,
came amongst them, crying out, that it was not courage, but outrage which they
showed: whereby they would procure, both danger to themselves and displeasure
against the whole City; that although wrong had been received, yet they were
not in the men, nor this the means to redress the same: So partly by their
persuasions, partly by their presence and authority, they repressed the riot,
and sent every man away, with straight charge to keep the peace. Here was yet
no great harm done, and the quarrel might have been quieted without more
ado, had not the Bishops stirred therein, and kindled the coals of
unkindnesse a fresh. For the Londoners at that time, were not only suspected
secretly, but openly noted to be favorers and followers of Wickliffes
opinions: for which cause, they were much maliced of the Bishops; and many of
their actions interpreted, to proceed from another mind, and tend to a worse
end, then was outwardly borne in countenance and show: and some matters of
chance, were taken as done of purpose. Therefore the Bishop of Salisbury called
John Waltham, who was also Treasourer of England, made a grievous complaint of
this attempt, to Thomas Arundel Archbishop of York, and Lord Chancellor;
affirming, that if upon every light pretense, the Citizens might be suffered
in this sort to insult upon the Bishops, without punishment, without reproof
and blame, they would bring into a hazard, not only the dignity and state, but
the liberty also of the whole Church: did they not lately take upon them the
punishment of adulteries, and other crimes appertaining to Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction? maliciously alleging, that the Bishops and their Officers,
either being infamous for those vices themselves, did winck at the same in
others: or else by covetous commutation, did rather set them to sale, then
carefully repress them. Did they not rudely and unreverently break open the
doors upon the Archbishop of Canterbury, and interrupt his proceedings against
John Astone, an open follower of Wickliffe? and do we think that this is the
last indignity that they will offer? no surely, nor yet the least: and if this
boldness be not beaten down, our authority will fall into open contempt* and
scorn, and be made a common foot ball, for every base Citizen to spurn at.
Hereupon they went together to the King, and so incensed his displeasure
against the Londoners, (being prepared thereto by former provocations) that he
was in the mind to make spoil of the City, and utterly to destroy it. But
being persuaded to some more moderation: in revenge, first he caused the Major
and Sheriffs, and many of the chief Citizens to be apprehended, and
committed to diverse several Prisons: then he ceazed all the liberties of the
City into his hands* and ordained, that no Major should any more be elected,
but that the King should at his pleasure appoint a Warden and Governor over
the City. This office was first committed to Sir Edward Darlington: who for his
gentleness toward the Citizens, was shortly after removed, and Sir Bauldwike
Radington placed in his room. Also the King was induced, or rather seduced by
the Archbishop of York Lord Chancellor, to remove the Terms and Courts: to
wit, the Chancery, the Exchequer, the Kings bench, the hamper, and the Common
pleas, from London, to be kept at York, where the same continued from
Mid-sommer in the year 1393. until Christmasse next following, to the great
hinderance and decay of the City of London. At the last, the King upon earnest
entreaty of the Duke of Lancaster, and the Duke of Gloucester, called the
Londoners before him at Windsore: where having first terrified them with the
presence and show of a great number of armed men) he caused all the
privileges of the City, both old and new, to be brought forth, whereof he
restored some, and restrained the rest: yet the Londoners were not fully
restored to favor; neither recovered they at that time, either the person or
dignity of their Major. Shortly after, the King went to London: at whose
coming the Citizens changed all their grief into gladness (as the common
sort is without measure in both) entertaining him with such joyful triumphs
and rich presents, as if it had been the day of his coronation. They supposed
with these great courtesies and costs to have satisfied his displeasure; but
they found themselves far deceived: for they were not fully restored to their
liberties again, until they had made fine to pay unto the King ten thousand
pounds. Thus did the Londoners manifest in themselves, a strange diversity of
disposition, both licentiously to commit offense, and patiently to endure
punishment; having rashness and rage so tempered with obedience, that they
were easily punished, who could not possibly be ruled. Yet for this cause, so
soon as first occasion did serve against the King; they showed themselves,
either his earnest enemies, or faint friends.

King Richard in the nineteenth year of his reign, passed the Seas to Calis:
the French King also came down to Ard: between which two Towns, a place was
appointed, and tents erected for both the Kings to meet. After large expenses
on both sides, and great honor done by the one King to the other: a surcease
of arms was concluded between them for thirty years: and King Richard took
to wife Lady Isabel, the French Kings Daughter, being not above seven or eight
years old. The Duke of Gloucester was so offended; both with this friendship,
and affinity, that he lost all manner of patience: exclaiming, that it was
more meet to be in arms, then in amity with the Frenchmen, who being
inferior to the English in courage, did always overreach them in craft, and
being too weak for War, did many times prevail by peace: that now they had
got into their hands, many Towns and Holds, appertaining to the Crown of
England, they were willing to conclude a peace, to exclude the King thereby
from his possessions: but whenever occasion should change for their
advantage, they would be then as ready to start from the friendship, as at
that present they were to strike it: that the French Kings Daughter, being but
a child, was very unmeet for the marriage of King Richard, as well for
disparity of age, as for that the King had no issue by his first wife, and was
not like to have any by this, except (perhaps) in his old and whithered years.
When the Duke saw, that with these motives he did nothing prevail, he
subordned the Londoners, to make petition to the King, that seeing there was
peace with France, he would release them of the Subsidy which they had granted
to him in regard of those wars. This suite was instantly followed, and much
perplexed the King, until the Duke of Lancaster declared to the people, that
the King had been at the charge and dispense of three hundred thousand pounds
in his voyage into France, for the procuring of this peace: whereupon they were
pacified, and desisted from their demand.

The year following, 1397.
Guido Earl of Saint Paul's, was sent into Englan by Charles King of France, to
visit and salute in his name, King Richard, and Queen Isabel his wife, the
French Kings Daughter. To this Earl, the King did relate, with what fervency
the Duke of Gloucester contended to make disturbance of the peace between
England and France, how, because his mind was not therein followed, he moved
the people to seditious attempts, bending himself wholly to maintain discord
and disquiet, rather in his own Country then not at all. He further reported
what stiff strifes, in former times, the Duke had stirred* which, howsoever
they were done, yet as they were declared, they sounded very odious and hard.
When the Earl heard this, he presently answered, that the Duke was to
dangerous a subject to be permitted to live: that greatness was never safe,
if it grow excessive and bold: that the King must not affect the vain
commendation of clemency, with his own peril: and that it touched him both in
honor to revenge the disgraces which he had received, and in policy to
prevent the dangers which he had cause to fear. These words so sharpened the
Kings displeasure, that from thenceforth he busied his brains in no one thing
more, then how to bring the Duke to his end. Now he began to pry more
narrowly into his demeanor: to watch his words: to observe actions: and
always to interpret them to the worst, framing himself to many vain and
needless fears. Oftentimes he would complain of him to the Duke of
Lancaster, and the Duke of York, how fierce and violent he was in his
speeches, and cross to him in all matters. The Dukes would make answer that
the Duke of Gloucester their brother, was indeed more hot and vehement then they
did commend: yet his fierceness was joined with faithfulness, and his
crossenesse proceeded from a care, least the Commonwealth should decrease
either in honor, or in possessions: and therefore the King had neither need to
fear, nor cause to dislike.

About that time, the Dukes of Lancaster and of York withdrew themselves from
the Court, to their private Houses, the Duke of Gloucester also went to ly at
Plashey, near Chelmsford in Essex: upon advantage of which separation, the
King stood distracted in mind, between fear to defer, and shame to avow the
destruction of the Duke, least he might happily be disappointed by the one,
or dishonored by the other. Hereupon he entered into counsel with John
Holland, Earl of Huntington, his half brother: and Thomas Mowbray, Earl of
Nottingham, how the Duke of Gloucester might, be suppressed or oppressed rather,
the cruelty which was but wavering in the King, yea wanting by nature, was
soon confirmed by evil advise: and being once inclined to blood, he did not
fail, either of examples of lewd action to follow, or direction of cruel
Counsel what to do: so the plot was contrived, and according thereto, the
King and the Earl of Nottingham rode together into Essex, as though it were to
disport themselves in hunting: when they were in the midst of the Forest, the
Earl made stay and the King passed forth with a small and unsuspitious company
to the Duke lying at Plashey: there he stayed dinner: and then pretending
occasion of present return, he desired the Duke to accompany him to London,
the fair entreaty of a Prince, is a most forcible command: therefore the Duke
supposing that only to be intended indeed, which was pretended in show, went
to horseback with the King, taking such small attendance, as upon the sudden
could be in a readiness, and appointing the rest to come after him to London.
So they rode together using much familiar talk by the way, until they came
near the place of await: then the King put his horse forward, and the Duke
coming behind, was suddenly intercepted and stayed, crying aloud, and calling
to the King for his help: the King continued his journey as though he had not
heard: and the Duke was violently carried to the Tham^s, and t^ere shipped in a
vessel laid for the purpose, and from thence conveyed over to Calis.

When the King came to London, he caused the Earl of Warwick also to be
arrested and sent to prison, the same day that he had invited him to dinner,
and showed good countenance, and promised to be a gracious Lord unto him. Upon
the like dissembled show, the Earl of Arundel, and his Son, and certain
others were arrested also, and committed to prison in the I Will of Wight.

The common people upon the apprehending of these three Noblemen, whom they
chiefly, and almost only favored, were in a great confusion and tumult; and
there wanted but a head to draw them to sedition: every man sorrowed, murmured,
and threatened, and daring no further, stood waiting for one to lead them the
way: all being ready to follow that, which any one was loath to begin. The
Duke of Lancaster and of York gathered a strong army, and came therewith to
London, where they were readily received by the Citizens, although the King had
commanded the contrary: but this seemed to be done, rather for guard to
themselves, then regard to any others.

The King all this time, kept at a Village called Helhame, within four miles
of London, having about him a great power of armed men, which he had gathered
out of Cheshire and Wales: and to pacify the common people, he caused to be
proclaimed, that the Lords were not apprehended upon old displeasures, but for
offenses lately committed, for which they should be appealed by order of Law,
and receive open trial, in the Parliament next following: the like message was
sent to the Duke of Lancaster, and the Duke of York, lying at London: to whom
the King made faith, for the safety of their persons, and indemnity of their
goods, and that nothing should be attempted without their privity and advice:
all this was as rashly believed, as it was craftily given out: whereupon the
Dukes dissembled their fears, and dissolved their forces, and remained in
expectancy what would ensue.

A little before the feast of Saint Michael, the Parliament began at London,
wherein Sir John Bushie, Sir William Bagot, and Sir Henry Green, were
principal agents for the Kings purpose. These were then in all the credites
and authority with the King, and his chiefest Schoolmasters both of cruelty
and deceit: they were proud, arrogant, and ambitious, and upon confidence of
the Kings favor, professed enemies to men of ancient Nobility; to the end,
that being lately start up, they might become more famous by maintaining
contention with great persons. And first, by their importuned travail, all the
Charters of pardon, granted by the King, were in this Parliament annulled and
revoked. Then the Prelates did constitute Sir Henry Percie their Procuratour,
and departed the house, because they might not be present in judgment of
blood. Lastly, the Earl of Arundel, and the Earl of Warwick were arraigned;
and for the same offenses, for which they had been pardoned (namely for
encroaching to themselves Royal power in judging to death Simon Burly, John
Berneis, and others, without the Kings consent) were condemned to be hanged,
drawn, and quartered: but the King so moderated the severity of this sentence,
that the Earl of Arundel was only beheaded, and the Earl of Warwick
committed to perpetual imprisonment in the I Will of Man.

The Duke of Gloucester, was so greatly favored, that it was thought a point
both of policy and peace, not to bring him to his open answer, but to put him
to death secretly: so he was strangled under a feather bed at Calis by the
Earl of Nottingham, being then Earl Marshall: which death, howsoever he
deserved; yet dying as he did not called, nor heard, he died as guiltless.

In this same Parliament, Thomas Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury was also
accused, for executing the commission against Michael De-la-poole, Earl of
Suffolk: for which cause, his temporalties were seized; his lands and goods
forfeited, as well in use as in possession^ and he himself was adjudged to
exile, and charged to depart the Realm, within six weeks then next ensuing.
So he went into France, where afterward, he became a principal mean of the
revolt which followed. Also the Lord Cobham was exiled into the I Will of Gernsey:
and Sir Reinold Cobham was condemned to death, not for entering into any attempt
against the King, but because he was appointed by the Lords to be one of his
Governors, and of his Counsel, in the 11. year of his reign.

Now the King falsely supposing, that he was free from all dangers, and that
the humor against him, was clean purged and spent, conceived more secret
contentment, then he would openly bewray; as more able to dissemble his joy,
then conceal his fear: being so blinded and bewitched with continual custom
of flatteries, that he perceived not, that the state of a Prince is never
stablished by cruelty and craft* On the other side, the Common people were much
dismayed, having now lost those whom they accounted their only helps, and
their only hopes, both for their private affairs, and for supporting the
state: and because these mishaps happened unto them, for maintaining a cause of
common dislike, the peoples stomach was stirred thereby to much hate and
heart-burning against the King. And to make their deaths the more odious, the
Earl of Arundel was reputed a Martyr, and Pilgrimages were daily made to the
place of his burial: the rumor also was current but without either author or
ground, that his head was miraculously fastened again to his body: this
whilst all men affirmed, and no man knew, the King caused the corpse to be
taken up, and viewed, ten days after it was interred: and finding the same
to be fabulous, he caused the ground to be paved where the Earl was laid,
and all mention of his burial to be taken away, forbidding publicly any such
speeches of him afterward to be used. But this restraint raised the more: and
they, who if it had bin lawful, would have said nothing, being once forbidden,
could not forbear to talk. It was also constantly reported, that the King was
much disquieted in his dreams with the Earl, who did often seem to appear
unto him, in so terrible and truculent manner, that breaking his fearful
sleep, he would curse the time that ever he knew him.

1398.
In the one and twenty year of the reign of King Richard, Henry Earl of
Darby, was created Duke of Hereford: at which time the King created four other
Dukes: to wit, Duke of Aumerle, who was before Earl of Rutland: Duke of
Southrey, who was before Earl of Kent: Duke of Excester, who was before Earl
of Huntington: and Duke of Norfolk, who was before Earl of Nottingham. This
degree of honor long time after the conquest of the Normans (whose chiefest
Rulers had no higher title) was accounted too great for a subject to bear: the
form of the Commonwealth, being framed by the Victours, far from equality
of all, and yet the King excepted without eminency of any. At the length King
Edward the third created his eldest Son Edward Duke of Corn^wall, and made
this honor hereditary, conferring it unto many: since which time, diverse
Princes of his land have been either put, or kept, or hazarded from their
estate, by men of that quality and degree. The King likewise created the
Countess of Norfolk, Duchess of Norfolk: the Earl of Sommerset, Marquess
of Sommerset: the Lord Spencer, Earl of Gloucester: the Lord Nevill, Earl of
Westmerland: the Lord Scroupe, Earl of Wiltshire, and the Lord Thomas Darcy
his Steward, Earl of Worcester. Among these, he made division of a great part
of the lands of the Duke of Gloucester, and of the Earls of Arundel and
Warwick: supposing by this double liberality of honor and possessions, to have
purchased to himself most firm friendships: but bought friends, for the most
part, are seldom either satisfied or sure: and like certain Ravens, in
Arabia, so long as they are full, do yield a pleasant voice: but being empty,
do make a horrible cry.

Now the Duke of Hereford raised his desires, together with his dignities, and
either upon disdain, at the undeserved favor and advancement of some persons
about the King: or upon dislike, that the King was so dishonourably both abused
and abased by them: or else (perhaps) upon desire, to manifest his own
sufficiency in matters of controulement and direction: being in familiar
discourse with Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolk, he brake into complaint, how
the King regarded not the Noble Princes of his blood, and Peers of the Realm,
and by extremities used to some, discouraged the rest from intermedling in any
public affairs: how instead of these he was wholly governed by certain
newfound and newfangled favorites, vulgar in birth, corrupt in qualities,
^aving no sufficiency either of council for peace, or of courage for war;
who being of all men the most unhonest, and the most unable, with hatefulness
of the one, and contempt of the other, were generally despised in all the
Realm: that hereby, First, the honor of the Kings person was much blemished;
for ungrate and ungratious adherents are always the way to hatred and contempt.
Secondly, the safety of his state might be endangered; for extraordinary
favor to men apparently of weak or bad desert, does breed insolency in them*
and coffeehouse in others, two dangerous humors in a Commonwealth.
Thirdly, the dignity of the Realm was much empaired: whose fortune and valor
being guided by the ill chance of such unlucky leaders, stood never in the like
Terms of doubt and distress; so that matters of peace were tumultuous and
uncertain, and achievements of war were never brought to honorable
conclusion: that Alexander Severus would have smoaked such sellers of smoke;
that Xerxes would have pulled their skin over their ears; and high time it
was, that the King should look unto them: for the Nobility grew out of heart,
the Commons out of hope, and all the people fell to a discontented murmuring.
And this he said (as he said) not for any grudge, but for grief and good
will: and therefore desired the Duke, who was one of the privy Council, and
well heard with the King, to discover unto him these deformities and dangers,
that by repairing the one, he might happily repel the other.

These words procured to the Duke of Hereford* both great offense, and great
glory: at the delivery whereof, the Duke of Norfolk made show of good liking,
and promise of sincere dealing. And indeed, if they had been as faithfully
reported by him, and by the King as friendly taken, as they were faithfully and
friendly meant, many mischiefs might have been avoided: but both of these did
fail: for the Duke of Norfolk although in former times he had taken part with
the Lords, yet afterward, being desirous to be accounted rather among the
great men, then the good, he made sale of his honor, to maintain his
pleasure, and continue himself in grace with the King; to which he was
altogether inthralled: insomuch, that the murdering of the Duke of Gloucester,
and the execution of the Earl of Arundel, was to his charge especially
committed: and supposing upon this occasion to make a free hold of his Princes
favor, he grievously aggravated these speeches in reporting them, and yet
cunningly too: with many lies intermixing some truths, or making the truth much
more then it was. Again, the King not enduring the search of his soars, did
bend his mind rather to punish the boldness, then examine the truth of these
reproves: his ears being so distempered with continuance of flattery, that
he accounted all sharp that was sound, and liked only that which was
presently pleasant, and afterward hurtful. Thus we may daily observe, that
no strange accident does at any time happen, but it is by some means
foreshewed, or foretold: but because these warnings are oftentimes either not
marked, or misconstrued, or else contemned, the events are accounted inevitable
and the admonitions vain.

The King being in this sort touched by the one Duke, and tickled by the other,
was not resolved upon the sudden, what to do* therefore he assembled his
Council and called the two Dukes before him, and demanded of the Duke of
Norfolk, if he would openly avouch that which he had suggested in secret. The
Duke seeing it was now no time for him, either to shrink or shuffle in his
tale, with a bold and confident courage repeated all that before he had
reported. But the Duke of Hereford could not be borne down by countenance,
where his cause was good: and therefore after a short silence, whereby he
seemed rather amazed at the strangeness of this matter, then abashed at the
guilt, he made low obeisance to the King, and greatly both thanked and
commended him, that he had not given hasty credit to matters of such tender
touch, as his grief might have borne out the blame of rashness in revenge;
desiring him to continue yet a while, the respite of his displeasure, and to
reserve his judgment free for indifferent audience. Then he declared in order,
what speech had passed from him, upon what occasion, and to what end: all the
rest he stoutly denied, affirming, that it was falsely surmised by his
Adversary, either upon malice to pick a quarrel; or upon sycophancy to pick a
thank, and that thereupon he was untrue, unjust, a forger of slanderous and
seditious lies, whereby he treacherously indevoured to seduce the King to
destroy the Nobility, and to raise disturbance within the Realm: and this he
offered to prove upon him (if the King would permit) by the stroke of a spear
and by dint of sword. The Duke of Norfolkes stomach not used to bear scorn;
could not digest these Terms of disgrace: whereupon he stiffely stood to
his first imputation: and for maintenance thereof, he accepted, and also
desired the combat. The King would some other ways have quieted this
contention, but the Dukes would agree to no other kind of agreement: and
thereupon threw down their gloves one against the other for gages. The King
seeing their obstinacy, granted them the battle, and assigned the place at
the City of Coventry, in the Month of August then next ensuing: where in the
mean time, he caused a sumptuous Theater, and Lists royal to be prepared.

At the day of combat, the two Dukes came, well handed with Noblemen and
Gentlemen of their lineage. The Duke of Aumerle for that day high Constable, and
the Duke of Surrey for the same time and action, high Marshall of England,
entered into the Lists, with a great troop of men apparelled in silk sondale,
embroidered with silver, every man having a tipped staff to keep the field in
order. About the time of prime, the Duke of Hereford came to the Barriers of
the Lists mounted upon a white courser, barbed with blew and green velvet,
embroidered gorgeously with Swans and Antilops of Goldsmiths work, armed at
all points, and his sword drawn in his hand. The Constable and Marshall came
to the barriers, and demanded of him, who he was? He answered: I am Henry
Duke of Hereford, and am come to do my devoire against Thomas Mowbray Duke of
Norfolk, as a Traitor to God, the King, the Realm, and me. Then he swear
upon the Evangelists, that his quarrel was right, and upon that point desired
to enter the lists, then he put up his sword, pulled down his beavier, made a
cross on his forehead, and with spear in hand, entered into the Lists, and
there lighted from his horse, and sat down in a chair of green velvet,
which was set in a traverse of green and blew velvet at the one end of the
listes: and so expected the coming of his enemy: soon after King Richard
entered the field with great pomp both in bravery and train: he had in his
company, the Earl of Saint Paul, who came purposely out of France to see this
combat tried; he was attended with all the Noble Peers of the Realm, and
guarded with ten thousand men in arms, for fear of any sudden or intended
tumult.

When he was placed on his stage, which was very curiously and richly set
forth, a King at arms made proclamation in the name of the King, and of the
high Constable, and of the Marshall, that no man, except such as were appointed
to order and marshall the field, should touch any part of the listes, upon
pain of death. This proclamation being ended, another Herald cried: Behold
here, Henry of Lancaster Duke of Hereford, appellant, who is entered into the
listes Royal, to do his devoire, against Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolk
defendant, upon pain to be accounted false and recreant. The Duke of Norfolk
was hovering on horseback at the entry of the listes, his horse being barbed
with crimson velvet, embroadered richly with lions of silver; and mulbery
trees: and when he had made his oath, before the Constable and Marshall, that
his quarrel was just and true, he entered the field boldly, crying aloud, God
aid him that has the right: then he lighted from his horse and sat down in a
Chair of crimson velvet, curtained about with red and white Damask, and
placed at the other end of the Lists. The Lord Marshall viewed both their
spears, to see that they were of equal length: the one spear he carried
himself to the Duke of Hereford, and sent the other to the Duke of Norfolk by
a Knight. This done a Herrald proclaimed, that the traverses and chaires of the
combattants should be removed, commanding them in the Kings name, to mount on
horseback, and address themselves to the encounter, the Dukes were quickly
horsed, and closed their beavieres, and cast their spears into the rests. Then
the trumpets sounded, and the Duke of Hereford set forth toward his enemy,
about six or seven paces; but before the Duke of Norfolk began to put
forward, the King cast down his Warder, and the Herralds cried ho: then the
King caused the Dukes spears to be taken from them, and commanded them to
forsake their horses, and return again to their chaires: where they remained
above two long hours, whilst the King deliberated with his Council what was
fittest to be done. At last, the Herralds cried silence: and Sir John Borcy a
Secretary of State, with a loud voice, read the sentence and determination of
the King and his Council out of a long roll: wherein was contained, that
Henry of Lancaster Duke of Hereford, appellant, and Thomas Mowbray Duke of
Norfolk, defendant, had honorably appeared that day within the Lists Royal,
and declared themselves valiant and hardy Champions; being not only ready, but
forward and desirous to dare in the battle: but because this was a matter of
great consequence and import, the King with the advice of his Council, thought
it meet to take the same into his own hands: and thereupon had decreed, that
Henry Duke of Hereford, because he had displeased the King, and for diverse
other considerations, should within 15. days next following, depart out of the
Realm, and not to return during the Term of ten years, without the Kings
especial license, upon pain of death.

When this judgment was heard, a confused noise was raised among the people,
some lamenting either the desert, or the injury of the Duke of Hereford, whom
they exceedingly favored: others laughing at the conceit of the King: first in
causing, and afterward in frustrating so great an expectation: wherein he
seemed to do not much unlike Caligula; who lying in France with a great army
near the Sea shore, gave the sign of battle, set his men in array, marched
forth as if it had been to some great piece of service and suddenly commanded
them all to gather cockles.

Then the Herralds cried again, o Yes: and the Secretary did read on, how the
King had likewise ordained, that Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolk, because he
had sown sedition, by words whereof he could make no proof should avoid the
Realm of England, and never return again, upon pain of death: and that the
King would take the profits and revenues of his lands, until he had received
such sums of money as the Duke had taken up, for wages of the garrison of
Calis, which was still unpaid: and that the King prohibited, upon pain of his
grievous displeasure, that any man should make suit or entreaty to him, on the
behalf of either of these two Dukes.

Those sentences being in this sort pronounced, the King called the two exiles
before him, and took of them an oath, That they should not converse together
in foreign Regions, nor one willingly come in place where the other was:
fearing (as it was like) least their Common coffeehouse should draw them,
first to reconcilement, and afterward to revenge. But this policy was over
weak for this purpose: for oaths are commonly spurned aside, when they lie in
the way, either to honor or revenge: and if their united forces was so much to
be regarded, their separate powers was not altogether to be contemned.

Therefore, the latter Princes of this Realm, have with more safety wholly
abolished the use of abjuration and exile: and do either by death extinguish
the power, or by pardon alter the will of great Offenders, from entering into
desperate and dangerous attempts: which men in misery and disgrace, have more
vehemence to begin, and more obstinacy to continue.

When the Samnites had once so enclosed the Roman Legions within certain
streights, that they left them neither space to fight, nor way to fly: but
without force enforced them to yield: they sent to Herennius Pontius, an aged
Ruler of their state, for his advise, what were best for them to do: his
answer was, that the Romans should be permitted to dep^rt, without any hurt,
loss or scorn. This pleased not such as were either covetous for spoil, or
cruel for blood: and therefore they sent unto him the second time, who then
returned answer, that the Romans should be put to the sword, and not one man
suffered to escape. The contrariety of these two counsels, brought the old man
into suspicion of dotage: but he coming in person to the Camp, maintained
both to be good: the first whereof (which he thought best) would by unexpected
favor, provoke the Romans to a perpetual friendship: the second would defer
the wars for many years, wherein the enemies should hardly recover strength:
third counsel there was none that safely might be followed. Yes (said the
Samnites) to grant them their lives, yet with such conditions of spoil and
shame, as the laws of victory do lay upon them. This is the way (answered
Herennius) which neither wins friends, nor weakneth enemies: but will much
increase the fury against us, and nothing diminish the force. And even so, in
matters of more particularity, that course of punishment is out of course,
which does neither reclaim the mind of men, nor restrain the might from
mischievous endeavors. But again to our purpose.

The Duke of Norfolk, having now got a fall, where he thought to take his
rest, repented his enterprise, and utterly condemned his light conceit of the
Kings lightness, and so with extreme grief and anguish of mind, he departed
out of the Realm into Almaine, and from thence traveled to Venice; where
through violence of thought and coffeehouse, in short time he ended his
d^yes. This sentence of banishment was given against him the same day of the
year, wherein the Duke of Gloucester by his wicked means was strangled to
death at Calice.

The Duke of Hereford took his leave of the King at El^ham, who there stroke
away four years of his banishment, and even offered himself to be fawned
upon and thanked, for so odious a benefit. And this unfortunate adventure he
neither bare out vain gloriously, nor yet took impatiently: but in the midst
of his misery, retained still his reputation and honor; showing no sign of
sorrow or submisnesse in his countenance, nor letting fall any intemperate and
unseemly word. The people as he departed, by heaps flocked about him, some to
see, and some to salute him: lamenting his departure in such sort, as though
their only light and delight did then forsake them: not sparing to exclaim,
that it was against the Law of Arms, against the custom of the Realm, and
against all right whatsoever, that he should be exiled, who had done his
honorable endeavor for the maintenance of his appeal. This affection was the
more excessive, for that the Duke was driven into exile by occasion of his
liberal speeches, against the most hateful persons in all the Realm: and
being the only noble man then alive, of the popular faction, the love was
wholly accumulated upon him, which was before divided among the rest. And thus
the Duke leaving England, took shipping and passed the Seas to Calice, and
from thence went into France: where he was honorably entertained by Charles
the French King, and found such favor, that he should have taken to wife the
only daughter of John Duke Berrie, Uncle to the King of France, but King
Richard fearing the sequel, if the favor which was borne to the Duke of
Hereford within the Realm, should be strengthened with so great affinity in
France, cast such stops in the way, that the marriage did not proceed.

This year the Laurel trees withered, almost throughout the Realm, and
afterward against all expectation, recovered life and flourished again. The
same year in Christmasse holidays a deep River which runs between
Snedlistorie and Hareswood, near to Bedford, suddenly stayed the stream: so
that for three miles in length, the channel was left dry, and no course of
water did hinder passage on foot. This was afterward interpreted to presage,
the revolt of the people, and the division which happened the year following:
to these we may add certain other prodegies, either forged in that fabulous
age, or happening commonly and of course, are then only noted, when any
notable accident does ensue. When K. Richard brought his first wife out of
Beam^, she had no sooner set foot within this Land, but such a tempest did
forthwith arise, as had not been seen many years before: whereby diverse
ships within the haven were quashed to pieces, but especially, and first of
all, the ship wherein the Queen was carried, this was the rather observed,
because such stiff storms were likewise stirring, when the King brought his
second wife out of France: wherein many ships perished, and a great part of the
Kings fardage was lost. At New Castle upon Tine, as two shipwrights were
squaring a piece of Timber, wheresoever they hewed, blood issued forth in great
abundance. At one of the Kings palaces, flies swarmed so thick, that they
obscured the air: these fought together most fiercely, so that sackfuls lay
dead upon the ground, and this continued so long, that scarce the third part of
them (as it was thought) remained alive, many like accidents are recorded of
that time; but I will mainetaine neither the truth of them, nor what they did
pretend: being a matter wherein most men are rather superstitious, then not
credulous, and do oftentimes repute common occurrences to be ominous, when any
strange event does ensue. Yet as I am loath to avouch any vain and trifling
matter, so dare I not detract all truth from things anciently reported;
although done in an age wherein was some delight in lying, many do suppose,
that those things which are fatally allotted, though they never be avoided, yet
sometimes are foreshewen: not so much that we may prevent them, as that we
should prepare our selves against them.

In the two and twenty year of the reign of K. Richard, John of Gaunt, Duke
of Lancaster dyed, and was buried, on the north-side of the high altar, of the
Cathedral Church of S. Paul in London, he was a man advised and wary in his
passages of life, liking better safe courses with reason, then happy by chance:
of his own glory, he was neither negligent, nor ambitiously careful: toward
the King he carried himself in terms honorable enough for a moderate
Prince, and yet not so plausible as a vain man would desire; whereby there
never happened to him any extraordinary matter, either in prejudice or
preferment. After his death, the Duchy of Lancaster did in right devolue to
the Duke of Hereford, his eldest son: but the King (as the nature of man is
inclinable, to hate those whom he has harmed) seized all the Lands and goods
which appertained to the Duke of Lancaster, into his own hands, and determined
to perpetuate the banishment of Duke Henry his son: revoking the Letters
Patents, which were granted to him at his departure: whereby his general
Atturnies were enabled to prosecute his causes, and sue Liverie of any
inheritance: which during his exile might fall unto him, his homage being
respited for a reasonable fine. The King supposed his estate more safe, by the
weakness and want of the Duke, whom he had now in some jealousy and doubt:
but these violent dealings were means rather to provoke his mischiefs, then
to prevent them; for by injurious suppressing of the Dukes greatness, he
greatly augmented the same.

Edmund Duke of York, the Kings only Uncle which remained alive* had hitherto
enforced his patience, to endure many things against his liking* but now either
in disdain of this indignity, or in distrust both of his own safety and of the
common tranquillity of the Realm, he retired himself with the Duke of Aumerle
his son, to his house at Langley: supposing privatenesse to be the best
defense, both from danger and blame, where neither the king had judgment to
discern, nor any about him had, either heart or honesty to admonish him what
was done amiss; where an honorable fame was held suspected, and a good life
more in hazard then a bad: protesting that none of these practices, were either
devised by his counsel, or done by his consent.

At this time, the whole frame of the state was much shaken, and matters of
great weight and moment did hang by a very slender thread. The King was plunged
in pleasure and sloth: after whose example, others also (as men do commonly
conform their minds according to the Princes disposition) gave over themselves
to delicacy and ease: whereby cowardice crept in, and shipwreck was made, both
of manhood and glory. The chiefest affairs of state had been ordered for a
long time, according to private respects, whereby the Commonwealth lost both
the fat and the favor, and seemed not at seasons and by degrees, but with a
maine course, and at once to ruinate, and fall. The north parts were many times
canvased, and by small, yet often losses, almost consumed by the Scots: who had
there taken many towns and castles, and defaced all the country with
slaughter and spoil. Likewise the south parts were oftentimes wasted by the
Frenchmen: and in France many strong holds were lost. It was also constantly
affirmed, that the King made agreement to deliver unto the King of France, the
possession of Calice, and of other towns which he held in those parts; but
the performance thereof was resisted by the Lords: whether this were true o^
surmised probably, as agreeable to the Kings loose government, I cannot
certainly affirm. As for Ireland, which in time of K. Edward the third, was
kept in order and awe, by acquainting the people with religion and civ^lity,
and drawing them to delight in the plenty and pleasures of well reclaimed
countries; whereby it yielded to the Kings coffers thirty thousand pounds every
year: it was then suffered to run into waste, and the people by rudeness
became intractible: so that the holding thereof charged the King, with the
yearly dispense of thirty thousand marks. Many succors had been sent into
these several countries; but scatteringly, and dropping, and never so many at
once, as to fur^ish the wars fully. The King made some expeditions in his own
person, with great preparation and charge: but being once out of credit,
whatsoever fell out well, was attributed to others; misfortunes were imputed
only to him. If any thing were happily achieved by some of the Nobility, it
was by the Kings base hearted Parasites, to whom military virtue was altogether
unpleasant, so extenuated or depraved, or envied, that it was seldom rewarded,
so much as with countenance and thanks: yea sometimes it procured suspicion
and danger, the King being informed by a cunning kind of enemies, Com^menders,
that to be a discreet and valiant Commander in the field, was a virtue peculiar
to a Prince; and that it was a perilous point, to have the name of a man of
private estate, famous for the same in every man's mouth. Hereupon, few sought
to rise by virtue and valor, the readier way was, to please the pleasant
humor of the Prince. Likewise matters of peace, were managed by men of weakest
sufficiency, by whose council either ignorant or corrupt, the destruction of
the best hearted Nobility, was many times attempted, and at the last wrought.
The profits and revenues of the Crown were said to be let to farm, the King
making himself Landlord of his Realm, and challenging no great privilege by
his Reign, but only a dissolute and uncontrouled life. Great sums of money
were yearly rather exacted from the subjects, then by them voluntarily
granted: whereof no good did ensue, but the maintenance of the Kings private
delights, and the advancement of his hateful favorites. To these he was
somewhat above his power liberal: for which cause, he was feign to borrow,
beg, and extort in other places: but he purchased not so much love by the one,
as hate by the other. Besides the ordinary terms of tenths and fifteenths,
which were many times paid double in one year, diverse new impositions were by
him devised and put in use: sometimes exacting xii. d. of every person
throughout the Realm: sometimes of every religious man and woman vi. s. viii.
d. and of every secular Priest as much, and of every lay person married or
sole, xii. d. Under the favorable term of benevolence, he wiped away from
the people such heaps of money, as were little answerable to that free and
friendly name. He borrowed in all places of the Realm great sums of money
upon his privy Seals, so that no man of worth could escape his loan: but he
seldom, and to few, returned payment again.

This present year, he sent certain Bishops, and other personages of honor,
to all the shires and Corporations within the Realm, to declare unto the
people the Kings heavy displeasures against them, for that they had been
abetters and accomplices of the Duke of Gloucester, and of the Earls of Arundell
and Warwick: and that the King was minded to make a road upon them, as common
enemies, except they would acknowledge their offense, and submit themselves to
his mercy and grace. Hereupon, all the men of worth in every shire, and
Towne-corporate, made their acknowledgement and submission in writing under
their seals: and afterward were feign to grant unto the King such importable
sums of money, to purchase again his favor, as the land being already
greatly impoverished, they were hardly able to endure. Then were exacted of
them strange and unaccustomed oaths, which were put likewise in vvriting
under their seal. They were also compelled to set their hands and seals to
blancke charts; wherein the King might afterward cause to be written what he
would: so that all the wealth of the Realm was in a manner at his devotion and
pleasure. These and such like violences, were far wide from the moderate
government of King Henry the second: who maintaining great wars, and
obtaining a larger dominion, then pertained at any other time to this Realm of
England, never demanded subsidy of his subjects: and yet his treasure after
his death, was found to be nine hundred thousand pounds, besides his Jewels,
and his plate.

In this sort the King bearing a heavy hand upon his subjects, and they again
a heavy heart against him, and being* withal a Prince weak in action, and
not of valor sufficient to bear out his vices by might, the people at length
resolved to revolt, and rather to run into the hazard of a ruinous rebellion,
then to endure safety joined with slaverie: so they attended occasion, which
shortly after was thus offered. The King received Letters of advertisement out
of Ireland (which being privileged from other venomous beasts, has always
been pestered with traitors) how the Barbarous Irish had cut in pieces his
Garrison, and slain Roger Mortimer Earl of March, (who had been declared
heir apparent to the Crown) exercising all the cruelty in wasting of the
country, which wrath and rage of victory could incite a barbarous people to
practice. This loss being great in it self, the hard affection of the people
did much augment by report: whereupon the King deliberated, whether it were
requisite that he should undertake the war in person, or commit it to
Commanders of lower degree? Some persuaded him, that wholly to subdue Ireland,
stood neither with policy, nor yet almost with possibility: for if it were
fully and quietly possessed, some governor might hap to grow to that
greatness, as to make himself absolute Lord thereof; and therefore it was
better to hold it certain by weak enemies, then suspected by mighty friends,
and yet by what means should those bogges and those woods be overcome, which
are more impregnable, then the walled Towns of other countries? then if the
purpose were, only to repress the savage people, the war was of no such
weight, as should draw the King to stand in the field: and therefore he might
stay in the West parts in England, and from thence make show of the Princely
puissance and state; neither venturing his person without cause, and already at
hand if need should require. Others were of opinion, that to subdue and
replenish Ireland, was a matter neither of difficulty nor danger: but both
profitable and honorable to the King, and to God very acceptable. For if
credit might be given to ancient Histories, this Realm of England was once as
insuperable with bogs and woods, as Ireland was then: but the Roman Conquerors
kept not their presidiarie Soldiers in idle garrison, whereby many times the
mind grew mutinous, and the body diseased, and both unable for the labor and
hardness of the field: but they held as well them, as the subdued Britains
continually exercised, either in building of towns in places of best
advantage; or in making of high ways: or else in drayning and paving of bogs:
by which means the country was made fruitful and habitable, and the people
learned the good manners, not rudely to repulse the flattering assaults of
pleasure; preferring subjection with plenty, before beggarly and miserable
liberty. That the same Romans also kept many larger Countries in quiet
obedience, (so long as they were quiet among themselves) without either fear
or danger of any Governors; first by dividing them into small Provinces:
Secondly by constituting in every province diverse officers, as Lieutenants and
Procurators, whereof one was able to restrain the other; the first having
power over the bodies of the subjects, the second over their goods: thirdly, by
changing these officers every year: which was too short a time to establish a
sovereignty: Lastly, by retaining at Rome, their wives and children, and whole
private estate, as pledges for their true demeanor. That the danger was rather
to be feared, least a weak enemy whilst he was contemned, should gather
strength, and be able to stand upon terms of withstanding: example here of
happened when the Romans overcame this Island: for many Britains, who upon no
conditions would abide bondage, withdrew themselves into the North parts of the
land, and by maintaining their ancient custom of painting their bodies, were
called of the Romans, Picti: these were neglected along time, and held in
scorn, as neither of force, nor of number to be thought worthy the name of
enemies: but afterward they confederated themselves with other people, and so
sharply assaulted the subdued Britains, that being unable to resist, and the
Romans shrinking from them, they were constrained to desire help of the
Saxons, and so between their enemies and their aids, (being set as it were
betwixt the bee^le and the block) they lost the possession of the best part of
their land. That it was a pitiful policy for assurance of peace, to lay all
waste as a wilderness, and to have dominion over trees and beasts, and not
over men. That hereby the King did loose the revenue of a fruitful country,
and the benefit of wealthy subjects, which are the surest treasure that a
prince can have. That hereby also the majesty of his estate was much impaired:
for (as Solomon says) The honor of a king consists in the multitude of
subjects. That the country being unfurnished of people, was open to all
opportunity of foreign enemies. That if none of these respects would move: yet
the King was bound in duty to reduce those savages to the true worship of God,
who did then either profanely contemn him, or superstitiously serve him.

These reasons so weighed with the King, that he gathered a mighty Army,
determining to go in person into Ireland, and to pacify the country before
his return: but all his provision was at the charge of the subjects: and
whereas in time of sedition, a wise Prince will least grieve his people: as
seeming to stand in some sort at their courtesy, and having to employ their
bodies beside; the King in peace no storer for war, was forced to offend, when
he should have been most careful to win favor. So about Whitsontide, he
set forth on his voyage with many men, and few soldiers; being a dissolute and
untrained company, and out of all compass of obedience, he carried with him
his whole treasure, and all the goods and ancient Jewels appertaining to the
Crown. In his company went the Duke of Aumerle, and the Duke of Exeter, and
diverse other noble men, and many Bishops, and the Abbot of Westminster. He
also took with him the sons of the Duke of Gloucester, and of the Duke of
Hereford; whose favorers he chiefly feared.

When he came to Bristow, he was put into suspicion, (whether upon some
likelihood, or mere malice) that Henry Piercy Earl of Northumberland, and
certain others, intended some disloyal enterprise against him: and for that
cause did not follow him into Ireland, but had fastened friendship with the King
of Scots, upon purpose to retire themselves into his country, if their
attempts should fail. Hereupon the King sent message that the Earl should
forthwith come unto him with all the power, that he could conveniently make.
The Earl returned answer, that it was unnecessary in respect of that service,
to draw men from such distant places: for the Irish rebels were neither so many
nor so mighty, but the King had strength at hand sufficient to suppress them:
that it was also dangerous to disfurnish the North-parts of their forces, and
to offer opportunity to the Scottish Borderers, who were always uncertain
friends in their extremities, and assured enemies upon advantage. The King
seeing his commandment in these terms, both contemned and controuled, would
not stand to reason the matter with the Earl, neither had he the reason to
defer revenge, until he had full power to work it: but presently in the
violence of his fury, caused the Earl and his confederates to be proclaimed
traitors, and all their Lands and goods to be seized to his use. The Earl
took grievously this disgrace, and determined to cure and close up this harm
with the disturbance of the common state. And thus the King having feathered
these arrows against his own breast, passed forth in his Journey into Ireland.

This expedition at the first proceeded and succeeded exceedingly well, and the
King obtained many victories, even without battle, as leading his men to a
slaughter rather then to a fight: for the savage Irish were not under one
government, but were divided into many parti^lities and factions, and seldom
did two or three parts join their Common strength and study together: so
whilst one by one did fight, all of them were either subdued or slain. But
these news little rejoiced the Common people, they lusted not to listen
thereto: their common talk was to recount their common grievances, to lay them
together, and aggravate them by construction: every man more abounding in
complaints then he did in miseries. Also the Noble men (the principal object
of cruelty) began to discourse both their private dangers, and the
deformities of the State: and upon opportunity of the Kings absence, some of
them did conspire to cut off that authority which would not be confined, and
to cast it upon some other, who was most like to repair that which King
Richard had ruined: or if (said they) our power shall come short of so good a
purpose, yet will we sell him both our lives and lands with glory in the
field, which with certainty in peace we cannot enjoy: The only man upon whom
all men resolved, was Henry Duke of Hereford (whom since the death of his
Father they called Duke of Lancaster) not at his own motion or desire, but
because he was generally esteemed meet: as being of the Royal blood, and next
by descent from males to the succession of the Crown: one that had made
honorable proof of his virtues and valor: the only man of note that
remained alive, of those that before had stood in arms against the King for
the behoof of the Commonwealth: for which cause he was deeply touched at
that time both in honor and in state. This attempt pleased as possible to
prove, and of necessity to be followed: whereupon they secretly dispatched
their letters to the Duke, soliciting his speedy return into England, and
declaring that as well for the benefit of the Realm, as for their own
particular safety, they were forced to use force against King Richard: that if
it would please him to make the head, they would furnish him the body of an
able army, to expel the King from his unfortunate government, and to settle
the possession of the Crown in him, who was more apt and able to sustain the
same: that they would not provide him a base multitude only, and they
themselves help in bare wish^s and advise, but would also adjoyne their hands
and their lives, so that the peril should be common to all, the glory only
his, if fortune favored the enterprise. These letters were conveyed by men
crafty and bold, yet of sure credit, and inward in trust with the Duke: who
passing into France, first associated unto them, Thomas Arundel late Archbishop
of Canterbury, and at that time (whether deservedly or without cause) an exile
in France: then they traveled by several ways, and in counterfeit attire to
Paris, where all met at the House of one Clugney, where the Duke then
sojourned. After some courtesies of course, with welcome on the one side, and
thanks on the other, and joy of both: the Archbishop of Canterbury having
obtained of the Duke privacy and silence, made unto him a solemn oration in
these words, or to this sense following.

We are sent unto you (right high and Noble Prince) from the chief Lords and
States of our land, not to seek revenge against our King upon private injury
and displeasure: nor upon a desperate coffeehouse to set the State on fire:
nor to procure the ambitious advancement of any particular person: but to open
unto you the deformities and decays of our broken estate, and to desire your
aid, in staying the ruinous downfall of the same. The remembrance of the
honorable reputation that our Country has borne, and the Noble acts which it
has achieved, does nothing else, but make the baseness more bitter unto us,
whereinto it is new fallen. Our victorious arms have heretofore been famous
and memorable not only within the bounds of our Ocean-Sea, and in the Islands
adjoining unto us; but also in France, in Spain, and in other parts of Europe,
yea in Asia and in Africa, against the Infidels and Barbarians: so that all
Christian Princes have been either glad to embrace our friendship or loath to
provoke us to hostility. But now the rude Scots, whose spirits we have so many
times broken and brought on their knees, do scornefully insult upon us: the
naked and fugitive Irish, have shaked often our shackles, and glutteth themselves
upon us, with massacres and spoils: with these we daily fight, not for glory,
but to live: insomuch as we are become a pity to our friends, and a very jest
to our most base and contemptible enemies. Indeed the King has both sent and
led great armies into these Countries, but in such sort, that they have much
wasted the Realm with their maintenance: but neither revenged nor relieved it
with their arms: and no mervaile, for all our diligent and discreet leaders
(the very sinews of the field) are either put to death, or banished, or else
ly buried in obscurity and disgrace: and the marshalling of all affairs is
committed (without any respect of sufficiency or desert) to the counsel and
conduct of those who can best apply themselves to the Kings youthful delights.
Among these ancient Nobility is accounted a vain jest; wealth, and virtue are
the ready means to bring to destruction.

It grieves me to speak, but it helps not, to hide that which every man
sees: our Ancestors lived in the highest pitch and perfection of liberty, but
we of servility; being in the nature not of subjects, but of abjects, and flat
slaves; not to one intractable Prince only, but to many proud and disdainefull
favorites* not always the same, but ever new: and no sooner have we satisfied
some, but fresh hungry Masters are straight ways set upon us, who have more
endammaged us by extortion and bribes, then the enemy has done by the sword.
What unusual kinds of exactions are daily put in practice? without either
measure or end, and oftentimes without need; or if any be, it proceeds rather
upon riotous expenses, then any necessity of honorable charge: and great
sums of money are pulled and pilled from good subjects, to be thrown away
amongst unprofitable unthrifts. And if any man opens his mouth against these
extorted taxations, then either by feined imputation of capital crimes, or by
small matters aggravated, or else by open cruelty and force, his life or
liberty is forth with hazarded. It were too tedious, too odious, too frivolous
to put you in mind of particular examples, as though your own estate, and the
lamentable loss of your Uncle, and other Noble friends, could be forgotten*
yea I suppose that there is no man of quality within the Realm, who either in
his own person, or in his nearest friends, does not plainly perceive, that no
man enjoys the safeguard of his goods, and suerty of his body; but rich men in
the one, and great men in the other are continually endangered. This then is
our case; but what is our remedy? we have endured, and we have entreated: but
our patience have drawn more heavy burdens, and our complaints procured more
bitter blows: by the one, our livings, and our lives by the other are daily
devoured. And therefore we are now compelled to shake off our shoulders this
importable yoke, and submit our selves to the sovereignty of some more moderate
and worthy person: not so much for the grief of our miseries which are past,
nor for the pain of our present distresses, as for fear of such dangers as
are most like to ensue; for the King has cut away the chief of the Nobility,
and the Commons he has pared to the quick, and still he harrieth us as a
conquered Country: whereby we are laid bare to the havoc of all our enemies,
and utterly disabled, not only to recover that which is lost, but also to
retain even that which is left. But to whom should we complain? what succor,
whose aid should we desire? you are the only man, who in right should, and in
wisdom can, and in goodness will (we hope) relieve us. For you are nearest
to the King in blood and therefore ought to have the rule of that which his
weakness cannot wield. Your years are well stayed from the light conceits of
youth, and so spent, that all your actions have made proof of ability in
government of greatest charge: nothing past needs excuse, and fear is vain
for any thing to come. The pains and perils which heretofore you have
undertaken for the benefit of your Country, puts us also in good hope, that
in these extremities you will not forsake us; we are all as in a ship that is
ready to sink, as in a house that is ready to fall, and do most humbly crave
and call for your help, now or else never show your self in favor of your
Countrymen, to free us, to free your self, to free the whole State from these
dangers and decays, by taking into your hands the scepter and diadem of the
Realm, and reducing again the government thereof to a Princely freedom; in
combining the Sovereignty of one with the liberty of all. Omit not this
occasion, to set forth to the view of the World, as in a large field, and at
free scope your virtue and courage, by relieving miserable wretches from their
Oppressors: which action has bin so highly honored, that many Heathen men
for the same, have been accounted as Gods. This we are constrained to offer
and entreat: this is both honorable for you to accept, and easy to be
performed: and so much the more, in that no Prince, by any people have been
desired with greater affection, nor shall be with more duty obeyed.

The Duke entertained this speech with great moderation of mind, showing
himself neither disturbed thereat, nor excessive in joy. His answer concerning
the King, was respective and well tempered; rather lamenting his weakness
then blaming his malice. Concerning himself he spoke so modestly, that he
seemed rather worthy of a Kingdom, then desirous. The life (quoth he) which
hitherto I have led, has always been free from ambitious attempts: and the
stayednesse of my years, has now settled my mind from aspiring thoughts: and
experience of former dangers has bred in me a wary regard in such weighty
proceedings; for to cast a King out of state, is an enterprise not hastily to
be resolved upon, nor easily affected: but suppose that matter not impossible;
and perhaps not hard, yet the ratenesse of that like precedents, will make the
action seem injurious to most men: and he that shall attain a Kingdom upon
opinion of desert, does charge himself with great expectation, and how
honorably soever he carry himself, shall never want his deadly Enviers:
besides this, in civil dissentions the faith of the whole people is fleeting,
and danger is to be doubted from every particular person: so that it is
possible that all may fall away, and impossible to beware of every one.
Therefore I could rather wish to spend the course of my years which yet
remain in this obscure, yet safe and certain state, then to thrust my self
upon the pikes of those perils, which being once entered into, are dangerous to
follow, and deadly to forsake: for in private attempts, a man may step and stop
when he please: but he that aims at a Kingdom, has no middle course
between the life of a Prince, and the death of a Traitor.

The Archbishop hearing this, did as vainly persist in importuning the Duke,
as he vainly seemed unwilling and strange. The state (said he) wherein now
you stand, is not so safe and certain as you do conceive. Indeed, by
rejecting our request you shall avoid certain dignity, and therewith
uncertain and contingent dangers; but you shall procure most certain
destruction both to your self and us. For this secret cannot be kept long
secret from the King: and even good Princes are nice in points of sovereignty,
and bear a nimble care to the touch of that string: and it more hurts a
subject to be esteemed worthy of the Kingdom, then it will profit him to have
refused the offer. What then will he do, who puts the chiefest surety of
his reign in the baseness and bareness of his subjects? whose head being
possessed with eternal jealousy, makes every presumption a proof, and every
light surmise a strong suspicion against them. Surely since the general favor
and love which the people bears you, has bereaved you of your liberty, this
their general desire will not leave your life untouched. As for us, if we
either faint in our intent, or fail in the interprise, actum est: we shall be
as lambs among lions: and no conquest can be so cruel as the Kings reign will
be over us. Certainly we have gone too far, for to go back; and the time is
past, when you for ambition and we for envy might seem to attempt against the
King: the attainment of the Kingdom must now be a Sanctuary and refuge for us
both. The like examples are not rare (as you affirm) nor long since put in
practice, nor far hence to be fetched. The Kings of Denmark and of Swedland,
are oftentimes banished by their Subjects; oftentimes imprisoned and put to
their fine; the Princes of Germany, about an ^undred years past, deposed
Adulphus their Emperor, and are now in hand to depose their Emperor
Wenceslaus. The Earl of Flanders was a while since driven out of his Dominion
by his own people, for usurping greater power then appertained to his estate.
The ancient Britains chased away their own King Carecious, for the lewdness
of his life, and cruelty of his rule. In the time of the Saxon Heptarchy,
Bernredus, King of Mercia, for his pride and stoutnes toward his people, was
by them deposed. Likewise Aldredus and Ethelbertus Kings of Northumberland,
were for their disorders expelled by their subjects. Since the victory of the
Normains, the Lords endeavored to expel King Henry the third, but they were
not able: yet were they able to depose King Edward, the second, and to
constitute his young Son Edward King in his stead: these are not all and yet
enough to clear this action of rareness in other Countries; and novelty in
our. The difficulty indeed is somewhat, because the excellency is great: but
they that are afraid of every bush, shall never take the bird: and your self
had once some trial hereof, when without battle, without blood or blows,
you had the King at such a lift, as he held his Crown at your courtesy, even
at that time when his grievances were, neither for greatness nor continuance,
so intolerable as now they are grown: and by reason of his tender years, not
out of all compass, both of excuse for the fault, and of hope for amendment.
And as concerning the lawfulness.

Nay (said the Duke) where necessity does enforce, it is superfluous to use
speech, either of easiness or of lawfulness: necessity will beat through
brazen walls; and can be limited by no laws. I have felt very deeply my part
in these calamities, and I would you knew with what grief I have beheld yours:
for what other reward have I received, of all my travailes and services, but
the death of my Uncle and dearest friends, my own banishment, the imprisonment
of my Children, and loss of my inheritance? and what have been returned to
you, for your blood so often shed in his unfortunate wars, but continual
tributes, scourges, gallows, and slavery? I have made sufficient proof both
of patience in my own miseries, and of pity in yours: remedy them hitherto I
could not: If now I can, I will not refuse to sustain that part, which your
importunity does impose upon me, if we prevail, we shall recover again our
liberty: if we loose, our State shall be worse then now it is: and since we
must needs perish, either deservingly, or without cause, it is more honorable
to put our selves upon the adventure either to win our lives, or to dye for
desert: and although our lives were safe, which indeed are not, yet to abandon
the State, and sleep still in this slavery; were a point of negligence and
sloth. It remains then, that we use both secrecy and celerity, laying hold
upon the opportunity which the Kings absence has now presented unto us: for in
all enterprises which never are commended before they be achieved, delays
are dangerous, and more safe it is to be found in action, then in counsel:
for they that deliberate only to rebel, have rebelled already.

So the Messengers departed into England, to declare the Dukes acceptance, and
to make preparation against his arrival, both of armor, and of subjection,
and desire to obey. Presently after their departure, the Duke signified to
Cha^les King of France, that he had a desire to go into Britain, to visit
John* Duke of Britain his friend and kinsman. The King suspecting no further
fetch, sent letters of commendation in his favor, to the Duke of Britain: but
if he had surmised any dangerous drift against King Richard, who not long
before, had taken his Daughter to wife; in stead of letters of safe conduct,
he would have found letts to have kept him safe from disturbing his Son in
laws estate.

As soon as the Duke was come into Britain, he waged certain soldiers, and
presently departed to Calis, and so committed to Sea for England; giving forth,
that the only cause of his voyage, was to recover the Duchy of Lancaster, and
the rest of his lawful inheritance, which the King wrongfully detained from
him. In this company was Thomas Arundel the Archbishop of Canterbury and Thomas
the Son and Heir of Richard late Earl of Arundel, who was very young, and
had a little before escaped out of prison, and fled into France to the Duke.
The residue of his attendants were very few, not exceeding the number of
fifteen lances* so that it is hard to esteem whether it was greater marvel,
either that he durst attempt, or that he did prevail with so small a company:
but his chiefest confidence was in the favor and assistance of the people
within the Realm. So he did bear with England, yet not in a straight course,
but sloated along the shore, making head sometimes to one coast, and sometime
to another, to discover what forces were in a readiness either to resist or
receive him.

As he was in this sort hovering on the Seas, Lord Edmund Duke of York, the
Kings Vn^le, to whom the King had committed the custody of the Realm during
the time of his absence, called unto him Edmund Stafford Bishop of Chichester,
Lord Chancellor, and William Soroupe Earl of Wiltshire, Lord Treasurour of of
the Realm, also Sir John Bushy, Sir Henry Green, Sir William Bagot, Sir John
Russell, and certain others of the Kings Privy Council; and entered into
deliberation what was best to be done. At the last it was concluded,
deceitfully by some, unskilfully by others, and by all perniciously for the
King; to leave the Sea coasts, and to leave London, the very Walls and Castle
of the Realm, and go to S. Albons, there to gather strength sufficient to
encounter with the Duke. It is most certain that the Dukes side was not any
ways ^oore furthered, then by this dissembling and deceiveable dealing: for
open hostility and arms, may openly and by arms be resisted: but privy
practices as they are hardly espied, so are they seldom avoided. And thus by
this means the Duke landed about the feast of S. Martin, without let or
resistance, at Ravenspur in Houldernesse, as most Writers affirm.

Presently after his arrival, there resorted to him Lord Henry Pearcy Earl of
Northumberland, and Lord Henry his Son, Earl of Westmerland, Lord Radulph
Nevil, Lord Rose, Lord Willoughby, and many other personages of honor, whose
company increased reputation to the cause, and was a great countenance and
strength to the Dukes further purposes. And first they took of him an oath,
that he should neither procure nor permit any bodily harm to be done unto
King Richard; whereupon they bound themselves upon their honors to prosecute
all extremities against his mischievous Counsailors. And this was one step
further then that which the Duke pretended at the first, when he took
shipping at Calis, which was only the recovery of his inheritance: but that
was as yet not determined, nor treated, and of some perhaps not thought upon;
which afterward it did ensue: and so was that place easily insinuated into by
degrees, which with maine and direct violence would hardlier have been
obtained. Then the common people desperate upon new desires, and without head,
headlong to matters of innovation, flocked very fast to these Noble men, the
better sort for love to the Commonwealth, some upon a wanton levity* and vain
desire of change, others in regard of their own distressed and decayed estate,
who setting their chlo^e hopes and devices upon a general disturbance, were
then most safe when the common state was most unsure. So between the one and
the other, the multitude did in short time increase to the number of threescore
thousand able soldiers.

The Duke finding this favor not only to exceed his expectation, but even
above his wish, he thought it best to follow the current whilst the stream
was most strong, knowing right well, that if fortune be followed, as the first
do fall out, the rest will commonly succeed: Therefore cutting off unnecessary
delays, with all possible celerity he hastened toward London: to the end that
possessing himself thereof as the chief place within the Realm, both for
strength and store, he might there make the seat of the war. In this journey
no sign nor show of hostility appeared, but all the way as he passed, the men
of chiefest quality and power adjoined themselves unto him, some upon heat of
affection, some for fear, others upon hope of reward after victory; every one
upon causes dislike; with like ardent desire contending, least any should seem
more forward then they: In every place also where he made stay, rich gifts and
pleasant devises were presented unto him, with large supply both of force and
provision, far above his need: and the Common people which for their
greatness take no care of public affairs, and are in least danger by reason
of their baseness, with shouts and acclamations gave their applause: extolling
the Duke, as the only man of courage, and saluting him King; but spending many
contumelious terms upon King Richard, and depraving him as a simple and
sluggish man, a dastard, a m^ycock, and one altogether unworthy to bear rule;
showing themselves as much without reason in railing upon the one, as they were
in flattering the other. Again, the Duke for his part was not negligent to
uncover the head, to bow the body, to stretch forth the hand to every mean
person, and to use all other complements of popular behavior: wherewith the
minds of the common multitude are much delighted and drawn; taking that to be
courtesy, which the severer sort account abasement. When he came to the City,
he was there likewise very richly and royally entertained, with processions
and pageants, and verse other triumphant devises and shows: the standing in all
the streets where he passed, were taken up to behold him; and the unable
multitude, who otherwise could not, yet by their good words, wishes, and wills,
did testify unto him their loving affections: neither did there appear in any
man at that time, any memory of faith and allegiance toward King Richard, but
as (in seditions it always happens) as the most swayed all did go.

On the contrary side, the Duke of York with the rest of his counsel, fell
to mustering of men at S. Albones for the King: but as the people out of diverse
quarters were called thither, many of them protested, that they would do
nothing to the harm and prejudice of the Duke of Lancaster, who they said was
unjustly expelled, first from his country, and afterward from his
inheritance. Then W. Scroupe Earl of Wiltshire, Lord Treasurer, S. I. Bush,
Sir W. Bagot, and Sir Henry Green, perceiving the stiff resolution of the
people, forsook the Duke of York, and the Lord Chancellor, and fled toward
Bristow; intending to pass the seas into Ireland to the King. These four were
they upon whom the common fame went, that they had taken of the King his Realm
to farm: who were so odious unto the people, that their presence turned away
the hearts of many subjects; yea it was thought that more for displeasure
against them, then against the King, the revolt was made. For being the only
men of credit and authority with the King* under false color of obedience,
they wholly governed both the Realm and him; to many mischiefs corrupting his
mind, and in many abusing his name, either against his will, or without his
knowledge, insomuch as he was innocent of much harm which passed under his
commandment: but the patience of the people could not endure that two or three
should rule all: not by reason they were sufficient, but because they were in
favor: and the King in that he permitted them whom he might have bridled, or
was ignorant of that which he should have known, by tollerating and wincking
at their faults, made them his own, and opened thereby the way to his
destruction. So often times it falls out to be as dangerous to a Prince to
have hurtful and hateful officers in place and services of weight, as to be
hurtful and hateful himself.

The Duke of York either amazed at this sudden change, or fearing his
adventure if he should proceed in resistance, gave over the cause, and
preferred present security, before duty with danger; giving most men occasion
to misdeeme by his dealing, that he secretly favored the Dukes Enterprise,
likewise all the other Counselors of that side, either openly declared for the
Duke, or secretly wished him well: and abandoning all private direction and
advise, adjoined themselves to the common course, presuming thereby of greater
safety.

Duke Henry in the mean time being at London, entered into deliberation with
his friends, what way were best to be followed. At the last; having considered
the forwardness of the people, the greatness of the peril whereinto they had
already plunged, and the Kings irreconcilable nature, whereof he made proof
against the Duke of Gloucester, and the Earls of Arundell and Warwick: they
finally resolved to expel him from his dignity, and to constitute Duke Henry
King in his stead: and to that end open war was denounced against the King,
and against all his partakers, as enemies, to the quiet and prosperity of the
Realm; and pardon also promised to all those that would submit themselves to
follow the present course, otherwise to look for no favor, but all
extremities. None of the Nobility durst openly oppose himself to these
designs: some unwilling to play all their state at a cast, kept themselves at
liberty, to be directed by success of further event: others consented coldly,
and in terms of doubtful construction, with intent to interpret them
afterward, as occasion should change; but the most part did directly and
resolutely enter into the cause, and made their fortunes common with the Duke,
in danger of the attempt, but not in honor: among whom, the Duke standing up,
used speech to this purpose.

I am returned here as you see, at your procurement, and by your agreement have
entered into arms for the common liberty: we have hitherto prosperously
proceeded, but in what terms we now stand, I am altogether uncertain. A
private man I am loath to be accounted, being designed to be King by you; and a
Prince I cannot be esteemed, whilst another is in possession of the Kingdom.
Also your name is in suspense, whether to be termed rebels or subjects, until
you have made manifest that your allegiance was bound rather to the state of
the Realm then the person of the Prince. Now you are the men who have both
caused this doubtfulnesse and must clear the same; your parts still remains
to be performed; your virtue and valor must add strength to the goodness of
this action. We have already attempted so far, that all hope of pardon is
extinct; so that if we should shrink back, and break off the enterprise, no
mercy is to be expected, but butchery and gibbets, and all extremities: if we
drive off and delay the accomplishment thereof, we shall loose the opportunity
which now is offered, and open to our enemies occasion of advantage. For the
peoples blood is up now on our side, and nothing is wanting but our own
diligence and care: let us not therefore trifle out the time of doing, in
talking and deliberating: it is best striking whilst the iron is hot: let us
set forth roundly, and possess our selves with speed of all the parts of the
Realm: and so we shall be able either to keep out our concurrent, or else to
entertain him little to his liking. So troops of men were sent into every
quarter of the Realm, to secure them for making strength on the part of King
Richard: but the people in all places as men broken with many burdens, did
easily entertain the first Commer, and were not curious to side with the
stronger. The Duke pursued those of the Kings Privy Council, which fled away
from the Duke of York; bearing himself with great cheer and courage, as
confident in the cause, and secure of the event. When he came at Bristow he
found the Castle fortified against him; but in short time he forced it, and
took therein Sir John Bushy, Sir Henry Green, and W. Scroupe, L. Treasurer, a
joyful prey to the common people: who (fearing that if execution should be
deferred, Petitions for pardon might happen to prevail, and so their cruelties
and injuries should be answered with the vain title and commendation of
clemency) did violently require them unto death, no respite could be obtained,
no defense admitted, no answer heard: yea their humble and submisse entreaty
was interpreted to argue a weak and broken courage upon a guilty conscience,
which more incensed the rage of the people, crying out that they were traitors,
blood-suckers, thieves, and what other heinous terms insulting fury did put
into their mouths: at which clamorous and importunant instance, the day
following they were beheaded, Sir William Bagot came not with them to Bristow*
but turned to Chester: and the pursuit being made after the most, he alone
escaped into Ireland. This execution, partly because it pleased the people, and
partly because it excluded all hope of the Kings pardon, caused them to cleave
more closely to the Duke; which greatly increased both his glory, and his hope*
having offers of so large aid and need of so little.

In the mean time this news of the Dukes arrival, and of other occurrences,
part true, part false, and part enlarged by circumstance, (as fame grows in
the going) was blown over to the King, being then entangled with other broils
in Ireland, at the receipt whereof, he caused the sons of the Duke of
Gloucester, and of the Duke of Lancaster to be imprisoned in the strong Castle
of Trim, which is in Ireland, and for dispatch to return into England, le^t
many matters unfinished, and most of his provision behind, hasting and
shuffling up, as present necessity did enforce. So being both unskilful and
unfortunate himself, and devoid of good direction; with more haste then good
hap, he took shipping, with the Duke of Aumerle, Exceter, and Surry, the
Bishops of London, Lincoln, and Caerliele, and many other men of quality: and
crossing the seas, landed at Milford-Haven in Wales, in which countrymen he
always reposed his chiefest surety and trust, but then he saw contrary to his
expectation, that as well there as in all other places, the people by plumps
flocked to the Duke, and fled from him: yea they that came with him began for
to waver, no man encouraging them to be constant, but many to revolt. This
sudden change not looked for, not thought upon, disturbed all the Kings
devises, and made him irresolute what he should do: on the one side he saw
his cause and quarrel to be right, and his conscience (he said) clear from
any bad demerite: on the other side he saw the great strength of his enemies,
and the whole power of the Realm bent against him: and being more abashed by
the one, then emboldned by the other, he stood perplexed in uncertain terms,
either where to stay, or whither to stir, having neither skill nor resolution
himself in cases of difficulty, and obnoxious to hurtful and unfaithful
counsel. Some advised him to martch forward, and pierce deeper into the land,
before his own forces fell from him: affirming that valor is seconded by
fortune: that this courage of his, would confirm the constancy of his
soldiers: and his presence put the people in remembrance of their says, that
in all places he should find some, who for favor, or for hire, or else for
duty, would adhere unto him: whereby he should soon gather strength
sufficient to join issue with his enemy in the field. Others persuaded him to
retire again into Ireland, and then if succor failed him in England, to wage
soldiers out of other countries. But the King being no man of action in
military affairs, rejected both the counsels, as neither venturous enough
with the one, nor wary enough with the other: and taking a middle course
(which in cases of extremity of all is the worst) he determined to make stay
in Wales, and there to attend to what head this humor would rise.

The Duke upon advertisement that the King was landed in Wales, removed with a
strong Army from Bristow toward Chester, using the first opportunity against
him, and which indeed was the fittest. When Lord Thomas Pearcy Earl of
Worcester, and Steward of the Kings Household* heard of the Dukes approach, he
brake forth into show of that displeasure, which before he had conceived
against the King, for proclaiming his brother, the Earl of Northumberland
traitor, and thereupon openly in the Hall, in the presence of the Kings
servants, he brake his white rod, the ensign of his office, and forthwith
departed to the Duke, willing every man to shift for himself in time: by which
act he lost reputation, both with the Haters and Favorers of King Richard;
being accounted of the one a Corrupter, of the other a Forsaker, and betrayer
of the King. After this example, almost all the rest, more fearful then
faithful, scattered themselves every one his way: and they who in the Kings
flourishing time, would have contended to be foremost, now in his declining
estate equally draw back, and like swallows, forsook that house in the
winter of fortunes boisterous blasts, where they did nothing but feed and foil
in the summer of her sweet sunshine. And thus between faint soldiers, and
false friends, the King was abandoned and forsaken, and left almost unto
himself: look on he might, but let it, he could not, as not of force to
punish that, which he never forced to prevent: his only remedy was patience:
(a cold comfort) his only revenge was complaint: (a weak weapon) between
which two, his bitterness did in this manner break from him.

And do these also (said he) forsake me? does their faith and my fortune end
together? well, if I had forsaken them in time, I had not been forsaken of
others, who once loved me better, and now are able to harm me more. But now I
see the blindness of my judgment: I plainly see, that there is no friendship
in flattery, nor treachery in plain truth: and I would I had as much time to
reform this error: as I am like to have to repent it, but they would not
suffer me to be wise when I might, and now they have made me wretched they
run from me: they could be the causes, but they will not be companions of my
miseries: such attendants are Crows to a carcass, which flock together, not
to defend, but to devour it, and no sooner have they laid the bones bare, but
straight-wayes they are gone.

Thus the King having lost both the fear and love of his subjects, disturbed
and distracted in thoughts, without comfort, council, or courage, remained
still in Wales, as a stranger at home, as an exile in his own Kingdom, not
daring to go to London, nor any man desirous to come to him, shifting still
from place to place, and (as it falls out to men distressed and amazed) fearing
all things, but most disliking the present. The Duke continually pursued him
with a mighty Army: but the Kings company was too small to do any thing by
force, and yet too great to remain in secret: neither were they in any sort
assured unto him, but such as shame and reverence retained a while; bands of
small countenance with men fearful of danger, and careless of credit. At the
length he came to the Castle of Conweye* and there being utterly destitute both
of help and hope, he stood divided in mind what way to bend his course, all
his followers were more ready to impugn the opinions of other, then to give
direction themselves, as seeing better what to shun then what to follow: and as
it always chances in desperate causes, that way was commonly preferred,
whereof the opportunity was already past. Some advised him that it was then
time to think, rather of saving his life, then recovering his estate. You see
(said they) how greatly, and how wholly your subjects are set against you: it
is but in vain to look for a sudden change, or without a change to hope that
your purposes may prevail, give place for a time to the current of this fury:
let it have the full sway; and when it is at the highest pitch, it will turn
again; and then you shall have the tide as strong on your side, as it is now
against you. This motion or rather commotion of the people* is violent and
against nature: and therefore (as a stone forced upward) is most strong at the
beginning, and the further it passes, the more it weakneth, until at last it
return to the natural course again. Therefore give a little space for the
bad to draw back, for the good to put forward: treasons prevail on the
sudden, but good counsels gather forces by leisure. You have example in
your noble Progenitor, King Henry the third, against whom the Lords set up
Lewis the French Kings son* conditions were concluded, and faith was made that
he should be their King; but this purpose lasted not the pulling on: for before
they had possessed him of the kingdom, they joined together in arms against
him, and were as fierce to drive him out of the Realm, as they had been found
to draw him in. The like alteration may you likewise not only hope, but
assuredly expect: for the minds of men are constant in nothing but inconstancy,
and persevere only in change, in dislike of things present they desire new,
wherewith they rest not long contented, but are many times glutted even with the
first sight. And indeed how can they long endure the Reign of him, who
attayning the Kingdom only by their favor and might, shall hold the same in
a manner, at their courtesy and will? for every unpleasant command, shall be
deemed ingratitude: every suit rejected, shall charge him with unkindnesse;
Yea, if honor be not offered, they will be discontented: and upon any occasion
of displeasure, think themselves as able to displace him, as they were to set
him up: therefore you may for a time, return again into Ireland; or else
pass the seas to your Father in law, the King of France: you may assure your
self of his assistance, to set upon your side, and recover your losses. Times
have their turns, and fortune her course too and fro like the sea, and
magnanimity is shown by enduring, and not relinquishing, when she does cross,
only loose no point of courage, and keep your person at large: reserving your
self to that good hope, which never dies whilst life endure.

Others, who were enemies to all counsel, whereof themselves were not
Authors, persuaded the King, that the Nobility and Commons of the Realm had
attempted so far, that they would rather dye, then desist; not so much for
hatred to you, as for fear to themselves; having so deadly incensed your
displeasure against them. For it is a hard matter to forgive, and impossible to
forget those injuries and indignities which they have offered. And to omit what
some Princes have done, what all will promise to do, they will soon find
fresh and bleeding examples what you are like to do. The Duke of Gloucester,
and the Earl of Arundell, and of Warwick did rise in arms against you, not
to remove you from your Crown: but to remove certain persons from your
company, an action more displeasing then prejudicial unto you: at the last, a
friendship was made, and charters of free pardon granted unto them: but what
followed? was ever the breach perfectly made up? did displeasure dye? or was it
only dissembled? ah, it grieveth us to think, how the present want of their
lives, has fully revenged their deaths: for if they had lived, their
countenance and authority would easily have stayed these stirs; and the manner
of their deaths does strike an obstinate persistance into all your enemies. As
for refuge to foreign Princes, you shall surely receive of them entertainment
and allowance, and yet may grow burdensome, and at last perhaps fail: but it
is very hard to draw any Prince into so dangerous a quarrel: and more hard by
that means to prevail: or if you should, it is to be feared that the
victorers will hold to themselves the benefit of their conquest, and not yield
it over unto you. Few countries but have been under pretense of aid by
forrainers subdued: and this was the only cause which first drew the Saxons
into this land: who so assisted the Britains against their enemies, that
themselves could not be resisted from possessing their kingdom. Yet we do not
altogether condemn the help of strangers, in cases of extremity; but do
account it a remedy, least to be trusted, and last of all to be tried. What
then if first you should procure a treaty, to see in what terms the people
stand against you? It may be that upon some conditions they will submit
themselves unto you, as heretofore they have done. Or if they will needs
deforce you from your kingdom, yet if an honorable maintenance may be
assured, what shall you lose thereby? What shall you lack? You have no child to
be disinherited; the chiefest motive which makes men so greedy to get, and so
careful to keep. And as for your self, you shall be removed from a steep
and slippery hill to a smooth and pleasant plain; from tempestuous seas to a
calm haven; from dangerous travail to secure rest, and if there be no solace
without safety, no felicity without firmness; you shall find the private life
not only more sweet, but more high and happy, then your princely state. The
tallest trees are weakest in the tops; in widest fields are greatest tempests;
and envy always aims at loftiest marks: so that to be placed on high, is a
false felicity, and a true misery in show a rule, but indeed a subjection to
all the subjects; having least stay to stand, and most danger in the fall: and
therefore if you come down safely, you are therein privileged above many
other. But you shall lose (you will say) the credit and the countenance of a
King: so you shall the cares; and so you shall the casualties. The Crown and
Scepter are things most weighty to weld: if a Prince be good, he is laden with
labor, if evil, with infamy and reproach: if either, with perils: on every
side he is beset with dangerous Rocks, with deadly Gulfes, and continually
tossed with strong and sturdy tempests: so that to be freed from these fears,
is to be esteemed an escape, and not a loss. This did the Stoic Philosopher
perceive, who seeing Dionysius sit merrily and freely conceited in the Theater,
being a little before expelled his Kingdom; greatly condemned the error of his
people, who had banished him to such liberty, and so preferred him by his
punishment. These are the dreams of Philosophers (you will say) who usually
deprave and contemn honor, and yet never lie from honorable men's tables. Let
pass then Philosophers: go to vain and sottish men. Seleuchus being a King,
was wont to say, that if a man knew with what cares the Diadem was clogged, he
would not take it up, although it lay in the street. You will say peradventure,
that like the Boat-man, he looked one way, and pulled another; or like the
Lapwing, he cried most when he was furthest from his Nest, vainly dispraysing
that which he was loathest to loose. What say you then to Antiochus? whom when
the Romans had dispoyled him of all Asia* he sent unto them great thanks, that
they had rid him of infinite and importable cares, and set him at a moderate
quiet: you will say that he made a virtue of his necessity. Well then, we are
somewhat near your case: and they that cannot frame their wills to this
wisdom, let them thank their enemies for enforcing them to it. But what say
you to Dioclesian? who did voluntarily relinquish, not a small and corner
Kingdom, but the greatest Empire that the world did ever bear, and found so
sweet contentment in that exchange, that when he was importuned by the Senate,
to resume his estate, he utterly rejected their suite. But what need we
travel in externe Histories for those examples, whereof we have so large
supply in our own? the ancient Saxon Kings: Kingilsus, Ina, Ceolulpus,
Fadbertus, Ethelredus, Kenredus, Offa, Sebbi, and Sigebertus did of their own
accord lay down their Diadems and Scepters, and betake themselves to solitary
and religious lives. Now many Princes have held their estate with better
fortune, but none did ever with greater honor leave it, then you should at
this present: for others have abandoned their rule, either for desire of case,
or for avoidance of dangers, or upon some sluggish or superstitious devotion:
but you for love to your Country, shall forbear to seek your uttermost
remedy, in setting up a most cruel war: wherein much English blood should
be spilt, and the Realm deprived of many worthy armies. Let others be
reported to forsake their Kingdoms, when they had no longer pleasure to hold
them: but your praise shall be for giving over, when it is greatest benefit
unto the people; and the more hope you have to prevail, if you list to
contend, the greater commendations will it be to yield, as being rather
voluntary then by constraint.

The King commended the courage of the first, but this last Counsel best
agreed with his faint and feeble Spirit, more yielding to fear then forward in
hope; apt by the one to despair, unable by the other to hold out in any hard
adventure, preferring always abject and base safety, before hazard with
honor. Yet were many ready to reply, that all speech of conditions and
yielding was both dishonorable, and also dangerous: for even in hardest haps,
said they, a Noble nature will not presently relinquish; but first endeavor
either by courage to repel the danger, or by wisdom to decline it: and why
should you so little esteem your glory and fame, as without battle, or blow
stricken to bind your hands, and yield up your weapons, and put your self upon
miserable mercy: or if the honor of your Noble house does nothing move you,
yet let danger and despair at least arm you to boldness; for neither the
Duke nor his friends will be so confident as to think themselves safe, so
long as you shall remain (although in private state) alive. Indeed you may
assure your self that fair words will be given, and large offers made: but
the performance shall consist in the courtesy of the Conqueror: and nothing
will be thought unlawful to him that has power. King Edward the second was
too heavy to be endured, even of his own Son: and many have used violence
to themselves, rather then they would fall into the power of their concurrents:
and do not you expect more favor or greater fortun then other have found: let
never that senselessness possess your mind, to imagine that a Prince may live
safely in private estate: for in this case there is no mean between Caesar,
and nothing between the highest honor and the deadliest downfall. Therefore
omit neither all, nor any one means unassayed, to maintain your side by
arms: no greater harm can happen at the hardest, then that which willingly
you run into: you can but die if you be vanquished, and die you shall if you
do yield: but by the one you shall end your life with glory, by the other with
shame and perpetual reproach. And although you do now esteem equally of
both, yet when you shall see your self pent in prison; in daily fear and
expectancy of a bloody Messenger; you shall then perceive a difference in
death, and find the weakness and fault of the Council which you are about to
follow. Many like speeches were with great vehemence often repeated, but the
Kings ears were stopped against all impression of manhood: and as he was
unable to govern himself in his prosperous estate, so was he much less
sufficient to wind out of these intricate troubles. Therefore perceiving
himself so straightly beset, that he could hardly either escape away, or shift
any longer, he desired speech with Thomas Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury,
and Lord Henry Pearcy Earl of Northumberland, of whom, the one he had
banished, the other he had proclaimed Traitor not long before. These two came
unto him, and the King upon short conference, understanding what stiff
stomachs they bare against him, was content not to demand that which he saw he
could not obtain: and thereupon agreed that he would relinquish his estate,
upon condition that an honorable living might be assigned him, and life
promised to eight such persons as he would name: the greatest number whom
adversity did not alter. This was then both readily and faithfully promised by
the Archbishop and the Earl, and afterward solemnly ratified by the Duke. The
King ceased not to entreat submisly, and promise largely, and (as the nature is
of men perplexed with fear) above his ability, and without measure, the Earl
encouraged him, and declared that the Duke before he had obtained any aid,
secured by his oath the safety of the Kings person. Then the King desired to
talk with the Duke, which was likewise promised; and so the Archbishop and the
Earl departed, and the King removed to the Castle of Flint about eight miles
distant from Chester, to which place the Duke came to him. Here the
countenances and words of both were noted, by them that were present; the King
seemed abject and base: the Duke neither insulting nor relenting, but
comforting and promising friendly. The King repeated many benefits and
kindnesses that he had showed: how in former time he had spared the Dukes
own life, and lately his Sons: in regard whereof he desired him, with such
submisnes as was agreeable rather with his necessity then his honor: that he
would show some pity where he had received such pleasure: and permit him to
enjoy his life, with such private maintenance as was convenient for his estate.
The Duke put him in good comfort, promising him assuredly, that he would
provide for his safety: for which he suffered himself to be solemnly thanked,
and thought it not much to have it accounted a great benefit. Indeed from that
time the King was kept safe and sure enough, from binding any of the Dukes
purposes, neither could it so easily have been discerned what had been best
for him to do, as that this which he did was the very worst: for the same
night he was brought by the Duke and his army to Chester, and from thence
secretly conveyed to the Tower of London, there to be kept safe until the
Parliament, which was appointed shortly after to be holden.

Thus the King yielded himself: the 20. day of August, being the 47. day after
the Dukes arrival: so that his journeyes considered, from Houldernesse in the
North to London: from thence to Bristow, and so into Wales, and back again to
Chester: a man shall not easily travail over the land in shorter time then he
conquered it. So friendly was fortune unto him, that he either found or made a
ready passage through all hindrances and lets: and it seemed that he needed
only, to open his arms, to meet and receive her, as she offered her self
unto him. All the Kings treasure and Jewels, with his horses, and all his
fardage came to the Dukes hands; and many that were in his company, were
afterward also despoiled by the soldiers of Northumberland and Wales.

Some Writers affirm, that the King did not yield himself, but was forelaid
and taken, as he was secretly passing from Flint to Chester: but the authority
of others who lived in that time, either in the plain view, or certain
intelligence of these affairs, who for their place could not but know, and for
their profession would not but deliver the very truth, has drawn me to
follow their report: which I find also received by some late Writers, of as
great deapth in judgment and choice, as any (without exception) that this age
has brought forth.

As the King was carried toward London, certain Citizens conspired to lay
themselves in a wait by the way, and suddenly to slay him; partly, for private
grievances, and partly, for the cruelty that he had used toward the whole
City: but the Major upon intelligence prevented the practice, and rod forth in
person with a convenient company, to conduct him safely unto the Tower. Shortly
after the Duke came to London in solemn estate, and sent forth summons in the
Kings name, for a Parliament to be holden at Westminster, the last day of
September, in the same year: in the mean time he deliberated with his
kindred, and kind friends, concerning the order of his proceedings. The Duke of
York (who a little before had been Governor of the Realm for the King, and
then was the chiefest Directour of the Duke) thought it best that King Richard
should both voluntarily resign, and also solemnly be deposed, by consent of
all the States of the Realm: for resignation only would be imputed to fear,
and deprivation to force: whereof the one is always pitied, and the other
envied: but if both concur, and his desire be combined with his desert, being
willing to forsake that which he is adjudged worthy to forgo, then shall it
appear, that he neither is expelled his Kingdom by mere constraint, nor
leaves it without just cause. This advice pleased the rest, and for executing
thereof upon the day of S. Michael (which was the day before the Parliament
should begin) there assembled at the Tower, Thomas Arundel Archbishop of
Canterbury* Richard Scroupe Archbishop of York John Bishop of Hereford, Henry
Duke of Lancaster, Henry Earl of Northumberland, Radulph Earl of Westmerland,
Lord Hugh Burnel, Lord Thomas Barkly, Lord Rose, Lord Willoughby, Lord
Abergeiny; The Abbot of Westminster, the ^riour of Canterbury, William
Thirminges, and John Markeham Chief Justices, Thomas Stoke, and John Burback*
Doctors of Law, Thomas Herpingham, and Thomas Gray Knights, William Forby, and
Dionis^ Lopham public Notaries, and diver^ others either not noted, or not
remembered. When all were set in their places, King Richard was brought forth,
apparelled in his Royal robe, the diadem on his head, and the Scepter in his
hand; and was placed amongst them in a Chair of estate. Never was Prince so
gorgeous, with less glory and greater grief: to whom it was not disgrace
sufficient, to lose both the honor and ornaments of a King, but he must
openly to his greater scorn, renounce the one, and deliver the other. After a
little pause and expectation, the King arose from his seat, and spoke to the
assembly these words, or the very like in effect.

I assure my self that some at this present, and many hereafter, will account
my case lamentable; either that I have deserved this dejection, if it be just;
or if it be wrongful, that I could notavoid it. Indeed I do confess that many
times I have showed my self both less provident and less painful for the
benefit of the Commonwealth, then I should, or might; or intended to do
hereafter; and have in many actions more respected the satisfying of my own
particular humor, then either justice to some private persons, or the common
good of all, yet I did not at any time either omit duty or commit grievance,
upon natural dulnes or set malice; but partly, by abuse of corrupt
Counselors, partly, by error of my youthful judgment. And now the
remembrance of these oversights, is so unpleasant to no man, as to my self;
and the rather because I have no means left, either to recompense the injuries
which I have done, or to testify to the World my reformed affections, which
experience and stayednesse of years had already corrected, and would daily
have framed to more perfection. But whether all the imputations, wherewith I am
charged be true, either in substance, or in such quality as they are laid, or
whether being true, they be so heinous, as to enforce these extremities, or
whether any other Prince, especially in the heat of youth, and in the space of
two and twenty years (the time of my unfortunate reign) does, not sometimes
either for advantage, or upon displeasure in as deep manner grieve some
particular subject; I will not now examine: it helps not to use defense,
neither booteth it to make complaint: there is left no place for the one, nor
pity for the other: and therefore I refer it to the judgment of God* and
your less distempered considerations.

I accuse no man, I blame no fortune, I complain of nothing: I have no
pleasure in such vain and needless comforts; and if I listed to have stood
upon terms, I know I have great favorers abroad; and some friends (I hope) at
home, who would have been ready* yea forward on my behalf to set up a bloody
and doubtful war: but I esteem not my dignity at so high a prize, at the
hazard of so great value, the spilling of so much English blood, and the spoil
and wast of so flourishing a Realm, as thereby might have been occasioned.
Therefore that the Commonwealth may rather rise by my fall, then I stand by
the ruin thereof, I willingly yield to your desires, and am here come to
dispossess my self to all public authority and title, and to make it free
and lawful for you to create for your King, Henry Duke of Lancaster my Cousin
German, whom I know to be as worthy to take that place, as I see you willing
to give it to him.

Then he read openly and distinctly the form of his cession, wherein he did
declare, that he had discharged his subjects, from their oaths of fealty and
homage, and all other oaths whatsoever; and of his own will and free motion,
did abdicate the title dignity, and authority of a King: and rendered up the
possession of the Realm, with the use and title thereof, and all the rights
thereunto appertaining. To this the King subscribed and was sworn: and then he
delivered with his own hands the Crown, the Scepter, and the Robe to the Duke
of Lancaster; wishing unto him more happiness therewith, then had ever
happened unto himself. Then he did constitute the Archbishop of York, and the
Bishop of Hereford his Procuratours, to intimate and declare this his
resignation to all the States of the Realm, which should be assembled together
in Parliament. Lastly he gave all his riches and goods, to the sum of three
hundred thousand pounds in coin, besides his Jewels and plate, for
satisfaction of the injuries that he had done, desiring the Duke, and all the
rest that were present severally by their names, not altogether to forget that
he had been their King, nor yet too much to think upon the same; but to
retain of him a moderate remembrance; and in recompense of the case that he
had done them by his voluntary yielding, to permit him to live safely, in a
private and obscure life: with the swetnesse whereof he was so possessed, that
from thenceforth he would prefer it, before any preferment in the World. All
this was delivered and done by the King, with voice and countenance so
agreeable to his present heaviness, that there was no man too unmindefull of
humane instability* which was not in some measure moved thereat: in so much as
a few secret tears melted from the eyes of many that were present, in whose
minds a confused and obscure alteration began to begin. So prone and inclinable
are men to pity misery, although they have procured it, and to envy prospery,
even that which they have raised.

Upon Monday next following, the Parliament began at W^stminster* and the
Archbishop of York and the Bishop of Hereford* (the Kings Atturneies for this
purpose) declared openly to the States there assembled, the Kings voluntary
resignation; and demanded whether they would assent and agree thereunto? the
Barons of the Realm by several and particular consent, the Commons with one
general voice, did expressly accept and admit the same. Then it was thought
meet that certain defects and misdemeanures concerning matters of government,
should be objected against the King: for which he should be adjudged as
unworthy, as he seemed unwilling to retain the Kingdom. To this purpose
certain articles were engrossed, and openly read: in which was contained, how
unprofitable the King had been to the Realm; how unjust and grievous to the
Subjects: contrary both to his honor, and to his oath. The chiefest of which
Articles are these that follow.

1 FIrst, that King Richard did wastfully spend the Tresure of the Realm, and
had given the possession of the Crown, to men unworthy, by reason whereof, new
charges were daily laid on the necks of the poor Comminalty.

2 Item, Where diverse* Lords as well Spiritual as Temporal, were appointed by
the High Court of Parliament, to commune and treat of matters concerning the
State of the Realm, and the Commonwealth of the same, they being busied about
the same commission he with with others of his affinity went about to impeach
them of treason.

3 Item, that by force and menace, he compelled the Justices of the Realm at
Shrewsbury to condescend to his opinion for the destruction of the said Lords:
Insomuch as he began to raise war, against John Duke of Lancaster, Thomas
Earl of Arundel, Richard Earl of Warwick, and other Lords contrary to his
honor and promise.

4 Item, that he caused his Uncle the Duke of Gloucester, to be arrested without
law, and sent him to Calis, and there without judgment murdered him: and
although the Earl of Arundel upon his arraignement, pleaded his charter of
pardon, he could not be heard, but was in most vile and shameful manner
suddenly put to death.

5 Item, he assembled certain Lancashire and Cheshire men, to the intent to
make war on the aforesaid Lords, and suffered them to rob and spoil,
without correction and reproof.

6 Item, that although the King flatteringly and with great dissimulation, made
proclamation throughout the Realm, that the Lords aforenamed were not attached
for any crime of treason, but only for extortions and oppressions done within
the Realm, yet he laid to them in the Parliament rebellion with manifest
treason.

7 Item, he has compelled diverse of the said Lords servants by menace, to
make great fines and extreme payments, to their utter undoing: and
notwithstanding his pardon to them granted, he made them fine a new.

8 Item, where diverse were appointed to commune of the estate of the Realm,
and the Commonwealth of the same, the King caused all the roules and records
to be kept from them, contrary to his promise made in Parliament, to his open
dishonor.

9 Item, he uncharitably commanded that no man upon pain of loss of life and
goods, should once entreat him for the return of Henry, now Duke of Lancaster.

10 Item, where the Realm is houlden of God, and not of the Pope, or any other
Prince, the said King Richard, after he had obtained diverse acts of
Parliament, for his own peculiar profit and pleasure, then he procured Bulls
and extreme censures from Rome to compel all men straightly to keep the
same, contrary to the honor and ancient privileges of this Realm.

11 Item, although the Duke of Lancaster had done his devoire against Thomas
Duke of Norfolk, in proof of his quarrel, yet the said King without reason
or ground, banished him the Realm for ten years, contrary to all equity.

12 Item, before the Dukes departure, he under his broad Seal, licensed him
to make Atturneyes, to prosecute and defend his causes: the said King after his
departure, would suffer none Attorney to appear for him, but did with his at
his pleasure.

13 Item, the said King put out diverse Sheriffs lawfully elected, and put in
their rooms diverse others of his own minions, subverting the law, contrary to
his oath and honor.

14 Item, he borrowed great sums of money, and bound himself under his
Letters patents for the repayment of the same, and yet not one penny paid.

15 Item, he taxed men at the will of him, and his unhappy Counsel, and the
same Treasure spent in folly, not paying poor men for their vittaile and viand.

16 Item, he said that the laws of the Realm were in his head, and sometimes
in his breast: by reason of which fantastical opinion, he destroyed Noble
men, and impoverished the poor Commons.

17 Item, the Parliament setting and enacting diverse notable Statutes, for the
profit and advancement of the Common wealth, he by his privy friends and
solicitours, caused to be enacted, that no act then enacted should be more
prejudicial to him then it was to his Predecessors: through which proviso, he
did often as he list, and not as the law meant.

18 Item, for to serve his purpose, he would suffer the Sheriffs of the
Shires, to remain above one year or two in their office.

19 Item, at the summons of Parliament, when the Knights and Burgesses should
be elected, and the election had fully proceeded, he put out diverse persons
elected and put in others in their places, to serve his will and appetite.

20 Item, he had privy espials in every Shire, to hear who had of him any
communication, and if he communed of his lascivious living, and outrageous
doing, he straightwayes was apprehended and made a grievous fine.

21 Item, the Spiritualty alleged against him, that he at his going into
Ireland, exacted many notable sums of money, beside Plate and Jewels, without
law or custom, contrary to his oath taken at his coronation.

22 Item, when diverse Lords and Justices were sworn to say the truth, of
diverse things to them committed in charge, both for the honor of the Realm
and profit of the King, the said King so menaced them with sore threatenings,
that no man would or durst say the right.

23 Item, that without the assent of the Nobility, he carried the Jewels and
Plate, and Treasure, over the Sea into Ireland, to the great impo^verishing of
the Realm; and all the good Records of the Commonwealth, against his
extortions, he caused privily to be embeasoled and carried away.

24 Item, in all leagues and letters to be concluded and sent to the Sea of
Rome, and other Regions, his writing was so subtle and dark, that no other
Prince durst once believe him, not yet his own Subjects.

25 Item, he most tyrannously and unprincely said, that the lives and goods of
all his Subjects, were in the Princes hands, and at his disposition.

26 Item, that he contrary to the great Charter of England, caused diverse
lusty men to appeal diverse old men, upon matters determinable at the Common
law, in the Court Marciall, because that in that Court is no trial but only
by battle: whereby the said aged persons fearing the sequel of the matter,
submitted themselves to his mercy, whom he fined and ransomed unreasonably at
his pleasure.

27 Item, he craftily devised cercaine privy oaths, contrary to Law, and
caused diverse of his subjects, first to be sworn to observe the same, and
after bound them in bands for surer keeping the same, to the great undoing of
many honest men.

28 Item, where the Chancellor according to law, would in no wise grant a
prohibition to a certain person, the King granted it unto the same person
under his privy Seal, with great threatenings if it should be disobeyed.

29 Item, he banished the Bishop of Canterbury, without cause or judgment, and
kept him in the Parliament Chamber with men of arms.

30 Item, the Bishops goods he granted to his successor, upon condition that
he should maintain all his statutes made at Shrewsbury, Anno 21. and the
statutes made, Anno. 22. at Coventree.

31 Item, upon the accusation of the Archbishop, the King craftily persuaded
the said Bishop to make no answer, for he would be his warrant, and advised him
not to come to the Parliament; and so without answer he was condemned, and
exiled, and his goods seized. Four other Articles were laid, which
particularly did concern the said Archbishop, by whose doing chiefly the King
was utterly undone.

Then was demanded of the Nobility and Commons of the Realm, what they judged
both of the truth and desert of these Articles? who all agreed that the crimes
were notorious, and that King Richard was worthy for the same to be deposed
from his princely dignity. The noble men gave their voices, part corrupted by
favor, part awed by fear: and the Commons are commonly like a flock of
Cranes, as one does fly all will follow. Hereupon Commissioners were appointed
by both the Houses; who pronounced sentence of deposition against King Richard,
in manner and form as follows.

In the name of God, Amen* We, John Bishop of S. Asses, I. Abbot of
Glastenbury, Thomas Earl of Gloucester, Thomas Lord Bekley, Thomas
Erpinghaime, Thomas Gray Knights: William Therning, Justice, Commissioners for
the matters hereafter specified, by the Lords spiritual and temporal of the
Realm of England, and the Commons of the said Realm, representing all the
States of the said Kingdom, specially deputed, sitting in seat of judgment,
and considering the manifold injuries, and cruelties, and many other crimes and
offenses by Richard late King of the said Realm committed and done, contrary to
good government in the Realms and Dominions aforesaid, during the time of his
Reign: also considering the articles which were openly exhibited and read
before the said States, which were so public, notorious, manifest, and famous,
that they could nor can by no avoydance and shift be concealed: also
considering the confession of the said King, acknowledging and reputing, and
truly upon his certain knowledge judging himself, to have been, and to be
altogether insufficient and unskilful, for the rule and government of the
Realms and Dominions aforesaid, and of any parts of them, and not unworthy to
be deposed for the notorious demerits, by the said Richard first acknowledged,
and afterward by his will and mandate, before the said States published, and to
them opened and declared in the English tongue. Upon these and other matters
which were done concerning the same business, before the said States and us, by
the diligent place, name and authority to us in this part committed, in
abundance and for a cautele we pronounce, decree, and declare, the said
Richard, to have been, and to be unprofitable and unable, and altogether
unsufficient and unworthy for the rule, and government of the said Realms, and
of the Dominions, Rights, and parts of them: and in regard and respect of the
premises, worthily to be deposed from all kingly dignity and honor (if any
such dignity and honor remains in him) and for the like cautele we do
depose him by our sentence definitive, in this writing: inhibiting from
henceforth expressly, all and singular Lords, Archbishops, Bishops, Prelates,
Dukes, Marquesses and Earls, Barons, Knights, Vassalles, and all other persons
whatsoever, of the said Realms and Dominions, and other places to the said
Realms and Dominions appertaining, the subjects and liege people of the same,
and every of them, that from henceforth none obey, or intend to obey the
aforesaid Richard, as King or Lord of the Realms and Dominions aforesaid.

Then the same Commissioners were by the consent and suffrages of both houses,
constituted Procurators, jointly and severally for all the States of the
Realm; to resign and surrender unto King Richard, for them and all other
homages of the Realm, all the homages and fealties which were both due and
done unto him, as King and Sovereign, and also to declare unto him all the
premises, concerning his deposition. Now Henry Duke of Lancaster, that he
might be reputed, or reported at the least, not to attain the Kingdom by
intrusion and wrong, was counseled by his friends, to pretend some lawful
challenge and claim thereunto: and being in power, it was no sooner advised
what was to be done, but it was presently devised how to do it. So a title
was drawn from Edmund, son to King Henry the third, whom they surnamed
Crouch-backe: affirming that he was the eldest son of King Henry, and that
for his deformity, he was put from his right of succession in the Kingdom;
which was for that cause given to his younger brother, King Edward the third;
to this Edmund the Duke was next of blood by his mother Blanch, sole daughter
and heir to Henry the first Duke of Lancaster, and son to the said Edmund.
This cunning conceit was perceived of all men, but seeming not to perceive it,
was a point of friendship in some, and of obedience in the rest: therefore the
Kingdom of England being then thought vacant, both by the resignation* and
also by the deposition of King Richard: Duke Henry arose from his seat, and
standing in the view of the Lords, crossed himself on the forehead, and on
the breast, and spoke as follows.

In the name of God, Amen: I Henry of Lancaster, claim the realm of England,
and the Crown, with all the appurtenances, as I that am descended by right line
of the blood royal, coming from that good Lord K. Henry the third, and
through the right that God of his grace has sent me, with the help of my
kindred, and of my friends, to recover the same: Which kingdom was in point to
be undone, for default of good government and due justice.

After these words, it was demanded in both houses, of the Nobility and of the
Commons which were assembled, whether they did consent, that the Duke should
reign? who all with one voice acknowledged and accepted him for their King:
then the Archbishop of Canterbury took him by the hand, and placed him in the
Throne of estate, the Archbishop of York assisting him, and all the assembly
testifying their own joy, and wishing his. Then the Archbishop made an
Oration, and took for his theme, this place of Scripture: See; this is the
man whom I spoke to thee of, this same shall reign over my people, 1 Reg.
9.17. After all this he was proclaimed King of England, and of France, and
Lord of Ireland: and the common people which is void of cares, not searching
into sequels, but without difference of right or wrong inclinable to follow
those that are mighty, with shoutes and clamours gave their applause, not all
upon judgment, or faithful meaning, but mostionly upon a received custom to
flatter the Prince whatsoever he be. Yet least the heat of this humor should
allay by delay, it was forthwith proclaimed in the great Hall, that upon the
13. day of September next ensuing, the Coronation of the King should be
celebrated at Westminster, These matters being thus dispatched, the K.
proclaimed, arose from his seat, and went to White Hall: where he spent the
rest of day in royal feasting, and all other complements of joy:
notwithstanding there appeared in him no token of stateliness or pride, nor
any change in so great a change.

Upon Wednesday next following, the Procurators, before mentioned, went to the
presence of King Richard, being within the Tower; and declared unto him the
admission of his resignation, and also the order and form of his deposition:
and in the name of all the States of the realm, did surrender the homage and
fealty which had bin due unto him; so that no man from thenceforth would bear
to him faith and obedience, as to their King. The King answered that he nothing
regarded these titular circumstances, but contented himself with hope, that
his cosen would be a gracious Lord, and good friend unto him.

So upon the 13. day of October, which was the day of the translation of Edward
the Confessor, the Duke was with all accustomed solemnities, by the Archbishop
of Canterbury, sacred, anointed, and crowned King at Westminster, by the name
of King Henry the fourth: upon the very same day, wherein the year before he
had bin banished the Realm. He was anointed with an oil, which a certain
religious man gave unto Henry the first, Duke of Lancaster, (Grandfather to the
King by the mothers side) when he served in the wars of King Edward the third,
beyond the seas; together with this Prophecy; that the Kings which should be
anointed therewith, should be the Champions of the Church. Duke Henry
delivered this oil in a golden violl to Prince Edward, the eldest son of
King Edward the third; who locked up the same in a barred Chest within the
Tower, with intent to be anointed therewith, when he should be crowned King:
but the Prince dying before his Father, it remained there, either not
remembered, or not regarded, until this present year; wherein the King, being
upon his voyage into Ireland, and making diligent search for the Jewels and
Monuments of his Progenitors, found this Violl and Prophecy: and understanding
the secret, was desirous to be anointed again with that oil: but the
Archbishop of Canterbury persuaded him, that both the fact was unlawful, and
the precedent unseen, that a King should be anointed twice: whereupon he brake
off that purpose, and took the violl with him into Ireland: and when he yielded
himself at Flint, the Archbishop of Canterbury demanded it of him again, and
did receive and reserve the same, until the coronation of King Henry; who was
the first King of this Realm, that was anointed therewith.

I am not purposed to discourse, either of the authority, or of the certainty
of these prophesies: but we may easily observe, that the greatest part of
them, either altogether failed, or were fulfilled in another sense, then as
they were commonly construed and taken. During the reign of King Henry the
fourth, execution by fire was first put in practice within this Realm, for
controversies in points of religion: in any other extraordinary matter, he did
as much make the Church Champion, as show himself a Champion of the Church:
but afterward his successors were intitule, Defendars of the faith: and how in
action they verified the same, I refer to remembrance, and report of later
times.

Now it had been considered, that the title which was derived to King Henry,
from Edmund, whom they surnamed Crouchbacke, would be taken but for a blind and
idle jest: for that it was notorious that the said Edmund was neither eldest
son to King Henry the third (as it was plainly declared by an act of
Parliament) nor yet a misshapen and deformed person: but a goodly Gentleman, and
valiant Commander in the field, and so favored of the King his Father, that
he gave him both the heritages and honors of Simon Mountfort Earl of
Leicester, of Ferrare, Earl of Darby, and of John Baron of Monmuth, who to
their own ruin and destruction, had displayed seditious ensigns against the
King. And further to advance him to the marriage of Blanch Queen of Naverne,
he created him the first Earl of Lancaster, and gave unto him the County,
Castle, and Town of Lancaster, with the Forests of Wiresdale Lounsdale,
New Castle, beneath Linne, the Manner, Castle, and Forest of Pickering, the
Manner of Scaleby, the Town of Gomecester, of Huntendone, etc. with many large
privileges, and high titles of honor.

Therefore King Henry upon the day of his Coronation; caused to be proclaimed,
that he claymed the kingdom of England, first by right of conquest: Secondly,
because King Richard had resigned his estate, and designed him for his
successor: Lastly, because he was of the blood royal, and next heir male
unto King Richard.

Haeres malus indeed (quoth Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March, unto his secret
friends) and so is the Pyrate to the Merchant, when he despoyleth him of all
that he has. This Edmund was son to Roger Mortimer; who was not long before
slain in Ireland, and had been openly declared heir apparent to the Crown,
in case King Richard should dye without issue, as descended by his Mother
Philip, from Lionell, Duke of Clarence, who was elder brother to John Duke of
Lancaster, King Henry's Father: and therefore the said Edmund thought himself,
and indeed was, nearer heir male to the succession of the Crown, then he
that by color of right, clayming it, carried it by dint of force.

But such was the condition of the time, that he supposed it was vain, for
him to stir, where King Richard could not stand: Whereupon he dissembled,
either that he saw his wrong, or that he regarded it; and chose rather to
suppress his title for a time, then by untimely opposing himself, to have it
oppressed and depressed for ever: to this end he withdrew himself far from
London, to his Lordship of Wigmore, in the West parts of the Realm, and there
settled himself to a private and close life: Idleness and vacancy from public
affairs, he accounted a virtue, and a deep point of wisdom to meddle with
nothing, whereof no man was chargeable to yield a reckoning. In revenues he
was mean, in apparel moderate, in company and train not excessive, (yet in
all these honorable, and according to his degree) so that they which esteemed
men by outward appearance only, could see in him no great show, either of wit
and courage in his mind to be feared; or of wealth and honor in his estate to
be envied. And thus whilst a greater enemy was feared, he passed unregarded;
making himself safe by contempt, where nothing was so dangerous as a good
opinion; and taking up those coals in obscurity for a time, which shortly
after set all the Realm on fire.

King Henry presently after his coronation, created his eldest son Lord
Henry, being then about xiii. years of age, Prince of Wales, Duke of
Cornwall, and Earl of Chester, and soon after he created him also Duke of
Aquitaine. Afterward it was enacted, by consent of all the states of the
Realm, assembled together in the Parliament, that the inheritance of the
Crowns and Realms of England, and of France, and of all the Dominions to them
appertaining, should be united and remain in the person of King Henry, and in
the heirs of his body lawfully begotten: and that Prince Henry his eldest
son, should be his heir apparent, and successor in the premises: and if he
should dye without lawful issue, then they were entayled to his other sons
successively in order, and to the heirs of their bodies lawfully begotten.

The inheritance of the Kingdom being in this sort settled in King Henry and in
his line, it was moved in the parliament what should be done with King Richard.
The Bishop of Caerliel, who was a man learned and wise, and one that always
used both liberty and constancy in a good cause; in his secret judgment did
never give allowance to these proceedings: yet dissembled his dislike until
he might to some purpose declare it: therefore now being in place to be heard
of all, and by order of the house, to be interrupted by none, he rose up and
with a bold and present spirit, uttered his mind as follows.

This question (right honorable Lords) concerns a matter of great
consequence and weight: the determining whereof will assuredly procure, either
safe quiet, or dangerous disturbance, both to our particular consciences, and
also to the common state. Therefore before you resolve upon it, I pray you call
to your considerations these two things: Frist, whether King Richard be
sufficiently deposed or no: Secondly, whether King Henry be with good
judgment or justice chosen in his place. For the first point we are first to
examine, whether a King, being lawfully and fully instituted by any just title,
may upon impution either of negligence, or of tyranny, be deposed by his
subjects: Secondly, what King Richard has omitted in the one, or committed in
the other, for which he should deserve so heavy judgment. I will not speak
what may be done in a popular state, or in a Consular; in which although one
bears the name and honor of a Prince, yet he has not supreme power of
Majesty; but in the one, the people have the highest Empire; in the other, the
Nobility, and chief men of estate; in neither, the Prince. Of the first sort
was the commonwealth of the Lacedaemoans, who after the form of government which
Licurgus framed, oftentimes fined, oftentimes fettered their kings, and
sometimes condemned them to death: such were also in Caesar's time, the petty
Kings of every City in France; who were many times arraigned upon life and
death, and (as Ambiorix Prince of the Leodienses confessed) had no greater
power over the people, then the people had over them. Of the second condition
were the Roman Emperors at the first; of whom some, namely, Nero and Maximinus
were openly condemned, others were suddenly surprised by judgment, Tranquil.
in Caligula. Tacitus in Proaemio.
and authority of the Senate: and such are now the Emperors of Germany, whom
the other Princes by their Aristocraticall power, do not only restrain, but
sometimes also remove from their Imperial state: such are also the Kings of
Denmark, and Sweveland, who are many times by the Nobility dejected, either
into prison, or into exile: such likewise are the Dukes of Venice, and of some
other free states in Italy: and the chiefest cause for which Jews Earl of
Flaunders was lately expelled from his place, was for drawing to himself
cognizance in matters of life and death, which high power never pertained to
his dignity.

In these and such like governments, the Prince has not regal rights, but is
himself subject to that power which is greater then his, whether it be in the
Nobility or in the common people. But if the Sovereign Majesty be in the
Prince, as it was in the three first Empires, and in the Kingdom of Judea, and
Israel; and is now in the kingdoms of England, France, Spain, Scotland,
Muscovia, Turkey, Tartaria, Persia, Ethiopia, and almost all the kingdoms of
Asia, and Afric: although for his vices he be unprofitable to the subjects,
yea hurtful, yea intolerable: yet can they lawfully neither harm his person,
nor hazard his power, whether by judgment, or else by force: for neither one,
nor all Magistrates have any authority over the Prince, from whom all authority
is derived, and whose only presence does silence, and suspend all inferior
jurisdiction and power. As for force, what subject can attempt, or assist, or
counsel, or conceal violence against his Prince, and not incur the high
and heinous crime of treason?

It is a common saying, thought is free: free indeed from punishment of secular
laws, except by word or deed it break forth into action: Yet the secret
thoughts against the sacred Majesty of a Prince, without attempt, without
endeavor, have been adjudged worthy of death: and some who in auriculer
confession, have discovered their treacherous devises against the person of
their Prince, have afterward been executed for the same. All Laws do exempt
a mad man from punishment: because their actions are not governed by their will
and purpose: and the will of man being set aside, all his doings are
indifferent, neither can the body offend without a corrupt or erroneous mind:
yet if a mad man draw his sword upon his King, it has been adjudged to
deserve death. And lest any man should surmise that Princes, for the
maintenance of their own safety and soveraignety, are the only Authors of
these judgments; let us a little consider the Patterns and Preceprs of Holy
Scripture. Nebuchadnezzar King of Assyria, wasted all Palestine with fire and
sword, oppugned Jerusalem a long time, and at the last expugned it: sl^e the
King: burnt the Temple: took away the Holy Vessels and Treasure: the rest he
permitted to the cruelty and spoil of his unmercifull soldiers: who defiled
all places with rape and slaughter, and ruinated to the ground that flourishing
City: after the glut of this bloody butchery, the people which remained, he
led captive into Chaldaea: and there erected his golden Image; and commanded
that they which refused to worship it, should be cast into a fiery Furnace.

What cruelty, what injustice, what impiety is comparable to this? and yet God
calls Nebuchadnezzar his servant, and promises hyre and wages for his
service: and the Prophets Jeremiah and Baruch did write unto the Jews to pray
for the life of him, Ier. 25 9. Ezech. 29 18. Ier. 29 7. Bacuch. 1.11.
and of Baltazar his son, that their days might be upon earth as the days
of Heaven: and Ezechiel with bitter terms abhorteth the disloyalty of
Zedechia, because he revolted from Nebuchadnezzar, whose homager and tributary
he was. What shall we say of Saul? did he not put all the Priests to
execution, because one of them did relieve holy and harmless David? did he
not violently persecute that his most faithful servant and dutiful son in
law? during which pursuit, he fell twice into the power of David; who did not
only spare, but also protect the King, and reproved the Pretorian soldiers for
their negligent watch, and was touched in heart for cutting away the lap of his
garment: and afterward caused the Messenger to be slain, who upon request
and for pity, had lent his hand (as he said) to help forward the voluntary
death of that sacred King. As for the contrary examples: as that of So did
Domitian put to death Epaphroditus, Neroes libertine, because he helped Nero
(although in love) to kill himself. So did Severus kill all the killers of
Pertinax his Predecessor; and likewise Vitellius did put to death all the
murderers of Galba. Theophilus Emperor of Grecia caused all those to be
slain, who had made his Father Emperor, by killing Leo Ar^^nius. And
Alexander the great put to cruel execution, those that had slain Darius his
mighty and mortal enemy.
Iehu who slew Iehoram and Ahazia, Kings of Israel and Judah: they were done by
express oracle and revelation from God, and are no more set down for our
imitation, then the robbing of the Egyptians, or any other particular and
privileged Commandment; but in the general Precept, which all men must
ordinarily follow, not only our actions, but our speeches also, and our very
thoughts are strictly charged with duty and obedience unto Princes, whether
they be good or evil, the law of God ordains: Deuteronomy. 17.12.
That he which does presumptuously against the Ruler of the people shall dye:
Psalm. 105.
and the Prophet David forbids, to touch the Lords anointed. Exodus 22.28.
Act. 23.5.
Thou shall not (says the Lord) rail upon the Judges, neither speak evil
against the Ruler of the people. And the Apostles do demand further, Romans
13.1.13. Tit. 3.1. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14, 17. 2 Timothy 2.2
that even our thoughts and souls be obedient to higher powers. And least any
should imagine that they meant of good Princes only, they speak generally of
all; and further to take away all doubt, they make express mention of the
evil. For the power and authority of wicked Princes is the ordinance of God;
Romans 13.2.
and therefore CHRIST told Pilate, John 19.11.
that the power which he had was given him from above; and the Prophet Esaias
calls Cyrus, being a Profane and Heathen Prince, Cap. 45.1.
the Lords anointed. For God stirred up the Spirit even of wicked Princes to
do his will; 2 Chronicles. 36.22.
and (as Iehosaphat said to his Rulers) they execute not the judgment of man,
but of the Lord: 2 Chronicles. 19.6. Psalm. 28.
in regard whereof David calls them Gods; because they have their rule and
authority immediately from God: which if they abuse, they are not to be
adjudged by their Subjects, for no power within their Dominion is superior to
theirs: but God reserveth them to the forest trial: Sap. 6.
Horribly and suddenly (says the Wisem^n) will the Lord appear^ unto them, and
a hard judgment shall they have.

The law of God commands, that the Child should be put to death, for any
con^umely done unto the Parents: but what if the Father be a robber? if a
murderer? if for all excess of villainies, odious and execrable both to God
and man? surely he deserves the highest degree of punishment, and yet must
not the Son lift up his hand against him, for no offense is so great as to
be punished by parricide: but our Country is deerer unto us then our Parents:
Quintil. in declam. Cic. offic. lib. 1.
and the Prince is Pater patriae, the Father of our Country: and therefore
more sacred and dear unto us, then our Parents by nature, and must not be
violated, how imperious, how impious so ever he be: does he command or
demand, our persons or our purses, we must not shun for the one, nor shrink
for the other: for (as Nehemiah says,) Kings have Dominion over the bodies and
over the cattle of their Subjects, Nehem 9.37.
at their pleasure. Does he enjoyne those actions which are contrary to the
laws of God? we must neither wholly obey, nor violently resist, but with a
constant courage submit our selves to all manner of punishment, and show our
subjection by enduring, and not performing: yea the Church has declared it to
be an Heresy, Alphons. a cas^ in l^b. de baer^s. in verb. Tiran. Dom Sot.
lib. 5. de just. and jur. q. 1 artic. 3.
to hold that a Prince may be slain or deposed by his Subjects, for any
disorder or default, either in life, or else in government, there will be
faults so long as there are men: and as we endure with patience a barren year,
if it happen, and unseasonable weather, and such other defects of nature, so
must we tolerate the imperfections of Rulers and quietly expect, either
reformation, or else a change.

But alas good King Richard, what such cruelty? what such impiety has he ever
committed? examine rightly those imputations which are laid against him,
without any false circumstance of aggravation, and you shall find nothing
objected, either of any truth, or of great moment. It may be that many errors
and oversights have escaped him, yet none so grievous to be termed tyranny; as
proceeding rather from unexperienced ignorance, or corrupt counsel, then from
any natural and wilful malice. Oh, how shall the World be pestered with
Tyrants, if Subjects may rebel upon every pretense of tyranny? how many good
Princes shall daily be suppressed by those, by whom they ought to be
supported? if they leavy a subsidy, or any other taxation* it shall be claimed
oppression: if they put any to death for traiterous attempts against their
Persons, it shall be exclaimed cruelty: if they do any thing against the lust
and liking of the people, it shall be proclaimed tyranny.

But let it be, that without authority in us, or desert in him, King Richard
must be deposed: yet what right had the Duke of Lancaster to the Crown? or
what reason have we without his right to give it to him? if he make title as
Heir unto King Richard, then must he yet stay until King Richards death: for
no man can succeed as Heir to one that lives. But it is well known to all
men, who are not either wilfully blind or grossly ignorant, that there are
some now alive. Lineally descended from L^onel Duke of Clarence, whose
offspring was by judgment of the High Court of Parliament holden the eight
year of the reign of King Richard, declared next Successor to the Crown, in
case King Richard should dye without issue. Concerning the title from Edmund
Crouchback, I will pass it over, seeing the authors thereof are become
ashamed of so absurd abuse, both of their own knowledge* and our credulity,
and therefore all the claim is now made, by right of conquest; by the cession
and grant of King Richard; and by the general consent of all the people. It is
a bad wool that can take no color: but what conquest can a Subject pretend
against his Sovereign, where the war is insurrection, and the victory high
and heinous treason? as for the resignation which King Richard made, being a
pent Prisoner for the same cause; it is an act exacted by force: and therefore
of no force and validity to bind him: and seeing that by the laws of this
Land, the King alone cannot alienate the ancient Jewels and ornaments
partaining to the Crown, surely he cannot give away the Crown it self, and
therewithal the Kingdom.

Neither have we any custom, that the people at pleasure should elect their
King: but they are always bound unto him, who by right of blood is right
successor; much less can they confirm and make good that title, which is
before by violence usurped: for nothing can then be freely done, when liberty
is once restrained by fear. So did Scilla by terror of his Legions, obtain
the law of Velleia to be made, whereby he was created Dictatour for fourscore
years: and by like impression of fear, Caesar caused the law Servia to be
promulged, by which he was made perpetual Dictatour: but both these laws
were afterward adjudged void. As for the deposing of King Edward the second it
is no more to be urged, then the poisoning of King John, or the murdering of
any other good and lawful Prince: we must live according to laws, and not to
examples: and yet the Kingdom was not then taken from the lawful successor.
But if we look back to times lately past, we shall find that these titles were
more strong in King Stephen, then they are in the Duke of Lancaster. For King
Henry the first being at large liberty, neither restrained in body, nor
constrained in mind, had appointed him to succeed: (as it was upon good credit,
certainly affirmed;) The people assented to this designement; and thereupon
without fear, and without force, he was anointed King, and obtained full
possession of the Realm. Yet Henry (Son of the Earl of Anjowe) having a
nearer right by his Mother to the Crown, (notwithstanding his Father was a
stranger, and himself borne beyond the Seas (raised such rough wars upon
King Stephen, that there was no end of spoiling the goods and spilling the
blood of the unhappy people, besides the ruins and deformities of many Cities
and Holds; until his lawful inheritance was to him assured. It terrifieth me
to remember how many flourishing Empires, and Kingdoms have been by means of
such contentions either torn in pieces with detestive division, or subdued to
foreign Princes, under pretense of assistance and aid: and I need not repeat
how sore this Realm has heretofore been shaken with these several
mischieves: and yet neither the e^amples of other Countries, nor the miseries
of our own, are sufficient to make us to beware.

O English men, worse bewitched then the foolish Galathians; our unstayed minds
and restless resolutions, do nothing else but hunt after our own harms: no
people have more hatred abroad, and none less quiet at home: in other
Countries the sword of invasion has been shaken against us: in our own land,
the fire of insurrection has been kindled among us: and what are these
innovasions* but whetstones to sharpen the one and bellows to blow up the
other.

Certainly I fear that the same will happen unto us which Aesop fableth to
have been fallen unto the Frogs; who being desirous to have a King, a beam
was given unto them: the first fall whereof did put them in some fear, but
when they saw it lie still in the stream, they insulted thereon with great
contempt, and desired a King of quicker courage^ then was sent unto them a
Storke, which stalking among them with stately steps, continually devoured
them. The mildness of King Richard has bred in us this scorn, interpreting
it to be cowardice and dullness of nature: the next Heir is likewise
rejected: I will not say that with greater courage we shall find greater
cruelty; but if either of these shall hereafter be able to set up their side,
and bring the matter to trial by arms, I do assuredly say, that which part
soever shall carry the fortune of the field, the people both ways must go to
wrack. And thus have I declared my mind concerning this question, in more words
then your wisdom, yet fewer then the weight of the cause does require: and do
boldly conclude, that we have neither power nor policy, either to depose King
Richard, or to elect Duke Henry in his place; that King Richard remains still
our Sovereign Prince, and therefore it is not lawful for us to give judgment
upon him; that the Duke whom you call King, has more offended against the King
and the Realm, then the King has done, either against him or us; for being
banished the Realm for ten years by the King and his Counsel (amongst
whom his own Father was chief) and sworn not to return again without
special license: he has not only violated his oath, but with impious arms
disturbed the quiet of the Land, and dispossessed the King from his Royal
estate, and now demands judgment against his person, without offense proved,
or defense heard. If this injury and this perjury does nothing move us, yet let
both our private and common dangers somewhat withdraw us from these violent
proceedings.

This speech was diversely taken, as men were diversely affected between fear,
hope, and shame: yet the most part did make show for King Henry, and thereupon
the Bishop was presently attached by the Earl Marshall, and committed to
prison in the Abbey of Saint Albones, whose counsel and conjecture then
contemned, was afterward better thought upon; partly in the life time of King
Henry, during whose reign, almost no year passed without great slaughters and
executions: but more especially in the times succeeding, when within the space
of 36. years, twelve set battles upon this quarrel were fought within the
Realm by English men only: and more then fourscore Princes of the Royal
blood slain one by another.

Then it was concluded, that King Richard should be kept in a large prison,
with all manner of Princely maintenance: and if any persons should conspire to
rear war for his deliverance, that he should be the first man who should
suffer death for that attempt. Then the Acts of the Parliament holden at
Westminster, in the 11. year of King Richard, were revived; and the Parliament
holden the 21. year of King Richard was wholly repealed: and they who were
attainted by that Parliament, were restored again to their fame and honor,
and to their Lands, without suing livery, and to such goods whereof the King
was not answered, except the rents and issues which had been received out of
their lands in the mean time. Hereupon, Richard Earl of Warwick was delivered
out of prison, and the Earl of Arundels Son recovered his inheritance: many
others also that were banished or imprisoned by King Richard, were then fully
restored again, to their Country, Liberty, and Estate.

It was further provided, that none of those which came in aid of King Henry
against King Richard, should for that cause be impeached or troubled. Also the
King gave to the Earl of Westmerland the County of Richmond; and to the Earl
of Northumberland he gave the I Will of Man* to be houlden of him by the service
of bearing the sword, wherewith he entered into England. Diverse other of his
followers he advances to offices of highest place and charge, some upon
judgment and for desert, but most part to win favor, and perhaps projecting
a plot for friends, if times should change: for in many actions men take more
care to prevent revenge, then to lead an innocent and harmless life.

It was further agreed, that the Procurers of the death and Murder of Thomas
late Duke of Gloucester, should be searched out and severely punished. And
judgment was given against the appellants of the Earl of Warwick and the
Earl of Arundel, that the Dukes of Aumerle, Sussex, and Exceter, the Marquess
of Dorset, and the Earl of Gloucester who were present, should loose their
degree of honor for them and their Heirs: that they should likewise loose all
the Castles, Mannours, Lordships, etc. then in their hands which sometimes
appertained to those whom they did appeal, and that all the letters patents
and charters which they had concerning the same, should be surrendered into the
Chancery, and there be cancelled: that for all other their Castles, Mannours,
Lordships, Possessions, and Liberties, they should be at the grace and mercy
of the King: that they should give no liveries, nor keep any retinue of men,
but only such Officers as were merely necessary for their degree: that if any
of them should adhere to Richard the deposed King, in giving him aid or
encouragement, against the judgment of his deposition, then he should incur
the pains and forfeitures of high treason. And because it was a clamorous
complaint among the Common people, that many Officers had committed grievous
extortions and wrongs, either by the open maintenance or secret connivence of
these Lords: First, those Officers were removed, and that corruption taken away
with integrity, which bribery had wrought, in placing (for money) men of bad
quality, in high degrees of office and service: then Proclamations were made,
that if any man had been oppressed by these Lords, or by any Officers under
them, he should prove his complaint, and receive recompense. It was made a
question whether it was not meet that these Noble men should be put to death:
the importunity of the people, and the persuasion of many great men drew that
way, but policy was against it, and especially the opinion of clemency, which
seemed needful to the settling of a new risen state.

In this Parliament also the Lord Fitzwater appealed the said Duke of Aumerle,
Son to the Duke of York, upon points of High treason: likewise the Lord
Monley appealed John Montacu^e Earl of Salisbury, and more then twenty other
appealants waged battle; but the King purposing to lay the foundation of his
Realm by favor and not by force, gave pardon and restitution alike to all,
upon sureties and band for their allegiance: and in a sweet and moderate
oration he admonishes, and as it were entreated the one part, that old
griefs and grudges should not be renewed, but buried together with the memory
of former times, wherein men were forced to do many things against their
minds: the other part he desired to be more regardfull of their actions
afterward, and for the time past, rather to forget that ever they were in
fault, then to remember that they were pardoned. No punishment was laid upon
any, save only the Earl of Salisbury and the Lord Morley, who had been in
especial grace and favor with King Richard^ these two were committed to
prison, but at the suit of their friends they were soon released: the rest the
King received freely to favor, but most especially the Duke of Aumerle, and
the Duke of Excester, Lord Governor of Calis. The Duke of Aumerle was cosen
germane to both the Kings: John Holland Duke of Exeter, was half brother to
King Richard, and brother in law to King Henry; whose Sister, the Lady
Elizabeth, he had taken to wife. The greatest matter that was enforced against
them, was their loialty unto King Richard: (a grievous crime among rebels)
because they did not only stomach and storm at his dejection, but stir also
more then others, and assay to raise forces on his behalf. The Dukes boldly
confessed the accusation, that they were indeed unfortunately faithful to King
Richard; but as those who once are false, do seldom afterward prove soundly
firm, so they that have showed themselves true to one Prince may the better
be trusted by any other. The King did rather admit this as a defense, then
remit it as a fault: affirming, that such examples were not to be misliked of
Princes: so he entered with them into great terms of friendship, and put them
in place nearest his person, endeavoring by courtesy and liberalty, to make
them fast and faithful unto him: this fact was diversely interpreted, according
to men's several dispositions, some admiring the Kings moderation, others
disliking and disallowing his confidence; and indeed, although these means
have to this purpose prevailed with some, yet the common course may move us
commonly to conjecture, that there is little assurance in reconciled enemies:
whose affections (for the most part) are like unto Glass; which being once
cracked, can never be made otherwise then crazed and unsound.

Furthermore, to qualify all prejudice and hard opinion which other Princes
might chance to conceive, King Henry dispatched Ambassadors to diverse
Countries near unto him, to make it known by what title, and by what favor
and desire of all the people he attained the Kingdom. To the Court of Rome,
he sent John Trevenant Bishop of Hereford, Sir John Cheyney Knight, and John
Cheyney Esquire: into France he sent Walter Sherlow Bishop of Durham, and Lord
Thomas Pearcy Earl of Worcester: into Spain, he sent John Trevor Bishop of
S. Assaphes, and Sir William Parre, and into Almaine he sent the Bishop of
Bangor, and certain other. Most of these Princes (as in a matter which little
concerned either their honor or their harm) seemed either not to regard what
was done, or easily to be persuaded that all was done well. But Charles King
of France, was so distempered at this dishonorable dealing with his Son in
law King Richard; that by violence of his passion, he fell into his old panges
of frenzy: and at the last by help of physic returning to the sobriety of
his senses, he purposed to make sharp war upon that disloyal people (as
he termed them) for this injury against their lawful and harmless Prince.
Many Noble men of France showed themselves very forward to enter into the
service, but especially the Earl of Saint Paul, who had married King Richards
half Sister. So letters of defiance were sent into England, and great
preparation was made for the war.

Likewise the news of these novelties much abashed the Aquitanes (who were at
that time under the English subjection) and plunged their thoughts in great
perplexities. Some were grieved at the infamous blemish of the English nation,
who had destained their honor with the spot of such disloyal dealing: others
feared the spoil of their goods, and oppression of their liberties by the
Frenchmen; against whose violence they suspected that the Realm of England,
being distracted into civil factions, either would not attend, or should not
be able to bear them out: but the Citizens of Bordeaux were chiefly
anguished in respect of King Richard, partly fretting at his injury, and partly
lamenting his infortunity; because he was borne and brought up within their
City. And thus in the violence, some of their anger, some of their grief, and
some of their fear, in this sort they did generally complain.

O good GOD (said they) where is the World become? Saints are turned to
Serpents, and Doves into Devils. The English nation which has been accounted
fierce only against their foes, and always faithful to their friends; are
now become both fierce and faith less against their lawful and loving Prince,
and have most barbarously betrayed him. Who would ever have thought that
Christians, that civil people, that any men, would thus have violated all
Religion, all Laws, and all honest and orderly demeanure? And although the
Heavens blush at the view, and the Earth sweat at the burden of so vile a
villainy, and all men proclaim and exclaim upon shame and confusion against
them: yet they neither feel the horror; nor shrink at the shame, nor fear
the revenge; but stand upon terms, some of defense for the lawfulness of
their dealing, and some of excuse for the necessity. Well, let them be able to
blind the world, and to resist man's revenge; yet shall they never be able to
escape either the sight or vengeance of Almighty God; which we daily expect,
and earnestly desire to be powered upon them. Alas good King Richard, thy
nature was too gentle, and thy government too mild for so stiff and stubborn
a people: what King will ever repose any trust in such unnatural subjects, but
fetter them with Laws, as thieves are with Irons? What carriage hereafter can
recover their credit? What time will be sufficient to blot out this blemish?
What other action could they have done, more joyful to their enemies, more
woeful to their friends, and more shameful to themselves? Oh corruption of
times! Oh conditions of men!

The Frenchmen were nothing discontented at this discontenement of the
Aquitanes, supposing that opportunity was then offered, to get into their
possession the Duchy of Guian, if either power or policy were thereto
applied. Hereupon L^wes Duke of Burbon came down to Angiers, who from thence
sent many messengers to the chief cities of Guian, and by fair speeches and
large promises, solicited the people to change allegiance: on the contrary
side, Sir Robert Knowles Lieutenant of Guian, endeavored with all diligence to
repress the mutinous, to stay the doubtful, to confirm the good, and to
retain all in order and obedience: but he profited very little, whether by
the weakness of his own arm, or stiff neck of the people it is not
certainly assured, Neither did the Duke of Burbone much prevail, when it was
considered, how ponderous the yonke of France was above the English subjection:
for all men were well acquainted with what tributes and taxations the French
men were charged, having in every country Lievtenants and Treasurers assigned,
the one to draw the blood, the other the substance of the slavish subjects,
whose c^uelty and covetousness laid hold without exception upon all, the one
tormenting by force, and the other undoing by Law. Thus stood the Aquitanes
upon tickle terms between obedience and revolt, as a ship which the wind
drives one way, and the tide another: desirous they were to displease the
English, but loath to endanger and undo themselves.

Upon advertisement whereof, King Henry sent into Guian, the Lord Thomas Perce
Earl of Worcester, whom he knew to be faithful unto him, and expert in
matters of charge, having in his company a strong and serviceable band of
souldie^s: who not by unseasonable exprobating their fault, but by reason,
convincing it, partly with his wisdom and credit so persuaded, and partly with
his authority and forces so terrified the wavering people, that he wanne them
to his opinion, and confirmed them in their allegiance; the graver sort with
respect of duty and faith, the rest with regard and fear of danger. Then he
received oaths of obedience unto King Henry, and planted certain strong
garrisons in places of chief import, without molestation if they remained
quiet, and yet of force to repress them, if they should rebel. This done, he
turned again into England, where he showed an excellent example of moderation,
in seeming rather to have found, then to have made the Aquitanes dutiful
subjects.

No sooner could this stir be stinted, but another more dangerous and
desperate did forthwith arise: for diverse noble men who either had dissembled,
or did repent the furtherance that they used to the advancement of King Henry,
did conspire together to compass his destruction: the Histories of that time
do vary, concerning the causes of this conspiracy; whether it were for favor
to King Richard, as the nature of man is inclinable, to behold sudden
misfortune with a pitiful eye; or for envy to King Henry, as commonly we can
endure excessive fortune, no where so little as in those that have been in
equal degree with our selves: or whether upon dishonours received in the late
Parliament, or upon disdain to see others go before them in the Princes
favor, many sought to revenge their unjust anger with lewd disloyalty:
likewise it is not assuredly known by what means the workers thereof were
drawn together, and the secret devises of some imparted to the rest: whether
one of them did persuade another to enter into the action, or whether all were
induced by the same unconstant disposition, and light account of faith: which
being once falsed to K. Richard, was afterward upon every light coffeehouse
little respected to any: but concerning these matters, the most curr^nt report
is this.

There was at that time an Abbot of Westminster, one that applied his studies,
not as the most part, to cloak idleness and sloth under the glorious title
of religion, but to enable himself for counsel and direction in public
affairs; who for the general opinion of his wisdom and integrity: was in
good favor and credit with King Richard, and did accompany him in his last
voyage into Ireland.

This Abbot called to his remembrance, a speech which he heard once fall from
King Henry, when he was but Earl of Derby, and not yet come to any great
stayednesse, either in years or judgment; that Princes had too little, and
religious men too much.

At that time the riches of the Church were grown so great, that many began to
look upon them with an envious eye; but lest covetousness should show it
self with open face, policy was pretended, and the excess thought dangerous,
both to the King and also to the Clergy; as very like to cause want to the one,
and wantonness in the other.

Hereupon many bills had been put up in the Parliaments holden in the reign of
King Richard, that provision might be made to repress the increase of
riligious possessions; namely, that inquisition and redress might be had
against such religious persons, as under the license to purchase ten pounds
yearly, did purchase fourscore, or a hundred pounds: and also against such
religious persons as caused their villains to take to their wives free-women,
inheritable, whereby the Lands came to those religious men's hands: yea it was
moved in open Parliament, that the King should seize into his hands, all the
temporal Livings of religious houses, as being rather a burden, then a
benefit unto religion.

Upon these and the like Petitions, the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the
Archbishop of York, for themselves and the Clergy of their Provinces, were
oftentimes compelled to make their solemn protestations in open Parliament,
that if any thing were attempted in restraint of the liberty of the Church,
they would in no wise assent, but utterly withstand the same: the which their
protestations they required to be enrouled.

So partly upon love to King Richard, and partly upon fear, least K. Henry
would be as ready to invade, as he was to inveigh against the richness of
religious houses: this Abbot was the first man that blew the coals and put
fuel to the fire of this confederacy. And first he observed a far off,
then he searched more nearly and narrowly (and yet warely too) how the minds
of certain Noblemen were affected, or rather infected against King Henry;
tempering his speeches in such sort, that if matters sorted to his mind, he
might take them upon him, if his courses were crossed, he might clearly
disclaim them: at last he invited to his house upon a day, in Michaelmas
term, those whom he had sounded to be most sound for his purpose: the chief
of whom were such as in the Parliament before had in some sort been touched in
reputation, although by pardon and reconcilement the harm did seem to be
closed up: their names were John Holland Duke of Exeter, of whom mention has
been made before, Thomas Holland his brothers Son, Duke of Surrey, Edward,
Duke of Aumerle, John Montacute, Earl of Salisbury, Hugh Spencer, Earl of
Gloucester, John Bishop of Caerliele, Sir Thomas Blunt, and Magdalen, one of
King Richards Chapel, who in all points, both of feature and favor, so
nearly resembled King Richard, that the Lords dissembled afterward, that he
was King Richard indeed.

These and some others were highly feasted by the Abbot: and after dinner they
withdrew themselves, into a secret Chamber to counsel: here the Duke of
Exceter, who was most hotly bent, either to restore, or to revenge the cause of
his deposed brother, declared unto the rest, the allegiance that they had
sworn unto King Richard: the honors and preferments whereunto they were by
him advanced: that therefore they were bound both in conscience by the one, and
in kindness by the other, to take his part against all men: that King Henry
contrary to both, had dispoyled him of his royal dignity, and unjustly
possessed himself thereof, whilst they stood looking on, and showed neither
the obedience of subjects, nor love of friends, as though they were men who,
knew to do any thing, better then to defend, and if need were to dye for their
lawful Prince and loving Patron: that King Henry by violent invading, or
fraudulent insinuating himself, into the kingdom of his natural and liege
Prince, was but a tyrant and usurper, and such aone as it was lawful for any
man, by any means to throw down, without respect whether he were a good man or
evil, for it is lawful for no man upon pretense and show of goodness, to draw
sovereignty unto himself; that the laws and examples of best governed
commonwealths, did not only permit this action, but highly honored it with
statues and garlands, and title* of Nobility, and also rewarded it with all the
wealth of the suppressed tyrant: that this enterprise would be very profitable,
and almost necessary to the Commonwealth, by extinguishing those wars which
the Scots menaced* the Frenchmen prepared, and the Welshmen had already begun
upon this occasion and quarrel: that he did not distrust but it might be
accomplished by open arms, but he thought it more sure for them, and for the
Commonwealth more safe, to put first in proof some secret policy: and to that
purpose he devis^, that a solemn Iusts should be challenged, to be keept at
Oxford, in Christmasse holy days, between him and twenty on his part, and the
Earl of Salisbury and twenty on his part, to which King Henry should be
invited: and when he was most intentive in regarding their military disport,
he should suddenly be surprised by men, which without suspicion, might at that
time be assembled, both for number and preparation sufficient for the exployt,
and thereby King Richard presently be restored, both to his liberty, and to his
estate.

This devise was no sooner uttered, then allowed and applauded of the rest of
the confederates: and so resolving upon the Enterprise, they took an oath upon
the Evangelists, the one to be true and secret to the other, even to the hour
and point of death: the Lords also made an Indenture sextiparti^e, wherein they
bound themselves, to do their best assay, for the death of the one King, and
deliverance of the other: this they sealed and subscribed, and delivered to
every Lord a counter-pane of the same: and further they concluded what forces
should be gathered, by whom, how they should be ordered and placed, and to
whose trust the execution should be committed.

When all things were thus contrived, and their hungry ambitious minds were
well filled with the vain winds of hope and desire: the Duke of Exeter came to
the King at Windsore, and desired him for the love that he bare to the noble
feats of Chevalry, that he would vouchsafe to honor with his presence the
martial exercise, that was appointed between him and the Earl of Salisbury,
and to be the Judge of their performances, if any controversy should arise.

The King supposing that to be intended indeed, which was pretended in show,
easily yielded to his request. The Duke supposing his purpose now half
performed, departed to his house, and so did the other consederates* where they
busily bestirred themselves, in raising men, and preparing horse and armor for
the accomplishment of this act.

When the Duchess of Exceter, K. Henry's sister perceived the drift of the
devise, and saw that the Duke was upon his journey: alas good Lady how was she
distracted in mind, with a sharp conflict of her conceits? one way she was
moved wi^h nature toward her brother; another way she was more strongly
stirred, with love toward her Lord and husband: and both ways she was divided
in duty. And what (said she) is this love then against nature? or above it?
shall I be undutifull to my Prince? or is no duty comparable to the duty of a
wife? heigh ho: in what perplexities (wretched woman) am I plunged, to see my
two dearest friends in this case of extremity, that (it is doubtful which but)
certainly one must be ruined by the other. Herewith such a shower of tears
streamed down her cheeks, that it drowned her speech, and stopped the passage
of further complaint: which when the Duke espied, he stepped unto her, and
seazing softly upon her hand, used these words. What Besse? is it kindness to
me, or kindred to your brother that thus has set your eyes on sloate? Content
your self woman, for whatsoever the event shall be, it cannot be evil to
you, nor worse to me then now it is. For if my purpose prevail, and my
brother be restored again to his Crown, both of us shall be sure never to
decline: if it be prevented, and your brother continue still in his estate, no
harm shall be done unto you, and I shall be sure then of that destruction
which I do now continually dread; the fear whereof in expecting, is a greater
torment then the pain in suffering. When he had thus said, he kissed her, and
so leaving her to the torture of a thousand thorny thoughts, he took his
journey toward Oxford, with a great company both of Archers and Horsemen.
There he found all the re^^ of his accomplices, well armed and banded, except
only the Duke of Aumerle.

The King also hearing that both the Challengers and Defendants were in a
readiness, determined the day following to ride to Oxford, according to his
promise and appointment.

Now the confederates much marvelled at the stay of the Duke of Aumerle, some
only blamed his slacknesse, others began to suspect it, every man conjectured
as he was diversely affected between confidence and fear: and in this
confusion of opinions, they sent unto him in post, to know the certain truth.
Before the Messenger came to the Duke, he was departed from Westminster toward
Oxford, not the direct way, but went first to see his Father the Duke of York,
and carried with him the counterpane of the Indenture of confederacy. As they
sat at dinner, the Father espied it in his bosom, and demanded what it was,
the son humbly craved pardon, and said that it nothing touched him; by Saint
George, (quoth the Father) but I will see it: and so whether upon precedent
jealousy, or some present cause of suspicion he took it away from him by
force. When he perceived the contents, he suddenly arose from the table, and
with great fierceness, both of countenance and speech, uttered to his Son
these words.

I see traitor, that idleness has made thee so wanton and mutinous, that thou
playest with thy says, as children do with slicks: thou have been once
already faithless to King Richard, and now again art false to K. Henry, so
that like the fish Sopia, thou troublest all the waters wherein thou live.
Thou know that in open Parliament I became surety and pledge for thy
allegiance, both in body and goods: and can neither thy duty, nor my desert
restrain thee, from seeking my destruction? in faith, but I will rather help
forward thine. With that he commanded his Horses to be made ready, and
presently took his journey toward Windsore, where the King then lay.

The Duke of Aumerle had no time either to consult with his friends, or to
consider with himself what was best to be done: but taking advise upon the
sudden he mounted likewise on horseback, and posted toward Windsore
another way. It was no need to force him forward, his youthful blood, and his
sudden danger were in steed of two wings, to keep his horse in Pegasus pace:
so that he came to Windsore, and was alighted at the Castle, before his stiff
aged Father could come near. Then he entered the gates, and caused them to be
surely locked, and took the keys into his own hands, pretending some secret
cause for which he would deliver them unto the King. When he came in presence
he kneeled down and humbly craved of the King mercy and forgiveness. The King
demanded for what offense? Then with a confused voice and sad countenance,
casting down his eyes as altogether abashed, partly with fear of his danger,
and partly with shame of his discredit; he declared unto the King all the
manner of the conspiracy. The King seemed neither rashly to believe, nor
negligently to distrust the Dukes report; neither stood it with policy to
entertain the discovery with any hard and violent usage: therefore with
gracious speeches he comforted the Duke; and if this be true, said he, we
pardon you: if it be feined, at your extreme peril be it.

By this time the Duke of York was rapping at the C^stle gates, and being
admitted to the Kings presence, he delivered to him the Indenture of
confederacy, which he had taken from his son. When the King had read it, and
was thereby persuaded of the truth of the matter, he was not a little
disquieted in mind, complaining of the unconstant disposition of those men,
whom neither cruelty (he said) could make firm to King Richard, nor clemency
to him, but upon dislike of every present government, they were desirous of any
change. So being possessed with deeper thoughts, then to gaze upon games, he
laid his journey aside, and determined to attend at Windsor, what course his
enemies would take, and which way they would set forward: knowing right well,
that in civil tumults, an advised patience, and opportunity well taken are the
only weapons of advantage; and that it is a special point of wisdom, to make
benefit of the enemies folly. In the mean time he directed his Letters to the
Earl of Northumberland, his high Constable, and to the Earl of Cumberland,
his high Marshall, and to others his most assured friends, concerning these
sudden and unexpected accidents.

The confederates all this time hearing nothing of the Duke of Aumerle, and
seeing no preparation for the Kings coming, were out of doubt that their
treason was betrayed. And now considering that once before they had been
pardoned, the guilt of this their rebellion, excluded them from all hope of
further mercy: whereupon they became desperate, and so resolved to prosecute
that by open arms, wherein their privy practices had failed. And first they
apparelled Magdalen (a man very like to King Richard, both in stature and
countenance, and of years not disagreeable) in princely attire; and gave
forth that he was King Richard, and that either by favor or negligence of his
Keepers, he was escaped out of prison, and desired the faith and aid of his
loving subjects. Then they determined to dispatch messengers to Charles King of
France, to desire his help and assistance on the behalf of his son in law,
if need should require.

The common people which commonly are soon changeable, and on the sudden, as
prone to pity, as they were before excessively cruel, most earnestly wished
the enlargement of King Richard, and earnestly wishing, did easily believe it:
in which imaginary conceit, being otherwise men of no deep search, the
presence of Magdalene most strongly confirmed them, and so either upon
ignorance of truth, or delight in trouble, they joined themselves in great
troops to the Lords: desiring nothing more then to be the means whereby King
Richard should be restored, as in a manner resuming their first affections and
humors toward him* Then the Lords of this association with great force, but
with greater fame, as the manner is of matters unknown, advanced forward in
battle array toward Windsore, against King Henry, as against an enemy of the
common state; having in their company above forty thousand armed men. The King
upon intelligence of their approach, secretly with a few horse, the next sunday
night after New-yeares day, departed from Windsore to the Tower of London, and
the same night before it was day, the confederates came to the Castle of
Windsore: where missing their expected prey, they stood doubtful and divided
in opinions, which way to bend their course. Some advised them with all speed
to follow the King to London, and not to leave him any leave and liberty, to
unite an Army against them: that Winter was no let but in idle and peaceable
times: that in civil dissentions nothing is more safe then speed, and greater
advantage always grows by dispatching then deferring: that whilst some were
in fear, some in doubt, and some ignorant, the City, yea the Realm might
easily be possessed: and that many Armies whose fury at the first rush could
not be resisted by delays, did wear out, and waste to nothing. Others who
would seem to be considerate and wise, but in very deed were no better then
dastards, persuaded rather to set King Richard first at liberty; for if their
counterfeiting should be discovered before they possessed themselves of his
person, the people undoubtedly would fall from them to the certain confusion
of them all. Hereupon they gave over the pursuit, and retired to Colebrooke,
and there delayed out the time of doing, in deliberating, being neither
coutagiously quick, nor considerately stayed, but faintly and fearfully
shrinking back: and when they once began to relent, they decreased every day
more and more both in power and in hope.

King Henry the next morning after he was come to the Tower, sent to the Major
of the City to put Soldiers in arms for his assistance, who presently
presented unto him three thousand Archers, and three thousand bill-men, besides
those that were appointed for defense of the City. The King spent upon him
many good speeches, and liberally loaded him with promises and thanks: and
soon after he issued out of London, with twenty thousand tall men, and came
to Hounslow Heath, abiding there, and as it were daring his enemies to join
issue in the field: contemning their disorderly multitude, as a vain terror
of names without forces. But the confederates, either for fear of the Kings
power, or for distrust of their own, or else lingering, perhaps, after some
succor out of France, refused the encounter; and doubtful it is, whether they
showed greater courage in setting up the danger, or cowardice, in declining it
when it was presented unto them.

So they departed from Colebrooke to Sunnings, a place near Redding, where
Queen Isabell, King Richards wife did then abide: to whom upon the plain truth
before declared fame had falsely descanted, that K. Richard was escaped out of
prison, and did lie at Pomfret with a hundred thousand armed men; and that King
Henry for fear of him, was fled with his children and friends to the Tower of
London. All which was as lightly believed as it was vainly told: whereupon she
defaced King Henry's arms, and plucked away his cognizance from those his
servants that attended upon her; and having in some sort satisfied her
womannish anger, with this harmless spite, she and the Lords departed
together first to Wallingford, and from thence to Abington, stirring the people
by the way to take armor, and to rise in aid of King Richard, who was (said
they) and is, and should be their Prince.

At the last they came to Chichester and there the Lords took their lodgings,
the Duke of Surrey, and the Earl of Salisbury in one Inn; the Duke of Exeter,
and the Earl of Gloucester in another; and all the host encamped in the
fields. But the Bayliffe of the Town, suspecting all this countenance, to be
but the vain flash of a false fire, did in the night with about fourscore
Archers, beset, and set upon the house where the Duke of Surrey, and the Earl
of Salisbury lay; who were men but of weak resistance by nature, but being put
upon necessity, showed great manhood and resistance in defending themselves
against the Townsmen. The Duke of Exeter, and the Earl of Gloucester being in
another Inn, were not able by force to rescue their associates; whereupon a
certain Priest of their company set diverse houses in the Town on fire,
supposing thereby to divert the townsmen from their assault, to the saving of
their houses and of their goods: but this fire greatly inflamed their fury, and
made them more obstinate in their attempt, crying out that they would never
labor to rescue their losses, but to revenge them, and that with the blood of
the Lords, whose flames should be quenched. Then there arose confused
clamours, and noyses, all the town being in an uproare, and in arms, shooting
fiercely, and running upon the Lords with a rash and desperate rage; not caring
to loose many, whereof they had many to spare.

When the Earl of Exeter, and they that were with him, perceived the force of
the assaylants dangerously to increase, and that it was impossible for a few to
sustain the fury of so many so obstinately bent: they fled out of the
backside toward the Camp, intending to bring the whole Army to the rescue:
but the soldiers having heard a tumult, and seeing fire within the town,
supposed that the King was entered with all his puissance: whereupon being
struck with a sudden and false fear, and wanting a Commander of courage to
confirm them, they ran away, and dispearsed themselves without measure; and so
whilst every man endeavored to save himself, all were brought to their
confusion.

Thus the Duke of Surrey, and the Earl of Salisbury, and the Lords, and
Gentlemen which were in their company, were left to defend themselves against
the townsmen as they could: who manfully maintained the fight with great
bloodshed of their enemies, from midnight until three of the clock the next
day in the afternoon: at the last, being inferior both in number and fortune,
the Duke and the Earl were wonded to death and taken, and the same Evening
their heads were stricken off and sent to London: there were also taken Sir
Bennet Shelley, Sir Barnard Brokas, Sir Thomas Blunt, and twenty eight other
Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen, who were sent to Oxford, where the King then
lay, and there were put to execution.

The Duke of Exeter when he found the Army dispersed and fled, fled likewise
with Sir John Shelley into Essex, lamenting the certain destruction which his
rashness had procured to himself, and to his friends, but most especially to
King Richard; if not as a party, yet as a cause of this unhappy tumult; many
times he did attempt to have escaped by Sea into France, but he was always
driven back by distress of weather; and so wandering and lurking in secret
places, he was at the last attached as he sa^e at supper in a certain friend^
house, and led to Plashy, and there shortly after beheaded: so that a man might
probably conjecture that the death of the Duke of Gloucester, was then brought
in reckoning, who by his counsel and contryvance chiefly, in the same place
had been apprehended. An excellent example for all those which measure their
Actions either by their pleasure, or by their power: that revenge of injurious
dealing, although it be prolonged, yet does never fail, but comes surely,
although perhaps slowly. This Duke was a man of high parentage, of a frank
mind, and wealth answerable thereunto: openly praise worthy, but his secret
actions were hardly spoken of: he was of consent to all his brothers vices,
and of counsel to many, yet somewhat the more close and vigilant man: and not
so much partaker of his prosperity, as violently carried with the current of
his misery.

The Earl of Gloucester fled toward Wales* but was forelayed and taken, and
beheaded at Bristow: Magdalen the counterfeit of King Richard, flying into
Scotland, was apprehended and brought to the Tower, and afterward hanged and
quartered, with W. Ferby, another of King Richards Chaplains. Diverse other
Lords and Knights, and Gentlemen, and a great number of mean and base persons,
were in other places put to death; insomuch as the King, though otherwise of a
very temperate, and intreatable nature, seemed to show too hard and haughty
dealing in revenging his own injury, or rather maintaining the injury that he
had done: the heads of the chief conspirators, were pitched upon poles, and
set over London Bridge: in all other parts of the Realm a spectacle both
lamentable and ugly was presented to the view and terror of others: bodies
hewn in pieces, heads and quarters of unfortunate dismembered wretches
putrefying above ground: not all for desert, but many to satisfy, either the
malice, or want of King Henry's friends; insomuch as many grave men openly gave
forth, that in short time there would be cause to wish King Richard again, as
being more tolerable to endure the cruelty of one, then of many, and to live
where nothing, then where any thing might be permitted.

The Abbot of Westminster in whose house, and in whose head the confederacy
began, hearing of these adventures, as he was going between his Monastery and
his Mansion fell suddenly into a palsy, and shortly after without speech
ended his life; and although in this enterprise fortune gave policy the check,
and by a strange accident, which wisdom could not foresee, overturned the
devise, yet is it certainly affirmed, that this Abbot first stirred the stone,
which rolling along, was like to have turned King Henry out of his seat. The
Bishop of Caerliel, was condemned upon this treason, but the extremity of his
fear, and grief, closed up his days, and prevented the violence and shame of
public execution. And now King Richard after he had abdicated his dignity, did
but short time enjoy that sweet security, which he did vainly expect, and
first all his goods which he did give in satisfaction of the injuries that he
had done, were brought to division and share amongst his enemies: shortly after
he was removed from the tower, to the castle of leeds in Kent, and from thence
to Pomfret, to the end that by often changing he might either more secretly be
dispatched, or more uncertainely found: here being kept in straight prison,
both innocent and ignorant of this offense, he was notwithstanding made a
party in the punishment. For King Henry perceiving that the Lords so far
prevailed with their late stratagem, that if their stomach had been answerable
to their strength, and their bold beginning had not ended in faintness and
sloth, they might have driven him to a hard hazard; caused King Richard to be
put to death, intending to make sure, that no man should cloak open rebellion,
under the color of following sides, nor countenance his conspiracy, either
with the person or name of K. Richard: whether he did expressly command his
death, or no, it is a question; out of question he showed some liking and
desire to the action, and gave allowance thereto when it was done.

The most current report at that time went, that he was princely served every
day at the Table, with abundance of costly meats, according to the order
prescribed by Parliament, but was not suffered to taste or touch any one of
them; and so perished of famine; being tormented with the presence of that,
whereof he dyed for want, but such horrible and unnatural cruelty, both
against a King and a kins-man, should not proceed from King Henry (me think)
a man of a moderate and mild disposition, nor yet from any other mind, which is
not altogether both savage in humanity, and in religion profane. One writer
who would seem to have the perfect intellgence of these affairs, makes
report, that King Henry sitting at his Table sad and pensive, with a deep sigh
brake forth into these words: Have I no faithful friend that will deliver me
of him, whose life will breed destruction to me and disturbance to the Realm,
and whose death will be a safety and quiet to both? for how can I be free from
fear, so long as the cause of my danger does continue? and what security, what
hope shall we have of peace, unless the seed of sedition be utterly rooted
out.

Upon this speech a certain Knight called Sir Pierce of Extone, presently
parted from the Court, accompanied with eight tall men, and came to Pomfret,
and there commanded, that the Esquire, who was accustomed to sewe, and take the
assay before King Richard, should no more use that manner of service: and let
him (quoth he) now eat well, for he shall not eat long* King Richard sat
down to dinner, and was served without courtesy or assay, whereat he
marvelled; and demanded of the Esquire, why he did not his duty? the Esquire
answered, that he was otherwise commanded by Sir Pierce of Extone, who was
lately come from King Henry. The King being somewhat moved at his act and
answer, took the carving knife in his hand, and struck the Esquire therewith
lightly on the head, saying, the devil take Henry of Lancaster and thee
together: with that Sir Pierce entered the Chamber, with eight men in harneys,
every one having a bill in his hand: Whereupon King Richard perceiving their
drift and his own danger, put the table from him, and st^pping stoutly to the
foremost man, wrested the bill ^ut of his hand, wherewith (although unarmed and
alone) he manfully defended himself a good space, and slew four of his
as^aylants. Sir Pierce lept to the Chair where King Richard was wont to sit,
whilst the rest chased him about the Chamber. At the last being forced toward
the place where Sir Pierce was, he with a stroke of his Pollax felled him to
the ground: and forthwith he was miserably rid out of his miserable life. It
is s^id that at the point of his death, he gathered some spirit, and with a
faint and feeble voice, groaned forth these words.

My great Grandfather King Edward the second, was in this manner deposed,
imprisoned, and murdered; by which means my Grandfather King Edward the third
obtained possession of the Crown; and now is the punishment of that injury
powered upon his next successor. Well, this is right for me to suffer, but not
for you to do: your King for a time may joy at my death, and enjoy his desire;
but let him qualify his pleasures with expectation of the like justice: for
God who measures all our actions by the malice of our minds, will not suffer
this violence unrevenged.

Whether these words proceeded from a distempered desire, or from the judgment
of his fore sight^, they were not altogether idle and vain. For Sir Pierce
expecting great favor and rewards for his ungracious service, was frustrated
of both, and not only missed that countenance for which he hoped, but lost
that which before he had: so odious are vices even where they are profitable.

Hereupon he grew at the first discontented, and afterward mightily turmoyled
and tormented in conscience, and raging against himself would often exclayme,
that to pleasure one unthankefull person, he had made both him self and his
posterity, hateful and infamous to all the world.

King Henry with great coffeehouse and disquiet held the Kingdom during his
life: and so did his son King Henry the fifth: in whose time by continual
wars against the Frenchmen, the malice of the humor was otherwise exercised
and spent. But his second successor King Henry the sixth was dispossessed
thereof* and together with his young son Henry, imprisoned and put to death,
either by the commandment* or connivence of King Edward the fourth.

And he also escaped not free; for he dyed not without many and manifest
suspicions of poison: and after his death his two sons were disinherited,
imprisoned, and butchered by their cruel Uncle the Duke of Glou^ester, who
being a Tyrant and Usurper, was lawfully shine in the field; and so in his
person (having no issue) the tragedy did end. Which are most rare and
excellent examples, both of comfort to them that are oppressed, and of terror
to violent D^alers; that God in his secret judgment does not always so
certainly provide for our safety, as revenge our injuries and harms: and that
all our unjust actions have a day of payment, and many times by way of
retaliation, even in the same manner and measure wherein they were committed.

And thus was king Richard brought to his death, by violence and force, as all
Writers agree, although al agree not upon the manner of the violence. He was a
man of personage, rather well proportioned then tall, of great beauty, and
grace, and comeliness in presence; he was of a good strength, and no abject
spirit; but the one by ease, the other by flattery were much abased. He
deserved many friends, but found few, because he sought them more by
liberality, then virtuous dealing He was mavelous unfortunate in all his
actions, which may very well be imputed to his negligence and sloth; for he
that is not provident can seldom prosper, but by his looseness will lose,
whatsoever fortune, or other men's labors do cast upon him. At the last he
was driven to such distress, that he accounted it as a benefit, to be
disburdened of his royal dignity, for which other men will not stick, to put
their goods, and lives, and souls in hazard.

He lived three and thirty years, and reigned two and twenty. His dead body
was embalmed, and seared, and covered with Lead all save his face, and carried
to London, and in all the chief places by the way, his face was uncovered and
shown, that by view thereof no doubt should be made concerning his death. At
London he had a solemn obsequie kept in the Cathedral Church of Saint Paul,
the King being present, and all the chief men of the City.

Then he was conveyed to Langley Abbey in Buckinghamshire, about twenty miles
from London, and there obscurely enterred by the Bishop of Chester, the Abbot
of S. Albones, and the Abbot of Waltham, without presence of noblemen, without
confluence of the common people, and without the charge of a dinner for
celebrating the Funerals: but afterwarward at the commandment of King Henry
the fifth, his body was taken up, and removed to Westminster, and honorably
entombed amongst his ancestors, with Queen Anna his wife, in expiation (as it
is like) of his Fathers violent and unfaithful dealing. So he whose life was
always tumultuous and unquiet, could not readily find rest for his bones, even
after death. It was not amiss in regard of the Commonwealth that he was
dead; yet they who caused his death had small reason to reckon it among their
good deeds.

And thus do these and the like accidents daily happen to such Princes as will
be absolute in power resolute in will, and dissolute in life.

This year Humfrey, the son and heir of the Duke of Gloucester, dyed of the
plague; as he returned out of Ireland, where King Richard had left him
prisoner and shortly after the Duchess his Mother with violence of grief
ended her days: this year also dyed Thomas Mowbray the Exiled Duke of
Norfolk, whose death would much have been lamented, if he had not furthered
so many lamentable deaths: but he over-lived his honor, and saw himself
accounted a person infamed and of no estimation. Likewise about this time, John
Duke of Britain deceased, who had taken to wife Mary daughter to King Edward
the third, and by her had no issue, but by Joan his second wife, he left
behind him three sons, John, Richard, and Arthur: this Joan was afterward
married to King Henry: as hereafter shall appear. Also this year Edmund Duke
of York departed this life, his honor not slayned, his fame not touched: he
was a man very circumspect and wary in his carriage, not careless of a good
fame, nor greedy after a great: of other men's wealth not desirous, liberal of
his own, and of the common, sparing: he did not by obstinate opposing
himself against the current of the time, rashly hasten, either his fame, or
his fall; but by moderation attained safely that degree of praise, and honor,
which others aspiring unto by desperate courses, wanne with ambitious death,
without any other profit at all. He left behind him two noble sons, express
resemblancers of his integrity: Edward, who succeeded in his dignity, and
before was called Duke of Aumerle, and Richard Earl of Cambridge. Edward, in
the change of the state, neither constantly kept his fidelity, nor stoutly
maintained his treason. Richard took to wife the daughter and heir of Roger
Mortimer, whose mother Phillip was sole daughter and heir to Lionell Duke of
Clarence, the third son of King Edward the third, by which title and descent,
his posterity claimed the Crown and Kingdom of this Realm from the
successors of King Henry, as hereafter more at large shall be declared.

Charles King of France lost no time all this while in making preparation to
invade England: and to that end had now raised an Army royal, which was
brought down into Picardie, and in a readiness to have been transported. But
it is very like that this haste for the deliverance of King Richard did the
more hasten his death: upon news whereof the Frenchmen perceiving their
purpose for his restitution to be to no purpose, gave over the enterprise;
some being grieved that the occasion was lost of making spoil of so plentiful
a country, others being well content to be discharged of that hope, together
with the hazard whereupon it depended. Shortly after the French King sent a
solemn Embassage into England, to treat, or rather entreat, that Lady Isabel
his daughter, who had been espoused to King Richard, might with her dowry be
restored to him again. King Henry most honorably received these Ambassadors,
and gave in answer, that he would speedily send his Commissioners to Calice,
which should fully commune and conclude with them, both of this and other
weighty affairs concerning both the Realms.

Not long after he sent Edward Duke of York, and Henry Earl of
Northumberland to Calice: Also the French King sent the Duke of Burbone, and
certain others to Bulleine. These Commissioners did often meet, sometimes at
one place, and sometimes at another: the Frenchmen especially required, that
Lady Isabell should be restored, showing that King Charles her Father had given
in charge, that this before all matters, and without this nothing should be
concluded. On the other side the Englishmen desired that she might be married
to Henry Prince of Wales, King Henry's eldest son, a man answerable to her in
equal degree, both of blood and of years: but the French King denied that he
would any more join affinity with the English nation, whose aliance had once
so unfortunately succeeded: then they entered into speech of a perpetual peace,
but hereto the Frenchmen would not agree. In the end it was concluded that Lady
Isabell should be delivered to King Charles her Father, but without Dower;
because the marriage between King Richard and her, was never consummate: by
reason whereof she was not donable by the very treaty of the marriage. Also
the surcease of arms which four years before had been made with King
Richard, for the term of thirty years, was continued and confirmed for the
time then unexpired. Some Authors affirm, that a new truce was taken, but
these also are at difference: for some report that it was during the life of
both the Kings; others, that it was but for a short time, which has the more
appearance of truth, by reason of the open hostility which the year following
did break forth between the two Realms.

Shortly after King Henry sent the Lady Isabel under the conduct of Lord Thomas
Piercy Earl of Worcester, in Royal estate to Calis: she was accompanied with
a great troop of honorable personages, both men and women; and carried with
her all the Jewels and Plate which she brought into England, with a great
surplusage of rich gifts bestowed upon her by the King: at Calis she was
received by the Earl of S. Paul, Lieutenant for the French King in Picardy,
and by him was conducted to King Charles her Father, who afterward gave her in
marriage to Charles Son to Le^es Duke of Orleances* and so was either rest,
or respite of wars procured in France, whilst nearer stirs might be
brought to some stay.

For within the Realm, the fire and fury of the late sedition was scarcely
quenched and quiet, but (that the Commonwealth should not cease to be torn,
by multiplying of divisions, one straight succeeding another) the Welshmen,
upon advantage of the doubtful and unsettled estate of King Henry, resolved to
break and make a defection; before either the King could ground his authority,
or the people frame themselves to a new obedience: and having learned that
common causes must be maintained by concord, they sought by assemblies to
establish an association: and to set up their own principality again.

To this purpose they created for their Prince, Owen Glendor an Esquire of
Wales, a factious Person, and apt to set up division and strife: and although
he was of no great state in birth; yet was he great and stately in stomach:
of an aspiring Spirit: and in wit somewhat above the ordinary of that untrained
people: bold, crafty, active, and as he listed to bend his mind, mischievous
or industrious in equal degree, in desires immoderate, and rashly adventurous,
in his young years he was brought up to the study of the Common law of the
Realm, at London: and when he came to man's estate, besides a natural
fierceness and hatred to the English name, he was particularly incensed by a
private suite, for certain lands in controversy, between the Lord Gray of
Ruthen and him; wherein his title was overthrown; and being a man by nature
not of the mildest, by this provocation he was made savadge and rough;
determining either to repair or to revenge his loss, by setting the whole
state on fire. Also his expense and liberality had been too excessive for a
great man to endure, which brought him to bareness, too base for a mean man
to bear: and therefore he must of necessity do and dare somewhat, and more
danger there was in soft and quiet dealing, then in hazarding rashly. Herewith
opportunity was then likewise presented: for trouble sometimes are most fit for
great attempts, and some likelihood there was, whilst the King and the Lords
were hard at variance, that harm might easily be wrought to them both. Upon
these causes his desire was founded, and upon these troubles his hope. But that
his aspiring and ambitious humor might bear some show of honest meaning, he
pretended to his Countrymen the recovery of their free estate, the desire
whereof was so naturally sweet, that even wild birds will rather live hardly
at large in the air, then be daintily dieted by others in a Cage; and
opportunity was at that time fitly offered, or else never to be expected, to
rid them of their thraldom, falsely and colourably entitled a peace, whilst
the one Kings power was waining, and the other not yet fully wexen, and either
of them grew weak by wasting the other: neither was their any difference which
of them should prevail, since the war touched both alike, insomuch as the
overthrow would ruin the one, and the victory the other; So he exhorted them
to take courage and arms: and first to kill all the English within their
territories, for liberty and Lords could not endure together: then to resume
their ancient customs and laws, whereby more then arms, Commonwealths are
established and enlarged: so should they be a people incorrupt, without
admixion of foreign manners of blood; and so should they forget servitude,
and either live at liberty or else perhaps, be Lords over other.

Hereupon many flocked unto him, the best for love of liberty, the basest for
desire of booty and spoil, insomuch as in short time he became Commander of
competent forces to stand openly in the field. And being desirous to make some
proof of his prowess, he sharply set upon his old adversary Reignold Lord
Gray of Ruthen, whose possessions he wasted and spoiled; slew many of his men,
and took himself prisoner; yet gave him fair and friendly entertainment, and
promised him releasement, if he would take his Daughter to wife. This he
desired, not so much for need of his ability or aid, as supposing that the name
and countenance of a Lord, would give reputation to the house that was then ^ut
in rising: but the Lord Gray at the first did not so much refuse as scorn the
offer: affirming that he was no ward, to have his marriage obtruded upon him.
Well (said Owen Glendore) although you be not my ward, yet are you in my ward:
and the suing your livery will cost double the marriage money that elsewhere
you shall procure. The Lord Gray being not very rich to discharge his ransom,
and seeing no other means of his deliverance, at the last accepted the
condition, and took the Damsel to wife; notwithstanding his deceitful
Father in law, trifled out the time of his enlargement until he died.

The Welshmen being confident upon this success, began to break into the
borders of Hereford-shire, and to make spoil and prey of the Country: against
whom Lord Edmund Mortimer Earl of March, who for fear of King Henry had
withdrawn himself (as has been declared) to Wigmore Castle, assembled all
the Gentlemen of the Country, and meeting with the Welchmen, they joined
together a sharp and cruel conflict* not in form of a loose skirmish, but
standing still and maintaining their place, they endeavored with maine might
to break and bear down one another. The courage and resolution of both sides
was alike, but the Welshmen were superior both for number and direction: for
they were conducted by one known Leader, who with his presence every where
assisted at need, enflaming his soldiers, some with shame and reproof, others
with praise and encouragement, all with hope and large promises: but the
Englishmen had no certain general, but many confused Commanders, yea every
man was a Commander to himself, pressing forward or drawing back, as his own
courage or fear did move him. Insomuch as no doubt they had taken a great blow
that day* by their ill governed boldness, had not Owen Glendor presently upon
the breaking up of the field, ceased to pursue the execution, and showed
himself more able to get a victory, then skillful to use it. But even to his
side the victory had cost blood, and many of those which remained, were either
wounded or weary: the night was near also, and they were in their enemies
Country; by which means our men had liberty to retire rather then run away,
no man being hot to follow the chase. They lost of their company about a
thousand men, who sold their lives at such a price, that when manhood had done
the hardest against them, certain mannish, or rather devilish women, whose
malice is immortal, exercised a vain revenge upon their dead bodies; in
cutting off their privy parts and their noses, whereof the one they stuffed in
their mouths, and pressed the other between their buttocks; and would not
suffer their mangled carcasses to be committed to the earth, until they were
redeemed with a great sum of money. By which cruel covetousness, the
faction lost reputation and credit with the moderate sort of their own people;
suspecting that it was not liberty but licentiousness which was desired: and
that subjection to such unhumane minds would be more insupportable then any
bondage.

In this conflict, the Earl of March was taken prisoner and fettered with
chains, and cast into a deep and vile dungeon. The King was solicited by many
Noble men, to use some means for his deliverance; but he would not hear on
that ear; he could rather have wished him and his two sisters in Heaven, for
then the only blemish to his title had been out of the way: and no man can
tell whether this mischance did not preserve him from a greater mischief.

Owen Glendore* by the prosperous success of his actions, was grown now more
hard to be dealt with, and hautely minded, and stood even upon terms of
equality with the King* whereupon he proceeded further to invade the Marches of
Wales on the West side of Severne; where he burnt many Villages and Towns,
slew much people, and returned with great prey, and praises of his adherents.
Thus he ceased not this year to infest the borderers on every side, amongst
whom he found so weak resistance, that he seemed to exercise rather a spoil
then a war. For King Henry was then detained with his chiefest forces, in
another more dangerous service, which besides these former vexations* and
hazards, this first year of his reign happened unto him.

For the Scots knowing that changes were times most apt for attempt, and upon
advantage of the absence of all the chief English borderers, partly by
occasion of the Parliament, and partly by reason of the plague which was very
grievous that year in the North parts of the Realm: they made a road into the
Country of Northumberland, and there committed great havoc and harm. Also on
a certain night, they suddenly set upon the Castle of Work, the Captain
whereof Sir Thomas Gray, was then one of the Knights of the Parliament: and
having slain the watch partly a sleep, partly amazed with fear, they brake
in and surprised the place: which they held a while, and at the last spoiled
and ruinated and then departed. Whilst further harms were feared, this passed
with light regard. But when great perils were past, as if no worse misfortune
could have befallen, then was it much sorrowed and lamented. And in revenge
thereof, the Englishmen invaded and spoiled certain Islands of Orkney: and so
the loss was in some sort repaired: yet (as in the reprisals of war it
commonly falls out) neither against those particular persons which committed
the harm, nor for those which suffered it: but one for another were both
recompensed and revenged. Again, the Scots set forth a fleet, under the
conduct of Sir Robert Logon, with direction to attempt as occasion should be
offered: his first purpose was against our Fishermen; but before he came to any
action, he was incountred by certain English ships, and the greatest part of
his fleet taken. Thus peace still continuing between both the Realms, a kind
of theevish hostility was daily practiced, which afterward brake out into open
war upon this occasion.

George of Dunbarre Earl of the Marches of Scotland, had betrothed Elizabeth
his Daughter to David, the Son and Heir apparent of Robert King of Scots,
and in regard of that marriage to be shortly celebrated and finished, he
delivered into the Kings hands a great sum of money for his Daughters dowry.
But Archibald Earl Dowglasse disdaining that the Earl of Marches blood should
be preferred before his, so wrought with King Robert, that Prince David his
Son refused the Earl of Marches Daughter, and took to wife Mariell Daughter
to the Earl Dowglasse: Earl George not used to offers of disgrace, could
hardly enforce his patience to endure this scorn: and first he demanded
restitution of his money, not so much for care to obtain, as for desire to
pick an occasion of breaking his allegiance. The King would make to him neither
payment nor promise, but trifled him off with many delusory and vain delays:
Whereupon he fled with all his family into England, to Henry Earl of
Northumberland, intending with open disloyalty both to revenge his indignity,
and recover his loss. The Englishmen with open arms entertained the
opportunity; with whose help and assistance, the Earl made diverse incursions
into Scotland, where he burnt many Towns, and slew much people, and daily
purchased with his sword, great abundance of booty and spoil.

Hereupon King Robert deprived the Earl of his honor, s^ized all his goods
and possessions, and wrote unto King Henry, as he would have the truce
between them any longer to continue; either to deliver unto him, the Earl of
March and other Traitors to his person and state, or else to banish them the
Realm of England. King Henry perceiving such jarres to jogger between the two
Realms, that the peace was already as it were out of joint, determined not to
lose the benefit of the discontented Subjects of his enemy: whereupon he
returned an answer to the Herald of Scotland, that he was neither weary of
Peace, nor fearful of Wars, and ready as occasion should change, either to
hold the one, or hazard the other: but the word of a Prince was of great
weight; and therefore since he had granted a safe conduct to the ^arle of March
and his company, it were an impeachment to his honor, without just cause to
violate the same. Upon this answer the King of Scots did presently proclaim
open war against the King of England, with blood, fire, and sword.

King Henry thought it policy, rather to begin the war in his enemies
Country, then to expect it in their own, because the Land which is the seat
of the war, does commonly furnish both sides with necessary supply; the
friend by contribution, and the enemy by spoil* Therefore sending certain
Troops of horsemen before him, both to espy and to induce an uncertain
terror upon the enemy, he entered into Scotland with a puissant army;
wherewith he burnt many Villages and Towns, cast down diverse Castles, and
ruined a great part of the Towns of Edenborough* and Lith, sparing nothing but
Churches and religious houses: so that in all places as he passed, the
spectacle was ougly and grisly which he left behind him; bodies torn in
pieces, mangled and putrified limbs, the air infected with stinck, the ground
imbrued with corruption and blood, the Country wasted, the Grass and Corn
trodden down and spoiled; insomuch as a man would have said that war is an
exercise not of manhood, but of inhumanity. They that fled before the army,
filled all places with fear and terror, extolling above truth the English
forces, to diminish thereby their shame in running from shame.

In the end of September, the King besieged the Castle of Maidens in
Edenborough; wherein were David Duke of Rothsay Prince of the Realm, and
Archibald Earl Dowglasse; the inconstancy of the one, and ambition of the
other, were principal causes of all this war.

During this siege, Robert Duke of Albony, who was appointed Governor of the
Realm, because the King was sick and unable to rule, sent an Herald unto
Henry; assuring him upon his honor that if he would abide but six days at
the most, he would give him battle; and either remove the siege, or loo^e
his life.

The King was well pleased with these tidings, and rewarded the Herald with a
gown of silk, and a chain of gould, and promised him in the word of a
Prince, to abide there and expect the Governor, during the time by him
prefixed.

The six days passed almost six times over, and no more news was heard of the
Governor, either by presence, or by messenger. Winter came on, and victuaile
failed, the Country was cold and fruitless, and it rained every day in great
abundance; so that partly by hunger, partly by distemperature of the weather,
the Soldiers be^anne to dye of the Flixe; it is very like that these accidents
stayed the Governor from performing his promise, for policy was against it, to
hazard his men in the field, when Winter and want, two forceable foes had given
the charge upon his enemies: certain it is, that they moved the King to remove
his siege, and to depart out of Scotland, without any battle or skirmish
offered.

Both the Wardens of the Marches were all this time in Scotland with the King:
upon which advantage the Scots did break into Northumberland, and burnt
certain Towns in Bamborough Shire. The Englishmen were speedily up in arms;
but the Scots more speedily made their return, or else no doubt they had been
met with, and encountered.

Again when King Henry had discharged his army, the Scots being desirous not
so much of life as of revenge, made a sudaine road into England, under the
conduct of Sir Thomas Halibarton of Dirleton, and Sir Patrick Hebburne, of
Hales: but all the harm which they wrought did rather waken then weaken the
Englishmen: and they themselves were somewhat encouraged, but nothing
enriched, by that which they got.

Not long after, Sir Patrick Hebburne, being lifted up in desire and hope,
resolved to undertake a greater enterprise: the people, which are easily led by
prosperous success, in great Companies resorted to him; but he was loath to
have more fellows in the spoil, then he thought should need in the danger:
therefore with a competent army of the men of Loughdeane, he invaded
Northumberland, where he made great spoil, and loaded his Soldiers with
prisoners and prey. There was no question made what peril might be in the
return: Therefore they marched loosely and licentiously as in a place of great
security, not keeping themselves to their ensigns and order: but the Earl of
Northumberlands Vice-warden, and other Gentlemen of the borders in good array,
set upon them at a Town in Northumberland called Nesbit. The Scots rallied as
well as the suddenness did serve, and valiantly received the charge; so that
the battle was sharp and cruel, and continued a good time, with great
mortality. In the end, the enemies ranks grew thin, as being rather
confusedly shuffled together, then orderly and firmly compacted: and when the
Vice-warden felt them weak in the shock, and yielding under his hand, with a
company which he purposely retained about him for sudden dispatches and
chances of war, he fiercely charged and disordered them. Sir Patrick
Hebburne being clean destitute both of Counsel and courage ran up and
down from one place to another, commanding many things, and presently
forbidding them again; and the less of force his directions were, the oftener
did he change them: anon (as it happens in lost and desperate cases) every
man became a Commander, and none a putter in execution: so the ranks loosed
and brake, and could not be reunited, the victour hotly pursuing the
advantage. Then might you have seen a grievous spectacle, pursuing, killing,
wounding, and taking, and killing those that were taken, when better were
offered: every where weapons, and dead bodies, and mangled limbs lay
scattered: and sometimes in those that were slain, appeared at their death
both anger and valor.

Sir Patrick Hebburne thought of nothing less then either fleeing or yielding,
but thrusting among the thickest of his enemies, honorably ended his life.
Many other of his lineage, and the flower of all Loughdeane were likewise
slain.

There were also taken, Sir John and William Cockburne, Sir Wil^iam Basse, John
and Thomas Hab^incton Esquires, and a great multitude of common soldiers.

On the English side, no great number was slain; and those of no great service
and degree. And with these troubles the life and reign of King Henry the
fourth ended.

FINIS.

