THE COURAGEOUS SEAMENS LOYAL HEALTH. Or, an Answer to Dub, a dub, a dub, etc.
To the Tune of The Granadeers Loyal Health.
This may be Printed, R. P.







SHall the Granadeer-Boys Proclaim
Their Loyalty to the Royal Train,
And we who belong to the Ocean Main,
now forget our Loyalty?
No, no, it never never shall be said.
That we who uphold now the National Trade,
Was ever yet, or will be afraid
of the greatest forces by Sea?
Against all those that dare inhance,
Our Courage we will soon advance,
We never feared the Power of France,
like Hero's we will fight
For Royal James, whom we adore,
Our thundering Cannons they shall roar,
We'll Chase them to the veen^ (...),
that dare to oppose his (...)
ONce our Enemies hold extremes,
Was Conquered by our Princely Royal James,
He rouzed them up from their Drowsy Dreams,
then with many a fair Broadside;
Making a thundering noble noise,
A Harmony for your Warlike Boys,
Lifted them up with a thousand Joys,
when we vanquished all their Pride.
Our Enemies did then look pale,
We through and through their Fleet did Sail,
Our Bullets flew as thick as Hail,
which proved their fatal bane:
We gave them many a heavy s^roast,
And filled their Fleet with Flame and Smoale,
Sure, sure they never will provoke
him to anger now again.
Now a Bowl of Punch, Boys, we'll make,
To Drink for Royal James his sake,
Who never feared to make them quake,
that Dare to invade the Land;
He was the Glory of all our Pride,
In Battle upon the Main Ocean wide,
With whom our Courage and Valor was tried,
and under his great command;
Now since our Gracious Prince is Crowned,
Boys, let his Royal Health go round,
With bended Knees upon the Ground,
and to all his Princely Train;
Courageous Seamen bold and stout,
We Will Drink his Royal Health about,
And when the Liquor is all out,
Boys, wash then and fill again.
When our Captain he calls us, then
We'll quit our selves like most undaunted Men's,
Never, never is there one in ten,
But what will express their joy.
Let the Granadeers Guard at home,
While we on the Marvel Main do rome,
Where Neptune himself does fret and some,
we value not the annoy:
With more than ordinary Delight,
We Plow the Ocean Day and Night,
To bring home Bacchus here to Fight,
he is worthy to be preferred:
For why most Noble Hearts of Gold,
He Will make them scorn to be controlled,
And when they are both faint and cold,
he will cheer them upon their Guard.
Printed for J. Back, at the Black-Boy, on London-bridges.


