THE FORM OF GOVERNMENT OF THE KINGDOM OF ENGLAND: Collected out of the
fundamental Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom.

Wherein is manifested the customary uses of the Kings of England upon all
occasions, either of Marriage, Peace or War, to call their Peers and Barons
of the Realm to be bartners in Treatizes, and to give their juditious advice:
the State and security of the whole Kingdom depending upon such Counsels and
determinations.

Likewise the names of the Kings, and the times when such Parliaments were
called, and the Acts that passed upon those and the like occasions. Henry 1
John Henry 3 Edward 1 Edward 2 Edward 3 Richard 2 Henry 4 Henry 5 Henry 6
Edward 4 Henry 7 Henry 8


Pulished for the satisfaction of all those, that desire to know the manner and
form of the Government of the Land, and the fundamental Laws of the
Kingdom.

London, Printed for Tho. Banks, 1642.

That the Kings of England have been pleased usually to consult in their great
Counsels of Marriage, Peace, and War with their Peers and Commons in
PARLIAMENT.
TO search so high as the Norman Conquest, it is necessary to lay down the
form of Government of those times, wherein the State of affairs led in
another form of public Councels: For the people (wrought under the Sword of
the first William, William the Conqueror.
and his followers, to a subjected Vassaladge) could not possess in such
Assemblies the Right of their former Liberties, Divisions and Power having
mastered them, and none of their old nobility and Heads, being left either of
credit or fortunes. Domesday.


What he retained not in providence as the Demeasnes of the Crown) or reserved
in Piety (as the maintenance of the Church) he parted to those Strangers that
sailed along with him, in that Barque of his Adventure; Edmerus.
leaving the Natives for the most part (as it appears by his Survey) in no
better condition, then villainy; moulding their Customs to the manner of his
own Country; and forbore to grant the Laws of Saint Edward, Huntington.
so often called for.

Ex Libro feodorum in Sccio.
To supply his occasions of men, money, and p^o(...)on; he ordered that all
those, that enjoyed any fruit of his Conquest, should hold their Lands
proportionable by so many Knights fees of the Crown; admitted them to enseoffe
their followers of such part^ (as they pleased) of their own portions, Hen. 1.
stat. Ex Libro rubro Sccij. Chronicon de Durst^ble.
which to ease their charge they did in his and his sons time by two
Feoffments, the one de novo, the other de veteri. This course provided him of
the body of his war; the money and Provision was by headage assested the
common people by the consent of their Lords; who held in all their Seigniories
such Right of Regalitie, as to their Vassalles; so as (says Paris) quot
Domini, Paris. Benedict. monac. in vita. H^n. 2. Gervasins Doubo.
tot Tyranni: and proved to the King so great a curb and restraint of power,
that nothing f^ll into the Care of Majesty afterward more, then ^o retrench
the force of this Aristocracy, that was in time like to strang^e the Monarchy.

Though others foresaw the mischief betimes, yet none attempted the remedy,
John.
until King John, whose overhastie undertaking brought in those broils of the
Barrons wars. Roger Wendon.
There needed not before this any ca^e to advise with the Commons in all
public Assembly, when every man in England by Tenure, held himsel^e ^o his
great Lords will, whose presence was ever required in those Counsels; and in
whose assent his dependant Tenants consent was ever included.

Before this Kings time then we seek in vain for any Commons called, they
were called ever for making of Laws, but not to consult touching war or
Peace The first (as may be gathered) though darkely) by the Records) that used
their Counsels and Assents, was t^is King in the sixth year of his Reign:
Claus. 6. Io. in dors.
here are the first summons on record to the Peers or Barrons, tractaturi de
magnis and ardius negotiis. It was about a war of defense against the French.
And that the Commons were admitted at this time, may fitly be gathered by the
ordinance; Provisum est communi assensu Archiepiscoporum, Claus. 6, Io. pt. 2.
in dors.
Comitam, Baronum, and aliorum fidelium nostrorum Angliae, quod nomen milites
Angliae invenirent decimum, etc. And this was directed to all the Shirefs in
England. The ancient use in public laws.

From this time, there is a breach until 18. Hen. 3. where the next Summons
extant, is in a Plea Roll of that year, Hen. 3. Plita de Bau co. 18. Hen. 3
but the ordinances are lost, from thence the Records afford us no light until
the 49 of the same King, where then the Summons to the Bishops, Lords, Knights,
and Burgesses are much in manner, Claus. 49. Hen. 3. iij. An. 11. Dors
though not in matter alike to the use in our times, this Parliament was called
to advise with the King pro pace assecuranda and firmanda, they are the words
of the writ; and where advice is required, consultation must be admitted.

To this King succeeded Edward the first, his Son, Edw. 1.
a wise, just, and fortunate Prince. In his Reign we have no light of public
Council of this kind; And so along to the fourth of his Granchild, Ex Rot.
part in Archinis Loud.
but what we borrow out of the Rolls of Summons, wherein the form stood
various according to the occasions, until it grew constant in the form it is,
about the entering of Richard the second, the Journall Rolls being spoiled by
the injury of time or private ends.

This King in the fifth of his Reign called a Parliament, Claus 5. Edw. 1. iij.
12. Dors.
and therein advised with his Lords and Commons, for suppressing Llewellin
Prince of Wales: And hearing that the French King intended to invade some
pieces of his inheritance in France, Claus. 7. E. 1 iij. 3. Dors.
summoned a Parliament ad tractandum, ordinandum, and faciendum cum Prelatis,
Proceris and aliis Inco^is Regni, quomodo huiusmodi periculis and excogitatis
militiis sit obviandum; inserting in the writ, that it was Lex notissima and
provida circumspectione stabilita, that that quod omnes tangit, Claus. 34. E.
1. Dors.
abomnibus approbaretur. In the thirty fourth of his Reign super ordinatione
and stabilimento Regni Scotie, he made the like convention.

His Son, Edw. 2.
the second Edward, pro solempnitate Sponsalium and Coronationis, consulted
with his people in his first year, Claus. 1. E. 2. iij. 19.
in his sixth year, super diversis negotiis statuum Regni and expeditione
Guerre Scotie specialiter tangentibus, he assembled the States to advise:
Claus. 6. E. 2. iij. 3.
the like he did in his eight year. The French King having invaded Gascoigne
in the thirteenth year, Claus. 8. E. 2. iij. 3.
the Parliament was called super arduis negotiis Statuum ducatus Vasconie
tangentibus; Claus. 13, E. 2. iij. 13. Dors.
And in the sixteenth to consult ad refraenandum Scotorum obstinantiam and
malitiam. Claus. 16. E. 2. iij. 27.


Before Edward the third would resolve in his first year, whether Peace or
war with the Scottish King; Edw. 3. Claus. 1. E. 3.
he summoned the Peers and Commons super praemissis tractare and concilium
impendere.

The Chancellor Anno the fifth declares from the King, Rotl. Parl. 5. Edw. 3.
the cause of that Assemby, that it was to consult and resolve, whether the
King should proceed with France for recoverie of his Seignories, by Alliance of
marriage, or by war? And whether to redress the disobedience of the Irish,
he should pass in person or not?

Parl. 6. E. 3.
The year following he resembled his Lords and Commons, and required their
advice, whether he should undertake the holy Expedition with the French King,
or no? The Bishops and Proctors of the Clergy would not be present, as
forbidden by their Canons such Councels. The Peers and Commons consult,
applauding the Religious and Princely forwardness of their Sovereign to this
holy enterprise, but humbly advise forbearance this year, for urgent reasons.

The same year though at another Session, the King demanding the advice of
his people, whether he should pass into France to an enterview as was desired,
Rotl. Parl. 6. Edw. 3. Ses. 2 ij. 6.
for expediting the treaty of Marriage: the Prelates by themselves, the Earls
and Barons by themselves, and the Knights of Shires by themselves, consulted
apart, for so are the Records, and in the end resolved, that to prevent some
dangers likely to arise from the North: it would please the King to forbear
his journey, and to draw toward those parts where the perils were feared, his
presence being the best prevention; which advise he followed.

In the following Parliament at York, the King shows, Rotl. Parl, 7 Edw. 3.
how by their former advice he had drawn himself toward the North parts, and
now again he had assembled them to advise further for his proceedings. To
which the Lords and Commons having consulted apart, pray further time to
resolve, until a full assembly of the States, which the King granting,
adjourneth that Session.

At their next meeting they are charged upon their Allegiance and Faith, Rotl.
Parl. 7. Edw. 3. Sess. 2. ij. 6.
to give the King their best advice; the Peers and Commons consulting apart,
delivered their opinions; And so the Parliament ended.

In the thirteenth year, the Grandees and Commons are called to consult, and
advise, Parl. 13. Edw. 3.
how the domestique quiet may be preserved, the ma^ches of Scotland defended,
and the Sea scoured from enemies. The Peers and Commons having apart
consulted, the Commons after a desire not to be charged to counsel in things
de queux ils n'ount pas cognizance, answers that the Guardians of the Shires
assisted by the knights may effect the first, if pardons of felons be not
granted: The care of the marches they humbly leave to the King and his Council,
And for the safeguard of His Seas, they wish that the Cinque Ports and Maritine
Towns; discharged for the most part from many Burdens of the Inland parts,
may have that left to their charge and care: and that such as have Lands near
the Courts be commanded to reside on those possessions.

Rot. Parl. 13. Edw. 3. Sess. 2. da.
The Parliament is the same year reassembled, advisamento Prelatorum, Proceram,
nec non Communitatis, to advise de expeditione Guerrae in partibus
transmarini^. At this Ordinance are made for provision of Ships, arraying of
men for the marches and defense of the I Will of Iersey, naming such in the
Records, as they conceived fit for those employments.

Parl. 14. E. 3
The next year de la poole accompteth the expenses of the war; a new aid is
granted, and by several Committe^s, in which diverse were named that were not
Peers of Parliament, the safeguard of the Seas, and defense of the Seas are
consulted of.

Parl. 15. E, 3.
In the fifteenth year de assensu Praelatorum Procerum. and alioram de
Concilio, the Kings passage into France is resolved of.

Parl. 17. E. 3
Anno. 17. Badlesmore in place of the Chancellor declares unto the Peers and
Commons; that whereas by their assents the King had undertaken the wars in
France, John 21.
and that by the mediation of the Pope a Truce was offered: which then their
Sovereign forbore to entertain without their allowance. The Lords apart
consult, and also the Commons, returning by Sir William Trussell in answer
their advise, and desireing to compose the Quarrel, approve the Truce and the
Popes mediations, The Popes undertaking proving fruitless, and delays to the
French advantageous, who in the mean time with Scotland and others practiced to
root out the English nation in France: The King again assembled his
Parliament the year following: Parl. 18. Edw. 3.
in which the Pears and Commons after many days of deliberation, resolve to
end it, either by Battle or Peace, and no more to trust upon the mediation or
message of his Holiness. Parl. 21. E^w. 3.


In the 21. year the Chief Justice Thorpe declaring to the Peers and
Commons, that the French Wars began by their advice: the Truce after by their
ass^nts accepted and now ended. The Kings pleasure was to have their Counsels
in the procecution. The Commons being commanded, que ils se devoient fair
assembler, and fills essent agree le devoient monetre an Roy and al Grandees de
son Council, after 4. days consultation, humbly desire of the King, that he
would be advised herein by his Lords and and others of more experience then
themselves in such affairs.

To advise the King the best for his French Employments, Parl. 25. Edw. 3.
a Parliament was summoned Anno 25. herein the King by a more public dispatch
wills the Commons to elect 24. or 30. of their House to consult with the
Lords, these to relate to their fellows, and the Conclusion general to the
King.

In the 27. a great Council is assembed, many of the Lay Peers, few of the
Clergy: and of the Shires and Buroughs but one a piece. This was for the
prosecution of the French wars, when an honorable Peace could not be
gotten. But the year following a Truce being offered, the King forbore to
entertain it, until he had the consent of his Peers and Commons which they
in Parliament accorded unto before the Popes notary by public Instrument.

The dallying of the French in the conclusion of Peace; Parl. 27. Edw. 3.
and the falling off of the Duke of Britain (having wrought with France by
the reputation of the English succors) is the year following declared in
Parliament, and their advice and aid required for the Kings proceedings.

Parl. 36. Edw. 3.
In the thirty sixth year he calls his Parliament to consult whether War or
Peace by David the King of Scotts, then offered, should be excepted.

Parl. 4^. E^w. 3.
In the Fortieth year the Pope demanding the Tribute of King John, the
Parliament was assembled; where after consu^tation apart, Vrbane 5.
the Prelates, Lords, and Commons advised the denial, although it be by dint
of sword.

Parl. 43. Edw. 3.
In the forty third year the King declared to the Peers and Commons, that the
French, against the Articles of the Truce, refused payment of the moneys, and
delivery of the Towns, summoning La Brett, and others of the Kings Subjects in
Gascoigne, to make at Paris their appeals, and had forraged his Country of
Poitiers: requiring in their breach, whether he might not resume the Style and
quarrel of France. The Lords and Commons having apart consulted, advise the
King to both, which he approving, altered the inscription and figure of his
Seal.

Parl. 45. Edw. 3.
Two years after it was declared to the Peers and Commons, that by their
advise he had resumed the Style and Quarrel of France; and therefore desired
their advise for the defense of the Reame against the French, securing of the
Seas, and pursuing of the Wars. Of which they consult, Parl. 46. Edw. 3.
and resolve to give the King an aid. The like Counsel and supply was the
very next year following. Parl. 50. Edw. 3.


In the Fiftieth year, a Parliament to the purpose of the former two, was
sommoned; Parl. 51.
and the year following, Edw. 3.
the King in Parliament declaring how the French had combined underhand against
him with Spain and Scotland, required their advice, how peace at home, the
Teritories abroad, security of the Seas, and charge of the War might be
maintained.

I have the longer insisted in observing the carriage of these times so good
and glorious, Rich. 2.
after ages having not left the Iournall entries of Parliament so full, which
therefore with a lighter hand I will pass through.

Richard the second, Parl. 1.
the Grandchild succeeded to the Crown and troubles, having nothing worth his
great fortunes, but his great Birth. The first of his Reign, Ric. 2.* anno 5.
stat. 6.
he pursued the steps of his wise Grandfather, advising with his Peers and
Commons, how best to resist his enemies that had lately wronged diverse of his
Subjects on the Sea coasts.

In the second year he again consulted with his people, how to withstand the
Scotts, Parl. 2. Ric. 2. anno 2.
who then had combined with the French to break the Truce.

In the third year he called the advice of his Parliament, how to maintain
his Regality, Parl. 3. Ric. 2. anno 7.
impared by the Popes Provisions, who to resist Spain, France, and Scotland,
that had raised Wars against him, Urban, 6.
how to suppress his Rebels in Guyon and Ireland, and to defend the Seas.

In the fourth year of his Reign, he called the like at Windsor. The year
following in a great Council, Parl. 4. Ric. 2. anno 2.3.
the King having purposed a Voyage Royal into France, now called his
Parliament to determine further of it. Parl. 5. Ric. 2. Sess. 1.
And it is worthey your observation, that for the most part before any
propositions of war or Peace were vented to the Commons, a debate thereof
precedeth in the great Council to shape in fitter for popular advise. Parl. 5.
Ric. 2. Sess. 2.
The quarrel with Spain continuing the Duke of Lancaster offers a voyage
against them, so as the State will lend him money: after consultation they
grant an aid, but not to bind them to any continuance of war with Spain.

Parl. 6. Ric. 2. Sess. 1.
In the sixth the Parliament was called to consult about the defense of the
Borders, the Kings possions beyond the Seas, Ireland and Gascoyne, his Subjects
in Portugal. The Lords approve the Dukes intentions for Portugal, and the
Commons that the Bishop of Norwich having the Popes Crosyer should invade
France. Parl. 6. Ric. 2. Sess. 2.
The same year the State was called again to consult, whether the King should
go in person to rescue Gaunt or send his Army. The Commonsafter two days
debate, craved a conference with the Lords. The effect is not entered in the
Roll only they by Sir Thomas Puckering their Speaker, protest that Counsels
for war did aptly belong to the King and his Lords, yet since the Commons were
commanded to give their advice, they humbly wished a voyage by the King, if
not, that the Bishop of Norwich might with the advantage of the Popes Crosier
be used in that Service, who accepted, the charge with ill success, he further
for the Commons prays, that the Kings Uncles should not be spared out of the
Realm before some Peace was settled with the Scotts; And that the Lord de
Lars-par sent with Propositions of Peace from Spain might first be heard.
Parl. 7. Ric. 2. Sess. 1.


The Chancellors in the seventh year in name of the King wills the Lords
apart, and so the Commons to consult, whether Peace or War with Scotland, and
whether to resist or assault the Kings Adversaries of Spain, France, and
Flanders: Their opinions are not entered in the Rolls, an omission usual to
the Clerks neglect, only their Petitions are recorded, that the Bishop of
Norwich may account in Parliament the expense of the money, and be punished for
his faults in the service, which he undertook, both which are granted. Sess.
2.
And at the next Session in the same year, the Commons are willed to advise
upon view of the Articles of peace with the French whether War or such Amity
should be accepted? They modestly excuse themselves as to weak to Counsel in
so weighty causes; But charged again as they did tender their honor, and the
right of the King, they make their Answer, giving their opinions rather for
Peace then War.

Peace with France not succeeding, in the eighth year, Parl. 8.
the body of the State was called to advise, Rich. 2.
whether the King in his own person; or by sending forces against the French,
Spain, Flaunders and Scotland, should proceed.

The King having this year assembled at Oxon his great Council to advise,
Claus. 9.
whether he should pass the Seas or no, with an Army Royal; Rich. 2.
and they not daring to assent without a greater Council: Parl. 10.
A Parliament the tenth year was called to have the advice of the Commons,
as well as of the Lords, Rich. 2.
how the Realm should be governed in their Sovereigns absence.

The Truce with France now near expired, Parl. 13.
the Parliament was called in the thirteenth year to advise upon what
condition it should be renewed: Rich. 2.
otherwise how the charge of war should be sustained. At this Assembly and by
consent of all, Claus. 13. Rich. 2.
the Duke of Lancaster is created Duke of Aquitaine, the Statutes of provision
were now pas^ed, and the Commons are named a party, Boniface 9.
in the letter to the Pope. Parl. 14.


The year succeeding a Parliament is called, Rich. 2.
for that the King would have the advice of his Lords and Commons for the war
with Scotland, and would not without their Counsel conclude a final peace
with France.

Parl. 15.
The like Assembly for the same causes was the year ensuing, Rich. 2.
wherein the Commons desire the King to use a moderation in the Law of
provision, to please at this time their Holy Father, So as the Statute upon
their dislike might again be executed, And that to negotiate the peace with
France, the Duke of Aquitaine might rather then any other, be employed.

Parl. 17.
To consult of the Treaty with France for the King in the seventeenth calls a
Parliament, Rich. 2.
the answer of the Lords is left unentred in the Roll, but the Commons upon
their faith and allegiance charged, advise that with good moderation, homage
may be made for Guyen, an appenage of the French Crown, so as it entrench not
to involve the other pieces of the English conquest, their answer is modest,
large, and worthy of mark.

Hen. 4th.
Now succeeded a man that first studied all popularity, as needing all to
support his Titles, Parl. 5. H. 4.
He in the fifth year called a Parliament, to suppress the malice of the Duke
of Orleance, and to advise for the wars in Ireland and Scotland, neither
counsels or supplies are entered in the Roll, Parl. 6. H. 4.
and to resist an Inovation intended by France and Britain, he assembleth the
State again.

Claus. 7.
The like was in the two years following for France. In this the Commons
conferr with the Lords for Guard of the Sea, Hen. 4. iii 33
and make many Ordinances to which the King assented: the Peace with the
merchants of Pruce, and the Hanstowns is debated, and a Proclamation published,
iii. 57
as they resolve, by the Speaker the Commons complain of 96. pieces of
Ordinance lost in Guyen the year before, the need of defense for the Borders,
and Guard of the Sea coasts. To suppress the Rebellion in Wales, and the
disloyalty of the Earl of Northumberland, they humbly desire, iii. 59.
that the Prince may be dispatched into those parts with speed: and to have a
vigilent eye of the Scottish Prisoners.

In the tenth the Parliament is commanded to give their advice about the truce
of Scotland, Parl. 10. Hen. 4.
and preparation against the malice of the French.

His Son, the wise and happy undert^ker, Hen. 5. Parl. 1.
consulteth with the Parliament in his first year, Hen. 5.
how to cherish his Allies, and restrain his Enemies, for this there wa^ a
select Committee of the Commons, appointed to confer with the Lords, the matter
being entered into a Schedu^e. Touching Ireland, Wales, Scotland, Calice, Anno
9.
Guyen, Shipping, Guard of the Seas, and wary provision to repulse the Enemy.

In the Second he opens to the Parliament his title to France, a quarrel he
would prosecute to death: Parl. 2. Hen. 5.
if they allowed and aided, death is in this Assembly, enacted to all, that
either break the Truce, or the Kings safe conduct.

The year following peace being offered by the French King, Rot. Parl. An. 3.
Hen. 5
and the King of the Romans arrived to effect the work, the King refuses any
conclusion, until he had thereunto the advice and assent of his Lords and
Commons, which occasion the Chancellor declares to that Assembly.

In the fourth and fifth, Parl. 4. and 5. Hen. 5.
no peace concluded with France, the King calls the State together to consult
about the War, concluding a Treaty of Amity with Sigismund King of the
Romans, by the allowance of the three States, and enters the Articles in the
Iournall Roll. In the same year by the Duke of Bedford, Parl. 5. H. 5.
in the Kings absence a Parliament was called to the former purposes, as it
appears by the Summons, though in the Roll omitted.

Parl. 7. H. 5.
The like in the seventh year. And the Treaty with France is by the Prelates,
Nobles and Commons of the Kingdom perused and ratified in the tenth year of
this King. Parl. 10. Hen. 5.


His Son more holy then happy succeeded, Hen. 6th.
and advises in the second year with the Lords and Commons for the well
keeping of the peace with France, Rot. Parl. 2. Hen. 6.
consulteth with them about the delivery of the Scottish King, and the
conclusion is confirmed by common assent. Rot. Parl. 3. Hen. 6.
In the third year they are called to advise and consent to a new Article in
the league with Scotland, for charge of Hostage, and in the ninth year
conclude of certain persons by name, to treat a peace with the Dolphin of
France. 9. Hen. 6.


The Treaty of Arras, Eugenius 4.14. Hen. 6.
whether the Pope had sent as mediators two Cardinals, not succeeding the King
in Parliament, Anno 14. shows that he must either loose his Title, Style, and
Kingdom of France, or else defend it by force: the best means for provision
whereof he wills them to advise him.

He summoneth again the next year the same Council to advise how the Realm
might be best defended, Parl. 15. Hen. 6.
and the Sea kept safe against the Enemies.

In the twentieth the Commons exhibit a Bill for Guard of the Se^, Anno. 20.
Hen. 6.
the number of ships, assesse wages, and dispose of Prizes if any fortune, To
which the King accords. And that the Genowaies might be declared Enemies, for
^ssisting the Turk in spoil of the Knights of Rhodes, And that the privilege
of the Pruce and Hanstownes might be suspended, until composition be made to
the English for wrongs they had done them. To the which in part the King
accords. Anno. 23.


The King by the Chancellor declares in Parliament, Hen. 6.
that the Marriage with Margaret the King of Sicily his daughter was
contracted. For induceing the peace made with France. Against the which the
Lords not by their advise effected, make a protestation, and enter it on the
Roll. Parl. 25.


The King intending to pass in person into France, there to treat of Peace
with the King, Hen. 6.
advises with His Lords and Commons in Parliament, Anno 3.
and letters of Mart are granted against the Britains for spoils done to the
English Merchants.

The Lord Hastings and the Abbot of Glou^, Anno. 27.
declare in Parliament the preparation of the French, Hen. 6.
the Breach by them of the Peace, the weak defense of Normandy, and the
expiration shortly of the Truce: requiring speedy advice and remedy.

It enjoined the Parliament to provide for the Defense of the Sea and Land,
Anno 29. Hen. 6.
against the French.

It was commanded by the King to the States assembled, Anno. 33. Hen. 6.
to advise for the well ordering of his House, payment of his Soldiers at
Calice, Guard of the Seas, raising of the Seige at Berwike made by the Scots
against the Truce: Disposing of 1300. Soldiers arrayed the last Parliament:
According of differences amongst the Lords, restraining the transportation of
Gold and Silver, and quieting the disorders in Wales, of all which Committees
are appointed to frame Bills.

Edw. 4.
Edward the fourth by the Chancellor declares to the Lords and Commons, Anno 7.
that having made peace with Scotland; entered league with France and Denmark,
contracted with Burgundy and Britain for their aid for the recovery of his
right in France, he had now assembled them to give their Counsel in proceeding,
which charge in a second Session was again pressed unto them. Anno 11.
The like was at another Parliament held in the eleventh year. Edw. 4.


Hen. 7.
After this time the Journals of Parliament have bin either not well preserved,
Parl. 1.
or not carefully entered, Hen. 7.
for I can find of this nature no Records, until the first of Henry the
seventh, wherein the Commons by Thomas Lov^ll their speaker, petition the King
to take to wife Elizabeth the daughter of Edward the fourth, to which the King
at their request does agree.

The next is the third of Henry the eighth in which from the King, Hen. 8, Rot.
Parl. 3.
the Chancellor declares to the States the cause of that Assembly to be
first, Hen. 8.
to advise a course for resisting the innovation of the Scots: Julius 2.
the next, how to quiet the quarrel between the King of Castile, and the Duke
of Gelders, lastly for assisting the Pope against Jews of France, whose Bull
expressing the injuries done the Sea Apostolic, was read by the Master of the
Rolls in open Parliament, after which the Chancellor, There and other Lords
were sent down unto the Commons to confer thereof.

Rot Parl. 32. Hen 8.
The last is in the two and thirtieth year wherein the Chancellor remembering
the many troubles the State had undergone in doubtful Titles of Succession,
declares, that although the convocation had judged void the marriage with Anne
of Cleve, yet the King would not proceed without the Counsel of the States, Ex
instrument. Original.
whereupon the two Archbishops are sent down to the Commons with the sentence
sealed, which being there discussed, they pass a Bill against the Marriage.

In all these passages of public Counsels, I still observe, that the
Sovereign Lord either in best advise, or most necessity would entertain the
Commons with the weightiest causes, either foreign or domestique, thereby to
apt them and bind them to a readiness of Charge And they as warily avoiding it
to shine expense.

FJNJS.

