A TREATISE, Showing That the Sovereigns Person is required in the great
Counsels or Assemblies of the State, as well at the Consultations as at the
Conclusions.

Written by Sir ROBERT COTTON, Knight and Baronet.

IN DOMINO CONFIDO
printer's or publisher's device

Printed in the Year 1641.

The right Worshipful Sir ROBERT COTTON, Knight and Baronnet his Speech in
Parliament.
That the Sovereigns person is required in the great Counsels or Assemblies
of the State, as well at the Consultations, as at the Conclusions.

SInce of these Assemblies few Dieries or exact Journall Books are remaining,
and those but of late, and negligently entered the Acts and Ordinances only
reported to posterity are the Rolls.

This Question (though clear) in general reason and conveniencie must be
wrought out of, for the particular out of such incident proofs, as the
Monument of Story and Records by pieces learn us. And to deduce it the
clearer down, some essential circumstances of Name, Time, Place, occasion,
and Persons must be in general shortly touched before the force of particular
proofs be laid down.

This noble body of the State (now called the houses in Parliament) is known
in several ages by several names.

Concilia, the Counsels in the Eldest times, afterward Ex Conciliis Reg.
Saxon. Cantuar.
Magnum, commune et generale Concilium, Curia magna Capitalis et curia Regis:
Sometimes Generale placitum, and sometimes Glanvill.
Synodus, and Synodalia decreta, although as well Liber Ely.
the causes of the Common wealth as Church Leges Etheldredi regis.
were there decided.

The name of Parliament (except in the Abbots Chapters) was never heard of unto
the reign Ingulphus Croylandensis.
of King John, and then but rarely.

At the Kings Court were these Conventions Registr. Monast.
usually, and the Presence, Privy Chamber, and other room convenient for the
Kings in former times, (as now) then used: For what is the present house of
Lords, but so at this day? and was before the firing of the Palace at
Westminster about Palate. Regale Westmonast.
17. H. 8. who then and there resided.

Improbable it is to believe the King excluded his own privy, and unmannerly
it is for guests to bar him their company, who gave to them their
entertainment.

It was now at first (as now) Edicto Principis, Regist. Eliense.
at the Kings pleasure.

Toward the end of the Saxon, and in the Annals Monaster.
first time of the Norman Kings it stood in Custome-Grace, to Easter,
Whitsuntide, and Christmas fixed: the Bishops, Earls, and Lords (ex more) then
assembled: So are the frequent Liber de Bello.
words in all the Annalls: The King of course revested with his Imperial
Crown by the Bishops, and the Peers assembling, in Recognition Registr.
Wigorniense.
of their preobliged faith and present duty and service; until the unsafe
time of King John (by over-potent and popular Lords) gave discontinuance to
this constant grace of Kings, and then it returned to the uncertain pleasure
of the Sovereign Summons.

The causes then (as now) of such assemblies, Ioannes Ewegden.
were provision for the support of the State in Men and Money, and well
ordering of the Church Matthew. Parls
and Commonwealth, and determining of such Hoveden. Bracton.
causes, which ordinary Courts nesciebant iudicare, (as Glanvill the grand
Judge under H. 2. Glanvill Fleta
says) Where the presence of the King was still required, it being otherwise
absurd to make the King assentor to the judgments of Parliament, and afford
him no part of the Consultation.

The necessity hereof is well and fully deduced unto us in a reverend Monument
not far from that grave Man's time, in these words, Rex tenetur omnimodo
personaliter interesse Parliamento, Modus tenendi Parliament.
nisi per corporalem aegritudinem detineatur, and then to acquaint the
Parliament of such occasion by several Members of either House. Causa est quod
solebat clamor et rumor esse pro absentia Regis, quia res damnosa and
periculosa est est toti Communitati, Parliamento, and Regno, cum Rex a
Parliamento absens fuerit: Nec se absentare debet, nec potest, nisi duntaxat in
causa supradicta.

By this appears the desire of the state to have the Kings presence in these
great Counsels by express necessity.

I will now endeavor to lead the practice of it from the dark and eldest
times to these no less neglected of ours.

From the year 720. to near 920. during all the Heptarchy, in all the
Council remaining Ex registr. Concili r. Cantuar. Ex Concilio Withredi R
composed ex Episcopis, Abbatibus, Ducibus, Satrapis, et omni dignitate
optimatibus, ecclesiasticis scilicet and secularibus personis pro utilitate
Ecclesiae and stabilitate Regni pertractatum. Seven of them are Rege
presidente, and but one by deputy; and incongruous it were, and almost
Nonsense, to bar his presence that is President of such an Assembly.

The Saxon Monarchy under Alfred, Etheldred, Edgar in their Synods, or placita
generalia, went Ex Synodis and legibus Alfredi, Etheldredi, Edgari.
in the same practice, and since. Thus Ethelwold appealed Earl Leofrick from
the County ad generale placitum, before King Etheldred and Edgyra the Queen,
against Earl Goda to Eldred the King at London, congregatis Principibus and
sapientibus Angliae. Ex Regist Ab^ington.


In the year 1052. under Edward the Confessor, Gesta St. Ed^. Ga^i^e.
statutum est placitum, magnum extra Londinum, quod Normanni (ex Francorum
consuet udine) Parliamentum appellant, where the King Allured. Rivalens. vita
Ed^. Confessoris.
and all his Barons appealed: Godwin for his brother Alureds death, the Earl
denied it, and the King replied thus, My Lords, you that are my Liege men,
Earls and Barons of the Land here assembled together, have heard my appeal,
and his answer: unto you be it left to do right betwixt us.

At the great Council at Westminster. 1072. in Registr. Cantuar.
Easter week the cause of the two Archbishops Lanfrank, and Thomas, Ventilata
suit in praesentia Regis Gulielmi, and after at Windsor sinem accepit in
praesentia Regis.

At the same Feast, Anno 1081. (the usual 10^1.
time of such assemblies) the King, the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Earls,
and chief Nobility of the Kingdom were present: for so are the words of the
Record.

The cause between Arsast Bishop of Norway, Registrum Sancti Edmundi.
and Baldwin Abbot of Bury, was also argued, Et ventilata in publico Rex jubet
teneri Iudicium, causis auditis amborum.

The diligence of his son (the learned H. 1.) in executing of this part of
his kingly function, is commended to posterity by Walter Maps (a learned man,
trained up, and dear in favor with Walterus Maps de R^gis (...).
H. 2.) in these words: Omnia Regali more, decentique moderamine faciebat,
neminem volebat egere justitia, vel pace: constituerat autem ad
tranaquillitatem omnium, ut diebus vacationis, vel in Domo magna sub dio copiam
sui faceret usque adhoram sextam, (which was till 10, as we now account) secum
habens Comites, Barons, Proceres, et vavasores, to hear and determine causes,
Henr. Hunting Malmsbury.
whereby he attained the surname of Leo Iustitiae in all Stories, and so out
went) in quiet quiddance of the state) his best Progenitors.

The next of his name that succeeded, is remembered Vita Tho. Cantuariensis.
Fitz-Stephan.
every where for the debates and disputes he heard in person with Thomas the
Archbishop, and others of his part at the greatest Councels, both at London,
Clarendon, and Northampton for the redress of the many complaints Gesta H. 2.
Benedic. Abbate Authore.
of the Commons against outrages, and extortions of Clergy men.

In the year 1057. die Pentecost. Apud 8. Edmundum: The same King (diademate
insignitus) Reg. Monast. de bello.
with the Bishops, Abbots, Earls, and Barons of the Kingdom sat daily
himself and heard all the debates concerning the liberties and Charters of
Batell Abbie. The interlocutorie speeches as well of the King as the Lords and
parties are at full related in a Register of the Church:

The suit between the Church of Lincoln and S. Albans in praesentia Regis H.
Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum omnium Angliae and comitatum and Reg.
Lincolniense.
Baronum Regni, was at Westmin. debated and ended: and had the love of Memory
and Truth bin a Protector to the public Records of the state, as the awe of
the Clergies censure was a guard to theirs in tempestuous times, we had not
been now left to the only friendship of Monks diligence for example in this
kind.

At Lincoln the Archbishop, some Bishops, Lib. Burton-Monaster.
but all the Earls and Barons of the Kingdom, una cum Rege Joanne congregati
ad colloquium de concordia Regis Scotiae, (says a Register of that Church.)

This use under King H. 3. needs no further proof than the Writ of Summons,
then (as some report) framed, expressing both the Kings mind and practice.

It is Nobiscum and Praelatis, and Magnatibus nostris Rot. claus. a. 59. H. 3.
quos vocari fecimus super premissis tractare, and Concilium impendere: which
word Nobiscum implies plainly the Kings presence.

What the succeeding practice was from the 15. year of E. 4. the proper Records
of this Inquiry, (the Iournall books being lost) I am enforced to draw from
out the Rolls of Acts wherein sometimes by chance they are remembered.

Edward the 2. was present in Parliament the Rot. Parl. 15. E. 2.
15. year of his reign, at the complaint against the Spencers, and at a
second Parliament that year for the repeal of their banishment.

In the 4. of E. 3. the King was present at the Rot. Parl. 4. E. 3. Rot. parl.
5. E. 3.
Accusation of Roger Mortimer, but not the Trial, and the next year in the
treaty of the French affairs.

In the 6. year, Intererat rex in causa Iohannis de Gray and Guilielmi de la
Zouch: and the same year 2. die Parliamenti, the King was present at the
debate about his voyage into Scotland.

In the 15. year the King in the Painted Chamber sitting with the Lords in
consultation, the Archbishop after pardon, prays that for better clearing
himself, he may be tried in full Parliament, Rott. Parl. 15. E. 3.
which was granted.

In the 17. in Camera alba (now called the Rot. Parl. 17. E. 3.
Court of Requests) Rex cum magnatibus convenient communes super negotiis Regni.

In the 10. of R. 2. the King departed from the Parliament in some discontent,
when after some time, Lords are sent to pray his presence, and to inform his
Majesty, that if he forbear his presence amongst them 40. days, that then
Chronicon Henvici Knighton.
ex antiquo Statuto, they may return absque domigerio Regis, to their several
homes.

Henry the 4. began his first Parliament the first of November, and was the 27.
day of the same month at a debate about the Duke of Rot. Parl. 3. H. 4
Britanie: the 30. day the cause of the Archbishop was before him proposed
only.

The 3. of Nov. he was at the debate whether the Commons had right of
Judicature, yea, or no.

On the 10. he was with the Lords in their Consultation about the expedition
against the Scots, the creation of the Duke of Lancaster, and the prohibition
of a new Sect from entering this Kingdom. Some Ordinances were at this time
consulted of concerning the staple, and the sentence against Haxey after
dispute revoked.

This King began his second Parliament the 20 Rot. Parl. 2. H. 4.
of January, and on the 9. of February was present to make agreement betwixt
the Bishop of Norwich, and Thomas of Erpingham.

On the 20. day of the same month, he was present at Council for repressing
of the Welsh Rebels, for revocations of stipends, and concerning the Priors
Aliens.

On the 26. they advise before the King of the Sestertian Order.

On the 2. of March of the Statute of Provisions, the keeper of the privy
Seal, and relieving of the two Universities.

On the 9. of March they mediate before the Rot. Parl. 4. H. 4.
King a reconciliation betwixt the Earl of Rutland, and the Lord Fitzwaters.

He also began a parliament in his fifth year, upon the 15. of January, and
the 10. they advise before the King, of guarding of the Seas, and the Welsh
Rebellion.

On the 8. of February, the Earl of Northumberland is charged before the
King, and in his presence, and by his permission, diverse of whom he knew no
harm were removed from the Court.

The next day at the petition of the Commons, he took upon him to reconcile
the Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland, and on the 22. of February of
Northumberland and Dunbar.

In a parliament of the 27. of H. 6. a challenge of Seat in parliament betwixt
the Earls of Arundell and Devonshire was examined and appointed Rott. Parl.
27. H. 6.
by the K. with the advice of the Lords.

In that great capital cause of the Duke of Suffolk, 28. H. 6. I find not the
King once present at the debates, but the Duke appealing from his trial by
Peerage to the K. is brought from out the house of Lords to a private chamber,
where the King (after the Chancellor in gross had declared his offense, and
refusal) himself (but not in place of judgment) adjudged his banishment.

By the Rolls of K. Ed. 4. it appears that he Rot. Parl. E. 4.
was many days (besides the first and last) in parliament, and there are
entered some Speeches by him uttered, but that of all the rest is most of mark,
the Reporter then present tells it thus, of the Duke of Florence, and the King,
Trist is disceptatio inter duos tantae humanitatis Germannos: Regist.
Croylandense.
Nemo arguit contra Ducem nisi Rex, nemo respondit Regi nisi Dux. Some other
testimonies were brought in; with which the Lords were satisfied, and so
formarunt in eum sententiam damnationis, by the mouth of the Duke of Buckingham
(then Steward of England:) All which was much distasted by the house of Commons.

The reign of H. 7. affords upon the Rolls Ex cartis Parlamen. 12. 11. 7.
no one example (the journall Books being lost) except so much as preserves the
passages of eight days, in the 12. of his reign, in which the King was some
days present at debates, and with his own hand the 31. day of the parliament
delivered in a Bill of Trade there read: but had the Memorial remained, it is
no doubt but he would have been found as frequent in his great Ex regist.
Camerae Stellatae.
Council of Parliament, as he was in the Star Chamber; where by the Register
of that Court appears, as well in debate at private causes, that touch neither
life nor member, as those of public care, he every year of all his reign
was often present.

Of H. 8. memory has not been curious; but if he were not often present,
peradventure that may be the cause of the disorder, which the learned Recorder
Fleetwood in his preface to the Ex Annalib. Fleetwood, Recorderi London.
Annalls of E. the 5. R. 3 H. 7. and H. 8. has observed in the Statutes made
in that Kings days: for which cause he has severed their Index from the
former; and much lay in the will of Wolsey, who was ever unwilling to let that
King see with his own eyes.

Edward the sixth in respect of his young years may be well excused; but that
such was his purpose appears by a memorial of his own hand, who proposing
the affairs of Council to several persons, reserved those of greatest weight
to his own presence, in these words: These to attend the matters of State,
that I will sit with them once a week to hear the debating of things of most
importance.

Unfitness by Sex in his two succeeding Sisters to be so frequently present
as their former Ancestors led in the ill occasion of such opinion and practice.

Most Excellent Majesty:
YOur most humble servant, in discharge of Obedience and Zeal has hastened up
this Abstract, which in all humility he offers up unto your gracious pardon.
Presumption to enter the closet of your Counsel is far from his modesty and
duty. What has been your powerful command, he has made his work; what is
fit to be done with it is only your divine judgment: He dares not say, that
Presidents are Warrants: To direct the success is as worthy observation as the
knowledge thereof, sometimes have made ill examples by extension of Regal
power through ill counsels, with ill success. Some as bad, or worse, when the
people have had too much of that, and the King too little, the danger no less.
To cut out of either of these paternes to follow were but to be in love with
the mischief for the example. The cleerer I present this to your Highness,
the nearer I approach the uprightness of your heart, (the blessed fortune of
your happy subjects.

Pardon (most sacred Majesty) that I offer up to your admired wisdom my
weak, but dutiful observations out of all the former gathering.

In Consultations of State, and decisions of private plaints it is clear from
all times, the King was not ouely present to advice and hear, but to determine
also.

In the cases Criminal, and not of blood to bar the King apart were to
seclude him the Star Chamber (as far from reason as example:) The doubt is then
aloud in crimes mere capital.

I dare not too much commend the times that left these Patterns, either for
the causes or effects, but wish the one and the other never more.

To proceed by public Act of Commons, Peers, and King, was most usual:
Appeals are gone by the Law of Henry the fourth. Of this now in debate, the
way I fear is yet obscure. As great advise of State is as needful for the
manner, as for the Justice.

The example in the cause of the Duke of Suffolk, 28. H. 6. where the King
gave judgment, was protested against by the Lords.

That of the Duke of Clarence, 6. E. 4. where the Lords, and the High Steward
(the Duke of Buckingham) gave judgment, was protested against by the House of
Commons. In both of these the King was sometimes present; but which of these
may suit these times I dare not guess.

That of 1. R. 2. of Gomenys and Weston accused by the Commons plaint for
Treason was tried by the Lords in absence of the King, but sentenced by the
Lord Scroop Steward for the King: The Accused were of the rank of the
Accusers, Commons, and not Lords.

How this will make a president to judge in causes Capital a peer of
Parliament, I cannot tell, but I should conceive a way answerable as well to
Parliament as other Courts.

If the King and the Lords were Traitors, and the common Assentors to the
Judgment, to hear together the charge and evidence, the Lords (as does the
Jury in other Courts) to withdraw, to find the verdict; and then the Steward,
for the K. to pronounce the sentence; it passes so by way of Act: a course
that carries with it no exception, and likely to avoid all curious Questions
of your Highness presence there.

If your humble Servant has in this expression of his desire to do you
service, presumed too far, his comfort is, that where Zeal of Duty has
made a fault, Benignity of Goodness will grant the pardon.

FINIS.

