THE Countries Advice To the Late Duke of Monmouth, And Those in Rebellion with
Him.
This may be Printed.

R. L. S.
June 30.
I.
YOU, who the gazing World did once admire,
And You, who were extolled and praised by all;
You, who each sighing Virgin did desire,
And You, who once we might Great Monmouth call;
Wherefore do you against our Peace conspire,
And in a bloody War our Land inthral?
Thus Lucifer aspiring to be Great,
Was thrown from Heaven to his Infernal Seat.
II.
When to Great CHARLES's Arms you did return,
(Not of your fore-committed Crimes to tell,)
How did that Sacred Prince's Bosom burn,
In hopes you from your former Ills had fell!
But, oh! too much Indulgence makes us mourn,
And sighs, instead of Joy, our Bosoms swell.
Thus Mercy freely given is abused,
And Pardoned Rebels for Sham-Princes used.
III.
Weigh with your self the Fall of Absalom,
Let His Example teach You to be wise;
(He justly had a Rebels Martyrdom,
And climbed a Tree, 'cause he would a mind to rise.)
Just Heaven in Thunder will with Vengeance come,
And on your Head avenge your Treacheries.
Think on the guiltless Blood you hourly spill,
Where Brother Brother, Father Son does kill.
IV.
In vain (alas!) Rebellious Arms you use,
In vain you mighty Preparations make,
And but in vain our Monarch you abuse,
And skulking round about poor Women take;
In vain you your Rebellion would excuse,
By saying it is for pure Religions sake.
What your Religion is, I cannot tell,
But Protestants I Am sure can never Rebel.
V.
Though with your weak Pretenses you delude,
And bring in some whe're (...) in Despair,
A wretched, hopeless, gaping Multitude,
Whose desperate Souls know neither sense nor care;
Yet all in vain your Treasons are pursued,
Your Stratagems but weak and feeble are;
For the Almighty has his Angels spread,
Toguard our Sacred Lawful Monarchs Head.
VI.
What show of Right, what Law can you pretend,
To justify this bold, this bloody Deed?
What is it you would have? wherefore do you contend,
That thus you make the shaking Country bleed?
Is this our Liberties? Are you our Friend?
Dear Liberties, and a fast Friend indeed.
Our Souls at Liberty you set; our Wives,
Our Goods, and Children, perish with our Lives.
VII.
When on Ambitions Wings you first were tossed,
And the cursed Faction did your mind invite,
They spared no Time, no Labor, nor no cost,
To puff you up with a supposed Right:
But, 'cause you should not in your Pride be lost,
Your Royal Father cleared your misted sight,
Who (Wise as Just, and Powerful as Great)
Declared you to be ILLEGITIMATE.
VIII.
And you deluded Souls that are engaged
In Arms against your Just and Lawful Prince,
Consult the grounds on which this War is waged,
Call back your Reason, and allarm your Sense,
That this sad bloody Conflict be assag'd,
In which you never can hope for recompense.
Ask God forgiveness, your wronged Sovereign great,
And lay your Arms at His Imperial Feet.
IX.
Good God! that ever People thus should be
Into such base, unnat'ral Wars betrayed,
Under the old sham-tale of LIBERTY,
Which at that very time they do invade,
When we before had all things just and free,
Nor any fear, or cause to be afraid:
Now Treason, Murder, Rape, and Massacre,
Must the blessed Title of RELIGION bear.
X.
But if you will not now be wise in time,
And choose Repentance e're it be late,
May you with speed be punished for your Crime,
And meet the scourge of your deserved Fate;
And for your Head, who would to Empire climb
Upon the Ashes of a ruined State,
Since neither Pardon, nor a Princes Love,
Can the sweet Bait of Mighty Crowns remove,
Let him unpitied in a Dungeon lie,
Till with Despair and Envy he shall die.
London: Printed by T. M. (for the Author) in the Year 1685.


