The Country-Maids Delight; Or; The Husbandman's Honor made known.
Being a Delightful song in praise of a Plowman.
You Husbandmen that in Country does dwell,
I pray observe and mark my Ditty well,
In praise of you I will set forth aright,
In this song called, The Country Maids Delight.
To the tune of, the soldiers delight; Or, the seamans adieu to his dear.


YOu young men and Maids that in Country does dwell,
lend attention if time spare you can;
I Will sing you a song that will please full well,
in praise of the honest Plowman;
Then hay for the Plowman that is valiant and stout,
I love him as dear as my life,
For if ever I be wed, or lose my Maidenhead,
I will be a Husbandman's wife.
Then mark well I pray what to you I shall say,
I Will show you if you will understand,
How a Plowman is him that in honor shall swim,
for he is the main staff of the Land.
Then, etc.
In the first place he works and labors full hard,
and takes great pains every day,
In Tilling and sowing in Reaping and Mowing,
for he has but small time for to play.
Then, etc.
And when his days work it is ended and done,
he is as merry as a Bird in the Cage:
Then with Bacon and Beef the which is of the chief,
his hunger it does soon assuage.
Then, etc.
Then to bed he does go his nights rest for to take,
in the morning betimes rises he,
His business to ply whether't be wet or dry,
for such things neglected must not be.
Then, etc.
And thus you may see that a Plowman is a man,
that bad Husbandry does abhor,
But he takes pains, yet be gets good gains,
whilst many Tradesmen live but poor.
Then hey for the Plowman that is valiant and stout,
I love him as dear as my life;
For if e're I be wed, or lose my Maiden head,
I Will be a Husbandman's Wife.
I Will not have a Tailor to measure my waste,
for he is falce in every way:
He loves Cabbidge so dear, that he cannot forbear,
but he the Thief often must play;
then hey for the Plowman that is Valiant and Stout*
I love him as dear as my life*
If ever I be Wed, or lose my maidenhead,
I will be a Husbandman's wife.
Also the stout Miller with his Tole-dish,
he never shall grind in my Mill,
For he is a Knave, though he bears it out brave,
and so he will ever be still:
then, etc.
There Is the Weaver, the Blacksmith, and the Shoo make
most of them are deceitful also,
But a Plowman is he that my true Love must be,
in spite of all them that say no.
Then, etc,
For if it were not for the honest Plowman,
what should we do for Bear or Bread,
The Baker and the Maultmen themselves might go hang
for trading with them would be dead.
Then, etc.
Also young fine Citizens the which does go,
so gallant so trim and so neat;
Tho dainties they have that is both pleasant and brave,
yet without Bread they cannot them eat.
Then, etc.
And ift ever be my fortune to have a Plowman,
with him i will go through thick and thin;
It Is not Lord nor Earl that has got Gold or Pearl,
that shall my true love from him win.
Then, etc.
Then let Country Lasses be all of my mind,
the honest Plowman for to love,
He is constant and true, he will not turn with the wind,
but he is as true as the Turtle-Dove.
Then. etc,
And so to conclude my new ditty here penned,
God bless the brave Plowman I say,
I wish him prosperity unto the end,
for it is he that does carry the day.
Then hey for the Plowman that is val^ant and stout
I love him as dear as my life,
If e're I be wed, and lose my Maiden head,
I Will be a Husbandmans wife.
Printed for F. Coals, T. Vere, J. Wright* and J. Clarke.


