THE COVENANT: WITH A Narrative OF The Proceedings and Solemn Manner of Taking
it by the Honorable House of COMMONS, and Reverent Assembly of DIVINES the
25th day of September, at Saint Margarets in Westminster.

ALSO, TWO SPEECHES Delivered at the same time; The one By Mr. Philip Nigh, The
other By Mr. Alexander Hendersam.

Published by special Order of the House.

LONDON,

Printed for Thomas Underhill at the Bible in Wood-Street, 1643.

THE COVENANT, That was read, svvorn unto, and subscribed by the Honorable
House of Commons, and Reverend Assembly of DIVINES, the 25. of September.
WE Noblemen; Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, Burgesses, Ministers of the
Gospel, and Commons of all sorts in the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, by the providence of God, living under one King, and being of one
Reformed Religion; Having before our eyes, the glory of God, and the
advancement of the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the Honor
and happiness of the Kings Majesty, and His posterity; and the true public
Liberty, Safety, and Peace of the Kingdoms; wherein every ones private
condition is included: And calling to mind the treacherous and bloody Plots,
Conspiracies, Attempts, and practices of the enemies of God, against the true
Religion, and Professors thereof, in all places, especially in these three
Kingdoms, ever since the Reformation of Religion: And how much their rage,
power, and presumption, are of late, and at this time increased, and exercised,
whereof the deplorable Estate of the Church and Kingdom of Ireland, the
distressed Estate of the Church and Kingdom of England, and the dangerous
Estate of the Church and Kingdom of Scotland, are present and public
Testimonies: We have now at last (after other means of Supplication,
Remonstrance, Protestations, and Sufferings)* for the Preservation of our
selves, and our Religion, from utter ruin and destruction, according to the
commendable practice of these Kingdoms in former times, and the example of Gods
people in other Nations, after mature deliberation, resolved and determined, to
enter into a mutual, and solemn League, and Covenant, wherein we all
subscribe; And each one of us for himself, with hands lifted up to the most
high God, do swear:

1 That we shall sincerely, really, and constantly, through the Grace of God,
endeavor in our several Places, and Callings, the preservation of the
Reformed Religion in the Church of Scotland in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline,
and Government against our common enemies; The Reformation of Religion in the
Kingdoms of England, and Ireland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and
Government, according to the Word of God, and the example of the best Reformed
Churches. And shall endeavor to bring the Churches of God in the three
Kingdoms, to the nearest Conjunction and Uniformity in Religion, Confession of
Faith, Form of Church Government, directory for Worship, and Catechizing, That
we and our Posterity after us, may as Brethren, live in Faith and love; and the
Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of us.

2 That we shall in like manner without respect of persons, endeavor the
extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, (that is, Church Government by Archbishops,
Bishops, their Chancellours and Commissaries, Deanes, Deanes and Chapters,
Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers, depending on that
Hierarchy) Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever shall
be found to be contrary to found Doctrine, and the power of Godliness; lest we
partake in other men's sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their
plagues: And that the Lord may be one, and his Name one in the three Kingdoms.

3 We shall with the same Sincerity, Reality, and Constancy, in our several
Vocations, endeavor with our Estates, and Lives, mutually, to preserve the
Rights and Privileges of Parliaments, and the Liberties of the Kingdoms: And
to preserve, and defend the Kings Majesty's Person, and Authority, in the
preservation and defense of the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdom:
That the World may bear witness with our Consciences, of our Loyalty; And
that we have no thoughts, or intentions to diminish His Majesty's just Power
and Greatness.

4 We shall also with all faithfulness endeavor the discovery of all such as
have been, or shall be Incendiaries, Malignants, or evil Instruments, by
hindering the Reformation of Religion, dividing the King from his People, or
one of the Kingdoms from another, or making any Faction, or Parties amongst
the People, contrary to this League and Covenant; that they may be brought to
public trial, and receive condign punishment, as the degree of their
offenses shall require, or deserve: Or the supreme Judicatories of both
Kingdoms respectively, or others having power from them for that effect, shall
judge convenient.

5 And whereas the happiness of a blessed Peace between these Kingdoms,
denied in former times to our Progenitors, is by the good providence of God
granted unto us, and has been lately concluded and settled by both
Parliaments; We shall each one of us according to our Place and Interest,
endeavor* That they may remain conjoined in a firm Peace and Union to all
posterity; And that Justice may be done upon the wilful opposers thereof in
manner expressed in the precedent Article.

6 We shall also according to our Places and Callings in this common Cause of
Religion, Liberty, and Peace of the Kingdoms, assist and defend all those that
enter into this League, and Covenant* in the maintenance and pursuing thereof;
And shall not suffer our selves, directly, or indirectly, by whatsoever
Combination, Persuasion, or Terror* to be divided, or withdrawn from this
blessed Union, and Conjunction; Whether to make defection to the contrary part;
Or to give our selves to a detestable indifferency, or neutrality in this
Cause, which so much concerns the Glory of God, the good of the Kingdoms,
and Honor of the King; But shall all the days of our lives, zealously and
constantly continue therein, against all opposition; And promote the same
according to our power, against all Lets, and Impediments whatsoever: And what
we are not able our selves to suppress, or overcome, we shall reveal, and
make known, that it may be timely prevented or removed. All which we shall do
as in the sight of God.

And because these Kingdoms are guilty of many sins and provocations against
God, and his Son Jesus Christ, as is too manifest by our present distresses*
and dangers, the fruits thereof; We profess and declare before God and the
world, our unfeigned desire to be humbled for our own sins, and for the
sins of these Kingdoms, especially, that we have not as we ought valued the
inestimable benefit, of the Gospel; That we have not labored for the purity and
power thereof, and that we have not endeavored to receive Christ in our hearts,
nor to walk worthy of him in our lives, which are the causes of other sins
and transgressions, so much abounding amongst us; And our true and unfeigned
purpose, desire, and endeavor for our selves, and all others under our power
and charge, both in public and in private, in all duties we owe to God and
man, to amend our lives, and each one to go before another in the example of a
real Reformation, that the Lord may turn away his wrath, and heavy
indignation, and establish these Churches and Kingdoms in Truth and Peace. And
this Covenant we make in the presence of Almighty God, the searcher of hearts,
with a true intention to perform the same, as we shall answer at that great day
when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed: Most humbly beseeching the
Lord to strengthen us by his Holy Spirit for this end, and to bless our
desires and proceedings with such success, as may be deliverance and safety to
his people, and encouragement to other Christian Churches groaning under, or in
danger of the yoke of Antichristian Tyranny, to join in the same, or like
Association and Covenant, to the glory of God, the enlargement of the Kingdom
of Jesus Christ, and the Peace and Tranquillity of Christian Kingdoms and
Commonwealths.

The Proceedings of the Covenant, with the manner of taking thereof by the
Honorable House of COMMONS, and the Reverend Assembly of DIVINES.
THe Commissioners sent from the Honorable Houses of Parliament to the
Kingdom of Scotland, having (besides other weighty Affairs) instructions to
take into consideration whatsoever might be effectual for bringing the two
Kingdoms to a more near Conjunction and Union, there was a Committee of the
Honorable Convention of Estates in Scotland, and another Committee of the
General Assembly of the Church designed to join with them in this great and
necessary consultation, in which, after much agitation, the result and
conclusion was, that a solemn League and Covenant taken mutually by both
Kingdoms, would be the most conducing means to such a happy Union. Thereupon
a form of Covenant by their Common assent was agreed upon, and presented to be
read and considered of, in the General Assembly; where it had assent and
approbation: and was thence recommended to the Convention of Estates, by an
Order of the Assembly, as follows.

Edenb. August. 17. 1643. Sess. 14.
THe Assembly having recommended unto a Committee appointed by them to join
with the Committee of the Honorable Convention of Estates, and the
Commissioners of the Honorable House of the Parliament of England, Certain
Propositions presented unto them by the aforesaid Commissioners of the
Honorable House of the Parliament of England, for bringing the two kingdoms to
a more near Conjunction and Union, received from the aforesaid Committees, the
Covenant underwritten, as the result of their Consultations; And having taken
the same as a matter of so public concernment, and of so deep importance, does
require unto their gravest consideration, Did with all their hearts and with
the beginnings of that joy which they did find in so great measure upon the
Renovation of the National Covenant of this Kirk and Kingdom, All with one
voice approve and embrace the same, as the most powerful mean by the blessing
of God for settling and preserving the true Protestant Religion with perfect
Peace in His Majesty's Dominions, and propagating the same to other Nations,
and for establishing his Majesty's Throne to all Ages and Generations. And
therefore with their best affections recommend the same to the Honorable
Convention of Estates, that being examined and approved by them, it may be sent
with all diligence unto the Kingdom of England, That being received and
approven there, the same may be with public humiliation, and all religious and
answerable solemnity sworn and subscribed by all true Professors of the
Reformed Religion, and all His Majesty's good Subjects in both Kingdoms.

Ar. Jhonston Cler. Eccl.

From that Honorable Convention it obtained like approbation, with a
recommendation to the Kingdom of England, as in this Order of theirs appears.

At Edinburgh. 17. of August, 1643.
THe Noblemen, Commissioners of Shires and Buroughs now convened, having
received the Covenant above-written from their Committee as the result of their
consultations with a Committee of their general Assembly and the Commissioners
of both Houses from the Parliament of England, and having taken the Covenant
into their gravest consideration, did with all their hearts, and great
expressions of joy and unanimity approve and embrace the same as the most
powerful mean, by the blessing of God, for settling and preserving the true
Protestant Religion with a perfect peace in all his Majesty's Dominions, and
propagating the same to other Nations, and for establishing his Majesty's
Throne to all ages: And being very confident that their Brethren in the
Kingdom of England will heartily receive and approve the same; Therefore
according to the earnest recommendation of that venerable Assembly of this Kirk
now thinks it most necessary for the good ends aforesaid, that it be sent into
that Kingdom with all diligence, that being received and approved by their
Brethren there, the same may be with all religious solemnities swerne and
subscribed by all true Professors of the Reformed Religion, and all his
Majesty's good Subjects in both Kingdoms. Extract.

Arch. Primrose, Cler. Conven.

Some Commissioners also, were sent from the General Assembly of the Church of
Scotland, with instructions for furthering the Covenant and the intended union
of the Churches of both Kingdoms. This Covenant being presented to the
Honorable House of Commons, and considered by them in the several branches
and Articles thereof, was recommended to a Committee to be chosen of their own
Members, and sorne of the Divines of the Assembly, together with the
Commissioners sent from Scotland, to the intent that some expressions might be
farther explained, and that the Kingdom of Ireland also might be expressly
taken into the same league and Covenant with us: Which being done with great
care and diligence by those Committees and Commissioners, It was then read in
the Assembly of Divines, and afterward in the House of Commons, and received a
most full and universal assent from the Members of both, Nemine contradicente.
This form of Covenant was presented also to the House of Lords, by whom
likewise it was taken into consideration, and approved of, as fit to be entered
into by the three Kingdoms.

On Friday the 22. of September it was concluded by the House, this Oath and
Covenant should be solemnly taken publicly in the Church at Westminster,
called Saint Margarets Church, the Monday following, by the House of Commons
and the Assembly of Divines: To which purpose an Order was sent to the Assembly
from the House to give them notice thereof; and that some of the Assembly be
appointed to pray and to exhort, for the more solemn celebrating of so serious
and weighty a service. The Assembly appointed Mr. Philip Nigh to make the
exhortation, Mr. John White to pray before, and Mr. Dr. Gouge to pray after the
exhortation. The House met at the usual place, and thence went with their
Speaker to the Church; the Assembly also at the same time with their
Prolocutor. A Psalm being sung, solemn prayer was made, after the prayer an
exhortation to the Honorable House and Reverend Divines encouraging them to
this work as a work of a mavelous high nature and concernment. This being
ended, Mr. Alexander Hendersam, one of the Commissioners sent from the Assembly
of the Church of Scotland, being also desired thereunto, made a Speech to the
like purpose.

Then the Covenant was read, notice being first given to the Assembly, that
after the hearing of it, each person should immediately by swearing, worship
the great Name of God, and testify so much outwardly by lifting up their
hands: which was all done very solemnly and with so much joy seen in their
countenances, and manifested by clapping of their hands, as was suitable to the
gravity of such a work, and the sadness of the present times.

Both Assemblies having thus sworn, with whom the Commissioners from Scotland
joined, the Speaker with the Members of the House of Commons, went up into the
Chancell, and there subscribed their names in a Roll of Parchment provided for
that purpose, in which this Covenant was fairly written, and afterward the
Prolocutor, the Commissioners from Scotland, and the Members of the Assembly of
Divines did the like in another Roll, which being finished, the Name of God was
again solemnly invocated, and praises returned for vouchsafing this Church and
Kingdom so happy and joyful a day; a Psalm was sung, and then the Assembly
dismissed.

An Exhortation made to the Honorable House of Commons and Reverend Divines of
the Assembly, by Mr. Nigh before he read the Covenant.
A Great and solemn work (Honorable and Reverend) this day is put into our
hands, let us stir up and awaken our hearts unto it. We deal with God as well
as with men, and with God in his greatness and excellency, for by him we
swear, and at the same time we have to do with God and his goodness, who now
reaches out unto us a strong and seasonable arm of assistance. The goodness
of God procuring succor and help to a sinful and afflicted people (such are
we) ought to be matter of fear and trembling even to all that hear of it,
Ier. 33. 9. We are to exalt and acknowledge him this day who is fearful in
praises, swear by that Name which is holy and reverent, enter into a Covenant
and league that is never to be forgotten by us nor our posterity, and the
fruit I hope of it shall be so great, as both we and they shall have cause to
remember it with joy; and such an Oath as for matter, persons, and other
circumstances, the like has not been in any age or Oath we read of in sacred
or humane Stories, yet sufficiently warranted in both.

The parties engaging in this league are three Kingdoms, famous for the
knowledge, and acknowledgement of Christ above all the Kingdoms in the world;
to swear before such a presence, should mould the spirit of man into a great
deal of reverence; what then to be engaged, to be incorporated, and that by
sacred Oath, with such an high and Honorable Fraternity? An Oath is to be
esteemed so much the more solemn, by how much greater the persons are that
swear each to other: as in heaven when God swears to his Son, on earth when
Kings swear each to other; so in this business, where Kingdoms swear
mutually.

And as the solemnity of an Oath is to be measured by the persons swearing, so
by the matter also that is to be sworn to; God would not swear to the
Covenant of works, he intended not to honor it so much, it was not to
continue, it was not worthy of an Oath of his; but to the Covenant of grace,
which is the Gospel, he swears and repents not of it. God swears for the
salvation of men, and of Kingdoms: And if Kingdoms swear, what subject of an
Oath becomes them better then the preservation and salvation of Kingdoms, by
establishing the Kingdom of a Savior amongst them, even our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, who is a Mediator and Savior for Nations as well as particular
persons?

The end also is great and honorable, as either of the former, Two is better
then one, says He who best knows what is best; and from whom alone every
thing has the goodness it has. Association is of divine Offspring; not only
the being of Creatures, but the putting of them together: the cluster as well
as the grape is the work of God: confort and harmony amongst men, especially
amongst Saints, is very pleasing unto the Lord. If when but two or three agree
and assent upon any thing on earth, it shall be confirmed in heaven; and for
this, because they gather together in his name, much more when two or three
Kingdoms shall meet and consent together in his name and for his name, that
God may be one, and his name one amongst them, and his presence amidst them.
That prayer of Christ seems to proceed from a feeling sense of his own
blessedness; Father, that they may be one, as thou in me, etc. Unity amongst
his Churches and Children must needs therefore be very acceptable unto him: For
out of the more deep sense desires are fetched from within us, the more pleasing
will be the answer of them unto us. Churches and Kingdoms are dear to God,
his patience toward them, his compassions over them, more then particular
persons, shows it plainly. But Kingdoms willingly engaging themselves for his
Kingdom, his Christ, his Saints, the purity of Religion, his worship, and
Government, in all particulars, and in all humility, sitting down at his feet
to receive the law and the rule from his mouth; what a price does he set upon
such? Especially when (as we this day) sensible of our infirmity, of an
unfaithful heart not steady with our God, but apt to start from the cause, if
we feel the knife or the fire; who bind our selves with cords, as a sacrifice
to the horns of the Altar. We invocare the name of the great God, that his
vows, yea his curse may be upon us, if we do not this; yea though we suffer
for so doing: that is, if we endeavor not so far as the Lord shall assist us
by his grace, to advance the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ here upon earth,
and make Jerusalem once more the praise of the whole world, notwithstanding all
the contradictions of men.

What is this but the contents and matter of our Oath? What do we covenant?
What do we vow? Is it not the preservation of Religion, where it is reformed,
and the Reformation of Religion, where it needs? Is it not the Reformation of
three Kingdoms, and a Reformatiom universal, Doctrine, Discipline, and
Worship, in whatsoever the Word shall discover unto us? To practice, is a fruit
of love; to reform, a fruit of zeal; but so to reform, will be a token of
great prudence, and circumspection in each of these Churches. And all this to
be done according to Gods word, the best Rule, and according to the best
reformed Churches, the best interpreters of this Rule. If England has obtained
to any greater perfection in so handling the word of righteousness, and
truths, that are according to godliness, as to make men more godly, more
righteous: And if in the Churches of Scotland any more light and beauty in
matters of Order and Discipline, by which their Assemblies are more orderly: Or
if to any other Church or person it has been given better to have learned
Christ in any of his ways then any of us; we shall humbly bow, and kiss
their lips that can speak right words unto us in this matter, and help us into
the nearest uniformity with the word and mind of Christ in this great work of
Reformation.

Honorable and Reverend Brethren, there cannot be a more direct and effectual
way to exhort and persuade the wise, and men of sad and serious spirits (and
such are you to whom I am commanded to speak this day) then to let into their
understandings the weight, and worth, and great importance of the work they are
persuaded unto. This Oath is such, and in the matter and consequence of it, of
such concernment, as I can truly say, it is worthy of us, yea of all these
Kingdoms, yea of all the Kingdoms of the World; for it is swearing fealty and
allegiance unto Christ the King of Kings; and a giving up of all these
Kingdoms, which are his inheritance, to be subdued more to his Throne, and
ruled more by his Scepter, upon whose shoulders the government is laid, and in
the increase of whose Government and peace there shall be no end, Esa. 9. Yea,
we find this very thing in the utmost accomplishment of it, to have been the
Oath of the greatest Angel that ever was, who setting his feet upon two of Gods
Kingdoms, the one upon the Sea, the other upon the Earth, lifting up his hand
to heaven, as you are to do this day, and so swearing, Rev. 10. The effect of
that Oath you shall find to bethis, that the kingdoms of the world become the
kingdoms of the Lord and his Christ, and he shall reign for ever, Rev. 11.
His Oath was for the full and final accomplishment, this of yours for a
graduall, yet a great performance toward it.

That which the Apostles and Primitive times did so much and so long pray for,
though never long with much quietness enjoyed, that which our Fathers in these
latter times have fasted, prayed and mourned after, yet attained not; even the
cause which many dear Saints now with God, have furthered by extremest
sufferings, poverty, imprisonment, banishment, death, even ever since the first
dawning of Reformation: That and the very same is the very cause and work that
we are come now, through the mercy of Jesus Christ, not only to pray for, but
swear to. And surely it can be no other, but the result and answer of such
prayers and tears of such sincerity and sufferings, that three Kingdoms should
be thus born, or rather new born in a day; that these Kingdoms should be
wrought about to so great an engagement, then which nothing is higher, for to
this end Kings reign, Kingdoms stand, and States are upheld.

It is a special grace and favor of God unto you Brethren, Reverend and
Honorable, to vouchsafe you the opportunity, and to put into your hearts (as
this day) to engage your lives and estates in matters so much concerning him
and his glory. And if you should do no more but lay a foundation stone in this
great work, and by so doing engage posterity after you to finish it, it were
honor enough: But there may yet further use be made of you, who now are to
take this Oath, you are designed as chief master Builders and choice
Instruments for the effecting of this settled Peace and Reformation; which if
the Lord shall please to finish in your hands, a greater happiness on earth,
nor a greater means to augment your glory and crown in heaven, you are not
capable of. And this let me further add for your encouragement, of what
extensive good and fruit in the success of it, this very Oath may prove to be,
we know not. God has set his Covenant like the Heavens, not only for
duration, but like also for extension: The Heavens move and roll about, and so
communicate their light, and heat, and virtue, to all places and parts of the
earth; so does the Covenant of God, so may this gift be given to other
Covenants that are framed to that pattern. How much this solemn League and Oath
may provoke other Reformed Churches to a further Reformation of themselves;
what light and heat it may communicate abroad to other parts of the world, it
is only in Him to define to whom is given the utmost ends of the earth for his
inheritance, and works by his exceeding great power great things out of as
small beginnings.

But however, this I am sure of, it is a way in all probability most likely to
enable us to preserve and defend our religion against our common enemies, and
possible a more sure foundation this day will be laid for ruining Popery and
Prelacy, the chief of them, then as yet we have been led unto in any age.

For Popery, it has been a Religion ever dexterous in fencing and muniting it
self by association and joint strength; all sorts of Professors amongst them
are cast into Fraternities and Brother-hoods, and these Orders carefully united
by Vow one with another and under some more general notion of common
dependency. Such States also and Kingdoms as they have thus made theirs; they
endeavor to improve and secure by strict combinations and leagues each to
other, witness of late years that La Saint ligue, the holy league. It will
not be unworthy your consideration, whether seeing the preservation of Popery
has been by Leagues and Covenants, God may not make a League or Covenant to
be the destruction of it* Nay, the very rise of Popery seems to be after such
a manner by Kings, that is, Kingdoms assenting and agreeing perhaps by some
joint Covenant (the Text says, with one mind, why not then with one mouth?)
to give their power and strength unto the Beast, and make war against the Lamb,
Rev. 17. where you read the Lamb shall overcome the Beast, and possibly with
the same weapons, he is the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, he can unite
Kings and Kingdoms, and give them one mind also to destroy the Whore and be
her utter ruin; And may not this days work be a happy beginning of such a
blessed expedition?

Prelacie another common enemy, that we Covenant and swear against, what has
it been, or what has the strength of it been, but a subtle combination of
Clergymen formed into a policy or body of their own invention framing
themselves into Subordination and Dependencie one upon another, so that the
interest of each is improved by all, and a great power by this means acquired
to themselves; as by sad experience we have lately found: The joints and
Members of this body, you know were knit together by the sacred engagement of
an Oath, the Oath of Canonical obedience as they called it: You remember also
with what cunning and industry they endeavored lately to make this Oath and
Covenant more sure for themselves and their posterity* And intended a more
public, solemn and universal engagement, then since Popery this cause of
theirs was ever maintained or supported by. And questionless* Ireland and
Scotland also must at last have been brought into this holy league with
England. But blessed be the Lord, and blessed be his good ^and the Parliament,
that from the indignation of their spirits against so horrid a yoke, have
dashed out the very brains of this project; and are now this day present
before the Lord to take and give possession of this blessed Ordinance, even an
Oath and Covenant as solemn and of as large extent as they intended theirs;
uniting these three Kingdoms into such a League and happy combination as will
doubtless preserve us and our Reformation against them, though their iniquity
in the mysteries of it should still be working amongst us. Come therefore (I
speak in the words of the Prophet) let us join our selves to the Lord, and one
to another, and each to all, in a perpetual Covenant that shall not be
forgotten.

We are now entering upon a work of the greatest moment and concernment, to us
and to our Posterity after us, that ever was undertaken by any of us, or any
of our forefathers before us, or neighboring Nations about us; if the Lord
shall bless this our beginning, it will be a happy day, and we shall be a
happy people. An Oath is a duty of the first Commandment, and therefore of the
highest and noblest order and rank of duties; therefore must come forth
attended with choycest graces; especially with these two, humility, and fear.

Fear, not only of God, which ought to be in an eminent measure, Genesis 31. 53.
Jacob swear by the fear of his father Isaac, as if he covered to inherit his
fathers grace, as well as his fathers God: But also fear of an Oath, it being
a dreadful duty, and has this peculiar, its established by the Oath of God, I
have sworn that unto me every tongue shall swear, Isa. 45. 23. Its made the
very Character of a Saint, he fears an Oath, Eccles. 9. 2.

Humility is another grace requisite, set your hearts before God in an humble
obedient frame, Deuteronomy. 6. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and
swear by his Name. The Apostle Paul was sensible of this engagement, even in
the very act of this duty, Romans 1. 9. I call God to witness, whom I serve in
my spirit; Although it be a work of the lips, yet the heart and whole man must
be interessed if we expect this worship to be acceptable, Psalm. 119. 108.
Accept the free will offering of my mouth, and teach me thy judgments.

Also it must be done in the greatest simplicity and plainness of spirit, in
respect of those with whom we covenant; We call God as a witness betwixt us
who searches the heart: With him is wisdom and strength, the deceived and
deceiver is his, Job, 12. 19. He has wisdom to discover, and strength to
punish, if our hearts be not upright to our brethren in this matter. Let us be
contented with this, that the words of our Covenant be hands; it may not be so
much as in the desire of our hearts, that they should become snares, no not to
the weakest and simplest person that joyneth with us. In the whole work make
your address unto God, as Jacob did to his father Isaac, and let there be the
like fear and jealousy over your spirits, Genesis 27. 12. My father peradventure
will feel me, and I shall seem to him as a deceiver, and I shall bring a curse
upon me, and not a blessing.

I take liberty with more earnestness to press this care upon you, because I
have observed Oaths and Covenants have been undertaken by us formerly, and by
the command of Authority, the fruit whereof, though great, yet not answered our
expectation, the Lord surely has been displeased with the slightness of our
hearts in the work. I beseech you be more watchful, and stir up your hearts
with more industry this day then ever before: As it is the last oath you are
likely to take in this kind, so is it our last refuge, tabula post
nat^fragium: If this help us not, we are likely to remain to our dying day an
unhappy people, but if otherwise, You will indeed swear with all your hearts,
and seek the Lord with your whole desire, God will be found, and give you rest
round about, 2 Chor. 15. 15.

And having sworn, and entered into this solemn engagement to God and man, make
conscience to do accordingly, otherwise it is better thou should not vow,
Eccles. 5. As is said of fasting, it is not the bowing down of the head for a
day, so of this solemn swearing, it is not the lifting up of the hand for a
day; but an honest and faithful endeavoring after the contents of this
Covenant all our days; A truce-breaker is reckoned up amongst the vilest of
Christians, 2 Timothy 3. 3. so a Covenant-breaker is listed amongst the worst of
Heathens, Romans 1. 31. But he that swears and changes not, though he swear
to his hurt, that is, he that will keep his Covenant and Oath though the
contents of it prove not for him, nay possibly against him, yet he will keep it
for his Oaths sake; such a one shall have his habitation with the most High and
dwell in his Tabernacle, Psalm. 15. And as for you Reverend Brethren, that are
Ministers of the Gospel, there is yet another obligation will lie upon you; let
us look to our selves, and make provision to walk answerable to this our
Covenant for the Gospels sake; it will reflect a great aspersion upon the truth
of the Gospel, if we should be false or unconstant in any word or purpose,
though in a matter of less consequence, as you can easily collect from that
apology of Paul, 2 Cor. 1. 17, 18. how much more in such a case as this is, if
we should be found to purpose, nay more, to vow, and covenant, and swear, and
all this according unto the flesh, and with us there should be, notwithstanding
all these obligations, yea yea, and nay nay?

That we may all who take the Covenant this day, be constant, immovable, and
abound in this work of the Lord, that we may not start aside, or give back, or
go on uncomfortably, there is a twofold grace or qualification to be labored
after.

1. We must get courage, spirits that are bold and resolute. It is said in
Haggai, that the Lord stirred up the spirit of Zerubbabel Governor of Judah,
and the spirit of Joshua the high Priest, and the spirit of all the remnant of
the people, and they came, and did work in the house of the Lord, the work of
Gods house: Reformation-work especially, is a stirring work: read Stories, you
find not any where, Reformation made in any age, either in Doctrine or
Discipline, without great stir and opposition. This was foretold by the same
Prophet, cap. 2. verse. 7. the promise is, He will fill his house with glory;
but what goes before? verse. 6. Yet once it is a little while and I will shake
the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land; that is, all
Nations, as in the words following. This place is applied Heb. 12. to the
removing Jewish Rites, the movables of Gods house. The like you find in the
Apostles times, Acts 17. the truth being preached; some believed, others did
not; here begins the stir, verse. 6. those that believed not, took unto
themselves certain lewd fellows of the baser sort, and gathered a company,
and set all the City in an uproare: and when they had done so, complained of
the brethren to the Rulers, as men that turn the world upside down, ver. 6.
Read also Acts 21. 27, 30, 31. In such a work therefore men had need be of
stout, resolute, and composed spirits, that we may be able to go on in the
maine, and stir in the midst of such stirs, and not be amused at any such
doings. It may possibly happen, that even amongst your selves there will be
outcries; Sir, you will undo all, says one; you will put all into confusion
says another; if you take this course, says a third, we can expect nothing
but blood: but a wise Statesman, like an experienced Seaman, knows the
compass of his vessel, and though it heave and rosse, and the passengers cry
out about him, yet in the midst of all* he is himself, turns not aside
from his work, but steereth on his course. I beseech you let it be seriously
considered, if you mean to do any such work in the house of God as this is;
if you mean to pluck up what many years ago was planted, or to build up what
so long ago was pulled down, and to go thorough with this work, and not be
discouraged, you must beg of the Lord this excellent spirit, this resolute
stirring spirit, otherwise you will be out-spirited, and both you and your
cause slighted and dishonored.

2. On the other hand we must labor for humility, prudence, gentleness,
meekness. A man may be very zealous and resolute, and yet very meek and
merciful: Jesus Christ was a Lion, and yet a Lamb also; in one place he
tells them he comes to send fire on the earth: and in another place
rebukes his Disciples for their fiery spirits, Luke 9* 54. There was the like
composition in Moses, and in Paul, and it is of great use, especially in this
work of Reformation. I have not observed any disputes carried on with more
bitterness in men's writings, and with a more unsanctified heat of spirit, yea
and by godly men too, then in controversies about Discipline, Church
Government, Ceremonies, and the like. Surely to argue about Government with
such ungoverned passions, to argue for Reformation with a spirit so unreformed,
is very uncomely. Let us be zealous, as Christ was, to cast our all, to
extirpate and root out every plant his heavenly Father has not planted; and
yet let us do it in as orderly way, and with the spirit of Christ, whose
servants we are. The servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle to all
men, apt to teach, patient, in meekness instructing those that oppose, 2 Timothy
2. 24, 25. We solemnly engage this day our utmost endeavors for Reformation;
let us remember this, that too much heat, as well as too much coldness, may
harden men in their ways, and hinder Reformation.

Brethren, let us come to this blessed work, with such a frame of heart, with
such a mind for the present, with such resolutions for the time to come; let
us not be wanting to the opportunity God has put into our hands this day;
and then I can promise you, as the Prophet, Consider this day and upwards, even
from this day, that the foundation of the Lords work is laid, Consider it, from
this day will I bless you, says the Lord: Nay, we have received as it were
the first fruits of this promise, for as it is said of some men's good works,
they are manifest before hand, 1 Timothy 5. Even so may be said of the good work
of this day, it is manifest before hand, God has as it were before hand
testified his acceptance; while we were thinking and purposing this free will
Offering; he was protecting and defending our Army; causing our enemies the
enemies of this work to fly before us, and gave us a victory, not to be
despised. Surely this Oath and Covenant shall be Iudahs joy, the joy and
comfort of this whole Kingdom; yea, of all three Kingdoms.

Jesus Christ King of the Saints govern us by his Spirit, strengthen us by his
power, undertake for us according as he has sworn, even the Oath which he
swear to our Father Abraham, that he would grant unto us, that we being
delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might serve him without fear in
holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life, Luke 1.
Grant unto us also, that when this life is finished, and we gathered to our
Fathers, there may be a generation out of our loins to stand up in this cause,
that his great and reverent Name may be exalted from one generation to another,
until he himself shall come, and perfect all with his own hand by his own
wisdom; even so come Lord Jesus, come quickly,

Amen.
A SPEECH Delivered by Mr Alexander Hendersam, immediately before the taking of
the Covenant by the House of COMMONS, and Assembly of DIVINES.
ALthough the time be far spent, yet am I bold (Honorable, Reverend, and
Beloved in the Lord) to crave your patience a little; It were both sin and
shame to us in this so acceptable a time, in this day, which the Lord has
made, to be silent and to say nothing: If we should hold our peace, we could
neither be answerable to God, whose cause and work is in hand; nor to this
Church and Kingdom, unto which we have made so large profession of duty, and
owe much more; nor to our native Kingdom, so abundant in affection toward you;
nor to our own hearts, which exceedingly rejoice to see this day: We have
greater reason then the leprous men sitting in a time of great extremity at the
gate of Samaria, to say one to another, We do not well, this day is a day of
good tidings, and we hold our peace? It is true the Syrians are not yet fled;
but our hope is through God, that the work begun this day, being sincerely
performed and faithfully pursued; shall put to flight, not only the Syrians and
Babylonians, but all other Enemies of the Church of God; of the Kings honor,
and of our liberty and peace.

For it is acceptable to God and wel-pleasing in his sight, when his people
come willingly in the day of his power (and how shall they not be willing in
the day of his power?) to enter a religious Covenant, with him, and amongst
themselves. Whatsoever be the condition of the people of God, whether in sorrow
and humiliation before deliverance; or in rejoicing and thanksgiving after
deliverance; this is it, which the Lord waits for at their hands, which they
have been used to perform, and with which he has been so well pleased, that
it has been the fountain of many deliverances and blessings unto them. When a
people begins to forget God, he lifts up his hand against them and
siniteth them: And when his people, humbled before him, lift up their hands,
not only in supplication, but in Covenant before the most high God; he is
pleased (such is his mercy and wonderful compassion) First, to lift his hand
unto them, saying, I am the Lord your God; as we have it three times in two
verses of the 20th of Ezekiel; And next he stretches out his hand against his
Enemies and theirs. It is the best work of Faith, to join in Covenant with God;
the best work of love and Christian Communion, to join in Covenant with the
people of God; the best work of the best zeal, to join in Covenant for
Reformation, against the Enemies of God and Religion; the best work of true
loyalty, to join in Covenant for the preservation of our King and Superiors;
and the best proof of natural affection (and to be without natural
affection, is one of the great sins of the Gentiles) to join in Covenant for
defense of our Native Country, Liberties, and Laws; Such as for these
necessary ends do withdraw and are not willing to enter into Covenant, have
reason to enter into their own hearts, and to look into their faith, love,
zeal, loyalty, and natural affection.

As it is acceptable to God, so have we for it the precedent and example, not
only of the people of God of old, of the Reformed Churches of Germany, and the
Low Countries; but of our own Noble and Christian Progenitors in the time of
the danger of Religion, which is expressed in the Covenant it self. The defect
was; They went not on thoroughly to enter in a Solemn Covenant; an happiness
reserved for this time: which had they done, the corruptions and calamities of
these days might have been prevented: And if the Lord shall be pleased to
move, loose, and enlarge the hearts of his people in his Majesty's Dominions to
take this Covenant, not in simulation, nor in luke-warmnesse, as those that are
almost persuaded to be Christians, but as becomes the people of God, it shall
be the prevention of many evils and miseries, and a mean of many and rich
blessings, spiritual and temporal, to our selves, our little ones, and the
Posterity that shall come after us for many Generations.

The near and neighboring example of the Church and Kingdom of Scotland, is
in this case worthy of our best observation: When the Prelates there, were grown
by their rents, and Lordly Dignities, by their exorbitant power over all sorts
of his Majesty's Subjects, Ministers and others, by their places in Parliament,
Council, College of Justice, Exchequer, and High Commission, to a monstrous
dominion and greatness, and like Giants, setting their one foot on the neck of
the Church, and the other on the neck of the State, were become intolerably
insolent; and when the people of God through their oppression in Religion,
Liberties, and Laws, and what was dearest unto them, were brought so low, that
they chused rather to die, then to live in such slavery, or to live in any
other place, rather then in their own native Country; Then did the Lord say, I
have seen, I have seen the affliction of my people, and I have heard their
groaning, and am come down to deliver them. The beginnings were small, and
contemptible in the eyes of the presumptuous Enemies, such as use to be the
beginnings of the greatest works of God; but were so seconded and continually
followed by the undeniable evidences of Divine Providence, leading them forward
from one step to another, that their Mountain became strong in the end. No
tongue can tell what motions filled the hearts, what tears were poured forth
from the eyes, and what cries came from the mouths of many thousands in that
Land, when they found an unwonted flame warming their breasts, and perceived
the power of God raising them from the dead, and creating for them a new world,
wherein should dwell Religion and Righteousness. When they were destitute both
of moneys and munition, which next unto the spirits and arms of men, are the
sinews of War, the Lord brought them forth out of his hid treasures; which
was wonderful in their eyes, and matter of astonishment to their hearts: When
they were many times at a pause in their deliberations, and brought to such
perplexity, that they knew not what to choose or to do, for prosecuting the work
of God, only their eyes were toward him; not only the fears and furies, but
the plots also and policies of the Adversaries, opened the way unto them, their
devices were turned upon their own heads, and served for the promoting of the
work of God. The purity of their intentions elevated above base and earthly
respects, and the constant peace of their hearts in the midst of many dangers,
did bear them out against the malicious accusations and aspersions put upon
their actions; all which were sensible impressions of the good providence of
God, and legible characters of his work: which as the Church and Kingdom of
England exercised at this time with greater difficulties then theirs, have in
part already found, so shall the Parallel be perfected to their greater comfort
in the faithful pursuing of the work unto the end.

Necessity, which has in it a kind of Sovereignty, and is a Law above all
Laws, and therefore is said to have no Law; does mightily press the Church
and Kingdom of Se^tland at this time. It is no small comfort unto them that
they have not been idle and at ease, but have used all good and lawful means
of Supplications, Declarations, and Remonstrances to his Majesty, for
quenching the combustion in this Kingdom: And after all these, that they sent
Commissioners to his Majesty, humbly to mediate for a reconcilement and
Pacification; But the offer of their humble service was rejected, from no other
reason, but that they had no warrant nor capacity for such a Mediation; And
that the intermixture of the Government of the Church of England with the
Civil government of the Kingdom, was such a mystery as could not be understood
by them. Although it be true, which was at that time often replied, that the
eighth demand of the Treaty, and the answer given thereunto concerning the
Uniformity of Religion, was a sufficient ground of capacity; and the
proceedings of the Houses of Parliament against Episcopal Government, as a
stumbling block hindering Reformation, and as a prejudice to the Civil State,
was ground enough for their information. The Commissioners having returned from
his Majesty without success, and the miseries of Ireland, the distresses of
England, and the dangers and pressures of the Kingdom of Scotland, growing to
greater extremity; such as were entrusted with the public affairs of the
Kingdom were necessitate according to the practice of former times (his
Majesty having denied a Parliament) to call a Convention of the Estates for
considering of the present affairs, and for providing the best remedies: which
immediately upon their meeting by the special providence of God, did receive
information of diverse treacherous attempts of Papists in all the three
Kingdoms, as if they had been called for that effect: And by the same
Providence, Commissioners were sent from both Houses of Parliament to consider
with the Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland, of such Articles and Propositions
as might make the conjunction betwixt the two Nations more beneficial and
effectual for the securing of Religion and Liberty against Papists and Prelates
with their Adherents. Their Consultations with the Commissioners of the
General Assembly, did in the end bring forth this Covenant, as the only mean
after all other have been assayed, for the deliverance of England and Ireland
out of the deeps of affliction, preservation of the Church and Kingdom of
Scotland from the extremity of misery, and the safety of our native King and
his Kingdoms from destruction and desolation. This is the manifold necessity
which Nature, Religion, Loyalty, and Love has laid upon them.

Nor is it unknown in this Honorable, Reverend, and wise Audience, what
errors, and heresies in doctrine; what Superstition and Idolatry in Worship,
what Usurpation and Tyranny in Government, what cruelty against the souls and
bodies of the Saints have been set on foot, exercised, and executed for many
Generations, and now of late, by the Roman Church; all which we hope through
the blessing of God upon this work, shall be brought to an end. Had the Pope at
Rome the knowledge of what is doing this day in England, and were this Covenant
written on the Plaster of the Wall over against him, where he sits
Belshazzar-like in his Sacriligious pomp, it would make his heart to tremble,
his countenance to change, his head and Miter to shake, his joints to loose,
and all his Cardinals and Prelates to be astonished.

When the Reformed Churches, which by their Letters have been exciting us to
Christian Communion and Sympathy in this time of the danger of Religion and
distress of the Godly, shall hear of this blessed conjunction for uniformity
in Religion according to the Word of God and the defense thereof; it shall
quicken their hearts against the heaviness of oppressing sorrows and fears;
and be no other than a beginning of a Jubilee and joyful deliverance unto
them, from the Antichristian yoke and tyranny.

Upon these and the like considerations we are very confident, that the Church
and Kingdom of Scotland will most cheerfully join in this Covenant, at the
first motion whereof, their (...) were moved within them* And to give testimony
of this our confidence, we who are Commissioners from the General Assembly,
although we have no particular and express Commission for that and, (not from
^a^t of willingness, but of a foresight) offer to joy^ our hearts and hands
unto it, being a stored that the Lord in his own time will against all
opposition even against the gates of Hell* crown it with a blessing from
Heaven. The Word of God is for it, as you have been (...) (...) by the consent
and testimony of a Reverend Assembly ^^ so many godly, learned, and grav(...)
Divines. In your own sense and experience you will find, that although, while
you are assaulted or exercised with worldly cares and fears, your thoughts may
somewhat trouble and direct you; yet at other times, when upon seeking of God in
private or public, as in the evening of a well spent Sabbath, or day of Fast
and Humiliation, your disposition is more spiritual, and leaving the world
behind you, you have found access unto God through Jesus Christ, the bent and
inclinations of your hearts will be strongest to go through with this work. It
is a good testimony that our designs and ways are agreeable to the will of
God, if we affect them most when our hearts are furthest from the world, and
our temper is most spiritual and heavenly, and least carnal and earthly. As
the Word of God, so the prayers of the people of God in all the Reformed
Churches are for us, and on our side: It were more terrible then an Army to
hear that there were any servent supplications to God against us; blasphemies,
curses, and horrid imprecations there be, proceeding from another spirit, and
that is all. That Divine Providence also which has maintained this Cause and
supported his Servants in a mavelous manner unto this day, and which this
time past has kept things in an equal balance and vicissitude of success,
will we trust from this day forth, through the weight of this Covenant, cast
the balance, and make Religion and Righteousness to prevail, to the glory of
God, the honor of our King, the confusion of our common Enemies, and the
comfort and safety of the people of God: Which he grant, who is able to do
above anything that we can ask or think.

FINIS.

