The Country-man's Petition for a Parliament.
The Humble Petition of Mr. Barnaby Clod, a well-descended Person, most Humbly,
and most Obediently, and most Submissively showing, and Expressing, and
declaring unto your Great Majesty.
THAT whereas, and whereby, and by which, the major, and most greater, and most
bigger and most stronger Party, of the most best, and the most ablest, and the
most mightiest sort of the People of the Baronage of Whigland, finding, and
knowing, and certifying themselves, both heretofore, and for the time past, and
now, and then, and at this present time, to be very much, and greatly
oppressed, and suppressed, and distressed, and overcharged in all Taxes,
Quitrents, and all other Levies and Fines, applotted, and levied, and gathered
together, in the said Baronage of Whigland, and for further prevention of any,
and all, and every such Offense, henceforth, hereafter, and for the time to
come, the aforesaid, most major, and most greater, and most bigger, and most
stronger Party, of the most best, and most ablest, and most mightiest sort of
the People, of the Baronage of Whigland aforesaid, have appointed, nominated,
constituted, ordained, elected, approved, and made choice of me, Mr. Barnaby
Clod, to solicit, intercede, and motion, and make application unto your
Majesty; looking upon me now, and there, and then, to be the most meetest, and
the most eloquent, and most accomplished Spokes-man, within the said Baronage,
their grand, and well-bestowed, and better-merited Agent, to represent, and
reprevent, and extortion, for all such, and all much, and the like Grievences
and disturbances. And whereas, and whereupon, your Petitioner, is hereby,
finally, and handsomely, and ingenuously, and deservedly appointed, constituted,
ordained, elected, approved, and chosen, to undergo, and undertake, and
underrun, and manage, this huge, big, mighty, great and weighty Service: These
are therefore, and shall be the especial, and importunate, and incessant, and
indefatigable Request of me your Petitioner: That your Majesty will be pleased,
satisfied, and resolved, to give, and grant, and deliver, and bestow unto me
the before-recited, and nominated Petitioner, an Order and Warrant to my Lord
of Crabtry, and Mr. Captain Yedard Bumkin, Justice of the Peace, and Governor
aforesaid, Esquire and to Mr. Raafe Yates Justice of the Peace, and Governor
aforesaid, Esquire or to any four or five, or more, or less, or either or neither,
or none of them, All Particulars and Parties as they shall imagine and
conceive, consider and suppose, esteem, think fit, and meet, and necessary,
convenient, and decent; and then, and there, and where, and whether, to
examine, and call to account, for their past, and repast Extortion, and then,
and when, and where, and whether, to establish, elect, choose, empower and
appoint, and authorize, all such, and all much Baylisss, and Applotters, and
Gatherers together, as your Petitioner do, or did, or have or had, or shall or
will, or may or can, might or would, could or should, or ought to choose or
pitch upon. And withal I desire, that I mine own self, Mr. Barnaby Clod as
aforesaid, that they and I, and all and every, and either or neither of the
said Parties, shall and will live and die in Cords, and Concords, Concordant
discord, Sorrowing, Rejoicing, Dying, Living, Broken, Healed, Tranquillity,
henceforth and hereafter, and for the time past and present, and for now, and
for everlasting, etc.

LONDON, Printed for C. Tebrock. 1682.


