The Schismatic Stigmatized.

Wherein all Make-bates are branded; whether they are
Eves-dropping-newes-carriers, Murmurers, Complainers, Railers, Reproachers,
Revilers, Repining Reformers, Fault-finders, Quarrell-pickers, and
Corner-creepers; with all the rabble of Brain-sicks, who are enemies to Old
Englands Peace.

Neminem dum possis offendas, Et Gemmam pacis offendes.

Offend no man; be meek in mind,
And thou the Gem of peace shall find.
Bono probari malo, quam multis malis.

By RICHARD CARTER.

LONDON, Printed by J. Oaks, for Francis Coals, and are to b^ sold at his shop
in the Old Baily. 1641.

To the Reader, Peace, Health, and Happiness.
PEace in all ages: She has still had enemies, and slanderers (amongst those
who know her not:) But none so bad as Schismatics; For one Thief in the
house, is worse than many without doors: Our Blessed Lord Jesus says, A man's
enemies shall be those of his own house. God himself first laid the
foundation of his Church in peace; our blessed Savior he is the chief corner
stone, and Prince of peace from age to age, to this present: God has, and
still does maintain and uphold the same by the Ministry of Christian Kings,
Queens, Princes, and Prelates, who do succeed our Lord and his holy Apostles.
The Devil seeing this, stirs up all the Rebel of Schismatics, like
Sampsons Foxes, not only tied tail to tail, but also tongue to tongue, with
balls of wildfire, or rather hellfire to disturb our peace, and set fire on
all at once. But I shall still desire of God, that those Foxes may be prevented
and taken, and this wildfire quenched: I know it belongs to Master Builders
to build a house: but being on fire blame me not, bringing my Bucket to help
quench the flame. We did all promise this when we were Baptized, to fight
against the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, under the Banner of Christ (which
is his Cross) and to continue Christ's faithful Soldiers and servants to our
lives end. If any shall find their knowledge increased hereby, or their
memories rubbed and refreshed in things already known, then give me thy best
wishes, as thou have mine. Thy friend (could I befriend thee,)

R. C.

(...) Conscius ipse sibi, de se putat omnia dici.
Behold the guilty man does dream,
All what I write puts him to shame.


The Contents of this great Volume.
FIrst, Schismatics are Stigmatized (according to my reading) with brands in
number 20.

Secondly, I have conceited a Fantasy Dialogue-wayes between Tom-ass
Pragmaticus, the great Petifogger, and Nickall-ass Nonsense, his close
companion.

Thirdly, and last; to wind up the bottom, because Schismatics cannot brook
Church-Musicke calling the same the Devills-Bag-pipes; and our singing of
Psalms, they profanely term Geneva-gigs: in spite of their teeth, their
hearts and tongues must sing with me this my home-spunne-plaine-song.

Reader, in reading my ensuing Lines, (I pray thee) be not currish but
courteous: in the 17. Stigma I name diverse Tradesmen: I blame no good Trade,
but presumptuous Tradesmen who dare to climb up into Pulpits, and make
themselves bold Ambassadors of the great King of Kings, to declare the will of
Almighty God to his people. This is horrible wickedness, and Devilish
damnablenesse. Hereby they do horribly dishonor both God and our King and
abuse the people who do give credit to them. But praised be God for ever, who
does continue our Kings sacred Majesty in his former royal resolution, (to
continue the Gospel of Peace, and the peace of the Gospel) that he may still
uphold the Doctrine, and Discipline of Old Englands Church. Pray we all for the
Lords anointed, that God would knit his sacred heart with both his Parliaments
in England, and Scotland. for the rooting out of all Traitors, Rebels,
Heretics, and Schismatics, and compose those great differences in Great
Britain: and I know all true hearted Subjects to this will say,

Amen.
The Schismatic Stigmatized.
Stigma 1.
SCHISMATICS in all ages, have been, and still are Pragmaticall, peremptory,
presumptuous Pettifoggers: they will not go to the Devil alone; but they are
ever stirring up others to Rebellion, Schism, and Faction: this all ages, and
all Nations must witness.

Stigma 2.
They are horrible cross to the proceedings of Kings, Princes, and
Parliaments, abusing them with Crosses, and cross Bills and Petitions.

Stigma 3.
They rail against our Church Government, and Governors, Slandering, and
loading them with a world of contumelies, defamations, and opprobrious
detractations; not once to be named among Christians; I may fitly compare them
to the Schismaticall-Rebells, Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, who murmured against
Moses and Aaron. Numb. 16.

Stigma 4.
They are like the Anabaptists, as Sleidan reports: The Devil stirred up
giddy-headed, Brainsick Preachers, who did not only prate against the Bishop
of Rome, but they railed against Luther also. Those Schismatics here are as
like the Anabaptists, as one egg is like another of the same kind: for they
rail not only against Rome, but Old England also. But I know the Pope is in
one extreme, and Schismatics in another: for they cry down all our
Orthodoxe Divines, and set up mechanics. When a sound Divine has lived in a
parish 30. or 40. years: Schismatics in his charge have preferred a Bill
against him; to bring in a blind guide. And a wife has put up a Bill in a
public Congregation against her husband, and her self to be prayed for,
because she loved another man better than her own husband. I suppose her
husband gave her, (Poculum Charitatis, in the stead of Copula Cannositatis.)
But they do with our sound and old Divines as the husbandman does with his old
Ox: when the poor harmless creature has ploughed the ground, and dragged
the Harrow, and drawed his Corn into the Barn, then for his reward, he has
an Axe to beat out his brains, and a knife to cut his throat.

Stigma 5.
They hang together in private Conventicles, as Mr. Calvin compares them to
the old Heretics (the Donatists) who in their Conventicles gave mutual oaths
each to other: so that they grew to such multitudes in Germany, they could not
be vanquished until there were a hundred thousand of them slain by the
Princes of Germany. See Sleidan. lib. 7.

Stigma 6.
And in their Conventicles they pretend nothing but Reformation, humiliation,
fasting, and prayer, persuading poor ignorants, that they are all for
Reformation, Reformation, and nothing but Reformation, (forsooth) hereby they
disturb the peace of our Church wonderfully: as Bullenger says Lib. 6. cap.
10. Advers. Anabapt. and Gualiher in 1. Cor. Epist. Dedicat. does most lively
set them forth.

Stigma 7.
They would have a parity, and equality of Ecclesiastical persons, like the
Anabaptists, as Bullenger says Gastius, and Hemingius reports the same, De
Erroribus Catabaptist, those Owls, Grows, and Mag-pyes, would have our Church
like Polyphemus, without eyes, and without order, like the confused Chaos: so
bring the Minister of the Gospel into contempt, forgetting that Solomon was a
Preacher as well as a King, and Nicodemus was a Ruler of Jews, and a Preacher
also. But prate they of parity, and brawl their brains out of their brainsick
brows, there is no wise man will give credit to them. September 1. 1641. The
orders from the house of Commons concerning Images was good; but now the
disorderly Rout do pretend this order, but intend nothing but disorder, for
they pull down, and tear up all ancient Monuments of all Benefactors, without
any respect to that good order at all. They fling and throw, pull, tear, and
hale, deface and demolish what they please, raging and raving like a shee-Beare
robbed of her Whelps, playing the Devil for Gods sake. But we hope those
damnable differences will be composed, and these fearful sparkles quenched
before long time, or else they will break forth into a devouring flame. They
rail against us, because we will not rail against those things which are
enacted by former Parliaments, and also sealed with the hearts-bloud of many
Martyrs: and the Papists they call us heretics. Good Lord now help us.

Stigma 8.
They preach, (prate I should say) that all Christian-liberty is lost, if we
obey any thing that is imposed on us by man. But Mr. Perkins in his Treatise of
Conscience says well (wholesome Laws of men concerning things indifferent do
bind the conscience, by virtue of Gods Law, which does commend, and command
the Authority of the Magistrate so he that transgresses the Laws of the King,
does transgress the Law of Almighty God also,) Romans 13.

Stigma 9.
They are peevishly perverse, against the laudable, and Christian orders of our
Church. When we stand up reverently, they unmannerly sit on their Bums. When we
kneel, they either sit or loll on their elbowes. When we are bare-headed, they
have their Bonnets, and Hats on their zealous Noddles. When we fast they will
feast. And again, when we feast they will fast. They will nibble on a red
Herring on Christmasse day, but feast liberally on Good Friday, like Zoilus,
and Momus, carping at every thing but pleased with nothing, but with Schism
Faction, and Rebellion. These have ever resisted our blessed and happy
beginnings, and preceedings in Old- England ever since the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign. Now all the learning, prudence, piety and policy of this
Kingdom, both King and Subjects are joined in one high and honorable
Assembly. I may safely say, there is not only the whole Body of great
Britain, but the soul also. Yet behold, the long-winded Prickecare does dare,
not only to divert, but also correct, both soul and body, pricking and
prating this shall be, and this or that shall not be done. They compare Old
England to Egypt, and themselves to the only true Israelites; and they
(forsooth) are holden in bondage under cruel Taske-masters. But our eyes are
up to the hills, from whence our help comes, (Oh Lord) help us, and send us
prosperity: and pray we all for the Lords anointed, and with one heart say
(help oh King, help oh King.)

Stigma 10.
And when they are most justly punished for their villainy, oh how they glory
brag and boast, saying that they do sufter for Righteousnesse-sake; when
indeed it is for railing against Dignites: We all know, it is not the
suffering, but the cause that makes a Martyr: for he that gives the cause
wherefore he is punished, he does punish himself.

Stigma 11.
They rail and rave against all our Vniversity-Degrees saying, all those are
nothing in the world, but the swelling Titles of Antichrist, and Romish
Relics. At Rome there is Antichrist, and in England here is Anti-Iesus, and
both are enemies to God, and our King.

Stigma 12.
They cram and stuff their Schismatic Pamphlets with a world of quotations,
to great purpose (I warrant you) see these two allegations for all the rest.
When they would prove it unlawful, to use Interrogations in Baptism, (then
they quote Galat. 6. 7. And when they would prove that Ministers must not wear
Gowns, Caps, Surplesses, Hoods, and such like, then they allege Matthew 26. 48.
By these two we may guess at all the rest. One of them reproved me once, and
his Text was Luke the 29. to whom I replied, God made 24. Chapters in the holy
Gospel of St. Luke, but the Devil and Schismatics have added five Chapters
more of their own.

Stigma 13.
They allow not any set forms of Prayer, because set forms do limit and bind
the Spirit (forsooth) but these Mag-pies with their chattering and vain
babbling, do horribly limit the devotion of all understanding men, who have
that ill hap to hear their vain babbling, as ah Lard, and eh Lard, a hundred
times over and over in one prating: for prayer I dare not term the same.

Stigma 14.
They approve not of Godfathers, and Godmothers for infants in Baptism; but
the whole Congregation must witness for the Child.

Stigma 15.
They do not only bafely reproach out Reverend Clergy in these days, but
they vilely esteem all the Classical and principal Bishops, Doctors, ancient
Fathers, Counsels and Synods of the Primitive Church; who did succeed our
blessed Savior, and his holy Apostles; who were indeed the very eyes of the
Church, and the hammers to all Schismatics, Heretics, Rebels, and Traitors.

Stigma 16.
They cannot brook an Orthodoxe Divine, because he uses to speak sometimes
in his Sermon, Hebrew, Greek, and Latin; because these three were accursed on
the Cross: and Latin (forsooth) is the language of the whore of Rome: they
are like the Fox who despised the Grapes which indeed he could in no wise come
at: and like the old Fox, having lost his tail persuades all his fellow Foxes
to cut off theirs also, thereby to hide the foul deformity, and to bury his
own ignorance in the common confused heap.

Stigma 17.
And in stead of Orthodoxe Divines, they set up all kind of Mechanics, as
Shooe-makers, Cobblers, Taylers, and Botchers: Glovers, who preach of nothing
but Mag-pies, and Crows, Boxe-Makers, and Button-Makers, Coach-men, and
Felt-makers, and Bottle-Ale-sellers, these predicant Mechanics, and lawless
lads do affect an odd kind of gesture in their Poopits, vapouring and throwing
heads, hands, and shoulders this way, and that way, puffing and blowing,
grinning, and gerning, showing their teeth, and snuffling through their noses:
hereby they astonish and amaze the poor ignorant multitude, persuading them
that he is a fellow that looks into deeper matters, than the common sort:
when indeed he has lately rubbed over some old moth-eaten Schismatic
Pamphlet: then he stampeth with his feet, and belaboureth the poor Cushion,
and makes the dust thereof fly about both his ears, beating the Pulpit with
both his fists, in a passion of blind zeal, able to drive his unlucky
Auditors out of their little wits, or seven senses.

Stigma 18.
They do imperiously take upon them to teach and direct all men; harping on no
string, but Reformation, Reformation; they will reform all abuses with a wet
finger, and in a trice. They will not leave the matter to the King, and to the
Lords spiritual and temporal, with the House of Commons assembled in the High
and Honorable Houses of Parliament. They pretend an extraordinary inspiration,
like the Goldsmiths, that blind Prophet in Germany, who proclaimed John of
Leidon Suitor ne ultra ^repidam
the Cobbler, that he should be Emperor of all the world: and that he should
destroy all Princes, Potentates, and Prelates, but should spare all the common
rout, who are the only lovers of sincerity, This was in the year 1533. Here
was the like braine-sick Schismatic in England, Hacket by name; he was
proclaimed King by other Schismatic Rebels, in the 33. of Elizabeth, read
Conspira. page 66. and the Annalls of England, collected by John Stow, page
1288. Also in the same 33. year of Queen Elizabeth. I read of another
Braine-sick Rebel, who with traiterous words reviled her Majesty, and defaced
her Arms, and pierced in that part of her picture which did represent her
breast and heart: for the which treason, he was justly put to death, July 26.
in the year above named: Read the forenamed John Stow his Annals, p. 1289.
Almighty God, who have delivered Queen Elizabeth, and K. James from all their
enemies, preserve also King Charles his sacred Majesty, from all his, and our
mortal phanatick, and Braine-sicke Schismatic foes.

Amen.
Stigma 19.
They revile Gods Divine Service, profanely tearming the same Porredge, and
the Popes Masse-booke: yea, their blind zeal will not permit the reading of
the Sacred Scriptures in public, no nor to use our blessed Lords Prayer,
neither first nor last, all our Service is no better than Mass (if you will
believe Schismatics.) And being grossly scandalous with whoring couzenage,
and drunkenness, and slandering: they put it often, saying it is the flesh, for
they are altogether spiritual (forsooth.)

Stigma 20.
Last of all, they are miserable close-fisted when our Kings Majesty demands
his due, for his Royal supportation and for the safety and defense of his
Kingdoms. I have read, that on a time Constantinople was besieged a long time
together: and at last the enemy was minded to give over the siege, and be
gone, but news came to the enemy, that the soldiers within the City were
grown very weak, and discontented for want of their pay; the enemy then
returned, and in short space took the City; there they found infinite store of
gold, and all manner of treasure; the hundred part thereof would have paid the
Soldiers, and so have kept out the enemy, and preserved all. The enemy
himself seeing the treasure hid basely, he lamented their folly: and this is
a Proverb to this day among the Turks when one becomes very rich: You have
been at the siege of Constantinople.


I leave this Bone for all hide-bound, close-fisted Schismatics to gnaw upon.
I will add what King James of ever blessed memory says in his learned (...),
verbatim his words are these in the 42. page of the said Book: These are very
Pests in Church and Commonweal, whom neither oaths, nor promises can bind,
breathing out nothing but sedition and calumnies, aspiring without measure, and
railing without reason: making their own imaginations (without any warrant of
Gods Word) the square of their consciences. I protest before the great God, and
since it is no time for me to lie, being now upon my Testament; (that ye
shall never find with any hy-land, or border-theeves, greater ingratitude, and
more lies, and vile perjuries than with these Phanatick spirits. Read the rest
of this Page, and the 43. of this most excellent Book. I will add what I read
in the Book of Homilies, Tome 1. p. 36. The world from the beginning till now,
was ever prompt and ready to fall from God, and his holy Commandments, in
seeking other devices of their own brains; and a devotion found out by the
Devil and themselves: the which idle dreams and devices, they ever set up
above Gods Commandments: What man of learning and sound judgment does not
see, how hypocrisy, schism, and faction, and heresy do not daily more and
more creep into our Church. The four Leaven thereof, does almost four the
unleavened lump.

I will conclude with that reverend Bishop Iuell, indeed the Juell of our
Church: whose Works are famous in our several Churches: He says, O immortal
God, have all our Orthodox Divines been out of the way: and now are a sort of
Schismatics only in the truth? God forbid, God forbid: It has been an old
complaint, even from the first time of the Patriarchs and Prophets, confirmed
by the writings and testimonies of every age: (veritatem in terris peregrinam
agere, and interagnotos, facile inimicos, and calumniatores invenire. Apologia
Eccles. Ang. And God affect all our hearts with a serious and frequent
cogitation of sickness, death, and the last judgment: that we may all fear
God, and honor our King, and live in peace, as good subjects should do,
according to Gods holy Word, and blessed Ordinance: that in whatsoever we do
think, or speak, we may ever mind that terrible voice, (Surgite mortui, and
venite ad judicium.) St. Hieron. de Reg. and Monarch. Chap. 30.

Saint Hierom often did well record,
The second coming of our Lord:
When this huge Globe shall with fire flame,
And all the creatures in the same:
Therefore all mind that dreadful doom,
Arise you dead, to judgment come.
Here follows my Fantasy, or Conceit, between Tom-asse Pragmaticus, and
Nick-all-asse Nonsense.

THomas thus began to vapor: Oh brother Nickallas, come, come, give me thy
hand, give me thy hand: well met, well met: what news about religion? the time
is come we looked for: there are rods in (these popish times) in piss, for all
those papisticall Protestants, and for this Episcopal Dependant Government,
and Governors: what say thou Nickallas?

Nick. Ha, ha, he: well emet, well emet, brother Tom, ge me thy han, ge me thy
vest (I say:) I con but laugh, ha, ha, lie. Oh my zide, oh my belly (I zay:)
what did you hire of the Protestation protested, wherein thuck zweet Teacher
(you know who) do say, that this government is popish, as indeed it is my Creed.


Tom. But what say thou to this R. C. who has written two Poems besides
this? and in all three he does extol this Antichristian government to the
skies?


Nick. I can him thurty or vorty years better than thuck that maden: and no man
knows what is in hem: but I cham zure, he has a little Pope in's belly: vor he
is ever pooring in books, and mooping by himzelfe: and this is the unjust cause
he gives thanks vor Zaints departed, and zets up Zaints in the Church; ha, ha,
he, I have hit the nail on the head, cham zure of that, ha, ha, he, oh my
belly, and my side (I say.)


Tom. I hit that in his teeth, and he said that he did put up one picture of
St. James, in St. James his Church: and because he stood bare-headed at the
time of Divine Service; therefore we have pulled it down: But the next time he
shall be set up with his hat on his head, sitting on his Bum. I asked him why
he gave thanks for Benefactors: and he replied. The practice of
Oxford-Schollers was Christian; for they rehearse in the Pulpit a large
Catalogue of Benefactors, by name; and giving God thanks for them all, because
they loved our nation, and have built us Synagogues: I heard him say also that
authority have removed the railes from the Communion Table, but Brairsick
Schismatics have brought all their railings into Pulpits: where they prate of
Mag-pyes, Cocks-combs, Rooks, and Wood-cocks, Jack Dawes, Crows, Ravens, their
cosen German: and of Crossing, and lies, Psalm. 59. 12.


Nick. Zay him what he woll, who hem do call praters are zweer Teachers; they
con stond under the originalls; but not one word of Latin: vor Latin (God
bless us) is the language of the whore of Rome. And a zet up a Zinc of Richard
and John Dorothing, and a zaith they were Benefactors to their Church: but
though o was a Benevactor, th a pulden down with a vengeance, because a had on
a Bishops Cap on's head; ha, ha, he. Oh my side, I say, ho, ho.


Tom. Brother Nickallas he set up Verses to this purpose.

Saint James, and both Derothings, we Record,
And for all such we bless and praise the Lord.
And again:

Such, and their works we high esteem.
What ever Brainsick fellows deem.
And again:

This Church repaired the time I fix,
Sixteen hundred thirty six.
And this following:

Behold, a blessed sight to see,
When men in peace and truth agree:
Concord with truth, makes strong all things,
This pleases God, and Christian Kings.
But discord has great mischiefs wrought,
And Kingdoms great has brought to naught.
Therefore good Christians all accord,
In peace, and truth still please the Lord:
Devils do join, tempt, and conspire,
Always to bring all to hellfire:
But men who do concord reject,
Are worse than Devils (in this respect.)

Nick. Oh brother Tom-asse, he makes us all worse than Devils: ha, ha, he: I
con but lafe.


Tom. I asked him who he meant by those Brainsick fellows? and he said, he did
well hope they had been all at Roter-dam, or Amsterdam. But being my poor
harmless Verses have done their Errand, and Schism and Faction has made
application, therefore now down with them, down with them, even to the
ground: thus we see his ignorance. I asked him where the soul of Lazarus was
while his body lay in the ground? and whether he did inherit his lands again
when he was restored to life? and he smiled (as indeed his common manner is)
and said he would not answer a fool in his folly. I demanded of him also, what
God was doing before he made the world? and he said, for ought he knew, God
was preparing hellfire to torment Brainsick fools, (unless they do repent
in time.)


Nick. I harden zay, that which we call porredge and Mass is Gods Divine
Service; what zaist thou?


Tom. I heard him compare the same to Nectar and Ambrosia; yea sweeter then the
honey and the honey-combe.


Nick. Zay what he woll, we zure must have all-turd this zourvice now or never.


Tom. Ay true-ly brother Nick, away with this dependant government, both head
and tail, root and branch. Down with all Universities, Colleges, and
Schools, they do but maintain Learning, an enemy to us. Down with Churches,
Hospitalls, and Almes-houses, they do but help the widows, fatherless,
blind, sick and lame, these were most of them founded by Papists. Down with
all these Crosses in general, especially that Idolatrous Cross in Cheap Side.
Away with all Orthodoxe Divines, as Doctors, Bishops, and such like: these all
the swelling Titles of Antichrist, and have a Pope in their bellies; being
Papists in grain. Up with a Barn, a Cowhouse, a Stable, a Hogs-stye, a
Dogs-kennell, a private house, or Privy house; the Woods, fields, in a Ditch,
under a hedge, all those places are consecrated, as well as their Popish
Churches.


Nick. Ha, ha, he; gramarcy, gramarcy brother Tom-asse; ge me thy vest; I zay I
zee thy zeal: away too with the zhitten smock of the whore of Rome.


Tom. Away with the whore, strip her stark naked, make her a very Adamite,
that silly senseless sinlesse shameless sister of ours.


Nick. Brother Tom, I hope zhortly to zee thee vapor up into a Poopit
vorzooth, as they are Cobblers, Boxe-makers, Felt-makers, Button-makers,
Coatch-men, Bottle-Ale-sellers, Taylers and Botchers, and zuch like; these are
all zweet Teachers: and all the happiness these poopish vellowes have, (next
to the blood of Christ) they are beholding to us vor the zame. And I zee the
Zaints on Christ's, and they zay the Zaints in heaven too are worshipped;
therevore I see no reason but they must all down.


Tom. Brother Nick, I would not part from thee thus, but we have a private
meeting anon: I pray thee meet me there.


Nick. Ha, ha, he; zaist thou zo? they zay our Prevemeetings are called
Tickles, I connot tell wot. Chivoz never zo joviall zince thouze ebore, ha, he,
ha. Oh what zhall I zay? I can but laugh: O my sides.


Tom. Call they our meetings what they please: In a word, Mr. Faction does
teach to day; and he came lately from Amsterdam, or Rotterdam, or some other
new Plantation, in Tom-Turbulents Ferry-Boat, with a huge Springtide, the last
great Beare-baiting, and he landed at the Isle of Dogs. And Mr. Tickle he will
tickle them in five places.


Nick. Cha haden bevore now: there woll be no Mass nor Poredge: Zames, nor
Glory Patria, no vurst nor zecond Lezon, no Epistle nor Gozpell, no Pater
noster, vor that is a zin and Popery to zay our Vather: no ten Commandments;
no Collects, no standing up at the Creed; nor no kneeling down, but all
zitting on our Bummes, and our Hats on, shim as we zate by the vire zide: vor
there is no prayer vor King or Queen nor their Children: no prayer vor vaire
weather nor a nont vowle, and no prayer a nont word, vamine or zicknesse: But
Mr. Vaction has abundance of indiscretion, and a negligent care to prevent all
good means to zee every thing our of order, and nothing as it should be. Oh
brother Tomasse who would have thote to zee this zweet deformation: ha, he: I
con but laugh; Oh my belly (I zay,)


Tom. There will be more than a good many, well known to thee and to me: these
by name, besides Master Faction and Master Tickle, there will be also Sir John
Lack-Latine Nebula Newes-carrier, Marmaduke Murmurer, Cabillus Complainer,
Ralph Rayler, Roger Reviler, Randall Repiner, Rodrick Reprocher, Rodulphus
Reformer, and Rowland Renegado Clement Corner-creeper, Edgar Etonist, Triston
Trakite, Patrick Peevish, Anthony Antinomist, Quintillian Quarrell-picker Pheb.
Phanaticus, Sim Separatist, Franck Familist, Bat Brownist, and Hercules
Hateful. Not only all those subtle Buzzards, but also a rout of our sweet
sistren: as Agnes Anabaptist, Kate Catabaptist, Franck Footbaptist, Penelope
Punck, Merald Makebate, Ruth Rake-hell: Tabitha Tattle, Pru Prattle, and that
poor silly, simple, senseless, sinlesse, shameless naked wretch, Alice the
Adamite. As bare as ones nail:
She shames not her tail.


These for brevitics sake: the rest we shall see anon, and enjoy their sweet
company.

Then I conceited, I heard the forenamed Rout and Rabble whispering, crooking,
and hissing, like Toads, Snakes, Adders, and Serpents, bussing, and hussing
like whole swarms of Bees, Waspes, and Hornets, thus croking, hissing,
buzzing, and hussing on both sides mine ears, which rouzed me up: and now I
know my Dream is out. For their Preaching, (or prating rather) against me is
nothing but cursing, and lies, as I sald above, Psalm. 59. 12. But while they
curse me, I will pray for them, as our blessed Savior has taught us all:
(Father forgive them, they know not what they do) and as the Proto-Martyr, St.
Stephen prayed for his mortal enemies, (Lord lay not this sin to their
charge,) and as our Church in Old-England does, teach us all to pray (that it
may please thee to forgive our enemies, persecuters, and slanderers, and t
turn their hearts:) We beseech thee to hear us (good Lord.)

For as much as Schismatics cannot brook Church-Musick, calling the same the
Devils Bag-pipes: I shall now sing them a plaine-song, and so wind up the
Bottom for this time.


OLD Homers Mastyx, Zoilus thou art,
And carping. Momus, bitter, sharp and tart;
You learned Poets spare my ignorance;
The less I am, the more I you advance.
Contraria juxta se posita, magis manifestant.
All Schismatics in general,
Against our Church do vent their Gall,
Like Cerberus, the Dog of Hell,
At peace, and truth, they yelp and yell.
In prayer they say, Lard, Lard, Lard, Lard,
Lard, Lard, a hundred times is hard:
But our Lords-prayer they despise,
Because they are blind and precise.
Behold, how they will brag and boast,
Blaspheming still the Holy Ghost;
They say the Spirit does them lead;
Because Gods Word they hear and read.
Gods sacred word they ever wrest,
And make it speak what faction list:
Whereby they hide great villainy,
With damned deep hy-po-cri-sie.
Poor widows, and poor fatherless,
They make no bones still to oppress:
And for pretense, long prayers make,
Because men should no notice take.
The Mote within his brothers eye,
The Schismatic will soon espy,
But his own Beam does cloud his sight,
Hypocrisy does him benight.
Like painted Tombs they do appear,
With rottenness full fraughted are:
Their hearts and tongues do not agree,
To God nor King will bend their knee.
Behold, when they do pray or fast,
Their hands and eyes to skies they cast,
Sighing foole-lowd, groan glout, and lower,
Wringing a crabbed face most sower.
But when the poor do cry for bread,
The hide-bound slave does hide his head:
With words Demure, he feeds the poor,
False-frothy-food, he gives great store.
As Joseph's Mistress cunningly,
Chaste Joseph's garment laid her by,
To show before her Husbands face,
To hide her whorish lust most base.
Thus Schismatics to Church will flock,
But use Religion for a cloak;
Unto Brownes Church they show great zeal,
Despising Church, and Commonweal.
Fault-finders they will sing no song,
But babble loud, in prayer long:
No show of good in them is found:
But Factions Trumpet loud must sound.
With vestures, gestures, and such things;
White-Surplesse, Rotchets, Hoods, and Rings,
The Schismatic will prating be,
Still Mint and Annis Tieth will he.
Men's virtues fools will seldom name,
But blast men's vices to their shame;
Foul flies, such suck foul matter still,
Rooting Swine-like, in each Dunghill.
Caesar when he demands his due,
Then startleth this braine-sick crew:
They prate forthwith some Scripture Text,
To spare his money (being vexed.)
Far from Saint Paul, behold he says;
That man denied has the faith,
Worse than an Infidel he is.
Who does not all provide for his.
The Devil had his Scriptum Est,
But sacred Writ he still did wrest.
He tempts the Church, and Christ our Lord, Matthew. 4.

As holy Scripture does Record.
By herds into Brownes Church they come,
And squot them down upon their Bum,
Gods Service they do all despise,
They are so fond, blind, and precise.
They still pretend a public good,
But for Faction is understood,
Our King and State, may sink, or swim,
Peace seems nothing unto him.
Against disorders fools will prate,
Controlling King, the Church, and State;
Bishops preach wrong, but Cobblers right:
(If judge may be the Brain-sick-wight.)
Their trade is all to prate, and hear,
Because they are all mouth and ear;
Like hounds, they hark, and bark about;
Our Church is combred with this rout,
They keep no calling honestly,
But loyter, laze, catch, cheat, and lie,
And when honest men's goods they nim,
Freeholders still they prove to him.
They read no books, but sacred Writ.
But yet (God knows they have no wit)
A senseless sense, themselves will give:
None but a dunce will them believe.
As holy water scares a sprite,
So learning frights the hy-po-crite:
All our forefathers they despise,
Grave Bishops, Doctors, Godly-wise.
These reverend Fathers, fools reject,
Tom-Cobler will himself direct:
In pulpits, tradesmen they extol;
But King, and Church they all control.
They seem a Papist to abhor,
For Idols vain they do adore:
If one be bad, neither is good;
With two faces under one Hood.
A Drunkard, Thief, or whore-Master,
Rogues, Ruffins, Bawds, I far prefer
Before false-faining, seeming-good,
Having two faces in one Hood.
Sectaries still do Idolize,
Vain factious fancies as their eyes,
But none can blind our God of light:
No Devil, nor no hy-po-crite.
Saint James, why should thou now have blame,
Because our Church does bear thy name?
Moses and Aaron blessed are:
No Catharists De-rothinges were.
Saints and their works we high esteem,
What ever Brainsick wisemen deem:
Benefactors we all record:
And for all such still praise the Lord.
Blind Zelots with blind zeal are bent,
(Against order of Parliament:
Their ears they prick up like an Ass,
And quarrels pick in Glass, and Brass.
He that shall at my Verses stick,
Perhaps may prove some Schismatic:
Sectaries, Brainsick heads are sick,
All spur-gald Jades will wince and kick.
Fables and Factions fools love best,
Fractions, and Factions I detest:
What our King Charles does defend,
In that I live (and hope to end,)
The Catholic undoubted- Creed,
I do believe, and hold indeed:
No way to bliss I know but one:
That is (by Jesus Christ alone.)
Lord bless King Charles his Majesty,
His Queen, and royal Progeny:
Elizabeth, with her offspring,
Their praises all the Muses sing.
The Honorable Counsel grave,
Thy Counsel (Lord) for them we crave;
And thus we pray with one consent:
(Lord) help our present Parliament.
God Almighty send peace among all Christians, and bless Great Britain; But
principally increase, and also confirm and continue peace more and more
between Old England and Scotland.

Soli Deo, Honor and Gloria. Richard Carter.

FINIS.

