LIFE and DEATH Offered to the choice of the Sons and Daughters OF ADAM.

OR, A Doctrinal Essay toward the discovery of the broad way that leads to
Destruction, and also the narrow path that leads unto LIFE.

Being the Substance of several SERMONS Preached on MATTHEW. 7. 13, 14.

In the entrance of which Discourse you have something spoken occasionally
touching judging of others, and also touching the giving of holy things to
dogs, and casting Pearls before Swine.

I call Heaven and Earth to record this day against you, that I have set before
you life and deach, blessing and cursing; therefore choose life, that both thou
and thy seed may live, Deuteronomy. 30. 19. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1662.

To my Friends and Neighbors in the Parish of Upton cum Chalveii, in the
County of Bucks, together with all those of adjacent parts that did use to
attend upon my Ministry in that place.
The Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Grace and Peace, be multiplied.
Friends and Neighbors,
IT was the good will and pleasure of God to grant me this mercy to be born in
a time of great Light, and in a Land of Visions, when, and where the Gospel was
preached in great Power and Glory; and to incline my heart in the morning of
mine age, to an attendance upon the preaching of the Gospel, by those whom he
had eminently gifted and spirited for that Work; yea, to take hold of my heart
by his Word, and so to engage me in the study of his will revealed in his word,
that I could not settle my self upon any secular employment, save only, that
while I did live at home, my dear Mother being a Widow, I was (as became me)
serviceable unto her in that Calling God had set her in. In which time I had
the happiness of enjoying Communion with many of the Lords people, by which
Communion I was furthered in the knowledge and understanding of Scripture.

After this the Lord brought me into acquaintance and favor with several godly
and able Ministers, who (after some knowledge of me) did tell me, that they did
verily believe God had some work for me to do in the Ministry, and that God
would find me out, and give me a clear call thereunto; which persuasion of
theirs, answering the inclination that God had wrought in my heart almost from
my Cradle, did the more unsettle me as to any worldly employment. And so it
was, that about the 21. year of mine age I had several proffers as to public
Work, but still there was something or other did impede and hinder. In fine,
being in the Country near Windsor, for my health's sake, about May, 1654. I
was desired to preach amongst you at Upton, which accordingly I did on the 27.
of that instant.

And after I had preached with you (you being destitute of a Minister) I was
desired to take hold of that opportunity for the doing of God service; which
desire I did freely close withal, and in order thereunto, after that I had
obtained power from the then Supreme Magistrate, I took possession of the
Pulpit to preach in, and the House to dwell in.

In this my undertaking I had but little external encouragement, there being
not much either of Maintenance or Countenance, to be expected from you: As for
Maintenance, its known to be very short; and as for Love and Countenance, I
could look for little, being at the first desired but by a very few in the
Parish; and besides, for that you did seem generally to expect those things
from him who should be your Minister, which (unless I should have sinned
against my Light and Conscience) I could not do. I hope I am able to say in
some good measure of sincerity and truth, That my great ends were the glory of
God, and the salvation of your precious souls. For I considering how you had
been supplied for sixty years, or more (according to your own confession) to
wit, with a profane Ministry; and also, that the means was so short, that few
good men (they being bound by the Law of God and Nature to provide for their
Families) could accept of it; I did judge I might be of more service among you
then elsewhere. My Lord Christ had told me by his blessed Word, that in this
Work I must not look to meet with the great things of this world, as Riches,
Honors, Friends, etc. but on the contrary, to meet with Disgrace, Contempt,
Scorn, and Persecution. And indeed, there was no reason for me to have expected
other among you, but the setting of you in a flame about me; so that I might
have walked by your doors in fear, have lai'n down, and rose up in fear; have
preached in fear; My great Work in the Ministry being to pull down your strong
holds, to plunder you of that which is more dear to you than your Gold and
Silver* namely, your sins, to take your Beloveds out of your bosom, to pull
out your right eyes, and cut off your right hands; to take away your Gods from
you, your Carnality, Hypocrisy, Superstition, etc. But it was otherwise
ordered by the holy and wise God; for in the room of this I had your attendance
upon my Ministry, and approbation of it, many of you confessing that the Word
came in power upon you, convincing you of many things. I also received great
respects and love from many. Nay more, after that I had been near two years
among you, and you fully knew what I refused to do, (I being always
open-hearted among you as to the matters of my God) you did notwithstanding
(hearing of some Overtures made to me about a remove) desire my continuance
with you, and did manifest this desire by subscribing your Names to what you
were freely willing to give me Quarterly for the supplies of my Family: Which
Subscription of yours, though it did not much augment my Maintenance, yet it
was to me so high an expression of your love, and so clear a discovery of some
Work that my Ministry had wrought among you, that I resolved thereupon to
continue a longer time with you; and manifested this my resolution to be real,
by laying out a considerable sum of money upon the Vicaridge-House for my own
^^ ommo lation: And so through the good hand of God did cont^nue with you until
December, 1660. for which opportunity of Service I do think my self obliged for
ever to bless the Lord that he should call out such a poor worm, and give him
six years time to bear a public Testimony for Christ in his generation.

Now as for my departure from you, though the cause thereof be known to many of
you, yet for the honor of the Gospel, and clearing of mine own innocence, I
shall give you a brief account thereof in this place.

The greatest Contest I had all along with many of you, was about the
administration of the Lords Supper, and Baptism, and Burial of the Dead, you
requiring of me that I would bury the Dead according to former custom, and
administer the Seals in a promiscuous manner to all in the Parish: The great
Argument you pressed upon me was this, That these were Church-Duties, and so
incumbent upon me as your Minister. Unto the which my general Answer was, That
I could not understand that the Lord Christ (our great Archbishop) had laid
any injunction upon his Ministers about the Burial of the Dead, and therefore I
refused the Observation of any Ceremony at Burials, save only to accompany the
Corpse to the Grave, and after a decent interment, to preach the Gospel to the
Living when it was desired, or I thought my Labors would be accepted. But then
for Baptism and the Lords Supper, I did readily grant them to be
Church-Ordinances, and being such (as I have often told you) did pre-suppose a
Church State, a submission to Gospel-Discipline: Now this Gospel-Discipline I
found you not only ignorant of, but very averse unto, not being willing to put
the Neck into Christ's Yoke: And these being Christ's matters, and I but a
steward, I durst not do any thing therein without my Lords Commission; and
(according to my light) did not see how you could be in a capacity to receive,
or I to administer, without a submission to the Rules of the Gospel. Now though
the violence of some in these matters was abated, (I judge through the power of
the Word) yet there did remain much prejudice in the hearts of others against
me, upon the account of my faithfulness unto my Lord and Master; which I did in
a good measure d^scern, and have sometimes told you, that that enmity and
prejudice against Christ and his faithful Servants, that lay hid under the Garb
of Courtesy and Civili^y, when ever opportunity did afford it self (if such
hearts were not subdued) would break forth, and discover its self according to
its utmost ability. But notwithstanding the prejudice of several, I did
nevertheless abide with you till there was not above seven or eight days left
by that Act of Parliament, entitled, An Act for confirming and restoring
Ministers; Dated September 13. 1660.) to the Justices, to hear and determine
such Cases: For that Act did expire on the 25th. of December next ensuing, and
it was the 18th. of that instant before I received any Warrant to appear before
them upon that account, and then in the evening of that day was a Warrant
brought to me, signed with the hands of two Commissioners. In the which Warrant
there was nothing mentioned of complaint against me, but only that as I
expected any benefit by the Act for Confirmation of Ministers, I should appear
before them and other Justices of the Peace, the next morning about ten of the
Clock, at the Crown in Beconsfield. And in obedience to this Warrant, I
appeared; and when I came there, I found four of my Parishioners ready to
appear against me; whom when there was five Justices come, (which made a
Quorum) were called in unto them, and the door shut. These four persons were
sworn, and upon their Oaths did say (among other things) that I had refused to
baptize my Parishioners Children (which was a truth upon the forementioned
account) and not only so, but that I had declared my judgment against
Infant Baptism. This they swore, notwithstanding I had often declared for
Infant Baptism publicly; and besides, the chief of those that swore against
me, his Wife was present at my House when one of my own Children was baptized.
And 2dly, They swore that I had refused to administer the Lords Supper to the
Parishioners (which was a truth ut supra) and not only so, but that I had
publicly preached against the same.

This they swore, notwithstanding I had the Summer before, upon 1 Cor. 11.
preached diverse Sermons touching the Author, Nature, Excellency etc. of that
Ordinance.

When these my Parishioners had done swearing, I was called in, and the
Depositions sworn against me, read. And when I heard what was sworn against me,
and withal did perceive their Resolutions, I told them* That as to my
preaching against these Ordinances, it was known to be notoriously false, for
that I did both in judgment and practice own them; but in that they said I had
not administered them to the Parishioners, they spoke truth; for I had not, nor
could not administer these Ordinances to a people that would not submit to
Gospel-Discipline. After I had thus spoken, they required me to withdraw; and
after a little space of time, called me in again, and read an Order unto me for
my leaving the possession of the Vicaridge House at Upton, at, or before the
25. of the said December. To the which I answered, that since it was the good
pleasure of my God that so it should be, I was even glad I had a quietus est to
my Conscience, and a freedom from further trouble in that place. As touching
this Order, I cannot but declare my judgment to be this, That doubtless it had
been a most righteous Sentence against me, had that which my Neighbors swore
been truth; for I do verily judge, that those Ministers that shall either
corrupt the Ordinances of Christ with their own inventions, or else deny them,
and preach against them, do both a like deserve to be deprived of public
opportunities for preaching, and to have the Church-doors shut against them. I
had now left me but one Lords day wherein I could preach Authoritatively among
you, at which time I preached the substance of what follows in this small
Treatise. This Lords Day in the afternoon Providence so ordered it, that the
four persons that swore against me, were a^l present, which I judge they hardly
ever were at one time all the six years I was amongst you. At which time I took
my farwell of you, and gave you a public account of what was sworn against me,
in their hearing; and when these persons came out of the place (as I was
informed by several) they denied that they had so sworn against me,
notwithstanding their Names, and what they swore, was ex^^est in the Order
drawn up for my ejectment. Which Order r^^ after this manner, (as I am able to
testify, having a true Copy of the Order still by me) Forasmuch as it
appears to the said Commissioners (the Names of the Commissioners being
asserted above the Order) upon the information of -- -- that R. C. who pretends
himself to be Vicar of Upton, in the County of Bucks, for many years I mention
no more of the Order, because these were the most material things in it.
last past, refused, and still does refuse to baptize Children, and has
declared himself against Infant Baptism; and that he has for many years last
past refused to administer the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper to his said
Parishioners, and has publicly preached against the same, etc. Therefore we
order so and so. The reason why I give this account, is not out of any
prejudice I have to those Neighbors that did so prosecute, and therefore I
have purposely omitted the naming of them, though they did as evil against me,
and my Wife and Children, as they could; for though we had a hole to put our
heads in, provided by the Father of Mercies, yet it clearly appeared that it
had been all one to them whether we had or not. But yet I can appeal to God in
this, that all the hurt I wish them is, that God would give them repentance
unto life. But the great end of this account is, that the Gospel may not suffer
reproach for my sake.

After that I was thus ordered to depart and the Church-doors shut against me
by the Wardens, I did with what convenient speed I could, remove my Family, and
leave the place, And now since my departure from you, looking back upon my
conversation among you, I find matter both of Humiliation, and also of Peace
and Consolation: That which does afford me matter of Humiliation, is the
consideration of the deadness of mine own heart, and the straitness of mine own
spirit while with you, that I wa^ no more abundant in labors, no more in
praying, in preaching publicly, and from house to house; that I did no more
earnestly and affectionately endeavor your conversion to Christ; though I have
as much to plead as some others, viz. a weak and frail body, and other
occasions which the wants of my Family did administer to me; yet I must
acknowledge, that these things do afford me matter of humiliation, to consider
that God should give me so large an opportunity, and that my heart should not
(as it ought) be enlarged in the work of my God. But then on the other hand,
there are some things do afford me matter of peace and comfort, as, 1. In that
I was (by the power of God) kept faithful to my light, with reference unto
Gospel-Administrations; I would not for all the world that I had come over to
you in the administration of the Lord's Supper, and Baptism, in a promiscuous
way. 2. In that I did design and endeavor (as I could) the obtaining of your
affections, and went as far as I did judge the shoes of the Gospel would carry
me, to accomplish this my design. 3. In that I did continue with you so long as
I could; had I come away sooner, I might have broken my peace; and had I
continued longer, I might have undone my Family, and done you no good, being
deprived of opportunity to preach the Gospel, amongst you. 4. In that I am not
without hopes that God did by my Ministry work upon some of your souls; I am
sure as to conviction there was work done. Now that work may be done, where
there is none, and carried on where there are any beginnings thereof, is the
design of this Book, which I do heartily present unto you of the Parish, and
also unto those of adjacent parts, that did use to attend upon my Ministry, as
a token of that dear love and affection I bear to your souls, desiring your
acceptance in the Lord. Now to him that is able to subdue most rebellious ones,
and to preserve subdued and enlightened ones from falling, and to present them
faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy; to him do I
commend you all, desiring that to this only wise God our Savior, you may be
enabled to give (as is most due) all Glory and Majesty, Dominion and Power, now
and ever.

Amen.
Yours, to serve you in the Lord, R. CARTER.

LIFE and DEATH OFFERED TO THE CHOICE OF THE Sons and Daughters OF ADAM.
Matthew. 7. 13, 14. 13. Enter ye in at the strait Gate; for wide is the Gate,
and broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many there be that go in
thereat.

14, Because straight is the Gate, and narrow is the way which leads unto
life, and few there be that find it.


THese words are part of Christ's Sermon upon the Mount, which he preach'ts to
his Disciples, and not only to them, but also to the multitude of people that
did crowd after him, as appears by the two last verses of this Chapter: -- When
Jesus had ended these sayings, the [People] were astonished at his Doctrine:
for ^e taught them as one having Authority, and not as the Scribes: Of which
Sermon this Evangelist does give us the largest account, taking up the 5, 6,
and 7. chap. of this Gospel. The substance of this Sermon is to discover what
blessed ones are, and what what blessed ones ought to do.

First, What blessed ones are, chap. 5. 3, to the 13. viz. Poor The pu^port of
Christ's Sermon on the Mount.
in spirit, true mourners, meekned ones, such as do hunger and thirst after
righteousness, merciful, pure in heart, peacemakers, though by the world they
are accounted troublers, and sowers of sedition, and upon that account not fit
to live; yet by Christ they are known and judged to be the children of peace.
Now our Lord Jesus whom God sent into the World to bless his people *, does
here declare the persons thus qualified to be blessed Acts 3. ult.
persons: Though we are to take notice, that these qualifications are not laid
down as the causes of blessedness, (which is alone the eternal love of God in
Christ) but as the properties of such as are so blessed.

And then finally, our Lord Christ does declare these blessed ones to be the
objects of the wickeds hatred and envy; and that notwithstanding they are so,
yet he does (for the comfort and establishment of all his) declare the persons
so qualified as before Those that are not so qual^fied, whatsoever, they may
suffer for the profession of Religion, ye^ they are not blessed.
, to be never the less blessed and happy at present; and as for their future
state, it will be so much the more glorious, by how much the more of
persecution they have undergone in this world above others.

The other part of this Sermon is to show what blessed ones ought to do. And
for this (in general) he teaches, that they (being the Salt of the Earth)
should labor to season others, walking in each part of their conversation so,
as that wicked ungodly men seeing their good works, might glorify their Father
* Matthew. 5. 6
which is in Heaven.

But before he descends into particulars, he does endeavor to establish his
Disciples in this persuasion, that he came not to destroy the Law, to derogate
from the Divine Authority thereof, to cause any part of it to be judged false
and unprofitable, o^ to release his people from obedience to the Moral Law
which he chiefly intends in this place, as appears by the following verses;)
Christ came to (...) the Law.
but he came to fulfill it, that is, 1. To answer all those shadows and
representations of him exhibited in the Old Testament, and also to accomplish
whatsoever was foretold of him by the holy Prophets. 2dly, To fulfill it, that
is to give a perfect and complete obedience to every tittle and Iota of the
Law, in the stead and room of the poor condemned sinner; which obedience being
imputed to the soul (as it is to every true believer) the soul comes to have as
legal a right to glory, as if he had fulfilled it in his own person. 3dly, To
fulfill it, that is, to enable his people by his Grace and Spirit to obey God
acceptably, doing that which is well-pleasing in his sight, yea to fulfill the
Law in desire and affection, (for love is the fulfilling of the Law) though
they cannot do it in an absolute perfection in this life. A true Christian (so
far as he is sanctified) in desire and will does keep the whole Law.

Nay further, our Lord Christ is so far from giving them a discharge as to
their obedience, that he tells them, if their righteousness did not exceed
the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, Matthew. 5. 2^.
they could in no wise enter into the Kingdom of Heaven *, could not be Members
of the true Gospel Church here on earth, or ever enter into the fellowship of
the Saints in that eternal glory above.

Now by this more exceeding righteousness, I humbly conceive in this place is
meant none other then the inherent righteousness of the Saints; that every one
who will be the Disciple, must in his obedience to God exceed the Scribes and
Pharisees: And accordingly, the obedience of every true Christian does exceed
theirs, and that in these two things, viz. Sincerity, and universality; theirs
being (first) hypocritical, minding the outside only, and not regarding the
heart; and then partial, being zealous for some small matters, and neglecting
the more weighty matters of the Law.

The Lord Christ having spoken thus in general, descends into particulars, and
does in the first place make a spiritual Exposition of the several Precepts of
the Moral Law, worthy of every Christians serious consideration, Chap. 5. 21.
to the end.

In the 6th. Chapter he proceeds to lay down several rules in several cases,
as first about giving of Alms: 2dly, About Prayer, under which head he condemns
the practice of the Pharisees, We should not make private prayers in a place of
public Worship.
who did love to pray standing in the Synagogues, and in the corners of the
streets, that they might be seen of men. And notwithanding Christ does here
condemn this practice, and require his people not to be like unto them, but
contrariwise to make their private prayers in a private secret place: Yet how
do persons superstitiously and wickedly follow their example, making their
private peayers in the places of public Worship. Persons that it may be are
wholly strangers to private prayers at home, yet when they come to the place of
public Worship, after they have bowed toward the East, (where usually the
Altar stood) then down upon their knees to their private devotion; yea though
it be in the time of public Worship, when the Minister is either speaking to
God, or from God; I have often told you, that this praying for a blessing upon
the Word preached, should be done at home in your Families and Closets, before
you come to the public.

And then under this head, our Lord Christ does also forbid vain repetitions,
as if we thought that God would hear us for our much speaking, and often
repeating the same thing.

3dly, He gives rules about fasting: And 4thly, about laying up of Treasure in
Heaven. 5thly, About keeping the Understanding (that leading faculty of the
soul) clear and single. And 6thly, About the management of our affections as to
the world, and all the concernments thereof. All this is contained in the sixth
Chapter.

In the 7th. Chap our Lord Christ does first forbid rash and unscriptural
judgment, wherewith we are apt to judge others: Against rash judgment.
Such a judging of others as has nothing of love and compassion in it, but
proceeds from pride, malice, suspicion, etc.

Not but that there is a Scripture-judgement to be made of How we may judge
others.
men's persons and actions: We may judge such as profess the Name of Christ, and
walk according to the rule of his Word in the general course of their
conversation, to be in a state of grace: And though many of these prove
hypocrites, yet we sin not in our judgment, since we are to judge persons by
that which visibly does appear. It Is true, God judges the life and actions by
the heart and inward principle; but we must judge the heart and inward
principle, by the life and outward action. Thus Simon was judged, ( Acts 8. 13.
to the 25.) to have believed, and thereupon was baptized; and yet soon
discovered himself after such a manner, as that Peter does positively declare
him for the present to be in the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity.
According to this rule does the Apostle Paul make his judgment of those to
whom he writes, to be Saints, and sanctified in Christ Jesus, etc. Rom 1. 7. 1
Cor. 1. 2. with many other parallel Scriptures; whereby the Apostle does not
pass an absolute and final judgment of the blessedness of their everlasting
state, but it is only a judgment proceeding from charity, regulated by the
Scripture.

And then on the other hand, we may judge such persons as do live in a
continual omission of known and confessed duties, such as hearing the Word
preached, prayer, reading the Scriptures, etc. that have nothing of God or his
fear in their Families, neither mind it; we may judge such to be in as wretched
an estate as any Heathen in the World, such Families being recko^ed among the
Families of the Heathen, in that Prophetical prayer of Jeremiah, chap. 10. 25.
Pour out thy fury upon the Heathen, and upon the Families that call not upon
thy Name.

How many such Families are there in this poor Island, notwithstanding that
preaching and light that has been of late years? People that do live like
Heathens and Atheists, that eat their food like the Beasts, not minding that
God that spreads their Tables, and fills their Cups for them, that in their
lyings down and risings up, goings forth, and comings in, regard not the Lord,
whose love and mercy it is that gave them a being, and that loadeth them with
daily mercy: And yet how enraged even are such persons as these, if you deny
unto them the Name of Christians? Are not many of these ready to pull out the
throat of their Minister, to suck his blood, or at least to manifest a spirit
of irreconcilable hatred and enmity against him, in case he shall deny to give
forth the blood of Christ in the Supper, unto them, and deal by them as if they
were the best Saints under Heaven?

We may also judge persons of a debauched life and conversation, that live
wallowing in the very Cinques of sin; as Swearing, Drunkenness, Uncleanness,
Idolatry, etc. to be in the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity, to be in
a state of wrath and condemnation, John 3. ult. -- He that believes not -- the
wrath of God abides on him.

But how can we judge whether a man has faith or no?

Ans. Jam. 2. A man is to show his faith by his works. Mind this (as I have
often told you) though there may be good works (as to visible appearance) where
there is no true Faith, yet where true Faith is, there the souls works, (I
speak as to the general course of the conversation) will visibly appear to be
good, they cannot do otherwise; for if the tree be good, the fruit will be good;
so that though a hearing, praying person may be a hypocrite, yet a swearing,
drunken, profane, idolatrous person cannot be a Christian; the one may be a
hypocrite, but the other cannot be Christian: Though I cannot say positively of
a visibly holy person, That he shall go to Heaven; yet I may certainly say of a
profane man, That he shall go to Hell, if he dies in that estate, without
repentance.

But does it not savor of pride, for persons to judge themselves to be holy
persons, and good Christians, and judge others to be outcasts, and wicked
persons?

Ans. It Is possible persons may judge themselves so, when Prove. 13. 12.
they are not so; judge themselves to be pure, and yet not washed from their
filthiness.

Now for any (notwithstanding their delight in secret sin, and the indulging
cursed lusts) to judge themselves more holy then others, this proceeds from
pride and self-love, and great blindness: But now for persons that are sincere
and upright toward God, to judge themselves to be in the love and favor of
God, looking upon God as their Father, and themselves as his sons and
Daughters, and also judging others to be wicked, this is according to holy
Scripture, 1 John 5. 19, 20. And we know, that [We] are of God, and the whole
world lies in wickedness; And we know that the Son of God is come, and has
given [Us] an Understanding that we may know him that is true; and [We] are in
him that is true, even in his Son, Jesus Christ, etc.

This was the judgment of an Apostle.

Answ. 1. None knows the heart but God: The Apostles themselves were not
infallibile in their Judgments, if they had, Simon the Sorcerer had not been
baptized. They judged only by what appeared to them; those that appeared truly
godly, they judged so; and those that appeared otherwise, they judged
otherwise. But

2dly, John speaks here in the plural number, Us, and We; whereby is clearly
intimated, that others as well as Apostles, may judge themselves to be of God:
Nay, he says in the 13th. ver. These things have I written unto you, that ye
may know that ye have eternal life; that ye may be able to try and examine your
own state, and make a judgment of your selves, whether you are the persons
that have a title to eternal glory, yea or no; and accordingly you shall find
that he does (for the furtherance of this work of self-examination) in this
Epistle characterize the Christian by his doing of righteousness, and loving
the Brethren.

But further, this judgment is not only lawful, but there is Great reason for
the passing of a Scriptu^^ judgment. 1. Reas.
great ground and reason for it; As,

1. If God's people should not judge themselves to be so, they would be guilty
of very great ingratitude. We ought to be thankful for all mercies, but
especially for spiritual mercies. When God shall by a mighty hand have brought a
soul out of the Devils Kingdom, into the Kingdom of his dear Son, and manifest
his love and mercy to it, what greater sin can such a soul be guilty of, then
the not taking notice of the exceeding riches of Grace, so as to own it, and
acknowledge it to the glory and praise of God? Col. 1. 12, 13. Giving thanks
unto the Father, which has made us meet to be ma^e partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints in light, who has delivered us from the power of
darkness, and has translated us into the Kingdom of his dear Son.

2dly, From this springs all a Christians comfort: Alas! what 2. Reas.
comfort can a Christian have in this wicked, miserable, reproachful, hateful
world, were it not for this, [ God is mine?] Psalm. 48. ult. For this God is our
God for ever and ever, etc. Isa. 25. 9. -- Lo, this is our God, we have waited
for him, etc. Isa. 41. 10. Be not dismayed, for I am thy God, etc. Isa. 63. 16.
Doubtless thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel
acknowledge us not: Thou Lord art our Father, our Redeemer, thy Name is from
everlasting.

3dly, Wicked profane men they do judge themselves to be 3. Reas.
the people of God, and good Christians, and thereupon do lay claim to the
seals of the Covenant, Baptism and the Lords Supper, and do judge holy and
religious persons to be a company of hypocrites, which are the worst sort of
wicked persons in the world, and shall undergo the greatest torments in Hell:
Then surely the true sincere Christian may judge God to be its Father, and
Christ its Savior; and on the contrary, judge profane wicked men to be (as
the Scripture declares them to be) in a state of wrath, without God in the
world, and strangers to the Covenant of promise, Ephesians 2. 12.

4thly, There are a several duties to be performed upon this 4. Reas.
Judgment; as thus, We are to do good to all, but especially to them of the
Household of Faith: Now this cannot be done, except Gal. 6. 10.
we may judge some to be of the Household of Faith. The wicked Prove. 29. 27.
is an abomination to the just: It follows thence, that the just does know him,
and judge him to be wicked.

The wicked are to be withdrawn from, 2 Timothy 3. 5. then they must be first
discovered, known, and judged to be so, else we break the rule of Charity by
withdrawing from them, especially if they are persons with whom we have
formerly had communion in spiritual matters; for from such we ought not to
withdraw without cause.

By all which it appears, that notwithstanding Christ does here forbid rash
Judgment, yet it hinders not that a Stripture Judgment may be made. Nay our
Lord Christ in this 7th. chapter does plainly declare his Will to be, that
according to the Scripture-Judgement should all his people walk.

According to this Rule should Hearers walk with respect to Hearers may pass a
Scripture judgment on their Teachers, yea ought to do it.
their Teachers, and also Teachers and Ministers with respect to their people.

First, People with respect to their Teachers, ver. 15. Beware of false
prophets which come to you in sheeps clothing, but inwardly are ravening
Wolves. But Lord (might the Disciples have said) How may we know them? Know
them! (says Christ) you may know them by their fruits, ver. 16. This
generation of ravening Wolves and false prophets God does generally suffer them
(for the good of his people, lest they be drawn away by them) by one means or
other to discover themselves by their fruits, either by superstitious and
idolatrous practices, thrusting in their own inventions into the Worship of
God, and persecuting all those that will not conform even to the death, and
that upon a pretense of zeal to the Churches peace (for that is their sheeps
clothing they wear to hide their abominable wickedness) Or else by their
debauchery and profaneness, whereby they make it to appear as clear as the Sun
at noon, that notwithstanding they may appear zealous for Church-Reformation,
and plead the holiness of places, Orders, Canons, Garments, etc. yet that they
are perfect enemies to a holy life, and to the power of Godliness, Deceivers
and Heretics when they plead the Kingly Office of Christ in his Church, and
are holy in their lives, are of all persons in the world most dangerous, and
fittest to propagate the design of the Devil, who often appears as an Angel of
Light, that he may deceive. For holiness in a Leader or Teacher is of a very
drawing, convincing Nature. When therefore any new notion is delivered to us,
that is contrary to the ancient received faith of the Saints, the more glorious
the pretense is under which it comes; the more should we fear it, and the more
carefully should we ponder it in the balance of the Sanctuary.

But now when God shall suffer deceivers by their profaneness and debauchery
so to discover themselves, as that he that runs may read of what kind of spirit
they are, and whose interest they are advancing; woe to those that shall join
with a generation thus discovered, a generation upon whom the marks of God's
wrath and displeasure are. He walks not by this rule that can be content to
hear his Parish-Minister, though he be never so superstitious in his Worship,
or profane in his life.

Also, according to this Rule should Teachers walk with respect to their
people, Ver. 6. Give not that which is holy unto dogs, neither cast ye the
Pearls before Swine, lest they trample them under their feet, and turn again
and rent you.

Wherein Christ does declare it to be lawful to call dogs dogs, and swine
swine; which cannot be meant of irrational creatures called by those Names, but
of men and women of profane and wicked lives. Now unto such must not be cast
pearls, which may have reference unto private reproof and admonition.

There is a great deal of Wisdom to be used in giving private and particular
reproof to profane persons; for that Solomon says, Reprove not a scorner,
lest he hate thee. He that reproves a Pro^ 9 7. 8
scoruer, gets to himself shame; and he that reproves a wicked man, gets
to himself a blot. There was a time when David was silent, because the wicked
were present. To admonish or reprove some wicked profane wretches, especially
in some of their mad moods and fits, or at such a time to be speaking to them
concerning the excellency of Christ, and concernments of Eternity, would be but
to expose the Truths of Christ to great contempt and reproach, and to draw
forth their cursed lusts and passions, giving them thereby opportunity to vent
that inward hatred they have against Christ and all his concernments. Again, by
holy things, and pearls, may be understood the sacred and holy things of God's
House, such as the Body and Blood of Christ in the Lords Supper. Indeed the
preaching of the Gospel belongs to all; It Is to be preached to every creature
Great difference between preaching and administering the Lords Supper.
(Mark 16. 15.) Dogs and Swine, to the vilest sinners in the world; and it is
the duty of all that live within the sound of the Gospel, to attend upon it.
But now the Lords Supper is a peculiar Ordinance, appointed and instituted to
be practiced by, and administered unto, not Dogs and Swine, but Sons and
Daughters: It Is a wicked man's duty to hear the Word preached, but not to come
to the Lords Supper: Before he comes to this Ordinance, he must look after
repentance toward God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ; which Faith in
Christ takes in not only the assent of the Judgment, but also the consent of
the will, not only the knowing, but the loving and embracing of truth, Heb.
11. 13 -- were persuaded of the promises (there was the assent of the
Judgment) and embraced them, there was the consent of the will.

It Is the duty of a Minister by all means possible, to entice and draw the
people, be they never so ignorant and profane, to the hearing of the Word, but
he greatly sins if he persuades, draws, much more if he shall compel an
ignorant, profane people to come to the Lord's Table.

Object. Some Ministers may here object and say, Though I do persuade my people
to come to the Lords Supper, yet I discharge my self, I tell them how they
should be qualified, and the danger of coming unprepared: And so I am clear
from the gu^lt of their blood.

Ans. 1. The Text says, Give not holy things to dogs, How then can thou
discharge thy self, when notwithstanding thou tellest the people they ought to
be so and so qualified, to have knowledge, faith, repentance, love to God and
his people, etc. and that if they come unprepared, they make themselves guilty
of the blood of Christ, and eat and drink to themselves damnation (which are
very astonishing considerations) and yet nevertheless do receive such to this
Ordinance as are known to be very ignorant, and also very dissolute and
profane. And unto every one of these thou say, delivering the bread, The
Body of our Lord Jesus Christ which was given for [ thee] take and eat this in
remembrance that Christ dyed for [ thee.] And delivering the Cup, The Blood of
our Lord Jesus Christ which was shed for [ thee;] drink this in remembrance
that Christ's blood was shed for [ thee.] It was Gods command to Jeremiah, that
he should separate the precious from the vile, ( Jer. 15. 19.) But
contrariwise, some men do separate the vile from the precious, do by the
vileness of their own lives, and the corruptnesse of their communions, forcibly
(as I may so speak) keep off such as do truly fear the Lord from joining with
them, and so become a separated company of ignorant, profane, vile persons.

Now whether in this practice thou can so clear thy self, as not to be guilty
of the blood of those souls as shall be strengthened in a way of wickedness by
their receiving the Lords Supper from thy hands, and strengthened in their hope
of Gods love, and eternal life (notwithstanding a wicked course) for that thou
do tell them in the administration of that Ordinance, that the Body of Christ
was given for them, and his blood shed for them: I say, this thing is worthy of
thy serious consideration. That expression of the Lord Chancellor in his speech
on the 8th. of May, 1661. is very significant, and will be found undoubtedly
true at the great day of Christ, and might well (for the consideration and
caution of all the Ministers of England) be written over every Communion Table,
namely, That to poison a man at the Lords Supper, would be worse then to kill
him in a Tavern.

Quest. But what is the reason that some men are so general Why some Ministers
are so general in admission to the Lords Supper,
in their admission to the Lords Supper, and ready (not only to invite all,
but) even to compel them (had they power) to come, how unworthy soever they may
be?

Ans. I am not able to say why, except for such reasons as these, which I wish
were not found too true, Viz.

etc. Romans 2. 3. Think thou this, O man, that judge them which do such
things, and do the same, that thou shall escape the Judgment of God? Thou
therefore which teach another, teach thou not thy self? Thou that
preachest a man should not steal, commit adultery, and do thou do the very
same things? From the 17. to the 25.

2dly, It Is possible they may either want money, or love money; so that the
gain and profit that comes in by the multitude of Communicants, may be another
reason. But

3dly, It may be there may dwell some in the parish that do truly fear God, or
a ^^east lie under some convictions of Spirit, and these persons having
received light to the contrary, dare not sit down in such corrupt Communions.
Now out of prejudice to these (there being an old enmity between the Seed of
the Woman, and the Seed of the Serpent) the parish Minister may not only
invite and persuade all to come, but (according to his power) force and compel
them, or at the least, threaten, that if they come not, they shall be indicted,
and so and so prosecuted; and all this to torment and afflict the best in the
parish.

Here we may consider into what a dilemma such Ministers do bring their people,
telling them on the one hand, that if they eat and drink unworthily, they eat
and drink damnation to themselves; and yet on the other hand do threaten, that
if they come not to the Communion, they shall undergo such and such penalties:
So that now if a person does judge himself unworthy, he must either venture his
own damnation, or else the undergoing of what trouble and loss the Minister can
put him to: Oh horrible wickedness!

Quest. Are there such Ministers in England?

Ans. I am not able to say there are not; but this I pray hear tily, that if
such there be, God would be pleased either to convert them, or else cast them
forth as dung in the midst of the Land.

It Is possible some willing to justify themselves in this practice may thus
reply, or at least we will suppose they do so: The reason or argument of this
prohibition, not to give that which is holy to dogs, is, lest they turn again
and rent you: Now we fear not by what we do, the peoples rending of us; our
discoveries of truth are not so piercing, but the people can bear them well
enough; especially since we do not trouble their Houses or Chambers with them;
We love not this preaching from House to House, persuading men to purity, it
tends to Sedition and Faction: And as for our reproofs of sin, they are mostly
public; and we know how to reprove sin in such a superficial manner, that it
shall not offend any. Our people know we cannot preach, but we must sometimes
speak against exorbitant practices; but then if at sometimes (to please some
whimsey-headed persons in our parishes) we happen to speak more against sin
then ordinary, or then we can do freely, we are sure, by our plausible
complying conversation; to make up that offense quickly with the honest
Orthodox party in our parishes, that they shall not be offended with us, or the
Church for it.

And then as for the Lords Supper, general admission is very pleasing; it is
more likely if we should deny it, they would rend us, rend our tithes from us,
yea our very lives, were it in their power. Our way therefore is, to please the
people in the administration of the Seals, and to hold a free conversation with
them, keeping up good fellowship among the elder sort, and indulging the
younger in their lawful recreation upon the Lords day, letting them alone with
their May-Poles and Whitsun-Ales, etc. And by this means we are persuaded we
gain more (ten to one) then the Puritans can in their precise way. This being
duly considered, we judge our selves not much concerned in this prohibition, it
being grounded upon the reason aforementioned.

Ans. Thou have spoken for thy self as much as well thou can; and I do grant,
that thou managing thy matters as thou have said, there is no visible cause of
fear that thou shall be rent by the profane about thee, though (it may be)
they may rend better men then thy self a thousand fold. But it will be thy
wisdom not to provoke these Dogs and Swine; for if thou shall be too quick with
them, and call them to say before they have had time to con their Lessons, and
then whip them because they have not them perfect, they will be ready to fall upon
thee; and if they be but once provoked, they will out with all thy wickedness;
they will tell thee to thy face of thy Oaths, Drunkenness, Wantonness, etc. And
what will they then say? Thou a Minister! Thou a Devil. Thus will they speak,
though they themselves be as vile as may be.

But I would here mind thee of that which happily thou had forgot; and that
is, that there is a double argument used by Christ, why holy things should not
be given to dogs, etc. 1. Lest they trample them under their feet. And then
2dly, Turn again, and rent you. Now thou have taken that concerns thy self, but
minds not that which concerns the glory of God, and the honor of his
Ordinances. Christ would have his people be prudent, and avoid rending if they
may; but upon their lives they must take care of his glory and honor. So that
when it comes once to this, that either they must expose themselves to rending,
or the Ordinances of Christ to pollution and contempt, a Minister of the Gospel
ought (in such a case) to choose his own rending.

Thou ought therefore to consider, whether by inviting and entertaining vile
persons at the Lords Table, thou do not expose his Ordinance to very great
contempt; whether persons will not greatly undervalue it, since they can have
it upon such terms; and also thou should consider whether by thy free
conversation among thy people, thou do not strengthen them in their
wickedness, and (as it were) with a light in thy hand lead them to Hell.

I have been the larger here, because usually when we speak against the
admission of ignorant profane persons to the Lord's Table, the reply presently
is, Judge not, lest ye be judged; and so this Scripture comes to be abused, by
being brought for that which Christ did not intend it.

Another thing Christ speaks unto in this 7th. chap. is, importunate prayer; 7,
8, 9, 10, 11: ver. And the last thing before the Text is that excellent Moral
Precept, To do to others Verse 12.
as we would be done unto. This Precept is taught by the very Light of Nature,
and is writ in the heart of every man; it is a Rule known to all, talked of by
most, and practiced by very few.

We shall now (God willing) speak of the Text it self: Enter ye in at the
strait Gate, etc.

These words seem to be spoken by our Lord Jesus Christ The Text opened.
to prevent an objection or query that might have been here made; as thus might
it have been objected, Lord, in case none are blessed but such as be, and do as
thou have said; such as be poor in spirit, pure in heart, etc. and then such as
in their Conversations walk as Lights in the World, conforming (at least in
desire) to the most spiritual part of the Law; pulling out their right eyes,
and cutting off their right hands, denying themselves in every thing, blessing
them that curse them, praying for them that persecute them; making it their
chief end to approve themselves to God rather then to man in every duty; living
by Faith as to all outward enjoyments; not judging any, but according to Rule;
condemning no man for that which they allow in themselves; praying earnestly
and importunately; doing to every man as they would be done unto: Then surely,
Lord, thy Discipline is a very severe Discipline, and there are but very few
that will be saved.

Our Lord Christ does in the Text resolve that Query, and does faithfully
acknowledge his Discipline to be severe, and that the way to heaven is a strait
narrow way. The parallel Scripture to this ( Luke 13, 2, 324.) we find brought
in as a Reply to a Question of this nature.

In these words you have two things considerable,

1. You have something plainly asserted by our Lord Christ as an undoubted
truth; to wit, That the way to true happiness is straight and narrow, but the
way to destruction broad and easy; and thereupon there is but few that do walk
in the former, but most in the latter way. 2. You have the Exhortation of our
Lord Christ, grounded upon this plain and undoubted Assertion, viz. That since
the way to destruction is broad and full, we should therefore beware of it; and
since the way to glory is narrow, we should therefore enter in (says this
Scripture) strive to enter in (says Luke) at this strait gate, and to walk in
this narrow way.
That which I shall speak unto, will be the undoubted Assertion in the Text;
and as for the Exhortatory part, that will fall in by way of improvement.

Two things are then to be spoken unto:

1. (For that I shall speak to first, though it be not first in 1 Doctr.
in the Text) That the way to hell and destruction, is a broad easy way, and
the most walk in it. 2. That the way to heaven and blessedness, is a strait
narrow way, 2. Doctr.
and few find it.
For the handling of the first particular, I shall propound, and resolve three
Queres.

1. What is this broad way? 2. What is that destruction it leads unto? 3. How
it comes to pass that (notwithstanding it leads to destruction, yet) the
most walk in it: Of these in their order.

1. What is this broad Way? What the broad way to destruction is.


Answ. By this way (in general) we may understand the way of the Unregenerate
man. God made man a glorious creature, but by his Fall he corrupted himself,
and begat his Children in his own corrupt and filthy likeness; so that all the
generation of mankind are naturally under sin Romans 3.
and out of the right way; by nature children of wrath Ephesians. 2.
, born with their faces toward Hell, and their backs upon God, and the
concernments of his Kingdom; The whole world lies in wickedness (1 John 5.
19.) All as sheep going astray, 1 Pet. 2. 25. So that without a turn, without
conversion there is no Every unregenerate person however qualified, is in the
broad way to Hell. Five paths in the broad way
salvation, John 3. 3. But I shall a little expatiate, descending into
particulars.

In this broad way we may consider these five paths all very broad, and leading
to destruction. 1. The path of Ignorance. 2dly, Of Profaneness. 3dly, Of
Disobedience. 4hly, Of false Worship. And 5thly, Of Hypocrisy.

First, The path of Ignorance, the want of the knowledge of 1. The path of
Ignorance.
the true God in the face of Jesus Christ; in whose face the glorious
attributes of God does shine forth most clearly. Now the want of this, does
render the soul in a lost and miserable state. 2 Cor. 4. 3. If our Gospel be
hid, it is hid to them that are lost. Mind Hos. 4 6 John 17. 3. Romans 10. 14.
Without this knowledge the mind cannot be good, Prove. 19. 2. A person may as
well say he has a good eye, though a blind one, as a good heart, though
ignorant: There can be no truly good meanings, breathings, desirings, in the
heart without light.

Now in this blind dark path, does all men naturally walk, Ps. Isa. 42. 6, 7.
and 49. 6 Mac. 4. 16.
14. 2. Ephesians. 4. 18. Ephesians. 5. 8. And therefore Christ is given to be a Light to
them that sit in darkness and in the shadow of death. The natural man
understands not the things of God, neither can he, because they are
spiritually discerned; and because he knows them not, therefore he cannot
receive them, John 14. 17. 1 Cor. 2. chapter Seek therefore after the knowledge of
God in Christ, and for the Lord's sake take heed of adding to natural
blindness, blindness of mind, and a hatred of the Light; for this obstinate
blindness does more and more alienate the heart from God, Ephesians. 4. 18. and bring
condemnation with a witness, John 3. 19. This is the condemnation, that Light
is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather then light, because their
deeds were evil. Take heed of opposing, neglecting, refusing, and despising the
precious Gospel, the means whereby you are to come to the knowledge of God in
Christ.

2dly, The path of Profaneness. This is the filthy, dirty 2. The path of
Profaneness.
path of a debauched, wretched life; the pollution of the world, the Cinque of
sin, when persons shall live in all manner of abominable wickedness, such as
swearing, drunkenness, uncleanness, idolatry, Sabbath-breaking, witchcraft,
etc. That this path leads to destruction, is clear from these Scriptures, 1
Cor. 6. 9, 10. Gal. 5. 19, 20. 21. Rev. 21 8. ult. and 22. 15.

That this path is broad and full, Experience does teach if we look no further
then our own Island, how does Profaneness and Debauchery spread it self? How
is the Lords Day profaned, his Name blasphemed, Holiness despised, etc.?
Because of cursing, and swearing, and damning, the Land does mourn, or rather
ought to mourn. Do we not wish the Pox, and Plague of God upon each other
daily, as if we would provoke the Almighty to shoot his Arrows amongst us? Is
not the iniquity of Sodom to be found amongst us. Pride, fullness of Bread, and
abundance of idleness, Ezekiel. 16. 49. And exceedingly aggravated above that of
Sodom, in that it has been against so many Warnings, so much Light, and the
exercise of such love and forbearance with us. Nay, may we not say concerning
England, as of Israel of old, (Hosea 4. 2.) That by swearing, and lying, and
killing, and stealing, and committing adultery, they break out, and blood
touches blood. But

3dly, There is the path of Disobedience. It Is true, the ignorant 3dly, The
path of Disobedience.
person is disobedient, forasmuch as it is the duty of all to labor after the
knowledge of God, and the debauched person is a disobedient person; but here I
understand the Negative Christian (if we may call him a Christian) that
pleases himself that he is not so and so; no Swearer, no Drunkard, etc. And
forasmuch as he cannot be charged with the commission of gross sins, he judges
his state good. Now this is a path that does most certainly lead to everlasting
ruin, and that because the Gospel does require positive obedience. It Is not
what thou art not, or what thou have not done; but what thou art, and what thou
have done, that will comfort thee upon a dying bed, and before a
Judgment Seat. Thou say thou have not walked The Gospel requires positive
obedience^
so and so; Well, but have thou believed, repented, and obeyed the Gospel?
These things are positively required. As first, the Gospel requires Faith
(which is a coming out of our selves to Christ for salvation, and a receiving
of Christ upon Gospelterms, A definition of Faith.
viz. as a King to rule, a Prophet to teach, and a Priest to save) 1 John 3.
23. Matthew. 11. 28. And without this, no salvation, Luke 19. 27. John 3. 18.

Again, the Gospel requires repentance, Mat. 4. 17. Acts 2. 38. and 3. 19. The
Law knows no repentance, the Language thereof is, The soul that sins must
dye. Repentance unto life is a A description of Repentance.
pure Gospel-Cammand, and comes in upon the account of the New Covenant. Now
that Repentance which the Gospel requires, it consists, (first) In a sense of
sin original and actual. Secondly, Humiliation for it. Thirdly, A hatred of all
of that kind. Fourthly, a departing from it. And this Repentance is so required
in the Gospel that without it there is no salvation, Luke 13. 3. Psalm. 68. 21.
God shall wound -- the hairy scalp of such an one as goes on still in his
trespasses.

Again, the Gospel requires obedience, Matthew. 20. 28. 1 Pet. 1. 15. 2 Cor. 10.
5. Romans 6. 13. And this is so required also, that without it there is no
entering into Heaven, Heb. 12. 14. and 5. 9. and 2 These. 1. 8. In flaming fire
taking vengeance on them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Consider this in the fear of the Lord all ye civil ones, that
though your lives may not be so vile as others, yet if that be wanting which
the Gospel does require, abovementioned, then as sure as thou have a being in
this World at present, so sure will thou have a being with the Devils in
everlasting flames, if free grace prevent-not. This path is doubtless a broad
path, thousands have traveled to Hell in this path, looking for no more then
the negative part of Godliness. To proceed.

4thly, There is a path of false Worship. As there is a true 4. The path of
false Worship.
Worship required in the first and second Pretepts of the Moral Law, so there
is likewise a false Worship in the world, which upon your souls you must beware
of. Now this false Worship may be reduced to one of these two heads, viz.
Idolatry, or Will Worship.

First for Idolatry. Idolatry is the Worship of Idol-gods; and Idolatry what it
is.
this Idolatry is either external or internal.

Internal Idolatry is the placing of that fear, trust, love, etc. Internal
Idolatry, what it is.
which is due to the true God, upon something else. This is a breach of the
first Commandment, wherein God does forbid heart-Idolatry.

God does require a precedence and preheminency in our affections, Deuteronomy 6. 5.
Now this heart-worship is called natural worship, and that because it depends
upon the very nature of God, considering what a God he is; and is due from us
by the very Law of Creation; being by that Law bound to love, fear, trust, etc.
the true God above all others in heaven or earth. And cursed is that soul that
withholds from God the male of his flock; which is the heart heart. Mal^ 1 ult.


Here note, that every man naturally has an Idol in his heart; something which
he prefers before God, and the welfare of his precious soul: so that we may
conclude every unregenerate person to be a Heart-Idolater.

External Idolatry, is either the worshipping of any thing External Idolatry
what it is.
besides the true GOD, as a God; or, Secondly, The worshipping of the true God
by Idols and Images. The former is a breach also of the first Command, which
says, Thou shall have no other Gods before me; and is expressly forbid in other
Exodus 20. 3.
Scriptures, as Exodus 34. 10. Deuteronomy. 6. 14. Nay, other false gods were not to be
once named amongst them, Exodus 23. 13. and the very places of Worship were to
be destroyed, Deuteronomy. 12. 2, 3. In this worship is nothing to be expected but
wrath and damnation, Deuteronomy. 6. 14, 15. and 29. 26, 27. Rev. 9 20. From which
wrath their false gods cannot save them, Jer. 10. 8, 14 15. Hab 2. 18, 19.

But secondly, There is another way of Idolatry, which God also abhors; and
that is, the pretending to worship the true God by Idols and Images. This kind
of Idolatry is a breach of the second Command, which forbids the making to our
selves graven Images, or the bowing down to Exodus 20. ^, 5.
them, and worshipping of them, if made by others: And this was the sin of
Israel in the matter of the Calf. Aaron and the rest were not so blind, as to
think the Calf was God, but they intended the worship of the true God by the
Calf, as appears Exodus 32. 5. Aaron proclaimed, to morrow is a seast to the
Lord, not to the Calf: and yet if you consult the the 8th verse of that Chapter,
as also Psalm. 106. 19, 20. Act. 7. 41. you will find, God did account it all one
as if they had terminated their worship in the Calf; forasmuch as these
Scriptures says plainly, That they did worship the Calf, and offered sacrifice
to the Idol, and rejoiced in the works of their own hands.

It Is therefore a vain plea of the Papists to say, they do not terminate their
Worship in the Image or Picture, but worship the true God by it: though they
uncover the head, bow the body, bend the knee to the Image, yet all this is not
worshipping the Image, but God by it. And thus do Altar-Worshipers plead, they
bow before the Altar, but not to it; they worship not the Altar, but God by it.
But the most High God will be worshipped in spirit and truth, and The drawing a
picture of God or Christ is abominable.
not by Pictures and Images. To make therefore a Picture of the Trinity is
abominable Idolatry. Consider these Scriptures, Deuteronomy. 4. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
Isa. 40. 18, 19, 20. and 46. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. And as for Christ, though indeed as
man he was picturable, yet because of that near union that was between the two
natures, the drawing a picture of him must needs be very sinful and wicked.
Both these kinds of Idolatry are to be fled from, 1 Cor. 10. 14. 1 John 5.
ult. God did so abhor it, that he gave order that their Groves and high Places
should be destroyed, Deuteronomy. 7. 5. Isa. 30. 22. 2 Cor. 6. 16. Number. 33. 53. and
accordingly you will find the good Kings of Israel did. This is a path that leads
certainly to ruin; Psalm 97. 7. Confounded be all they that serve graven
Images, that boast themselves of Idols: Worship him all ye gods. You may do
well here to consider that severe Law ( Deuteronomy. 13.) against those that should
secretly entice to Idolatry; the 6th verse to the 12. the substance of which
Law was this, That if a man's own son, daughter, wife, friend, etc. should
entice him secretly to the Worship of a false God, that then that man should
not conceal it, but his hand should be first upon him to kill him, stoning him
with stones until he died. And the end of this severe Law is expressed to be,
That Israel might hear, and fear, and do no more so wickedly. Ver. 11. Of
Will Worship. The difference between natural and instituted Worship.


The other part of False Worship, is Will Worship, that Worship which is
founded purely upon man's will.

Note here, that though natural Worship is founded upon the very nature of God,
and due by the very Law of Creation, and so needed no institution for it, yet
the instituted Worship of God (of which the second Command treats) is built
upon the command of God: so that God will own no Worship to be his, but what he
has commanded. Hence it is, that though natural Worship abides ever the same,
yet instituted Worship has been diverse. Under the Old Testament in one form,
and under the Gospel in another. And as all the Ceremonies under the Law were
lawful only upon the account of Gods command,; so under the Gospel* that
which does warrant Church-constitution and Discipline, Ordination of Officers,
Administration of the Seals, etc. is nothing else but the command of God. And
therefore when God speaks (in Jer. 7. 31. and 19 5.) against the offering of
their Sons and Daughters to Baal, he says not, I forbad this (though he had
forbad it once and again, as Levit 18. 21. and 20. 2. Deuteronomy. 12. 31. and 18. 2.)
but it never came into my heart to require it. By Will Worship then I mean men's
additions unto, or substractions from the Word of God, in the matter of
instituted Worship. This is forbidden Deuteronomy. 4. 2. and 12. 32. Prove. 30. 6.

Now this way of Will Worship must needs lead to everlasting Wherein the evil
of Will Worship confisteth.
destruction; For that

1. It Is committing high Treason against the God of heaven. To clip the King's
Coin is Treason, but to put our own stamp upon it is high Treason: To diminish
ought from God's Law is very abominable, but to make Laws of our own is much
more abominable.

2. It Is the setting up of the Will and Wisdom of man in opposition to the
Authority and Wisdom of Christ. That whereas we are commanded to do that which
is right in the sight of the Lord ( Deuteronomy. 6. 17, 18. and 12. 25, 28. and 13.
18. and 28. 14.) this is doing that which is right in our own eyes, as if we
were wiser then the Lord. It Is the Language of the heart of an Idolater, I Will
not have this man to rule over me; if I do him any homage, it shall be
according to my own will.

3. This is in Scripture called the Worship of Devils, Lev. 17. 7. Deuteronomy. 32.
17. 1 Cor, 10. 20. Rev. 9. 20. Psalm 106. 36, 37. 2 Chronicles. 11. 15. and that
because it is not God but the Devil that is served by such Worshippers. It Is a
Worship of the Devils inventing, and that he by all means possible endeavors
to strengthen and establish. Now the Worship of the Devil must needs lead to
ruin.

4. Idolatry and Will. Worship is that which causes the Jealousy of God to
break forth. We have this word Jealousy mentioned in no Command but the
Second, which treats of instituted Worship, and several times it is used in
Scripture in reference to Worship, as Exodus 34. 10. Deuteronomy. 6. 14, 15. and 32.
16. Psalm. 78. 58. If you ask what Jealousy is, Solomon says, It Is the rage of
a man, Prove. 6 34. So that (to speak with holy reverence) pollution in matter
of Worship is that which puts the holy God into a rage and fury, makes him
very wroth, and Who is able to stand when once the Jealousy of God breaks
forth? Now by all this it appears, that Idolatry and Will Worship leads to
destruction.

And now that this way of false Worship is nevertheless a broad path, appears,
if we shall consider, that most part of the world is without the knowledge of
the true God: Some worshipping the Sun, Moon, and Stars, etc. some, Men, like
themselves; and some fourfooted Beasts, and Creeping things: For the proof of
which, the Scriptures are abundantly full; Jer. 10. 1, and so on. Psalm. 115. 4.
and 135. 15, 16, 17, 18. Romans 1. 21, 22, 23. 1 Cor. 10. 20. And then in that
part of the world which is called Christian, there Antichrist sits in the
Temple of God, setting up his Post by Gods Post, and his Pillar by Gods Pillar.
Revel. 14. 9, 10, 11, 12. There it says, that Whosoever shall worship the
Beast, or receive his Mark, etc. shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God,
that is poured out without mixture, into the cup of his Indignation, etc. And
yet you shall find ( Rev. 13. 3, 8.) that upon the healing of the deadly wound
of the Beast, all those whose names are not written in the Lambs book of Life,
shall wonder after the Beast, and worship him. Now for the Lords sake, and for
your souls sake look to it, that neither by threats nor flatteries you are
brought to walk in this accursed path.

Quest. But will not the Command of a Chief Magistrate excuse me?

Answ. Daniel and the three Children had the command of the King, and yet that
would not prevail with them, either to neglect the Worship of the true God, or
to worship Dan. chapters 3, and 6.
a false God.

Quest. But may I not keep my heart to God, though I do submit externally to a
false, superstitious Will Worship?

Answ. No: It Is impossible for thee to give thy heart to God, and thy body to
an Idol. He that is not with me is against me, and he that gathers not with
me scatters abroad, Math. 12. 30.

5. The 5th and last is the Path of Hypocrisy. The way 5. The path of
Hypocrisy.
of Hypocrisy, is when men and women shall pretend to the true Worship of God,
and seem zealons for his glory, and yet in heart be enemies to Christ, and the
power of Godliness. A Hypocrite is one that has a Saints name and a Devils
nature; one that hates the practice of that he knows and commends to others,
Ezekiel. 33. 33. Jerem. 1. to the 12. Math. 23.

This is a Path that leads to Hell; for, 1. All such a persons performances are
abominable to God, Isa 1. 11. and 66. 3. Zech. 7. 4, 5, 6. Mal. 1. 7, 8. 2.
There are several dreadful words written against him, Mal. 1. ult. Isai. 33.
14. Job 8. 13. and 20. 5. and 27. 8. and 15. 34. and 13. 16. Math. 24. ult. And
this is also a broad path, Isai. 9. 17. Every one is a hypocrite, etc. Math. 7.
22. Many shall say in that day, etc. And I shall profess unto them I never knew
you: Depart from me ye workers of Iniquity. Nay, among the Virgin-Worshipers,
such as have not been polluted by Antichrist, there will be as many foolish as
wise. Thus much in answer to the first Querie, viz. What this broad way is. The

Second Query propounded was, What destruction that is, What destruction it is
the broad way ^eadeth unto.
which this broad way leads unto?

Answ. This Destruction has two parts; which I shall but name.

1. From the presence of the Lord (the chiefest good) Angels and Saints, 2
These. 1. 8, 9. In flaming fire, taking vengeonce on them that know not God, and
that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. Who shall be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of
his power. And

2. This destruction will be to the company of the Devils and damned Spirits,
in everlasting flames, under God's wrath, and the terror of a gnawing
Conscience for ever and ever. Mat. 25. 41, 46, 30. Mar. 44 46, 48


3. The third Query to be resolved is, How it comes to pass Why most walk in
this broad way.
that the most of men travel in this way which leads unto destruction?

Answ. For the solution of this Query, I shall lay down these five Reasons:

^*
his face toward hell, as before said, and thitherward does he travel until
conversion. Now, says Solomon Prove. 16. 2. The ways of a man (that is, the
unregenerate man) are clean in his own eyes, etc. Home is home though never so
homely. Hence it was that Hadad in another case, (1 Kings 11. 21, 22) desired
of Pharaoh that he might go home to his [own] Country, though he had lacked
nothing in Egypt, yet he would go home in any wise. Christ in the Gospel
calls the sinner to the forsaking of his own kindred, and his fathers house;
all its own ways, relations, and concernments whatsoever. And therefore it is,
that though Christ does make never such rich profers to the sinner, yet here he
sticks (till overcome by Almighty power) he cannot leave home, he loves his own
ways, and must walk in them, though he perish eternally. It Is for this cause
that the Fathers of the Antichristian Church, cannot be content to worship God
according to their own brains themselves, but (according to their power) will
force it upon others: The reason is, because it is framed by their grace,
wisdom, and understanding, and all of it the work of the Crafts-men; and
therefore say they, let the men that sacrifice kiss the Calf, bovv and stoop to
our Image, and that upon pain of death, or banishment; see for this Hosea 13.
2. Oh! how earnest has this made persons at Idolatry, Isa. 66. 3. Jer. 7. 18.
But

they want that education which others have, God expects not that they should
trouble themselves about searching the Scriptures, or about the various
Opinions of men in the Worship of God; and so contents themselves,
(notwithstanding they are under the glorious light of the Gospel) do live and
dye in ignorance. And there is a Ministry in the World that suits this spirit,
that teaches the people that they need trouble themselves no further about
Religion, save only to attend constantly upon Divine Service, and to be
constant at the Sacrament when it is administered, and get some good Prayer Book
to read in their Families Mind here, that the greatest work of Religion is
internal work, pulling down the strong holds of the heart* It lies in
Regeneration and mor^ification, and without this wo^k be done, people may go to
hell for all their Divine Service, and good Prayer Books
. Now this being an easy Religion, it is greatly pleasing, and many poor
ignorant people will thank a Minister at present that shall so instruct them,
though it may be they may curse him hereafter in Hell for it. 2dly, The way of
profaneness, an easy path; a man may sit upon an Ale-Bench and be drunk, lie
upon a Down-bed and be unclean, sit upon a Couch and swear, and curse, and
blaspheme the Name of God, and reproach his people, etc. And so also for the
Negative Christian, the Will-worshipper, and the Hypocrite. None of these come
so far as to pull out a right eye, or cut off a right hand for God. Sin may be
loved, yea practiced either more openly, or more secretly in all these paths

3dly. Here Is peace (such as it is) enjoyed in this broad way. It Is true, God
speaks not peace to a wicked man, but the Devil he does, Luke 11. 21. When a
strong man armed keeps his Palace, his Goods are in peace. The soul of an
unregenerate man is the Devil's habitation; and it is the great design of the
Devil to guard the soul, and to preserve its sinful peace, and to prevent
whatever might disturb it. And herein does a wicked man join with the Devil,
being very loath to have his peace broken. Hence it is that wicked men do so
hate and abhor a soul-searching-Minister, a burning and a shining light; the
reason is, because such a Ministry has a tendency to break this hellish peace.
It Is therefore the Devils business to furnish those of his Subjects, (which
must needs have some kind of preaching) with such a Ministry as shall neither
by preaching nor living, disturb their peace. Those then that do employ
themselves to thrust out Laborers, and to put in Loyterers; to thrust out such
who endeavor to search to the quick, and bring in such as will daub with
untempered mortar, do the Devil the best service of any men in the world.

But note, that before ever the soul comes to enjoy true peace of Conscience,
this sinful peace must be destroyed. Christ comes not (in the Gospel) to
maintain, but to destroy this peace.

4thly, Man is a sociable creature, and loves company; and in this broad way
the Devil can furnish them with all sorts of associates suitable to his
disposition. As,

1. Art thou a plain Countryman that loves to talk of thy Ploughing and
sowing, etc. but do not fancy to discourse of Religion; thou think that
Discourse is fit only for Ministers or learned Gentlemen, and not for such
plain men as thy self. The Devil can furnish thee with very suitable company;
for he has thousands in his Kingdom that do regard Religion as little as thou
do. Or,

2dly, Art thou a ranting, damning fellow, that is resolved for a merry life,
though a short one; to satifie thy lust to the full; and that never a
Phanatique in the world shall alter thy mind, or stop thee in this Carear: That
let what will come of it, thou art resolved to have thy Whores, Cups, Oaths,
etc. The Devil has company for thee also. I am apt to think, that at this day
the Devil has more of this sort in his Kingdom then pleases him, they being
grown now to that pass, that they cannot be satisfied to have their fill of
wickedness, but they must abuse such as will not run with them into the same
excess. Now the Devil has such in his Kingdom, that though they do not hate
such things upon Gods account, (for then they would hate all sin) yet their
very Coustitutions and Educations leads them to abhor them. And these persons
being a^used and affronted Psalm. 31. 20
by the debauched party in the Devils Kingdom, may happily be convinced, and put
upon it to look after a Pavillion, wherein they may be kept from the strife of
Tongues *: For something that may down-weigh that reproach and malignity that
this hellish party does cast upon them.

3dly, Art thou for civil company? The Devil has of these also in his Kingdom,
persons that are well bred, and that do scorn to abuse any, does abhor a
profane dissolute Carriage.

4thly, Art thou one, that though thou love not to be over-precise, to be
tied up to hard meat, yet (having some notions of immortality) can not be
content without some kind of Worship, thou art therefore for a good honest
merry Religion, that Religion that has been of late years, is too melancholy
for thee, it makes thee no Music; and thou art for a Minister that is a good
fellow, that will not preach too often, and when he does, not be too earnest, but
will now and then break a jest in the Pulpit; and when he has done preaching,
will not press you so much to private devotion, but that you may after Sermon
upon Sunday (as you call it) fetch a walk in the fields, and play a game or two
at nine-pins, or at bowls, etc. In this broad way there are many of thy spirit
in this also. And this let me tell thee, That it shall not be the Devils fault,
nor the fault of his servants, if thou art not fitted with a Religion that
shall suit thee; a Religion that shall (1.) be easy to understand. 2dly, To
perform, 3dly, That shall indulge thy lusts sufficiently. But,

5thly, Art thou past all the former, and art not only for some Worship, but a
pure Worship? Will no company please thee but Virgins, such as have not defiled
themselves with polluted Worship? Give but heed to the Devil, and he^le help
thee to dissemble, and by dissimulation to get in among Gods people, it may be
into Church Fellowship; and when thou art there (carrying thy self closely) a
thousand to one but in a little time the Devil will help thee to the society of
some in that Church that have as vain a spirit as thy self, and so you may walk
together (concealing the matter) not only in the love, but practice of
abominable wickedness, under a great profession. Now there being such
accommodation for company in the Devils Kingdom, is a fourth Reason why so many
walk in it. But,

begotten us again to a lively hope) and it has all its nourishment from
Heaven; so a wicked man's hope it is begotten by the Devil, and nourished by the
breast of Hell, and so long as the Devil can preserve this hope of happiness
(notwithstanding a sinful life) the soul is secure; but when once this wretched
hope is destroyed, then the Devils Kingdom in the soul begins to shake. For the
Kingdom of Christ (his Rule and Dominion in the soul) is built upon the ruins
of this accursed Hope. Alas! were but a wicked man sensible of his Estate, he
could not rest satisfied one hour; but they are infatuated, under the power of
an Egyptian darkness, only differing from the darkness of Egypt Exodus 10 21
in this, that they fell it not, are not sensible of it. And hence it is that
the Devil's Kingdom is so full.

Thus much for the first particular proposed, namely, That the way that leads
to everlasting ruin, is a broad, easy way.

The second thing to be spoken to (in the handling of which The 2d. doct That
the way to Heaven is a strait narrow way.
we shall but hint things) is, That the way to glory and everlasting
blessedness, is astrait narrow way. I shall (for the dispatch of this)
endeavor to make a twofold discovery, and that in a very summary, viz.

1. What the way to true blessedness is. 2. What the reason is it is so straight
and narrow.
For the solution of the first, I shall only give you this general What the
way to blessedness is.
answer, That it is the way of Faith in Christ, and Obedience to Christ. Of
faith in Christ, whereby the soul goes out of its self, and rests alone upon
the free grace of God in Christ for salvation. Of obedience, whereby the soul
receiving Christ as a Lord and King, is made willing to subject to all his
Commandments, desiring to own and obey (in the strength of God) whatever it
finds to have the stamp of his Authority upon it. These two (Faith and
Obedience) taken in conjunction, are paths that will undoubtedly lead to
everlasting glory. Indeed that faith that is without obedience, is a dead
faith, Jam. 2 And on the other hand, that obedience that is without faith, is
unacceptable, Heb. 11. 6. But in what soul soever there is such a faith as does
produce obedience, and such an obedience as is the fruit of true faith, that
soul is blessed at present, and shall be blessed unto Eternity. And this is all I
shall say in answer to the first query: The second follows. What it is that
makes Heavens way so strait.


2dly, The second thing to be discovered is, What it is that makes the way to
glory so straight and narrow.

Ans. It arises not from any thing in the way it self; for all the ways of
Wisdom are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace Prove. 3. 19
. Christ's yoke it is easy, and his burden light Matt. 11.
. And his commands they are not grievous 1 John 5. 3.
. But from that contrariety and opposition that there is not only in the
unconverted, but also in the unregenerated part of those that are converted
against those terms which Christ has propounded for all those that will be his
Disciples, to submit unto. The sinner would embrace Christ gladly, so he might
have him upon his own terms; but now all those that do expect benefit by
Christ, they must Christ his terms.
submit to those terms that Christ has proposed; which terms are expressed,
Luke 9. 23. And he said to them all, If any man will come after me, let him.

1. Deny himself. 2. Take up his Cross daily. 3. And follow me. Now these terms
being so contrary to flesh and blood, hence it is that it is so hard a matter
to be a true Disciple of Christ. I shall therefore for the further clearing of
this discovery, speak something touching each of these terms proposed by
Christ. And About selfdenial.

1. For that of self-denial: I shall

1. Give you a more general description of it. And 2. Shall show you more
particularly what it is that Christ does call the sinner to deny.
Take the general description thus: Self-denial, is a gracious Self-denial
described.
work of the Spirit of God, enabling the soul by Faith, so to behold the glory
and excellency of Christ, as to deny its self, and all self-concernments, as
they are either compared to Christ, or else come in competition with Christ.

I shall not stand to open the parts of this Description (for What Christ
call^th the sinner to deny
that would take up too much time, and also increase the number of sheets above
my intent) but shall (according to promise) show you in a few particulars what
it is that Christ calls the sinner to deny. And

1. He calls him to deny all ungodliness and worldly lust, to 1. Sin.
part with every sin, yea even such sins that may be as a right eye, or a right
hand, Matthew. 5. 29. Tit. 2. 12, 14. There must be forsaking of all sin, as to
the love of it, and delight in it. A wicked man may (for base ends) refrain
sin, and yet love it; and a good man may commit sin, and yet hate it. But note
here, it is not the presence of sin, so much as the love of sin, that damns the
soul.

2dly, He calls the soul to deny all natural and acquired parto, 2 Natural and
acquired parts
as a meek, well-tempered nature, an humble, lowly carriage, good education,
school-learning, etc. These things are not so to be denied, as (1.) not to
bless God for them. And 2dly, not to improve them; but they are so to be
denied, as that we should not look upon our selves to be ever the more
deserving the love and favor of God because of these endowments. And 2dly,
That we should not rest in these qualifications, placing our happiness in them,
and not coming to Christ, in whom alone is true perfection, 1 Cor. 1. 21 -- The
world by [Wisdom] knew not God. The learned of the Jews and Greeks were too
wise to close with Christ, and to hearken to the foolish preaching of the
Gospel. And therefore the Apostle says, Cap. 3. ver. 18. He that would be
wise, he must become a fool. The only way to obtain spiritual Wisdom, is to
deny our natural and acquired parts, and s^o know our selves to be fools. 3 All
Religious performances


3dly, We are called to deny all our Religious performances, uch as preaching,
hearing, praying, etc. to deny all in point of Justification from the guilt of
sin, and acceptance into Gods favor, Isa. 64. 6. Phil. 3. 7, 8, 9: We are to
perform religious duties with that care and diligence, as if we were to obtain
eternal life by our works; and yet on the other hand, we are to rest upon the
free grace of God in Christ for salvation, as if we had never done one good
work, never performed one good duty

4thly, All Ordinances and external privileges are also to be 4 Ordinances and
privileges.
denied, Amos 6. 1. Woe to them that are at ease (not in Sodom, but) in Sion.

It Is a great mercy to enjoy Ordinances; they are of great advantage to a
people Romans 3*
, but if thou do rest in bare Ordinances, without the enjoyment of the God of
Ordinances, they will leave thee short of heaven at last, as they did the foolish
Virgins, Math. 25. See also Math. 7. 22, 23. Ordinances are but as the Casement
through which the light does shine, as the Dish in which the Meat is brought,
as the Pipe through which the Water does run. Now can you imagine, that a man
that is not blind, can be content with a Casement without Light? or a Hungry
man, with a Dish wherein is no meat? or a Thirsty man, with a Pipe through
which does run no Water? And yet such is the madness of those that please
themselves with hearing Sermons, and receiving Sacraments, resting in these
things, notwithstanding they remain in an ignorant, vile, and wretched estate,
without the experience of ought that has been preached to them in the Word, or
represented to them in the Lords Supper.

5. Christ calls to the denying of all worldly concernments 5. All wordly
concernments, as
whatsoever, in comparison of, or in competition with himself, as

1. Riches; Jer. 9. 23. Psalm. 62. 10. 1 Timothy 6. 17. Heb. 11. 1. Riches.
26. It Is a hard matter for a man to be rich in this world, and not to trust in
his riches, and therefore it is that it is so hard for a rich man to enter into
heaven, Math. 19. 23. compared with Mark 10. 24. where Christ by the rich man
declares his meaning to be of those that trust in riches.

2. Honor; Christ in this is proposed for our ensample, 2. Honor.
Phil. 2. 7. made himself of no reputation. The Apostles (1 Cor. 4. 13.) were
content to be defamed, made as the filth and offscouring of the world. Heb. 11.
24, 25, 26. There Moses despised and trampled upon the glory and honor of the
Court, and of being called the Son of Pharaohs Daughter. A good name is a
precious ointment, but sometimes a person may fall into this dilemma, that
either he must be dishonest, or be so accounted, be a fanatic in name, or in
truth: It then savours of an excellent spirit, when a person shall choose
rather to be accounted dishonest, then to be dishonest; choose rather to be
called a fanatic, then to be so. 3 Relations and Habitations


3. Relations and Habitations; Relations, Mat. 10. 37. compared with Luke 14.
26. there you will find that our love to Relations must be a hatred, compared
with our love to Christ. Habitations, Genesis 1^. 1. Psalm. 45. 10. Heb. 11. 8.
Math. 19. 28. Mark 10. 29, 30. Luke 18. 29, 30.

4. Pleasures; 2 Timothy 3. 4. We must take heed of loving 4 Pleasures.
pleasures more then God. Isa. 58. 13. It Is the love of pleasure that does
occasion the breach of the Sabbath. An excellent example of this part of
Self-denial we have in Moses, Heb. 11. 25. Choosing rather to suffer affliction
with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season.

5. There must be a denying our selves in respect of injuries 5. In respect of
Injuries offered.
offered; we must not seek revenge, nor return evil for evil, but on the
contrary bless them that curse us, etc. Math. 5. Romans 12. 14, 19, 20, 21. 1
Pet. 2. 23.

6. In Meats and Drinks; we are not to eat and drink in 6. Meats and Drinks. 1
Cor. 10. 31.
excess, to surfeting and drunkenness, but to use moderation, making the
service and glory of God our great end in the use of his creatures, Prove. 23.
1, 2, 3. Romans 13. 13. 1 Cor. 9. 27. Ephesians. 5. 18. Luke 21. 34. Phil. 3. 19.

7. Life it self; as father and mother, brother and sister, 7. Life it self.
etc. are to be hated in comparison of Christ, so is even life it self, Luke
14. 26. And the only way to keep life here with a blessing, and enjoy an
eternal life in glory, is to be willing to resign up our selves, and all that
we have and are to the cause of Christ, when ever Christ shall call us so to
do. Our Lord Christ has said it once and again: Whosoever will save his life
shall lose it; but whosoever shall lose his life for my sake and the Gospel,
the same shall save it: and what profit will it be for a man to gain the whole
world and lose his soul? Math. 10. 39. and 16 25, 26. Mark 8. 35, 36, 37. Luke
9. 24. 25.

And thus much touching the first term, viz. Self-denial; the second follows,
which is

2. That every Disciple must take up hit Cross daily.

I shall here first show you what this Cross is; secondly, what it is to take
up this Cross.

1. By Cross sometimes is understood the efficacy and power What the Cross of
Christ is.
of Christ's Death, as 1 Cor. 1. 17, 18. Gal. 6. 14. Col. 2. 14. and sometimes
Affliction and Persecution, so Heb. 12. 2. and so are we to understand it here
in this Scripture. A Christian he has many Crosses in this world, as that of
Sin, Temptation, Desertion, etc. but that which Christ chiefly does here
intend, is doubtless that of Persecution. There are four places wherein Christ
propounds this term, namely, Math. 10 30: and 16. 24. Mark 8. 34: and this in
Luke 9. 23. In Math 10. he spoke largely touching what they should expect from
men, and then in the close tells them, That he that takeih not his Cross and
follows him, is not worthy of him; that is, whosoever shall decline him, or
his way, by reason of that Cross of persecution he had aforementioned, that
person was not worthy of him. And in the three other places, he was in each of
them showing to his Disciples what great things he was to suffer of the Elders
and chief Priests at Jerusalem; and Peter being somewhat offended and troubled
at it, Christ rebukes him, and declares in the presence of the people, and of
his Disciples, That whosoever would come after him must take up his Cross.
Hereby clearly showing to all his Disciples, that the same spirit of envy and
hatred that was in the world against him, will be against them also, Math 10.
23, 24, 25. Joh. 15. 18, 19, 20. and therefore they must resolve to follow him,
bearing their Cross. There is a Cross of Persecution and Tribulation to be born
in a lesser Such an enmity there is between the two Seeds, that nothing can be
expected but persecution from the wicked of the world. See Gen 3. 15. Gal 4.
29. Prove. 29. ult. John 16. ult.
or greater measure by all the Saints in this world, Joh. 16. ult. Acts 14 22.
Phil. 1. 29. and 2 Timothy 3. 12. there the Apostle says, All that will live
godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer Persecution. It Is possible some carnal
formal Professors may rub out in persecuting times; but such as are godly in
Christ Jesus, such as walk by Gospel Light, and according to Gospel-rule, they
shall be sure to suffer persecution. Every unregenerate man is more or less a
persecutor, and therefore while the Saints do live in this world among wicked
and ungodly men, they will in a greater or lesser measure be tormented and
persecuted by the world.

But what is it to take up this Cross?

I shall answer to this both Negatively and Affirmatively, What the taking up
of the Cross is. 1. Negatively.
what we are not to understand, and then what we are.

1. Negatively; We are not to understand any kind of reverence to be given,
either to the Image, or sign of the Cross. The bearing of the image of the
Cross is a place of great honor among the Papists, who do greatly adore and
reverence the same: And so also they do the Sign of the Cross, giving the Sign
no less honor then the Image; but herein they are certainly (as Paul said of
the Athenians) too superstitious, there being no rule in the Word of God for
such Adoration.

2. Christ in propounding this term, does (as it seems to me) secretly
inhibite his people the making and creating a Cross to themselves. As wicked
men are apt to say, Peace, Peace, when there is no Peace; so Gods own people
are apt to fear when no fear is, and to create trouble and sorrow to
themselves. For the Devil, if he cannot entice the soul from the ways of God,
then will he endeavor to discourage it, by persuading it that there is a Lion
in the way. That it will never be able to hold out, and hold on in heavens way,
there is such valleys of death, and mountains of difficulties to pass through
and go over. Now though Christ would have the Soul to persevere in his
commands, whatever the difficulty be he meets withal, yet he would not have it
give heed to such amazing and perplexing suggestions, but by faith to live
above them, And thus by way of Negation.

For the Affirmative, I shall answer it in these four particulars: 2.
Affirmatively.
To take up the Cross is,

1. For the Soul deliberately, after serious debates in the heart about this
matter, to resolve (in the strength of God) to hold on in heavens-way, let what
will come, Disgrace, Poverty, Imprisonment, Fire and Faggot, etc. with Job to
resolve, Though he kill me, yet I Will trust him Job 13. 15.
. A Hypocrite may resolve high, but his resolves are usually sudden and
passionate resolves, and so come to little: but now a Christians resolves (when
he acts like himself) are deliberate and sincere resolves, depending not upon
his own but the strength of God, and these resolves hold; and though a
Christian (that has so resolved) may live and dye in a calm season, and suffer
little, (comparatively) yet God (who knows the heart) accepts the will for
the deed, and takes it as kindly as if he had suffered abundantly more for
his name and glory.

2. It is to acquiesce in Gods pleasure, to have our wills resolved into the
will of God, quietly to submit under all his dispensations and providence,
though seemingly they may contradict his promises and our expectations: with
the Church ( Micah 7. 9) to resolve the bearing his indignation, until he
plead our cause, etc. That soul does truly and rightly bear his Cross, that
does quietly submit himself to God under all afflictions, being (in David's
sense) dumb, not opening his mouth, because it is the Lords doings Psalm. 39. 9.
.

3. To take up this Cross, is to do it cheerfully, to do it upon choice; for so
Christ propounds this term, that whosoever will choose him to be his Lord and
Savior, must choose the Cross also; will choose to reign with him, must also
choose to suffer with him. A hypocrite may suffer much upon the account of
Religion, but he suffers not upon choice; could he preserve his name, or bring
about some such sinister end, he would never suffer; his suffering for truth is
not out of love to truth, but upon some other base and low account. But now
Moses he suffered much, and that upon choice, he chose rather to suffer with
Gods people, then to enjoy sinful pleasures Heb. 11. 25.
. Christ's yoke is not put on per force, we are to take his yoke and burden
upon us, Math. 11.

4. The last particular (which acquainteth us rather with the manner then the
matter* of the duty) is, that to take up this Cross, is to persevere, to hold
out to the end. He must deny himself, and take up his Cross [daily.] We must
not be weary of suffering for Christ, or Truth, but after we have suffered
reproach* and scorn, then we must be willing to suffer confiscation of Goods,
after that Imprisonment, and after that Banishment, and after that cruel Death,
Math. 10. 22. And ye shall be hated of all men for my Names sake; but he that
endures to the end shall be saved. And thus I have dispatched the second term,
viz. The taking up the Cross.

The third and last is, to follow Christ. Now we are to follow We are to follow
Christ
Christ, 1. In his Commands, 2. Examples, and 3. Providence.

1. In his Commands; to follow Christ, is to obey him, 1. In his Commands.
Joh. 10. 4, 5, 27. The true Sheep follow the true Shepherd, and will not
follow strangers; that is, they hear and obey the voice of Christ, and his
only, they will not hear neither obey the voice of Strangers. In this term is
required then, that the soul do heartily and sincerely own Christ for it is Lord
and King, to be ruled and governed by him, owning him alone for the Lord of
it is conscience, and obeying him (at le^st in desire and affection) in all his
commands, so far as they are revealed and discovered unto the soul.

2. We are to follow Christ in his Examples. Christ was 2. In his Examples
not in all things our Example; for some things he did by the power of his
Godhead, and therein he was not an Example to us; and something he did as
Mediator, viz. satisfy his Fathers wrath, and purchase eternal life for his
people, and herein he was not an Example, Heb. 1. 3. -- When he had [by
himself] purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high:
but in that holiness and righteousness that did appear in him, therein he was
our Example, Math. 11. 29. Learn of me: What is it we should learn? Not to
raise the Dead, open the eyes of the Blind, etc. but to be meek and lowly.
Every true Christian was predestined to be conformable to this Pattern, Romans
8. 29. and called unto it, 1 Pet. 2. 21, 22, 23. For even hereunto were ye
called: because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example that we
should follow his steps. Who did no sin, etc. And therefore, Whosoever says he
abides in him, ought himself so to walk, even as he walked, 1 John 2. 6. A
true Christian is then to take Christ for its great and high Example, to
consider how Christ carried it first with respect to the world, and all the
enjoyments thereof, how he* debased and humbled himself; and then secondly how
he carried it with respect to Satan, when under his temptations, how he
defended Satan, not with this or that notion, nor yet with this or that
experience, but with a scriptum est, Math. 4.
It is written. The sword of the Spirit is the best Weapon to fight the Devil
with. And then thirdly how Christ carried it toward men, both Saints and
Sinners; how loving, and meek, and graciously disposed he was to all: and
finally, how he carried it toward his Father; how he obeyed, how zealously,
how cheerfully, how exactly; he did not only do what was commanded, but as it
was commanded, Joh 14. ult. how fully fulfilling all righteousness, Mat. 3. 15.
how constantly he began in the morning of his age, Luke 2. 42 to the 50. and
continued until he had finished his whole work: And then how he believed, and
how he prayed; and lastly how he carried it under sufferings, when upon the
Cross, in that great torment, he cries not out, Oh my hands, or my sides; but,
Oh my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? The withdrawings of God was more
to him then all his sufferings. Now in such things as these, is the Christian
to write after this pattern, to walk (according as he is able) even as Christ
walked.

3. We are to follow Christ in his Providence. To follow 3. In his Providence.
Rev. 14 4.
the Lamb whithersoever he goes. Now we may be said to follow Christ in his
Providence, when we do, 1. Acknowledge God in them, see and acknowledge the
hand of God in all providential dispensations; and 2. Quietly submit to God's
hand, and not with that wicked man, to say, This evil is of the Lord, why
should I wait any longer upon him? But 2 Kings 6. 33.
how cross soever Providence may be, even to the promise of God, yet to rest
upon the faithfulness of him that has promised, and to believe that God will
most certainly make good all that he has spoken concerning the glory of his
Sons Kingdom. And lastly, then do we follow Christ in his Providence, when we
do hear and obey the call of Providence. Now the call of Providence is not
always the same; sometimes it calls for Thanksgiving, and sometimes for
Humiliation; sometimes for doing, and sometimes for suffering; sometimes to bear
a testimony to one Truth and Way of Christ, and sometimes to another. So that
then do we follow Christ in his Providence, when we do hear, understand, and
obey the voice of Providence, doing that which the present Providence of God
does call for.

Thus have I briefly showed what those terms are that Christ has propounded to
all that will be his Disciples. Whereby you may see the reason, why it is that
so few walk in the way of life, It Is because they cannot stoop to these terms.
Naturally men are engaged to their lusts, and their own ways, and these they
will serve and follow, though they venture the loss of their souls by it. And
hence it is also, that God's own people find it so hard a matter to keep close
with God; the reason is from that averseness that is in the unregenerate part
unto Christ's commands: So that although the soul has freely and heartily
closed with Christ upon his own terms; yet often times when it comes to the
trial, it is forced to cry out with Paul, that to will is present Romans 7. 18.
*. The Lord knows my heart is right with him; but how to obey, how to pass
over this difficulty, how to perform this duty, how to take up this cross, etc.
I cannot tell.

I have now finished what I shall say to the Doctrinal part of both
propositions, viz. 1. That the way to destruction is broad and easy. And 2dly,
That the way to happiness is straight and narrow. I shall wind up the whole
with four words of application.

1. It may serve by way of Information, to inform us of The Use. 1. Of
Information.
the great reason why so many that do profess the Name of Christ, fall from
their profession. The reason is, because they did never cordially and heartily
receive Christ upon the terms beforementioned; took not up their profession
out of love to Christ, but upon some other base and lovv account, and in the
midst of all their profession had their hearts engaged to one cursed lust or
other, which they could not deny for Christ, And mind this, that that
profession which is Note.
taken up in hypocrisy, a thousand to one but it ends in apostasy; as every
you would persevere in Heavens way, labor to be sincere and upright with
God,

The second Use is of Caution, and that in two respects. 2. Of Cautio^
1. Take heed of walking securely in any path upon this account that the most
walk in it, since you see that the most of the world walk in the broad way that
leads to destruction. To do as the most do, is to damn your souls: to trifle
away your day of grace, until your glass be run, and your sun be set, and
everlasting flames about your ears. Say not that this or that way of worship is
most acceptable to God, because it is accepted and approved of by the most of
men; for that way of worship which God requires (that is, a spiritual worship)
is not known by, or beloved of the most of the sons and daughters of Adam.

2. Take heed of disowning the way of Christ, because of the paucity of those
that walk therein. This was that which made the Sodomites to despise Lot and
his counsel, Genesis 19. 9. This [one] fellow (say they) came in to sojourn
amongst us, and he will needs be a Judge. If there had been hundreds of Lot's
mind, happily they would have been more ready to have inclined; but he being
alone, they looked upon him as an odd fellow, one that was brainsick, that had
a Fanatic spirit, and therefore regarded not what he spoke. God's people they
are a very small remnant, as a lodge in a Garden of Cucumbers, there is no
cluster in them, as the gleanings after the Vintage is over. * It may be here
and there but Isa. 1 8, 9 Mic. 7. 1
one in a great family that does own the way of Christ, and and that it may be
a child, or a poor servant. A few in a parish, and they it may be the poorer
sort; and hereupon the men of the world do despise, and trample upon the holy
ways of Christ. Persons in matters of Religion, do generally resolve to do as
the most and greatest of men do, though they suffer everlastingly for it. As
you love your souls take heed of stumbling at this stumbling-stone.

The third use is of trial, If the way to destruction be broad, A use of trial.
and the way to life narrow, then it concerns every one thus to reason with his
soul; O my soul! in which of these two paths do thou walk? Art thou bound for
Heaven, or Hell? What will become of thee, when thou shall leave this house of
clay, Arguments to enforce examination.
and lanch forth into the great Ocean of Eternity? How will it fare with thee
in the other world? Consider of the concernment of this duty in these four
particulars

Adam walk. There are but two estates in that Eternity that is before thee, the
one everlastingly blessed, and the other everlastingly miserable and thou art
hasting to one of these estates; every motion of thy soul is a motion toward
Eternity; and so soon as ever thou come to dye, thou will either enter into
the joy of the blessed, or else be a companion for damned Spirits, and reserved
under chains of darkness, unto the judgment of the great day. While thou art
in this world, thou art either a believer or an unbeliever, a Child of God, or
a Child of the Devil; in the Kingdom of Christ, or in the Kingdom of Satan:
Christ's friend, or his enemy: And when thou leavest this world, thou must
either be blessed with the seed of Jacob, or cursed with the seed of Cain.

2dly, The Scriptures tell us there are but a very few that will enter in at
the strait gate. Now if the Scriptures had declared that all mankind should
have been saved except ten persons thou might have feared thy self to have
been one of those ten: But when on the other hand, the Scriptures shall so
plainly declare, that the most will be damned, and but a few saved, how is it
then that thou can eat and sleep in peace, plow and sow in peace, and the
salvation of thy precious soul be at such uncertainties?

3dly, Consider how many thousands have been mistaken in this great business;
who in the time of their health and prosperity, have been very confident of
mercy and salvation, and of Gods love to their souls: how has such a soul said
of all Gospel-priviledges, These are mine? Of the promise of pardon, This is
mine? Of peace and joy* These are mine? Of Divine protection, This is mine? And
yet when such have come to dye, have found nothing theirs but their sin, and
God's wrath. Yea, how at the last they shall come knocking at Heaven's Gate,
and demand entrance, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us, but shall find the gate
everlastingly shut upon them, Matt. 7* 22, 23. and 25. 11, 12. For Christ sake
(therefore) take heed of a groundless confidence of God's love, and thine own
salvation.

4thly, If thou dyest under such a mistake, thou art eternally lost. If sin be
thy burden now, the Scriptures tells thee where thou may have ease, upon whom
thou may cast this burden; but if thou shall not feel the burden of sin till
thou droppest into H^ll, (for there thou will be sure to feel it* with a
witness) then it will be too late; there will then be no remedy,

Quest, How may I do that I may know the state and condition of my soul, as to
this great matter?

Ans. In the handling of the first Doctrine we made a fivefold How to come to
know the true state of our souls.
discovery of the broad way to Hell, and have shown, that ignorance,
profaneness, disobedience, will worship, and hypocrisy, are all paths that do
lead into the Chambers of death. I would therefore in the first place propose,
that thou would consider of this discovery by way of trial, as thus: 1.
Examine whether thou art not yet in a state of ignorance. This is a souldamning
path. If our Gospel be hid (says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 4. 3) its hid to them
that are lost. What knowledge have thou of thy wretched estate by nature? Of
the free and absolute Covenant of Grace sealed in the blood of Christ? etc. I
must here be plain. I am greatly afraid that many of you are so far from
knowing these things experimentally, in the mystery of them, that you are
strangers to the notion, and history of them. Now though we may know the
History, and be strangers to the Mystery; yet its impossible we should know
these things in the mystery, and by experience, and not know them notionally.
The mystery is wrapped up in the History. The precious word of the Gospel is the
field in which this Pearl is hid, the swaddling clothes in which the Babe is
wrapped: So that there can be no receiving of, or believing in the Lord Christ
without some knowledge of him as declared and discovered in the Scriptures.
2dly, Thou speak of God's love and mercy; examine, it may be thou art to be
found in the path of a debauched life; it may be thou may be found to be a
drunkard, a swearer, a sabbath-breaker, a contemner of God and his people, a
scoffer at the ways of holiness, etc. to live in the practice of such things
as these; and not only so, but to take pleasure in them that do them, Romans 1.
ult. Now consider, how can thou call thy self a Christian, and live after
this rate? What, a Christian and a Drunkard! a Christian and a Swearer! a
Christian and a scoffer at godliness! I Will tell thee plainly, there are better
Christians in Hell a thousandfold then thou art, if thou be'st such an one.
3dly, If thou art not a debauched person, then examine whether thou have any
thing more then Civility and Morality; Thou do pride thy self in thy
civility, but O man or woman, where is thy faith, thy repentance, thy holiness?
For to Hell thou must go with all thy sweet dispositions, and moral virtues, if
these things be wanting. Thou may be a moral man, and yet no Christian; a
civil, wellbred person, and yet in thy heart an enemy to Christ and the power
of godliness.

When Christ was on earth, he had not among the sons of men a more malignant
enemy then the civil honest Pharisees. And to this very day God's people do by
experience find and feel the moral civil man to be the most desparate,
indefatigable, insatiable and indefeasable persecutor they meet withal. The
moral, civil men are the fittest Engines in the Devils work, and are able to do
the most mischief to God's people. Let a wicked drunken, profane fellow rail
and ball against those of his neighbors that do fear the Lord, or against any
of Gods faithful Ministers, calling them Heretics and Phanatiques, etc. there
will hardly any take notice of such a fellow, except it be to cry out shame
upon him. But now in a Countrey-parish, where a good Minister is, it may be
there you will have a sober, well-composed Gentleman, or some grave Yeoman that
has been an ancient Parishioner, and a loving, quiet neighbor, who has
composed many differences, and prevented many suits of Law among his neighbors
(things very worthy of praise) And this man he designs the outing of this
faithful Minister; and how does he endeavor it? Not by railing against him to
his face (though happily privately he may use as scurrilous language as others)
but first he deals with the Minister himself, and tells him how sorry he is
that it should be his fortune to come into such a place where the people will
by no means conform to his Rules; and therefore out of that love and respect he
has for him, he thought meet to advise him to remove, and to enquire out some
other place where its likely he may have more love, and more maintenance If
this will do, he is pleased; but if he finds the Minister resolved still to wait
upon the providence of God amongst them, then he deals with the Parishioners,
and counsels them in this wise: Neighbors, you know how that for many years
we lived in love and peace together, (as became us) and good neighborhood and
fellowship was maintained amongst us, and how that we went comfortably to the
House of God together, and at the appointed seasons had the Communion; and that
our former Ministers and we did live in love and charity one with another; but
now since this Minister came amongst us, it is nothing so; he does seem by his
preaching, to design the breaking of that former peace and union that was
amongst us: For, 1. He does in his preaching press us to look after the truth
of our conversion and regeneration, and after true saving faith; as if we were
not converted, and had not true faith in God: And further, he usually has in
his application a word for Saints, and a word for Sinners, as if there were two
parties amongst; whereas (neighbors) I hope, though we be great sinners, yet
we have all a strong faith in Christ, and do love God (as God forbid we should
do otherwise) and rhat we are all true Christians, let him say what he will.
But 2dly, we do already experience the sad effects of his Ministry amongst us
in that some of our neighbors begin to cry out of the greatness of their sin,
and to question the salvation of their souls, etc. And besides, in our Families
there we are distracted, some of our Servants and Children they can mind
nothing but reading, and praying, and talking of the word they hear, etc. So
that the word is made good amongst us; for here is the Father against the Son,
and the Servant against his Master, and the Husband against his Wife, and so
on, Matt. 10. 34, 35, 36. And further, he does refuse to give us the Communion
except we will give an account of our hope of salvation, and amend our lives.
Now these things (neighbors) they are a trouble to me, and I suppose may be
the like to many of you, to think that we who have been all along accounted
good Neighbors, and good Churchmen, should now in our elder years come to be
catechized, and have our says in God questioned. My advice therefore is (that
this Gangreen may spread no further) that you would join as one man with me for
the putting this Minister out, and getting an honest man that will have charity
for us all, and perform Church-duties, as others have done heretofore; and (as
I am a Christian) I shall be sure to improve my Interest for the effecting it.
But hear one word before I forget it; keep this Conference private, don'^ let
the Minister know that we had this meeting, or that I have thus advised you;
for I am resolved (that I may the better accomplish the thing intended) to
carry it as fair to the Minister as I may; but do you be sure to be true to the
promise, and as I am a sinner to God) I Will be true to mine. I say, that such a
man as this is, by such means as these, shall be able to do more toward the
extinguishing of a glorious light, the removing of a faithful Minister, the
ruin of his family then a hundred profane, drunken, idle fellows could have
done; and indeed the profane can do little, except headed, abetted, and
encouraged by some such persons as these. Take heed therefore, left under the
garb of Civility, thou retainest Enmity to Christ, and his People and Ways.
But then

4thly, Do thou boast not only of thy Civility, but also of this, That thou
art a Worshipper of God; then examine whether thou art not a Will-worshipper;
is not thy fear of God taught by the precepts of men? Art thou not carried on
in thy Worship more by the will of man, then by the will of God? Art thou not
more willing to take Humane, then Divine Conduct in matters of Worship? The
Word of God is the perfect Rule of Worship: Now what higher argument have thou
for the greatest part of thy Worship, then the Command and Example of man? Thou
art resolved to be of the Religion of thy Country, be it what it will; and so
it may well be judged, that if thou had been born in India, or among the
Turks, thou would have been of thy Countries Religion, right or wrong.
Undoubtedly one Act of Parliament (supposing all the Inhabitants Note.
of this Land were Papists) against the Papists, should make more Protestants
(in profession) then a thousand Sermons would do. Consider, in matters of
Worship art thou more zealous for thine own prayer, then for the ways of
Christ? More zealous for thee keeping of a holy day, then for the keeping of
the Lord's Day? More zealous of praying in thy Pew, then in thy Closet? More
zealous for prayers over the dead, then for good, sound, and powerful
preaching? Nay, have not some of you been more troubled about the thoughts of
your Burial, then you have about eternal provision for your precious souls?
Thus the proud Pharisees were more zealous for the traditions of the Elders,
then they were for the Commands of God. They had an ancient Tradition among
them for the Washing of hands before meat. And the Disciples of Christ
(notwithstanding this was a very innocent Ceremony, yet) observing what weight
the Jews laid upon it, and how they did impose it, denied conformity, and were
defended by Christ in it. But oh! how greatly were the Jews offended at their
nonconformity? They themselves could suffer the Law of God to be broken, had
no zeal for God or his Commands, but for their own Traditions and Commands they
had great zeal, these must not be omitted by any means. And this is the very
spirit of the man of Sin, and of all those that do adhere unto him; for in the
Romish Church you shall have them make more conscience of a nod or a cringe, or
a cross, etc. then of swearing, or whoring, or Sabbath-breaking, or any such
notorious wickedness; nay, it is more easy to obtain pardon for any of these,
then for nonconformity to any of their Ecclesiastical Laws.

Search therefore whether thy Worship be not Will Worship, whether thou art not
superstitious in thy Worshipping, doing what thou do either without a
command, or else without respect to the command of God, as thy chief and only
Rule in the matters of his Worship.

Object. I am not able to discern between true and false Worship, and therefore
I must trust to the judgments of such as I judge wiser then my self.

Answ. 1. The wisest of men are subject to error, and amongst Not to rely
barely upon the judgments of men in matters Religion.
the best and ablest there are great differences in matters of Worship. What
sort of men then can thou trust? Unto what party then will thou cleave? Why,
I Will cleave (it may be thou may answer) to that party that has most power
to impose their judgments upon me. I confess that is a good shift to keep thee
from sufferings; but if thou have no better, thou will hardly keep thy self out
of hell.

2. At the great day of Christ, thou may then answer for thy self. There is
none of those upon whose sleeves thou do now pin thy faith, will then appear
to plead for thee; it is well if they can plead their own cause. When God shall
say, Who required those things at thy hand? it will not be enough for thee to
answer, I had such a man's command, and such a man's judgment for it; for God
will say, Did I ever require it? Thou should have made me, and not thy
Fellow Creature the Lord of thy conscience.

3. It Is a duty incumbent upon every of you to search the Scriptures, Joh. 5.
39. Col. 3. 16. And it is the great work of a Minister of the Gospel to
endeavor so to enlighten his people, that in the performance of all religious
duties they may walk by Scripture light, doing all in judgment. To be able, as
the Apostle says (1 Cor. 14. 15) to pray and sing with the spirit, and with
understanding also.

4. Without knowledge and understanding in the will of God, thy heart cannot be
good, neither can thou be sincere in thy Worship; mind that Scripture, Phil.
1. 9, 10, 11. neither can thou perform any duty that shall be well pleasing
in the sight of God. See for that Col. 1. 9, 10.

Finally, Art thou got a step above all the former? Do thou not only plead
for a Worship, but a pure Worship, a Worship according to Scripture, a
Virgin-Worship? Why then examine, Art thou not in the way of Hypocrisy? Is thy
heart right with God? Is Christ thy all and in all? For know, that by so much
the more glorious thy profession is, and the greater thy light is, by so much
the greater will thy condemnation be, if thy heart shall not be found to be
right with God. And thus much for the first direction about Self-examination.

Again secondly, In the handling of the second Doctrine, we have opened those
terms whereby Christ offers himself unto the sons and daughters of Adam, now
examine thy self, whether thou have to this day cordially and heartily received
Christ upon those terms? Received Christ, so as to deny and abhor thy self, so
as to take up the Cross, and so as to follow him, in his Commands, Examples,
and Providence.

3. And chiefly, if thou would go through with this work, beg of God that he
would pour forth of his spirit upon thee; it being the great Office of this
Spirit to discover unto the Seed of Jacob their own vileness, and Christ's
excellency; their own sinfulness, and Christ's righteousness; their own wants,
and Christ's fullness; their own guilt, and Christ's satisfaction: The misery of
their estate, as the children of the first Adam; and the happiness of their
estate* by virtue of union with the Lord Christ the second Adam, Joh. 16. 8, 9,
10, 11. 1 Cor. 2 9. to the end, Ephesians. 1. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. Be faithful in the
making use of these directions, and by the blessing of the Lord upon thee, thou
may come to know the state of thy soul, whether thou art in the broad way to
destruction, or in the narrow straight path to life and glory.

The fourth and last Use is of Exhortation, and that first A Use of Exhortation.
to those who upon examination shall be found in the broad way that leads to
ruin, shall be found walking in the path of Ignorance, Profaness,
Disobedience, Will Worship, or Hypocrisy; them I exhort (being in some measure
sensible of the terrors of the Almighty) with David to consider their ways,
and turn to the Lord, Psalm. 119. 59. I thought on my ways, and turned my feet
unto thy testimonies. Consider O Soul, what it is to be in this broad way; if
thou know not, give me leave a little to acquaint thee: To be in this broad
way (as all unregenerate persons are) is to be without God in the world,
without interest in him, or communion with him; to be a stranger to the
covenants of promise, to be without any true hope of Salvation: If thou know
not, I Will tell thee; It Is to be a filthy, loathsome, noisome creature, more
abominable to God then a Toad; to be an enemy of God, a child of the Devil, in
the kingdom and under the power of Darkness: If thou know not, I Will tell
thee; It Is to be a child of wrath, and an heir of hell. This (and a
thousand-fold more then I can express) is thy condition at present; and as for
thy future estate* (if thou dyest unchanged) let it suffice that I tell thee
thou shall be damned, and punished by an Almighty hand. All Gods works are like
himself; if he loves a poor creature, he loves him like a God; if he hates a
poor sinner, it is the hatred of a God; if he saves a soul, he saves him like a
God; and so if he damnes thy soul, and torments thee in hell, it will be the
damnation and torment of a God. Hear this Sinners, and hasten out of this
Sodom, before God rains down fire and brimstone upon you. Arise, depart, for
this is not your rest, it is polluted, and take Christ's counsel, Strive to enter
in at this straight gate, to walk in this narrow path whatever it cost thee;
and that this may stick, mind these two arguments:

1. There Is no life but in this narrow way; all that ever went to heaven went
through this strait gate; there is no salvation without Christ, and no Christ
without believing, and no believing without holiness.

2. Ere long, Striving time will be over; Life and Death are now offered to
your choice; you are now told, If that ye live after the flesh, ye shall dye;
but if ye through the spirit mortify Romans 8. 13.
the deeds of the flesh, ye shall live. You have as yet a may be for salvation,
which if you neglect, you will most certainly be damned. This is the day of
Christ's patience, the golden Scepter is yet held forth, Mercy is yet upon the
bare knee to poor sinners, but when once the Master of Luke 13. 25.
the house be risen up and has shut to the door, then striving will be in
vain. It will then be in vain to say ye were baptized in his Name, and that you
have eat and drank at his Table; Christ will then say, Depart ye workers of
iniquity, I know you not: What! you baptized in my Name, you eat and drink in
my presence? What! and blaspheme my Name, and contemn my people, and profane my
Sabbaths, and swear, and be drunk, etc. Away says Christ, depart, I know not
whence you are: since you would not in the day of my Patience give me
entertainment into your heart, neither will I now entertain you in my glory.
Then will be fulfilled that, Revel. 22. 11. He that is unjust let him be unjust
still, and he that is filthy let him be filthy still, etc. After this time
preaching will cease, and the strivings of the blessed Spirit will cease, and
all hopes of salvation will cease for ever. Oh! therefore strike while the Iron
is hot, while Grace is proffered accept i^, while the Spirit strives with thee
yield unto him; suffer thy self to be overcome by the Spirit in a way of Mercy,
or else God will overcome thee in a way of Wrath and Indignation. The
concernment of the soul is made a by-business with the most in the world, and
is taken care for in the last place. Most do by their souls, as it has been
formerly said of the Courtiers, that they do all things late; rise late, and
dine late, and go to bed late, and (that which is worst of all) they usually
repent late. It was my observation in the Country, that it was rare to have
prayers desired for the Sick, or any counsel desired from the Minister to the
Sick, till all hopes of life was even gone: So that (generally) if public
prayers were desired, or the Minister sent for, you might conclude nothing but
death was expected. Take heed of thus deferring repentance; for consider, that
though true repentance be never too late, yet late repentance is seldom true*
Christ saved one at the last hour (as the Thief upon the Cross) that none might
despair, and it was but one that so none might presume.

3. Consider that the day of Grace may be over with Note.
thee before thy life is ended. God does often in judgment give men up to
hardness of heart, and blindeness of mind, that in seeing they might see and
not perceive, and in hearing they might hear and not understand, etc. After
that persons have withstood a powerful Ministry, it may be ten, twenty,
thirty, or forty years, and in this time the Spirit has strove with them,
and persuaded them (times without number) to close with Christ, and forsake
sin, and could never prevail upon them, then does God judicially give them up
to their own hearts lusts, commands his Spirit to strive no more with them, and
gives a Commission to the Devil to take them for his own, and to seal them up
unto the day of wrath. Consider a little what a dreadful Judgment this is; for
first it is a spiritual Judgment. Now the spirituality of this Judgment
consists in these three particulars: 1. In that it is upon the spiritual part
of man, it is to have the heart fatned, the mind blinded, the conscience
seared, etc. Isai. 6. 9, 10. Math. 13. 14 15. Mark 4. 12. John 12. 40. Acts 18.
26, 27. Romans 11. 8. 1 Timothy ^. 2. 2. In that it is executed by a Spirit,
designed and commissioned for that work, 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4. It is the great work
of Satan to harden and blind the hearts of such as do slight and oppose Christ.
3dly, In that it is with respect to spiritual blessings, lest they should see,
and understand, and believe; and lest the light of the glorious Gospel should
shine upon them, and they should be converted, and healed. This judgment it is
to this end, that those who before would not see, now may not see; that those
who before opposed and shut out the light, may now for ever be rendered
incapable of understanding Gospel-Mysteries; that the light of the glorious
Gospel may never break in upon their hearts. So that a soul under this
judgment is not capable of receiving any benefit by the means of Grace, be it
never so powerful and glorious: And therefore Christ says not ( Luke 19. 42.)
but now they are taken from thine eyes, (for at this time they had Christ's
Ministry among them, and afterward the Ministry of the Apostles) but says
Christ, Now they are hid from thine eyes: So that persons judicially hardened,
are under the power of such darkness, that though the Gospel be preached to
them, yet it is hid from them, and becomes not the savor of life to life, but
the savor of death to death.

2dly, This Judgment is irrevocable. The soul is lost for ever; it is
impossible to renew him unto Repentance; there remains now no more sacrifice
for sin, Heb. 6. 6. and 10. 26, 27.

3dly, To complete the dread of this Judgment, consider that the soul is here
struck insensibly; mortally wounded, and knows it not. This we may see in Esau,
who though he was much tormented that his brother Jacob should circumvent him,
yet could find no place for repentance, no place wherein to change his mind,
Heb. 12. 17. The man had the plague at his heart, was given up to a reprobate
sense; but this he knows not, he bewails not: We feel the smart of outward
Judgments, and they often do us good; but this gives a deadly wound, and is
not felt: This stroke makes persons that before would melt under a Sermon, and
be moved by counsel and reproof, to be Sermon and Counsel-proof, make them able
to defend themselves against all Assaults that shall be made against them. If
this be so, then it concerns you to make out after Christ while there are any
movings and stirrings upon your spirit, left you be given up to this dreadful
Judgment. There are three bad Companions upon a dying bed; 1. Good counsel
refused. 2. Vows and Promises not performed. And, 3. Strong Conviction
rejected, and not obeyed. Thus much by way of Argument:

Object. It Is possible some may here object* That it is in vain for them to
seek, since Christ says, (Luke 13. 24.) That many of those that seek, shall
not be able to enter in.

Ans. The great reason why the most will fall short, is because they cannot
submit to the terms aforementioned, they cannot with that Merchant ( Matt. 13.
46.) part with all for the purchase of the Pearl.

Quest. What then may I do to bring my heart to submit to those terms?

Ans. 1. Study the worth and excellency of thy precious and immortal Spirit. It
would be but a bad bargain, though thou should gain the whole world, if thou
should lose thy soul, Job* 27, 8. Mark 8. 36, 37. This well studied, would
soon make thee willing to deny all, to forsake all, so thou might save thy
soul 2dly, Consider, that the design of the Devil and sin, is to undo thee for
ever; for Lust when it is conceived, brings forth sin; and sin when it is
perfected, will most certainly bring forth death, Jam. 1. 15. 3dly, And
chiefly, Study the worth and excellency of Christ; What ever thou deniest for
Christ, thou will find it abundantly made up in him; If Riches, durable Riches
are with him, Prove. 8. 18. If Honor, All that believe in him are made Sons and
Heirs, and that of a Kingdom, Joh. 1. 12 Romans 8. 15, 16, 17. Gal. 3. 26. Joh.
17. 22. If Pleasures, At his right hand are pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16.
ult. If the rags of thine own righteousness, he will become the Lord thy
Righteousness; Jer. 23. 6. If thine own wisdom, In him are hid the treasures of
Wisdom and Knowledge, Col. 2. 3. Had thou but a sight of Christ's glory, a
taste of his goodness, thou would be willing to part with all other things, so
thou might but enjoy him.

My last word is to such as have engaged in Heavens way, in the strait path; My
Exhortation to you is, that you would hold on your way, and persevere unto the
end. Though your troubles should be great, and your Friends few, yet know that
you are in a blessed path, and that your end will be peace. Let not therefore
vain Worldlings baffle you out of your Religion; let neither the frowns for
smiles of men cause you to decline the ways of God, and walk in any accursed
path. I Will propose two Scriptures for your consideration, and so conclude; one
is Heb. 10. 38. Now the Just shall live by faith (and he will make a good living
on it) but if any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him. The
other is Mark 8. 38. compared with Mat. 10 32, 33. and Luke 12. 8, 9. where our
Lord says, That whosoever shall confess him before men, him will he confess
before his Father and his holy Angels; but whosoever shall deny him (be the
Generation wherein he lives, never so adulterous and wicked, never so full of
malignity and cruelty) him will he deny when he shall come in his own glory,
and in the glory of his Father, and in the glory of his holy Angels.

The good Lord cause the rain of his blessing to fall upon these Lines, Amen,
and Amen.

FINIS.

