THE INTERPRETER: OR BOOK CONTAINING The signification of WORDS.

Wherein is set forth the true meaning of all, or the most part of such words
and terms as are mentioned in the Law-Writers, or Statutes of this victorious
and renowned Kingdom, requiring any Exposition or Interpretation.

A Work not only profitable, but necessary for such as desire thoroughly to be
instructed in the knowledge of our Laws, Statutes, or other Antiquities.

Collected by JOHN COWELL, Doctor, sometime the Kings Majesty's Professor of
the Civil Law in the University of Cambridge.

In Legum obscuritate captio.

LONDON

Printed by F. Leach, and are to be sold by Hen. Twyford, Tho. Dring, and Io.
Place, 1658.

To his Reverend Father in GOD, his especial good Lord, THE LORD ARCHBISHOP OF
CANTERBVRY, Primate and Metropolitan of England, and one of his MAJESTY'S most
Honorable Privy Council.
AFter long deliberation, I hardly induced my self to crave your gracious
protection toward this simple work: valuing it at so low a price, as I think
it hardly worth the respect of any grave man, much less the favorable aspect
of so honorable a personage. Yet the remembrance of those your Fatherly
provocations, whereby, at my coming to your Grace from the University, you
first put me upon these studies, at the last, by a kind of necessity, enforced
me to this attempt; because I could not see how well to avoid it, but by
adventuring the hateful note of unthankfulness. For I cannot without
dissimulation, but confess my self persuaded, that this poor Pamphlet may
prove profitable to the young Students of both Laws, to whose advancement that
way, I have of late addicted mine endeavors; else were I more than mad to
offer it to the world: and to offer it without mention of him, that by
occasioning of this good, more or less, deserves the prime thanks, were to
prove my self unworthy of so grave advice.

And therefore howsoever I account this too much boldness in respect of the
subject: yet could I be exceedingly glad it might please your Grace to ascribe
mine intention to the integrity of my duty. For he that means truly well, and
cannot perform much, must needs rejoice at the good acceptance of that little
which he performs.

All I crave, for this at your Graces hands, is patience and pardon for this
enterprise, with the continuance of those your many favors, that hitherto to
my great comfort I have enjoyed. And so my long observation of your judicious
disposition, having taught me, what small delight you take in affected
complements, and verbal commendation, without more words, In all true
humbleness, I beseech the Almighty long to continue your Grace in health and
prosperity, to his glory, and the good of his Church.

Your Graces at all Commandment. JO. COWELL:

To the Readers
GENTLE Readers, I here offer my self to your censures, with no other desire,
than by you to be admonished of my faults. For though I do profess the
amplifying of their works, that have gone before me in this kind, and have both
gathered at home, and brought from abroad some ornaments for their better
imbellishing of our English Laws: yet am I neither so vain as to deny my
imperfections, nor so passionate as to be offended at your charitable
reformations. Nay my true end is the advancement of knowledge; and therefore
have published this poor work, not only to impart the good thereof to those
young ones that want it; but also to draw from the learned the supply of my
defects: and so by degrees, if not my self to finish this model; yet at least,
by the heat of emulation to incense some skilfuller Architect thereunto. Yea, I
shall think my pains sufficiently recompensed, if they may be found but worthy
to stir up one learned man to amend mine errors.

The Civilians of other Nations, have by their mutual industries raised this
kind of work in their profession, to an unexpected excellency. I have seen many
of them that have bestowed very profitable and commendable pains therein: And
Lastly, one Calvinus a Doctor at Heidelberge, like a laborious Be, has
gathered from all the former, the best juice of their flowers, and made up a
hive full of delectable honey. And by this example would I gladly incite the
learned in our Common Laws and Antiquities of England, yet to lend their
advice, to the gaining of some comfortable lights and prospects toward the
beautifying of this ancient Palace, that hitherto has been accounted
(howsoever substantial) yet but dark and melancholy.

Whosoever will charge these my travels with many oversights, he shall need no
solemn pains to prove them; for I will easily confess them. And, upon my view
taken of this Book, sithence the Impression, I dare assure them that shall
observe most faults therein, that I by gleaning after him, will gather as many
omitted by him, as he shall show committed by me. But I learned long sithence
out of famous Tully, That as no man's errors ought to be followed, because he
says some things well: so that which a man says well is not to be rejected,
because he has some errors. No man, no Book is void of imperfections. And
therefore reprehend who will, in Gods name: that is with sweetness, and
without reproach. So shall he reap hearty thanks at my hands: and by true
imitation of the most indicious that ever wrote, more soundly help on this
point of learning to perfection in a few months, than I by tossing and tumbling
my books at home, could possibly have done in many years. Experience has
taught me this in my Institutes lately set forth: by publishing whereof I have
gained the judicious observations of diverse learned Gentlemen upon them, which
by keeping them private I could never have procured. By which means, I hope one
day to commend them to you again in a more exact purity, and so leave them to
future times for such acceptance as it shall please God to give them.

I have is some Towardness a Tract (De Regulis Juris) wherein my intent is, by
collating the cases of both Laws, to show, that they both be raised of one
foundation, and differ more in language and terms, than in substance, and
therefore were they reduced to one method, (as they easily might) to be
attained (in a manner) with all one pains. But my time imparted to these
studies, being but stolen from mine employments of greater necessity, I cannot
make the have I desire, or perhaps that the discourse may deserve. Wherefore,
until my leisure may serve to perform that, I entreat you lovingly to accept
this.

One thing I have done in this Book, whereof because it may seem strange to
some, I think to yield my reason: and that is the inserting, not only of words
belonging to the art of the Law, but of any other also, that I thought obscure,
of what sort soever; as Fish, Cloth, Stices, Druggs, Furrs, and such like. For
in this I follow the example of our Civilians, that have thought it their part
to expound any thing they could meet with in their walk. And indeed a Lawyer
professes true Philosophy, and therefore should not be ignorant (if it were
possible) of either beasts, fowls, or creeping things, nor of the trees from
the Cedar in Lebanon, to the Hyssop that springs out of the wall. And
therefore if I have either omitted any hard word within my circuit, or set it
it down not expounded; I give you good leave to impute the one to my
negligence, the other to mine ignorance: and so commend these my pains to your
best profit, and you unto God.

November 3. 1607. IO. COWELL.

The Signification of Words.
AB
ABATE (Intrudere) seems to be taken from the French Abatre i. decutere,
destruere, prosternere. It is in the Writers of the Common law used both
actively and passively, or rather neuterly: as to abate a Castle or a Fortlet,
Old not. br. fol. 45. which in Westminster. 1 cap. 17. is plainly interpreted to be
as much as to beat down. And to abate a writ, is by some exception to defeat or
overthrow it, Britton, cap. 48. And in this Active voice it has two
significations: one general, another special: general, as in the former
examples: and again in Kitchen, fol. 173. Abater meason, is to ruin or cast
down a House: especially, as in the Old not. br. fol. 115. A Stranger abateth,
that is, enters upon a House or Land void by the death of him that last
possessed it, before the Heir take his possession, and so keeps him ou^.
Wherefore as he that puts out him in possession, is said to disseise: so he
that steppeth in between the former possessor and his heir, is said to abate.
In the neuter signification it is used, an. 34 Ed. 1. stat. 2. of joint
tenants; viz. the writ of the demandant shall abate, that is, shall be
disabled, frustrated or overthrown. So in Stawnfords pleas of the Crown, fol.
148. In this case a man may say, that the Appeal abateth by covin, that is,
that the accusation is defeated by deceit. See Intrusion.

Abatement (Intrusio) comes also of the French ( abatement. i. dejectio,
decussio, prostratio) and likewise used as the verb (abate) both actively and
passively: sometime signifying the act of the abator; as the abatement of the
heir into the Land before he has agreed with the Lord, Old not. br. fol. 91.
Sometime the affection or passing of the thing abated, as abatement of the
writ, Kitchen, fol. 214. And in this signification it is as much as exceptio
dilatoria with the Civilians, Brit. cap. 51. or rather in effect of it. For the
exception alleged and made good, works the abatement. And this exception may
be taken either to the insufficiency of the matter, or to the incertainty of
the allegation by the misnaming of the Plaintiff, Defendant, or place to the
variance between the Writ and the Speciality, or Record, to the incertainty of
the Writ, Count, or Declaration, or to the death of the Plaintiff or Defendant:
New Terms of the Law, verbo, Abatement of Writ. And he that will read more of
this, may look upon the new Book of Entries, verbo, brief.

Abatour (Intrusor) is he that abateth, that is, thrusts into a house or
land, void by the death of the former Possessor, and not yet entered or taken up
by his Heir. Old not. br. fol. 115. Perkins, fol. 76. If there be a Disseisor,
Abator, or Intrudor upon any Land by the deceit of the woman, etc.

Abbat (Abbas) in French Abbe, is by skillful Linguists said to come from the
Syriacke word (Abba) i. pater, and in our Common Law is used for him that in
the Covent or fellowship of Canons has the rule and pre-eminence. He is by
Justinian novel Constitut. 115. (...). termed Archimandrita, of others
Coenobiarcha, vel Archimonachus, Hoto. in verbis Feuda. Of these some here in
England were Mitred, some not: Stowes annals, pa. 442. And those that were
Mitred, were exempted from the jurisdiction of the Diocesan, having in
themselves Episcopal authority within their precincts, and being also Lords of
the Parliament. Of this kind thus says Corasius; Aliqui Abbates h^bent
jurisdictionem Episcopalem ad quos cum Ecclesia pleno jure pertineat, in little
Monasteriis Episcopus nihil exercet, cap. Ea quae. Ubi Panor, extra de statu
Monacho. Haec dictus Author in Paraphrasi de Sacerdotio, materia part pri.
cap. 9. And these were called Abbots sovereign, anno 9 R. 2. cap. 4. and Abbots
generals, as M. Fern notes in his glory of generosity, pa. 126. The other
sort were subject to the Diocesan in all spiritual government, cap. Monasteria
18. quaest. 2. ca. Abbas. and ca. visitandi, cum quatuor sequentibus ibidem,
Omnes 16. quaest. 7. and ca. Cum venerabilis, extra de religiosis domibus. And
as Abbots, so were there Lord Priors also, who both had exempt jurisdiction,
and were Lords of the Parliament, as appears by S. Edwara Cook de jure
Ecclesiastico. fol. 28. a.

Abeyance, seems to be derived from ( Abayer. i. allatrare) to bark at as
Dogs do against a Stranger, or Spaniels at a Feasant put to the Peark. So
children are said (bayer a la mamme) when seeing the dugge, they struggle and
make means toward it. And they likewise (bayer aut Pargent) qui spe atque
animo incumbunt pecuniae. This word in Littleton, cap. Discontinuance, is thus
used. The right of Fee-simple lies in abeyance: that is (as himself
interprets) all only in the remembrance, intendment, and consideration of the
Law. Also in the same place, the Frank tenement of the Glebe of the Parsonage,
is in no man during the time that the Parsonage is void, but is in abeyance.
And again: It is a principle in Law, that of every land there is Fee-simple in
some man, or the Fee-simple is in Abeyance. Considering these places, and
comparing them with the signification of the French word, I am driven to think,
that our ancient Lawyers would signify hereby a kind of hope, or longing
expectance: because that those things that be in abeyance, though for the
present they be in no man, yet they are in hope and expectation belonging to
him that is next to enjoy them. For I find also in the French, that unbayard,
is avidus spectator, a greedy beholder. I cannot in mine own opinion better
compare this, than to that which the Civilians call Haereditatem jacentem. For
as Bracton says ( lib. 1. cap. 12. nu. 10.) Haereditas jacens nullius est
bonis ante aditionem. Sed fallit in hoc quia sustinet vicem personae defuncti,
vel quia speratur futur a haeredisas ejus qui adibit. So that (as the Civilians
say) goods and lands do jacere, whilst they want a Possessor, and yet not
simply, because they had lately one, and may shortly have another: So the
Common Lawyers do say, that things in like estate are in abeyance. Read farther
of this in the new terms of Law, and in Plowdens reports, casu Walsingham, fol.
554. a.

Abet (Abetare) may without absurdity be said to proceed from the French (
bouter. i. ponere, apponere, impellere propellere.) It signifies in our common
Law as much as to encourage or set on. The substantive (abetment, abettum) is
used for an encouraging or setting on, Stawnf. pl. cor. fol. 105. And also
(abettour) for him that encourages or sets on, Old not. br. fol. 21. But
both verb and noun is always used in the evil part.

Abishersing (according to Rastall in his Abridgement, titulo Exposition of law
words) is to be quit of amerciaments before whomsoever, of transgression. The
Author of the new terms calls it otherwise (Mishersing) and says it is to
be quit of amerciaments, before whomsoever, of transgression prooved. I am of
opinion that the word original signifies a forfeiture, or an amerciament, and
that it is much transformed in the writing, by misprision and ignorance of
Clarks: thinking it very probable that it proceeds from the German verb
Beschetzen, which is as much as fisco addicere vel confiscere. It seems by
the former Authors to be termed a freedom or liberty; because he that has
his word in any Charter or Grant, has not only the forfeitures and
amerciaments of all others, within his fee or transgressions, but also is
himself free from all such control of any within that compass.

Abjuration (abjuratio) signifies in our common law a sworn banishment; or an
oath taken to forsake the Realm for ever. For as Stawnf. pl. Cor. lib. 2. ca.
40. says out of Polydore Virgils 11 book of Chronicles, the devotion toward
the Church, first in Saint Edward a Saxon King, and so consequently in all the
rest, until anno 22 Hen. 8. was so earnest, that if a man having committed
felony, could recover a Church, or Churchyard, before he were apprehended, he
might not be thence drawn to the usual trial of Law, but confessing his fault
to the Justices at their coming, or to their Coroner, before them or him give
his oath finally to forsake the Realm. Of this you may read a touch, an. 7 Hen.
7. cap. 7. But the form and effect of this you may have in the old Abridgement
of Statutes, titulo Abjuration, nu. 3. taken out of the ancient Tractate,
entitled De officiis Coronatorum, as also in Cromptons Tractate of the Office
of the Coroner, fo. 260. b. and in the new Book of Entries, verbo Abjuration:
and in Andrew Horus Mirror of Justices, lib. 1. cap. del Office del Coroner.
This part of our Law was in some sort practiced by the Saxons, as appears by
the Laws of King Edward, set out by Master Lambert, number. 10. but more directly
by the Normans, as is evident by the grand Custumary, ca. 24. where you have
these words in effect, He that flies to a Church or holy place, may stay there
for eight days, and at the ninth day he must be demanded, whether he will
yield himself to secular justice, or hold him to the Church: for if he will he
may yield himself to the lay Court. If he cleave to the Church, he shall
foreswear the Country before the Knights and other people of credit, which may
witness the act, if need require. The form of the Oath is likewise there set
down, with the rest of the proceeding in this matter, very agreeable with ours.
This mercy as well of the Saxons as Normans derived unto us, something
resembles that of the Roman Emperors toward such as fled to the Church, lib.
1. Co. titulo 12. or to the images of themselves, eodem, titulo 25. And also
that of Moses touching the Cities of refuge, Exodus cap. 21. verse. 13. Number. ca.
15. verse. 6, 11, 12. Deuteronomy. 19. verse. 2. Josh. 20. verse. 2. But as it was in our
Ancestors days larger by great odds, in this Realm, so had it less reason, as
may appear to all that will compare them. Of all circumstances belonging to
this abjuration, you may futher read the new Terms of law, Stawnford ubi
supra, and such others. But this grew at the last upon good reason, to be but a
perpetual confining of the offender to some Sanctuary; wherein, upon abjurarion
of his liberty and free habitations, he would choose to spend his life, as
appears, an. 22 Hen. 8. cap. 14. And this benefit also by other Statutes is
at the last wholly taken away. So that abjurati on at this day has place but
in few places: And if it be inflicted upon any, it is not a confining to a
Sanctuary (for there be no Sanctuaries remaining amongst us) but a sworn
banishment of the Kings Dominions. This the Civilians call exilium, or
deportatinem, li. 28. Digest. tit. 22. de interdictis, relegatis, and
deportatis.

Abridge (abbreviare) comes of the French abreger, and in one general
language signifies as much as to make shorter in words, holding still the
whole substance. But in the Common law it seems (at the least for the most
part) to be more particularly used for making a declaration or count shorter,
by subtracting or severing some of the substance therein comprised. As for
example, a man is said to abridge his plaint in an Assise, or a woman her
demand in an action of Dower, that has put into the plee or demand, any land
not in the tenure of the tenant or defendant: and finding that by his answer,
raseth those parcels out of the plee, praying answer to the rest. So that here
Abridger is not contrahere, but rather subtrahere. Terms of the Law: Brook,
titulo Abridgement: and an. 21 Hen. 8. ca. 3. Of this the Civilians have no
use, by reason of certain cautelous clauses they ordinarily have at the end of
every position or article of their libel or declaration, to this effect: and
ponit conjunctim, divisim, et de quolibet, et de tali et tanta quantitate vel
summa qualis and quanta per confessionem partis adversae, vel per probationes
legitimas in fine litis apparebit. And again in the conclusion of all: Non
astringens se ad singula probanda, sed petens, ut quatenus probaverit in
praemissis, aut eorum aliquo, eatenus obtineat; by virtue of which clauses the
Plaintiff fails not in the end by any over or under demand, neither is driven
to begin his Action again, but obtains for so much as he proves to be due,
though not to the height of his demand.

Abridgement (abbreviamentum) see Abridge.

AC
ACcedas ad curiam, is a Writ that lies for him, who has received false
judgment in a Court Baron, being directed to the Sheriff, as appears by Dyer
f. 169. nu. 20. Like as the writ De falso judicio, lies for him that has
received false judgment in the County Court: the form whereof you may see in
Fitz. not. br. fol. 18. d. in the Register, fol. 9. b. where it is said, that
this writ lies for Justice delayed, as well as falsely given. It is a species
of the writ called (Recordare) Register original, fol. 5. b. and Fitz. ubi
supra.

Accedas ad Vicecomitem, is a writ directed to the Coroner, commanding him to
deliver a writ to the Sheriff, that having a (pone) delivered unto him, does
suppress it. Regist. orig. fol. 83.

Accessory (Accessorius vel Accessorium) is used in our Common law, otherwise
than among the Civilians. For whereas with them it is generally taken for any
thing depending upon another; here though it be so likewise, yet most commonly
and notoriously it signifies a man that is guilty of a felonious offense, not
principally, but by participation: as by commandment, advice, or concealment.
And a man may be accessory to the offense of another, after two sorts: by the
Common law, or by Statute: and by the Common law two ways also: that is,
before, or after the fact. Before the fact, as when one commands or advises
another to commit a selony, and is not present at the execution thereof. For
his presence makes him also a principal: wherefore there cannot be an accessory
before the fact in manslaughter, because manslaughter is sudden and not
prepensed, Cook lib. 4. fol. 44. a. Accessory after the fact, is when one
receives him, whom he knows to have committed selony. Accessory by Statute
is he that abetteth, counsels, or hides any man committing or having
committed an offense made felony by Statute. For though the Statute make no
mention of abettours etc. yet they are by interpretation included. Of all these
consult with Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 1. cap. 45, 46, 47, 48. There is also an
accessory of an accessory, as he that wittinglie receives an accessory to
felony, lib. Assis. 26. pl. 51. coron. Fitz. 197. Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 1. cap.
48. And the Law of England is, that so long as the principal is not attainted,
the accessorie may not be dealt with, Stawnf. ubi supra. The reason whereof you
may see, Cook li. 4. fo. 43. b. And this is also true by the Civil Law.
Claudius de Battandier in pract. crim. regula 101. at the least until the
principal be certainly known. Of this subject read M. Cromprons Justice fol.
37. b. 38, 39.

Acceptance, is a receiving of a rent, whereby the Receiver binds himself for
ever to allow a former fact done by another, whether it be in it self good or
not. New terms of Law.

Account (computus) is in the Common law taken for a writ or action brought
against a man, that by means of Office or business undertaken, is to render an
account unto another: as a Bailiff toward his Master, a Guardian in soccage
toward his Ward, and such others, as you shall find particularly named by Fitz.
in his not. br. fol. 116. where you may also have the form and further use of
this writ. See ex part talis.

Accroche. See Encrochment. This word Accroche is used, an. 25 Edward 3. Stat.
3. cap. 8.

Achat, comes of the French ( achet, i. emptio, nundinatio) and is used for a
contract or bargain. Brook tit. Contract.

Acquittal, signifies in our Common law most ordinarily a deliverance and
setting free from the suspicion or guiltiness of an offense and is two fold:
acquital in law, or acquital in fact. Acquital in law is, when two be appealed
or endicted of felony, one is principal, the other accessory, the principal
being discharged, the accessory by consequent is also freed. And in this case
as the the accessorie is acquitted by law, so is principal in fact, Stawnf. pl.
cor. fol. 168.

Acquittance (acquietantia) comes from the French ( quicter, or quitter, i.
accepto far, or quictance, i. acceptitatio, apocha) and signifies a release
or discharge from a debt formerly due. But the verb (acquit) the participle
(acquitted) and the noun (acquittal) signify also a discharge or clearing from
an offense objected, as, acquitted by proclamation, Smith de Rep. Anglo. pa.
76. Stawnf. pl. cor. fol. 168. Brook tit. Acquittall. See the new terms of
Law, verbo, Acquittal and Acquittance.

Acquietandis plegiis, is a writ lying for a surety against the creditour that
refuses to acquit him, after the debt is paid by the Debtour, Regist. orig.
fol. 158. where it appears that this is a Justicies.

Acre (acre) is a certain quantity of land containing in length 40 perches, and
four in breadth, or to that quantity, be the length more or less. And if a man
erect any new Cottage, he must lay 4 acres of land to it after this measure,
anno 31 Eliz. ca. 7. and with this measure agrees Master Crompton in his
Jurisdiction of Courts, fol. 222. though he say also, that according to the
diverse customs of diverse Countries the the Perch differs, being in some
places and most ordinarily, but 16 foot dimid. But in the County of Strafford
24 foot, as was adjudged in the case between Sir Edward Aston, and Sir John B.
in the Exchequer. In the Statute made of sowing of Flax, anno 24 H. 8. cap. 4.
eight score Perches make an acre, which is 40 multiplied by 4. See also the
ordinance of measuring of Land, made an. 34 Ed. 1. statut. 1. which agrees
with this acompt. The word (Acre) seems to come from the German word (acker)
which is all one with the Latin (ager.)

Action (actio) is defined by Bracton lib. 3. cap. 1. as it is by Justinian
lib. 4. Instit. titulo de actionibus, viz. Actio nihil aliud est quam jus
persequendi in judicio quod alicui debetur. Action is principally divided by
Justinian, in personalem and realem: by Bracton into personal, real, and mixed:
action personal is that, which belongs to a man against another by reason of
any contract, offense, or cause of like force to a contract or offense made or
done by him or some other, for whose fact he is by law to answer. Bract. lib.
3. cap. 3. nu. 2. Action real is defined to be that which is given to any man
against another, that upon any cause possesses or occupies the thing requited
or sued for in his own name, and no other man's: and in this only respect, that
he possesses or occupies the thing, and none other. Bract. ibid. nu. 3. and
his reason is this: quia habet rem vel possidet, quam restituere potest vel
dominum nominare. This definition and reason he farther exemplifieth in the
words there following, which he that will may read at large. Action mixed is
that which lies as well against or for the thing which we seek, as against the
person that has it: and is called mixed, because it has a mixed respect both to
the thing and the person. Bract. lib. 3. cap. 3. nu. 5. For example, the
division of an Inheritance between coheirs or copartners, called in the Civil
law (actio familiae exciscundae:) secondly, the division of any particular
thing being common to more, called likewise (actio de communi dividundo:) and
this kind of action (says Bracton) does seem to be mixed, because it lies as
well against the thing as the person: and indeed so do other excellent
Civilians, as Cuiacius and Wesenbecius in their Paratitles. p. finium regund.
And though Justinian in his first division omitteth the third member: yet
afterward in the same title, 20. he says as these men do, viz. that there be
certain actions (naming these and other of like nature) that seem to have a
mixture, etc. Of this you may also read Britton at large in his Chapter 71. And
this division of action springs from the object or matter whereabout it
consists, Wesenb. parat. p. de actio. and obliga. The Author of the new
Terms of Law defines a mixed action to be a suit given by the Law to recover
the thing demanded, and also the damages for wrong done: as in Assise of novel
disseisin: the which writ, if the disseisour make a feoffment to another, the
disseiseur shall have a remedy against the disseisour and the feoffer, or
other land tenant, to recover not only the land, but the damages also. See the
test. These words occasion me to show, that actio is by the Civil law called
mixta in two respects: Nam quadam mistae sunt, quod in se, and actionis in rem,
and actionis personalis naturam habeant, and in us, and actor and reus uterque
sit, l. actionis verbo.. fina w. de obliga. and actio. Tales sunt actio
familiae excisc. communi dividun. and finium regun. quaedam vero mistae sunt
quod rem simul and poenam persequantur; ut in action vi bonorum rapt. legis
Aquiliae, and ea quae datur contra eos qui legata vel fidei commissa
sacrosanctis Ecclesiis relicta solvere distulerunt. And of this latter sort is
the example that the said Author brings of a mixed action.

Action, is also by the Civilians divided, of the efficient cause, in civilem
and praetoriam. Whereof one rises out of the common civil law, the other from
some Edict of the Pretour. Who being Chief Justicer, had authority for his
year, to supply the defects of the general law by his especial edicts. And a
division not unlike this may be made in the Common law of England, one growing
from the ancient customary law, the other from some Statute. Brook tit. Action
sur le statut.

Action of the final cause, is divided into civil, poenal, and mixed. Cook vol.
6. fol. 61. a. Action civil is that, which tends only to the reeovery of that
which by reason of any contract or other like cause, is due unto us: as if a
man by action seek to recover a sum of money formerly lent, etc. Action penal
is, that aims at some penalty or punishment in the party sued, be it corporal
or pecuniary. As in the Action legis Aquiliae in the Civil law: whereby in our
Common law the next Friends of a man feloniously slain or wounded, shall pursue
the law against the murderer, or him that wounded him, to condign punishment.
Bract. li. 3. ca. 4. Action mixed is that, which seeks both the thing whereof
we are deprived, and a penalty also for the unjust deteining of the same: as in
an Action of Tithe upon the Statute, anno 2 and 3 Ed. 6. cap. 13.

Action is also, according to the form of Petition, divided into such as are
conceived to recover either the simple value of the thing challenged, or the
double, the triple, or quadruple. Bract. li. 3. ca. 3. nu. 6. So does Decies
tantum lie against Embracers. Fitz. not. br. fol. 171. and against Jurours that
take money for their verdict of one part, or the other, or both. And to be
short, any other action upon a Statute that punishes any offense by
restitution, or fine proportionable to the transgression.

Action is prejudicial (otherwise called preparatorie) or else principal:
prejudicial is that which grows from some question or doubt in the principal:
as if a man sue his younger Brother for Land descended from his Father, and it
be objected unto him he is a Bastard. Bract. lib. 3, ca. 4. nu. 6. For this
point of bastardy must be tried before the cause can further proceed, and
therefore is termed praejudicialis, quia prius judicanda.

Action is either awncestrel, or personal. Stawnf. pl. cor. 59. Auncestrel
seems to be that, which we have by some right descending from our Ancestor
upon us: and that personal, which has the beginning in and from our selves.

Action upon the Case (actio super casu) is a general Action given for redress
of wrongs done without force against any man, and by Law not especially
provided for. For where you have any occasion of suit, that neither has a fit
name, nor certain form already prescribed: there the Clerks of the Chancery in
ancient time conceived a fit form of Action for the fact in question: which the
Civilians call actionem in factum, and our common Lawyers, action upon the
case. In factum actiones dicuntur ideo, quia quod nomine non possunt exprimere
negotium, id rei gesta enarratione declarant citra formulam ac solennitatem
ullam: Cuiacius and Gothofredus ad Rubricam de praescriptis verbis. And whereas
in the Civil Law there are two sorts (actionis in factum) one termed actio in
factum ex praescriptis verbis, the other actio in factum praetoria. Wesenb.
parat. de praescrip. verb. the former growing upon words passed in contract,
the other more generally upon any, fact touching either contract or offense
formerly not provided against; this Action upon the Case seems in use to be
more like to the Pretours Action in factum, than to the other: because in the
perusal of the new book of Entries, and Brooks his Abridgement hereupon, I
perceive that an Action upon the Case lies as well against offenses, as breach
of contract. Of this see more in the word Trespass.

Action upon the Statute (actio super Statuto) is an Action brought against a
man upon breach of a Statute: to be resembled in mine opinion to any Action
given in the law Imperial, either upon edictum praetoris, ple biscitum or
senatusconsultum. For as the Pretour, so the common People in comitiis
tributis, and the Senators or Nobility in curia vel senatu, had power to make
laws, whereupon the Pretour or other Judges permitted Action. And even so our
high Court of Parliament makes Statutes against such offenses, as are either
newly grown, or more and more increased: and our Judges entertain their Plees,
that commence their actions against the breakers of them.

Action is perpetual or temporal (perpetua vel temporalis) and that is called
perpetual, the force whereof is by no time determined. Of which sort were all
civil Actions among the ancient Romans, viz. such as grew from Laws, decrees of
the Senate, or constitutions of the Emperors: whereas actions granted by the
Praetor, died within the year, de perpet. and tempor. actio. in Instit. So we
have in England perpetual and temporary actions: and I think all may be called
perpetual, that are not expressly limited. As diverse Statutes give actions, so
they be pursued within the time by them prescribed, namely, the Statute anno 1
Ed. 6. cap. 1. gives action for three years after the offenses therein shall
be committed, and no longer: and the Statute anno 7 H. 8. cap. 3. does the like
for four years; and that anno 31 Eliz. cap. 5. for one year and no more. But as
by the Civil Law no actions were at the last so perpetual, but that by time
they might be prescribed against: as actiones in rem december aut viginti
terminantur annis, personales vero triginta. sect. 1. de perpet. and temp.
actioin Institutio. and l. 3. Co. de praescript. 30. annorum: so in our Common
law, though actions may be called perpetual in comparison of those that be
expressly limited by Statute; yet is there a means to prescribe against real
actions within five years, by a fine levied, or a recovery acknowledged, as you
may see farther in the word Fine, and Recovery. And for this also look
Limitation of Assise.

Action is farther divided, in actionem bonae fidei and stricti juris. Which
division has good use in our common Law likewise, though the terms I find not
in any of their Writers. But of this, and such like divisions, because they
have as yet no apparent acceptance amongst our Lawyers, but only a hidden use,
I refer the Reader to the Civilians, and namely to Wesenb. in his Paratitles.
^. Deobligatio. and actio.

AD
Addition (additio) is both the English and French word made of the Latin, and
signifies in our common Law a title, given to a man over and above his
Christian and Surname, showing his Estate, Degree, Occupation, Trade, Age,
Place of Dwelling, etc. For the use whereof in original writs of Actions
personal, appeals, and indictments. It is provided by Statute an. 1 H. 5. cap.
5. upon the penalty therein expressed. Terms of the Law. Brook farther adds,
that it is likewise requisite in Towns, and Gates of the Towns; Parishes in
great Towns and Cities, where there may be any doubt, by reason of more Towns,
Gates, or Parishes of the same name, titulo Addition. See also M. Cromptons
Justice of peace fol. 95, 96.

Adeling was a word of Honor among the Angles, properly appertaining to the
Kings Children, whereupon King Edward being himself without issue, and
intending to make Eadgare (to whom he was great Uncle by the Mothers side) his
Heir to this Kingdom, called him Adeling. Roger Hoveden, part poster. suorum
Annal. fol. 347. a.

Adjournment (adjournamentum) is almost all one with the French ( adjouarement.
i. denunciatio vel diei dictio.) and signifies in our Common Law an assignment
of a day, or a putting off until another day, Adjournment in air, ( anno 25
Ed. 3. Statute of Pourveyers, cap. 18.) is an appointment of a day, when the
Justices in air mean to sit again. Adjourn. anno 2 Edw. 3. cap. 11. has the
like signification. And this whole Title in Brook his Abridgement proves the
same. The bastard Latin word (adjournamentum) is used also among the
Burgundians, as M. Skene notes in his Book De verbo signi. verbo, Ad urnatus,
out of Cassaneus de consuet. Burg.

Ad inquirendum, is a Writ judicial, commanding inquiry to be made of any thing
touching a Cause depending in the Kings Court, for the better execution of
Justice, as of Bastardy, of Bondmen, and such like: whereof see great
diversity in the Table of the Register judicial, verbo, ad inquirendum.

Admeasurement (admensuratio) is a Writ, which lies for the bringing of those
to a mediocrity, that usurp more than their part. And it lies in two cases:
one is termed Admeasurement of Dower (admensuratio dotis) where the widow of
the deceased, holds from the Heir or his Guardian more in the name of her
Dower than of right belonging unto her. Register orig. fol. 171. a. Fitzh. not.
br. fol. 148. The other is Admeasurement of Pasture (admensuratio pasturae)
which lies between those, that have common of Pasture appendant to their
freehold, or common by vicenage, in case any one of them, or more, do
surcharge the Common with more Cattle than they ought, Register orig. fol. 156.
b. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 125.

Administer (administrator) in our Common Law is properly taken for him, that
has the Goods of a Man dying intestate, committed to his charge by the
Ordinary, and is accountable for the same, whenever it shall please the
Ordinary to call him thereunto. I find not this word so used in all the Civil
or Canon Law; but more generally for those, that have the Government of any
thing, as the Degrees. Can. 23. quaest. 5. cap. 26. Administratores plane
saecularium dignitatum, etc. and extrava. com. ca. 11. Grangias autem, and alia
loca Cisterciensium ordinis, and aliorum Regalium, in quibus Gubernatores, seu
custodes, vel administratores ponuntur, etc. Howsoever the signification of
this word grew to be restrained amongst us, it greatly booteth not. But there
was a Statute made anno, 31 Ed. 3. cap. 11. whereby Power was given to the
Ordinary to appoint these Administrators, and to authorize them as fully as
Executors, to gather up, and to dispose the Goods of the deceased: always
provided, that they should be accountable for the same, as Executors. And
before that, viz. Westminster. 2. anno 13 Ed. 1. cap. 19. it was ordained, that the
Goods of those that died intestate, should be committed to the Ordinary his
disposition, and that the Ordinary should be bound to answer his debts, so far
forth as the Goods would extend, as Executors. And I persuade my self that the
committing of this burden unto Bishops, and those that derive Ecclesiastical
Authority from them, grew first from the constitution of Leo the Emperor. Co.
de Episco. et cleri. l. nulli li licere. 28. Where it is said, that if a man
dying, bequeath any thing to the redeeming of Captives, etc. and appoint one to
execute his Will in that point, the Party so appointed shall see it performed:
and if he appoint none to do it, then the Bishop of the City shall have power
to demand the legacy, and without all delay perform the Will of the deceased.

Admiral (Admiralius) comes of the French (amerel) and signifies, both in
France and with us, an high Officer or Magistrate that has the Government of
the Kings Navy, and the hearing and determining of all Causes, as well Civil as
Criminal belonging to the Sea. Cromptons diverse jurisd. fo. 88. and the
Statutes anno 13 R. 2. ca. 5. and anno 15. ejusdem, ca. 3. and anno 2 H. 4. ca.
11. and anno 2 H. 4. ca. 6. and anno 28. H. 8. ca. 15. with such like. This
Officer is in all Kingdoms of Europe that border upon the Sea: and this
Authority in the Kingdom of Naples is called, magna Curia Admiratiae quae habet
jurisdictionem in eos qui vivunt ex art maris. Vincent. de Franch. deseis.
142. nu. 1. This Magistrate among the Romans was called praefectus classis, as
appears by Tully in Verrem. 7. but his Authority was not continual, as the
Admirals in these day, but only in time of War. Neither do I find any such
Officer belonging to the Emperors in our Code. And M. Gwin in the Preface to
his reading, is of opinion, that this Office in England was not created until
the days of Edward the third. His reason is probable. Britton that wrote in
Edw. the firsts time, and in the beginning of his Book taking upon him to name
all the Courts of Justice, makes no mention of this Court or Magistrate. And
again Richard the second finding the Admiral to extend his Jurisdictions over
far, ordained by Statute made the 10 year of his Reign, that the limits of the
Admirals jurisdiction should be restrained to the power he had in his
Grandfather Edward the thirds days, whereby the said Master Gwin conjectureth,
that he did naught else but reduce him to his original. But contrarily to this
it appears by ancient Records, the Copies whereof I have seen, that not only
in the days of Edward the first, but also of King John, all causes of
Merchants and Mariners, and things happening within the Floodmark, were ever
tried before the Lord Admiral.

Ad jura Regis, is a Writ for the Kings Clark against him that seeks to eject
him to the prejudice of the Kings Title in the right of his Crown. Of this you
may see diverse forms upon diverse Cases. Register orig. fo. 61. a.

Admittendo clerico, is a Writ granted to him that has recovered his right of
presentation against the Bishop in the Common-bank: the form whereof read in
Fitzh. not. br. fol. 38. and the Register orig. fol. 33. a.

Admittendo in socium, is a Writ for the association of certain Persons to
Justices of Assizes formerly appointed, Register orig. fol 206. a.

Ad quod damnum, is a Writ that lies to the Escheater to inquire what hurt it
will be to the King, or other Person, to grant a Fair or Market, or a Mortmain
for any Lands intended to be given in Fee-simple to any House of Religion, or
other body politic. For in that Case, the Land so given is said to fall into a
dead hand, that is, Such an estate and condition, that the chief Lords do leese
all hope of Heriots, service of Court, and escheats upon any traitorous or
felonious Offense committed by the Tenant. For a body politic dies not,
neither can perform personal service, or commit Treason, or Felony, as a single
Person may. And therefore it is reasonable, that before any such Grant be made,
it should be known, what prejudice it is like to work to the Granter. Of this
read more in Fitzh. not. brev. folio 221. and look Mortmain.

Ad terminum qui praeteriit, is a Writ of Entry, that lies in case where a man
having leased Lands or Tenements for term of life or years, and after the term
expired, is held from them by the Tenent, or other Stranger that occupies the
same, and deforceth the Leasour. Which Writ belongs to the Leasour and his
Heir also. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 201.

Advent (adventus) is a certain space of time comprising a Month or
thereabouts, next before the Feast of Christ's Nativity. Wherein it seems that
our Ancestors reposed a kind of Reverence for the neerness of that solemn
Feast: so that all contentions in Law were then remitted for a season.
Whereupon there was a Statute ordained, Westminster. 1. cap. 48. anno 3. Ed. 1. that
notwithstanding the said usual solemnity and time of rest, it might be lawful
in respect Justice and Charity, which ought at all times to be regarded, to
take Assizes of novel disseisin, mort d'auncester, and darrein presentment, in
the time of Advent, Septuagesima, and Lent. This is also one of the times, from
the beginning whereof unto the end of the Octaves of the Epiphany, the
solemnizing of Marriages were forbidden., by reason of a certain spiritual joy
that the Church, and so consequently every Member thereof for that time, does
or ought to conceive in the remembrance of her Spouse Christ Jesus, and so
abandon all affections of the flesh. See Rogation week, and Septuagesima.

Advocatione decimarum, is a Writ that lies for the claim of the fourth part
or upward, of the Tithes that belong to any Church. Register orig. fol. 29. b.

Advow, alias avowe (advocare) comes of the French (advouer, alias avouer)
and signifies as much as to justify or maintain an Act formerly done. For
example, one takes a distress for rent or other thing, and he that is
distreined, sueth a Replevin. Now he that took the Distress, or to whose use
the Distress was taken by another, justifying or maintaining the Act, is said
to avow. Terms of the Law. Hereof comes advowant. Old. not. br. fol. 43. and
advowrie, eodem folio. Bracton uses the Latin word in the same signification,
(as advocatio disseifinae) li. 4. cap. 26. And I find in Cassanaeus de consuet.
Burg. page 1210. (advohare) in the same signification, and page 1213. the
Substantive (desavohamentum) for a disavowing or refusal to avow.

Advowzen (advocatio) signifies in our Common Law a right to present a
benefice, as much as (jus patronatus) in the Canon Law. The reason why it is so
termed, proceeds from this, Because they that originally obtained the right
of presenting to any Church, were Maintainers and Upholders, or great
Benefactors to that Church, either by building or increasing it: and are
thereupon termed sometime Patroni, sometime Advocati, cap. 4. and cap. 23. de
jure Patronatus in Decretal. And advowzen being a bastardly French word is used
for the right of presenting, as appears by the Statute of Westminster the second,
anno 13 Edw. 1. ca. 5.

Advowzen is of twosorts: advowzen in gross, that is, sole or principal, not
adhering or belonging to any Manor as parcel of the right thereof: advowzen
dependant, which depends upon a Manor as appertinent unto it, termed of
Kitchen an incident, that may be separated from the Subject. Of this M. John
Skene de verbo sig. has these words: dicitur advocatio Ecclesiae, vel quia
Patronus alicujus Ecclesiae ratione sui juris advocat se ad eandem Ecclesiam,
and asserit se in eadem habere jus Patronatus, eamque esse sui quasi clientis
loco, vel potius cum aliquis (nempe patronus) advocat alium jure suo ad
Ecclesiam vacantem, cumque loco alterius (veluti defuncti) praesentat and quasi
exhibet. See Advowe next following.

Advowe, alias avowe (advocatus) is used for him that has right to present to
a benefice. Anno 25 Ed. 3. stat. 5. ca. unico. There have you also, (Advowe
paramount) which is as much as the highest Patron, and is spoken of the King.
Advocatus est ad quem pertinet jus advocationis alicujus Ecclesiae, ut ad
Ecclesiam, nomine proprio non alieno, possit praesentare. Fleta l. 5. ca. 14.
1. Fitzh. in his not. br. fol. 39. uses it in the same signification. See
Advowzen, and Avowe.

AE
Aetate probanda, is a Writ that the Kings Tenent holding in chief by Chivalry,
and being Ward by reason of his nonage, obtains to the Eschetour of the
County where he was born, or some time where the Land lies, to inquire,
whether he be of full age to have delivery of his Lands in his own hand.
Register orig. fol. 294. and 295. Fitzh. not. br. fo. 253. who also fo. 257.
says, that this Writ is sometime directed to the Sheriff to empanell a Jury,
for this is inquiry against a day certain, before Commissioners authorized
under the broad Seal to deal in such a cause.

Aerie of Coshawkes (aeria accipitrum) comes from the French (aiere)
signifying so much as (par) in Latin, or (a pair) in English. For the
Frenchman saying that one is (un houme de boun aiere) signifies that he
comes of a good Pair, that is, a good Father and a good Mother. It is in our
Language the proper word in Hawks, for that we generally call a nest in other
birds. So it is used anno 9 H. 3. c. 13. in the Charter of the Forest, and in
diverse other places.

AF
Affeerours (afferatores, alias affidati) may probably be thought to proceed
from the French ( affier, i. confirmare, affirmare.) It signifies in our
Common Law, those that be appointed in Court-leets, etc. upon Oath, to mulct
such as have committed faults arbitrably punishable, and have no express
penalty set down by Statute. The form of their Oath you may see in Kitchen,
fol. 46. The reason of this appellation may seem to be, Because they that be
appointed to this Office, do affirm upon their Oaths, what penalty they think
in Conscience the Offendour has deserved. It may likewise probably be thought,
that this comes from (feere) an old English word, signifying a Companion, as
(gefera) does amongst the Saxons by M. Lamberd^ testimony, verbo
(contubernalis) in his explication of Saxon words. And so it may be gathered
that M. Kitchen takes it, ca. Amercements, fo. 78. in these words (Mas file
amercement soit affire per pares) where (pares) be put for Affeerors. And there
may be good reason of this, because they are in this business made companions
and equals. You shall find this word used anno 25 Ed. 3. st. 7. viz. And the
same Justices before their rising in every Sessions, shall cause to be affeered
the amercements, as pertains; and also to the same effect, anno 26 H. 8. cap.
6. Kitchen fo. 78. joineth these 3 words together as synonyma. (Affidati,
amerciatores, affirours.) Affidare in the Canon law is used for fidem dare, ca.
fina. de cognatio. spiritua. in Decretal and ca. super ^o de testibus. Bracton
has Affidare mulierem, for to be betrothed to a Woman, li. 2. cap. 12. But I
find in the customary of Normandy, ca. 20. this word (affeurer) which the
Latin Interpretour expresses by (taxare) that is, to set the price of a
thing, as (aestimare, indicare, etc.) which Etymology of all the other
pleases me best, leaving every man to his own Judgment.

Affirm (affimare) comes either of the Latin, or French (affirmer) it
signifies in our Common law, as much as to ratify or approve a former Law, or
Judgment. So is the Substantive (affirmance) used anno 8. H. 6. c. 12. And so
is the verb it self by M. West. part 2. symbolai. titule, Fines. sect. 152.
And if the Judgment be affirmed, etc. as also by M. Crompton in his diverse
Jurisd. fo. 166.

Afforest (afforestare) is to turn ground into Forest. Charta de foresta, c. 1.
and 30. an. 9 H. 3. What that is, look more at large in Forest.

Affray (affreia) comes of the French ( affraier, i. horrificare, terrere) it
signifies in our Common law a Skirmish, or fighting between two or more. M.
Lambert in his cirenarcha, lib. 2. cap. 3. says, that it is oftentimes
confounded with an assault, but yet he is of opinion that they differ in this,
that where an assault is but a wrong to the Party, an affray is a common wrong:
and therefore both enquirable and punishable in a Leet. It might be said
likewise, that an assault is but of one side, and an affray of two or more. I
think this word (affray) to be two ways used: one, as I have already described
it: another, for a terror wrought in the subject by any unlawful sight of
violence or armor, etc. tending toward violence. For so is it used, an. 2. Ed.
3. cap. 3.

AG
Age (atas) comes from the French (aage) and signifies in our Language, that
part of man's life, which is from his birth unto his last day. But it is in the
Common Law particularly used for those especial times, which enable men or
women to do that, which before for want of age, and so consequently of
Judgment, they might not do. And these times, in a man be two, in a woman six.
The age of 21 years is termed the full Age, in a man, the age of fourteen
years, the age of discretion. Littleton lib. 2. cap. 4. In a Woman there are
six several ages observed that severally enable her to do six several things,
Broke Guard. 7. First, at 7 years of age the Lord her Father may distrain his
Tenants for aid to mary her: for at those years she may consent to matrimony.
Bracton lib. 2. cap. 36. nu. 3. Secondly, at the age of nine years she is
dowable: for then, or within half a year after, is she able promereri dotem,
and virum sustinere. Fleta lib. 5. cap. 22. Littleton lib. prim. cap. 5. which
Bracton loco citato does notwithstanding limit at 12 years. Thirdly, at twelve
years she is able finally to ratify and confirm her former consent given to
Matrimony. Fourthly, at fourteen years she is enabled to receive her Land into
her own hands, and shall be out of Ward, if she be of this age at the death of
her Ancestor. Fifthly, at sixteen years she shall be out of Ward, though at the
death of her Ancestor she was within the age of fourteen years. The reason is,
because then she may take a Husband able to perform Knights-service. Sixthly at
21 years she is able to alienate her Lands and Tenements, Instit. jure com.
cap. 24. Touching this matter, take further these notes perspicuously gathered.
At the age of fourteen years a Striplin is enabled to choose his own Guardian,
and to claim his Land holden in socage, Dyer fol. 162. which Bracton limiteth
at fifteen years, li. 2. cap. 37. number. 2. with whom Glanvile also agrees, lib.
7. ca. 9. And at the age of fourteen years a Man may consent to marriage, as a
Woman at twelve. Bracton ubi supra. At the age of fifteen years, a man ought to
be sworn to keep the Kings peace, anno 34 Ed. 1. Stat. 3. The age of 21 years
compels a man to be Knight, that has twenty pounds Land per annum in fee,
or for term of life, anno 1. Ed. 2. stat. 1. and also enableth him to contract
and to deal by himself, in all lawful causes appertaining unto his estate.
Which until that time he cannot, with the security of those that deal with him.
This the Lomberds lettle at 18. years, as appears by Hotemans disputations in
libros feudorum, l. 2. c. 53. ver. decimo octavo anno. Which power the Romans
permitted not usque ad plenam maturitatem, and that they limited at 25. years,
lib. 1 in fine p. de major. 25. ann. l. fin. Co. de Legit. tit. in principio,
titulo de curat. in Institut. The age of twelve years binds to appearance
before the Sheriff and Coroner for inquiry after Robberies, ann. 52. H. 3.
cap. 24. The age of 14. years enableth to enter an order of religion without
consent of parents, etc. anno 4. H. 4. cap. 17.

Age prier (aetatem precari) or (aetatis precatio) is a petition made in count
by one in his minority, having an action brought against him, for lands coming
to him by descent, that the action may rest until he come to his full age:
which the Court in most cases ought to yield unto. This is otherwise in the
Civil law, which inforceth children in their minority to answer by their
tutors or curatours, p. de minor. 25. an.

Agenhine See Haghenhine.

Agist (agistare) seems to come of the French (gist, i. jacet) having (gisir)
in the Infinitive mood, whence comes the nown (gisme) a lying in childbed:
or rather of (gister, i. stabulari) a word proper to a Deer, cum sub mensem
Maium e lodis abditis in quibus deli tuit emigrans in loco delecto stabulari
incipit, unde commoda and propinqua sit pabulatio. Budeus in posteriori libro
philologiae. Where also he says, that (giste) est idem quod lustrum vel
cubile. Or if it may be probably deduced from the Saxon word (Gast, i. hospes.)
It signifies in our Common law, to take in and feed the cattle of strangers in
the Kings Forest, and to gather the money due for the same to the Kings use,
Charta de foresta, an. 9. H. 3. cap. 9. The Officers that do this, are called
(agistors) in English, Guest-takers, eodem c. 8. Cromptons Jurisdict. fo. 146.
These are made by the Kings Letters patents under the great Seal of England: of
whom the King has four in number within every Forest, where he has any
pawnage, called agistors, or Gist-takers. And their office consists in these
four points: (in agistando, recipiendo, imbrevitando, certificando) Manwood
part prima, of Forest laws, p. 336. and 337. whom you may read more at large.
Their function is termed Agistment, as agistment upon the sea banks, anno 6.
H. 6. cap. 5.

Agreement (agreamentum, i. aggregatio mentium) is the assent or concord of
more to one thing: and this by the Author of the new terms of law, is either
executed or executory: which you may read more at large in him exemplified by
cases.

AY
Aid (auxilium) is all one in signification with the French (aid) and
differs in nothing, but the only pronunciation, if we take it as it is used
in our vulgar language. But in the Common law, it is applied to diverse
particular significations, as sometime to a subsidy, anno 14. Ed. 3. stat. 2.
ca. 1. sometime to a prestation due from Tenants to their Lords, as toward the
relief due to the Lord Paramount, Glanvile li. 9. ca. 8. or for the making of
his son Knight, or the marying of his daughter, idem, eodem. This the King,
or other Lord by the ancient Law of, England, might lay upon their Tenants, for
the Knighting of his eldest Son at the age of 15. years, or the marriage of
his daughter at the age of 7 years, Regist. orig. fol. 87. a. and that at what
rate themselves listed. But Satute West. 1. anno 3. Ed. 1. ordained a restraint
for so large a demand, made by common persons being Lords, in this case, and
tied them to a constant rate. And the Statute made anno 25. Ed. 3. stat. 5. ca.
11. provideth, that the rate set down by the former Statute, should hold in the
King, as well as in other Lords. Of this I find mention in the Statute, an. 27.
H. 8. cap. 10. This imposition seems to have descended to us from Normandy:
for in the grand custumary, cap. 35. you have a Tractat entitled ( des aides
chevelz, i. de auxiliis capitalibus) whereof the first is ( a fair l'ai^e
filz. de son seigneur chevalier. i. ad filium primogenitum militem faciendum)
the second ( son ainee fille marier, i. ad filiam primogenitam maritandam.) And
the third, ( a rechapter le corpse de son seigneur de prison quand il est prius
per la guerre au Duc, i. ad corpus domini sui de prisona redimendum cum captus
fuerit pro bello. Ducis Normandiae. Also I find in Cassan. de consuet. Burg.
Quod dominus accipit a subditis pro dotanda filia, pa. 122. which seems to be
all one with this our imposition: and also in Vincentius de Franchis deseis.
131. where he calls it adjutorium pro maritanda Filia. Whence it appears,
that this custom is within the Kingdom of Naples also. Touching this
likewise, you may read these words in Menochius lib. 2. de arbitrat, Jud.
quaest. centuria 2. cap. 181. Habent saepissime feudorum possessores and Domini
multa in little ditionibus privilegia, multasque cum locerum incolis
conventiones: inter quas, illa una solet nominari, ut possit Dominus collect am
illis indicere pro solutione dotium suarum filiaru^, cum matrimonio
collocantur. Hoc aliquando Romae observatum a Caligula fuisse, in illius vita
scribit Suetonius, cap. 42. Hodie hic usus in subalpina regione est frequens,
ut scribit Jacobinus, de Sancto Georgio, in tractu de homagiis, col. 8. Etiam
pro filia quae religionem ingreditur: and non modo pro una filia, sed pluribus
filiabus, non tamen pro secundis nuptiis exigitur. In which place the said
author makes mention of diverse other Civilians and Feudists, that record this
custom to be in other places. Of this Aid our Fleta writes thus: sicut etiam
quaedam consuetudines quae servitia non dicuntur, nec concomitantia
servitiorum, sicut rationabilia auxilia ad filium primogenitum militens
faciendum, vel ad filiam primogenitam maritandam: quae quidem auxilia sunt de
gratia and non de jure, pro necessitate et indigentia domini capitalis. Et non
sunt pradialia, sed personalia, secundum quod perpendi poterit in brevi ad hoc
proviso, etc.

This word (Aid) is also particularly used in matter of pleading, for a
petition made in court for the calling in of help from another, that has an
interest in the cause in question, and is likely both to give strength to the
party that prays in aid of him, and also to avoid a prejudice growing toward
his own right, except it be prevented. For example, when a tenent for term of
life, by courtesy, tenent in tail after possibility of issue extinct, for term
of years, at will, by Elegit, or tenent by Statute-merchant being impleaded
touching his estate, may petere auxtlium, that is, pray in aid of him in the
reversion, that is, desire or entreat the Court, that he may be called in by
writ, to allege what he thinks good for the maintenance both of his right and
his own. Terms of the Law. Fitzherbet mentions both prier in aid, and prier
aid de patron, etc. auxilium petere a patrono, Not. Brev. fo. 50. d. And the
new book of Entries, Verbo Aid de parcener, auxilium de parcionaria, fo. 411,
Columna 4. This the later practitioners in the Civil Law call authoris
laudationem vel nominationem. Emericus in practition. titulo 48. This aid
prier is also used sometime in the Kings behoof, that there be no proceeding
against him until the Kings Council be called, and heard to say what they
think good, for the avoiding of the Kings prejudice or loss, touching the
cause in hand. For example, if the kings tenent holding in chief, be demanded a
rent of a common person, he may pray in aid of the king. Also a City or Borough
that has a fee ferm of the king, any thing being demanded against them which
belongs thereunto, may pray in aid of the king, etc. Terms of the law. Of
this thing you may read the Statute ( de bigamis. a. 4. Ed. 1. ca. 1. 2. and 3.
and an. 14. Ed. 3. stat. 1. ca. 14. The Civil law in suits begun between two,
allows a third to come in (pro interesse) and he that comes in for his
interest, comes either assistendo, or opponendo, etc. The former is like to
this (aid prier) the other to that which our common Lawiers call Receite. Look
Receito.

Aile (avo) comes of the French ( aieul, i. avus) and signifies a writ that
lies where the grandfather or great grandfather, called of our common lawyers
(besacle) but in true French (bisaicul) was seized in his demaines as of fee,
of any land or tenement in fee simple, the day that he died, and a stranger
abateth or enters the same day and dis^possesseth the heir. Fitz. not. br. fo.
222.

AL
Alderman (aldermannus) is borrowed from the Saxon (Ealderman) signifying as
much as Senator in Latin. Lamb. in his explication of Saxon words, verbo
senator. See Roger Hoveden par. poster. suorum. annal. fo. 346. b.

Aler sans jour, is verbatim, to go without day: the meaning whereof is, to be
finally dismissed the Court: because there is no day of farther appearance
assigned. Kitchen fol. 140.

Ale-taster, is an officer appointed in every Court leet, and sworn to look to
the assise, and the goodness of bread and ale, or beer, within the precincts
of that Lordship: Kitchen f. 46. where you may see the form of his oath.

Alias, v. Capias alias.

Alien (alienare) comes of the French aliener, and signifies as much as to
transfer the property of any thing unto another man. To alien in mortmain, is
to make over lands or tenements to a Religious company, or other body
politic: Stawnf. praerog. fo. 40. Look Mortmain. To alien in fee, is to sell
the fee simple of any land or tenement, or of any incorpore all right. West. 2.
ca. 25. an. 13 Ed. 1.

Alien, alias, alion (allenigena) comes of the Latin alienus, and signifies
one born in a strange Country. It is ordinarily taken for the contrary to
Denizen, or a natural subject, that is, one born in a strange country, and
never here infranchised. Brook, Denizen 4. etc. And in this case, a man born
out of the land, so it be within the limits of the kings obedience beyond the
Seas, or of English parents out of the Kings obedience, so the parents at the
time of the birth be of the kings obedience, is no alien in account, but a
subject to the King. Statute 2. a. 25. Edw. 3. c. unico. commonly called the
Statute, de natis ultra mare. Also if one born out of the Kings allegiance,
come and dwell in England, his children (if he beget any here) be not aliens,
but denizens. Terms of the Law. See Denizen.

Allaye (Allaia) is used for the temper and mixture of silver and gold, an. 9.
H. 5. Stat. 2. c. 4. and Stat. 1. ejusdem anni, cap. 11. The reason of which
allay is, with a baser metal to augment the weight of the silver or gold so
much, as may counter vail the Princes charge in the coining. Antonius Faber. de
nummariorum debitorum solutionibus, cap. 1.

Allocatione facienda, is a writ directed to the Lord Treasurer, and Barons of
the Exchequer, upon a complaint of some accountant, commanding them to allow
the accountant such sums, as he has by virtue of his office lawfully and
reasonably expended. Regist. orig. fol. 206. b.

Alluminor, seems to be made of the French ( allumer, i. accendere,
incendere, inflammare it is used for one that by his trade colors or
painteth upon paper or parchment. And the reason is, because he gives grace,
light, and ornament by his colors, to the letters or other figures colored.
You shall find the word, an. 1. R. 3. ca. 9.

Almaine rivets, be a certain light kind of armor for the body of a man, with
sleeves of male or plates of iron for the defense of his arms. The former of
which words, seems to show the country where it was first invented: the
other, whether it may come from the French verb ( revestir, i. superinduere) to
put on upon another garment, I leave to farther consideration.

Almner (eleemosynarius) is an officer of the Kings house, whose function is,
fragmenta diligenter colligere, and ea distribuerre singulis diebut egenis:
agrotos and leprosos, incarceratos, pauperesque viduas, et alios egenos
vagosque in patria commorantes, charitative visitare: item equos relictos,
robas, pecuniam, et alia ad elecmosynam largita, recipere and fideliter
distribuere. Debet etiam regem super eleemosyne largitione crebris
summonitionibus stimulare, and praecipne diebus Sanstorum, and rogare ne robas
suas quae magni sunt pretii, histrionibus, blanditoribus, adulatoribus,
accusatoribus vel ministrallis, sed ad eleemosynae suae incrementum jubeat
largiri, Fleta, lib. 2. cap. 22.

Almoine (eleemosyna.) See Frank almoyne.

Almond (amygdalum) is well known to every man's sight: it is the kernel of a
nut or stone, which the tree in Latin called (amygdalus) does bear within a
husk in manner of a walnut, of whose nature, and diversities, you may read
Gerards Herball, lib. 3. cap. 87. This is noted among Merchandise that are to
be garbled, anno 1. Jaco. cap. 19.

Alnegeor, alias, aulnegeor (ulniger vel ulnator) comes from the French
(aulne) an elle, or elwand, and signifies an Officer of the Kings, who by
himself or his Deputy, in places convenient, looks to the Assise of woollen
cloth made through the land, and to seals for that purpose ordained unto them,
anno 25. Ed. 3. Stat. 4. cap. 1. anno 3. R. 2. cap. 2. who is accomptable to
the king for every cloth so sealed in a fee or custom thereunto belonging, an.
17 R. 2. c. 2. Read of this more an. 27. Ed. 3. c. 4. an. 17. R. 2. c. 2. and
5. an. 1. H. 4. c. 13. an. 7. ejusd. c. 10. an. 11. ejusd. cap. 6. an. 13.
ejusd. ca. 4. an 11. H. 6. ca. 9. an. 31. ejusdem cap. 5. anno 4. Ed. 4. ca. 1.
anno 8. ejusdem ca. 1. and an. 1. R. 3. cap. 8.

AM
Ambidexter, is that jurour or embraceour, that takes of both parties for the
giving of his verdict. He forfeiteth ten times so much as he takes, anno 38.
Edw. 3. cap. 12. Cromptons Juflice of Peace, fol. 156. b.

Amendment (amendatio) comes of the French (amendment) and signifies in our
common Law, a correction of an error committed in a Process, and espied
before judgment. Terms of the law. Brook titulo Amendment, per totum. But if
the fault be found after judgment given, then is the party that will redress
it, driven to his writ of error. Terms of the Law, Brok titulo Error.

Amerciament (amerciamentum) signifies the pecuniarie punishment of an
offender against the king or other Lord in his court, that is found to be (in
misericordia) i. to have offended, and to stand at the mercy of the King or
Lord. There seems to be a difference between amerciament and fines, Kitthin,
fol. 214. And I have heard common Lawyers say, that fines, as they are taken
for punishments be punishments certain, which grow expressly from some Statute,
and that amerciaments be such, as be arbitrably opposed by affeerors. This is
in some sort confirmed by Kitch. f. 78. in these words: (l'amerciament est
affire per pares.) M. Manwood in his first part of Forest Laws, page 166.
seems to make another difference, as if he would infer an amerciament to be
a more easy, or more merciful penalty, and a fine more sharp and grievous.
Take his words: If the pledges for such a trespass (says he) do appear by
common summons, but not the defendant himself, then the pledges shall be
imprisoned, for that default of the defendant: but otherwise it is, if the
defendant himself do appear, and be ready in Court before the Lord Justice in
eyr, to receive his judgment, and to pay his fine. But if such pledges do make
default, in that case the pledges shall be amerced, but not fined, etc. The
Author of the new terms of law, says, that amerciament is most properly a
penalty assessed, by the peers or equals of the party amercied for an offense
done, for the which he puts himself upon the mercy of the Lord. Who also
makes mention of an amerciament royal, and defines it to be a pecuniary
punishment laid upon a Sheriff, Coroner, or such like Officer of the Kings,
amercied by Justices for his offense. See Misericordia.

Amoveas maium. Look ouster le maine.

AN
An, tour, and waste, (annus, dies, and vastum.) Look year day, and waste.

Anealing of tile, anno 17. Ed. 4. ca. 4.

Annats, Annaies.) seems to be all one with first fruits anno 25. H. 8. ca.
20. Look, First fruits. The reason is, because the rate of first fruits paid
of spiritual livings, is after one years profit: Of which Polydore Virgil, de
inventione rerum, lib. 8. cap. 2. says thus: Nullum inventum majores Romano
Pontifici cumulavit opes, quam annatum (qua vocant) usus, qui omnino multo
antiquior est, quam recentiores quidam scriptores suspicantur. Et annates more
suo appellant primos fractus unius anni sacer dotii vacantis, aut dimidiam
eorum partem. Sane hoc vectigal jam pridem, cum Romanus Pontifex non habuerit
tot possessiones quot nunc habet, and cum oportuerit pro dignitate, pro
officio, multos magnosque facere sumptus, paulatim impositum fuit sacerdotiis
vacantibus quae ille conferret: de qua quidem re ut gravi, saepe reclamatum
fuisse testatur Henricus Hostiensis, qui cum Alexandro 4. Pontifice vixit, sic
ut Franciscus Zabarellus tradat posthac in concilio Viennensi, quod Clemens
quintus indixit (qui factus est Pontifex anno salutis humanae, 135.) agitatum
fuisse, ut, eo deposito, annatum onere vigesima pars vectigalium sacerdotalium
penderetur quotannis Romano Pontifici, and id quidem frustra, Quare Pontifex
annatas in sua massa retinuit, ut ne indidem exire possent: lege caetera.

Anniented, comes of the French ( anneantir, i. se abjicere, atque
prosternere.) It signifies with our Lawyers, as much as frustrated or brought
to nothing, Littleton, lib. 3. cap. warrantie.

Annua pensione, is a writ, whereby the King having due unto him an annual
pension from an Abbot or Prior for any of his Chaplains, whom he shall think
good to name unto him, being as yet unprovided of sufficient living, does
demand the same of the said Abbot or Prior for one, whose name is comprised in
the same writ, until, etc. and also wills him, for his Chaplains better
assurance, to give him, his Letters patents for the same. Register orig. fol.
265, and 307. and Fitz. not. br. fol. 231. where you may see the names of all
the Abbeys and Priories bound unto this, in respect of their Foundation or
creation: as also the form of the Letters Patents usually granted upon this
writ.

Annuitie (annuus reditus) signifies a yearly rent to be paid for term of life
or years, or in fee, and is also used, for the Writ that lies against a man
for the recovery of such a rent, either out of his Land, or out of his Coffers,
or to be received of his person, at a day certain every year, not satisfying it
according to the Grant. Register Origin. fol. 158. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 152.
The Author of the new terms of Law defines (annuitie) to be a certain sum of
money granted to another in fee-simple, fee-tail, for term of life, or of years,
to receive of the Granter, or his Heirs, so that no Freehold be charged
therewith, whereof a man shall never have assise or other action, but a Writ of
Annuity. Saintgerman in his Book entitled (The Doctor and Student) dialogo
primo, cap. 3. shows diverse differences between a Rent and an Annuity: whereof
the first is, That every rent, be it rentcharge, rent-service, or rent-seck,
is going out of Land: but an Annuity goes not out of any Land, but charge
only the person: that is to say, the Granter, or his Heirs that have Assets by
descent, or the House, if it be granted by a House of Religion, to perceive of
their Coffers. The second difference is, that for the recovery of an Annuity,
no Action lies, but only the Writ of Annuity against the Granter, his Heirs or
Successors: but of a Rent, the same Actions lie as do of Land, as the Case
requires. The third difference is, that an Annuity is never taken for Assets,
because it is no Freehold in law, neither shall be put in execution upon a
Statute Merchant, Statute Staple, or Elegit, as a Rent may. Dyer fol. 345. number.
2. speaks also to this effect.

Annise-seed (semen anisi) is a medicinal seed not unknown, so called of the
herb anisum, whereof it is the fruit. Of this he that lists may read Gerards
Herbal, lib. 2. ca. 397. It is noted among the garbleable drugs and spices,
anno 1 Jaco. ca. 19.

Anoisance, alias Noisance, alias Nuisance (nocumentum) comes of the French (
nuisance, i. incommodum, noxa) and has a double signification, being used as
well for any hurt done either to a public place, as (highway, bridge, or
common river) or to a private, by laying any thing, that may breed infection,
by incroaching, or such like means: as also, for the Writ that is brought upon
this transgression: whereof see more in Nuisance. The word (Anoysance) I find,
anno 22 H. 8. c. 5.

AP
Apostate capiendo, is a Writ that lies against one, that having entered and
professed some order of Religion, breaks out again, and wandereth the
Country, contrary to the Rules of his Order. For the Abbot or Prior of the
House, certifying this into the Chancery, under their Common seal, and praying
this Writ directed to the Sheriff for the apprehension of such Offendour, and
for the delivery of him again to his Abbot or Prior, or their lawful Attorney,
were wont to obtain the same. The form whereof, with other circumstances, you
shall find in the Register orig. fol. 71, and 267. and Fitzh. nature. br. fol.
233. C.

Apparlement, comes of the French ( pareilement, i. similiter, perinde,
itidem) and signifies a resemblance, as apparlment of War, anno 2 R. 2. stat.
1. ca. 6.

Appeal (appellum) comes of the French ( appellor, i. accire, accersere,
nominare, evocare, clamore aliquem flagitare.) Itsignifieth in our Common Law,
as much as (accusati^) with the Civilians. For as in the Civil-law, Cognizance
of criminal Causes, is taken either upon inquisition, denunciation, or
accusation: so in ours, upon indictment or appeal, indictment comprehending
both inquisition and denunciation. And accusation or appeal, is a lawful
declaration of another man's crime (which by Bracton must be felony at the least
in the Common Law) before a competent Judge, by one that sets his name to
the Declaration, and undertaketh to prove it, upon the penalty that may ensue
of the contrary. To declare the whole course of an Appeal, were too much for
this Treatise. Wherefore for that, I must refer you to Bracton lib. 3. tract.
2. c. 18. cum sequent. Britton. c. 22, 23, 24, 25. and to S. Thomas Smith, l.
3. de repub. Anglo. c. 3. and lastly to Stawnf. pl. cor. l. 2. c. 6, 7, etc.
usque 17. An Appeal is commenced two ways: either by Writ, or by Bill.
Stawnf. ubi supra. fol. 46. And it may be gathered by him, fol. 148. that an
Appeal by Writ is, when a Writ is purchased out of the Chancery by one to
another, to this end, that he appeal a third of some felony committed by him,
finding Pledges that he shall do it, and deliver this Writ to the Sheriff to
be recorded. Appeal by Bill is, when a man of himself gives up his accusation
in writing to the Vicount or Coroner, offering to undergo the burden of
appealing another therein named. This point of our Law, among others, is drawn
from the Normans, as appears plainly by the grand Customary, cap. 68. where
there is set down a solemn discourse, both of the effects of this Appeal, viz.
the order of the combat, and of the trial by inquest: of which by the
Common Law of England, it is in the choice of the Defendant, whether to take.
See the new book of entries, verbo Appel. and the book of Assizes, fo. 78.
Appel.

Appeal of mahem (appellum mahemit) is an accusing of one that has maimed
another. But that being no felony, the Appeal thereof is but in sort an action
of Trespass: because there is nothing recovered but damages. Bracton calls
this (appellum de plagis and mahem^o) and writes of it a whole Chapter, l. 3.
tract. 2. ca. 24. See S. Edw. Cook 4. vol. fo. 43. a.

Appeal of wrong imprisonment (appellum de pace and imprisonnamento) is used by
Bracton, for an action of wrong imprisonment, whereof he writes a whole
tractat. lib. 3. tractat. 2. ca. 25.

Appeal (appellatio) used in our Common law diverse times, as it is taken in the
Civil Law: which is a removing of a cause from an inferior Judge to a
superior, as appeal to Rome, an. 24. H. 8. ca. 12. and an. 1 Eliz. ca. 1. But
it is more commonly used, for the private accusation of a murderer, by a party
who had interest in the party murdered, or of any felon by one of his
accomplices in the fact. See Approver.

Appendant (appendens) is any thing belonging to another, as accessorium
principali, with the Civilians, or adjunctum subjecto, with the Logicians. An
Hospital may be appendant to a manor. Fitz. not. br. f. 142. Common of fishing
appendant to a free hold. Westminster. 2. ca. 25. anno 13. Ed. 1.

Appertinances (pertinentiae) comes of the French ( appertenir, i. pertinere)
It signifies in our common law, things both corporal, belonging to another
thing, as to the more principal: as Hamlets to a chief Manor, common of
pasture, turbarie, piscarie, and such like; and incorporeall, as liberties and
services of Tenants. Brit. c. 39. Where I note by the way, that he accounts
common of Pasture, turbary, and piscary, to be things corporal. Look Common.

Apportionment (Apportionamentum) is a dividing of a Rent into parts, according
as the land, whence the whole rent issues, is divided among two or more. See
the new terms of Law.

Apprentice (Appenticius) comes of the French ( aprenti, i. tyro and rudis
discipulus) or of the verb ( apprendre, i. addiscere, discere) and signifies
with us, one that is bound by covenant in word or writing, to serve another man
of Trade, for certain years, upon Condition, that the Artificer or man of
Trade, shall in the mean time endeavor to instruct him in his Art or Mystery.
S. Thomas Smith, in his Book de rep. Ang. l. 3. c. 8. says, that they are kind
of Bondmen, differing only, in that they be Servants by Covenant and for a
time. Of these you may read diverse Statutes made by the wisdom of our Realm,
which I think superfluous here to mention.

Appropriation (appropriatio) proceeds from the French ( approprier, i.
aptare, accommodare) and properly signifies, in the law of England, a severing
of a benefice ecclesiastical (which originally and in nature is, juris divi^i
and in patrimonio nullius) to the proper and perpetual use of some Religious
House or Dean, etc. and Chapter, Bishopric or College. And the reason of the
name I take to be this: because that whereas Parsons ordinarily be not
accounted (domini) but usufructuarii) having no right of fee simple, Littleton
titu. Discontinuance: these, by reason of their perpetuity, are accounted
owners of the fee simple, and therefore are called proprietarii. And before the
time of Richard the second, it was lawful (as it seems) simply, at the least
by man's law, to appropriate the whole fruits of a benefice to an Abbey or
Priory, they finding one to serve the cure. But that King made so evil a thing
more tolerable by a Law, whereby he ordained, that in every license of
appropriation made in Chancery, it should expressly be contained, that the
Diocesan of the place should provide a convenient sum of money yearly to be paid
out of the fruits, toward the sustenance of the poor in that Parish, and that
the Vicar should be well and sufficiently endowed, anno 15 R. 2, c. 6. Touching
the first institution, and other things worth the learning about
Appropriations, read Plowden in Grendons Case, fo. 496. b. and seq. as also the
new terms of Law, verbo Appropriation. To an appropriation, after the License
obtained of the King in Chancery, the consent of the Diocesan, Patron, and
Incumbent are necessary, if the Church be full: but if the Church be void, the
Diocesan and the Patron upon the Kings license may conclude it. Plowden ubi
supra. To dissolve an appropriation, it is enough to present a Clerk to the
Bishop. For, that once done, the benefice returns to the former nature. Fitz.
not. br. fol. 35. E.

Approvour (approbatur) comes of the French ( approuver, i. approbare,
comprobare, calculum albo adjicere) It signifies in our Common law, one that
confessing felony of himself, appealeth or accuses another, one or more, to be
guilty of the same; and he is called so, because he must prove that which he
has alleged in his appeal, Stawnf. pl. cor. fo. 142. And that proof, is by
battle, or by the Country, at his election that appealed. The form of this
accusation, you may in part gather by M. Cromptons Justice of Peace, fo. 250,
and 251. that it is done before the Coroner, either assigned unto the felon by
the Court, to take and record what he says, or else called by the felon
himself, and required for the good of the Prince and Commonwealth, to record
that which he says, etc. The oath of the Approver, when he begins the
combat, see also in Crompton in the very last page of his book, as also the
Proclamation by the Herald. Of the antiquity of this Law, you may read
something in Horns mirror of Justices, lt. 1. in fine cap. del Office del
Coroner. Of this also see Bracton more at large, lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 21. and
34. and Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 2. cap. 52. cum seq.

Approvers of the King (Appruatores Regis) be such as have the letting of the
Kings demesnes in small Manors to the Kings best advantage, anno 51. H. 3.
Stat. 5. See Approve.

Approve (appruare) comes of the French ( approver, i. approbare, comprobare,
caleulum albo adjicere) it signifies in the Common law to augment, (or as it
were) to examine to the uttermost. For example: to approve land, is to make the
best benefit thereof by increasing the rent, etc. So is the Substantive
(Approvement) used in Cromptons Jurisd. fol. 153. for the profits themselves.
So is it likewise in the Statute of Merton, ca. 4. anno 2. H. 3. land newly
approved, Old not. br. fol. 79. So the Sheriffs called themselves the Kings
approvers, anno 1. Ed. 3. cap. 8. which is as much in mine opinion as the
gatherers or exactors of the Kings profits. And anno 9. H. 6. cap. 10.
Bailiffes of Lords in their franchises be called their approvers. But anno 2.
Ed. 3. cap. 12. Approvers be certain men especially sent into leveral Counties
of the Realm, to increase the Farms of Hundreds and Wapentakes, which formerly
were set at a certain rate to the Sheriffs, who likewise demised them to
others, the County Court excepted.

Approvement (appruamentum) see Approve. See the Register judicial, fol. 8. br.
and 9 a. See the New terms of Law, verbo (Approvement.)

AR
Arbitratour (arbiter) may be taken to proceed from either the Latin
(arbitrator) or the French (arbitre) it signifies an extraordinary Judge in
one or more Causes, between party and party, chosen by their mutual consents,
West. part 2. Symbol. titulo Compromise, Sect. 21. who likewise divides
arbitrament, into general, that is, including all actions, quarrels,
executions, and demands; and special, which is of one or more matters, facts,
or things specified, codem sect. 2, 3, 4. The Civilians make 2 difference
between (arbitrum and arbitratorem) li. 76. p. pro socio. For though they both
ground their power upon the compromise of the parties: yet their liberty is
diverse. For arbiter is tied to proceed, and judge according to Law, with equity
mingled: arbitrator is permitted wholly to his own discretion, without
solemnity of process, or course of Judgment, to hear or determine the
controversy committed unto him, so it be juxta arbitrium bont viri.

Arches court (Curia de arcubus) is the chief and antientest Consistory that
belongs to the Archbishop of Canterbury, for the debating of Spiritual
causes: and so is called of the Church in London, dedicated to the blessed
Virgin, commonly called Bow-Church, where it is kept. And the Church is called
Bow-Church of the fashion of the Steeple or clocher thereof, whose top is
raised of stone Pillars, builded Archwise, like so many bent bows.

The Judge of this Court is termed the Dean of the Arches, or the Official of
the Arches Court. Dean of the Arches, because with this officialty, is commonly
joined a peculiar Jurisdiction of thirteen Parishes in Londor, termed a
Deanrie, being exempted from the authority of the Bishop of London, and
belonging to the Archbishop of Canterbury: of which the Parish of Bow is one
and the chief, because the Court is there kept. Some others say, that he was
first called Dean of the Arches, because the official to the Archbishop, being
many times employed abroad, in Ambassages for the King and Realm, the Dean of
the Arches was his Substitute in his Court, and by that means the names became
confounded. The jurisdiction of this Judge is ordinary, and extends it self
through the whole Province of Canterbnry. So that upon any Appeal made, he
forthwith and without any further examination of the Cause, sends out his
Citation to the party appealed, and his inhibition to the Judge from whom the
Appeal is made. Of this he that will may read more in the book, entitled De
antiquitate Ecclesiae Britan. historiae.

Arma moluta seem to be sharp weapons that do cut, and not blunt, that do only
break or bruise. Bract. lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 23. and Stawnf. pl. cor. fo. 78,
and 79: whereof Bracton bath these words; arma moluta plagam faciunt, sicut
gladius, hisacuta, and hujusmodi: ligna vero and lapides brusuras, orbs, and
^ctus, qui judicari non possunt ad plagam ad hoc, ut inde veniri possit ad
duellum.

Armor (arma) in the understanding of our Common law is extended to any thing
that a man in his wrath or fury takes into his hand, to cast at or strike
another. Crompton Justice of Peace, fo. 65. a. So armorum appellatio, non
utique scuta and gladios and galeas significat, sed and fustes, et lapides,
lib. 42 p. de verbo significatione.

Array (arr^ia, alias arraiamentum) comes of the French Array, i. ordo, which
is an old word out of use. Or it may be may be well deduced from raye, i.
linea. It signifies in our Common Law, the ranking or setting orth of a Jury
or enquest of men impannelled upon a Cause, a. 18 H. 6. c. 14. Thence is the
verb to array a panel, Old N. B. fo. 157. that is, to set forth one by another
the men impannelled. The array shall be quashedi; Old Not. Br. fo. 157. By
Statute every array in assise ought to be made four days before. Br. t^^.
Panel. nu. 10. to challenge the array, Kitchen, fol. 92.

Arrayers seems to be used in the Statute, an. 12 R. 2. c. 6, for such
Officers as had care of the Soldiers armor, to see them duly appointed in
their kinds.

Arraine (arraniare) comes of the French arranger, i. astituere, ordinare,
that is, to set a thing in order in his place: and the same signification it
has in our Common law. For example, he is said to arrain a Writ of Novel
disseisin in a County, that sits it for Trial before the Justices of the
Circuit, Old not. brev. fo. 109. Littleton fo. 78. uses the same word in the
same sense, viz. the Lease arraineth an assise of Novel disseisin. Also a
Prisoner is said to be arrained, where he is inindicted and brought forth to
his Trial. Arrained within the Verge for murder, Stawnf. pl. cor. fol. 150.
The course of this arrainment you may read in Sir Tho. Smith, de rep. Angl. l.
2. c. 23.

Arrearages (arreragia) comes of the French ( arrierages, i. reliqua.) It
signifies the remain of an Account, or a sum of Money remaining in the hands of
an Accountant. It is used sometimes more generally, for any money unpaid at a
due time, as arrerages of rent. That this word is borrowed from France, it
appears by Tiraquel de utroque retractu, tomo 3. p. 32. number. 10.

Arrest (arestum) comes of the French ( arrester, i. retinere, retare,
subsistere) or rather it is a French word in it self, signifying a settling,
stop, or stay, and is metaphorically used for a decree or determination of a
cause debated or disputed to and fro: as ( arrest du Senate, i. placitum
curiae.) In our Common law it is taken most of all for a stay or stop, as a man
apprehended for debt, etc. is said to be arrested. To plead in arrest of
Judgment, is to show cause why judgment should be staid, though the verdict
of the twelve be passed. To plead in arest of taking the enquest upon the
former issue, is to show cause why an enquest should not be taken, etc. Brook
tit. Repleader. Take this of the learned Master Lambert, in his Eirenarch lib.
2. c. 2. p. 94. Budae, says he in his Greek Commentaries is of opinion, that
the French word (Arrest) which with them signifies a decree or judgment of
Court, took beginning from the Greek (...), i. placitum, and as we might say,
the pleasure and will of a Court. And albeit it were not out of the way, to
think that it is called an Arrest, because it stays or arresteth the party;
yet I believe rather, that we receive the same from the Norman laws, because we
use it in the same sense with them. For commonly with us, an arrest is taken
for the excution of the Commandment of some Court, or of some Officer in
justice. But howsoever the name began, an arrest is a certain restraint of a
man's person, depriving him of his own will and liberty, and binding it to
become obedient to the will of the Law, and it may be called the beginning of
imprisonment. Precepts and Writs of the higher Courts of Law do use to express
it by two sundry words: as (capias) and attachies) which signify or take to
catch hold of a man. But this our Precept notes it by the words (ducifacias)
that is cause him to be conveyed, etc. For that the Officer has, after a sort,
taken him before, in that he comes unto him, and requires him to go to some
Justice of the Peace. Thus far M. Lambert. And belike this word is spread
farther than France: for Gaile a German Writer shows by his Tractate de
arrestis imperii, that it is used also in the imperial Territories, and in the
same signification, c. 1. n. 1.

Arrestandis bonis ne dissipentur, is a Writ which lies for him whose Cattle
or Goods are taken by another, that during the controversy, does or is like to
make them away, and will be hardly able to make satisfaction for them
afterward. Reg. orig. fo. 126. b.

Arrestando ipsum qui pecuniam recepit ad proficiscendum in obsequium regis,
etc. is a Writ that lies for the apprehension of him that has taken pressed
money toward the Kings wars, and lies hidden when he should go. Register orig.
24. b.

Arresto facto super bonis mercatorum alienigenorum, etc. is a Writ that lies
for a Denizen against the Goods of Strangers of any other Country, found within
the Kingdom, in recompense of Goods taken from him in the said Country, after
he has been denied restitution there. Reg. orig. fo. 129. a. This among the
ancient Civilians was called clarigatio, now barbarously represaliae.

Arretted (arrectatus) is he that is covenanted before a Judge, and charged
with a crime, Stawn. pl. cor. li. 2.45. quasi ad rectum vocatus. It is used
sometime for Imputed or laid unto, as, no folly may be arrected to him being
under age. Littleton, cap. Remitter. The Latin Substantive Rettum is used in
the Register orig. Chawcer uses the verb Arretteth, id est, lays blame, as
M. Speight interprets it. I may probably conjecture that this word is the
Latin (Rectum:) For Bracton has this phrase, ad rectum habere malefactoremi,
i. to have the Malefactor forth coming, so as he may be charged and put to his
Trial, lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 10. And in another place, Rectatus de morte
hominis. i. charged with the death of a man, codem c. 2. n. 3.

Articles of the Clergy (articuli Cleri) be certain Statues made touching
persons and causes Ecclesi astical, an. 9 E. 2. like unto which there were
others made, an. 14 E. 3. stat. 3.

AS
Assay of measures and weights (assais mensurarum and ponderum) Reg. orig. fo.
279, is the examination used by the Clark of the Market.

Assayer of the King, is an Officer of the Mint, for the due trial of Silver,
indifferently appointed between the Master of the Mint, and the Merchants that
bring silver thither for exchange. An. 2 H. 6. c. 12.

Assault (insultus) comes of the French verb assailer, i. adoriri, appetere,
invadere; which French proceeds also from the Latin assilire, i. vim
afferre, oppugnare. It signifies in out Common law, a violent kind of injury
offered to a man's person, of a higher nature than battery, for it may be
committed by offering of a blow, or by a fearful speech. M. Lambert in his
Eirenar. lib. 1. cap. 3. whom read. The Feudists call this assulium, and define
it thus: Assultus est impetus in personam aut locum, sive hoc pedibus fiat, vel
equo, aut machinis, aut quacunque alia re assiliatur. Zasius de feud. part 10.
nu. 38. And assilere est vim adferre, adoriri, oppngnare, lib. feud. 1. titulo
5.. 1.

Assach seems to be a Welsh word, and to signify so much as a kind of excuse
or strange kind of purgation by the Oaths of 300 men. An. 1 H. 5. ca. 6.

Assart, (Assartum) in M. Manwoods Judgment, part 2. c. 9. nu. 5. of the
Forest laws, comes of the French assortir, signifying as he says, to make
plain, or to furnish, but rather indeed, to set in order, and handsomely to
dispose. Assertum est, quod redactum est ad culturam, Fleta lib. 4. ca. 21,.
Item respondere. It signifies, as much as the said M. Manwood says, n. 1. ubi
supra, an offense committed in the Forest, by plucking up those woods by the
roo^s, that are thickets or coverts of the Forest, and by making them plain as
earable land: where he also says, that an assart of the Forest is the greatest
offense or trespass of all other that can be done in the Forest, to vert or
venison, containing in it as much as the Waste, or more. For whereas the waste
of the Forest, is but the felling and cutting down of the coverts, which may
grow again in time, an assart is a plucking them up, etc. Which he confirms
out of the red book in the Exchequer, in these words: Assarta vero, occaesiones
nominantur, quando sc: forestae nemora vel dumeta, pascuis and latibulis
ferarum opportuna, succiduutur: quibus succisis and radicitus avulsis, terra
subversitur and excolitur. And again out of the Register origin. fol^ 257. a,
b. in the Writ Adquod damrum, sent out in case where a man sueth for a License
to assart his grounds in the Forest, and to make it several for tillage. So
that it is no offense if it be done with license. To this may Bracton also be
added, lib. 4. cap. 38. number. 11. where he says that these words, boscus
efficitnr assartum, signify as much as redactus in culturam. Of this you may
read more in Cromptons Jurisdictions, fo. 203. and in Charta de foresta, an. 9
H. 3. c. 4. where the English word is not assart, but assert. And in Manwood
part 1. of his Forest laws, page 171. The word is used an. 4 Ed. 1. stat. 1. in
the same signification. That which we call assartum, is elsewhere termed
Disboscatio Decis. Genu. 78.

Assembly unlawful (illicita assemblata) comes of the French assembler, i.
aggregare, whence also is the Substantive assemblee, i. coitio, congregatio. It
is in our Common law, as M. Lambert defines it, Eiren. li. 1. c. 19. the
company of three persons or more, gathered together to do an unlawful act,
although they do it not. See unlawful assembly.

Assets (quod tantundem valet) Bract. l. 5. tract. 3. c. 8. nu. 2. is nothing
but the French assez, i. satis. For though this word masque under the vilard of
a Substantive, it is in truth but an Adverb. It signifies in our Common law,
goods enough to discharge that burden, which is cast upon the Executor or
Heir, in the satisfying of the Testators or Ancestors debts or Legacies. See
Brook titulo Assets per dissent: by whom you shall learn, that whosoever
pleads Assets faith nothing, but that he against whom he pleads has enough
descended or come to his hands, to discharge that which is in demand. The
Author of the new Terms of law makes two sorts of Assets, viz. assets par
descent, and assets enter mains; the former being to be alleged against an
Heir, the other against an Executor or Administor.

Assign (assignare) both it self and the French assigner come of the Latin.
It has two significations: one general, as to appoint a depute, or to set over
a right unto another. In which signification, Briston, fo. 122. says, This
word was first brought into use for the favor of Bastards, because they cannot
run under the name of Heirs to their Fathers, and therefore were and are
comprised under the name of Assignees. The other signification of this word is
special, as to appoint at, or set forth, viz. to assign Ertor, Old not. B. fo.
19. is to show in what part of the Process Error is committed. To assign false
Judgment, cod^m fo. 17. that is, to declare how and where the judgment is
unjust. To assign a false verdict, codem fol. 112. and to assign an Oath to be
false, an. 9 R. 2. c. 3. To assign the Cessor, Old not. br. fol. 1341. to show
how the Plaintiff had cessed, or given over. To assign waste, is to show,
wherein especially the waste is committed, Reg. orig. f. 72.

Assign, in the general signification is used, an. 20 Ed. 1. and anno 11 H. 6.
c. 2. in these words, Justices assigned to take Assizes. And the Substantive
(assignment) has the same signification, West symb. part 1. lib. 2. sect.
496. and seq. In which manner is also used the Adjective (assignee, assignatus)
viz. for him that is appointed or deputed by another, to do any Act, or perform
any business, or enjoy any commodity. And an assignee may be either in deed, or
in Law. Assignee in deed, is he that is appointed by a Person: an assignee in
Law, is he whom the Law so makes, without any appointment of the Person. Vide
Dyer, fol. 6. nu. 5. Perkins in Grants says, that an assignee is he that
occupiesh a thing in his own right: and Depute, he that does it in the right of
another.

Assise (assisa) comes of the French word assise, which in the grand
Customary of Normandy, c. 24. is defined to this effect: Assise is an Assembly
of Knights and other substantial men, with the Bailiff or Justice, in a certain
place, and at a ceptain time appointed. And again, c. 55. Assise is a Court, in
the which whatsoever is done, ought to have perpetual strength. This Norman
word assise, comes of the French asseoire, i. collocare, to settle or bestow
in some place certain: as S'asseoir, is to fit down by another. And
metaphorically it is used of things incorporeal, as asseoir son jugement sur
quel que lieu, is, interponere judicium suum. Of this Verb comes the
Participle assis, as estre assis, i. sedere. And this Participle in the grand
Customary of Normandy, c. 68. is used as we would say, appointed, limited, or
determined, viz. au jour qui est assis afaire la battaille, se doibuent les
champions offrir a la justice; That is, At the day which is appointed for the
combat, the Champions ought to offer themselves to the Justice. So that by all
these places compared together, it is evident whence the original of this word
assise flows. How diversely it is used in our Common law, it follows that we
declare. First, Littleton in the Chapter Rents says, that it is aequivocum:
where he sets down three several significations of it; one, as it is taken
for a Writ: another, as it is used for a Jury: the third, as for an Ordinance.
And him, he that lists may read more at large. My Collections have served me
thus; first, assise is taken for a Writ directed to a Sheriff, for the recovery
of possession of things immovable, where of your self or your Ancestors have
been disseised. And this is as well of things corporal, as incorporeal rights,
being of four sorts as here they follow in their order.

Assise of novel disseisin (assisanovae disseisinae) lies, where a Tenent in
fee-simple, fee-tail, or for term of life, is lately disseised of his Lands or
Tenements, or else of a Rent-service, Rent-seck, or Rentcharge, of common of
Pasture, of an office, of toll, tronage, passage, pownage, or for a Nuisance
levied, and diverse other such like. For confirmation whereof you may read
Glanvile li. 10. c. 2. Bracton li. 4. tract. 1. per totum. Britton c. 70. and
seq. Reg orig. fol. 197. Fitz. Not. br. fo. 177, 178, 179. New book of Entries,
fo. 74. col. 3. West. 2. c 25. anno 13 Ed. 1. And to this may aptly be added
the Bill of fresh force (friscae fortiae) which is directed to the Officers or
Magistrates of Cities or Towns corporate, being a kind of Assise for recovery
of possession in such places within forty days after the force, as the
ordinary Assise is in the County. Fitzh. Not. br. fol. 7. c. This the Civilians
call Judicium possessorium recuperandi.

Assise of mort d'auncester (assisa mortis antecessoris) lies where my Father,
Mother, Brother, Sister, Uncle, Aunt, etc. died seized of Lands, Tenements,
Rents, etc. that he had in Fee-simple, and after his death a Stranger abateth:
and it is good as well against the Abatour, as any other in possession. How
likewise this is extended, see Bracton lib. 4. trast. 3. per totum. Britton ca.
70. cum multis sequent. Fitzh. Not. br. fo. 114. Regist. orig. fo. 223. This
the Civilians call Judicium possessorium adipiscend^.

Assise of darrein presentment, (assisa ultimae praesentationis) lies, where I
or mine Ancestor have presented a Clark to a Church, and after (the Church
being void by the death of the said Clark, or otherwise) a Stranger presents
his Clark to the same Church, in disturbance of me. And how otherwise this Writ
is used, see Bracton l. 4. tract. 2. Reg. orig. fo. 30. Fitzh. Not. br. fo. 195.

Assise de utrum (assisa utrum) lies for a Parson against a Layman, or a
Layman against a Parson, for Land or Tenement doubtful, whether it be
lay-fee, or free-alms. And of this see Bracton li. 4. sract. 5. ca. 1. and seq.
Britton ca. 95. The reason why these Writs be called assizes, may be diverse:
First, because they settle the possession, and so an outward right in him that
obtains by them. Secondly, they were originally sped and executed at a
certain time and place formerly appointed. For by the Norman law, the time and
place must be known forty days before the Justices sat of them: and by our Law
there must be likewise fifteen days of preparation, except they be tried in
those standing Courts of the King in Westminster, as appears by F. N. B. fo.
177. d, e. Lastly, they may be called Assizes; because they are tried most
commonly by especial Courts, set and appointed for the purpose, as may be well
proved not only out of the Customary of Normandy, but our books also: which
show, that in ancient times Justices were appointed by special Commission, to
dispatch controversies of possession, one or more, in this or that only County,
as occasion fell out, or disseisins were offered, and that as well in Term
time, as out of Term: whereas of later days, we see that all these Commissions
of Assizes, of Eyr, of Oyer and Terminer, of Jail-deliver, and of Nisi prius,
are dispatched all at one time, by two several Circuits in the year, out of
term, and by such as have the greatest sway of Justice, being all of them
either the Kings ordinary Justices of his Benches, Sergeants at the Law, or
such like.

Assise, in the second signification, according to Littleton, is used for a
Jury. For (to use his own example) it is set down in the beginning of the
Record of an Assise of novel disseisin, assisa venit recognatura, which is as
much as to say, as Juratores ven^unt recognituri. The reason why the Jury is
called an Assise, he gives to be this, because by writ of Assise, the Sheriff
is commanded, quod faciat duodecim liberos and legales homines de viceneto,
etc. Videre Tenementum illud, and nomina little imbreviari, and quod summoneat
eos per bonas summonitiones, quod sint coram Justiciariis, etc. parati inde
facere recognitionem, etc. This is (as if he should have spoken shorter)
Metonymia effecti. For they are called the Assizes, because they are summoned
by virtue of the Writ so termed. And yet the Jury summoned upon a Writ of
right, is likewise called the Assise, as himself there confesses. Which writ
of right is not an Assise: but this may be said to be (...), or abusively so
termed. Assise in this signication is divided in magnam and parvam, Glanvile,
li. 2. c. 6, and 7, etc. and Britton c. 12. where it appears, wherein the
great Assise differs from the petit Assise; whom I wish to be read, by those
who would be further instructed in this point. For this place thus much in
short. The former four kinds of Assizes used in actions only possessory, be
called petit assizes, in respect of the grand Assise. For the Law of fees is
grounded upon two rights: one of possession, the other of property: and as the
grand Assise serves for the right of property, so the petit assise serves for
the right of possession. Horns mirror of Justices, l. 2. c. de novel. disseisin.

Assise in the third signification according to Littleton, is an Ordinance or
Statute: as the Statute of bread and ale made, anno 51 H. 3. is termed the
assise of bread and ale (assisa panis and cervisiae) Register orig. fol. 279.
b. The Assise of Clarendon (assisa de Clarendon) whereby those that be accused
of any heinous crime, and not able to purge themselves by fire and water, but
must abjure the Realm, had liberry of forty days to stay, and try what
succor they could get of their Friends, toward their sustenance in exile.
Stawnf. pl. cor. fo. 118. out of Bracton, li. 3. tract. 2. cap. 16. number. 2. Of
this also Roger Hoveden makes mention, and more particularly than any I have
heard, part poster, suorum annalium, fo. 313. b. in Henrico secundo. Assise of
the Forest (assisa de Foresta) which is a statute or condition touching orders
to be observed in the Kings Forest. Manwood part 1. of his Forest laws, p. 35.
Crompton in the Court of Justices of the Forest, per totum, fo. 146. and seq.
And the assise of the King, anno 18. Edw. 1. Stat. 1. called the Statute for
view of Frank-pledge. And these be called assizes, because they set down and
appoint a certain measure, tate, or order in the things which they concern. Of
Assise in this singnification does Glanvile also speak, lib. 9. c. 10. in fine.
Geraliter verum est quod de quolibet placito quod in comitatu deducitur and
terminatur, misericordia quae inde provenit, vicecomiti aebetur: quae quanta
sit, per nullam assisam generalem determinadum est. And thus much touching
Littletons division. But if we mark well the Writers of the Law, we shall find
this word (assise) more diversely used, than this Author has noted. For it is
sometime used for the measure or quantity it self, (and that per Metonymiam
effecti) because it is the very scantline described or commanded by the
Ordinance: as for example, we say, when Wheat, etc. is of this price, then the
bread, etc. shall be of this assise. This word is further taken, for the whole
process in court upon the Writ of assise, or for some part thereof, as the
issue or verdict of the Jury. For example, assizes of new disseisin, etc. shall
not be taken, but in their shires, and after this manner, etc. Mag. Char. c.
12. And so it seems to signify, Westminster. 2. cap. 25. an. 13 Ed. 1. in these
words let the Disseisour allege no false exceptions, whereby the taking of the
Assizes may be deferred, etc. And anno 34 Ed. 1. Stat. 2. if it be found by
assise: the assise is arrained: to aver by the assise: the assise by their
default shall pass against them: and also anno 1 H. 6. c. 2. assizes awarded by
default of the Tenants, etc. Lastly by Merton, cap. 4. an. 20 Henry 3.
certified by the assise, quit by the assise, etc. And in this signification
Glanvile calls it, magnam assisam domins regis: quae ex duodecim ad minus
legalium hominum sacramentis consistit. li. 2. c. 7. Bracton uses it in like
sort: as assisa cadit in transgressionem, lib. 4. c. 30. and assisa cadit in
perambnlationem, eodem c. 31. number. 2. Fleta defines an assise in this
signification, thus: Assisa in jure possessorio, est quaedam recognitio
duodecim hominum juratorum, per quam Justicjarii certiorantur de articulis in
brevi contentis. And assise also thus signifying, is said sometime to pass (per
modum assisae) and sometime in modum juratae; in manner of an assise, when only
the Dissesin in question, is put to the trial of the Twelve; in manner of a
Jury, when as any exception is objected to disable the interest of the
Disseisee, and is put to be tried by the Twelve, before the assise can pass: as
for example; Quaestio status, causa successionis, causa donationis, pactum sive
conditio vel conventio, voluntas and disimulatio, transactio, vel
quistaclamatio vel remissio confirmatio sive consensus, propria usurpatio rei
propriae, difficultas Judicii, justum judicium, finis, chirographum, intrusio
in rem alienam, vel disseisina, si incontinenti rejiciatur, negligentia quae
per transitum temporis excludit actionem. Fleta lib. 4. c. 10. 1. whom read
also to this point, c. 11.. Si autem a domino, and at large, c. 16. ejusdem
libri. and l. b. 5. c. 6.. Item vertitur assisa and seq. And note, that assise
in this signification, is taken four ways, Old not. br. fol. 105. The first is
assise at large, which is taken as well upon other points, as upon the
disseisin. For example, where an Infant brings an assise, and the deed of his
Ancestor is pleaded, whereby he claims his right or foundeth his title, then
the assise shall be taken at large: that is, the Jury shall enquire not only
whether the Plaintiff were disseised or not by the Tenent, but also of these
two points: viz. whether his ancestor were of full age, of good memory, and out
of Prison, when he made the Deed pleaded. Another example out of Kitchen, fol.
66. The Tenent pleads a foreign release, in bar to an assise, whereupon the
cause was adjourned. At the day the Tenent makes default. Therefore the assise
was taken at large: that is, not only whether the Plaintiff were disseised, but
also whether there be any foreign release. A third example you may read in
Littleton, c. Estates upon Condition. The second manner of assise in point of
assise (assisa in modum assisae) which is, when the Tenent, as it were setting
foot to foot with the Demandant, without farther circumstance, pleads
directly contrary to the Writ, no wrong, no disseisin. The third manner is,
assise out of the point of assise (assisa extra assisam, velin modum jurata)
viz. when the Tenent allegeth some by exception, that must be tried by a Jury,
before the principal cause can proceed: as if he plead a foreign release, or
foreign matter tryable in another County. For in this case, the Justices refer
the Record to the Court of Common pleas, for the Trial of the Foreign pleas,
before the disseisin can come to be decussed. Of this sort read diverse others
examples in Bracton l. 4. part 1. c. 34. For there be of them (as he says)
and Britten also, c. 52. both dilatory and peremptory, The fourth and last
manner is: Assise of right of damages, and that is, when the Tenent confessing
a putting out, and referring it to a demurrer in Law, whether it were rightly
done or not, is adjudged to have done wrong. For then shall the Demandant have
a Writ to recover damages, which is called assise to recover damages, as also
the whole process.

Assise, is further taken for the Court, place, or time, when and where the
Writs and processes of the assise be handled or taken. And in this
signification assise is general: as when the Justices pass their several
Circuits, every couple with their Commission, to take all assizes twice in the
year. For he that speaks of any thing done, at that time, and in that place,
will commonly say, that it was done at the general assise. It may likewise be
special, in this signification: as if an especial Commission should be granted
to certain (as in ancient times they often were, Bracton lib. 3. c. 11. in
fine) for the taking of an assise upon one disseisin or two: any thing done in
the Court before them, a man would say, it was done at such an especial assise.
And in this very signification does Glanvile use it, lib. 9. c. 12. in these
words: Sicontra dominum suum and non infra assisam, tunc distringitur ^se
occupator, etc. and lib. 13. cap. 32. in these words: cum quis itaque infra;
assisam domini regis, i. infra tempus a domino rege de consilio procerum ad hoc
constitutum, quandoque majus, quandoqne minus censetur, alium injuste and sine
judicio disseisiverit etc. Of this word Assise you may read in M^ Skene de
verbo signif. de verbo Assise, and by him understand, that in Scotland also it
is diversely used, viz. in five several significations. And touching the fifth
signification, he has these words. An Assise is called a certain number of men
lawfully summoned, received, sworn and admitted to judge and discern in sundry
civil causes, like as Perambulations, Cognitions, Molestations, pourpestrure,
division of Lands, serving of Briefs, and in all and sundry Criminal causes,
decided and tried by an assise: whereof there are two kinds: one ordinarily in
use, which may be called a little assise of the number of 13, or 15 persons:
the other, called a Great assise, which consists of 25. Persons, etc. The
rest is very worth the reading.

Assisa continuanda, is a Writ directed to the Justices assigned to take an
assise, for the continuance of the cause, in case where certain Records
alleged, cannot in time be procured by the party that would use it, Reg. orig.
f. 217.

Assisa praeroganda, it is a Writ directed to the Justices of Assise, for the
stay of proceeding, by reason of the Kings business, wherein the party is
employed. Register orig. fo. 208, and 221.

Association (associatio) is a patent sent by the King, either of his own
motion, or at the sure of the Plaintiff, to Justices appointed to take assizes
of novel disseisin, or of Oyer and Terminer, etc. to take others unto them as
fellows and colleagues in that business. The derivation is plain: the examples
and sundry uses hereof you may find in Fitzh. not. br. fol. 185. E. and fo.
111. B. but more particularly in the Reg. orig. fol. 201, 202, 205, 206, 207,
223, 224.

Assoile (absolvere) comes of the French (absouldre) and signifies to
deliver or set free from an excommunication, Stawnf. pl. cor. fol. 72. in words
to this effect: otherwise the Defendant should remain in Prison until the
Plaintiff were assoiled, that is, delivered from his excommunication.

Assumpsit, is a voluntary promise made by word, whereby a man assumeth, or
takes upon him to perform or pay any thing unto another. This word contains
any verbal promise made upon consideration, which the Civilians express by
diverse words, according to the nature of the promise, calling it sometime
pactum, sometime sponsionem, sometime promissionem, pollicitationem or
constitutum; the word seems to be drawn from the Latin (assumptio) quae
significat professionem, l. p. ad municipalem.

AT
Attache (attachiare) comes of the French ( attacher, i. figere, nectere,
illigare, defigere, alligare.) In our Common law it signifies, to take or
apprehend by Commandment or Writ. And M. Lambert in his Eirenarch, lib. 1.
cap. 16. makes this difference between an Arrest and an Attachment: that an
arrest proceeds out of lower Courts by Precept, and an attachment out of
higher Courts by Precept or Writ: and that a Precept to arrest, has these
formal words (ducifacias, etc.) and a Writ of attachment these words
(praecipimus tibi quod attachies talem, and habeas cum coram nobis, etc.)
whereby it appears, that he which arresteth, carries the party arrested to
another higher Person to be disposed of forthwith, he that attacheth, keeps
the Party attached, and presents him in Court at the day assigned in
attachment. Yet I observe out of Master Kitchen, that an attachment issues out
of a Court Baron, which is a low Court, cap. Attachment in Court Baron, fol.
79. Another difference there is, that an arrest lies only upon the body of a
man, and an attachment sometime upon his goods, as shall be showed in the
sequel. It may be likewise asked how an attachment and a (capias) do differ:
and how an attachment and a (cape) and an attachment and a Distress. First,
that an attachment differs from a (capias) it appears by Kitchen in these
words: fol. 79. Note that in a Court Baron a man shall be attached by his
goods; and a (capias) shall not go out thence: whereby I gather, that an
attachment is more general, taking hold of a man's goods, and a (capias) of his
body only. Then an attachment differs from a (cape) in this, because a (cape)
be it (cape magnum) or (cape parvum) takes hold of immoveables, as Lands or
Tenements, and are properly belonging to action real: as you may gather out of
their forms, in Fitzh. not. br. whereas attachment has rather place in Actions
personal, as Bracton plainly sets down, lib. 4. tract. 4. cap. 5. number. 3.
Where nevertheless it appears, that a (cape) may be likewise used in an
Action personal. An attachment (as is formerly said) takes hold of moveable
goods, or the body. For it appears by Kitchen, fol. 263. that a man may be
attached by an hundred Sheep. Read Skene, de verbo signif. verbo Attachiamentum.

Now it follows to show how Attachment differs from a Distress. For so it
does, as may be showed out of Kitchen, fol. 78. where he says, that Process in
Court Baron, is Summons, Attachment, and Distress, our of the Old not. br. fol.
27. where it is said, that a Process in a (quare impedit) is Summons,
Attachment, and one Distress, and again, fol. 28. where speaking of the Writ Ne
admittas) he says thus: And the Process is one prohibition; and upon the
prohibition an Attatchment or Distress; and fol. 32. in a Writ of (Indicavit)
you have these words: And after the attachment returned, the Distress shall go
out of the Roles of the Justices. Bracton on the other side, l. 5. tract. 3. c.
4. number. 2. shows, that both (attachiamentum, and magnum cape, districtiones
sunt.) Of which opinion Fleta also is, li. 5. ca. 24.. si autem aed. But there
also he says, that (attachiamentum est districtio personalis, and cape magnum
districtio realis.) So that by his opinion, districtio is (genus) to
Attachment. Britton in his 26 Chapter, has words to this effect: But in
Attachment of Felony, there comes no Distress, otherwise than by the body.
And if the Sheriff return in the cases aforesaid, that the Trespassours have
nothing in his Bayliwick, by the which they may be distreined, it must be
awarded that he take their bodies etc. In which place, an Attachment is plainly
used, for an apprehension of an Offender by his goods. So that to conclude, I
find no difference between an Attachment, and a Distress, but these two: That
an Attachment reaches not to Lands, as a Distress does; and that a Distress
touches not the body (if it be properly taken) as an attachment does. Yet are
they diverse times confounded, as may appear by the places formerly alleged, and
by Glanvil. lib. 10. cap. 3. and Fleta lib. 2. cap. 66. and seq. Howbeit, in
the most common use, an Attachment is an apprehension of a man by his Body, to
bring him to answer the action of the Plaintiff: a Distress is the taking of
another man's goods, for some real cause, as rent, service, or such like,
whereby to drive him to replevy, and so to be Plaintiff in an action of
Trespass, against him that distreined him. And so much for the difference, and
coherence of these words. See also Distress.

I find in West. part 2. symbolaio. titulo Proceedings in Chancery, sect. 22,
23. that Attachment out of the Chancery is twofold, one simple, and originally
decreed for the apprehension of the party: the other, after return made by the
Sheriff, Quod defendens non est inventus in Baliva sua, with Proclamations made
through the whole County, in such places, as he shall think meet, that the
party appear by a day assigned, and that he be attatched nevertheless, if he
may be found. This second kind has an affinity with the Canonists (viis and
modis) at the which if the Party appear not, he is excommunicate: or with the
Civilians viis and modisuna cum intimatione for in the Chancery, if he come not
upon this, he is forthwith pressed with a Writ of rebellion.

There is an attachment of Privilege, which is a power to apprehend a man in a
privileged place, or else, by virtue of a man's privilege, to call another to
this or that Court, whereunto he himself belongs, and in respect whereof he
is privileged. New book of Entries, verbo Privilege, fo. 431. col. 2. There is
also a foreign attachment, which is an attachment of a Foreiners goods found
within a Liberty or City, to satisfy some Creditor of his within the City.
There is also an attachment of the Forest, which is a Court there held. For as
( M. Manwood says) in his first Book of forest Laws, page 90, 62, 99. there be
three Courts of the Forest, where the lowest is called the (attachment) the
mean, the (swaynemote) the highest, the (Justice seat in Eyr.) This Court of
attachment seems so to be called, because the Verderours of the Forest have
therein no other authority, but to receive the attachments of Offenders
against vert and venison, taken by the rest of the Officers, and to enroll
them, that they may be presented and punished at the next Justice-seat.
Manwood, part 1. page 93. And this attaching is by three means, by Goods and
Cattels, by Body, Pledges, and Mainprise, or by the body only. The Court is
kept every forty days throughout the year. And he that has occasion to learn
more of this, I refer him to M. Manwood, loco quo supra, and to M. Crompton in
his Court of the Forest. Attachment is commanded in Writs, the diversity
whereof you may see, in the Regist. orig. under the word Attachiamentum, in
Indice.

At large, see Assise at large in the word Assise, and Old not. br. fol. 105.
Verdict at large, Littleton, fo. 98. To vouch at large, Old not. br. fol. 108.
To make title at large Kitch. f. 68. See Bar.

Attain (attincta) comes of the French, as you shall see in the word
(attainted:) But as it is a Substantive, it is used for a Writ, that lies
after Judgment, against a Jury that has given a false verdict in any Court of
Record (be the action real or personal) if the debt or damages surmount the
sum of 40 s: What the form of the Writ is, and how in use it is extended, Fitz.
not. br. f. 105. and the new Book of Enteries, f. 84. colum. 1. The reason why
it is so called, seems to be, because the party that obtains it,
endeavors thereby to touch, deprehend, or stain the Jury with perjury, by
whose verdict he is grieved. What the punishment of this perjury is, or of him
that brings the Writ against the Jury, if he fail in his proof, see Glanvil,
lib. 2. cap. 19. Fitz. not. br. fol. 109. K. L. and 110. A. B. C. D. etc. the
Terms of the Law, verb. Attaint. Fortescue, cap. 26. Smith de rep. Anglo. lib.
3. cap. 2. and anno 11 H. 7. cap. 21. and anno 23 H. 8. cap. 3. and others. In
what diversity of Cases this Writ is brought, see the Register orig. in Indice.

Attainted (attinctus) comes of the French ( temdre, i. tingere) the
Participle whereof is ( teinct, i. tinctus) or else of ( attaindre, i. assequi,
attingere.) It is used in our Common law, particularly for such as are found
guilty of some crime or offense, and especially of Felony or Treason. Howbeit a
man is said to be attainted of Disseisin, Westminster. 1. cap. 24 and 36. anno 3 Ed.
1. And so it is taken in French likewise (as estre attaint and vayncu en
aucuncas) is to be cast in any cafe. Which makes me to think that it rather
comes from (attaindre) as we would say in English catched, overtaken, or
plainly deprehended. And Britton, cap. 75. uses the Participle (attaint) in
the sense that we say (attained unto) A man is attainted by two means: by
Appearance or by Proces^. Stawnf. pl. cor. fol. 44. Attainder by Appearance, is
by confession, by battle, or by verdict, idem fo. 122. Confession whereof
attaint grows, is double: one at the Bar before the Judges, when the Prisoner
upon his endictment read, being asked guilty or not guilty, answers guilty,
never putting himself upon the verdict of the Jury: the other is before the
Coroner in Sanctuary, where he upon his Confession was in former times
constrained to abjure the Realm: which kind also, of the effect, is called
attainder by abjuration. Idem fol. 182. Attainder by battle is, when the party
appealed by another, and choosing to try the truth by combat rather than by
Jury, is vanquished. Idem fol. 44. Attainder by verdict is, when the Prisoner
at the bar, answering to the endirement, not guilty; has an enquest of life
and death passing upon him, and is by their verdict or doom pronounced guilty.
Idem fol. 108. and 192. Attainder by Process otherwise called attain der by
default, or attainder by outlagary) is where a Party flies, and is not found
until he have been 5 times called publicly in the County, and at the last
outlawed upon his default. Idem f. 44. Ifind by the same Author, f. 108. that
he makes a difference between Attainder and Conviction, in these words: And
note the diversity between Attainder and Conviction, etc. And with this agrees
the Statute, anno 34, and 35 H. ^. cap. 14. in ipso principio, and anno 1 Ed.
6. cap. 12. in these words: that then every such Offender being duly thereof
convicted, or attainted, by the Laws of this Realm etc. And again, in these
words: every Woman that is, or shall fortune to be Wife of the person so
attainted, convicted, or outlawed, etc. To this you may likewise add the
Statute, an. 2 and 3 Ed. 6. c. 33. And Ifind by Stawnf. pl. cor. f. 66. that a
Man by our ancient Laws, was said to be convicted presently upon the verdict
(guilty,) but not to be attainted, until it appeared he was no clerk or being a
Clerk, and demanded of his Ordinary, could not purge himself. So that a man was
not attainted upon Conviction, except he were no Clerk: and in one word it
appears, that Attainder is larger than Conviction; Conviction being only by
the Jury.

And attainder is not before Judgment, Perkins Graunts, number. 27, 29. Yet it
appears by Stawnf. fo. 9. that Conviction is called attainder sometime. For
there he says, that the verdict of the Jury does either acquit, or attaint a
man: and so it is, Westminster. pr. cap. 14. anno 3 Edw. 1. This ancient Law touching
the Conviction and Purgation of Clerks, is altered by an. 23 Eliz. cap. 2. as
you may further read in Clergy.

Attainder (Attinctus) though it be most used in matters of Felony or Treason:
yet it is likewise applied to inferior transgressions, as to Disseisin, Westminster.
1. cap. 36. an. 3 Ed. 1. and Britton cap. 26. See Attaint, and Attainted.

Attendant (attendens) comes of the French ( attendere, i. demorari, operiri,
expectare, praestolari) it signifies in our Common law, one that owes a Duty
or Service to another, or after a sort depends of another. For example, there
is a Lord, Mesn, and Tenent: the Tenent holds of the Mesn by a penny; the
Mesn holds over by two pence. The mean releaseth to the Tenent all the right
he has in the Land, and the Tenent di^^h. His wife shall be endowed of the
Land, and she shall be attendent to the Heir of the third part of the penny, and
not of the 3d. part of the two pence. For she shall be endowed of the best
possession of her husband. Another has, Kithin. f. 209. in these word: where
the wife is endowed by the guardian, she shall be attendant to the guardian and
to the heir at his full age: with whom agrees Perkins also in Dower. 424.

Attorney (atturnatus) comes of the french ( tourner, i. vertere) as ( tourner
son esprit a fair quelque chose, i. animum adrem aliquam inclinare.) Thence
comes the participle ( turn, i. versus, conversus) and the Substantive (
tour, i. vices, vicissitudo) as, chacun a sontour, i. quilibet sua vice. It
signifies in our Common law, one appointed by another man to do any thing in
his stead, as much as procurator) or (syndicus) in the Civil law, West. part
1. Symbolaogr. lib. 2. sect. 559. defines it thus: Atturneys be such persons,
as by the consent, commandment, or request to take heed, see to, and take upon
them the charge of other men's business in their absence, by whom they are
commanded or requested. And where it seems that in ancient time, those of
authority in Courts, had it in their arbitrament, whether they would suffer men
to appear, or sue by any other than themselves, as is evident by Fitzh. not.
br. fol. 25. in the writ Dedimus potestatem de atturnato faciendo, where it is
showed, that men were driven to procure the Kings writs or letters patents to
appoint Atturneys for them: it is sithence provided by Statutes, that it should
be lawful so to do without any such circuit, as by the Statute, anno 20. H. 3.
cap. 10. anno 6 Edw. 1. c. 8. anno 27 ejusdem. stat. 2. anno 12 Edw. 2.1. anno
15 ejusdem, cap. unico. anno 7 Ric. 2. cap. 14. anno 7 H. 4. cap. 13. anno 3 H.
5. cap. 2. anno 15 Hen. 6. cap. 7. and anno 17 H. 7. cap. 2. is to be proved.
And you may set great diversity of writs, in the table of the Regi. origin.
wherein the King by his writ commands the Judges to admit of Atturneys.
Whereby there grew at the last so many unskilfnl Atturneys, and so many
mischiefs by them, that provision for restraining them was requisite.
Wherefore anno 4 H. cap. 18. it was ordained, that the Justrces should examine
them, and displace the unskilful. And again, anno 33 H. 6. cap. 7. that there
should be but acertain number of them in Norfolk and Suffolk. In what cases, a
man at this day may have an Attorney, and in what not, see Fitzh. ubi supra.
Attorney is either general or special; Attorney general is he, that by general
authority is appointed to all our affairs or suits: as the Attorney general of
the King, pl. cor. fol. 152. which is as much as (Procurator Caesaris) was in
the Roman Empire. Attorney general of the Duke, Cromptons jurisd. fol. 105.
Attorney special or particular is he, that is employed in one or more causes
particularly specified. Atturneys-general, be made after two sorts: either by
the Kings letters patents before him or the Lord Chancellor, or by our
appointment before Justices in Eyr in open court, Glanvile l. 11. c. pri.
Britton, c. 126. whom of this thing you may read more at large. There be also
in respect of the diverse Courts, Atturneys at large, and Atturnies special,
longing to this or that Court only. The name is borrowed of the Norman, as
appears by the Custumary, c. 65. And I find the word (Attornaty) or as some
read (Turnati) in the same signification in the title de statu regularium. ca.
unico. Sect. Porro in sexto.) where the gloss says, that Atturnati dicuntur
Procuratores apud acta eonstituti. Our old Latin word for this seems to be
(responsalis) Bract. lib. 4. cap. 31. and lib. 5. part 2. cap. 8. and so it is
in Scotland at this day, but especially for the Attorney of the Defendant, as
(prolocutor) is for the Perssewer. M. Skene de verb. significatione.
Responsalis, as Sigonius witnesses in his first book De regno It aliae, was in
an ancient time, the title of the Popes Ambassador, Page 11.

Attorney of the Court of Wards and Liveries (Atturnatus regis in curia
Wardorum and Liberatur arum) is the third office in that Court, who must be a
person learned in the laws of the Land, being named and assigned by the King.
At his admission into the office, he takes an oath before the Master of the
said Court, well and truly to serve the King, as his Attorney in all Courts,
for and concerning any matter or cause, that touches the possessions and
hereditaments limited to the Survey and government of this Court; and to
procure the Kings profit thereof: truly to counsel the King, and the Master of
the Court, in all things concerning the same, to the best of his cunning, wit,
and power: and with allspeed and diligence, from time to time at the calling of
the Master, to endeavor himself for the hearing and determination indifferently
of such matters and causes, as depend before the Master: not to take any gift
or reward in any matter or cause depending in the Court, or elsewhere, wherein
the King shall be party, whereby the King shall be hurt, hindered, or
dis-inherited: to do to his power, twit and cunning, all and every thing that
appertains to his office.

Attorney of the Court of the Duchy of Lancaster (Atturnatus curiae Ducatus
Lancastriae) is the second Officer in that Court; and seems, for his skill in
law, to be there placed as (assessor) to the Chancellor of that Court, being
for the most part, some honorable man, and chosen rather for some especial
Trust reposed in him, to deal between the King and his Tenants, than for any
great learning, as was usual with the Emperors of Rome, in the choice of their
Magistrates.

Attournment (attornamentum) comes of the French ( tourner, i. vertere) and
in our Common law, is an yielding of the Tenent to a new Lord, or
acknowledgement of him to be his Lord. For otherwise he that buyeth or
obteineth any Lands or Tenements of another, which are in the occupation of a
third, cannot get possession: yet see the Statute, anno 27 H. 8. cap. 16. The
words used in Atturnment are set down in Littleton. I agree me to the Grant
made to you, etc. But more common Atturnment is to say: Sir, I atturn to you by
force of the same Grant: or I become your Tenent, etc. or else deliver unto the
Grantee a penny, halfpenny, or farthing, by way of Attournment, Littleton lib.
3. cap. Attournment, 10. whom you may read more at large, and find that this
Definition proceeds from more Law than Logic: because he sets down diverse
other Cases in the same Chapter, whereto Attournment apperraineth as properly
as unto this. But you may perceive there, that Atttournment is the transposing
of those Duties that the Tenent ought to his former Lord, unto another, as to
his Lord: and also, that Attournment is either by word, or by act, etc. Also
attournment is voluntary, or else compulsorie, by the Writ termed Per quae
servitia, Old not. br. fol. 155. or sometime by Distress, Fitzh. not. br. fol.
147. Lastly, Attournment may be made to the Lord himself, or to his Steward in
Court, Kitchen fo. 70. And there is attournment in deed, and attournment in
Law, Coke vol. 6. fo. 113. a. Attournment in Law, is an Act, which though it be
no express Attournment, yet in intendment of Law is all one.

Atturnato faciendo vel recipiendo) is a Writ which a man owing suit to a
County, Hundred, Wapen-take, or other Court, and desiring to make an Attorney
to appear for him at the same Court: whom, he doubts whether the Shetiff or
Bailiff will admit or not for his Attorney there, purchases, to command him
to receive such a man for his Attorney, and admit his appearance by him. The
form and other circumstances whereof, see in Fitzh. not. br. fo. 156.

AU
Audiendo and terminando, is a Writ, but more properly termed a Commission,
directed to tertain persons, when as any greater Assembly, Insurrection, or
heinous Demeanor or Trespass is committed in any place; for the appeasing, and
punishment thereof, which you may read at large, in Fitzh. not. br. fol. 110.
See also Oyer and Terminer.

Audience Court (Curia audientiae Cantuariensis) is a Court belonging to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, of equal authority with the Arches Court, though
inferior both in dignity and antiquity. The original of this Court was,
because the Archbishop of Canterbury heard many Causes extrajudicially at home
in his own Palace, in which, before he would finally determine any thing, he
did usually commit them to be discussed by certain learned men in the Civil and
Canon laws, whom thereupon be termed his Auditors. And so in time it grew to
one especial man, who at this day is called (Causarum negotiorumque audientiae
Cantuariensis anditoriseu officialis.) And with this Office has heretosore
commonly been joined the Chancerie of the Archbishop, who medleth not in any
point of contentious? Jurisdiction, that is, deciding of Causes between party
and party (except such as are ventilated pro forma only, as the confirmation of
Bishops Elections, or such like) but only of Office, and especially such as are
voluntariae jurisdictionis, as the granting of the custody of the
Spiritualities, during the vacation of Bishoprics, Institutions to Benefices,
dispencing with Banes of Matrimony, and such like. But this is now
distinguished in Person from the Audience. Of this Audience Court, you may read
more in the Book, entitled De antiquitate Ecclesiae Britannicae historia.

Audita querela, is a Writ that lies against him, who having taken the Bond
called (Statute-Merchant) of another, and craving or having obtained execution
of the same at the Mayor and Bailiffs hands, before whom it was entered, at the
complaint of the party who entered the same, upon suggestion of some just cause
why execution should not begranted; as a Release, or other exception. This Writ
is granted by the Chaunceler of England, upon view of the exception suggested,
to the Justices of the Common bank, or of the Kings Bench, willing them to
grant Summons to the Sheriff of the County, where the Creditour is, for his
appearance at a certain day before them. See more in Old not. br. fo. 66. and
Fitzh. not. br. fo. 102.

Auditour (auditor) comes of the French auditeur) and in our Law, signifies
an Officer of the King, or some other great Personage, which yearlie by
examining the Accounts of all under Officers accountable, makes up a general
Book, that shows the difference between their receipts or burden, and their
allowarces, commonly called allocations) as namely, the Auditors of the
Exchequer take the accounts of those Receivors, which receive the revenues of
the Augmentation: as also of the Sheriffs, Escheatours, Collectours, and
Customers, and set them down and perfect them. Him that will read more of this,
I refer to the Statute, anno 33. H. 8. ca. 33.

Auditors of the Prests, are also officers in the Exchequer, that do take, and
make up the great accounts of Ireland, Barwick, the Mint, and of any money
imprested to any man.

Auditour of the Receipts, is an officer of the Exchequer, that fileth the
Tellers bills, and makes an entry of them, and gives to the Lord Treasurer a
certificate of the money received the week before. He makes also ( Debentures
to every Teller, before they pay any money, and takes their accounts. He
keeps the Black book of the Receipts, and the Treasurers key of the Treasury:
and sees every Tellers moneys locked up in the new Treasury.

Aventure, is a mischance, causing the death of a man, without Felony: as when
he is suddenly drowned, or burnt, by any sudden disease, falling into the water
or fire, Britton ca. 7. where you may see what it differs from Miladventure.
See Misadventure.

Average (averagium) by M. Skenes opinion (verbo arage) de verborum
significatione, comes of the word (averia) i. a beast, and so consequently
signifies service which the Tenent owes to the Lord, by horse, or carriage of
horse. I have heard others probably derive it from the French (euvrage) or (
euvre, i. opus.) It seems with us to have two diverse significations: For the
first, Rastall titulo, Exposition of words, makes mention of the Kings
averages, which I take to be the Kings cariages by horse or cart. Then anno 32.
H. 8. ca. 14. and anno 1. Jacobi, ca. 32. it is used for a certain contribution
that Merchants and others do every man proportionably make toward their
losses, who have their goods cast into the sea for the safeguard of the ship, or
of the goods and lives of them in the ship in time of a tempest. And this
contribution seems to be so called, because it is proportioned, after the
rate of every man's average or goods carried.

Averiis captis in withernam, is a writ for the taking of cattle to his use,
that has his cattle taken unlawfully by another, and driven out of the County
where they were taken, that hey cannot be replevied. Register origin. fol. 82.
a. b.

Averment (verificatto) comes of the French ( averer, i. testari) as averer
quelque meschancete, i. extrahere scelus aliquod in lucem ex occultis tenebris.
It signifies (according to the Author of the terms of Law) an offer of the
Defendant to make good, or to justify an exception pleaded in abatement or
bar of the Plaintiffs act. But me thinks it should rather signify the act,
than the offer or justifying the exception, by diverse places where I find it
used. For example, an. 34. Ed. 1. stat 2. And the demandant will offer to aver
by the assise or jury; where to offer to aver and to aver must needs differ:
and again in the same statute, and the demandant will offer to averr by the
country, etc. thirdly in the English, not. br. fo 57. These errors shall be
tried by averment etc.

Aver penny ( quasi Average penny is money contributed toward the Kings
averages. Rastal exposition of words. See Average.

Augmentation (augmentatio) was the name of a Court, erected the seven and
twentieth year of Henry the 8. as appears by the 27. chapter of that years
parliament. And the end thereof was, that the King might be justly dealt with
touching the profit of such religious houses and their lands, as were given
unto him by act of Parliament the same year not printed. For the dissolving of
which court, there was authority given to Queen Mary, by the Parliament held
the first year of her reign, ses. 2. cap. 10. which she afterward put in
execution by her letters patents. The name of the Court grew from this, that
the revenues of the Crown were augmented so much by the suppression of the said
houses, as the King reserved unto the Crown, and neither gave nor sold away to
others.

Aulne of Renesh wine. a. 1. Ed. 6. cap. 13. alias, Awme of Renish wine. 1.
Jaco. ca.p 33. is a vessel that contains forty gallons.

Aulnogeour. See Alneger.

Ave, is the name of a writ for the which see (Ayle.)

Awncell weight, as I have been informed, is a kind of weight with scoles
hanging, or hooks fastened at each end of a staff, which a man lifts up upon
his forefinger, or hand, and so discerns the equality or difference between
the weight and the thing weighed. In which, because there may, and was wont to
be great deceit, it was forbidden, anno 25 Edw. 3. stat. 5. ca. 9. and anno 34
ejusdem, cap. 5. and the even balance only commanded; yet a man of good
credit, once certified me, that it is still used in Leaden Hall at London among
Butchers, etc. In the derivation of this word I dare not be over confident. But
it may probably be thought to be called (awnsell weight, quasi hand sale
weight) because it was and is performed by the hand, as the other is by the
beam. And if I should draw i^ from the Greek, (...), i. cubitus, the part of
the arm from the elbow to the fingers ends, I might challenge a good warrant of
this from the Romans; who thence derived their (ancile) i. the luckie shield,
that was said to be sent from heaven in a tempest to Numa Pompilius, together
with a voice, that the city of Rome should be the mightiest of all others, so
long as that shield remained in it.

Ancient demeasne (antiquum dominicum) is called (more at large) ancient
demeasne of the King or of the Crown. Fitz. not. br. fol. 14. d. It comes of
two French words ( auncieu, i. veter, vetus, veteranus, antiquus, and of (
demain, alias domain, i. publicum vectigal) It signifies in our Common law, a
certain tenure whereby all the manors belonging to the Crown, in the days of
Saint Edward, the Saxon King, or of William the Conqueror did hold. The number
and names of which manors, as all other belonging to common persons, he caused
to be written into a book, after a survey made of them, now remaining in the
Exchequer, and called Domes-day book. And those, which by that book do appear,
to have belonged to the Crown at that time, and are contained under the title
(Terraregis) be called ancient demeasn. Kitchen, fol. 98. and M. Gwin, in the
Preface to his readings. Of these Tenants there were two sorts, one that held
their land frankly, by Charter, and another that held by copy of Court-roll,
or by verge, at the will of the Lord, according to the custom of the manor.
Fitz. not. br. fol. 14. d. of which opinion also Britton is, ca. 66. nu. 8. The
benefit of this tenure, consists in these poines: first the Tenants of a
manor holding freely by Charter in this sort, cannot be impleaded out of the
same manor: and if they be, they may abate the writ, by pleading their tenure
before or after answer made. Secondly, they be free of toll for all things
concerning their sustenance and husbandry. Thirdly, they may not be impanelled
upon any enquest. Terms of the Law. But more at large by Fitz. not. br. f. 14.
d. whom read also fo. 128. a. etc. And as it appears by him, codem fol. 3. b,
c, these Tenants held by the service of prowing the Kings land, by plashing his
hedges, or by such like, toward the maintenance of the Kings household; in which
regard they had such Liberties given them, wherein to avoid disturbance, they
may have writs to such as take the duties of Toll in any market or fair, as
likewise for immunitie of portage, passage and such like. Fitzh. natura brev.
fol. 228. a, b, c, d. by which Author also it appears, That no lands be to
be accounted Ancient Demeasne, but such as are holden in Socage. fol. 13. d,
and 14 b, c. See Monstraverunt; and Fitzherb. fol. 14. and Dessendo quietum de
telonio, fol. 226. Fleta makes three tenures holding of the Crown, Ancient
demeasne, by Echeate, and by Purchase, lib. 1. cap. 2. See Demaine.

Ancient Demesne arere (antiquum dominicum a retro) is that ancient demeasn
which the King grants over to hold of a manor, Kitch. fol. 67, b.

Avowe (Advocatus) see Advowe, Britton says, that Avowe is he to whom the
right of Advowzen of any Church appertains, so that he may present thereunto
in his own name, and is called Avowe, for a difference from those that sometime
present in another man's name, as a Guardian that presents in the name of his
Ward: and for a difference also from them which have the lands whereunto an
advowzen appertains, but only for term of their lives, or of years, or by
intrusion or Disseisin, cap. 29.

Avowrie, see advowry.

Avoir du pois, is in true French, ( avoir du poix, i. habere pondus, aut justi
esse ponderis.) It signifies in our Common law two things, first a kind of
weight diverte from that which is called Troy weight, containing but twelve
ounces to the pound, whereas this contains sixteen. And in this respect it
may be probably conjectured, that it is so called, because it is of more weight
than the other. Then also it signifies such merchandise as are weighed by this
weight, and not by Troy weight, as in the statute of York, anno 9 Edw. 3. in
proaem. anno 27 Edw. 3. statut. 2. cap. 10. and anno 2 Rich. 2. cap. 1. See
Weights.

Auxilium ad silium militem faciendum, and filiam maritandam, is a Writ
directed to the Sheriff of every County, where the King or other Lord has any
Tenants, to levy of them reasonable aid toward the knighting of his son, and
the marriage of his daughter. See Aid, and Fitzh. Not. Brev. fol. 82.

B.
BA
BAcheler (bachalaureus) comes of the French bachalier, i. tyro: and thereupon
I think, those that be called Bachelors of the companies in London, be such of
eath company as be springing toward the estate of those that be employed in
council, but as yet are inferiors. For every company of the twelve consists
of a Master, two Wardens, the Livery, which are assistants in matters of
counsel, or at the least such as the assistants be chosen out of, and the
Bachelors, which are yet but in expectance of dignity among them, and have
their function only in attendance upon the Master and Wardens. I have read in
an old monument, this word Bacheler attributed to the Lord Admiral of England,
if he be under a Baron, in French words to this effect: And it is to weet, that
when the Admiral rides to assemble a ship of war or other, for the business
and affairs of the realm, if he be a Bacheler, he shall take for his days
wages 4 s. sterling: if he bean Earl or Baron, he shall take wages after the
rate of his estate and degree. This word is used, an. 13 R. 2. stat. 2. cap. 1,
and signifies as much as Bacheler knight does, anno 3 Ed. 4. cap. 5. that is,
a simple knight, not a knight baneret. See Baneret. Touching the farther
etymology of this word, Bachalarii test Renano, a Bacillo nominati sunt, quia
primi studii authoritatem, quae per exhibitionem baculi concedebatur, jam
consecuti fuissent. Ut fuerit velut quoddam mancipationis signum in hujusmodi
aliquod studium baculi traditto. Alciat writes the word, baccalaurei, eosque
dicit visos a bacca laurea nomen sumpsisse in l. cui praecipua 57 p. de verbo
signif.

Backberond, is a Saxon word, and almost English at this day, signifying as
much as bearing upon the back, or about a man. Bracton uses it for a sign or
circumstance of manifest theft, which the Civilians call Furtum manifestum. For
dividing Furtum, in manifestum and non manifestum, he defines furtum
manifestum in this sort: Furtum vero manifestu^ est, ubi latro deprehensus est
seisitus de aliquo latrocinio: sc. haud. habend. and backberend, and insecutus
fuerit per aliquem cujus res illa fuerit. lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 32. Master
Manwood in the second part of his Forest laws, notes it for one of the four
circumstances, or cases, wherein a Forester may arrest the body of an offender
against vert or venison in the Forest. For by the assise of the Forest of
Lancaster (says he) taken with the manner is, when one is found in the kings
forest, in any of these four degrees, sc. Stable stand, Dog draw, Back bear,
and Bloody hand. In which place you may find all these interpreted

Badger, comes of the French ( bagage, i. sarcina, impedimentum) It signifies
with us, one that buyeth corn or victuals in one place, and carries it into
another. See Cromptons Justice of Peace. f. 69 and 70.

Baye, or Pen, is a Pond head made up of a great height, to keep in a great
quantity or store of water, so that the wheels of the furnace or hammer
belonging to an iron mill, may stand under them, and be driven by the water
coming out of them, by a passage or floud-gate (called the Penstock) and
falling upon the said wheels. This word is mentioned in the statute, an. 27
Elizab. cap. 19.

Bayl (ballium, plevina manucaptio) comes of the French ( bailler, i.
attribuere, tradere, tribuere.) It is used in our Common law properly for the
freeing or setting at liberty of one arrested or imprisoned upon action either
civil or criminal, under surety taken for his appearance at a day and place
certainly assigned, Bracton lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 8. number. 8, and 9. The
reason why it is called Bayl, is because by this means the party restrained is
delivred into the hands of those that bind themselves for his forthcoming.
There is both common and special bayl. Common bayl is in actions of small pre
judice, or slight proof, being called common, because any Sureties in that case
are taken: whereas upon causes of greater weight, or apparent specialty, special
bayl or surety must be taken: as Subsidy-men at the least, and they according
to the value. Master Manwood in his first part of Forest laws, page 167.
makes a great difference between Bayland Mainprise, in these words: and note,
that there is a great diversity between bail and mainprise. For he that is
mainprised, is always said to be at large and to go at his own liberty out of
ward, after that he is let to mainprise, until the day of his appearance, by
reason of the said common summons, or otherwise. But otherwise it is, where a
man is let to bail, by four or two men, by the Lord chief Justice in the Air
of the forest, until a certain day. For there he is always accounted by the
Law, to be in their ward and custody for the time. And they may if they will,
keep him in ward or in Prison at that time, or otherwise at their will. So that
he which is so bayled, shall not be said, by the Law to be at large, or at his
own liberty: see Lamberts Eirenal. l. 3. cap. 2. page 330. Bayl is also a
certain limit within the Forest, accordingly as the forest is divided into the
charges of several foresters. Crompton in the Oath of the Bow-bearer, fol. 201.
See Maynprise.

Bailiff (ballivus) comes of the French ( bailif, i. diacetes, nomarcha,
praefectus provinciae) and as the name, so the office it self, in ancient time
was very answerable to that of France and Normandy: for as in France there be
sixteen Parliaments, ( Lupanus de magistratibus Francorum, lib. 2. cap.
Parlamentum) which be high Courts, whence lies no appeal; and within the
precincts of those several parts of that kingdom, that belong to each Parliament
there be several provinces, unto which, within themselves, Justice is
ministered by certain officers called Bailiffs: So in England we see many
several Counties or Shires, within the which Justice has been ministered to
the inhabitants of each County, by the officer whom we now call Sheriff or
Vicount (one name descending from the Saxons, the other from the Normans.) And
though I cannot expressly prove, that this Sheriff was ever called a Bailiff:
yet it is probable that that was one of his names likewise, because the County
is called many times (Balliva) that is a Bavliwick: as namely in the return of
a writ with (Non est inventus) he writes thus: (A. S. infra scriptus, non est
inventus in Balliva mea, post receptionem hujus brevis) Kitchen, returna
brevium, fo. 285. And again in Bracton, lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 33. number. 3. And
anno 5 Eliz. cap. 23. and anno 14 Edw. 3. stat. 1. cap 6. And I think the word
Bailiff) used ca. 28 of Magna charta, compriseth as well Sheriffs, as Bailiffs
of Hundreds: as also anno 14 Edw. 3. stat. 1. ca. 9. But as the Realm is
divided into Counties, so every County is again divided into hundreds: within
the which it is manifest, that in ancient time the Kings subjects had justice
ministered unto them by the several Officers of every Hundred, which were
called Bailiffs, as those officets were and are in France and Normandy, being
chief officers of justice within every Province. Lupanus de Magistratibus
Francorum, lib. 2. cap. Baltvi. and the Grand Custumary of Normandy, cap. 1.
And that this is true among many others I bring Bracton for my witness, lib. 3.
tract. 2. cap. 34. un. 5. where it appears, that Bailiffs of Hundreds might
hold plee of Appeal and Approvers. But sithence that time, these Hundred Courts
(certain Franchises excepted) are by the Statute anno 14 Ed. 3. stat. 1. cap.
9. swallowed into the County Courts, as you may read in County and Hundred. And
the Bailiffs name and Office is grown into such contempt, at the least, these
Bailiffs of Hundreds, that they are now but bare Messengers and Mandataries,
within their liberties, to serve Writs, and such base offices: their office
consisting in three points only, which see in Cromptons Justice of Peace, fol.
49. a. Yet is the name still in good esteem some other way. For the chief
Magistrates in diverse Towns Corporate be called Bailiffs: as in Ipswich,
Yarmouth, Colchester, and such like. And again, there be certain, to whom the
Kings Castles be Committed which called are Bailiffs, as the Bailiff of Dover
Castle.

These ordinary Bailiffs are of two sorts: Bailiffs Errant, and Bailiffs of
Franchises. Bailiffs Errant (Ballivi itinerantes) be those, which the Sheriff
makes, and appoints to go hither and thither in the County to serve writs,
to summon the County, Sessions, Assizes and such like. Bailiffs of Franchises
(Ballivi Franchesiaru^ aut libertatu^) be those that are appointed by every
Lord within his liberty, to do such offices within his Precincts, as the
Bailiff Errant does at large in the County. Of these read S. Thomas Smith de
re. Anglo. lib. 2. c. 16. There be also Bailiffs of the Forest, Manwood par. 1.
pa. 113. There be likewise Bailiffs of Husbandry, belonging to private men of
great Substance, who seem to be so called, because they dispose of the under
Servants, every man to his labor and task, check them for misdoing their
business, gather the profits to their Lord and Master, and deliver an account
for the same at the years end, or otherwise, as it shall be called for. The
word Bailiff, or Ballivus, is by Rebuffus derived from ( Baal, i. dominus, quia
Ballivi dominantur suis subditis, quasi eorum magistri and domini. Rebuf. in
constit. regias, de senten. excutionis, art. 7. glos. 1.) The office or duty of
a Bailiff of a manor or Household (which in ancient time seems to have been
all one) Fleta well describes li. 2. ca. 72. and 73. This word is also used in
the Canon Law, ca. dilecto de sentent. excom. in sexto, etc. 1. de paenis in
Clement. where the Glossographer says it is a French word, signifying as much
as praepositus; and Balia or Bativatus) is used among our later interpreters of
the Civil and Canon law, for Provincia, as Balliva here in England, is used for
a County or Shire.

Balkers, See Conders.

Ballivo amovendo, is a writ to remove a Bailiff out of his office for want of
sufficient living within his Bayliwick. Reg. or. fo. 78.

Bane seems to signify the destruction or overthrow of any thing. Bract. l.
2. tract. 8. ca. 1. nu. 1. as he which is the cause of another man's drowning,
is said there to be Labane, i. Malefactor. In that Bracton in the place
aforesaid prefixeth a French article to this word, it should seem by his
opinion that the word is French; but I find it not in any French writer that
ever I read.

Baneret (banerettus) in M. Skenes opinion, seems to be compounded of baner
and rent: whom read more at large of this, verbo Baneret, de verbo sign. But
our M. Camden rather draws the word from the German Bannerheires, Britan.
page 109. in meo libro. S. Thomas Smith de republ. Angl. li. c. 18. says, That
Baneret is a Knight made in the field, with the ceremony of cutting off the
point of his Standard, and making it as it were a Banner: and they being being
Ba chelors, are now of greater degree, allowed to display their arms in a
banner in the Kings army, as Barons do. M. Camden ubi supra has these words
of this matter: Baneretti cum vasullorum nomen jam desierat, a baronibus,
secundi erant: quibus inditum nomen a vexillo. Concessum illis erat miliaris
virtutis ergo, quadrato vexillo (perinde ac barons) uti, unde and equites
vexillarii a nonulllis vocantur, etc. Of creating a Knight baneret you may read
farther in M. Segar, Norrey, his book, lib. 2. c. 10. That they be next to
Barons in dignity, it appears by the Statute anno 14 R. 2. ca. 11. and by
anno 5 R. 2. statut. 2. ca. 4. it may be probably conjectured, that they were
anciently called by summons to the court of Parliament. And anno 13 R. 2. stat.
2. ca. 1. we find, That a Baneret for praying a pardon for a murderer,
contrary to that statute, is subject to all one punishment with a Baron. Johan.
Gregorius Tholosanus li. 6. ca. 10. sui syntagmatis, number. 9. has these words,
In Gallia sunt duae species affines nobilium and feudorum, quas dicunt de
Benneretz and Barons: bennerettus jure suae dignitatis, antequam talis dici
mereatur, nobilis esse debet genere, in quarto gradu, possidens in ditione
december scutarios bachalarios armorum, id est, december vasallos, habens sufficiens
patrimonium quo possit secum ducere quatuor aut quinque nobiles comites
continuos, cum equitibus duodecim aut sexdecim. Fit autem Benneretus, cum
princepts jusmodi personae concedit vexilli jus, and ex vexillo peditum in
acie, vel extra, die solenni, sacris peractis, adimit acumina. Vocant la queve
de pennon, fitque labarum, i. equitum vexillum, vocant cornette, eumque equitem
facit. si jam non est. Quod si ditior his fiat benneretus, et habet unam be
neretam, aut sex equites bachalarios, qui possideant singuli in censum sexcent
as libras ex ejus ditione seu feudo, tunc possunt ex licentia principis,
baronis nomen sibi adsciscere.

Bans (bannus vel bannum) signifies a public notice given of any thing. The
word is ordinary among the Feudists, and grown from them to other uses: as to
that which we here in England call a proclamation, whereby any thing is
publicly commanded or forbidden. Vincentius de Franchis. descis. 521. and 360.
Hottoman verbo bannus, in verbis feudalibus, says that there is both bannus
and bannum; and that they signify two diverse things. His words are these:
Bannus sive bannu^ duo fignificat: Edictu^, qua die vasalli equis armisque
instructi, ad commitatum adesse debent: et sanctionem, hoc est, mulctam edicto
non parentis; which he confirms by diverse authorities. This word bans we use
here in England, especially in the publishing of matrimonial contracts in the
Church, before marriage, to the end that if any man can say against the
intention of the parties, either in respect of kindred or otherwise, they may
take their exception in time. And in the Canon law, Banna sunt proclamationes
sponsi et sponsae in ecclesiis fieri solitae, ca. 27. extra. de sponsal. et ca.
ult. qui matrimonium accus. pos. and ca. ult de clan. despons. Yet our word
(Banuing) seems to come thence, being nothing but an exclamation of another.
Only Bracton once makes mention of Banuus Regis, for a proclamation, or
silence made by the Crier, before the congresse of the Champions in a Combat,
Lib. 3. tract. 2 cap 21:

Bank (bancus) comes of the French Banque, i. mensa. In our Common Law it is
most usually taken for a seat or bench of judgment: as bank le Roy, the Kings
bench, bank de Common plees, the Bench of Como^nplees, or the Common Bench,
Kitchen f. 102. called also in Latin, bancus regius and bancus communium
placit. Crompt. juris. fo. 67 and 91. Camden in his Britannia, page 112. and
113, in meo, calls them also, Bancum regium, et Bancum communem. See Frank
bank.

Bankrupt (alias brankrout) comes of the French (banque route) and (fair
banqueroute) with the French is as much as (foro cedere, solum vetere) with the
Romans: The composition of the French word I take to be this, ( banque, i.
mensa) et ( route, i. vestigium) metaphorically taken from the sign left in the
earth, of a table once fastened unto it, and now taken away. So that the
original seems to have sprung from those Roman (mensarii) which as appears
by many writers, had their (tabernas et mensas) in certain public places,
whereof when they were disposed to fly, an deceive men that had put them in
trust with their moneys, they left but the signs or carcasses behind them. I
know that others of good learning, and M. Skene for one, bring this (a banco
rupto) but the French word works in me this other opinion, for after their
sense, the French should rather be banque rompu. Bankerupt with us signifies
him or his act, that having gotten other men's goods into his hands hides
himself in places unknown, or in his own private house, not minding to pay or
restore to his creditours their duties. anno 34 Hen. 8. cap. 4. where the
French phrase (Fair banque route) is translated to the word, to make Bankrupt.
A Bankrupt, anno 1 Jacobi, ca. 15. is thus described: All and every such person
and persons, using, or that shall use the trade of merchandise, by way of
bargaining, exchange, bartery, chevisance, or otherwise in gross, or by
seeking his, her, or their trade of living, by buying and selling, and being a
subject(...) born of this realm, or any the kings dominions, or Denizen, who at
any time since the first day of this present Parliament, or at any time
hereafter shall depart the realm, or begin to keep his other house or houses,
or otherwise to absent him or her self, or take Sanctuary, or suffer him or
her self willingly to be arrested for any debt, or other thing not grown or
due, for money delivered, wares fould, or any other just or lawful canse, or
good consideration, or purposes, or has or will suffer him or her self to be
outlawed, or yield him or herself to prison, or willingly or fraudulently has
or shall procure him or her self to be arested, or his or her goods, money, or
chattels to be attached or sequestered, or depart from his or her
dwelling house, or make or cause to be made any fraudulent grant or conveiance
of his, her, or their lands, tenements, goods, or chattels, to the intent, or
whereby his, her, or their creditours, being subjects born, as aforesaid, shall
or may be defeated or delayed for the recovery of their just and true debt: or
being arrested for debt, shall after his or her arrest, lie in prison six
months or more, upon that arrest, or any other arrest or detention in prison
for debt, and lie in prison six months upon such arrest or detention, shall be
accounted and adjudged a Bankrupt to all intents and purposes.

Banishment (ex lium, abjuxatio) comes of the French bannissement) and has a
signification known to every man. But there be two kinds of Banishment in
England: one voluntary and upon oath, whereof you may read (Abjuration:) the
other upon compulsion for some offense or crime: as if a layman succor him
that having taken Sanctuary for an offense, obstinately refuses to abjure the
Realm, he shall lose his life and member: if a Clerk do so, he sholl be
banished. Stawnf. pl. cor. fol. 117. This punishment is also of our modern
Civilians called (bannimertum) which was aunelently termed depertatlo if it
were perpetual, or (religatio in insulam,) if for a time. Vincentius de
Franchis. Petrus de Bellug a in suo speculo, fol. 125. number. 4.

Barbaries (Oxycantha) is a thornie shrub known to most men to bear a berry or
fr^^t of a sharp taste. These berries (as also the leaves of the said tree) be
medicinable, as Goard in his Herbal shows, lib. 3. cap. 21. You find them
mentioned among Drugges to be garbled, Anno 1 Jacob. cap. 9.

Bargain and sale, as it seems by Westpart. 1. symb. lib. 2. sect. 436, is
properly acontract made of manors, lands, renements, hereditaments, and other
things, transferring the property thereof from the bargainer to the bargainee.
But the Author of the new terms of Law, adds, that it ought to be for money,
saying farther, that this is a good contract, for Land, etc. and that
Fee-simple passes thereby; though it be not said in the deed. (To have and to
hold the land to him and to his heir,) and though there be no liverie and
selfin made by the seller, so it be by deed intended, sealed and enrolled,
either in the County where the land lies, or within one of the Kings. Courts
of Records at Westminster, within six months after the date of the Deed
intended, an. 27 H. 8. cap. 16.

Barkarie (Barkaria) is a heath house. New book of Entries, titulo Assise corp.
poli^. 2. Some call it a Tan-house.

Baron (Barao) is a French word, and has diverse fignifications here in
England. First, it is taken for a degree of Nobility next unto a Vicount,
Bracton lib. 1. cap. 8. number. 4. where he says, they be called Barons, quasi
robur belli. And in this fignification it is borrowed from other Nations, with
whom Baroniae be as much as Provinciae, Petrus Belluga in speculo princip. fol.
119. So Barons be such as have the government of Provinces, as their Fee
holden of the King: foam having greater, some lesser authority within their
territories, as appears by Vincentius de Franobis in diverse of his
disceisions, and others. Yet it may probably be thought, that of old times here
in England all they were called Barons that had such Seigniories, as we now
call Court-barons, as they be at this day called Seigneurs in France, that have
any such Manor or Lordship. Yea, I have heard by men very learned in our
Antiquities, that near after the Conquest, all such came to the Parliament, and
sat as Nobles in the upper-house. But when by experience it appeared, that the
Parliament was too much pestered with such multitudes, it grew to a custom,
that none should come but such, as the King, for their extraordinary wisdom
or quality, thought good to call by Writ, which Writ ran (hac vice tantum.)
After that again men feeing this estate of Nobility to be but casual, and to
depend merely upon the Prine^s pleasure, they sought a more certain hold, and
obtained of the King, letters patents of this dignity to them and their heirs
male. And these were called Barons by letters patents or by creation: whose
postority, be now by inhefitance and true delcent of Nobility, those Barons
that be called Lords of the Barliament: of which kind the King may create more
at his pleasure. It is thought nevertheless, that there are yet Barons by
writ, as well as Barons by letters patents, and that they may be discerned by
their titles: because the Barons by writare those, that to the title of Lord
have their own surnames annexed, as Crompton, North, Norice, etc. whereas the
Barons by letters patents, are named by their Barronies. These Barons which
were first by writ; may now justly also be called Barons by prescription, for
that they have continued Barons in themselves and their ancestors came, beyond
the memory of man. The original of Barons by writ Master Camden in his
Britaunia, Page 109. in meo, refers to Henry the third: Barons by letters
patents or creation (as I have heard among our Antiquaries) were first created
about the days of Henry the sixth: the manner of whose creation read in Master
Stows Annals, page 1121. Of all these you may also read Mast. Ferns glory of
Generofity pa. 125. and 126. And see M. Skene de ver. signif. verb. Baro. with
Sir Thomas Smith, lib. 1. d^^^pub. Anglor. cap. 17. who says, that none in
England is created Baron, except he can dispend a thousand pound by year, or a
thousand marks at the least. To these former Master Seager (by office) Norrey,
lib. 4. cap. 13. of Honor civil and militariy, adds a ^ird kind of baron,
calling them Barons by conure, and those be the Bishops of the land: all which,
by virtue of Baronies annexed to their Bishoprics, have always had place in
the upper house of Parliament; and are termed by the name of Lords Spiritual.

Baron in the next signification is an Officer: as Barons of the Exchequer be
to the King: of which the principal is called Lord chief Baron (capitalis Baro)
and the three other (for so many there be) are his Assistants in causes of
Justice, between the King and his subjects, touching causes appertaining to the
Exchequer.

The Lord chief Baron at this day, is the chief Judge of the Court, and in
matter of Law, Information, and Plea, answers the Bar, and gives order for
judgment thereupon. He alone in the Term time does sit upon Nist prius, that
come out of the Kings Remembrancers office, or out of the office of the Clerk
of the Pleas, which cannot be dispatched in the mornings for want of time. He
takes recognisancea for the Kings debts, for appearances, and observing of
orders. He takes the presentation of all the officers in Court under himself,
and of the Mayor of London, and sees the Kings Remembrancer to give them their
oaths. He takes the declaration of certain receivers accounts of the lands of
the late augmentation made before him by the Anditors of the Shires. He gives
the two parcel makers places by virtue of his office.

The second Baron in the absence of the Lord chief Baron, answers the Bar in
matters aforesaid: he also takes recognisances for the Kings debts,
apparences, and observing of orders. He gives yearly the oath to the late
Mayor and Escheatour of London for the true account of the profits of his
office. He takes a declaration of certain receivers accounts. He also
examineth the letters and sums of such Sheriffs foreign accounts, as also the
accounts of Escheatours and Collectours of subsidies and Fifteens, as are
brought unto him by the Auditors of the Court.

The third Baron in the absence of the other two, answers the bar in matters
aforesaid, he also takes recognisances, as aforesaid. He gives yearly the
oath of the late Major and Gawger of London for his true accounting. He also
takes a declaration of certain receivers accounts: and examineth the letters,
and sums of such of the former accountants, as are brought unto him.

The fourth Baron, is always a Coursetour of the court, and has been chosen
of some one of he clerks in the remembrancers offices, or of the clerk of the
Pipes office. He at the days of prefixion, takes oath of all high Sheriffs,
and their under Sheriffs, and of all Escheatours, Bailiffs, and other
accountants, for their true accounting. He takes the oath of all Collectours,
Controllers, Surveyours and searchers of the Custom houses, that they have made
true entrances in their books. He apposeth all Sheriffs upon their Summons of
the Pipe in open Court. He informs the rest of the Barons, of the course of
the Court in any matter that concerns the Kings Prerogrative. He likewise as
the other Barons, takes the declaration of certain receivers accounts: and
examineth the letters and sums of such of the former accountants, as are
brought unto him.

These Barons of the exchequer, are ancient officers: for I find them named,
West. 2. c. 11. an. 13 Ed. 1. and they be called Barons, because Barons of the
realm were wont to be employed in that office, Fleta, li. 2. c. 24. S. Tho.
Smith says of them, that their office is to look to the accounts of the
Prince: and to that end they have Auditors under them: as also to decide all
causes, appertaning to the Kings profits coming into the Exchequer by any
means. This is in part also proved by the Stat. an. 20. Ed. 3. ca. 2. and anno
27 ejusd. stat. 2. ca. 18. and anno 5. R. 2. stat. 1. ca. 9. and 12. et anno
14. ejusd. ca. 11. And hereupon they be of late, men learned in the Common Law
of the Realm: whereas in autient times they were others: viz. majores et
discretiores in regno, sive de clero essent, sive de curia. Ockam in his
lucubrations de fisci regii ratione. Horn. in his mirror of Justices says,
that Barons were wont to be two, and they Knights, cap. De la place del
Eschequer.

Then be there in this signification, Barons of the Cinque Ports, anno 31 Ed.
3. stat. 2. cap. 2. and an. 33 H. 8. cap. 10. which are two of every of the
seven towns, Hastings, Winchelsey, Rye, Rumney, Hithe, Dover, and Sandwich,
that have places in the lower house of Parliament, Cromptons jurisd. fol. 28.
Baron in the third signification, is used for the husband in relation to his
wife: which is so ordinary in all our law-writers, that write in French, as it
were superfluous to confirm it by any one.

Baronet. I read this word, anno 13 R. 2. stat. 2. cap. 1. But I hold it falsely
printed for Baneret, or else to signify all one with it.

Baronye (baronia, baronagium) is the fee of a Baron. In which account are not
only the fees of Temporal Barons, but of Bishops also: who have two respects:
One, ^s they are Spiritual men, without possessions, as was the Tribe of Levy
among the Israelites, being sustained by the only First fruits, and Tenths of
the other Tribes, Josh. cap. 13. verse. 14. The other respect they have, grows
from the bounty of our English Kings, whereby they have Baronies at the least,
and are thereby Barons or Lords of the Par^iament. This Baronie (as Bracton
says, lib. 2. cap. 34.) is a right indivisible: and therefore if, an
inheritance be to be divided among Co-parteners; Though some capital messuages
may be divided, yet, si capitale messuagium sit caput Comitatus, vel caput
Baroniae, he faith they may not be parcelled: The reason is, ne sic caput per
plu^es particulas dividatur, and plura jura comitatuum and baroniarium
deveniant ad nihilum: per quod deficiat Regnum, quod ex Comitatibus and
Baroniis dicitur esse constitutu^.

Bar (Barra) comes of the French (bar) or barriere (i. repagulum, obex,
vectis.) It is used in our Common law, for a peremptory exception against a
Demand or plaint: and is by the Author of the terms of Law, defined to be a
Plee brought by the Defendant in an Action, that destroys the Action of the
Plaintiff for ever. It is divided into a Bar to common intent, and a Bar
scecial. A Bar to a common intendment, is an ordinary or general Bar, that
ordinarily disableth the Declaration or Plee of the Plaintiff. A Bar special,
is that which is more than ordinary, and falls out in the case in hand, or
question, upon some special circumstance of the fact, Plowden casu Colthirst.
fol. 26. a.b. For example, an Executor being sued for his Testators debt,
pleads, that he had no goods left in his hands at the day when the Writ was
purchased or taken out against him. This is a good bar to common intendment;
or (prima facie.) But yet the case may so fall out, that more goods might come
to his hands, sithence that time: which if the Plaintiff can show by way of
replication, then except he have a more especial plee or bar to allege he is
to be condemned in the action. See also Plowden in the case aforenamed, fol.
28. a. b. and Broke, t^^ul^ Bar, number. 101. and Kitchen, fol. 215. Bar also
in the same signification, is divided into bar material, and bar at large,
Kitchen, fol. 68. A bar material (as it seems) may otherwise be called a
bar special: as when one in the stop of the Plaintiffes Action, pleads some
particular matter, as a descent from him that was the undoubted owner, a
Feoffment made by the Ancester of the Plaintiff, or such like. A bar at large
is, when the Tenent or Defendant by way of exception, does not traverse the
Plaintiffs title by pleading not guilty, nor confe ie and avoid it, but only
makes to himself a title in his bar. As if in an Assise of novel disseisin,
the Tenent plead a Feoffment of a stranger unto him, and gives but a color
only to the Plaintiff. Of this there is an apt example to be found, 5 H. 7.
fol. 29.

Bar, is also in regard of the effect, divided into bar perpetual, and
bar pro tempore. Perpetual is that, which overthrows the action for ever.
Bar pro tempore is that, which is good for the present, and may fail
hereafter: look an example or two in Broke titu. Bar, nu. 23. where he says,
that to plead (plene administravit) is good, until it may appear, that more
goods come to the Executors hands afterward, which also holds for an heir,
that in an action of his Ancesters debt pleads (rien per descent.) This word
is also used for a material bar: as the place where Sergeants or Councellers
stand to plead causes in Court, or Prisoners to answer to their Indictment. Of
which our Common lawyers, that be licensed to plead, in other Countries called
(licentiati) are termed Baristers, anno 24 H. 8. cap. 24.

Barrator (barectator) comes from the French ( Barat, i. astutia) and is near
the French it self in signification. For (barateur) in that tongue betokens a
deceiver: and a barator in our Common law, is a common wrangler, that sets
men at ods, and is himself never quiet but at brawl with one or other. To this
effect you may read M. Lamb. Eirenarcha, pa. 342. who says likewise, that
barettor (for so he writes it) may seem to come from the Latin (baratro) or
(balatro) that is, a vile knave or unthrift, and (by a metaphor) a spot in a
Common wealth. See the statute of Champerty, anno 33 Ed. 1. stat. 2. cap.
unico, and West. 1. ca. 32. an. 3 Ed. 1. M. Skene de vere. signif. verbo,
barracrie, says that Barrators be Symonists called of the Italian word
(barrataria) signifying corruption or bribery in a Judge giving a false
sentence for money: whom you may read more at large, as also Hortensius
Cavalcanus in his tractat, de brachio rigio, part 5. nu. 66. whose words are:
Barataria vero dicitur, quando Judex aliquid petit indebitum, ut justituam
faciat. Who also, nu. 195. part. 5. says thus: barraterii appellantur, qui
praetorium nimis frequentant. And in another place of the same work; Barratria
dicitur, quia fit quoddam barratrum, i. commutatio pecuniae cum justitia, etc.
See also Aegidius Bossius in practica criminali, titulo de officialibus
corrupt. etc. nu. 2. and 6. Baratariam committunt, Judices, qui justitiam auro
vendunt. Paris Pateola. de syndicatu, verbo Barataria. pa. 217.

Bar fee, is a fee of twenty pence, that every prisoner acquitted of felony
paieth to the Jailer. Crompt. Justece of peace, fo. 158. b.

Barrel, is a measure of wine, oil, etc. containing the eighth part of a tun,
the fourth of a Pipe, and the second of a hogshead, that is, 31. gallons and a
half, anno 1 R. 3. cap. 13. But this vessel seems not to contain any certain
quantity, but differs according to the liquor: for a barrel of beer
contains 36. gallons, the Kilderkin 18. and the Firkin 9. a barrel of ale 32.
gallons, the Kilderkin 16. and the firkin, 8. gallons, an. 23 H. 8. c. 4.

Barriers, comes of the French (bars) and signifies with us that which the
Frenchmen call ( jeu de bars, i. palaestra^^) a martial sport or exercise of
men armed and fighting together with short swords, within certain limits or
lists, whereby they are severed from the beholders.

Barter may seem to come of the French ( barater, i. circumvenire) It
signifies in our Statutes, exchange of wares with wares, anno 1 R. 3. ca. 9.
and so bartry the substantive, anno 13 Eliz. cap. 7. The reason may be, because
they that chop and change in this manner, do what they can for the most part,
one to overreach the other. See barratour.

Base estate, is in true French (bas estat.) It signifies in our Common law,
that estate which base Tenants have in their lands. Base Tenants be they (as M.
Lamberd says in his explica. of Saxon words, verb. Paganus) which do to their
Lords villainous service. The Author of the Terms of law in his Tractat of old
Terms, says, that to hold in fee base, is to hold at the will of the Lord.
Kitchen, fol. 41. seems to make base tenure and franck to be contraries:
where it appears, that he puts Copyholders in the number of base Tenants.
And out of these, I think, that it may be probably conjectured, that every base
Tenent holds at the will of the Lord, but yet, that there is a difference
between a base estate and villenage; which Fitzh. in his not. br. f. 12. B. C.
seems co confound. For the abovenamed Author of the Terms of law says in
the place before ciced, that to hold in pure villenage, is to do all that the
Lord will command him. So that if a Copyholder have but base estate, he not
holding by the performance of every commandment of his Lord, cannot be said to
hold in villenage. Whether it may be said, that Copyholders be by custom and
continuance of time, grown out of that extreme servitude, wherein they were
first created, I leave to others of better judgment: but Fitz. loco citato
says, tenure by Copy is a Term but lately invented.

Base Court, is any Court that is not of record, as the Court Baron. Of this
read Kitchen, f. 95, 96, etc.

Base fee, See Base estate.

Baselard (baslardus) in the Statute, an. 12 R. 2. ca. 6. signifies a weapon,
which M. Speight in his exposition upon Chawcer, calls pugionem vel sicam.

Bastard (bastardus.) See Bastardy. And See Skene de verbo. signif. verbo
Bastardus.

Bastardy (bastardia) commech of the French ( bastard, i. nothus) Cassanaeus de
consuetu. Burg. page 1116 says (bastard) and (filius naturalis) be all one.
Bastardy in our Common law, signifies a defect of birth objected to one
begotout of wedlock, Bract. l. 5. cap. 19 per totum. How bastardy is to be
proved, or to be inquired into, if it be pleaded, see Rastals book of Entries,
tit. Bastardy, 104. f. Kitchen f. 64 makes mention of Bastardy special, and
Barstardy general. The difference of which is, that Bastardy general, is a
Certificate from the Bishop of the Diocese to the Kings Justices, after just
inquity made, that the party inquired of, is a Bastard or not a Bastard, upon
some question of inheritance. Bastatdy special, is a suit commenced in the
Kings Court, against him that calls another Bastard: so termed (as it
seems) because Bastardy is the principal and especial case in trial, and no
inheritance contended for. And by this it appears, that in both these
fignifications, Bastardy is rather taken for an examination or trial, whether
a man's birth be defective or illegitimate, than for Bastardy it self. See
Broke, titulo, Bastardy. n. 29. and Doctor Ridlies book, pa. 203, 204.

Baston, is in French a staff, club, or coulstaff. It signifies in the
Statutes of our Realm, one of the Warden of the Fleet his servants; or
officers, that attends the Kings Court with a red staff, for the taking of
such to ward, as be committed by the Court. So it is used, anno 1 R. 2. cap.
12. anno 5 Eliz. cap. 23.

Batable ground, seems to be the ground in question heretofore, whether it
belonged to England or Scotland, lying between both the Kingdoms, anno 23 H.
8. cap. 16. as if we should say, debatable ground. For by that name M. Skene de
verbo. sign. verbo Plegius, calls ground that is in controversy between two.

Battle (duellum) comes of the French ( battle, i. bellum, praelium) and
signifies in our Common law, a trial by combat. The manner whereof, because it
is long, and full of ceremonies, I do for the better and more full
understanding of it, refer you to Glanvile, lib. 2. cap. 3, 4, 5. to Bracton,
lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 21. fol. 140. to Britton, cap. 22. and to S. Thomas
Smith de repub. Anglorum, lib. 2. cap. 7. and lib. 3. cap. 3. See Combat.

Battery comes of the French ( batre, i. verberare, cudere, percutere) and
signifies in our Common law, a violent striking of any man, which the
Civilians call injuriam personalem, quia personae infertur per verbera,
cruciatum, etc. Wesemb. parat. p. de injur. and fam. libel.

Baubels (baubella) is an old word, signifying Jewels. To. Hoveden part
poster. suorum. annal. fol. 449. b.

BE
Bearding, alias, Barding of wool. See Clack.

Bearers, signify all one with Maintainers, anno 20 Edvar. 3. cap. 5.

Beconage (Beconagium) signifies money paid for the maintenance of Becons.

Bewpleder (pulchre placitando) is made of 2. French words ( beau, i. decorus,
formosus, pulcher) and ( pleder, i. disputare, and causam agere.) It signifies
in our Common law, a writ upon the statute of Marlbridge, or Malborow, made the
52. year of H. 3. cap. 11. whereby it is provided, that neither in the circuit
of Justices, nor in Counties, Hundreds, or Courts-baron, any fines shall be
taken of any man for fair pleading, that is, for not pleading fairly or aptly
to the purpose. Upon which Statute, this Writ was ordained against those, that
violate the law herein. See Fitzh. not. br. fol. 270. A.B.C. whose definition
is to this effect: the Writ upon the statute of Marlebridge for not fair
pleading, lies where the Shyreeve or other Bailiff in his Court, will take
fine of the party Plaintiff or Defendant, for that he ple^deth not fairly, etc.

Bedell (Bedellus) comes of the French ( be deau, i. apparitor) and it
signifies with us, nothing else but a messenger or servitour belonging to a
Court, as a Court Baron or Leet, Kitchen, fol, 46. where you may see his oath:
or to the Court of the Forest, Manwood part pri. of his forest laws. page
221. in these words: A Bedel is an officer or servant of the Forest, that does
make all manner of garnishments of the Courts of the Forest, and also all
manner of Proclamations, as well within the Courts of the Forest as without:
and also does execute all the processes of the Forest. He is like to a Bailiff
errant of a Shyreeve in a County, etc.

Benefice (Beneficium) is generally taken for all ecclesiastical livings, be
they dignities or other, as anno 13 R. 2. stat. 2. cap. 2. where benefices are
divided into elective, and benefices of gift. So is it used in the Canon law
also. Duarenus de beneficiis, lib. 2. cap. 3.

Beneficio primo ecclesiastico habendo, is a writ directed from the King to the
Chancellor, to bestow the benefice that first shall fall in the Kings gift,
above or under such a value, upon this or that man, Regist. orig. fol. 307. b.

Benevolence (Benevolentia) is used both in the Chronicles and Statutes of this
Realm, for a voluntary gratuity given by the subjects to the King. Look Stowes
annals, page 701. That it has been something anciently accustomed, it
appears by him, and by the Statute anno 1 Rich. 3. cap. 2. where it is called
a new imposition: and in that respect reprehended by that Tyrant in his
predecessors: whether justly or not I cannot say, nor mind to dispute. But
Stow, page 791. says, that the invention grew from Edward the fourths days.
You may find it also, anno 11 H. 7. cap. 10. to have been yielded to that
worthy Prince, in regard of his great expenses in wars and otherwise. This is
also mentioned and excepted out of the pardon, anno 1 Ed. 6. cap. 15. It is in
other Nations called (subsidium charitativum) given sometime to Lords of the
Fee by their Tenants, sometime to Bishops by their Clergy. Matthaeus de
Afflictis, descis. 136. Gassan. de consuet. Burg. page 134, 136. Baldus
consitio. 120. vol. 6. page 230. Of this Maenochius makes mention, lib. 2.
cent. 2. cap. 178, and 179. showing, when it is lawful for a Prelate
charitativum subsidium a sibi subditis exigere, and quanta debeat esse ejus
summa, setting down eight just causes of this exaction.

Besaile, (proavus) is borrowed of the French ( bisayeul, i. le pere de mon
pere grand) the father of my grandfather. In the Common law it fignifieth a
Writ, that lies where the great grandfather was seized in his demesne as of
Fee, of any Lands or Tenements, in Fee-simple, the day that he dyed, and after
his death a stranger abateth, or enters the same day upon him, and keeps out
his heir, etc. The form and farther use of this Writ, read in Fitz. not. br.
fol. 221. D. E. F. etc.

Beasts of chase (Ferae campestres) be five of the Forest, chase or park: that
is, the Buck, the Do, the Fox, the Martron, and the Roe, Manwood part. prim. of
his Forest laws, page 342. and part. 2. cap. 4. number. 2.

Beasts of the Forest (ferae sylvestres) are the Heart, the Hind, the Hare, the
Boar, and the Wolf, Manwood part 2. of his Forest laws, cap. 4. number. 1.

Beasts and Fowls of Waren, are the Hare, Conie, Fesant, and the Patridge,
Manwood part 2. cap. 4. number. 3.

Besta^l, comes of the French ( bestial, i. pecus) it seems with us to
signify all kind of cattle taken for the Kings provision, anno 4 Ed. 3. cap.
3. And bestial is generally used for all kind of cattle, anno 1 Jacobi cap. 33.

BY
Bidding of the Beads, was a charge or warning that the Parish Priest gave to
his Parishioners, at certain especial times, to say so many Pater nosters, etc.
upon their beads, anno 27 H. S. cap. 26.

Bigamie (bigamia) signifies a double marriage. It is used in the Common law,
for an impediment that hinders a man to be a Clerk, by reason that he has
been twice married. For upon those words of S. Paul to Timothy the first, cap.
5. verse. 2. Oportet ergo Episcopum irreprehensibilem esse, and unius uxoris
virum: the Canonists have founded their doctrine, that he that has been twice
married, may not be a Clerk. And also him that has married a widow, they by
interpretation, take to have been twice matried. And both these they do not
only exclude from holy orders, but also deny them all privileges that belong
unto Clerks. But the author of the new terms of Law well says, that this Law
is abolished by anno 1 Ed. 6. cap. 12. And to that may be added the stature,
anno 18 Elizab. cap. 7. which allows to all men that can read as Clerks,
though not within orders, the benefit of Clergy in case of selonie not
especially excepted by some other statute.

Bilanciis deferendis, is a Writ directed to a corporation, for the carrying of
weights, to such or such a haven, there to weigh the wools that such a man is
licenced to transport, Reg. orig. fol. 270. a.

Bilawes, are orders made in Court Leets or Court Barons by common assent, for
the good of those that make them, farther than the Public law does bind. Coke
vol. 6. fol. 63. a. Kitchen fo. 45. and 79. These in Scotland are called
(burlaw) or (birlaw.) Skene de verbo. sign. verbo Burlaw: where he says thus:
Laws of burlaw, are made and determined, by consent of neighbors elected and
chosen by common consent, in the Courts called birlaw courts. In the which
cognition is taken of complaints betwixt neighbor and neighbor: which menso
chosen, are Judges and Arbitratours to the effect aforesaid, and are called
birlaw men. For (bawr) or (bawrsman) in Dutch is rusticus) and so (birlaw) or
(burlaw) leges rusticorum. Hitherto M. Skene.

Bilinguis, though it signify in the generality a double tongued man; yet in
our Common law, it is used for that Jury that passes between an English man
and an alien. Whereof part must be Englishmen, and part strangers, an. 28 Ed.
3. cap. 13.

Bille (billa) is diversely used among our Common lawyers. First, (as West says
pa. 1. symb. lib. 2. sect. 146.) it is all one with an obligation, saving that
when it is in English it is commonty called a bill, and when it is in Latin an
obligation. But I hear other good Lawyers say, that a bill, though it be
obligatory, yet is without condition or forfeiture for non payment: and that
the obligation has both. Bill secondly, is a declaration in writing, that
expresses either the grief and the wrong that the complainant has suffered,
by the party complained of, or else some fault, that the party complained of,
has committed against some law or statute of the Commonwealth. This bill is
sometime offered up to Justices errants in the general assizes: sometime, and
most of all, to the Lord Chancellor of England, especially for unconscionable
wrongs done: sometime to others having jurisdiction, accordingly as the law,
where upon they are grounded, does direct. It contains the fact complained
of, the damages thereby suffered, and petition of process against the
defendant for redress. West. part 2. Symbol. titulo supplications, sect. 52.
whom you may read at large touching this matter.

Billa vera, is (as it were) a word of art in our Common law. For the grand
enquest empaneled and sworn before the Justices in Air, etc. indorsing a bill,
whereby any crime punishable in that Court, is presented unto them, with these
two words; do signify thereby, that the present or has furnished his
presentment or denunciation with probable evidence, and worthy of farther
consideration. And thereupon, the party presented by the same bill, is said to
stand indicted of the crime, and so tied to make answer unto it, either by
confessing, or traversing the indictment. And if the crime touch the sife of
the person indicted, it is yet referred to another enquest, called the enquest
of life and death: who if they find him guilty, then he stands convicted of
the crime, and is by the Judge to be condemned to death. See Ignoramus, see
Indictment.

Billets of gold, comes of the French ( billot, i. massa auri.) anno 27 Edw.
3. stat. 2. ca. 14.

Bynny peper, anno 1 Jaco. ca. 19.

BL
Black maile, is half English, half French. For in French (maille) signifies a
small piece of money, which we call a half penny. It signifies, in the Counties
of Cumberland, Northumberland, Westmerland, and the Bishopric of Duresme, a
certain rate of money, corn, cattle, or other consideration, paid unto some
inhabiting upon or near the borders, being men of name and power, allied with
certain, known to be great robbers and spoil-takers within the said Counties,
to the end thereby to be by them fteed, protected, and kept in safety, from
the danger of such as do usually rob and steal in those parts, anno 43.
Eliz. cap. 13.

Black rod, is the huissier belonging to the order of the Garter, so called
of his black rodd that he carries in his hand. He is of the Kings chamber, and
also huissier of the parliament.

Blancks, comes of the French ( blanc, i. candidus, albus.) It signifies a
kind of coin that was coin in the parts of France by King H. the fifth, that
were subject to England: the value whereof was eight pence, Stowes annals, page
586. These were forbidden to be current within this Realm, an. 2 H. 6. cap. 9.
The reason why they were called blanks may be because at the time these were
coined in France there was also a piece of gold coined, which was called a
(Salus) of the value of twenty-two shillings, from which this silver was in
name distinguished by the color.

Bloody hand, See Backberend.

Blomary, is one of the forges belonging to an iron mill (which also seems
otherwise to be termed a Finary.) The use whereof, if you will understand, you
must know, that first there is a furnace, wherein the mine-stones are melted
and cast into a raw iron, fashioned into long wedges three square, that be
called sows. Then be there two forges like unto Smiths forges, but much bigger,
the one whereof is called the blomary, or (as it seems) the finary, into the
which being maintained with a charcole fire blown with bellows, made to go by
water, are cast the said sowes of raw iron, and melted again, and by a workman
called the finary man, are wound and wrought round, and afterward beaten by a
hammer into ^ittle wedges about a yard long, which are called bloomes. Then is
there another forge called the Hammer, into which these bloomes are cast, and
by a workman (called the Hammer man) again chafed and made soft in a charcole
fire, blown likewise with bellows caused to go by water: and after carried by
the said Hammerman, and put under the great Hammer also driven by the water.
And so the said bloomes are drawn, fashioned, and made into such barts of iron
of diverse sorts and forms, as we see commonly sold. Of this you may read in the
Statute, an. 27 Elizab. ca. 19. See Baye.

Bloudwit ( blodwita is compounded of two Saxon words ( blout i. sanguis.) and
( wit, for the which we have the word (wite) still in the West parts of
England, signifying a charging of one with a fault, or an upbraiding. And
Speight in his expositions upon Chawcer says, that (to twit) is as much as to
blame. (To twit) in some other places of this land signify has much as (to
hitt in the teeth) or to upbraid. This bloudwit is a word used in charters of
liberties anciently granted, and signifies an amercement for shedding of
blood. So that whosoever had it given him in his Charter, had the penalty due
for shedding of blood granted unto him. Rastal in his exposition of words.
Skene de verbo, signif, writes it (bludveit) and says that (veit) in English
is injuria vel misericordia: and that (bludveit) is an amercement or (unlawe)
as the Scottishmen call it, for wrong or injury, as bloodshed is. For he that
is infest with (bludveit) has free liberty to take all amercements of Courts
for effusion of blood, Fleta says, quod significat quietantiam misericordiae
pro effusione sanguinis, li. 1. ca. 47.

BO
Bockland, See Charterland, See Copie-hold and Freehold.

Bonis arrestandis, is a writ, for the which See Arrestandis bonis.

Bonis non amovendis, is a writ to the Shyreevs of London, etc. to charge them,
that one condemned by judgment in an action, and prosecuting a writ of error,
be not suffered to remove his goods, until the error be tried, Register orig.
fo. 131. b.

Borow (burgus vel burgum) may either come from the French ( burg, i. pagus) or
from the Saxon ( borhoe, i. vadium, pignus.) It signifies here in England a
corporate Town that is not a City. anno 2 Ed. 3. ca. 3. namely, all such as
send Burgesses to the Parliament: the number whereof you may see in M.
Cromptons jurisd. fo. 24. It may probably be thought, that it was anciently
taken for those companies consisting often families, which were combined to be
one another pledge or borhoe: See Bracton, li. 3. tractat. 2. a. 10. See
Headborow, and Borowhead, and M. Lamberd in the duties of Constables, page 8.
Lynwood upon the provincial (ut singula de censibus) speak to this effect:
Aliqui interpretantur burgum esse castrum, vel locum ubi sunt crebra castra,
vel dicitur burgus, ubisunt per limits habitacula plura constituta.) Butthen
setting down his own opinion, he defines it thus: Burgus dici potest villa
quaecu^que alia a civitate, in qua est universitas approba ta. And that he
provethout of the 11. book of Justinians Codex, tit. de fund. rei privatae. 65.
and l. 6. ejus tituli, where burgus is termed corpus. Some derive it from the
Greek ((...), i, turris) see M. Skene de verbo sign. verbo Borghe. The late
author M. Verstegan, in his restitution of decayed intelligences, says, that
(burg) or ( burgh whereof we say yet (Borough) (or Bourrow) metaphorically
signifies a Town, having a wall, or some kind of closure about it: also a
Castle. All places that in old time had among our ancestors the name of
Borrough, were places one way or other fenced or fortified.

Bordlands, signify the demesnes, that Lords keep in their hands, to the
maintenance of their board or table. Bract. li. 4. tractat. 3. ca. 9. nu. 5.

Borrowhead, alias Headborow, (capitalis plegius) by M. Lamberds opinion in his
treatise of Constables is made up of these two words, ( borhoe, i. pledge) and
(head) and signifies a head or chief pledge. And in explication of this, and
other Saxon words of this nature, he makes an excellent rehearsal of some
ancient customs of England, during the reign of the Saxons, which you may read.
This borowhead (in short) was the head or chief man of the Decurie or Borhoe,
that there he speaks of, chosen by the rest to speak, and to do in the name
of the rest, those things that concerned them. See Boron-holders.

Borow-holders, allas Bursholders, be quasi borhoe calders, signifying the same
officers that be called borow-heads. ( Lamb. in the duties of Caustables)
Bracton calls them (Borghio Aldere) li. 3. tractat. 2. ca. 10.

Borow english, is a customary descent of lands or tenements, whereby in all
places where this custom holds, lands and tenements descend to the youngest
son: or if the owner have no issue, to his youngest brother: as in Edmuntan.
Kitchen, fa 102. And the reason of this custom, as (Lutleton) says, is, for
that the youngest is tresumed in law, to be least able to shift for himself.

Barow goods divisable, I find these words in the Statute of Acton Burnal. anno
11 Edw. 1. statuto unico, and dare not confidently set down the true meaning of
them. But as before the Statute of 32. and 34. H. 8. no lands were divisable at
the Common law, but in ancient baronies: so perhaps, at the making of the
foresaid Statute of Acton burnel, it was doubtful, whether goods were
devisable but in ancient borrowes. For it seems by the writ de rationabili
part bonorum, that anciently the goods of a man were partible between his wife
and children.

Bote signifies compensation. Lamb. explication of Saxon words; Thence comes
(manbote alias monbote) that is compensation or amends for a man slain, which
is bound to another. For farther understanding whereof, it is to be seen in K.
Inas laws, set out by M. Lamberd, ca. 96. what rate was ordained for the
expiation of this offense: See Hedgebote, Plowbote, Howsebote, and read M.
Skene de verbo signif. verbo, Bote.

Boeiler of the King (pincerua regis) anno 43 Ed. 3. ca. 3. is an officer that
provideth the Kings wines: who (as Fleta li. 2. ca. 21. says) may by virtue of
his office out of every ship laden with sale wines, unum dolium eligere in
prora navis ad opus regis, et aliud in puppi, et pro qualibet pecia reddere
tantum 20. solid. mercatori. Si autem plura inde habere volucrit been licebie:
dum tamen precium fide dignorum judicio pro rege apponatur.

Bow-bearer, is an under-officer of the Forest (as M. Crompton in his
jurisdict. fo. 201. sets down) sworn to the true performance of his Office
in these words: I will true man be to the Master Forester of this Forest, and
to his lieutenent: and in the absence of them, I shall truly oversee, and true
inquisition make, as well of swornmen as unsworn in every bayliwick, both in
the North bayl, and South bayl of this Forest, and of all manner of trespasses
done, either to vert or venison, I shall truly endeavor my self to attach, or
cause them to be attached, in the next court Attachment, there to be presented,
without any concealment had to my knowledge: So help me God, etc.

BR
Bracton (otherwise called Henry of Bracton) was a famous Lawyer of this land,
renowned for his knowledge both in the Common and Civil laws, as appears by
his book every where extant. He lived in the days of Henry the third Stawnf.
praero. f. 5. b. and as some say, Lord chief Justice of England.

Bread of treat, and bread of coker, anno 51. H. 3. statuto 1. of bread and
ale.

Bred, signifies broad. This word Bracton uses, li. 3. wact. 2. ca. 15. nu.
7. proverbially thus: to lange and to bred: the meaning whereof you may there
find, word for word it is, as we now speak, two long and two broad: or, two in
length, or two in brea th.

Brevibus, and rotulis liberandis, is a writ or mandat to a Shyreeve to deliver
unto the new Shyreeve chosen in his room, the County with the appertinances,
together with the rols, briefs, remembrances, and all other things belonging to
that office. Register orig. fo. 295. a.

Bribours, comes of the French ( bribeur, i. mendicus.) It seems to signify
with us, one that pilfreth other men's goods, anno 28 Ed. 2. stat. 1. ca. unico.

Brief (breve) comes from the French ( bref, ou brief. i. brevis) and in our
Common law siggnifieth a writ, whereby a man is summoned to answer to any
action: or (more largely) any precept of the King in writing, issuing out of
any Court whereby he commands any thing to be done, for the furtherance of
justice or good order. The word is used in the Civil law, sometime in the
singular number, and masculin gender, as l. ult. Cod. de conveniendis fisci
debitoribus, l. 10. tit. 2. you have these words: Inter chartul as confiscati
brevis, quidam adseveratur inventus, qui nomina continebat debitorum. Where it
it is used for a short note. Again, I find a title restored by Gothofred, in
the first book of the Code, de quadrimenstruis brevibus. Quadrimenstru^ autem
breves erant, qui de singulis indictionum pensionibus, quarto quoque mense
solutis, conficiebantur. Also Lampridius in Alexandro has it singularly thus:
notarium, qui falsum causae brevem in consilio imperatorio retulisset, etc. And
in the Authenticks, Novel. 105. cap. 2. you have this word ( breviatores, i.
brevium proscriptores.) Breves autem, brevia, brevicula, sunt chartae sive
libelli breves, as Gothofred, there notes. Where he notes likewise out of
Zonacas in Carthagin: Concilio, that this is a Greek word thus: (...). See
Skene de verbo signif. verbo Breve. Of these briefs see also Bracton l. 5.
tract. 5. c. 17. number. 2. Breve quidem cum sit formatum ad similitudinem regulae
juris, quia breviter and paucis verbis intentionem proferentis exponit and
explanat, sicut regula juris rem quae est breviter enarrat. Non tamen ita breve
esse debet, quin rationem and vim intentionis contineat, etc.

Brigandine (lorica) is the French (brigandine that is a coat of mail. This is
used, anno 4. and 5. Ph. and Mar. cap. 2.

Brigbote, significat quietantiam reparationis pontium. Fleta lib. 1. cap. 47.
It is compounded of (brig) a bridge, and (bote) which is a yielding of amends,
or supplying a defect. See (Bote) and Bruck-bote.

Britton, was a famous Lawyer, that lived in the days of K. Edward the first,
at whose commandment, and by whose authority, he writ a learned book of the
law of this realm. The tenure whereof runs in the Kings name, as if it had
been penned by himself, answerably to the institutions, which Justinian
assumeth to himself, though composed by others. Stawnf. praero. f. 6. and 21.
S. Eaward Coke says, that this Britton writ his book in the fiftieth year of
the said Kings reign. lib. 4. fol. 126. a. and lib. 6. fo. 67. a. M. Guin in
the Preface to his reading, mentions, that this John Britton was Bishop of
Hereford.

Broke commonly called S. Robert Broke, was a great Lawyer and Lord chief
Justice of the Common plees in Queen Mary's time. Cromptons Justice of peace,
f. 22. b. he made an abridgment of the whole law, a book of high account.

Broker (brocarius) seems to come from the French ( broicur, i. tritor) that
is a grinder or breaker into small pieces. Because he that is of that trade, to
deal in matters of money and merchandise between English men and Strangers,
does draw the bargain to particulars, and the parties to conclusion, not
forgetting to grind out something to his own profit. These men be called
broggers, anno 10 R. 2. cap. 1. It may not improbably be said, that this word
comes from ( brocarder, i. cavallari) because these kind of men, by their
deceitful speeches, and abusing their true trade, many times inveigle others.
In Scotland they be called (broccarii) and in their own idiome, blockers or
brockers, that is, mediators or intercessors in any transaction, paction, or
contract: as in buying or selling, or in contracting marriage. Skene de de verbo
sig. verbo broccarii.

He that will know what these brokers were wont, and ought to be, let him read
the statute anno 1 Jacobi. ca. 21. These in the Civil law are called
(proxeneti) as also of some (licitatores and mediatores, tit. de proxeneticit,
in Digestis.) This kind of dealer is also of the Romans called (pararius)
Sencca l. 2. de benef. ca. 22. Caelius Rhodoginus, libro 6. c. 32. and li. 3.
cap. 15.

Broderers comes of the French (brodeur,) and that comes of ( bordure, i,
fimbria, limbus,) the edge or hemme of a garment. And that because it is
distinguished from the rest, most commonly, by some conceited or costly work;
he that works it, is called (brodeur) in French, and broderer or embroderer
with us.

Brodehalpeny, comes of the three Saxon words ( bret, or bred) i. a board,
and (halve) that is, for this or that cause (cujus rei gratia) as the Latinists
speak, and (penning) it signifies a toll or custom for setting up of tables
or boords in a Fair or Market. From the which, they that are freed by the Kings
Charter, had this word mentioned in their letters patents. Insomuch, as at this
day the freedom it self (for shortness of speech,) is called by the name of
brodehalpenie.

Broggers. See Brokers.

Bruckbote (Pontagium) is compounded of two German words ( bruck i. pons,) and
( bote, i. compensatic.) It signifies with us, a tribute, contribution or aid
toward the mending, or reedifying of Bri^ges; whereof many are freed by the
Kings Charter. And thereupon the word is used for the very liberty or exemption
from this tribute. See Pontage and Brigbote.

BU
Bull (bulla) seems to come from the Greek, ((...), i. consilium) as
Polydorus Virgilius says, de inventio. rerum, lib. 8. cap. 2. It signifies
the letters, by the Canonists called Apostolic, strengthened with a leaden
seal, and containing in them the decrees or commandments of the Pope or Bishop
of Rome. The word is used many times in our Statutes: as anno 28 H. 8. cap. 16.
and anno 1. and 2. Ph. and Ma. cap. 8.

Bullion, comes of the French (billon) that is, the place where gold is tried.
It signifies with us, gold or silver in mass or billet, anno 9 Ed. 3. stat.
2. cap. 2. and sometime the Kings exchange or place, whither such gold in the
lump is brought to be tried or exchanged, anno 27 Ed. 3. stat. 2. cap. 14. and
anno 4 H. 4. cap. 10. See Skene de verbo signif. verbo Bullion.

Burgbote, comes of ( burg, i. castellum) and ( bote, 1. compensatio) and
signifies a tribute or contribution toward the building or repairing of
Castles, or walls of defense, or toward the building of a Borrow or City. From
this diverse had exemption by the ancient Charters of the Saxon Kings. Whereupon
it is taken ordinarily for the exemption or liberty it self. Rastals expos. of
words. Fleta has these words of it: Significat quietantiam reparationis
murorum civitatis, vel burgi. lib. 1. c. 47.

Burg English. See Borow English.

Burgage (burgagium) is a tenure proper to Cities and Towns, whereby men of
Cities or Borows hold their lands or tenements of the King, or other Lord, for
a certain yearly rent. Old Tenures. It is a kind of socage. Swinborn part 3..
3. number. 6.

Burglarie (burglaria) is compounded of two French words ( bourg, i. pagus,
villa) and ( larecin, i. furtum) or of (bourg and laron) Coke lib. 4. fol. 39.
b. It is according to the acceptance of our Common law thus defined: Burglary
is a felonious entering into another man's dwelling house, wherein some person
is, or into a Church in the night time, to the end to commit some felony
therein: as to kill some man, or to steal somewhat thence, or to do some other
felonious act there, albeit he execute not the same. If the intent, or fact of
this offendour, be to steal, this is like robbery, if to murder, it differs
not much from murder, and so of other felonies, West. part 2. symbol. titulo
Indictments, Sect. 56. Burglarie in the natural signification of the word, is
nothing, but the robbing of a house: but as it is (vox artis) our Common
Lawyers restrain it to robbing a house by night, or breaking in with an intent
to rob, or to do some other felony. The like offense committed by day, they
call house-robbing, by a peculiar name. How many ways burglarie may be
committed, see Cromptons Justice of Peace, fol. 28. b. and fol. 29, 30.

Butlerage of wines, signifies that imposition of sale wine brought into the
land, which the Kings Butler, by virtue of his office, may take of every ship,
anno 1 H. 8. cap. 5. For the which see more in Botyler.

C.
CA
CAblish (cablicia) among the Writers of the Forest laws, signifies brush
wood, Manwood part page 84. Cromptons Jurisd. fol. 165.

Calamus, is a cane, reed, or quill, the diverse kinds whereof, you have set
down in Gerards Herbal, lib. 1. cap. 24. This is comprised among merchandise
and drugs to be garbled, in the statute anno 1 Jacobi, cap. 19.

Calendrin of Worsseds. anno 5 H. 8. cap. 4. and an. 35 ejusdem, cap. 5.

Cantred, is as much in Wales, as an Hundred in England. For Cantre in the
British tongue signifies centum. This word is used anno 28 H. 8. cap. 3.

Cape is a writ judicial touching plee of land or tenements, so termed (as most
writs be) of that word in it self, which carries the especiallest intention or
end thereof. And this writ is divided in (Cape magnum, and cape parvum:) both
which (as is before said in Attachment) take hold of things immovable, and
seem to differ between themselves in these points. First, because (cape magnum)
or the (grand Cape) lies before appearance, and (Cape parvum) afterward.
Secondly, the (Cape magnum) summoneth the Tenent to answer to the default, and
over to the demandant: (Cape parvum) summoneth the Tenent to answer to the
default only: and therefore is called (Cape parvum) or in French English
(petit Cape.) Old. not. br. fol. 161, 162. Yet Ingham says, that it is called
(petit Cape) not because it is of small force, but that it consists of few
words. (Cape magnum) in the old. not. br. is thus defined. This writ is a
judicial, and lies where a man has brought a (Principe quod reddat) of a
thing that touches plee of land, and the Tenant make default at the day to him
given in the Writ original, then this writ shall go for the King, to take the
land in o the Kings hands: and if he come not at the day given him by the
(grand Cape) he has lost his land, etc. A President and form of this writ you
may see in the Register judicial, fol. 1. b. It seems after a sort to contain
in it the effect (missionis in possessionem ex primo and secundo decreto) among
the Civilians. For as the first decree, seiseth the thing, and the second
gives it from him, that the second time defaulteth in his appearance, so this
(Cape) both seiseth the land, and also assigns to the party a farther day of
appearance, at which if he come not in, the land is forfeited. Yet is there
difference between these two courses of the Civil and Common law first, for
that (missio in possessionem) touches both mooveable and immooveable goods,
whereas the (Cape) is extended only to immovable: secondly, that the party
being satisfied of his demand, the remanet is restored to him that defaulted:
but by the ( Cape all is seized without restitution: thirdly, (missio in
possess:) is to the use of the party agent, the (Cape) is to the use of the
King. Of this writ, and the explication of the true force and effect thereof,
read Bracton lib. 5. tract. 3. cap. 1. number. 4, 5, and 6. See Cape ad valentiam.

Cape parvum in the Old. not. br. fol. 162. is thus defined: This writ lies,
in case where the Tenant is summoned in plee of land, and comes at the
summons, and his appearance is of record, and after he makes default at the
day that is given to him: then shall go this writ for the king, etc. Of this
likewise you have the form in the Register judicial, fol. 2. a. Why it is
called Cape parvum, see in Cape magnum. Of both these writs read Fleta lib. 6.
cap. 44. Magnum and seq.

Cape ad valentiam, is a species of Cape magnum, so called of the end whereunto
it tends. In the Old not. br. fol. 161, 162. it is thus defined or described:
This writ lies, where any impleaded of certain lands, and I vouch to warrant
another, against whom the summons ad warantizandum, has been awarded, and the
Shyreeve comes not at the day given: then if the Demandant recover against me,
I shall have this Writ against the vouchee, and shall recover so much in value
of the land of the vouchee, if he have so much: and if he have not so much,
then I shall have execution of such lands and tenements, as descend unto him in
fee-simple: or if he purchase afterward, I shall have against him a resummons:
and if he can nothing say, I shall recover the value. And note ye, that this
writ lies before appearance. Thus far goes the book. Of these, and the
diverse uses of them, see the Table of the Register judicial, verbo Cape.

Capias, is a writ of two sorts, one before judgment called (capias ad
respondendum) in an action personal, if the Shyreeve upon the first writ of
distress return (nihil habet in baliva nostra:) and the other is a writ of
execution after judgment, being also of diverse kinds, (viz. Capias ad
satisfaciendum, Capias pro fine, Capias utlagatum, Capias utlagatum, and
inquiras de lonis and catallis.

Capias ad satisfacieudum, is a writ of execution after judgment, lying where a
man recovereth in an action personal, as debt, or damages, or detinue in the
Kings Court: and he against whom the debt is recovered, and has no lands nor
tenements, nor sufficient goods, whereof the debt may be levied. For in this
case, he that recovereth, shall have this writ to the Sheriff commanding him
that he take the body of him, against whom the debt is recovered: and he shall
be put in prison, until satisfaction be made unto him that recovered.

Capias pro fine, is where one being by judgment fined unto the King, upon
some offense committed against a statute, does not discharge it according to
the judgment. For by this is his body taken, and committed to prison, until he
content the King for his fine, Coke lib. 3. fol. 12. a.

Capias utlagatum, is a word of execution, or after judgment, which lies
against him that is outlawed upon any sure: by the which the Sheriff upon the
receipt thereof, apprehends the party outlawed, for not appearing upon the
(exigend.) and keeps him in safe custody until the day of return assigned in
the writ: and then presents him unto the Court, there farther to be ordered
for his contempt.

Capias utlagatum, and inquir as de bonis and catallis, is a writ all one with
the former, but that it it gives a farther power to the Shyreeve over and
beside the apprehension of the body, to inquire of his goods, and cattels. The
form of all these writs see in the Old not. br. fol. 154. and see the Terms of
law, verbo Process. Lastly, you may find great variety of this kind in the table
of the Register judicial, verbo Capias.

Capias in Wi^hernamium de averiis, is a Writ lying for Cattle in Withernam.
Register orig. f. 82. and 83. see Withernam.

Capias in Withernamium de bemine, is a writ that lies for a servant in
Withernam. Register onig. f. 79. and 80. see Withernam.

Capias conductos ad proficiscendum, is a writ that lies for the taking up of
such, as having received pressed money to serve the King, slink away, and come
not in at their time assigned, Register orig. fo. 191.

Captain, alias captain (capitaneus) comes of the French (captain) and
signifies with us, him that leads, or has charge of a company of Soldiers:
and is either general, as he that has the governance of the whole host: or
special, as he that leads one only band. The word (capitanei) in other
nations signifies more generally those that are in Latin called (principes)
or (proceres) because, as Hotteman says in verbis feudalibus: tanquam caput
reliquo corpori, sic hii reliquis civibus praesunt. He divides them into two
sorts: and to use his words, alii sunt capitanei regni: quo verbo Duces,
Comites, Marchiones intelliguntur. l. 1. feud. tit. 1.. 1. and ti. 7. Alii
improprie, qui urbium praefecti sunt, quibus plebs ab liquo superiorum
gubernanda committitur: qui and vallaso^es rigit, and majores appellantur. l.
feud. tit. 1.. 1. and tit. 7. et tit. 17. So we have captains of Castles here
in England, and other places, as of the Isles of Gersay and Gernsey, of the
Isle of Wight, etc.

Capite, is a tenute, which holds im^ ediately of the King, as of his crown,
be it by Knights service or socage: Broke tet. tenures 46. 94. Dyer, fo. 123.
nu. 38. et fo. 363. nu. 18. and not as of any Honor Castle, or Manor: and
therefore it is otherwise called a tenure, that holds merely of the King,
because as the crown is a corporation, and seigneurie in gross (as the Common
lawyers term it) so the King that possesses the crown, is in account of law,
perpetually King, and never in his minority, nor never dies: no more than
(populus) does, whose authority he bears. See Fitzh. not. br. f. 5. F. Note
by the way, that a man may hold of the King, and not (in Capite) that is, not
immediately of the crown in gross, but by means of some Honor, Castle or
Manor belonging to the Crown, whereof I hold my land. Whereof Kitchen says
well, that a man may hold of the King by Knights service, and yet not in capite,
because he holds happily of some honor by Knights service, which is in the
Kings hands (as by descent from his ancestors) and not immediately of the King,
as of his crown, f. 129. with whom agrees Fitzh. not. or. f. 5. K. whose words
are to this effect: So that it plainly appears, that lands which be held of
the King, as of an Honor, Castle or Manor, are not held in capite of the
King: because that a writ of right, in that case, shall be directed to the
Bailiff of the Honor, Castle, or manor, etc. but when the lands be held of the
King, as of his Crown, then they be not held of Honor, Castle, or Manor, but
merely of the King, as King, and of the Kings Crown, as of a seigneury of it
self in gross, and the chief above all other seigneuries, etc. And this tenure
in capite is otherwise called tenure holding of the person of the King. Dyer
fo. 44. nu. 37. Author of the new Terms, ver. Tenure in capite. Broke titulo
Tenures, nu. 65. 99. And yet M. Kitchen fo. 208. says, that a man may hold of
the person of the King, and not in capite. His example is this: If the King
purchase a manor that I. S. holds, the Tenent shall hold as he held before,
and shall not render livery or primei^ seisin, nor hold in capite: And if the
King grant that manor to W. N. in fee, excepting the services of I. S. then I.
S. holds of the King, as of the person of the King, and yet holds not in
capite, but as he held before. So that by this Book, tenure holding of the
person of the King, and tenure in capite, are two diverse tenures. To take away
this difficulty, I think M. Kitchen is in that place to be taken, as if he
said, not in capite by Knights service, but by socage, following (...) usual
speech: because most commonly where we talk of tenure in capite, we mean
tenure by knights service.

Carno, Cromptons jurisd. fol. 191. is an immunitie.

Carke, seems to be a quantity of Wool, whereof thirty make a Sarpler, anno
27 H. 6. ca. 2. See Sarpler.

Carrack, alias Carrick, seems to be a ship of burden, so called of this
Italian (carrico) or (carco) a burden or charge, or the Spanish (cargo) you
have this word, anno 2 R. 2. ca. 4. and anno 1 Ja. ca. 33.

Carroway seeds, alias Carruway seeds, (semen cari vel carei) is a Seed
springing of the herb so called, of whose operation you may read in Gerards
Herball, li. 2. cap. 396. It is reckoned among the Merchandise, that ought to
be garbled, anno 1 Jaco. ca. 19.

Carue of land (carrucata terrae) comes of the French ( charue, i. aratrum)
and with us is a certain quantity of land, by the which the Subjects have
sometime been taxed: whereupon the tribute so levied, is called (Caruago,
Caruagium) Bracton li. 2. cap. 16. nu. 8. It is all one with that, which the
same Author, lib. 2. cap. 17. calls (carucatam terrae.) For Littleton ca.
Teuure in socage, says, that (haec soca socae, idem est quod caruca) sc. one
soke, or one plow land. Yet one place I find in Stowes annals, that makes me
doubt, page 271. where he has these words: The same time King Henry took
caruage, that is to say, two marks of silver of every Knights fee, toward the
marriage of his sister Izabell to the Emperor: where caruage cannot be taken
for a Plow land, except there were some other farther division, whereby to
raise of every plow land so much: and so consequently of every Knights fee:
that is, of every 680. acres two marks of silver. Rastal in his Exposition of
words, says, that caruage is to be quit, if the Lord the King shall tax all
the land by carues: that is, a privilege, whereby a man is exempted from
caruage. Skene de verb. signif. ver. Carucata terrae, deriveth it from the
French ( charon, i. a plough) and says, that it contains as great a portion
of land, as may be tilled and labored in a year and day with one plough: which
also is called (hilda) or (hida terrae,) a word used in the old Britain laws.
Master Lamberd among his precedents, in the end of his Eirenarcha, translateth
(carucatum terrae) a plough land.

Caruage (caruagium) see Carue.

Cassia Fistula, is a tree that bears certain black, round, and long cods,
wherein is contained a pulpe, soft and pleasant sweet, serving for many uses in
Physic. This tree with her virtues you may find described in Gerards Herball,
lib. 3. cap. 77. The fruit is mentioned in the Statute anno 1 Jacob. cap. 19.
among drugges and spices, that be to be garbled.

Cassia Lignea, is a sweet wood not unlike to Cynamon, and sometime used in
stead of Cynamon. Whereof you may read in Gerards Herball, lib. 1. cap. 141.
this is called Cassia lignum, in the Statute anno 1. Jacob. c. 19. and is
comprised among merchandise that are to be garbled.

Castellain (castellanus) is a keeper or a Captain, sometime called a Constable
of a Castle, Bracton lib. 5. tractat. 2. cap. 16. and lib. 2. cap. 32. number. 2.
In like manner is it used anno 3 Ed. 1. cap. 7. In the books (de feudis) you
shall find (guastaldus) to be almost of the same signification, but something
more large: because it is also extended to those that have the custody of the
Kings mansion houses, called of the Lomberds (curtes) in England (Courts)
though they be not places of defense or strength. M. Manwood, part. 1. of his
Forest laws, page 113. says, that there is an Officer of the Forest called
Castellanus.

Castelward (castelgardum, vel wardum castri) is an imposition laid upon such
of the Kings subjects, as ^^en within a certain compass of any Castle, toward
the maintenance of such, is do watch and ward the Castle. Magna charta, cap.
20. and anno 32 H. 8. cap. 48. It is used sometime for the very circuit it
self, which is inhabited by such as are subject to this service, is in Stowes
annals, page 632.

Casu consim^li, is a writ of entry, granted where the Tenent by courtesy, or
Tenent for Term of life, or for the life of another, does alien in fee, or in
tail, or for term of another life. And it has the name of this, for that the
Clerks of the Chauncery, did, by their common consent, frame it to the
likeness of the writ called (In casu proviso) according to their authority
given them by the Starute, Westminster. 2. cap. 24. which, as often as there chances
any new case in Chancery, something like to a former case, and yet not
especially fitted by any writ, licenceth them to lay their heads toge(...) and
to frame a new form answerable to the new case, and as like some former case as
they may. And this writ is granted to him in the reversion, against the party
to whom the said Tenent so alienateth to his prejudice, and in the life time of
the said Tenent. The form and effect whereof, read more at large in Fitzh. na.
br. fol. 206.

Casu proviso is a writ of entry, given by the Statute of Gloucester, cap. 7. in
case where a Tenent in dower alieneth in fee or for Term of life, or in tail,
and lies for him in reversion against the alienee. Whereof read Fitz. not. br.
more at large fol. 205.

Catalls, (Catalla) al. as chatels, comes of the Normans. For in the
eighty-seventh Chapter of the grand customary you shall find, that all moveable
goods with them, are called charels: the contrary whereof is (fief) ibid. which
we do call fee. But as it is used in our Common Law, it comprehends all goods
moveable and immovable, but such as are in the nature of freehold, or parcel
thereof, as may be gathered out of Stawnf. praero. cap. 16. and anno Eliz. 1.
cap. 2. Howbeit, Kitchen in the chapter catalla. fol. 32. says that ready
money is not accounted any goods or chatels, nor hawks, nor hounds. The reason
why hawks and hounds be not, he gives, because they be (ferae naturae) why
money is not, though he set not down the cause, yet it may be gathered to be,
for that money of it self, is not of worth, but as by consent of men, for their
easier traffic, or permutation of things necessary for Common life, it is
reckoned a thing rather consisting in imagination, than in deed. Catals be
either personal or real. Personal may be so called in two respects: one,
because they belong immediately to the person of a man, as a bow, horse, etc.
the other, for that being any way withheld injuriously from us, we have no
means to recover them, but by personal action. Chatels real be such, as either
appertain not immediately to the person, but to some other thing, by way of
dependency: as a box with charters of land, the body of a ward, apples upon a
tree, or a tree it self growing on the ground. Cromptons Justice of peace, fol.
33. B. or else such as are necessary, issuing out of some immovable thing to a
person: as a lease or rent for term of years. Also to hold at will, is a
chatel real. New terms, verbo Chatel. The Civilians comprehend these things,
as also lands of what kind or hold soever, under bona; bona autem dividuntur in
mobilia and immobilia: mobilia vero in ea quae se movent, vel ab aliis
moventur, v. legem 49. and l. 208. p. de verb. significa. and interpretes
ibidem. Bracton also c. 3. l. 3. number. 3. and 4. seems to be of the same
judgment.

Catallis captis nomine dictrictionis, it is a Writ that lies within a Borow,
or within a honse, for rent going out of the same, and warranteth a man to take
the doors, windows, or gates, by way of distress, for the rent. Old. not. br.
Fol. 66.

Catallis reddendis, is a Writ which lies where goods being delivered to any
man to keep until a certain day, and be not upon demand delivered at the day.
And it may be otherwise called a Writ of detinew. See more of it in the
Register orig. f. 139. and in the Old not. br. fol. 63. This is answerable to
actio dispositi, in the Civil law.

Catchep^lle, though it now be used as a word of contempt, yet in ancient
times, it seems to have been used without reproach, for such as we now call
Sergeants of the Mace; or any other that use to arrest men upon any cause, anno
25 Ed. 3. stat. 4. cap. 2.

Cathedral. See Church.

Casu matrimonii praelocuti, is a Writ which lies in case where a woman gives
lands to a man in fee simple, to the intent he shall marry her, and refusesh so
to do in reasonable time, being required thereunto by the woman. The form, and
farther use thereof, learn in the Register orig. fol. 233. and in Fitzh. not.
br. fol. 205.

Causam nobis significes, is a Writ which lies to a Mayor of a Town or City,
etc. that formerly by the Kings writ being commanded to give seisin unto the
Kings grantee lof any land or tenements, does delay so to do, willing him to
show cause, why he so delayeth the performance of his charge. Coke. l. 4. casu
communalty des Sadlers. fol. 55. b.

Cautione admittenda, is a Writ that lies against the Bishops, holding an
excommunicate person in prison for his contempt, notwithstanding that he
offers sufficient caution or assurance to obey the commandments and orders of
holy Church from thenceforth. The form and farther effect whereof, take out of
the Regist. orig. page 66. and Fitzh. not. br. fol. 63.

CE
Century (centuria.) See Hundred.

Cepicorpus, is a return made by the Sheriff, that upon an (exigend.) he has
taken the body of the party, Fitzh. not. br. Fol. 26.

Certiorari, is Writ issuing out of the Chancery, to an inferior Court, to call
up the records of a cause therein depending, that conscionable Justice therein
may be ministered, upon complaint made by bill, that the party which seeks the
said Writ, has received hard dealing in the said Court. Terms of the Law. See
the diverse forms and uses of this, in Fitzh. not. br. fol. 242. as also the
Register, both original and judicial, in the tables, verbo Certiorari. Crompton
in his Justice of peace. f. 117. says, that this Writ is either returnable in
the Kings Bench, and then has these words (nobis mittatis:) or in the
Chauncerie, and then has (in caucellaria nostra) or in the Common Bench, and
then has (Justiciariis nostris de banco.) The word (Certiorare) is used diverse
times in the digest of the Civil Law: but our later Critics think it so
barbarous, that they suspect it rather to be foisted in by Tribonian, than to
be originally used by those men, of whose works the said digest is compiled.
Prataeus in suo lexico.

Certificat (certificatorium) is used for a writing made in any Court, to give
notice to another Court of any thing done therein. As for example, a certificat
of the cause of attaint, is a transcript made briefly and in few words, by the
Clerk of the Crown, Clerk of the Peace, or Clerk of Assise, to the Court of the
Kings Bench, containing the tenure and effect of every endictment, outlawrie,
or convictior, and Clerk attainted, made or pronounced in any other Court, anno
34 H. 8. cap. 14. Of this see more in Certificat d'evesque. Broke, fol. 119.

Certification of assise of novel disseisin, etc. Certificatio assisae novae
disseisinae, etc. is a Writ grant ed for the reexamining or review of a matter
passed by assise before any Justices, and is called (certificatione novae
dissessinae) Old not. br. fol. 181. Of this see also the Register original.
fol. 200. and the new book of entries, verb. Certificat of assise. This word
has use, where a man appearing by his Bailiff to an assise brought by another,
has lost the day: and having something more to plead for himself, as a deed of
release, etc. which the Bailiff did not or might not plead for him, desires a
farther examination of the cause, either before the same Justices, or others:
and obtains Letters patents unto them to that effect. (The form of these
Letters Patents, you may see in Fitzh. not. br. fol. 181.) and that done,
brings a Writ to the Sheriff, to call both the party for whom the assise
passed, and the Jurie that was empaneled upon the same, before the said
Justices at a certain day and place. And it is called a certificate, because in
it there is mention made to the Sheriff, that upon the parties complaint of the
defective examination, or doubts yet remaining upon the assise passed, the King
has directed his Letters patents to the Justices, for the better certifying of
themselves, whether all points of the said assise were duly examined, yea or
not. See farther Old not. br. and Fitzh. ubi supra. Of this also you may read
Bracto^. lib. 4. cap. 19. number. 4. in fine, and 5, 6. where he discusseth the
reason of this point very learnedly; and lastly, Horn in his Mirror of
Justices, lib. 3. cap. finali,. en eyde des memoyees. etc.

Certificando' de recognitione Stapulae, it is a Writ directed to the Major of
the Staple, etc. commanding him to certify the Chauncellor of a statute of the
staple, taken before him between such and such, in case where the party himself
detaineth it, and refuses to bring it in, Regist. orig. fol. 152. b. In like
manner may be said of (certificando de statuto mercatorio) eodem, fol. 148. and
(de certificando in cancellarium de inquisitione de idemptitate nominis) fol.
195. and (certificando quando recognitio, etc.) and (certificando quid actum
est de brevi super statutum mercatorium,) fol. 151. and (certificando si
loquela Warantiae,) fol. 13.

Cessor, is he that cease or neglects so long to perform a duty be longing
unto him, as that by his cesse or cessing he incurreth the danger of Law, and
has, or may have the Writ (cessavit) brought against him. Old not. br. fol.
136. And note, that where it is said in diverse places (the Tenent cesseth)
without any more words, such phrase is so to be understood, as if it were said,
the Tenent cesseth to do that which he ought, or is bound to do by his Land or
Tenement.

Cessavit, is a Writ, that lies in diverse cases, as appears by Fitzh. not.
br. fol. 280. upon this general ground; that he against whom it is brought,
has for two years foreslown to perform such service, or to pay such rent, as
he is ^ed unto by his Tenure, and has not upon his Land or his Tenement,
sufficient goods or cattels to be distreined. Consult more at large with Fitz.
upon this ubi supra, with Fleta lib. 5. cap. 34. visa sunt, and with the Terms
of law. See Cessavit de cantaria. Register orig. fol. 238. Cessavit de feod:
firma, eodem fol. 237. Cessavit per biennium, eodem, folio etiam eodem. See the
new book of Entries, verbo Cessavit.

Cestui qui vie, is in true French (Cestui a vie de qui.) i. he for whose life
any Land or Tenement is granted. Perkins graunts, 97.

Cestus qui use (ille cujus usui vel ad cujus usum) is broken French, and thus
may be bettered: (Cestui all use de qui.) It is an ordinary speech among our
Common lawyers, signifying him, to whose use any other man is infeoffed in any
Lands or Tenements. See the new book of entries, verbo uses, and in Replevin,
fol. 508. colum. 3. and verbo Trespass, fol. 606. and fol. 123. a. b. colum. 3.
number. 7.

CH
Chafe wax, is an Officer in Chauncery, that fitteth the wax for the sealing of
the Writs, and such other instruments as are there made to be sent out. This
Officer is borrowed from the French. For there (calefactores cerae sunt, qui
regiis literis in Cancellaria ceram imprimunt. (Corasius.

Chase (chacea) comes of the French (chasser, i. sectari belluas, apros,
cervos.) It signifies two things in the Common Law. First, as much as (actus)
in the Civil law, that is a driving of cattle to or from any place: as to chase
a distress to a fortlet. Old. not. br. fol. 45. Secondly, it is used for a
receipt for Deer and wild beasts, of a middle nature between a Forest, and a
Park: being commonly less than a Forest, and not endued with so many
liberties, as the Courts of attachment, Swain mote, and Justice seat: and yet
of a larger compass, and stored with greater diversity both of keepers and wild
beasts or game, than a park. And Crompton in his book of Jurisdictions, fol.
148. says, that a Forest cannot be in the hands of a subject, but it forth
with loses the name, and becomes a chase, and yet fol. 197. he says, that a
subject may be lord and owner of a Forest, which though it seem a contrariety,
yet be both his sayings, in some sort, true. For the King may give or alienate
a Forest to a subject, yet so, as when it is once in the subject, it leeseth
the true property of a Forest: because that the Courts, called the Justice
seat, the Swain more, and Attachment, forthwith do vanish; none being able to
make a Lord chief Justice in Eyr of the Forest, but the King: as M. Manwood
well shows, part 2. of his Forest Laws, cap. 3. and 4. And yet it may be
granted in so large a manner, that there may be Attachment and Swainmote, and a
Court equivalent to a Justice seat, as appears by him in the same chapter,
number. 3. So that a Chase differs from a Forest in this, because it may be in
the hands of a subject, which a Forest in his proper and true nature cannot:
and from a Park, in that that it is not enclosed, and has not only a larger
compass and more store of game, but of Keepers also and Overseers. See Forest.

Challenge (calumnia) comes of the French ( chalenger, i. sib^ asserere) and is
used in the Common law for an exception taken either against persons or things:
persons, as in assise to the Jurors, or any one or more of them: or in a case
of felony by the prisoner at the bar. Smith de re^. Angl. lib. 2. cap. 12.
Briton. cap. 52. Bracton. lib. 2. tract. 2. cap. 22. Against things, as a
declaration, Old not. br. fol. 76. Challenge made to the Jurors, is either made
to the array, or to the polles. Challenge to the array is, when the whole number
is excepted against, as partially empaneled: challenge to or by the polle, when
some one, or more are excepted against, as not different. Terms of the Law.
Challenge to the Jurours, is also divided into Challenge principal, and Challenge
per cause, i. upon cause or reason. Challenge principal (otherwise by Stawnf.
pl. cor. fol. 157. and 158. called peremptory is that, which the Law allows
without cause alleged or farther examination. Lamberd. Eirena. lib. 4. cap. 14.
as a prisoner at the bar, arraigned upon felony, may peremptorily challenge to
the number of 20. one after another, of the Jurie empaneled upon him, alleging
no cause, but his own dislike: and they shall be still put off, and new taken
in their places. But in case of high treason no challenge peremptory is
allowed, anno 33 H. 8. cap. 23. Fortescue says that a prisoner in this case
may challenge, 35 men, c. 27. but that law was abridged by anno 25 H. 8. cap.
3. I cannot here omit to note some difference, that (in mine opinion) I observe
between Challenge principal, and Challenge peremptory, finding peremptory to be
used only in matters criminal, and barely without cause alleged more than the
prisoners own fantasy, Stawnf. pl. cor. fol. 124. but principal in civil
actions for the most part, and with naming of some such cause of exception, as
being found true, the law allows without farther scanning. For example: if
either party say, that one of the Jurors is the son, brother, cousin, or tenent
to the other, or espoused his daughter, this is exception good and strong
enough (if it be true) without farther examination of the parties credit. And
how far this Challenge upon children reaches, you have a notable example, in
Plowden, casu Vernon, against Manners, fol. 425. Also in the plee of the death
of a man, and in every action real, as also every action personal, where the
debt or damages amount to 40 marks, it is a good Challenge to any man, that he
cannot dispend 40 shillings by the year of Freehold, anno 11 H. 7. cap. 21.
and Terms of the Law, verbo Challenge. The ground of this Challenge you may see
farther in Fleta, lib. 4. cap. 8. Challenge upon reason or cause is, when the
party does allege some such exception against one or more of the Jurors, as is
not forthwith sufficient upon acknowledgement of the truth thereof, but rather
arbitrable and considerable by the rest of the Jurors: as for example: if the
son of the Juror have married or espoused the daughter of the adverse party.
Terms of the Law, ubi supra. This Challenge, per cause, seemed to be termed by
Kitchen, challenge for favor, fol. ^2. or rather Challenge for favor is said
there to be one species of Challenge per cause: where you may read what
chalenges be commonly accounted principal, and what not. See the new book of
Enteries, verbo, Challenge, and the Old. not. br. fol. 158. and 159. That this
word (Challenge) is long sithence latined by the word (calumnia) appears by
Bracton. lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 18. and lib. 4. tract. 3. cap. 6. and lib. 5.
cap. 6. But I doubt Priscian will never forgive him that first struck this blow
at him. Of Challenge you may farther read Fleta lib. 1. cap. 32.. Ad quem diem,
and seq.

Chamberdekins, are Irish beggars, an. 1 H. 5. c. 8.

Chamberer, is used for a Chambermaid, an. 33 H. 8. cap. 21.

Chamberlain (camerarius vel camberlingus) comes of the French ( chambellan i.
cubicularius, vel praefectus cubiculi.) It is diversely used in our Cbronicles,
Laws, and Statutes: as Lord great Chamberlain of England, Lord Chamberlain of
the Kings house, the Kings Chamberlain, anno 13 Ed. 1. cap. 41. anno 17 R. 2.
cap. 6. to whose office it especially appertains to look to the Kings
chambers and wardrope, and to govern the under ministers belonging unto the
same. Fleta lib. 2. cap. 6. and 7. Chamberlain of any of the Kings courts, anno
7 Edw. 6. cap. 1. Chamberlain of the Exchequer, anno 51 H. 3. stat. 5. and anno
10 Ed. 3. cap. 11. and anno 14 ejusdem, cap. 14. and anno 26 H. 8. cap. 3.
Chamberlain of North Wales, Stow, page 641. Chamberlain of Chester, Cromptons
jurisd. fol. 7. This Officer is commonly the receiver of all rents and revenues
belonging to that person or City whereunto he is Chamberlain. Vide Fletam lib.
2. cap. 70.. Si autem. The Latin word seems to express the function of this
officer. For ( camerarius dicitur a camer a, i. testitudine sive fornice: ^quia
custodit pecun^as quae in cameris praecipue reservantur. Onyphrius de
interpret. vocum ecclesiasticarum. It seems to be borrowed from the Feudists,
who define the word (camera) thus: Camera est locus in quem the saurus
recolligitur, vel conclave in quo pecunia reservatur. Zasius de feudis, part.
4. number. 7. and Peregrinus, de jure fisci, lib. 6. tit. 3. says, that
camerarius vel camberlingus (quem quaestorem antiqui appellarunt) in rebus
fisci primum locum tenet, quia thesaurarius and custos est publicae pecuniae.
Sane officium hoc primipilatus fuisse nonnulli senserunt. There be two officers
of this name in the Kings Exch^quer, who were wont to keep a controlement of
the pells of receipt and exitus, and kept certain keys of the treasure cofers,
which is not now in use. They keep the keys of the Treasury, where the
leagues of the Kings predecessors, and diverse ancient books do remain. There is
mention of this officer, in the Statute, an. 34. and 35 H. 8. cap. 16. There be
also Under-chamberlains of the Exchequer, which see in Under-chamberlain.

Champartie (cambipartita) alias champertie, seems to come from the French (
champert, i. vectigal) and signifies in our Common law, a maintenance of any
man in his suit depending, upon condition to have part of the thing (be it
lands or goods) when it is recovered. Fitz. not. br. fol. 171. and champertours
be they, that move plees or suits, or cause to be moved, either by their own
procurement, or by other; and pursue at their proper costs, for to have part of
the land in variance, or part of the gains, anno 33 Ed. 1. stat. 2. in fine.
Whereunto add the third statute made the same year. This seems to have been
an ancient fault in our Realm. For notwithstanding these former statutes, and a
form of writ framed unto them, yet anno 4 Ed. 3. cap. 11. it was again enacted,
that whereas the former statute provided redress for this in the Kings Bench
only (which in those days followed the Court) from thenceforth it should be
lawful for Justices of the Common plees likewise, and Justices of Assizes in
their circuits, to inquire, hear, and determine this and such like cases, as
well at the suit of the King, as of the Party. How far this Writ extends,
and the diverse forms thereof, applied to several cases, See Fitz. not. br. fol.
171. and the Register orig. fol. 183. and the new book of Enteries, verbo
Champertie. Every Champertie imployeth maintenance, Cromptons jurisd. fol. 39.
See also his Justice of Peace, fol. 155. b. etc. These with the Romans were
called redemptores litium, qui sc. quotidian as lites mercantur, aut qui partem
litis paciscuntur, l. si remuner andi. Maurus. p. Mandati, l. si contra. and l.
per diversas. Co. eodem, 13.

C^anpion (campio) is thus defined by Hottoman, in verbis feudalibus. Campio
est certator pro alio datus in duello: a campo dictus, qui circus erat
decertantibus definitus. In our Common law, it is taken no les^e for him that
tries the combat in his own case, than for him that fights in the place or
quarrel of another, Bracton, lib. 3, tract. 2. cap. 21. number. 24. who also
seems to use this word for such, as hold by Seargante, or some service of
another: as campiones faciunt homagium domino suo, lib. 2. cap. 35. Of this
read more in Battle and Combat. 30.

Chanceler (cancellarius) comes of the French (chancelier) Vicentius Lupanus
de magistratibus Francorum says that (cancellarius) is no Latin word:
howbeit, he cites diverse Latin Writers that do use it. With him agrees that
excellent man Petrus Pithaeus, libro 2. adversariorum, cap. 12. and whereas
Lupanus would derive it from the verb (cancello), Pithaeus confe^eth, he has
good color for his opinion though he think it not sound; and therefore rather
deduceth it (a cancellis. (Cancellare) is (liter as vel scriptum linea per
medium duct a damnare) and seems of it self like wise to be derived (a
cancellis) which signify all one with ((...)) in Greek, which we in our tongue
call a Le^is: that is, a thing made of wood or iron bars, laid crosse-waies
one over another, so that a man may see through them in and out. And is to be
thought, that Judgment seats in old time, were compassed in with those bars,
being found most necessary to defend Judges and other Officers from the press
of the multitude, and yet never the more to hinder; any man's view, that had a
desire or cause to observe what was done. Cancellarius at the first, by the
opinion of Lupanus, signified the registers or actuaries in Court (grapharios
sc. qui conscribendis and excipiendis judicum act is dant operam) Pithaeus
says, they were such as we now call (Secretarios.) But this name in our days
is greatly advanced and not only in other Kingdoms, but in ours also, is given
to him that is the chief man for matter of Justice (in private causes
especially) next unto the Prince. For whereas all other Justices in our
Commonwealth, are tied to the Law, and may not swerve from it in judgment: the
Chancellor has in this the Kings absolute power, to moderate and temper the
written Law, and subjecteth himself only to the Law of nature and conscience,
ordering all things juxta aequum and bonum. And therefore Stanford in his
Prerogative cap. 20. fol. 65. says, that the Chancellor has two powers, one
absolute, the other ordinary: meaning, that though by his ordinary power in
some cases, he must observe the form of proceeding, as other ordinary Judges:
yet that in his absolute power he is not limited by the written law, but by
conscience and equity, according to the circumstances of the matter in
question. But how long he has had this power, some would doubt. For Polidorus
Virgilius, lib. 9. historiae Anglica. has these words of William the
Conqueror: Instituit item Scribarum Colleginm qui diplomata scriberent, and
ejns Collegii magistrum vocabat Cancellarium, qui paulatim supremus factus est
Magistratus, qualis hodie habeiur. And see Flet. lib. 2. cap. 13. This high
Officer, seemeh to be derived from France unto us, as many other Officers and
usages be. For of this thus writes Boerius in his tract. De authorit. Magni
Consilii. nu. 8. Consistorio Franciae post Principem Dominus Franciae
Cancellarius cui velut excelsum judicii tribunal hoc in regno (sub Principe
tamen nostro mother anti, sigillum ^ authenticum, quo sine publicis and
patentibus regiis literis nulla fides adhibetur, liberam administrationem
habenti, omnes and singuli regii Justiciarii, quocunque nomine nuncupontur, ac
quavis authoritate fung antur, co inferiores sant. Et merito: Succedit enim in
quaestoris locnm, etc.

He that bears this Magistracy, is called the Chancellor of England, anno 7
R. 2. c. 14. and by the Statute anno 5 Eliz. cap. 18. the Lord Chancellor and
Keeper have all one power. Nore farther, that diverse inferior Officers are
called Chancellors, as Chancellor of the Exchequer, anno 25 H. 8. cap. 16.
whose office has been thought by many, to have been created for the qualifying
of extremities in the Exchequer. He f^teth in the Court, and in the Exchequer
chamber, and with the rest of the Court orders things to the Kings best
benefit: he is always in commission with the Lord Treasurer for the letting of
the Lands that came to the Crown by the dissolution of Abbeyes: and has by
privy seal from the King, power with others to compound for forfeitures of
honds, and forfeitures upon penal statutes. He has also much to do in the
revenue come by the dissolution and first fruits, as appears by the acts of
uniting them to the Crown. Chanchellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, anno 3 Ed.
6. cap. 1. and anno 5 ejusdem, cap. 26. whose office is principal in that Court
to judge and determine all controversies between the King and his Tenants of
the Duchy land, and otherwise to direct all the Kings affairs belonging to
that Court. Chancellor of the Order, i. of the Garter, Stowes annals, page 706.
Chancellor of the University, anno 9 H. 5. cap. 8. and anno 2 H. 6. cap. 8.
Chancellor of the Court of Augmentations, anno 27 H. 8. cap. 27. and anno 32.
ejusdem; cap. 20. and anno 33. ejusdem, cap. 39. Chancellor of the n^^t truits,
anno 32 H. 8. cap. 45. Chancellor of Courts, anno 32 H. 8. cap. 28. Chancellor
of the Diocese, anno 32 H. 8. cap. 15.

Chancerie, (Cancellaria) is the Court of equity and conscience moderating the
rigor of other Courts, that are most straightly tied to the Letter of the Law,
whereof the Lord Chancellor of England is the chief Judge. Cromptons jurisd.
fol. 41. or else the Lord Keeper of the great Seal, sithence the statute 4
Eliz. cap. 18. It takes the name from the Chancellor, as M. Cambden notes in
his Britannia, page 114. in meo. The Officers belonging to this Court, are (as
is abovesaid) the Chancellor or Keeper of the broad Seal, twelve Masters of the
Chancery, whereof the Master of the Rolls is one and the chief, the six Clerks,
the Examiners, a Sergeant at Arms, the Marshall, and Crier of the Court, the
Clerks of the courts, otherwise called Courseters, the Clerks of the Petty
bag, the Clerk of the Crown, the Clerk of the hanapar, the protonotary or
register, the controller of the hanaper, the Clerk of appeals, the Sealer, the
Chafe-wax, the Clerk of the faculties, the Clerk of the patents, Clerk of the
statre - chamber, Clerk of presentations, Clerk of dismission, Clerck of
licenses to alienate, Clerks of the enrollements, Clerk of the protections,
Clerk of the court of wards, Clerk of the subpenaes, which lee described in
their places.

Chapel (Capella) comes of the French ( chapelle, i. aedicnla) and is of two
sorts, either adjoining to a Church, as a parcel of the same, which men of
worth do build, ut ibidem familiaria sepalchra sibi constituant, to the use of
the Romans, l. 5. p. de religio: or else separate from the mother Church,
where the Parish is wide, and is commonly called a Chapel of ease: because it
is builded for the ease of one or more Parishioners that dwell over far from
the Church, and is served by some inferior Curate provided at the charge of the
Rector, or of them that have benefit by it, as the composition or custom is.
Whence the word is derived, the Caronists differ in opinion. Rebuffus de pacif.
possess. number. 104. saying, that some take it (a capiendo l. icos) others (a
capra) because it represents those cottages, which men wore wont to cover
over with Goats skins. Petrus Gregorius in suo syntagmate, lib. 15. cap. 29.
has these words of this thing; Capellanus a capella is and capella cui
praeficitur, nominatur: item ab officio sen been ficio and capellania. Capella
aliquibus dicta, quasi capiens (...) seu populos, vel capiens landem: vel
secundum praepositum (a cappa Divi Martini, aut a caprinis pellibus, quibus
olim altaria tegeba^tur secundum Archidiacanum. Arbitrarer and a simplici
tecto, quo oratorium campestre operitur, laeteribus undiquaque patentibus and
patulis. Tectum enim Gallis simpliciter dicitur (chapelle) a capite. Under and
formata aliqua aomina (chape in, cape, etc.) Aut capella locus qui minor is
spatii sit quam ecclesia quod tot homines non capiat, ut ecclesia. Ita altar
eapella est ca. quaesitum, etc. penult. i. quaest. 3. Jahan. A^draeas in cap.
1. de succes. ab intesta. and praebenda cum onere quotidie celebrandi sacram
l^turgiam. ca. significatum. 11. de praebend. and or atorium. ca. authoritate:
de privilegiis, in 6. quod in eo loco orationes non aliae res profanae peragi
debeant. ca. pen. and fina. 42. distinct. The same author in his book de
beneficiis, cap. 11. nu. 10. has these words: D^cti porro primi tus cappellant
a cappa Sancti Martini, quam Reges Francorum ob adjuratorium in praeliis
solebant secum habere: quam ferentes and custodientes, cum caeteris sanctorum
reliquiis clerici, capellani caeperunt vocari, ut omnia refert Valafridus
Strabo, Abbas Augensis, ca. fina. de incrementis rerum ecclesiastica.

There is of these chapels one kind called a f^ee chapel, which seems to be
such as has maintenance perpetual toward the upholding thereof and wages of
the curate, by some lands charitably bestowed on it, without the charge of the
Rector or Parish, anno 37 H. 8. cap. 4. anno 1 Ed. 6. cap. 14.

Chapellain, (capellanus) is he that performs divine service in a chapel; and
therefore in our Common law, it i^ used most ordinarily for him, that is
depending upon the king, or other man of worth, for the instruction of him and
his family, the executing of prayers and preaching in his private house, where
commonly they have a Chapel for that purpose, as anno 21 H. 8. cap. 13. Where
it is set down what persons may privilege one or mo Chaplains, to discontinew
from their benefices, for their particular service.

Chapiters (capitula) comes of the French ( chapitre, i. caput libri) It
signifies in our Common law, a summary or con ent of such matters, as are to
be inquired of or presented before Justices in Eyr, Justices of Assise, or of
Peace in their sessions. So it is used, anno 3 Ed. 1. cap. 27. in these words:
and that no Clerk of any Justice, Escheatour, or Commissioner in Eyr, shall
take any thing for delivering chapiters, but only Clerks of Justices in their
circuits: and again, anno 13 ejusdem, cap. 10. in these words: and when the
time comes, the Sheriff shall certify the Chapiters before the Justices in
Eyr, how many Writs he has, and what, etc. Britton likewise uses the same
word in this signification, cap. 3. Chapiters or ( capitula be now called
articles most ordinarily, and are delivered as well by the mouth of the Justice
in his charge, as by the Clerks in writing to the Enquest; whereas in ancient
times (as appears by Bracton and Britton they were after an exhortation given
by the Justices for the good observation of the laws and kings peace, first
read distinctly and openly in the whole Court, and then delivered in writing to
the grand Enquest. And the same order does M. Lamberd wish to be kept in these
days also. Eirenar. lib. 4. cap. 4. page 393. Horn in his mirror of Justices
calieth them articles; and expresses what they were wont to contain, lib. 3.
cap. des articles in Eyr. An example of these chapters or articles you have in
the book of assizes, fol. 138. number. 44. as also in Roger Hoveaen, part poster.
suorum annal. i^ Richardo primo, fol. 423.

Chapter (capitulum) signifies in our Common law (as in the Canon Law, whence
it is borrowed) congregationem clericorum in ecclesia cathedrali conventuali,
regulari, vel collegiata; and in another signification, locum in quo fiunt
communes tractatus collegiatorum. It has other significations, though not
greatly worth the repeating in this place, which you may read in Linwoods
provincials glos. in ca, quia incontinentiae, de constitutionibas, verb.
Capitulis. Why this collegiat company should be called (capitulum) of the
Canonists, a man may make a question: and for answer, it may be said, that it
is metaphorically so termed, the word originally signifying a little head. For
this company or corporation is a kind of head, not only to rule and govern the
Diocese in the vacation of the Bishopric, but also in many things to advise
the Bishop, when the Sea is full. See Panormitan. in ca. capitulum. extrade
rescriptis.

Charta perdonationis se defendendo, is the form of a pardon for slaying
another in a man's own defense. Register. original. fol. 287.

Charta perdonationis Utlagariae, is the form of a pardon for a man that is
outlawed. Regi. orig. fol. 288.388.

Charter chartea) comes of the French ( chartres, i. instrumenta.) It is taken
in our law, for written evidence of things done between man and man, whereof
Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 16. number. 1. says thus: Fiunt aliquando donationes in
scriptis, sicut in chartis, ad perpetuam rei memoriam propter breve^ hominu^
vita^, etc. and a little after: number. 12. Et sciendum quod chartarumalia regia,
alia privatorum; and regiarum alia privata, alia co^munis, and aliauniver
salis. Itemprivatorum, alia de puro feoffame^to and simplici, alia de
feoffamento conditionali sive conventionali: and secundum omnia genera
feoffamextorum fieri potest. Item privatorum alia de recognitione pura vel
conditionali. Item aliam de qutete-clamantia, Item alia de confirmatione, etc.
and so through the chapter. Briton likewise in his 39. chapter, divides
Charters into the Charters of the King, and Charters of private persons.
Charters of the King are those, whereby the King passes any grant to any
person or more, or to any body politic: as a Charter of exemption that a man
shall not be empaneled upon any Jury. Kitchen, fol. 114. and fol. 177. Charter
of pardon, whereby a man is forgiven a felony, or other offense committed
against the Kings Crown and dignity. Broke, tit. Charter of pardon. Charter of
the Forest, wherein the laws of the forest are comprised. anno 9 H. 3.
Cromptons jurisd. fol. 147. Pupilla oculi, part 5. cap. 22. Manwood, part 1.
of his Forest laws fol. 1. where he sets down the Charters of Canutus, and
fol. 17. where he has set down that which was made, anno 9 H. 3. with the
Charter of the Forest which we use; M. Skene says, that the laws of the Forest
in Scotland do agree. De verbo signif. verbo Venison. Charter of land. Broke,
eodem titulo. That which we call a Charter, the Lombards in libris feudalibus
call praeceptum (praeceptionem) Hotama, verbo praeceptum in verbis feudalibus.
Of these Charters you have also along discourse in Fleta lib. 3. cap. 14. who
expounds every substantial part of a deed of gift particularly in order.

Charter land, (terra per chartam) is such as a man holds by Charter, that
is, by evidence in writing; otherwise called-Free hold, anno 19 H. 7. cap. 13.
and Kitchen. fol. 86. and these in the Saxons time, were wont to be called,
(Bockland) Idem, fol. 89. and Lamberd in his explication of Saxon words, verbo
Terra ox Scripto, which was held as he there says, with more commodious and
easier conditions, than (Folkland) was: that is land held without writing. And
the season he gives, because that was haereditaria, libera, atque immunis:
whereas fundus sine scripto censum pensitab at annuum a que officiorum quadam
servitute est obligatus. Priorem viri plerumque nobiles atque ingenui,
posteriorem rustici fere and pagani possidebant. Illam nos vulgo freehold and
per chartam, hanc ad voluntatem domini appellamus. Thus far M. Lamberd.

Charta party (charta partita) is nothing but that which we call a pair of
indentures, containing the covenants and agreements made between Merchants, or
Seafaring men, touching their maritine affairs, anno 32 H. 8. cap. 14.

Chartis redd ndis, is a Writ, which lies against him that has Charters of
Feofment delivered him to be kept, and refuses to deliver them, Old not. br.
fol. 66. Register orig. fol. 159.

Chase. See Chase.

Chatel. See Catel.

Chance medley (Infortunium) comes of the French words ( chance, i. lapsus)
and ( mester, i. miscere) It signifies in our Common law, the casual slaughter
of a man, not altogether without the fault of the slayer. Stawnf. pl. cor. lib.
1. cap. 8. calls it homicide by misadventure, West calls it Homicide mixed.
part. 2. symbol. titulo Indictments, sect. 50. and there defines it thus:
Homicide mixed is, when the killers ignorance or negligence is joined with the
chance: as if a man lop trees by an high way side, by which many usually
travel, and cast down a bow, not giving warning to take heed thereof, by which
bow one passing by is slain: In which case he offends, because he gave no
warning, that the party might have taken heed to himself. See Skene de verbo
signifi. verbo Melletum.

Chaungeour, is an Officer belonging to the Kings mint, whose function seems
especially to consist, in exchanging coin for gold or silver in the Mass,
brought in by Merchants or others, anno 2 H. 6. cap. 12.

Chauntery, (cantaria) is a Church or Chapel endowed with lands or other yearly
revenue, for the maintenance of one or more Priests, daily to sing Mass for the
souls of the Donours, and such others, as they do appoint, anno 37 H. 8. cap.
4. anno 1 Ed. 6. cap. 14.

Check-rolle, seems to be a roll or book, that contains the names of such,
as are attendants and in pay to great personages, as their household servants.
It is otherwise called the chequer roll, anno 24 H. 8. cap. 13. anno 3 H. 7.
cap. 13. and seems to have one etymology with eschequer. Which see.

Chevage, (chevagin^) comes of the French ( chef, i. caput.) It signifies
with us, a sum of money paid by villeins to their Lords, in acknowledgement
of their slavery. Whereof Bracton, lib. 1. cap. 10 says thus: chevagium
dicitur recognitio in signum subjectionis and dominti de capite suo. It seems
also to be used, for a sum of money, yearly given to a man by another of might
and power, for his avowement, and maintenance and protection, as to their head
or leader. M. Lamberds, li. 2. cap. 5. Eirenarch, writeh it (chivagt) or rather
(chiefage.)

Chevisance, comes of the French ( chevir, i. venir a chief de quelque chose)
to come to the head or end of a business, to perfect a matter. This word is
used for bargaining, anno 37 H. 8. cap. 9. t anno 13 Eliz. cap. 5. et 8. anno
10 R. 2. cap. 1. et anno 3 H. 7. cap. 5.

Chief. See Capite.

Chief pledge (plegius, vel vas capitalis) anno 20 H. 6. cap. 8. For the
understanding of this word, See Bo^owhead.

Childwit, comes of the Saxon word (child.) and wit) which some say in that
tongue, is a termination of some words without signification, as (dom) in
(Christendom) or (hood) in (childhood) with us. But for the signification of
(wit) see Bloudwit. Childwit signifies a power to take a fine of your
bondwoman begotten with child without your consent, Rastall, exposit. of words.

Chimin, (chiminus) comes from the French ( chemin, i. aditus, via) and
signifies in our Common law, a way. It is divided into two sorts: the Kings
high way, and a private way, Kitchen. fol. 35. The Kings high way (chiminus
regius is that, by which the Kings subjects, and all others under his
protection, have free liberty to pass, though the property of the soil of
each side, where the way lies, may perhaps belong to some private man. A way
private i: that, by which one man or more have liberty to pass, either by
prescription or by Charter, through another man's ground. And this is divided
into chimin in gross, and chimin appendant, Kitchen fol. 117. Chymin in gross
is that way, which a man holds principally and solely in it self: Chimin
appendant is that, which a man has adjoyne^ to some other thing as appertinent
thereunto. For example, if a man hire a close or pasture, and covenant for
ingresse and egresse to and from the said close, through some other ground, by
which otherwise he cannot pass. Or Chimin in gross may be that, which the
Civilians call personal: as when one covenanteth for a way through another
man's ground, for himself and his heirs: Chimin appendant, on the other side,
may be that which they call real; as when a man purchases a way through
another man's ground, for such as do or shall dwell in this or that house, for
ever, or be owners of such a manor.

Chiminage, (chiminagium) signifies a toll for wayfarage through the Forest,
Cromptons jurisd. fol. 189. and Manwood part 1. of his Forest, laws, page 86.
See Chimin. The Feudists call it, Pedagium. See Chimin.

Chirographer of Fines (chirographus finium and concord^arum) comes of the
Greek ((...)) which signifies a writing of a man's own hand, whereby he
acknowledges a debt to another. It signifies in our Common Low, him in the
Common Bench office, that ingrosseth Fines in that Court acknowledged into a
perpetual record, after they be acknowledged, and fully passed by those
Officers, by whom they are formerly examined; and that writes and delivers
the Indentures of them unto the party, anno 2 H. 3. cap. 8. and West. Symbol.
part 2. titulo fines. sect. 114. and 129. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 147. A. This
Officer also makes two Indentures, one for the Buyer, another for the Seller;
and makes one other intended piece, containing also the effect of the Fine,
which he delivers over to the Custosbrevium, that is called the foot of the
Fine. The Chirographer also, or his Deputy, does proclaim all the Fines in the
Court every Term, according to the Statute; and then repairing to the office of
the Custos brevium, there indorseth the Proclamations upon the backside of the
foot thereof: and always keeps the Writ of Covenant, as also the note of the
Fine.

Chivage. See Chevage.

Chivalrie, (servitium militare) comes o the French ( chevalier, i. eques)
and signifies in our Common law, a tenure of land by Knights service. For the
better understanding whereof, it is to be known, that there is no land, but is
holden mediately or immediately of the Crown, by some service or other: and
therefore are all our Free-holds that are to us and our heirs, called (Feuda)
feese; as proceeding from the benefit of the King, for some small yearly Ren^,
and the performance of such services, as originally were laid upon the Land at
the donation thereof. For as the King gave to the great Nobles his immediate
Tenants, large possessions for ever, to hold of him for this or that Rent and
service: so they again in time parcelled out to such as they liked their lands
so received of the kings bounty, for Rents and services, as they thought good.
And these services are all by Litleton divided into two sorts: Chivalrie, and
Socage. The one is martial and military, the other clownish and rusticall.
Chivalrie therefore is a tenure of service, whereby the Tenent is bound to
perform some noble or military office unto his Lord, and is of two sorrs:
either regal, that is, such as may hold only of the king: or such as may also
hold of a Common person, as well as of the king. That which may hold only of
the king is properly called Servitium, or Sergeanti^: and is again divided into
grand or petit, i. great or small. Great, commonly called Grand Sergeantie, is
that where one holds lands of the King by service, which he ought to do in
his own person unto him: as to bear the kings Banner, or his Spear, or to lead
his Host, or to be his Marshall, or to blow a Horn, when he sees his enemies
invade the Land. or to find a man at Arms to fight within the four Seas, or
else to do it himself, or to bear the Kings Sword before him at his Coronation,
or at that day to be his Sewer, Carver, Butler, or Chamberlain. Litleton tit.
Sergeantie. Petit Sergeantie, is where a man holds land of the King, to yield
him yearly some small thing toward his wars, as a Sword, Dagger, Bow, Knife,
Spear, pair of Gloves of mail, a pair of Spurs, or such like. Litleton titulo
petit Sergeantie. Chivalrie, that may hold of a Common person, as well as of
the King, is called (scutagium) escuage, that is, service of the shield And
this is either uncertain or certain. Escuage is uncertain is likewise twofold:
first where the Tenent by his tenure is bound to follow his Lord going in
person to the Kings wars against his enemies, either himself, or to send a
sufficient man in his place, there to be maintained at his cost so many days,
as were agreed upon between the Lord and his first Tenent at the granting of
the fee. And the days of such service seem to have been rated by the quantity
of the land so holden: as if it extend to a whole Knights fee, then the Tenent
was bound thus to follow his Lord forty days. And a Knights see, was so much
land, as in those days was accounted a sufficient living for a Knight: and
that was 680 acres, as some opinion is, or 800. as others think: or 15 pounds
per annum. Camdens Britan. page 110. in meo. S. Thomas Smith says, Census
equestris is forty pounds revenue in free lands. If the law extend but to half
a knights fee, then the Tenent is bound to follow his Lord, as above is said,
but twenty days. If to a fourth part, then ten days, Fitz. not, br. fo. 83.
C. and 84. C. E. The other kind of this Escuage uncertain is called Castleward:
where the Tenent by his land is bound, either by himself, or by some other, to
defend a Castle, as often as it shall come to his course Escuage certain, is
where the Tenent is set at a certain sum of money, to be paid in lien of such
uncertain service, as that a man shall yearly pay for a Knights fee, twenty
shillings. Stow. annal. page 238. for half a Knights fee, ten shillings, or
some like rate. And this service, because is it drawn to a certain rent,
grows to be of a mixed nature: not merely Socage, for that it smells not of
the Plough, and yet Socage in effect: being now neither personal service, nor
uncertain. Litleton, titulo Socage. This tenure called Chivalrie, has other
conditions annexed unto it: as Homage, Fealty, Wardship, Relief, and Marriage,
Bracton lib. 2 cap. 35. which, what they signify, look in their places.
Chivalrie is either general or especial. Dyer fo. 161. number. 47. General
seems to be, where only it is said in the Feosment, that the Tenent holds
per servitium militare, without any specification of Sergeantie, Escuage, etc.
Special, that which is declared particularly what kind of Knights service he
holds by.

Chorall, (choralts) seems to be any, that by virtue of any of the orders of
Clergy, was in ancient time admitted to fit and serve God in the Quire, which
in Latin is termed Chorus.

Chose, (res) is the French word as general as (thing) is with us. It is in
the Common law, used with diverse Epithites worthy the interpretation: as Chose
local is such a thing as is ^nnexed to a place. Fo example: a mill is Chose
local, Kitchen fol. 18. Chose transitory, in the same place seems to be
that thing which is moveable, and may be taken away, or carried from place to
place. Chose in action is a thing incorporeall, and only a right: as an
Annuitie, an obligation of debt, a Covenant, or Voucher by warrantie, Broke
titulo, Chose in action. And it seems, that Chose in action, may be also
called Chose in suspense, because it has no real existence or being, neither
can be properly said to be in our possession, Broke ibidem.

Church - wardens (Ecclesiarum gardiani) be Officers yearly chosen, by the
consent of the Minister and Parishioners, according to the Cnstome of every
several place, to look to the Church, Churchyard, and such things as belong
^o both, and to observe the behaviors of their Parishioners for such faults as
appertain ^o the Jurisdiction or censure of the Court Ecclesiastical. These be
a kind of Corporation, enabled by law, to sue for any thing belonging to their
Church, or poor of their Parish. See Lamberd in his Pamphlet of the duty of
churchwardens.

Churchesset, is a word that I find in Fleta l.b. 1. cap. 47. in fine: whereof
he thus writes: Certam mensuram bladi tritici significat, quam quilibet olim
sanctae Ecclesiae die Sancti Martini empore tam Britonum quam Anglorum
contribuerunt. Plures tamen magnates, post Romanorum adventum, illam
contributionem secundum veterem legem Moysi nomine primitiarum dabant: prout in
brevi regis Knuti, ad summum Pontificem traxsmisso, continetur, in quo illam
contributionem, (chirchsed) appellant, quasi semen Ecclesiae.

CI
Cinnamon (cinamomum) is a tree, whereof the bark is known to be a pleasant,
comfortable, and medicinal spice, which you have described in Gerards Herball,
li. 3. cap. 142. This is reckoned among garbleable spices, anno 1 Jac. 19.

Cinqne ports (quinque portus) be those special Havens that ly toward France
and therefore have been thought by out Kings, from time to time, to be such as
ought most vigilantly to be observed against Invasion. In which respect the
places where they be, have an especial governor or keeper, called by his
office Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports: and diverse pri vileges granted unto
them, as a particular ju risdiction, their Warden having the authority of an
Admiral among them, and sending out writs in his own name. Crompton in his
jurisdictions, fol. 28. names the Cinque por. s Dover, Sandwich, Rye,
Hastings, Winchelsea, Rumney, Hithe, whereof some, because the number exceeds
five, must either be added to the first institution, by some latter grant or
be accounted as appendents to some of the rest. See Gardein of the Cinque
ports, and the Statute anno 32 H. 8. cap. 48.

Circuit of action (circuitus actionis) is a longer course of proceeding, to
recover the thing sued for, than is needful. See the new Terms of law.

Circumstantibus, is a word of art, signifying the supply or making up of the
number of Jurors, (if any impaneled appear not, or appearing, be challenged by
either party) by adding unto them so many other of those that are present or
standing by, as will serve the turn, v. an. 35 H. 8. cap. 6. and anno 5 Elizab.
cap. 25.

City (civitas) comes of the French (cite) and signifies with us, as it
does in other Regions, such a Town corporate, as has a Bishop and a Cathedral
Church. For Lucas de Penna, lege unica, tituli, De Metropol. Bcryto. tit. 21.
lib. 10. Cod. has these words: Idem locus, urbs, civitas, and opidum
appellatur. (Pro quo est etiam infra. De spectaculis, l. Nemo.) Civitas enim
dicitur, quatenus cum justitia and magistr atuum ordine gubernatur; opidum,
quatenus est ^bi copia incolarum: and urbs, quatenus muris debito more
cingitur. Proprie autem dicitur civitas, quae habet Episcopum. Supra de
Episcop. and Cleri. l. Nulli. Alias dicitur gener aliter omnis habitatio
plurimorum, quae muro cingitur. p. de verbo signif. lib. 2. and de penu lega.
l. Nam quod. Si ita. Sed stricte loquendo, si Episcopo caret, dicitur nrbs. p.
de verb. signif. l. Pupillus.. Oppidum, etc. Yet M. Crompton in his
Jurisdictions, where he reckons up the Cities, leaves out Ely, though it
have a Bishop and a Cathedral Church, and puts in Westminster, though now
it have no Bishop. And anno 35 Eliz. cap. 6. Westminster is called a City, anno
27 ejusd. cap. 5. Of the Statutes not printed, it is alternatively termed a
City or Borow. It appears by the Statute 35 H. 8. cap. 10. that then there
was a Bishop of Westusmjter. Civitas, according to Aristotle, li. politicorum,
ca. pri. is defined to be a certain or uniform government of the Inhabitants,
and Caesar civitatem vocat populum eodem jure utentem, Camd. Britan. pa. 310.
But this is the general definition of a Commonwealth, and not of a City, at
the least, as we now a days particularly take it. For over and beside that
which is above said, Cassanaeus in consuetudi. Burg. page 15. says, that
France has within the territories of it, one hundred and four Cities, and
gives reason of this his saying, because there be there so many seats of
Archbishops and Bishops.

CL
Clack, as to clack, force, and bard, alias, beard good wools, anno 8 H. 6. ca.
22. whereof the first. viz. to clack wool, is to cut off the sheeps mark, which
makes it to weigh less, and so yield the less custom to the King; to force
wool, is to clip off the upper and more hairy part of it; to bard or beard it,
is to cut the head and neck from the rest of the sleece.

Clamea admittenda in i^inere per Atturnatum, is a writ whereby the King
commands the Justices in Air to admit of ones clai^n by Attorney, that is
employed in the Kings service, and cannot come in his own person. Register.
orig. fol. 19. b.

Claim (clameum is a challenge of Interest in any thing that is in the
possession of another or at the least out of his own: as, claim by Charter,
claim by Descen. Old. not. br. fol. 11. Si dominus infra annum clamcum
qualitercunque apposuerit: Bracton lib. 1. cap. 10. See the definition and
diverse sorts of claim in Plowden. Casu Stowel. fol. 359. a.

Clarentius. See Herald.

Clergy (clerus, clericatus) is diversely taken: sometime for the whole number
of those, that are (de clero Domini) of the Lords lot or share, as the tribe of
Levi was in Judaea: sometime for a plee to an Indictment, or an appeal, and is
by Stawnf. pl. cor. l. 2. cap. 41, thus defined. Clergy is an ancient liberty
of the Church, which has been confitmed by diverse Parliaments, and is, when a
Priest, or one within Orders, is arraigned of felony before a secular Judge, he
may pray his Clergy, which is as much as if he prayed to be delivered to his
Ordinary, to purge himself of the offense objected. And this might be done in
case of murder. Cook lib. 4. fol. 46, a. This liberty is mentioned in
articulis cleri, ann. 9 Ed. 2. cap. 16. and what persons might have their
Clergy, and what not, see Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 2. cap. 42 and 43. Howbeit
there be many statutes made since he writ that book, whereby the benefit of
Clergy is abridged: As anno S. El. cap. 4. an 14. ejusdem, cap. 5. anno 18
ejusdem, cap. 4, 6, 7. and anno 23 ejusdem, cap. 2 a. 29 ejusdem, cap. 2. an.
31 ejusdem, cap. 12. a. 39 ejusdem, cap. 9. and cap. 15. Of this see Cromptons
Justice of peace, fol. 102, 103, 104, 105. And Lamberts Eirenarcha, lib. 4.
cap. 14. page 543. And note by the way, that the ancient course of the Law in
this point of Clergy, is much altered, for by the statute Anno 18 Eliz. cap. 7.
Clerks be no more delivered to their Ordinaries to be purged, but now every
man, though not within orders, is put to read at the bar, being found guilty,
and convicted of such felony as this benefit is granted for: and so burnt in
the hand and set free for the first time, if the Ordinaries Commissioner, or
Deputy standing by do say (legit ut Clericus) or otherwise suffers death for
his transgression.

Clerico admittendo, is a Writ directed to the Bishop, for the admitting of a
Clerk to a Benefice upon a (Ne admittas) tried and found for the party that
procures the Writ. Reg. orig. fol. 31, 6.

Clerico capto per statutum mercatorum, etc. is a Writ for the delivery of a
Clerk out of prison that is imprisoned upon the breach of a statute metchant.
Rtg. orig. fol. 147.

Clerico convicto commisso gaolae in defectu ordinarii deliberando, etc. is a
Writ for the delivery of a Clerk to his Ordinary, that formerly was convicted
of felony, by reason his Ordinary did not challenge him according to the
privile^ges of Clerks. Regist. origin. fol. 69. a.

Clerico infra sacros ordines constituto non eligendo in officium, is a Writ
directed to the Bailiffs, etc. that have thrust a Bayliwick or bedleship upon
one in holy Orders, charging them to release him again. Register orig. fol.
143. a.

Clerk (clericus) has two significations: one, as it is the title of him that
belongs to the holy ministry of the Church, that is, (in these days) either
Minister or Deacon, or what other degree or dignity soever: though according to
former times, not only Sacerdotes and Diaconi, but also subdiaconi, cantores,
acolyti, exo^cistae, and ostiarii, were within this account, as they be at this
day, where the Canon Law has full power. And in this signification a Clerk is
either religious (otherwise called regular) or secular, anno 4 Hen. 4. cap. 12.
The other signification of this word notes those, that by their function or
course of life practice their pen in any Court, or otherwise; as namely, the
Clerk of the Rolls of Parliament, Clerks of the Chancery, and such like, whose
peculiar offices I purpose to set down in order, according to that knowledge
that I could procure of them.

Clerk of the Parliament Rolls, (Clericus Rotulorum Parliamenti,) is he that
records all things done in the high Court of Parliament, and engrosseth them
fairly into parchment rolls, for their better keeping to all posterity. Of
these there be two, one of the higher, another of the lower or Common house,
Cromptons Jurisd. fol. 4 and 8. Smith de republ. Anglorum, page 38. See also
Vowels book touching the order of the Parliament.

Clerk of the Crown in the Chancery (clericus coronae in Cancellaria) is an
Officer there, that by himself or his Deputy is continually to attend the Lord
Chancellor or Lord Keeper, for special matters of estate by commission or the
like, either immediately from his Majesty, or by order of his council, as well
ordinary as extraordinary, viz. commissions of Lieutenancies, of Justices
errant, and of Assizes of Oyer and Terminer, of Jail-deliver, of the peace,
and such like, with their writs of Association, and Dedimus potestatem, for
taking of oaths. Also all general pardons upon grants of them at the Kings
coronation, or at a Parliament, where he sits in the higher-house at the
Parliament time; he writs of Parliament, with the names of Knights and
Burgesses, which be to be returned into his office. He has also the making of
all special pardons and writs of execution, upon bonds of statute of the Staple
forfeited: which was anne^ed to his office in the reign of Queen Mary, in
consideration of his continual and chargeable attendance: both these before
being common for every Cursitour and Clerk of Court to make.

Clerk of the Crown (clericus coronae) is a Clerk or officer in the Kings
Bench, whose function is, to frame, read, and record all indictments against
Traitors, Felons, and other offenders there arraigned upon any public crime.
He is otherwise termed Clerk of the Crown-office. And anno 2 H. 4. cap. 10. he
is called Clerk of the Crown of the Kings Bench.

Clerk of the Extreats (clericus Extractorum) is a Clerk belonging to the
Exchequer, who termely receives the Extreats out of the Lord Treasurers
Remembrancer his office, and writes them out to be levied for the King. He
also makes schedules of such sums extreated as as are to be discharged.

Clerk of assise clericus assisae) is he that writes all things judicially
done by the Justices of assise in their circuits. Cromptons Jurisdict. fol. 227.

Clerk of the Pell (clericus Pellis) is a Clerk belonging to the Exchequer,
whose office is to enter every Tellers bill into a parchement roll called
(Pellis receptorum) and also to make another roll of payments, which is called
(Pellis exitum) wherein he sets down by what warrant the money was paid.

Clerk of the Warrants (clericus Warrantorum) is an officer belonging to the
Court of Common Plees which enters all warrants of Attorney for Plaintiff and
Defendant, and intolleth all Deeds of Indentures of bargain, and sale, which
are acknowledged in the Court, or before any Judges out of the Court. And he
does extreat into the Exchequer all issues, fines, and amerciaments, which grow
due to the King any way in that Court, and has a standing fee of ten pounds of
the King, for making the same ex treats. See Fitzh. not. br. fol. 76. in prin.

Clerk of the pety Bag (clericus parvae bagiae) is an Officer of the
Chauncerie, of which sort there be three, and the Master of the Rolls their
chief. Their office is to record the return of all inquisitions out of ^every
Shire, all Liveries granted in the Court of Wards, all ouster le maines, to
make all patents of Customers, Gaugers, Controllers, and Aulnegers, All conge
de eslires, for Bishops, All liberateis upon extents of statute staples, the
recovery of Recognisances forfeited, and all Elegits upon them, the summons of
the Nobility, Clergy, and Burgesses to the Parliament; Commissions directed to
Knights, and other of every Shire, for seizing of the Subsidies. Writs for the
nominations of Collectours for the fifteenths, and all traverses upon any
office, bill or otherwise, and to receive the money due to the King for the
same. This Officer is mentioned, anno 33 H. 8. cap. 22.

Clerk of the Kings great Wardrobe (clericus magnae garderobae regis) is an
Officer of the Kings house, that keeps an account or Inventary in writing, of
all things belonging to the Kings wardrobe. This Officer is mentioned, an. 1
Ed. 4. cap. 1.

Clerk of the Market (clericus merketi) is an Officer of the Kings house, anno
1 Ed. 4. cap. 1. and anno 13 R. 2. cap. 4. whose duty is to take charge of the
Kings measures, and to keep the standards of them (that is) the examples of all
the measures that ought to be through the Land: as of Elns, Yards, Lagens, as
Quarts, Pottles, Gallons, etc. of Weights, Bushels and such like, and to see
that all measures in every place be answerable unto the said Standard, Fleta
lib. 2. cap. 8.9.10.11.12. of which office, as also of our diversity of weights
and measures, you may there find a Treatise worth the reading. Britton also in
his 30 chapter, says in the Kings person, to this effect: We will that none
have Measures in the Realm but we our selves: but that every man take his
Measures and Weights from our Standards: and so goes on with a Tractat of this
matter, that well shows the ancient law and practice in this point. Touching
this Officers duty, you have also a good statute, anno 13 R. 2. c. 4.

Clerk of the Kings silver (clericus argenti Regis) is an Officer belonging to
the Court of Common plees, unto whom every fine is brought, after it has been
with the custos Brevium, and by whom the effect of the Writ of Covenant is
entered into a Paper-book; and according to that note, all the fines of that
term are also recorded in the Rolls of the Court. And his entry is in this
form: He puts the Shire over the Margin, and then says, A.B. dat domino
Regi dimidium merkam (or more according to the value) pro licentia concordandi
C. cum C.D. pro talibus terris, in tali villa, and habet chirographum per pacem
admissum, etc.

Clerk of the Peace (clericus pacis) is an Officer belonging to the Sessions of
the peace. His duty is, in the Sessions to read the Endictments, to enrol the
Acts, and draw the Process: to record the Proclamations of rates for servants
Wages, to enrol the discharge of Apprentices, to keep the Counterpain of the
Indenture of Armor, to keep the Register book of Licenses, given to Badgers
and laders of corn, and of those that are licensed to shoot in gunnes, and to
certify into the Kings Bench transcripts of Indictments, Outlawries,
Attainders, and Convictions had before the Justices of the peace, within the
time limited by statute. Lamberts Eirenarcha, lib. 4. cap. 3. fol. 379.

Clerk of the Signet (clericus signeti) is an Officer attendant continually on
his Majesty's principal secretary, who always has the custody of the privy
Signet, as well for sealing his Majesty's private Letters, as also such grants
as pass his Majesty's hand by bill assigned. Of these there be four that
attend in their course, and have their diet at the Secretaries table. More
largely you may read of their office in the statute made anno 27 H. 8. cap. 11.

Clerk of the privy seal (clericus privati sigilli) is an officer (whereof
there be four of number) that attends the Lord Keeper of the privy Seal, or
if there be none such, upon the principal Secretary, writing and making out all
things that be sent by warrant from the Signer to the privy Seal, and are to be
passed to the great Seal, as also to make out (as they are termed) privy Seals
upon any special occasion of his Majesty's affairs; as for loan of money, and
such like. Of this officer and his function, you may read the statute, an. 27
H. 8. cap. 11. He that is in these days called the Lord Keeper of the privy
Seal, seems in ancient time to have been called Clerk of the privy Seal, and
to have been reckoned in the number of the great officers of the realm. Read
the statute, anno 12 R. 2. cap. 11.

Clerk of the Juries or Jurata writs (clericus Juratorum) is an Officer
belonging to the Court of the Common plees, which makes out the Writs called
(Habeas corpora) and (Distringas) for appearance of the Jury, either in Court,
or at the Assizes, after that the Jury or Panel is returned upon the (Venire
facias.) He enters also into the Rolls the awarding of these Writs, and
makes all the continuance from the going out of the (Habeas corpora) until the
verdict be given.

Clerck of the Pipe (clericus Pipae) is an Officer in the Kings Exchequer, who
having all accounts and debts due to the King, delivered and drawn out of the
Remembrancers offices, charge them down into the great Roll: who also writes
summons to the Sheriff, to levy the said debts upon the goods and cattels of
the Debtours: and if they have no goods, then does he draw them down to the
Lord Treasurers Remembrancer, to write extreats against their Lands. The
ancient renew of the Crown remains in charge before him, and he sees the
same answered by the Fermers and Sheriffs to the King. He makes a charge to
all Sheriffs, of their summons of the Pipe and Green wax, and sees it answered
upon their accounts. He has the drawing and engrossing of all leases of the
Kings land.

Clerk of the Hamper or Hanaper (clericus Hanaperii) is an Officer in
Chauncery, anno 2 Edw. 4. cap. 1. otherwise called Warden of the Hamper, in the
same statute, whose function is to receive all the money due to the Kings
Majesty for the seals of Charters, Patents, Commissions, and Writs, as also
fees due to the Officers for enrolling and examining the same, with such like.
He is tied to attendance on the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper daily in the
Term time, and at all times of sealing having with him leather bags, wherein
are put all Charters, etc. after they be sealed by the Lord Chancellor, and
those bags being sealed up with the Lord Chauncellours private Seal, are to
be delivered to the Controller of the Hamper, who upon receipt of them, does as
you shall read in his office. This Hanaper represents a shadow of that which
the Romans termed (Fiscum) that contained the Emperors treasure.

Clerk of the Plees (clericus placitorum) is an Officer in the Exchequer, in
whose office all the Officers of the Court upon especial privilege belonging
unto them) ought to sue or to be sued upon any action.

Clerk of the Treasury (clericus the saurariae) is an Officer belonging to the
Common plees, who has the charge of keeping the records of the Court, and
makes out all the records of Nisi prius, has the fees due for all searches,
and has the certifying of all records into the Kings Bench, when a Writ of
Error is brought; and makes out all Writs of (Supersedeas de non molestando)
which are granted for the Defendants while the Writ of Error hangs. Also he
makes all Exemplifications of Records being in the Treasury. He is taken to
be the servant of the chief Justice, and removeable at his pleasure, whereas
all other Officers are for term of life. There is also a Secundary, or
Under-Clerk of the Treasury for assistance, which has some allowances. There
is likewise an Underkeeper, who always keeps one key of the Treasury door, and
the chief Clerk of the Secundary an other, so the one cannot come in without
the other.

Clerk of Essoines (clericus essoniorum) is an Officer belonging to the Court
of Common plees, who only keeps the Essoins roll, and has for entering
every essoin six pence, and for every exception to bar the essoin, in case
where the party has omitted his time, six pence. He has also the providing of
parchment, and cutting it out into rolls, and marking the numbers upon them,
and the delivery out of all the rolls to every Officer, and the receiving of
them again when they be written, and the binding and making up of the whole
bundles of every term: and this he does as servant to the chief Justice. For
the chief Justice is at charge for all the parchment of all the rolls.

Clerk of the outlawries (clericus utlagariarum) is an Officer belonging to the
Court of Common plees, being only the servant or Deputy to the Kings Atturny
general, for making out the writs of (capias utlaga^um) after outlawry. And the
Kings Atturnies name is to every one of those writs. And whereas seven pence is
paid for the Seal of every other writ, betwixt party and party, there is but a
penny paid for the Seal of this writ, because it goes out at the Kings suit.

Clerk of the sewers (clericus suerarum) is an officer appertaining to the
Commissioners of sewers, writing all things that they do by virtue of their
commission, for the which see Sewers: and see the statute of anno 13 Elizab.
cap. 9.

Clerk controller of the Kings house whereof there be two) is an officer in
Court, that has place and seat in the Counting House, and authority to allow
or disallow the charges and demands of persuivants or messengers of the Green
cloth, purveyours, or other like. He has also the oversight and controlling
of al defaults, defects and miscarriages of any the inferior officers, and to
sit in the Counting House with the superior officers, viz. the Lord Steward,
Treasurer, Controller, and Cofferer, either for correcting or bettering things
out of order; and also for bringing in Country provision requisite for the
Kings household: and the censure for failing of carriages and carts warned and
charged for that purpose. This Officer you have mentioned, an. 33 H. 8. cap. 12.

Clerk of the Nihils (clericus Nihilorum) is an officer in the Exchequer, that
makes a roll of all such sums as are nihiled by the Sheriffs upon their
estreats of green wax, and delivers the same into the lord Treasurers
Remembrancer his office, to have execution done upon it for the King.

Clerk of the check is an officer in Court, so called, because he has the
check and controllement of the yeomen of the Guard, and all other ordinary
yeomen or huissiers belonging either to his Majesty, the Queen, or Prince,
either giving leave, or allowing their absences or defects in attendance, or
diminishing their wages for the same. He also nightly by himself or Deputy
takes the view of those that are to watch in the Court, and has the setting
of the watch. This officer is mentioned, anno 33 Henric. 8. cap. 12.

Clerk Marshal of the Kings house, seems to be an Officer that attends the
Marshall in his Court, and records all his proceedings, anno 33 Henr. 8. cap.
12.

Clothe of Raye, an. 27 E. 3 stat. 1. cap. 4.

Closhe, is an unlawful game forbidden by the the statute, anno 17 E. 4. cap.
3. which is casting of a bowl at nine pinnes of wood, or nine shank bones of an
ox or horse.

Clove is the 32 part of a weigh of cheese, i. eight pound, anno 9 H. 6. cap. 8.

Cloves (caryophilli) are a spice known by sight to every man. They are flowers
of a tree called (caryophillus) gathered and hardened by the Sun. Of their
nature you may read in Gerards Herbal. lib. 3. cap. 144. This is comprised
among such spices as be to be garbled, an. 1 Jacob. c. 19.

CO
Cocket (cockettum) is a seal appertaining to the Kings Custom House, Regist.
orig. fol. 192 a. and also a scrow of parchment sealed and delivered by the
officers of the Custom House to Merchants, as a warrant that their merchandise
be customed anno 11 H. 6. cap. 16. which parchment is otherwise called literae
de coketto, or literae testimoniales de coketto, Regist. ubi supr. fol. 179 a.
So is the word used, anno 5 and 6 Edw. 6. cap. 14. and an. 14 Edw. 3. stat. 1.
c. 21. This word is also used for a distinction of bread in the statutes of
bread and ale, made anno 51 H. 3. where you have mention of bread coket,
wastelbread, bread of trete, and bread of Common wheat.

Coferer of the Kings household, is a principal officer of his Majesty's Court
next under the controller, that in the Counting House, and elsewhere at other
times has a special charge and oversight of other officers of the household,
for their good demeanor and carriage in their offices, to all which one and
other, being either Sergeants, Yeomen, Grooms, Pages, or children of the
kitchen, or any other in any room of his Majesty's servants of household, and
pays their wages. This officer is mentioned, an. 39 Eliz. cap. 7.

Cogs, anno 23 H. 8. cap. 18.

Conisor of a fine, is he that passes or acknowledges a fine in Lands or
Tenements to another: Cognisee is he to whom the fine is acknowledged, West,
part 2. symbol. tit. Fines, sect. 2.

Cognizance, comes from the French ( cognizance, id est, intelligentia,
intellectus, notio cognitio) with us it is used diversely; sometime signifying a
badge of a serving-mans sleeve, whereby he is discerned to belong to this or
that Noble or Gentleman: sometime an acknowledgement of a fine, or confession
of a thing done: as cognoscens latro. Bracton lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 3.20, 32.
cognoscere se ad villanum, Idem, lib. 4. tract. 3. cap. 16. As also to make
cognizance of taking a distress: sometime as an audience or hearing of a
matter judicially, as to take cognizance: sometime a power or jurisdiction, as
cognizance of plee, is an ability to call a cause or plee out of another Court:
which no man can do but the King, except he can show Charters for it. Manwood,
part 1. of his Forest laws, page 68. See the new Terms of the Law, and the
new book of Entries, verbo Conusance.

Cognatione, see Cosenage.

Cognisour, see Conisour.

Cognitionibus mittendis is a Writ to a Justice, or other that has power to
take a Fine, who having taken acknowledgement of a Fine, deferreth to certify
it into the Court of Common plees, commanding him to certify it, Reg. orig.
68. b.

Coin (cuneus vel cuna) seems to come from the French ( coin, id est,
Angulus) which probably verifieth the opinion of such as do hold the ancientest
sort of Coin to be cornered, and not round. Of this Lawyers substantive (cuna)
comes the Lawyers verb (cunare) i. to coin. Cromtons Justice of peace fol.
220.

Coliander seed, or rather coriander seed (Semen coriandri) is the seed of an
herb so called, medicinable and wholesome for diverse goo^ purposes: which see
in Gerards Herbal, l. 2. cap. 379. It is numbered among the drugges that be to
be garbled. an. 1 Jacob. cap. 19.

Collateral (collateralis) comes of the Latin (Laterale) id est, that which
hangs by the side, Lateralia viatoria. p. de lega and fidelium tertio l. 102.
seem to signify a budget or cap-case to hang by a saddel pomel. Collateral is
used in the Common law for that which comes in, or is adhering of the side:
as collateral assurance is that which is made over and beside the deed it
self. For example, if a man covenant with another, and enter bond for the
performance of his covenant, the bond is termed collateral assurance, because
it is external, and without the nature and essence of the covenant. And
Crompt. Jurisd. fol. 185. says, that to be subject to the fee ding of the
Kings Deer is collateral to the spoil within the Forest. in the like manner
may we say, That the liberty to pitch booths or standings for a Fair in another
man's ground, is collateral to the ground. The private woods of a Common person
within a Forest may not be cut without the Kings license. For it is a
prerogative collateral to to the soil. Manwood part 1. of his Forest laws, p.
66.

Collateral warranty, see Warranty.

Collation of benefice (collatio beneficii) signifies properly the bestowing
of a Benefice by the Bishop that has it in his own gift or patronage, and
differs from Institution in this, for that institution into a benefice is
performed by the Bishop, at the motion or presentation of another who is patron
of the same, or has the Patrons right for the time. Extra de institutionibus,
and De concessione praebendarum, etc. And yet is collation used for
presentation, anno 25 Edw. 3. stat. 6.

Collatione fact a uni post mortem alterius, etc. is a writ directed to the
Justices of the Common Plees, commanding them to direct their writ to a Bishop,
for the admitting of a Clerk in the place of another presented by the King,
that during the suit between the King and the Bishops Clerk is departed. For
judgment once passed for the Kings Clerk, and he dying before he be admitted,
the king may bestow his presentation upon another. Regist. orig. fol. 31. b.

Collatione heremitagii, is a writ whereby the king conferreth the keeping of
an Ermitage upon a Clerk. Register orig. fol. 303, 308.

Color (color) signifies in the Common law, a probable plee, but in truth
false, and has this end, to draw the trial of the cause from the Jury to the
Judges. Of this see two apt examples in the Author of the new Terms, verbo
Color: who also refers you to the Doctor and Student, fol. 158. etc. See
Brook, tit. Color in Assise, trespass, etc. fol. 104.

Collusion, (collusio) is in our Common law, a deceitful agreement or compact
between two or more, for the one party to bring an action against the other to
some evil purpose, as to defraud a third of his right, etc. See the new Terms,
and Brook tit. Collusion. See also one Case of Collusion in the Register orig.
fol. 179 a.

Combat (duellum) is a French word, signifying as much as (certamen,
decertatio, dimicatio, discrimen, praelium, pugna) but in our Common law it is
taken for a formal trial of a doubtful cause or quarrel, by the Sword or
Bastons, of two Champions. Of this you may read at large, both in diverse
Civilians, as Paris de Puteo, de re militari and duello, Alciat de Duello,
Hottoman disputatio feudalium, cap. 42. and others. As also in our Common
Lawiers of England. namely Glandvile, l. 14. cap. 1. Bracton, l. 3. tract. 2.
cap. 3. Britton, cap. 22. Horns Myrrhor of Justices, l. 3. cap. des exceptions
in fine proxime and c. Juramentum duelli. Dyer, fo. 301. nu. 41. and 42. That
this also was anciently the Law of the Lombards, before they invaded Italy
(which was about the year of our Lord 571) appears by Sigonius, in his
History de regno Italiae, l. 2. de Aricaldo rege: who there reports, that the
said king having put away his wife Gundeberga, upon a surmise of Adultery with
Tato Duke of Etruria, at the private suggestion of Adalulphus, a great man
among the Lombards, and being charged by Clotharius the King of France his
Ambassador, of whose blood she wa^that he had done her wrong: he answered,
that he had done her no wrong. Whereupon Ansoaldus one of the Ambassador
replied, That they would easily believe him, if he would suffer the truth to be
tried by combat, between some one of the Queen's friends, and her accuser,
according to the custom of the Lombards. And the king yielding unto this,
Adulphus was vanquished by one Pitto, otherwise called Charles, set forth for
the Queens Champion, and she restored to her former place and honor.

Comin seed, alias Cumin seed, (Semen cumini) is a seed brought forth by an
Herb so called, which you may see described in Gerards Herball, lib. 2. cap.
416. this is placed among the garbleable drugs, anno 1. Jacob. cap. 19.

Commitatu commisso, is a writ or a Commission, whereby the Sheriff is
authorized to take upon him the sway of the County, Reg. orig. fol. 295. a.
and b. and Cokes Reports, l. 3. fol. 72. a.

Comitatu and castro commisso, is a writ whereby the charge of a County
together with the keeping of a Castle is committed to the Sheriff, Reg. orig.
fol. 295. a.

Commandrie (praeceptoria) was by some men's opinion, a Manor or chief message,
with which lands or tenements were occupied, belonging to the Priorie of S.
John's in Jerusalem, in England, and he which had the Government of any such
Manor or house, was called the Commander, who had nothing to dispose of it, but
to the use of the Priory, taking only his sustenance thence, according to his
degree, and was usually a brother of the same Priorie. Author of the new Terms
of law, verbo, Commandrie. By some other Books it appears, that the chief
Prior of S. John's, was a commander of a Nunnerie, and constituted the Prioress
of the said Nunnery, who was under his obedience, and removeable at his will,
notwithstanding that she had covent and common seal and had her possessions
several, and was wont to lease the land for Term of years, Fulbecks Paralels,
fol. 2. a. Of these commandries also Petrus Gregorius lib. de beneficiis, cap.
11. number. 11. has these words: Praeceptoriae dictae commendae satrorum militum,
veluti ordinis hospitalis Sancti Johannis Hierosolymitani, beneficia quidem
secundum quid ecclesiastica dicuntur a Barbatia ad Clement. causam col. 51. de
Electione. Tamen non prop ie dicuntur ex genere communium beneficiorum, eo quod
personae conferentes, and quibus conferuntur, non sunt laicae vel
ecclesiasticae, sed tertii ordinis. De his benefici^s fit mentio. cap. exhibita
de privilegiis, in extravag.com. in cap. Dudum, de decimis. These in many
places of our Realm are termed by the name of Temples, because they sometime
belonged to the Templers. Of these you read, anno 26 H. 8. cap. 2. and anno 32
ejusd. cap. 24 And of these the said Gregorius Tolosanus, l. 15, sui
syntagmatis, cap. 34. has these words: Monuimus superiori capite, crescente
numero peregrinorum, juxta templum Hierosolymitanum Xendochium edificatum, tit.
Divi Johannis, quo exciperentur peregrini, quos coenobia caepere non possent.
Hujus ergo ministerio quoque viri p^i nobiles se devoverunt, qui and peregrinos
tutarentur, and a latronum seu Agarenorum incursu defen dear nt. Horum
professio est votum solenne paupertatis, and abdicationis propriorum,
castuatis, et obedientiae. Proinde propter primum votum nihil proprii habent,
vel habere debent, sed accipiunt annonam, quam diu vivunt, vel praeceptorias
(quas vocant Commandries) administrant, quam diu eas possident, et optione
mutant, vel en magistri licentia permutant reddituri morientes quae apud eos
reperientur: societati. Of these Corasius in his para phrase ad sacerd. not.
part. 1. ca. 3. says thus: Praeceptoriae Rhodienses, cum non nisi fratribus
Hierosolymitanis, atque ita personis ecclesiasticis confer antur beneficiis
ecclesiasticis annumer ari merit o debent.

Commandment (praeceptum) is used diversely in the Common law: sometime for the
commandment of the King when upon his mere motion, and from his own mouth, he
casts any man into prison. Stawnf. pl. Coron. fol. 72. or of the Justices.
And this commandment of the Justices is either absolute or ordinary. Absolute,
as when upon their own authority in their wisdom and descretion, they commit a
man to prison for a punishment: ordinary is, when they commit one rather for
safe custody than punishment. And ^ man committed upon an ordinary commandment
is replevisable, Pl. cor. fol. 73. Commandment is again used for the offense
of him that wills another man to transgress the law, or to do any such thing
as is contrary to the law, as Murder, Theft, or such like. Bract. l. 3. tract.
2. ca. 19. And this the Civilians call (mandatum) Angelus de maleficiis.

Commen (communiae) comes from the French ( cummun, i. quod ad omnes
pertinet) and signifies in our Common law, that soil or water whereof the use
is common to this or that town or Lordship; as Commen of pasture, (communia
pasturae) Bract. lib. 4. ca. 19. and 40. Commen of fishing, communia pis^ariae.
Idem l. 2. ca. 34. Common of Turbary, i. of digging Turves (communia turbariae)
Idem lib. 4. cap. 41. Commen of estovers (communia estoveriorum.) Kitchen, fo.
94. Commen is divided into Commen in gross, commen appendant, commen
appertinent, and commen per cause. de vicinage, i. by reason of neighborhood.
Commen in gross is a liberty to have Commen alone (that is) without any land
or tenement, in another man's land, to himself for life, or to him and his
heirs. And it is commonly passed by deed of grant or specialty, Old not. brev.
fol. 31. and 37. Commen appendant and Commen appertinent be in a manner
confounded; as appears by Fitz. Not. brev. fol. 180. and be defined ^^ be a
liberty of Common, appertaining to, or depending of such or such a Freehold.
Only Kitchen, fol. 94, seems to make this difference, that he which has
Common appertinent, has it without limitation of this or that kind of Beasts.
But that is controlled by Dyer, fol. 70. b. number. 19. He that has Commen
appendant has it but for beasts commendable, as horses, oxen, kine and sheep,
being accounted fittest for the Plowman: and not of Goats, Geese, and Hogs.
Whereunto the Author of the new Terms of Law adds another difference, which
is, That Commen appertinent may be severed from the land whereunto it is
appertinent, but not Commen appendant. The original of Commen appendant, Sir
Edw. Coke, l. 4. fol. 37. thus expresserh: Commen appendant by the ancient Law
had beginning in this manner; when a Lord infeossed another in earable lands,
to hold of him in Socage, (id est, per servitium socae) as all tenure in the
beginning, according to Litleton, was: the Feoffee to maintain the service of
his plow, had Commen in the wastes of his Lord, for his necessary beasts to gain
and compass his land: and that for two causes; one, for that as then it was
taken, it was (tacit) employed in the feoffement, by reason the Feoffee could
not gain or compass his land without cattle, and cattle could not be sustained
without pasture, and so by consequent, the feoffee had, as a thing necessary
and incident, Commen in the wastes and land of the Lord. And this appears by
ancient books, temp. Ed. 1. tit. Commen 24. and 17. Ed. 2. tit. Commen 23. and
20 Ed. 3. tit Admesurement, S. and 18 Ed. 3. and by the rehearsal of the
statute of Merton, c. 4. The second reason was for maintenance and advancement
of tillage, which is much regarded and favored in the Law. Thus far Sir Edward.

Commen per cause de vicinage, is a liberty that the Tenants of one Lord in one
town, have to Commen with the Tenants of another Lord in another town: which
kind of Commen they that challenge, may not put their cattle into the Commen
of the other town, for then they be distreinable: but turning them into their
own fields, if they stray into the neighbors Commen they must be suffered. See
the terms of Law. Commen of pasture the Civilians call Jus compascendi, cum sc.
plures ex municipibus qui diversa praedia possidebant, saltum communem, ut jus
compascendi haberent mercc^rentur. l. panul. p. si servit. vendicetur. It is
also called Jus compascuum. Ibid.

Commendam (commenda) is a Benefice that being void, is commended to the charge
and care of some sufficient Clerk, to be supplied, until it may be
conveniently provided of a Pastor. And that this was the true original of this
practice, you may read at large in Duraneus, de sacris ecclesiae ministeri^s
and beneficiis, l. 5. ca. 7. And whereas the gloss, in verbo commendare, in
ca. Nemo deinceps: de electione, in sexto, defines, commendam esse ecclesiae
custodiam alicui comissam: Johannes Andreas thereupon says thus: huic
definitioni necessario haec ad^icienda putem: in tempus gratia evidentis
necessitatis and utilitasis. Idque docuit textus in dicto capice. Nem^.
Corrasius in his paraphrase de sacerdo^iorum materia, part 1. cap. 6. nu. 3.
and seq. thus describes the matter: In commendam conceditur benificium, cum
Romanus Pontifex, Legatus, aut Episcopus (Neque enim inferioribus, qui ex
privilegio aut alio jure spirituali conferunt, concessum est ca. cunt omnes
basilicae, 16. quaest. 7. ecclesiae vacantis custodiam alicui committit,
administratorem generalem ejus templi eum constituens, ca. nemo, de electio. in
sexto. Commendare nnim aliud est nihil, quam deponere. l. publius. p. depositi.
l. commendare. ^. de verb. signif. Hoc autem, ad tempus sex. mensium, et pro
evidenti necessitate aut utilitate ecclesiae lex permittit, (d. ca. Nemo.)
Quare commendatarius qui ecclesiae vacantis and fructuum ad tempus duntaxat
custodiam habet, nec tenere beneficium, jusve habere in beneficio, aut
canonicum titulum censebitur; uti nec depositarius in re deposita: whereof also
Petrus Gregorius de beneficiis, cap. 10. nu. 13, thus writes: In hac quarta
divisione, potest addi tertium genus beneficii, quod citra praescriptionem
qualitatis a persona alterius qualitatis quam beneficium exig at nature a
possidetur, sed sine praejudicio naturae beneficii, et per dispensationem eo
commendato olim ad tempus certum certae personae, hodie, ut plerunque quam diu
commendatarius vixerit. Vocant hoc beneficium commendatum commendam: ut si
regulare beneficium a Summo Pontifice conferatur, nomine commendae seculari.
Nam ideo non mutatur beneficii natura, nec fit ideo seculare, etc. And a little
after, Interim annotabimus duplici de causa fieri commendam ecclesiae, nempe
vel in utilitatem ecclesia, vel commendatarii. In primo commenda titulum non
dat beneficii commendatario, and dicitur potius custodia qua revocari potest:
quod repugnat naturae beficii, quod est perpetuum. In secundo autem casu
beneficium censetur in utilitatem commendatarii commenda facta, quam possidere
potest quam diu vixerit, etc. whom you may also read, c. 2, l. 13.

Commissary (commissarius) is a title of ecclesiastical jurisdiction,
appertaining to such a one as exercises spiritual jurisdiction (at the least
so far as his Commission permits him) in places of the Dioces so far distant
from the chief City, as the Chancellor cannot call the subjects to the Bishops
principal Consistory, without their too great molestation. This Commissary is
of the Canonists termed commissarius, or officialis foraneus. Lyndwoods
provin. cap. 1. de accusatio, verbo, Mandatum archiepiscopi, in glos. and is
ordained to this especial end, that he supply the Bishops jurisdiction and
office in the out-places of the Dioces, or else in such parishes as be
peculiars to the Bishop, and exempted from the jurisdiction of the Archdeacon.
For where either by prescription or composition, there be Archdeacons that have
jurisdiction within their Archdeaconries, as in most places they there have,
this commissary is but superfluous, and most commonly does rather vex and
disturb the Country for his lucre, than of conscience seek to redress the
lives of offenders. And therefore the Bishop taking prestation money of his
Archdeacons yearly pro exteriori jurisdictione, as it is ordinarily called,
does by super-onerating their circuit with a commissary, not only wrong
Archdeacons, but the poorer sort of subjects much more, as common practice
daily teaches to their great woe.

Commission (commissio) is for the most part in the understanding of the Common
law, as much as (delegatio) with the Civilians, (See Brook, titulo Commission)
and is taken for the warrant or Letters Patents, that all men exercising
jurisdiction either ordinary or extraordinary, have for their power to hear or
determine any cause or action. Of these see diverse in the table of the Register
original, verbo Commissio. Yet this word sometime is extended further than to
matters of judgment: as the Commission of Purveyers or takers, anno 11 H. 4.
cap. 28. But with this epitheton (High) it is most notoriously used for the
honorable Commission Court, instituted and founded upon the Statute, 1 Eliz.
cap. 1. for the ordering and reformation of all offenses in any thing
appertaining to the jurisdiction ecclesiastical: but especially such as are of
higher nature, or at the least require greater punishment, than ordinary
jurisdiction can afford. For the world being grown to that looseness, as not
to esteem the censure of excommunication, necessity calls for those censures
of fines to the Prince and imprisonment, which do affect men more nearly.

Commission of rebellion (commissio rebellionis) is otherwise called a writ of
Rebellion (Breve Rebellionis) and it has use, when a man after proclamation
made by the Sheriff upon an order of the Chauncery, or court of Statrechamber,
under penalty of his allegiance, to present himself to the Court by a certain
day, appears not. And this commission is directed by way of command to
certain persons, to this end, that they, or three, two, or one of them, do
apprehend, or cause to be apprehended, the party as a rebel and contemner of
the Kings laws, wheresoever they find him within the Kingdom, and bring him,
or cause him to be brought to the court, upon a day therein assigned. The true
copy of this commission or Writ, you have in Cromptons diverse jurisdictions.
Court de Star Chamber: as also in West. tractat. touching proceedings in
chancery, Sectio 24.

Commissioner (commissionarius) is he that has commission, as Letters Patents,
or other lawful warrant, to execute any public office: as Commissioners of the
office of Fines and Licenses. West. part 2. symbol. titulo Fines. sect. 106.
Commissioners, in Eyr, anno 3 Ed. 1. cap. 26. with infinite such like.

Committee, is he to whom the consideration or ordering of any matter is
referred, either by some Court, or consent of parties, to whom it belongs. As
in Parliament, a Bill being read, is either consented unto, and passed, or
denied, or neither of both, but referred to the consideration of some certain
men, appointed by the house, farther to examine it: who thereupon are called
Committees. Committee of the King, West. part. 2. symbol. titulo Chancerie,
sect. 144. This word seems to be something strangely used in Kitchen, fol.
160. where the widow of the Kings Tenent being dead, is called the Committee of
the King, that is, one committed by the ancient law of the land, to the Kings
care and protection.

Common bench, (bancus communis) is used some time for the Court of Common
plees, anno 2 Ed. 3. cap. 11. So called, as M. Cambden says in his Britannia.
page 113. quia communia placita inter subditos ex jure nostro, quod commune
vocant, in hoc disceptantur, that is the Plees or Controversies tried between
Common persons.

Common fine (finis communis) of this, Fleta has these words: Quibus expeditis
(speaking of the business finished by Justices in Eyr) consueverunt
Justiciarii imponere villatis, juratoribus, hundredis, and toti comitatui
concelamentum, and omnes separatim amerciare: quod videtur voluntarium, cum de
per jurio and concelau^ento non fuerint convicti, sed potius dispensandum esset
cum eis quod anim as in statera posuerint pro pacis conservatione, lib. 1. cap.
48.. Quibus. And a little following,. Et provisum, he has these words: Et
provisum ests, quod communes misericordiae vel fines comitatuum amerciatorum in
finibus ininerum Justiciariorum ante recessum ipsorum Justiciariorum per
sacramenta militum, and aliorum proborum hominum de comitatu eodem, affidentur
super eos qui contribuere debent: unde particulae Justiciariis liberentur, ut
cum aliis extractis suis ad Scaccarium liberare valiant. These last words of
his have relation to the statute, Westminst. pr. cap. 18. which read. See Fine.

Common Plees (communia placita) is the Kings Court now held in Westminster
Hall, but in ancient time moveable, as appears by the Statute called Magna
charta, cap. 11. as also anno 2 Ed. 3. cap. 11. and Pupilla oculi, part 5.
cap. 22. But M. Gwin in the Preface to his Readings says, that until the time
that Henry the third granted the great Charter, there were but two Courts in
all, called the Kings Courts: whereof one was the Exchequer, the other the
Kings Bench, which was then called (Curia Domini regis) and (Aula regia)
because it followed the Court or King: and that upon the grant of that Charter,
the Court of Common plees was erected, and settled in one place certain viz. at
Westminster. And because this Court was settled at Westminster, wheresoever the
King lay, thereupon M. Gwin, ubi supra, says, that after that all the Writs
ran, Quod sit coram Justiciariis meis apud Westmonasterium: whereas before the
party was commanded by them, to appear coram me vel Justiciariis meis, simply
without addition of place, as he well observes out of Glanvile and Bracton,
the one writing in Henry the seconds time, before this Court was erected, the
other in the latter end of Henry the thirds time, who erected this Court. All
civil causes both real and personal are, or were in former times, tried in this
Court, according to the strict law of the Realm: and by Fortescue, cap. 50. it
seems to have been the only Court for real causes. The chief Judge thereof
is called the Lord chief Justice of the Common Plees, accompanied with 3 a 4
Assistants or Associates, which are created by Letters Patents from the King,
and (as it were) enstalled or placed upon the Bench, by the Lord Chancellor, and
Lord chief Justice of the Court, as appears by Fortescue, cap. 51. who
expresses all the circumstances of this admission. The rest of the Officers
belonging to this Court, are these: The Custos brevium, three Protonotaries,
otherwise called Prenotaries, Chirographer, Filazers 14. Exigenters 4. Clerk of
the Warrants, Clerk of the Juries, or Jurata writs, Clerk of the Treasury,
Clerk of the Kings Silver, Clerk of the Essoins, Clerk of the Outlawries. Whose
distinct functions look in their places. See Common Bench.

Common day in plee of land, anno 13 R. 2. stat. 1. cap. 17. signifies an
ordinary day in the Court, as Octavis Michaelis, quindena Pascae, etc. as you
may see in the statute made an. 51 H. 3. concerning general days in the Bench.

Common house of Parliament, is used for the nether house: because the Commons
of the Realm, that is, the Knights of the Shires and Burgesses, possess that
house, Crompton, jurisd. 9.

Commotes, seems to be compounded of the Preposition (con) and ( mot, i.
dictio, verbum) and signifies in Wales a part of a Shire, as an Hundred, anno
28 H. 8. cap. 3. It is written Commoi^hes, anno 4 H. 4. cap. 17. and is used
for a gathering made upon the people (as it seems) of this or that Hundred,
by Welsh Minstrels.

Common law, (communis lex) has three diverse significations, which see in the
Author of new terms of law. verb. Common law.

Communi custodia, is a writ that lies for that Lord, whose Tenant holding by
Knights service, dies, and leaves his eldest Son under age, against a
stranger that enters the land, and obtains the ward of the body. It may seem
to take the name from the Common custom or right in this case: which is, that
the Lord have the wardship of this Tenant, until his full age, or because it is
common for the recovery both of Land and Tenant, as appears by the form
thereof. Old. not. br. fol. 89. See also the Register orig. fol. 161. a.

Communi placito non tenendo in scaccario, is a a Writ directed to the
Treasurer and Barons of the Exchequer, forbidding them to hold Ple^ between two
common persons in that Court, there of them belonging toward the said Court,
Register orig. fol. 187. b.

Companion of the Garter, is one of the Knights of that most noble and
honorable order, anno 24 H. 8. cap. 13. See Garter.

Compromis (compromissum) is a mutual promise of two or more parties at
difference, to refer the ending of their Controversies, to the arbitriment
and equity of one or more arbitratours. West. defines it thus, part 2.
symbol. titulo Compromise sect. pri. A compromise or submission (arbitrium,
compromissum, submissio) is the faculty or power of pronouncing sentence
between persons at controversy, given to arbitratours by the parties mutual
private consent, without public authority.

Computo, is a writ so called of the effect: because it compels a Bailiff,
Chamberlain, or Receiver to yield his account, Old not. br. fol. 58. It is
founded upon the statute of West. 2. c. 2. an. 13 E. 1. which for your
hetterunderstanding you may read. And it lies also for executours of
executours, anno 15 Ed. 3. statut. de provis. victual. cap. 5. Thirdly, against
the guardian in Socage for waste made in the minority of the heir, Marbl. cap.
17. And see farther in what other cases it lies, Register orig. fol. 135. Old
not. br. ubi supra. and Fitzh. not. br. fol. 116.

Concealers, be such as find out concealed lands, that is, such lands as are
privily kept from the King by common persons, having nothing to show for them,
anno 39 Eliz. cap. 22. They be so called, a concelando, as mons a movendo, per
antiphrasin.

Concord (concordia) is in the Common law, by a peculiar signification, defined
to be the very agreement between parties, that intend the levying of a Fine of
lands one to the other, who and in what manner the land shall pass. For in the
form thereof many things are to be considered, West. part 2. Symbol. titulo
fines and concords. sect. 30. whom read at large. Concord is also an agreement
made upon any trespass committed between two or more: and is divided into a
Concord executory, and a Concord executed. See Plowden, casu Renig^r, and
Fogassa. fol. 5. and 6. where it appears by some opinion, that the one
binds not as being imperpect: the other absolute, and tyeth the partie^: and
yet by some other opinion in the same case, it is affirmed that agreements
executory be perfect, and do no less bind than agreements executed, fol. 8. b.

Concubinage (concubinatus) is an exception against her, that sueth for her
Dower, whereby it is alleged, that she was not a wife lawfully married to the
party, in whose lands she seeks to be endowed, but his Concubine, Britton,
cap. 107. Bract. l. 4. tract. 6. cap. 8.

Condition (conditio) is a rate, manner, or law, annexed to men's acts, staying
or suspending the same, and making them uncertain, whether they shall take
effect or no, West. part. 1. symb. li. 2. Sect. 156. In a Lease there may be
two sorts of conditions: condition collateral, or condition annexed to the
rent. Sir Edward Coke, lib. 3. Pennants case, fol. 64. Collateral condition is
that, which is annexed to any collateral act: as that the Leassee shall not go
to Rome, ib. fol. 65. Condition is also divided, into condition in deed or
fact, and condition in Law: which otherwise may be termed, condition expressed,
and condition employed. Perkins, Conditions, 722. These, and other like
divisions of conditions, you may read in the Author of the new Terms of Law,
verbo condition. And in Litleton, lib. 3. cap. 5.

Conders, may seem to proceed from the French ( Conduire, 1. deducere,
gubernare) they be such is stand upon high places near the Seacoast, at the
time of Herring-fishing, to make signs with Boughs, etc. in their hand unto
the Fishers, which way the shole of Herrings passes. For that may better
appear to such as stand upon some high cliff on the shore, by a kind of blew
color, that the said Fish causes in the water, than to those that be in the
Ships. These be otherwise calls Huers, by likelihood of the French huyer, i.
exclamare and balkers: as appears by the statute, anno 1 Jacob. cap. 23.

Cone and key. Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 37. nu. 3. Look Cover and Key.

Confirmation (confirmatio) is a strengthening of an estate formerly had, and
yet voidable, though not presently void. For example; a Bishop grants his
Chancelership by Patent, for the term of the Patentee his life: this is no void
grant, but voidable by the Bishops death, except it be strengthened by the
confirmation of the Dean and Chapter. See more of this, in West. part prim.
symb. lib. 2. sect. 500. and Fitzh. not. br. fol. 169. B. 226 H. 271 D. 163. G.
and Littleton, lib. 3. cap. 9.

Confiscate (confiscatus) may be said to come either from the Latin
(confiscare) or the French ( confisquer, i. in publicum addicere.) All these
words are drawn from (fiscus) which originally signifies a Hamper, Pannier,
Basket, or Freil: but Metonymically the Emperors Treasure: because it was
anciently kept in such Hampers, etc. And though our King keep not his Treasure
in such things: yet as the Romans said, that such goods as were forfeited to
the Emperors Treasury for any offense, were bona confiscata: so do we those
that are forfeited to our Kings Exchequer. See more of these goods confiscate,
in Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 3. cap. 24.

Conge d'eslire venia elegendi) is very French, and signifies in our Common
law, the Kings Permission royal, to a Dean and Chapter in time of vacation, to
choose a Bishop: or to an Abbey or Priorie of his own foundation, to choose their
Abbot or Prior, Fitzh. not. br. fol. 169. B. 170. B.C. etc. Touching this
matter, M. Gwin in the Preface to his Readings says, that the King of England,
as sovereign Patron of all Arch-bishoprickes, Bishoprics, and other
Ecclesiastical Benefices, had of ancient time, free appointment of all
Ecclesiastical Dignities, whenever they chanced to be void: investing them
first (per baculum and annulum) and afterward by his Letters Patents: and that
in process of time he made the Election over to others, under certain forms
and conditions: as namely, that they should at every vacation before they
choose, demand of the King (conge de'slire), that is, license to proceed to
Election, and then after the Election to crave his royal assent, etc. And
farther he affirms by good proof out of Common Law Books, that King John was
the first that granted this, and that it was afterward confirmed by Westminster. pri.
ca. 1. which statute was made, anno 3 Ed. pri. And again by the statute,
(Articuli cleri) c. 2. which was ordained, anno 25 Ed. 3. statuto tertio.

Congeable, comes of the French ( conge, i. venia, It signifies in our
Common law, as much as lawful or lawfully done; as the entry of the Disseisee
is Congeable, Litseton. fol. 91. in meo.

Conisance. See Cognizance.

Contzour, alias cognizour (recognitor) comes of the French cognoistre, i.
cognoscere, cernere) and is used in the passing of Fines for him that does
acknowledge the Fine; and the Conizee is he, to whom it is acknowledged, West.
part 1 symbol. l. 2. sect. 49. and part 2. titulo, Fines sect. 114. See
Recognizour.

Conjuration (conjuratio) is the very French word drawn from the Latin; which,
as it is compounded of (con and juro) so it signifies, a compact or plot, made
by men combining themselves together by oath or promise, to do some public
harm. But in our Common law, it is especially used for such as have personal
conference with the Devil or evil spirit, to know any secret, or to affect any
purpose, anno 5 Elizab. cap. 16. And the difference that I have observed (how
truly, let those judge that be better skilled in these matters) between
conjuration and witchcraft, is because the one seems, by prayers and
invocation of Gods powerful names, to compel the devil, to say or do what he
commands him: the other deals rather by friendly and voluntary conference
or agreement between him or her and the devil or familiar, to have her or his
desires and turns served in lieu of blood, or other gift offered unto him
especially of his or her soul. And both these differ from enchantments or
sorceries, because they are personal conferences with the Devil, as is said:
but these are but medicines and ceremonial forms of words (called commonly
charms) without apparition.

Consanguineo, is a Writ, for the which see Avo: and see the Register orig. De
avo, proavo, and consanguinco, fol. 226. a.

Conservator of the truee and sase conduicts (conservator induciarum and
salvorum regis conductuum) was an officer appointed in every port of the Sea,
under the Kings Letters Patents, and had forty pound for his yearly stipend, at
the least. His charge was to enquire of all offenses done against the Kings
truce and safe conducts, upon the main Sea, out of the Countries, and out of
the Franchises of the Cinque ports of the King, as the Admirals of Custom were
wont, and such other things as are declared, anno 2 H. 5. cap. 6. Touching this
matter you may read another statute, anno 4 H. 5. cap. 7.

Conservatour of the Peace (conservator velcustos pacis) is he that has an
especial charge by virtue of his office, to see the Kings peace kept. Which
peace learned M. Lamberd defines, in effect, to be a withholding or
abstinence from that injurious force and violence, which boisterous and unruly
persons are in their natures prone to use toward others, were they not
restrained by laws and fear of punishment. Of these Conservators he farther
says thus: that before the time of King Edward the third, who first erected
Justices of Peace there were sundry persons, that by the Common law had
interest in keeping of the Peace. Of those some had that charge as incident to
their offices, which they did bear, and so included within the same, that they
were never the less called by the name of their office only: some others had
it simply as of it self, and were thereof name custodes pacis; Wardens or
Conservators of the Peace. The former and latter sort he again subdivideth.
Which read in his Eirenarcha, lib. 1. cap. 3.

Consideration, (consideratio) is that with us, which the Grecians called
(...): that is, the material cause of a contract, without the which, no
contract binds. This consideration is either expressed, as if a man bargain
to give twenty shillings for a Horse: or else employed, as when the law it self
inforceth a confideration; as if a man come into a common Inn, and there
staying sometime, taking both meat and lodging, or either for himself and his
Horse: the Law presumes, that he intends to pay for both, though nothing be
farther covenanted between him and his Host: and therefore if he discharge not
the house, the Host may stay his Horse, Fulb. parel. tract. Contracts. fol. 6.
a. b.

Consistory consistorium) is a word borrowed of the Italians, or rather
Lombards, signifying as much as (praetorium) or tribunal. vocab. utriusque jur.
It is used for the place of Justice in the Court Christian.

Convocation-house (domus convocationis) is the house, wherein the whole
Clergy is assembled, for consultation upon matters Ecclesiastical in time of
Parliament. And as the House of Parliament. And as the house of the Parliament,
so this consists of two distinct Houses: one called the higher
Convocation-house, where the Archbishops and Bishops sit severally by
themselves: the other, the lower Convocation-house, where all the rest of the
Clergy are bestowed. See Prolecutor.

Conusance. See Cognizance.

Conusour. See Cognizour.

Consolidation (consolidatio) is used for the combining, and uniting of two
Benefices in one. Broke titulo Union. This word is taken from the Civil Law,
where it signifies properly an uniting of the possession, occupation, or
profit with the property. For example, if a man have by Legacy usum fructum
fundi, and afterward buy the property or fee-simple (as we call it) of the
heir, hoc casu consolidatio fieri dicitur.. 3. De usu fructu in Institut. See
Union, and Unity of possession.

Conspiracy (conspiratio) though both in Latin and French, it be used for an
agreement of men, to do any thing, either good or bad: yet in our Lawyers
books, it is always taken in the evil part. It is defined, anno 34 Ed. pri.
stat. 2. to be an agreement of such as do confeder and bind themselves by oath,
covenant, or other aliance, that every of them shall bear and aid the other,
falsely and maliciously to indite, or falsely to move or maintain Plees, and also
such as cause children within age, to appeal men of Felony, whereby they are
imprisoned, and fore grieved: and such as retain men in the Countries with
liveries or fees, to maintain their malicious enterprises. And this extends
as well to the takets, as to the givers. And Stewards and Bayliffes of great
Lords, which by their seignorie, office, or power, undertake to bear or
maintain quarrels, plees, or debates that concern other parties, than such as
touch the estate of their Lords, or themselves, anno 4 Ed. 3. cap. 11. anno 3
H. 7. cap. 13. and of this see more, anno 1 H. 5. cap. 3. and an. 18 H. 6. cap.
12. as also in the new book of Entries, ver. Conspiraey.

Conspiracy, in the places before mentioned, is taken more generally, and is
confounded with maintenance and champerty. But in a more special signification,
it is taken for a confederacy of two at the least, falsely to endict one, or
to procure one to be endicted of Felony, And the punishment of Conspiracy, upon
an Indictment of Felony, at the Kings suit, is that the party attainted, leese
his frank law, to the intent that he be not empaneld upon Juries or Assizes or
such like eploiments, for the testifying of truth. And if he have to do in the
Kings Court, that he make his Attorney: and that his lands, goods, and chattels
be seized into the Kings hands, his Lands estreaped (if he find no better
favor) his trees raced, and his body committed to prison. 27 lib. assis. 59.
Cromptons Justice of Peace, fol. 156. b. This is called villainous judgment or
punishment. See Villainous judgment. But if the party grieved sue upon the
Writ of conspiracy, then see Fitzh. not. br. fol. 114. D. 115. I. Conspiracy
may be also in cases of less weight, Idem fol. 116. A. etc. See Frank Law.

Conspiratione, is a Writ that lies against conspiratours, Fitz. not. br. fol.
114. d. Cromptons Jurisd. fol. 209. See also the Register fol. 134.

Constable (constabularius, vel Conestabulis) is a Saxon word, compounded of (
cuning or cyng) and (staple) which do signiffe the stay and hold of the King.
Lamb. duties of Constables, number. 4. But I have heard it made heretofore of
these two words, (comes stabuli) which seems to me the more probable, because
we have this Officer from France, as most others, and not from the Saxons. And
Tilius in his Commentaries ( de rebus Gallicis li. 2. c. de conistabili, has
the same etymology, giving the reason thereof, ( quia praeest stabulo, i.
equili regis) which office is ancient here in England, and mentioned by
Bracton, seeming to answer him that was called (tribunus celerum) under the
first Kings of Rome, and (Magister equitum) afterward. The Germans that
inhabit the side of the river Rhene, note him by this title (die constofler)
and in counterfeit Latin (constofelerus) and in older time (constafolarius)
that the Romans were wont to term (assessorem judicii.) And (as Spiegelius in
his Lexicon noreth, derive the word) a stafolo comitis, i. gradu Judicis
fiscalis. For staffel in their language (as he says) signifies a grees or
step of a pair of stairs. And thereupon (stafelstein) being a word used in
their very ancient writings, signifies as much as Praetorium. But a man many
times may show in this kind more curiosity than discretion: as perhaps some
will judge me here to have done. And therefore enough of this. This word is
diversely used in our Common law: first for the Constable of England, who is
also called Marshall. Stawn^^ pl. cor. fol. 65. Of whose great dignity and
authority a man may find many arguments and signs both in the Statutes and
Chronicles of this Realm. His sway consists in the care of the common peace
of the Land, in deeds of arms, and matters of wars. Lamb. ubi supra, with whom
agrees the statut. anno 13 R. 2. cap. 2. statut. 1. Smith de Repub. Anglo.
lib. 2. cap. 25. Of this Officer or Magistrate, M. Gwin in the Preface to his
Reading says to this effect: The Court of the Constable and Marshal
determines contracts touching deeds of arms tout of the Realm, and handles
things concerning wars within the Realm, as Combats, blasons of armory, etc.
But it may not deal with battle in appeals, nor generally with any other thing
that may be tried by the Law of the Land. And read Fortescue c. 32. This office
was belonging heretofore to the Lords of certain manors, jure feudi: and why
it is discontinued, see Dyer f. 258. nu. 39. Out of this high magistracy
(says M. Lamberd) were drawn these lower Constables which we cal^o^stables of
Hundreds, and franchises, and first ordained by the Statute of Winchester, anno
13 Ed. 1. which appoints for the conservation of the peace, and view of
armor, two Constables in every Hundred and franchise, which in Latin are
called constabularii capitales. And these be now a days called high
Constables: because continuance of time, and increase both of people and
offenses, has again under these made others in every Town called petit
Constables, in Latin (subconstabularios) which are of like nature, but of
inferior authority to the other, as you may read at large in that learned man's
Treatise before named. Of these also read S. Thomas Smith, lib. 2. cap. 22.
Beside these there be officers of particular places called by this name; as
Constable of the Tower, Stawnf. pl. cor. fol. 152. and anno 1 H. 4. cap. 13.
Stows annals pa. 812. jurisdict. fol. 132. Constable of the Exchequer, anno 51
H. 3. statute 5. Constable of Dover Castle, Camdeni Britan. page 239. Fitzh.
not. br. fol. 240. otherwise called castellane, West. i. cap. 7. anno 3 Ed. 1.
But these be castellani properly, as Master Lamberd notes, though conjoined in
name with the others. See the Statute anno 32 H. 8. cap. 38. M. Manwood part
prima, c. 13. of his Forest laws makes mention of a Constable of the Forest.

Consuetudinibus and servitiis, is a Writ of right close, which lies against
the Tenant, that deforceth his Lord of the rent or service due unto him. Of
this see more at large the Old. not. br. fol. 77. Fitzh. eodem, fol. 151. and
the Register orig. fol. 159.

Consultation, (consultatio) is a Writ whereby a cause, being formerly removed
by prohibition from the Ecclesiastical Court, or Court Christian, to the Kings
Court, is returned thither again. For the Judges of the Kings Court, if upon
comparing the libel with the suggestion of the party, they do find the
suggestion false or not proved, and therefore the cause to be wrongfully called
from the Court Christian; then upon this consultation or deliberation, they
decree it to be returned again, whereupon the Writ in this case obtained, is
called a consultation. Of this you may read the Register orig. fol. 44, 45.
etc. usque fol. 58. Old not. br. fol. 32. and Fitz. eodem fol. 50.

Contenement, (contenementum) seems to be the freehold Land, which lies to
a man's Tenement or dwelling house, that is in his own occupation. For in Magna
charta, chap. 14. you have these words: A free man shall not be amerced for a
small fault, but after the quantity of the fault, and for a great fault after
the manner thereof, saving to him his contenement or freehold. And a Merchant
likewise shall be amerced saving to him his merchandies: and any other villain
then owers, shall be amerced saving his waynage, if he take him to our mercy.
And Bracton. lib. 3. tractat. 2. cap. 1. number. 3. has these words: and
sciendum, quod miles and liber homo non amerciabitur, nisi secundum modum
delicti, secundum quod delictum fuit magnum velparvum, and salvo contenemento
suo: mercator vero non nisi salva merchandiz: sua, and villanus nisi salvo
Waniagio suo: which mercy seems to have been learned from the Civil law:
whereby (executio non potest fieri in boves, aratra, aliave instrumenta
rusticorum, l. executores and Authen. Agricultores. Co. quae res pign. obliga.
nec in stipendia, arma and equos militum, l. stipendia. Co. de executio. rei
judica. and ibi doctores nec in libros scholarium. glos. in l. Nepos Proculo.
verbo dignitate. p. de verbo significa. Quae tamen rusticorum, militum and
scholarium privilegia circa executionem vera esse, and eatenus obtinere
intelligenda sunt, quatenus alia bona habent. Johan. Eimericus in processu
judiciario: cap. de Executione senten. 79. number. 11.

Continuance, seems to be used in the Common law, as prorogatio is in the
Civil law. For example: Continuance until the next Assise. Fitz. not. br. fol.
154. F. and 244. D. in both which places it is said, that if a record in the
Treasury be alleged by the one party, and denied by the other: a (certiorari)
shall be sued to the Treasurer, and the Chamberlain of the Exchequer: who, if
they certify not in the Chauncerie, that such a record is there, or that it is
likely to be in the Tower, the King shall send to the Justices repeating the
(certificate) and will them to continue the Assise. In this signification it is
likewise used by Kitchen, fol. 202. and 199. and also anno 11 H. 6. cap. 4.

Continual claim (continuum clameum) is a claim made from time to time, Within
every year and day, to Land or other thing, which in some respect we cannot
attain without danger. For example, if I be disseised of land, into which,
though I have right unto it, I dare not enter for fear of beating: it behooveth
me to hold on my right of entry to the best opportunity of me and minetheir, by
approaching as near it I can, once every year, as long as I live: and so I save
the right of entry to mine heir. Terms of Law. Again, if I have a slave or
villein broken from me, and remaining any where within the ancient demeasne of
the King, being in the hands of the King, I cannot maintain the writ de nativo
habendo, as long as he contuinueth there: but if I claim him within the year
and the day, and so continue my claim, until I can find him within that
compass: I may lawfully lay hold of him as mine own. Fitz. not. br. fol. 79.
See more in Litleton, verbo, Continual claim. And the new book of Entries,
Ibid. and Fleta. lib. 6. cap. 53.

Contract (contractus) is a Covenant or agreement with a lawful consideration
or cause. West, part prim. symbol. l. 1. Sect. 10. and lib. 19. p. de verbo
Significa. with other places, it is thus defined: Contractus est negotium inter
duos pluresve data opera gestum, ut vel uterque invice^; vel alteruter
obligetur. Who so will thoroughly examine the difference between this and
(pactum,) and such otherwords something like in signification, let himsearch
the Civilians, and he shall find workboth pleasant and profitable, and well
fitting the Common law also.

Contra formam collation is, is a Writ that lies against an Abbot, or his
successor (for him, or his heir) that has given land toan Abbey, to certain
good uses, and finds that the Abbot or his Successor has made a Feofment
thereof, with the assent of the Tenants, to the disherison of the House and
Church. This is founded upon the statute of West. 2. cap. 41. And of this see
the Regist. orig. fol. 238. and Fitzh. not. br. fol. 210. And note, that the
Author of the Terms of Law says, that this is not brought against the Tenent
or alienee.

Contra formam feoffamenti, is a Writ that lies for the heir of a Tenent
infeoffed of certain Lands or Tenements, by charter of Feofment of a Lord, to
make certain services and suits to his Court, and is afterward distreined for
more, than is contained in the said charter, Register orig. fol. 176. Old not.
br. fol. 162. and the Terms of the Law.

Contributione facienda is a Writ that lies in case where more are bound to
one thing, and one is put to the whole burden, Fitz. not. br. fol. 162.
brings these examples. If Tenants in common or joint, hold a Mill (pro
indiviso) and equally take the profits thereof, the Mill falling to decay, and
one or more of them refusing to contribute toward the reparation thereof, the
rest shall have this Writ to compel them. And if there be three Coparceners of
Land, that owe suit to the Lords Court, and the eldest perform the whole: then
may she have this Writ to compel the other two to a contribution of the charge,
or to one of them; if one only refuse. The Old not. br. frames this Writ to a
case, where one only suit is required for Land, and that Land being sold to
diverse, suit is required of them all, or some of them by distress, as
entirely, as if all were still in one, fol. 103. See the Register orig. fol.
176.

Controller (contrarotulator) comes of the French ( contrerouleur, i.
antigraphus, graece (...), which in Rome was used for him, cui ia muneris
iujunctum erat, ut observares pecuniam, quam in usum Principis vel civitatis
collegerunt exactores. Budaeus in annota. prio. in pand. tit. De officio
quaestoris. In England we have diverse officers of this name: as Controller of
the Kings house, pl. cor. fol. 52. and anno 6 H. 4. cap. 3. Controller of the
Navy, anno 35 Elizabeth. cap. 4. Controller of the Custom, Cromptons Jurisd.
fol. 105. Controller of Calis, anno 21 Rich. 2. cap. 18. Controller of the
Mint, anno 2 H. 6. cap. 12. Controller of the Hamper, (Contrarotulator
Hamperii) which is an officer in the Chancerie attending on the Lord Chancellor
or Keeper daily in the Term time, and days appointed for sealing. His office
is to take all things sealed from the Clerk of the Hanaper, enclosed in bags of
Lether, as is mentioned in the laid Clerks office, and opening the bags, to
note the just number, and especial effect of all things so received, and to
enter the same into a special book, with all the duties appertaining to his
Majesty, and other officers for the same, and so charge the Clerk of the
Hanaper with the same. Controller of the Pipe, (contrarotulator Pipae) who is
an officer of the Exchequer that writes out summons twice every year to the
Sheriffs, to levy the ferms and debts of the Pipe, and also keeps a
contrarolment of the Pipe. Controller of the Pell, is also an officer of the
Exchequer, of which sort there be two, vtz, the two Chamberlains Clerks, that
do, or should keep a controlment of the Pell of receipts and goings out. And in
one word, this officer was originally one, that took notes of any other
officers accounts or receipts, to the intent to discover him, if he dealt
amiss, and was ordained for the Princes better security, howsoever the name
sithence may be in somethings otherwise applied. To the proof whereof you may
take these few words out of Fleta, lib. 1. cap. 18. in prim. Qui cum fuerint ad
hoc vocati and Electi, (speaking of the Coroners) attachiari praecipiant
appella: qui and capitula coronae in comitatu praesentent: contra quos
vicecomes loci habeat contrarotulum, tam de appellis and inquisitionibus, quam
aliis officium illudtangentibus, etc. Which (contrarollum) is nothing else but
a parallel of the same quality and contents with the (...), or original. This
also appears by anno 12 Ed. 3. cap. 3. And this signification it seems to
have also in France. For there the King has his Receivers of Tails in every
Province, and Controllers, qui ad majorem fidem susceptoribus accedunt,
describu^tque in tabulis quae colliguntur. Gregorii syntag. lib. 3. cap. 6.
number. 6.

Conventione, is a Writ, that lies for the breach of any covenant in writing,
Register orig. fol. 185. Old not. br. fol. 101. Fitzh. calls a Writ of
Covenant, not. br. fol. 145. who divides covenants into personal and real,
making a sufficient discourse of them both: as also how this Wtit lies for
both.

Convict, (convictus) is he that is found guilty of an offense by the verdict
of the Jurie, Stawnf. pl. cor. fol. 186. Jet Master Crompton out of Judge Dyers
Commentaries 275 says, that conviction is, either when a man is outlawed, o^
appears and confesses, or else is found guilty by the Inquest, Crompt Just.
of Peace, fol. 9. a. Conviction and attainder are often confound ed, lib. 4.
fol. 46. a. b. See Attaint.

Coparceners, (participes) be otherwise called Parceners: and in Common Law,
are such as have equal portion in the Inheritance of their Ancestour; and, as
Litleton in the beginning of his third Book says, Parceners be either b^ Law,
or by custom. Parceners by Law, are the issue Female, which (no heir Male
being) come in equality to the Lands of their Ancestors, Bract. lib. 2. cap.
30. Parceners by custom, are those that by Custom of the Country challenge
equal part in such Lands: as in Kent by the Custom called (Gavel Kind.) This
is called Adaequatio among the Feudists. Hot. in verbis feuda. verbo
Adaequatio. And among the Civilians it is termed familiae erciscundae judicium,
quod inter cohaeredes ideo redditur, ut and haereditas dividatur, and quod
alterum alteri dare facere oport^bit, praestetur, Hotoman. Of these two you may
see Litleton at large in the first and second Chapters of his third Book, and
Britton, cap. 27. entitled, De heritage divisable. The Crown of England is not
subject to Coparcinory, anno 25 H. 8. cap. 22.

Copy, (copia) comes from the French ( copia, i. le double de quelque
escripture, latin descriptio, graece (...),) and signifies in our common
language, the example of an original writing; as the copy of a Charter, the
copy of a Court-roll.

Copia libelli deliberanda, is a Writ that lies in case where a man cannot get
the copy of a Libel at the hands of the Judge Ecclesiastical, Reg. orig. fol.
51.

Copie-hold (tenura per copiam rotuli curiae) is a tenure, for the which the
Tenent has nothing to show, but the copy of the Rolls made by the Steward of
his Lords Court. For the Steward, as he inrolleth, and makes remembrances of
all other things done in the Lords Court: so he does also of such Tenants, as
be admitted in the Court, to any parcel of Land or Tenement belonging to the
Manor: and the transcript of this, is called the Courtroll: the copy whereof
the Tenent takes from him, and keeps as his only Evidence, Coke, lib. 4.
fol. 25. b. This Tenure is called a Base-tenure, because it holds at the will
of the Lord. Kitchen, fol. 80. cap. Copy-holds. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 12. B. C.
who there says, that it was wont to be called Tenure in villenage, and that
this Copie-hold is but a new name. Yet it is not simply at the will of the
Lord, but according to the custom of the Manor. So that if a Cople-holder
break not the custom of the Manor, and thereby forfeit his Tenure, he seems
not so much to stand at the Lords courtesy for his right, that he may be
displaced hand over head at his pleasure. These customs of Manor be infinite,
varying in one point or other, almost in every several Manor. First, some
Copyhold is fineable, and some certain that which is fineable the Lord rateth
at what fine or income he pleases, when the Tenent is admitted unto it: that
which is certain, is a kind of inheritance, and called in many places
Custumarie: because the Tenent dying, and the hold being void, the next of the
blood paying the custumarie fine, as two shillings for an Acre or such like,
may not be denied his admission. Secondly, some Copyholders have by custom,
the wood growing upon their own land, which by Law they could not have. Kitchen
ubi supra. Thirdly, Copyholders some be such as hold by the verge in ancient
Demesne: and although they hold by Copy, yet are they in account a kind of
Freeholder. For if such a one commit Felony, the King has (annum, diem, and
vastum) as in case of Freehold. Some other hold by common Tenure, called mere
Copyhold: and they committing Felony, their land escheateth to the Lord of the
Manor forthwith. Kitchen, fol. 81. chap. Tenants per verge in ancient Demesne.
What ancient Demesne is see in the right place. See Tenent by Copy of
Court-roll. This is the land that in the Saxons time, was called Folk-land.
Lamberd, explicat. of Saxon words, verbo, Terra ex scripto, West. part. prim.
symb. l. 2. Sect. 646. defines a Copyholder thus: Tenent by copy of
Court-roll, is he which is admitted Tenent of any lands, or tenements within a
Manor, that time out of memory of man, by use and custom of the said Manor,
have been demisable, and demised to such, as will take the same in Fee, in
Fee-tail for life, years, or at will, according to the custom of the said
Manor, by copy of Court-roll of the same Manor, where you may read more of
these things.

Coraage (coraagium) is a kind of imposition extraordinary, and growing upon
some unusual occasion, and it seems to be of certain measures of corn. For
corus tritici is a certain measure of corn. Bracton libro 2. cap. 116. nu. 6.
who in the same Chapter, number. 8. has of this matter these words: Sunt etiam
quaedam communes praestationes, quae servitia non dicuntur, nec de
consuetisdine veniunt, nisi cum necessitas intervenerit, vel cum rex venerit:
sicut sunt hidagia, coraagia, and carvagia, and alia plura de necessitate, and
ex consensu communi totius regni introducta, and quae ad dominum feudi non
pertinent, and de quibus nullus tenetur tenentem suum acquietare, nisi se ad
hoc specialiter obligaverit in charta sua, etc.

Cordiner, comes of the French ( Cordovannier, i. suitor calcearius) a
Shoo-maker, and is so used in diverse Statutes, as anno 3 H. 8. cap. 10. and
anno 5 ejusdem cap. 7. and others.

Cornage (cornagium) comes of the French ( cor, i. cornu) and in our Common
law, signifies a kind of grand seargancy, the service of which tenure, is to
blow a horn, when any invasion of the Northern enemy is perceived. And by this
many men hold their land Northward, about the wall, commonly called the
Pictswall. Cambden Britan. page 609. hence comes the word (cornuare) to blow a
horn. pupil. oculi, part 5. cap. 22. in charta de Foresta. This service
seems to have proceeded from the Romans. For I find (cornicularios) mentioned
in the Civil law, viz. lib. 1. Cod. de officio diverso. Jud. 48. lege 3. and
lib. 12. tit. de apparitoribus praefectorum praetorio, 53. lege 1. and 3. where
Lucas de Penna defines them (eos qui cornu faciunt excubias militares.) And
Brissonius lib. 3. de verbo significat. faith thus of them: (hi militum quoddam
genus fuere, quicorniculo merebant, unde nomen habent.) Where it appears by
him out of Suetonius, Pliny, and Livie, that the horn was an honor and reward
given for service in war.

Corner-tile. See Gutter-tile.

Corody (corodium) comes of the Latin verb (corrodo) and signifies in our
Common Law, a sum of money or allowance of meat and drink due to the King
from an Abbey, or other house of Religion, whereof he is the founder, toward
the reasonable sustenance of such a one of his servants, being put to his
pensior, as he thinks good to bestow it on. And the difference between a
corrodie and a pension seems to be, that a Corrody is allowed toward the main
enauce of any the Kings servants, that lives in the Abbey: a pension is given
to one of the Kings Chaplains for his better maintenance in the Kings service,
until he may be provided of a benefice. Of both these read Fitzh. not. br. fol.
230, 231, 233. who there sets down all the Corrodies and pensions certain,
that any Abbey, when they stood, was bound to perform unto the King. There is
mention also of a Corrody in Stawn. praerogative 44. And this seems to be an
ancient law. For in Westminster. 2. cap. 25. it is ordained, that an Assise shall lie
for a Corrody. It is also apparent by the Statute, anno 34. and 35 H. 8. c. 16.
that Corrodies belonged some time to Bishops from Monasteries: and by the new
Terms of law, that a Corrody may be due to a common person by grant from one
to another, or of common right, to him that is founder of a Religious house,
not holden in frank almoyn For that Tenure was a discharge of all Corrodies in
it self. By which book it appears also, that a Corrody is either certain or
uncertain, and that it may be for life, years, in Tail, or in Fee.

Corodio habendo, it is a Writ, whereby to exact a Corrody of any Abbey or
Religious house. See Corodie, see the Regist. orig. fol. 264.

Coronatore eligendo, is a Writ which after the death or discharge of any
Coroner, is directed to the Shyreeve out of the Chancery, to call together the
Freeholders of the County, for the choice of a new Coroner, to certify into
the Chancerie, both the election, and the name of the party elected and to give
him his oath. See Westminster. 1. cap. 10. and Fitzh. not. br. fol. 163. and the
Register orig. fol. 177.

Coroner (coronator) is an ancient Officer of this land, so called, because he
deals wholly for the King and Crown, There be four of them commonly in every
County, and they are chosen by the Freeholders of the same upon Writ, and not
made by Letters Patents. Crompt. Jurisd. fol. 126. This Officer, though now he
be some inferior Gentleman, that has some smattering in the Law: yet if we
look to the statute of Westminster. 1. cap. 10. we shall find, that he was wont, and
ought to be, a sufficient man: that is, the most wise and discreet Knight, that
best will and may attend upon such an office. Yea, there is a Writ in the
Register, Nisi sit miles, fol. 177. b. whereby it appears, that it was
sufficient cause to remove a Coroner chosen, if he were not a Knight, and had
not a hundred shillings rent of Freehold. And the Lord Chief Justice of the
Kings Bench, is the Sovereign Coroner of the whole Realm in person, i.
wheresoever he remains, libro assissarum fol. 49.5. coron. Coke, lib. 4. casu
de Wardens: etc. of the Sadlers, fol. 57. b. His office especially concerns
the Plees of the Crown: But if you will read at large, what anciently belonged
unto him, read Bract. lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 5. de officio coronatorum circa
homicidium: and cap. 6. de of sicio coronatoris in thesauris inventis: and cap.
6. de officio coronatorum in raptu virginum: and cap. 8. de officio coronatorum
de pace and plagis. And Britton in his first Chapter, where he handles it at
large. Fleta also in his first book, cap. 18. and A^drew Horns mirror of
Justices, lib. 1. cap. del. office del coroners. But more aptly for the present
times, Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 1. cap. 51. Note, there be certain Coroners
special within diverse liberties, as well as these ordinary officers in every
County: as the Coroner of the Verge, which is a certain compass about the
Kings Court, whom Crompton in his Jurisd. fol. 102. calls the Coroner of the
Kings house: of whose authority see S. Edw. Cokes reports, lib. 4. fol. 46. a.
b. And I know certain Charters belonging to Colleges, and other corporations,
whereby they are licensed to appoint their Coroner within their own precincts.
Farther of this office see also Fitzh. not. br. fol. 76. A. B. Sir Thomas
Smith, lib. 2. cap. 21. de repub. Anglo. and Lamb. Eirenarcha, lib. 4. cap. 3.
page 380. And the office of the Coroner in Scot land, what it is, read M. John
Skene de verbo signif. verbo Iter.

Corporation (Corporatio) is that which the Civil law calls Vniversitatem, or
Collegium: A body Politic authorized by the Kings Charter, to have a common
Seal, a head Officer, one or more, and members able by their common consent, to
grant, or to receive in law, any thing within the compass of their Charter:
even as one man may do by Law all things that by law is not forbidden: and
binds the Successors, as a single man binds his Executor or Heir. See
Brokes his abridgement, titulo Corporation: and the new Terms of Law, Eodem.

Corpus cum causa, is a Writ issuing out of the Chancerie, to remove both the
body and the record touching the cause of any man lying in execution, upon a
judgment for debt, into the Kings Bench, etc. there to lie until he have
satisfied the judgment, Fitzh. not. br. fol. 251. E.

Corrector of the staple, is an officer, or Clerk belonging to the Staple, that
writes and records the bargains of Merchants there made, anno 27 Ed. 3.
stat. 2. cap. 22, and 23. The Romans called them Me^sarios.

Corruption of blood, is an infection growing to the state of a man attainted
of Felony, or Treason, and to his issue. For as he leeseth all to the Prince,
or other Lord of the Fee, accordingly as his case is, so his issue cannot be
heirs to him, or to any other Ancestor, of whom they might have claimed by him.
And farther, if he were noble, or a Gentleman before, he and his children are
made unnoble and ungentle in respect of the father. New Terms of the Law.

Corse present, are words borrowed from the French, signifiing a Mortuarie,
anno 21 H. 8. c. 6. The true French is (corpse praesente) i. the body presented
or tendered. The reason why the Mortuarie is thus also termed, seems to be,
for that where a Mortuarie was wont to be due, the body of the best Beast was
according to the law or custom, offered or presented to the Priest.

Corselet, is a French word, signifying a little Body, in Latin (corpusculum.)
It is used with us, for an armor to cover the whole body, or trunk of a man,
anno 4, and 5. Ph. and Mar. cap. 2. where with the Pikemen, commonly set in the
front and flanks of the battle, are armed, for the better resistance of the
enemies assaults, and the surer guard of the Gunners placed behind, or within
them, being more slightly armed, for their speedier issuing in and out to
discharge their Pieces. See Barrets discourse of War, lib. 3. dialog. 2.

Cosenage, (cognatione) is a Writ, that lies where the Tresail (that is,
Tritavus, the father of the Befail, or of the great Grandfather is seized in
his Demesne, as of Fee, at the day of his death, of certain lands or tenements,
and dies: and then a Stranger enters and abateth. For then shall his Heir
have this Writ of Cosenage: the form whereof see in Fitzh. not. br. fol. 221.
Of this also read Britton at large, cap. 89.

Cosening, is an offense unnamed, whereby any thing is done guilefully in or
out of contracts, which cannot be fitly termed by any especial name West. part
2. Symbolaeogr. titulo, Indictments. sect. 68. It is called Stellionatus in the
Civil law, of (Stellio) the beast, which is lacertae genus versutissimum, as
Cujacius in his paratitles calls it, and, quo nullum an mal homini invidet
fraudulentius, Pliny, lib. 3. cap. 10.

Cotage, (cotagium) is a house without land belonging unto it, anno 4. Ed. pri.
statut. prima. And the inhabitant of such a house is called a Cotager. But by a
later statute, no man may build a Cotage, but he must lay 4. Acres of ground
unto it, 31 Eliz. cap. 7.

Cote, is a kind of reffuse wool clung or clotted together, that it cannot be
pulled asunder, anno 13. R. 2. stat. 1. cap. 9. It lignineth also as much as
Cotage, in many places, as also it did among the Saxons, Verstegan in his
Restitut. of decayed intelligence in entiquities.

Covenable, (rationabilis) is a French word, signifying, fit or convenient, or
suitable, convenably endowed, anno 4. H. 8. ca. 12. it is anciently written
(convenable) as in the statute, an. 27. Ed. 3. stat. 2. cap. 17.

Covenant, conventio, is the consent of two, or more in one self thing, to do,
or give somewhat, West. part 2. symbol. lib. 1. sect. 4. It seems to be as
much as (pactum conventum) with the Civilians, which you read oftentimes in
Tullie. Pactum conventum, quod et vulgo vesticum vocant, opponitur nudo pacto,
vetue ab omni juris solennitate destatuto. Hujus exempla ponere difficile esse
Jason existimavit. Conventum aiunt, quod vestitur, autre, aut verbis, aut
literis, aut contractus cohaerentia, aut rei interventu. Oldendorpius. And
covenant in this signification, is either a covenant in law, or a covenant in
fact, Coke, li. 4. Nokes case, fol. 80. or covenant express, and covenant in
law, idem, li. 6. fo. 17. a. Covenant in law is that, which the law intends
to be made, though in words it be not expressed: as if the lessour do demise
and grant, etc. to the Leassee for a certain term, the Law intends a covenant
of the Leassers part, that the Leassee shall, during his whole term, quietly
enjoy his Lease against all lawful encumbrance. Covenant in fact, is that
which is expressly agreed between the parties. There is also a covenant merely
personal, and a covenant real, Fitzh. not. br. fo. 145. And he seems to
say, that a covenant real is, whereby a man tyeth himself to pass a thing
real, as land or tenements, as a covenant to levy a Fine of land, etc. A
covenant merely personal of the other side is, where a man covenanteth with
another by deed to build him a house, or any other thing, or to serve him, or
to in - feoff him, etc. Covenant is also the name of a writ: for the which see
Conventione. Instruments of covenant, you may see good store in West. part 1.
Symbolaeog. lib. 2. sectio 100. See also the new book of Entries, verbo,
Covenant.

Covent, (conventus) signifies the sooiety or fraternity of an abbey or
priorie, as (societas) signifies the number of fellows in a College. Bracton,
lib. 2. cap. 35. It comes of the French ( convent, i. coenobium.)

Coverture, is a French word signifying any thing that covers, as apparel, a
coverlet, etc. and deduced from the verb ( couvar, i. tegere.) It is
particularly applied in our Common law, to the estate and condition of a
married woman, who by the laws of our Realm, is in (potestute viri) and
therefore disabled to contract with any, to the prejudice of her self of her
husband, without his consent and privity; or at the least, without his
allowance and confirmation. Broke hoc tit. per totum. And Bracton says, that
omnia quae sure uxorit, sunt ipsius viri, nec habet uxer potestatem sui, sed
vir. L^. 2. cap. 15. and that ( vir est caput mutieris li. 4. cap. 24. and
again, that in any law-matter, sine viro respondere non potest, li. 5. tract.
2. cap. 3. and tract. 5. cap. 23. ejusdem libri, he has words to this effect,
Vir and uxor sum quasi unica persona: quia caro una and sanguis unus. Res licet
sit propria uxoris, vir tamen ejus custos, cum sit caput mulieris, and lib. 1.
cap. 10. nu. 2. Uxores sunt sub virg a viri. And if the husband alienate the
wifes land, during the marriage, she cannot gainesay it during his life. See Cui
ante divortium, and Cui in vita.

Covine, (covina) is a deceitful assent or agreement between two or more, to
the prejudice or hurt of another. New terms of Law. It comes from the French
verb ( convenancer, i. depascisci,) or rather ( convenir, i. convenire.)

Coucher, signifies a Factour that continues in some place or Country for
trasique. anno 37. Ed. 3. cap. 16. It is used also for the general book, into
which any Corporation enters their particular acts for a perpetual
remembrance of them.

Count, comes of the French ( coumpte i. subductus, computatio, ratio) or of
( emote, i. warratio.) It signifies as much as the original de claration in a
process, though more used in real actions than personal, as declaration is
rather applied to personal than real. Fitz. not. br. fol. 16. A. 60. D. Pl.
71. A. 191. E. 217. A. (Libellus) with the Civilians comprehends both. And
yet count and declaration be confounded sometimes; as Count in debt, Kitchen,
fol. 281. count or declaration in appeal, pl. cor. fol. 78. Count in trespass,
Britton, ca. 26. Count in an action of Trespass upon the case for a slander,
Kuchin, fol. 252. This word seems to come from France and Normandy. For in
the grand Custumary ca. 64. I find (Contours) to be those, which a man set teth
to speak for him in court, as advocates: and cap. 63. (Pledurs) to be another
sort of spokes-men, in the nature of Atturneys, for one that is himself
present, but suffers another to tell his tale. Where also in the 65. chapter,
Attorney is said to be he, that deals for him that is absent. See this text
and gloss upon those 3. chapters. Camntours (by Horn in his Mirror of
Justices, li. 2. ca. Des loyers) are Sergeants skillful in the law of the
Realm, which serve the common people, to pronounce and defend their actions in
judgment for their fee, when occasion requires: whose duty, if it be as it is
there described, and were observed men might have much more comfort of the Law
than they have.

Countenance, seems to be used for credit or estimation, Old not. br. fo.
111. in these words: Also the attaint shall be granted to poor men that will
swear, that they have nothing whereof they may make Fine, saving their
countenance, or to other by a reasonable Fine. So is it used, anno 1. Ed. 3.
stat. 2. cap. 4. in these words: Sheriffs shall charge the Kings debtors with
as much as they may levy with their oaths, without abating the Debtors
countenance.

Counter, (computatorium) seems to come of the Latin (computare) or the
French (counter.) For we use it for the name of a prison. whereinto, he that
once slippeth, is like to acconut ere he get out.

Counter-plee is compounded of two French words ( contre, i. contra, adversus)
and ( pleder, i. causam agere.) it signifies properly in our Common law, a
replication to (aid prier.) For when the Tenent by cour esie, or in dower,
prays in aid of the King, or him in the teversion, for his better defense:
or else if a stranger to the action begun, desire to be received, to say what
he can for the safeguard of his estate: that which the demandant allegeth
against this request, why it should not be admitted, is called a counter-plee.
See Broke tit. And in this signification it is used, anno 25. Ed. 3. stat. 3.
cap. 7. See also the new Terms of Law, and the Statute, anno 3. Ed. 1. cap. 39.

County, (comitatus) signifies as much as (Shire) the one descending from the
French, the other from the Saxons, both containing a circuit or portion of the
Realm, into the which the whole land is divided, for the better government
thereof, and the more easy administration of justice. So that there is no part
of the Kingdom, that lies not within some County, and every County is
governed by a yearly officer, whom we call a Sheriff, which among other duties
belonging to his office, puts in execution all the Commandments and
Judgments of the Kings courts, that are to be executed within that compass.
Fortescue cap. 24. Of these Counties, there be four of especial mark, which
therefore are termed Counties Palatines, as the County Palatine of Laucaster,
of Chester, of Durham, and of Ely, an. 5. Eliz. 1. ca. 23. I read also of the
County Palatine of Hexam, an. 33. H. 8. ca. 10. Unde quaere. And this County
Palatine is a Jurisdiction of so high a nature, that whereas all Plees touching
the life, or mayhem of man called Plees of the Crown, be ordinarily held and
sped in the Kings name, and cannot pass in the name of any other, the chief
governors of these, by especial charter from the King, did heretofore send out
all writs in their own name, and did all things touching Justice, as absolutely
as the Prince himself in other Counties, only acknowledging him their Superior
and Sovereign. But by the Statute anno 27. H. 8. ca. 25. this power is much
abridged, unto the which I refer the reader; as also to Crom. Juris. fol. 137.
for the whole course of this court. Besides these Counties of both sorts, there
be likewise Counties Corporate, as appears by the Statute anno 3. Ed. 4, 5.
And these be certain Cities, or ancient Boroughs of the land, upon which the
Princes of our Nation have thought good to bestow such extraordinary liberties.
Of these the famous City of London is one, and the principal; York another,
an. 32. H. 8. cap. 13. the City of Chester a third, an. 42. Eliz. cap. 15.
Canterbury a fourth, Lamb. Eire. lib. 1. cap. 9. And to these may be added many
more: but I have only observed out of the statutes and other writers, the
County of the Town of Kingston upon Hull, anno 32. H. 8. cap. 13. the County of
the Town of Haverford West, anno 35. H. 8. cap. 26. and the County of
Litchfield, Cromptons Justice of peace, fo. 59. a. County is in another
signification used for the County court, which the Sheriff keeps every month
within his charge, either by himself or his Deputy, anno 2. Ed. 6. ca. 25.
Crompt. Juris. f. 221. Bract. li. 3. c. 7. and l. 3. tract. 2. cap. 12. Of
these Counties or Shires one with another, there are reckoned in England 37.
beside twelve in Wales.

The word (comitatus) is also used for a jurisdiction or territory among the
Feudists.

County court (curia comitatus) by M. Lamberd is otherwise called (conventus)
in his explication of Saxon words, and divided into two sorts: one retaining
the geneeal name, as the County Court held every month by the Shiereve, or his
Deputy the under Sheriff, whereof you may read in Crompt. jurisd. f. 231. the
other called the Turn, held twice every year, which see more at large in his
place: and Cromptons Jurisd. fol. 231. This County court had in ancient times
the cognition of these and other great matters, as may appear by Glanvile lib.
1. cap. 2.3.4. by Bracton and Britton in diverse places, and by Pleta lib 2.
cap. 62. But was abridged by the Statute of Magna charta cap. 17. and much more
by 1 Ed. 4. cap. unico. It had also, and has the determination of certain
trespasses, and debts under forty shillings. Britton, cap. 27, and 28. what
manner of proceeding was of old used in this Court, see Fleta ubi supra.

Coursitour. See Cursetour.

Court curia) comes of the French (court) which signifies the Kings Palace or
Mansion, as (curtis) does among the Lombards. All these spring of the Latin
curia) which signifies one of thirty parts, into which Romulus divided the
whole number of the Romans: sometime also the Senat-house, as appears by
Tully in his Offices (nihil est quod dignum nobis, aut in foro aut in curta
agere possumus) which in his oration (pro Milone) he calls Templum
sanctitatis, amplitudinis mentis, consilii publici, caput urbis, etc. Court
with us, signifies diversely: as the House where presently the King remains
with his ordinary retinue, and also the place where Justice is judicially
ministered: of which you find 32 several s^rts in M. Cromptons book of
Jurisdictions well described. And of them most be courts of record: some be
not, and therefore are accounted base Courts in comparison of the rest. Beside
these also there are Courts Christian. Smith de Repnb. Anglor. lib. 3. cap. 6.
which are so called, because they handle matters especially appertaining to
Christianity, and such as without good knowledge in Divinity cannot be well
judged of, being held heretofore by Archbishops and Bishops, as from the Pope
of Rome: because he challenged the superiority in all causes spiritual: but
sithence his ejection, they hold them by the Kings authority (virtute
magistratus sui) as the Admiral of England does his Court. Whereupon it
proceeds, that they send out their precepts, in their own names, and not in
the Kings, as the Justices of the Kings Courts do. And therefore as the appeal
from these Courts did lie to Rome: now by the statute anno 25 H. 8. cap. 19. it
lies to the King in his Chancerie.

Court baron (curia baronis) is a Court that every Lord of a manor (which in
ancient times were called Barons) has within his own precincts. Barons in
other Nations have great Territories and jurisdiction from their Sovereigns:
as may be proved out of Cassanaeus de gloria mundi. part. 5. consideratio 56.
by Vincentius de Franchis. descis. 211. and many others. Bu here in England
what they be, and have been heretofore, see in Baron. Of this Court Baron you
may read your fill in Kitchen, that writes a large Book of it, and of a Court
Leet. Sir Edward Coke in his fourth Book of Reports, amongst his Copyhold
cases. fol. 26. b. says, that this Court is two after a sort: and therefore if
a man having a manor in a Town, and do grant the inheritance of the
Copyholders thereunto belonging, unto another: this grantee may keep a Court
for the customarie Tenants, and accept surrenders to the use of others, and
make both admittances and graunts: the other Court is of Freeholders, which is
properly called the Court Baron, wherein the suitors, that is, the Freeholders,
be Judges: whereas of the other the Lord or his Steward is Judge.

Court of Pypowders. See Pie-powders.

Court of Requests (curia requestarum) is a Court of equity, of the same nature
with the Chancerie, principally instituted for the help of such petitioners, as
in conscionable cases deal by supplication with his Majesty. This Court, as M.
Gwin says, in the Preface to his Readings, had beginning from Commission first
granted by Henry the eighth to the Masters of Requests: whereas before that
time (by his opinion) they had no warrant of ordinary jurisdiction, but
traveled between the King and the Petitioner by direction from the Kings
mouth. But Sir Julius Caesar in a Tractate of his, painfully and very
judiciously gathered from the Records of the same Court, plainly shows that
this Court was 9 Henrici septimi, though then following the King, and not
settled in any certain place, neither swayed particularly by the Masters of
Requests (as now it is) but more at large by others of the Kings most
Honorable Council, whom he pleased to employ in this service. For page 148. of
the said Tractate, you have the form of the oath then ministered to those that
were Judges in this Court: and a page pri. usque ad page 46. causes of diverse
natures, which in the said Kings days, were there handled and adjudged. This
Court, as that right honorable and Learned Knight, in a Brief of his upon the
same Court plainly proves, was and is parcel of the Kings most honoutable
Council, and so always called and esteemed. The Judges thereof were always of
the Kings most Honorable Council, appointed by the King to keep his Council
board. The keeping of this Court was never tied to any place certain, but only
where the Counsel sat, the suitors were to attend. But now of late for the ease
of suitors, it has been kept in the White Hall at Westminster, and only in
Term time. It is a Court of Record, wherein Recognizances are also taken by the
Kings Council. The form of proceeding in this Court, was altogether according
to the process of summarie causes in the Civil Law. The persons Plaintiffs,
and Defendants, were always either privileged, as officers of the Court, or
their servants, or as the Kings servants; or as necessary Attendants of them:
or else where the Plaintiffs poverty, or mean estate was not matchable with the
wealth or greatness of the Defendant: or where the cause merely contained
matter of Equity, and had no proper remedy at the Common law: or where it was
specially recommended from the King to the Examination of his Council: or
concerned Universities, Colleges, Hospitals, and the like. The causes wherewith
they deal, and whereof they judge are of all sorts: as Maritine, Ultra Marine,
Ecclesiastical, Temporal; But properly Temporal causes, and only of the other
sort, as they are mixed with Temporal. The manner of proceeding in the said
Court, is first, by Privy Seal, Letters Missive, or Injunction, or Messenger,
or Bond. Secondly, By Attachement. Thirdly, by Proclamation of Rebellion.
Fourthly, by Commission of Rebellion. Fifthly, by Sergeant at Arms. The effect
of the Defendants appearance is, that he attend De die in diem on the Council,
till he have mad his answer to the Plaintiffs Bill, and be licensed to depart
upon caution De judicio sisti and judicato solvendo, and Constitution of his
Attorney and Council by name. The authority of this Court is such, as upon
cause to grant injunctions for barring the Defendant from suing the Plaintiff
at the Common law: and to stay the suit at the Common law before commencement,
and not to arrest the body of the Plaintiff till further order be taken by the
Kings Council; and the execution of a Decree in this Court may be done, either
by imprisonment of the person disobeying, being party, or claiming, under the
party: or by levy of the sum adjudged upon his Lands.

Courtesy of England (lex Angliae) comes of the French, ( Courtesy, i.
benignitas, humanitas) but with us has a proper signification, being used for
a Tenure. For if a man marry an Inheritrice, that is, a woman seized of land in
feesimple, or fee-tail general, or seized as heir of the tail special, and
gets a child of her that comes alive into the world, though both it and his
wife die forthwith, yet if she were in possession, shall he keep the land
during his life, and is called Tenent per Legem Angliae, or by the courtesy of
England. Glanvil. lib. 7. cap. 18. Bracton. lib. 5. tractat. 5. cap. 30. number.
7, 8, 9. r itto n. cap. 51. fol. 132. Fleta, lib. 6. cap. 56. lex quaedam.
Fitz. not. br. fol. 149. D. Littleton, lib. 1. cap. It is called the law of
England. West. 3. cap. 3. This is in Scotland called ( curialitas Scotiae.
Skene de verbo, sign. verbo Curialitas: who there says that this is used in
these two Realms only, and makes a large discourse of the custom.

Coutheutlaughe, is he that wittingly receives a man outlawed, and cherishes,
or hides him. In which case he was in ancient times subject to the same
punishment, that the outlaw himself was, Bracton. lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 13.
number. 2. It is compounded of (couthe) i. known, acquainted, familiar, and
(utlaughe) an outlaw, as we now call him.

Coutilage, alias curtilage (Curtilagium, alias curtilegium) signifies a
garden, a yard, or a field, or piece of void ground lying near and belonging to
a mesuage, West. part 2. Symbolaeo. titulo Fines. sect. 26. And so it is used
anno 4 Ed. 1. cap. unico anno 35 H 8. cap. 4. and anno 39 Eliz. cap. 2. and
Coke vol. 6. fol. 64. a. Of this also Lindwood thus writes. Curtilegium
vulgar nomen est, non ommum patriarum, sed certarum. Est enim curtis mansio
vel manerium ad habitandum cum terris possession^bus, and aliis emo^umentis
adtale manerium pertinentibus, prout satis colligitur in libro feudorum,
titulo, De controversia investiturae,. si quis de manso. Col. 10. Unde
curtilegium dicitur locus adjunctus tali curti, ubi leguntur herbae vel olera
^^^c dictus a (curtis) and (lego legis) pro colligere. Thus far Linwood
titulo de decimis. ca. Sancta. omnibus, verbo Curtelegiorum. So that in effect,
it is a Yard or a Garden adjoining to a House.

CR
Creansour (creditor) comes of the French ( croyance, i. persuasio) and
signifies, him that trusts another with any debt, be it in money or wares,
Old not. br. fol. 67.

Cranage, (cranagium) is a liberty to use a Crane for the drawing up of wares
from the Vessels, at any creek of the Sea or wharf, unto the Land, and to make
profit of it. It signifies also the money paid and taken for the same. New
Book of Entries, fol. 3. col. 3.

Creek, (creca, crecca, vel crecum) seems to be a part of a Haven, where any
thing is landed or disburthned out of the Sea. So that when you are out of the
Main Sea, within the Haven, look how many landing places you have, so many
Creeks may be said to belong to that Haven. See Cromptons Jurisdictions, fol.
110. a. This word is mentioned in the statute, as anno 5 Eliz. c. 5. and diverse
others.

Creast-tile. See Roof-tile.

Croft, (croftum) is a little close or pitle joined to a house, that sometimes
is used for a Hemp-ground, sometime for Corn, and sometime for Pasture, as the
owner lists. It seems to come of the old English word (Creaft) signifying
handy-craft: because such grounds are for the most part extraordinarily dressed
and trimmed by the both labor and skill of the owner.

Croises, (cruce signati) be used by Britton, cap. 122. for such as are
Pilgrims: the reason may be, for that they wear the sign of the Cross upon
their Garments. Of these, and their Privileges, read Bracton, lib. 5. part 2.
cap. 2. and part. 5. cap. 29. and the Grand Custumary of Normandy, cap. 45.
Under this word are also signified, the Knights of the order of Saint John of
Jerusalem, created for the defense of Pilgrims, Gregor. Syntagm. lib. 15. cap.
13. and 14.

CU
Cuckingool, (tumbrella) is an engine invented for the punishment of Scolds and
unquiet women, called in ancient time a tumbrel, Lamb. Eirenarcha, lib. 1. cap.
12. po. 62. in meo. Bracton writes this word (Tymborella.) Kitchen, where he
says, that every one having view of Frank-pledge, ought to have a Pillorie and
a Tumbrel, seems by a Tumbrel, to mean the same thing, cap. Charge in Court
leet. fol. 13. a.

Cuth, other, uncuth (privatus vel extraneus.) These be old English words, not
yet worn out of knowledge, for the which see Roger Hoveden, part poster.
suorum annalium, fol. 345. a.

Cudutlaghe. See Couthutlaughe.

Cui ante divortium, is a Writ, that a Woman divorced from her Husband, has to
recover lands or tenements from him, to whom her husband did alienate them
during the marriage: because, during the marriage, she could not gainsay it,
Regist. orig. fol. 233. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 204.

Cuinage, is a word used for the making up of Tin, into such fashion as it is
commonly framed into for the carriage thereof into other places, anno 11 H. 7.
cap. 4.

Cui in vita, is a Writ of Entry, that a Widow has against him, to whom her
Husband aliened her Lands or Tenements in his life time: which must contain in
it, that during his life time, she could not withstand it. Regist. orig. fol.
232. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 193. See the new Book of Entries, verbo, Cui in vita.

Cuntey cuntey, is a kind of trial, as appears by Bracton in these words:
Negotium in hoc casu terminabitur per cuntey cuntey, sicut inter coharedes,
Bracton lib. 4. tract. 3. cap. 18. And again, in the same place: In b evi de
recto negotium terminabitur per cuntey cuntey. And thirdly, lib. 4. tract. 4.
cap. 2. Terminabitur negotium per breve de recto: ubi nec duellum, nec magna
assisa, sed per cuntey cuntey omnino: which in mine opinion is, as much as the
ordinary Jury.

Curfew comes of two French words ( couvrir, i. tegere) and ( feu, i. ignis.
We use it for an Evening Peal, by the which, the Conqueror willed every man to
take warning for the raking up of his fire, and the putting out of his light.
So that in many places at this day, where a Bell customably is rung toward
Bedtime, it is said to ring Curfew: Stowes annals.

Curia avisare vult, is a deliberation, that the Court purposes to take, upon
any point or points of a cause, before judgment be resolved on. For this, see
the new Book of Entries, verbo, Curia advisare vult.

Curia claudenda, is a Writ, that lies against him, who should fence and close
up his ground, if he refuse, or defer to do it, Regist. orig. fol 155. Fitzh.
not. br. fol. 127. See also the new Book of Entries, verbo, Curia claudenda.

Cursiter (clericus de cursu, vel cursista curiae cancellariae) is an Officer
or Clerk, belonging o the Chancerie, that makes out original Writs, anno 14,
and 15 H. 8. cap. 8. They be called Clerks of Course, in the oath of the Clerks
of the Chancery, appointed anno 18 Ed. 3. stut. 5. cap. unico. There be of
these, 24 in number, which have allotted unto every of them certain Shires;
into the which, they make out such original writs, as are by the subject
required, and are a Corporation among themselves.

Curteyn (curtana) was the name of King Edward the Saint his Sword, which is
the first Sword that is carried before the Kings of this Land at their
Coronation, Matthaeus Parisiens. in Henrico tertio. And I have heard say, that
the point thereof is broken: which may argue an emblem of Mercy.

Curtilage. See Curtelage.

Custode admittendo, and Custode amovendo, are Writs for the admitting or
removing of Gardians, Reg. orig. in indice.

Custom (consuetudo) is all one in signification with our Common Lawyers and
Civilians, being by them both accounted a part of the law. Consuetudo quandoque
pro lege servatur (says Bracton) in partibus ubi fuerit more utentium
approbata. Longaevi enim temporis usus and consuetudinis non est vilis
authoritas, lib. 1. cap. 3. It may be thus not unaptly defined: Custom is a
law or right not written, which being established by long use, and the consent
of our Ancestors, has been, and is daily practiced: our Ancestors, that is
(majores,) and those of our kindred that are Ultra tritavum, lib. 4.. parentem,
p. de in jus vocando, lib. ult.. parents, p. de gradibus and affini, and
nominibus eorum. So that allowing the father to be so much older than his son,
as (pubertas) or the years of generation do require, the Grandfather so much
elder than him, and fo forth usque ad tritavum: we cannot say that this or that
is a Custom, except we can justify, that it has continued so one hundred
years. For tritavus must be so much elder than the party that pleads it: yet
because that is hard to prove, it is enough for the proof of a Custom by
witness in the Common law, (as I have credibly heard) if 2 or more can depose,
that they heard their Fathers say, that it was a custom all their time, and
that their Fathers heard their Fathers also say, that it was likewise a custom
in their time. If it be to be proved by record, the continuance of a hundred
years will serve. Custom is either general, or particular: General I call
that, which is current through England: whereof you shall read diverse in the
Doctor and Student, lib. pri. c. 7. very worthy to be known. Particular is
that, which belongs to this or that County, as Gravelkind to Kent, or to this
or that Lordship, City, or Town. Custom differs from Prescription, for that
cu^ome i^ common to more, and Prescription (in some men's opinion) is particular
to this or to that man. Again Prescription may be for a far shorter time than
a Custom, viz. for five years, or for one year or less. Example of five years
Prescription you have in the levying of a Fine. For if a Fine duly levied of
Lands and Tenements be not impugned within five years, it excludes all claim
for ever. And if a man omit his continual claim for a year and a day: then the
Tenent in possession prescribes an immunity against the entry of the Demandant
and his Heir, Fitz. not. br. fol. 79. Terms of the law, verbo continual claim.
Out of our statutes you may have greater diversity, which see collected in mine
Institutes, titulo de Usucapio, and longi tempo. praescript. So that Brissonius
in his 14 de verbo signif. seems to say truly, that Prescription is an
exception founded upon so long time run and past, as the Law limiteth for the
pursuit of any action. An example may be taken from those statutes, anno 1 H.
8. cap. 4. which enacteth, that in all action popular, information shall be
made within three years after the offense committed, or else be of no force. Of
like nature is the Statute, anno 7 H. 8. cap. 3. which in some cases makes one
years prescription sufficient against informations. Custom is also used for
the tribute or toll, that Merchants pay to the King for cartying in and out
Merchandise, anno 14 Ed. 3. stat. 1. cap. 21. in which signification it is
Latined (Custuma) Register orig. fol. 138. a. r 29. a. And lastly, for such
services, as Tenants of a Manor owe unto their Lord: New book of Entries,
verbo Custom.

Customary tenants, (tenentes per consuetudinem) are such Tenants, as hold by
the Custom of the Manor, as their special evidence. See Copieholds.

Custos brevium, is the principal Clerk belonging to the Court of Common Plees:
whose office is to receive and keep all the Writs, and put them upon files,
every return by it self, and at the end of every Term to receive of the
Protonotaries all the Records of (Nisi prius) called the (postea.) For they are
first brought in by the Clerk of Assise of every circuit to the Protonotary
that entered the issue in that matter, for the entering of the Judgment. And
then do the Pronotaries get of the Court peremptory day, for every party to
speak what he has to allege in arrest of Judgment: which day being past, he
enters the Verdict and Judgment thereupon into the rols of the Court: and
that done, he does in the end of the Term deliver over to the Custos brevium,
all the Records of (Nisi prius) which came to his hand that term: which
received, he binds into a bundle and bestows them. The Custos breviam also
makes entry of the Writs of Covenant, and the Concord upon every Fine: and
makes forth exemplifications and Copies of all Writs and Records in his
office, and of all Fines levied. The Fines after they be engrossed, the parts
thereof are divided between the Custos brevium and the Chirographer: whereof
the Chirograper keeps always with him the Writ of Covenant and the note, the
Custos brevium keeps the concord and the foot of the Fine, upon the which
foot the Chirographer do because the Proclamations to be endorsed, when they be
all proclaimed. This Office is in the Princes gift.

Custos placitorum coronae: Bracton, l. 2. cap. 5. This seems to be all one
with him, whom we now call (Custos rotulorum) Of this Officer I find mention in
the Writ (odio and acia) Regist. orig. fol. 133. b.

Custos rotulorum, is he, that has the custody of the Rolls or Records of the
Sessions of Peace: and (as some think) of the commission of the Peace it self.
Lamb. Eirenarch. lib. 4. ca. 3. page 373. He is always a Justice of Peace and
Quorum, in the County where he has his Office, Idem, eodem, and by his Office
he is rather termed an Officer or Minister than a Judge: because the Commission
of the Peace lays, by express words, this especial charge upon him, quod
addies and loca praedicta, brevia, praecepta, praecessus, and indictamenta
prodictacoram te and dictis sociis tuis venire facias. Idem, eodem. where read
a competent tract of other things belonging to this Office.

Custos of the spiritualities (custos spiritualitatis vel spiritualium) is he
that exercises the Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of any Dioces,
during the vacancie of the Sea: the appointment of whom by the Canon Law
appertains to the Dean and Chapter. ca. ad abolenda^ Extra. Ne sede vacant
aliquid innovetur. But with us in England to the Archbishop of the Province by
Prescription. Howbeit, diverse Deans and Chapters (if M. Gwin say truly in the
Preface to his Readings,) do challenge this by ancient Charters from the Kings
of this Land.

Cutter of the tayls, is an Officer in the Exchequer, that provideth Wood for
the Tails, and cutteth the sum paid upon them, and then casts the same into
the Court to be written upon.

DA
Damage, comes of the French (dam) or (damage) signifying generally any hurt
or hinderance that a man takes in his estate: But in the Common law, it
particularly signifies a part of that the Jurours be to enquire of, passing
for the Plaintiff or Demandant in a Civil action, be it personal or real. For
after verdict given of the principal cause, they are likewise asked their
consciences touching costs (which be the charges of suit, called of the
Civilians (expensae litis) and Damages, which conte in the hindrance that the
Plaintiff or Demandant has suffered by means of the wrong done to him by the
Defendant or Tenant.

Dane-gilt, Dane-gold, or Dane-gelt (Dane-geldum is compounded of ( Dane and
gelt, i. pecunia) and was a Tribute laid upon our Ancestors of twelve pence for
every hide of Land through the Realm by the Danes, that once got the masterie
of us, in regard (as they pretended) of clearing the Seas of Pirates, which
greatly annoyed our Land in those days. Cambd. Britan. 83. with whom agree the
laws of Edward set out by M. Lamberd, cap. 11. Stow in his annals, page 118.
says, that this tribute came to 40000. pounds by the year, and that it was
released by Ed. the Confessor. The Author of the new terms of Law says, that
this tribute began in the time of King Etheldred, who being sore distressed by
the continual invasion of the Daue, to procure his peace, was compelled to
charge his people with importable payments. For first he gave them at five
several payments 113000. pounds, and afterward granted them 48000. pounds
yearly. See Roger Hoveden part poster. suorum annalium in Henrico secundo fol.
344. a.

Dareyn continuance. See Continuance. Darein is a corrupt word of the French (
dernier, i. ultimus.)

Darrein presentment (ultimae prasentatio.) See Assise or Darreyn presentment.

Dates (dactyli) is the plumme or fruit of the tree in Latin called palma, in
English the Datetree, well known to most men by sight. And he that will farther
understand the nature or diversities of this fruit, may repair to Gerards
Herbal, lib. 3. cap. 131. They be numbered among Spices and Drugs to be garbled,
1 Jacob. 19.

Day (dies) is sometime used in the Law, for the day of appearance in Court,
either originally, or upon assignation; and sometime for the returns of Writs.
For example, days in bank, be days set down by Statute or order of the Court,
when Writs shall be returned, or when the party shall appear upon the Writ
served. And of this you may read the Statutes, anno 51 H. 3. cap. 1. and 2.
Marlb. cap. 12. anno 52 H. 3. and the Statute de anno bissextili, anno 21 H. 3.
and lastly, anno 32 H. 8. cap. 21. To be dismissed without day, is to be
finally discharged the Court, Kitchen fol. 193. He had a day by the Roll,
Kitchen fol. 197. that is, he had a day of appearance assigned him. Day, Year,
and waste. See Dies, and Year.

DE
Deadly feud (feuda) is a profession of an unquenchable hatred, until we be
revenged, even by the death of our enemy. It is deduced from the German word
(Feed) which, as Hotoman says, in verbis feudalibus, modo bellum, modo
capitales inimicitias significat. This word is used anno 43 Eliz. cap. 13.

Dead pledge (mortuum vadium) See Mori gage.

Dean, (decanus) is an Ecclesiastical Magistrate, so called of the Greek ((...)
because he has power over ten Canons at the least. Howbeit in England we use
to call him a Dean, that is next under the Bishop, and chief of the Chapter
ordinarily in a Cathedral Church: and the rest of the Society or Corporation we
call Capitulum, he Chapter. But this word how diversely it is used read
Lindwood, titulo de judic. ca. pri. verbo Decani rurales, where Dean Rurals are
said to be certain persons that have certain jurisdiction Ecclesiastical over
other Ministers and Parishes near adjoining, assigned unto them by the Bishop
and Archdeacon, being placed and displaced by them. As there be two foundations
of Cathedral Churches in England, the old, and the new (the new be those which
Henry the eighth upon suppression of Abbyes transformed from Abbot or Prior and
Covent to Dean and Chapter) so be there two means of creating these Deans. For
these of the old foundation are brought to their dignity much like Bishops: the
King first (ending out his Conge d'eslire to the Chapter, the Chapter then
choosing, the King yielding his royal assent, and the Bishop confirming him, and
giving his mandate to install him. Those of the new foundation are by a shorter
course installed by virtue of the Kings Letters Patents, without either
election or confirmation. This word is also applied to diverse that are the
chief of certain peculiar Churches, or Chapels, as the Dean of the Kings
Chapel, the Dean of the Arches, the Dean of Saint George his Chapel in
Windfor, the Dean of Bocking in Essex.

Debet and solet; These words are diverse times used in the Writers of the
Common law, and may trouble the mind of a young Student, except he have some
advertisement of them. For example, it is said in the Old not. br. fol. 98.
This Writ (de secta molindini) being in the (debet) and (solet) is a Writ of
right, etc. and again, fol. 69. A Writ of (Quod permittat) may be pleaded in
the County before the Sheriff, and it may be in the (debet) and in the (solet)
or the (debet) without the (solet) according as the Demandant claims.
Wherefore note, that those Writs that be in this sort brought, have these words
in them, as formal words not be omitted. And according to the diversity of the
case, both (debet) and (solet) are used, or (debet) alone: that is, if a man
sue to recover any right by a Writ, whereof his Ancester was disseised by the
Tenant or his Ancestor, then he uses only the word (debet) in his Writ,
because (solet) is not fit by reason his Ancestor was disseised, and the
custom discontinued: but if he sue for any thing, that is now first of all
denied him, then he uses both these words (debet and solet) because his
Ancestors before him, and he himself usually enjoyed the thing sued for: as
suit to a Mill, or common of Pasture, until this present refusal of the Tenant.
The like may be said of (debet) and (detinet) as appears by the Regist. orig.
in the Writ de debito, fol. 140. a.

Debito, is a Writ which lies, where a man owes to another a certain sum
of money upon an Obligation or other bargain, for any thing sold unto him.
Fitzh. not. br. fol. 119. This Writ is made sometime in the Detinet, and not
in the Debet, which properly falls out, where a manoweth an Annuitie ^or a
certain quantity of wheat, barley, or such like, which he refuses to pay, Old
not. br. fol. 75. See Debet and Solet.

Denelage (Denelagia) is the law that the Danes made here in England, out of
which, and Merchenlage, and West-Saxonlage, the Conqueror compounded certain
ordinances for his subjects, Camdeni Britan. page 94. and page 183.

Decens tales. See Tales.

Decies tantum, is a Writ that lies against a Jurour, which has taken money
for the giving of his Verdict, called so of the effect, because it is to
recover ten times so much as he took. It lies also against Embracers, that
procure such an Enquest, anno 38 Ed. 3. cap. 13. Reg. orig. fol. 188. Fitzh.
not. br. fol. 171. New book of Entries, verbo Decies tantum.

Deceit (deceptio, fraus, dolus) is a subtle wily shift or devise, having no
other name. Hereunto may be drawn all manner of craft, subtilty, guile, fraud,
wiliness, slightness, cunning, covin, collusion, practice, and offense, used
to deceive another man by any means, which has none other proper or particular
name, but offense, West. part 2. symbol. titulo Indictments, sect. 68. See
Cosening.

Decanniers. See Deciners.

Deceptione, is a Writ that lies properly against him that deceitfully does
any thing in the name of another, for one that receives harm or Damage
thereby. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 95. This Writ is either original or judicial, as
appears by the Old not, br. fol. 50. where you may read the use of both. For
some satisfaction, take these words of that book: This Writ of deceit, when it
is original, then it lies in case, where deceit is made to a man by another,
by which deceit he may be disherited, or otherwise evil entreated: as it
appears by the Register, etc. And when it is judicial, then it lies out of
the Rolls of Record: as in case where (scire facias) is sent to the Sheriff,
that he warn a man to be before the Justices at a certain day, and the Sheriff
return the Writ served: whereas the said man was not warned, by which the party
that sueth the (scire facias) recovereth, then the party which ought to have
been warned, shall have the said Writ against the Sheriff. The Author of the
Terms of Law, verbo Deceit, says, that the original Writ of Deceit lies,
where any Deceit is done to a man by another, so that he has not sufficiently
performed his bargain or promise. In the Writ judicial he concurreth with the
former book. See the Reg. orig. fol. 112. and the Reg. Judicial in the table,
verbo Deceptione.

Decintis solvendis pro possessionibus alienigenarune, is a Writ, or Letters
Patents, yet extant in the Register, which lay against those, that had fermed
the Priors aliens lands of the King, for the Rector of the Parish, to recover
his tithe of them, Regist. orig. fol. 179.

Deciners, alias, desiners, alias, doziners, (decenarii) comes of the French (
dizeine, i. decan ten in number or old of ( disenier, i. decearchus.) It
fignifieth in the ancient monuments of our law, such as were wont to have the
oversight and check of ten Fribargs, for the maintenance of the Kings peace.
And the limits or compal^e of their jurisdiction was called decenna) Bracton
lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 15. of whom you may also read, Fleta, lib. 1. cap. 27.
and a touch in the Regist. orig. fol. 98. b. These seemed to have large
authority in the Saxons time, taking knowledge of causes within their Circuit,
and redressing wrongs by way of judgment, as you may read in the Laws of King
Edward, set out by M. Lamberd, number. 32. In later times I find mention of these,
as in Britton, cap. 12. who says in the Kings person (as he writes his whole
book) in this manner: We will, that all those which be 14 years old, shall
make oath, that they shall be sufficient and loyal unto us, and that they will
be neither Felons, nor assenting to Felons^ and we will, that all be (endozeint
and plevis per dozeniers) that is, profess themselves to be of this or that
Dozein, and make or offer surety of their behavior by these or those
Doziniers: except Religious persous, Clerks, Knights, and their eldest Sons,
and Women. Yet the same Author in his 29 Chapter, something toward the end,
does say, that all of twelve years old, and upward, are punishable for not
coming to the turn of the Sheriff, Except Earls, Prelates, Barons, Religious
persons, and women. Stawnf. pl. cor. fol. 37. out of Fitzh. has these words:
The like Law is, where the Dozeniers make presentment that a Felon is taken for
Felony, and delivered to the Sheriff etc. And Kitchen out of the Register, and
Britton, says thus: Religious persons Clerks, Knights, or Women, shall not be
Deceniers, fol. 33. So that hereby I gather, that of later times, this word
signifies nothing but such an one, as by oath of loyalty to his Prince, (for
surety none ordinarily finds at these days) is settled in the combination or
society of a Dozein. And a Dozein seems now to extend so far, as every Leet
extends: because in L^ets only this oath is ministered by the Steward, and
taken by such as are twelve years old and upwards, dwelling within the compass
of the Leet where they are sworn Fitzh. not. br. fol. 161. A. The particulars
of this oath you may read in Bracton, lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 1. number. 1. in
these words: Quibus propositis (that is, the Commission of the Justices being
read, and the cause of their coming being showed) debent Justiciarii se
transfer in aliquem locum secretam, and vocatis ad so quatuor vel sex, uel
pluribus de ma oribus de comitatu, qui dicuntur Busones Comitatus and ad quorum
nutum dependent vota aliorum, and sic inter se tractatum habeant Justiciarii
adinvicem, and ostendant qualiter a Don^ino Rege and erus concilio provisum
sit, quad omnes tam milite, quam alii qui sunt quindecim ann^rum and amplius,
jurare debent quod utlagatos, murditores, robbatores, and burglatores non
recepta^^nt, nec eis consentient, nec little receptatoribus, and. si quos tales
noverint, illos attachiari facient, and hoc Vicecomiti and balivis suis
monstrabunt^ and si hutesium vel clameum de talibus audiverint, statim and to
clamore, sequantur cum familia and hominibus de terra sua. Here Bracton setreth
down fifteen years for the age of those that are sworn to the Kings peace, but
lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 11. number. 5. he names 12 years. See Inlaughe. A man may
note out of the Premises, diversities between the ancient, and these our
times, in this point of law and government, as well for the age of those that
are to be sworn as also that Decennier is not now used for the chief man of a
Dozen, but for him that is sworn to the Kings peace: and lastly, that now there
are no other Dozens but Leets, and that no man ordinarily gives other security
for the keeping of the Kings peace, but his own oath: and that therefore none
answers for another transgression, but every man for himself. And for the
general ground this may suffice. See Frank pledge.

Declaration (declaratio) is properly the showing forth, or laying out of an
action personal in any sure, howbeit, it is used sometime, and indifferently
for both personal and real actions. For example, anno. 36. E. 3. cap. 15. in
these words: By the ancient terms and forms of Declarations, no man shall be
prejudiced: so that the matter of the action be fully showed in the
Demonstration, and in the Writ: See the new Terms of Law. See Cownte.

Dedimus potestatem, is a Writ, whereby commission is given to a private man
for the speeding of some act. appertaining to a Judge. The Civilians call it
(Delegationem.) And it is granted most commonly upon suggestion that the party:
which is to do something before a Judge, or in Court, is so feeble, that he
cannot travel. It is used in diverse cases: as to make a personal answer to a
Bill of complaint in the Chaunce^ie, to make an Attorney for the following of a
suit in the County, Hundred, Wapentake, etc. Old not. br. fol. 20. To levy a
Fine, West. part 2. symbol. titulo Fines, sect. 112. and diverse others
effects, as you may see by Fitzh. not. br. in diverse places noted in the Index
of the Book: In what diversity of cases this Writ or Commission is used, see
the Table of the Regist. orig. verbo, Dedimus potestatem.

Deeds (Facta) signify in our Common law-writings, that contain the effect of
a contract made between man and man, which the Civilians call (Literarum
obligationem.) And of Deeds there be two sorts, Deeds indented, and Deeds poll.
Which division, as M. West. says part 1. Symbol. lib. 1. sect. 46. grows
from the form or fashion of them; the one being cut to the fashion of teeth in
the top or side, the other being plain. And the definition of a deed indented,
he expresses thus, Sect. 47. A Deed indented, is a Deed consisting of two
parts, or more, in which it is expressed, that the parties to the same Deed,
have to every part thereof interchangeably, or severally, set their several
seals. See the rest, where at the last, he shows the cause of the name: viz.
for that consisting of more parts, each part is indented, or cut one of them
into the other, that by the cut it may appear, they belong to one business, or
contract. A Deed poll, or polled, he describes thus: Sect. 46. Q. A polled
Deed is a Deed testifying, that only the one of the parties to the bargain,
has put his seal thereunto, after the manner there by him described: which
read for your better understanding. See the new Terms of law, verbo Fait, where
he shows, that each Deed consists in three points: writing, sealing, and
delivery.

Deer Hayse, anno 19 H. 7. cap. 11. seems to be an Engine of cords, to catch
Deer.

De essendo quietum de telonio, is a Writ that that lies for them which are
by privilege freed from the payment of Toll, which read at large in Fitzh. not.
br. fol. 226.

Defalt (Defalta) comes from the French (Defaut) and is an offense, in
omitting that which we ought to do. West. part 2. symbol. titulo Indictment.
sect. 2. Of this has Bracton a whole Tractate, lib. 5. tractat. 3. By whom it
appears that a Default is most notoriously taken for non appearance in Court,
at a day assigned. Of this you may read also in Fleta, lib. 6. cap. 14.

Defeisance (defeisantia) comes of the French (Desfaire) or ( Deffaire, i.
infectum reddere quod factum est) and signifies in our Common law, nothing but
a condition annexed to an Act, as to an Obligation, a Recognisance or Statute,
which performed by the Obligee or Recognizee, the Act as disabled and made
void, as if it never had been done, whereof you may see West. at large, part.
1. symb. lib. 2. Sect. 156.

Defendant (defendens) is he that is sued in an Action personal: as Tenant, is
he which is sued in an Action real. Terms of the Law.

Defendemus, is an ordinary word in a Feofment or Donation, and has this
force, that it binds the Donour and his Heirs, to defend the Donee, if any
man go about to lay any servitude upon the thing given, other than is contained
in the Donation. Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 16. number. 10. See also Warrantizabimus
and Acquietabimus.

Defender of the Faith (defensor fidei) is a peculiar title given to the King
of England by the Pope, as (Catholicus) to the King of Spain, and
Christianissimus to the French King. It was first given by Leo Decimus to King
Henry the 8. for writing against Marsin Luther, in the behalf of the Church of
Rome, then accounted, Domicilium fidei Catholicae. Stows annals, page 863.

Deforsour (deforciator) comes of the French ( Forceur, i. expugnator.) It is
used in our Common law, for one that overcomes and casts out by force, and
differs from disseisour first in this, because a man may disseise another
without force, which act is called simple disseisin. Britton. cap. 53. next,
because a man may deforce another, that never was in possession: as for
example, if more have right to lands as Common heirs, and one entering keeps
out the rest, the Law says, that he deforceth them, though he do not disseise
them. Old not. br. fol. 118. and Litleton in his Chapter, (Disconti nuance)
fol. 117. says, that he which is enfeoffed by the Tenant in Tail, and put in
possession, by keeping out the Heir of him in reversion being dead, does
deforce him, though he did not disseise him; because he entered, when the Tenant
in tail was living, and the Heir had no present right. And a Deforsor differs
from an intrudour, because a man is made an Intrudour by a wrongful entry only
into Land or Tenement void of a possessour. Bracton, lib. 4. cap. pri. and a
Deforsour is also by holding out the right He iras is above said.

Deliverances. See Repligiare.

Demand, ( demanda vel demandum comes of the French ( Demand, i. postulatio,
postulatus) and signifies a calling upon a man for any thing due. It has
likewise a proper signification with the Common Lawyers opposite to plaint. For
the pursuit of all civil actions are either demands or plaints: and the persuer
is called Demandant or Plaintiff: viz. Demandant in actions real, and Plaintiff
in personal. And where the party perfuing is called Demandant, there the party
persued is called Tenant: where Plaintiff, there Defendant. See Terms of Law,
verbo Demandant.

Demi haque. See Haque, and Haquebut.

Demain, (Dominicum) is a French word, otherwise written (Domaine) and
signifies (Patrimonium Domini) as Hotoman says, in verbis feudalibus, verbo
Dominicum, where by diverse authorities he proves those Lands to be dominicum,
which a man holds originally of himself, and those to be feodum, which he
holds by the benefit of a superior Lord. And I find in the Civil Law (Rem
dominicam) for that which is proper to the Emperor. Cod. Ne rei dominicae vel
templorum vindicatio temporis praescriptione submoveatur, being the 38 title of
the 7 book. And ( Res dominici juris, i. reipub.) in the same place. And by the
word (Domanium) or (Demanium) are properly signified the Kings Lands in France,
appertaining to him in property, Quia Domanium definitur illud, quod nominatim
consecratum est, unitum and incorporatum Regiae coronae, ut scripsit Chopinus
de doman^o Franciae, tit 2. per legem. Si quando 3. Cod. de bon. vacan. lib.
10. and Mathaeut de Afflictis in consti. Siciliae lib. 1. tit. De locatione
Demanii, 82. which may be called, Bona incorporata and in corpus fisci redacta,
Skene de verborum signif. verb. Terrae Dominicales. In like manner co we use it
in England: howbeit we here have no land (the Crown-land only excepted) which
holds not of a Superior. For all depends either mediatly or immediately of
the Crown, that is, of some honor or other belonging to the Crown, and not
granted in fee to any inferior person. Wherefore no common person has any
Demaines, simply understood. For when a man in pleading, would signify his
land to be his own, he says, that he is, or was seized thereof in his demain as
of Fee. Litleton, l. 1. c. 1. Whereby he signifies, that though his land be to
him and his Heirs for ever, yet it is not true Demain, but depending upon a
superior Lord, and holding by service, or rent in lieu of service, or by both
service and rent: Yet I find these words used in the Kings right, anno 37 H. 8.
cap. 16. and 39 Eliz. cap. 22. But the application of this speech to the King
and crown land, is crept in by error and ignorance of the word (Fee) or at
least, by understanding it otherwise than of the Feudists it is taken. But
Britton, cap. 78. shows, that this word (demeyn) is diversely taken: sometime
more largely, as of Lands or Tenements held for life, etc. and sometime more
strictly, as for such only as are generally held in see. This word sometime is
used for a distinction between those lands, that the Lord of a Manor has in
his own hands, or in the hands of his Leassee, dimised upon a rent for term of
years or life, and such other land appertaining to the said Manor, which
belongs to free, or copyholders. Howbeit, the copyhold belonging to any
Manor, is also in the opinion of many good Law yers accounted Demeines: Bracton
in his fourth Book, tract. 3. cap. 9. number. 5. has these words: Item dominicum
accipitur multipliciter. Est autem dominicum quod quis habet ad mensam suam and
proprie, sicut sunt Bordlands anglice. Item dicitur dominicum villenagium quod
traditur villanis, quod quis te^pestive and intempestive sumere possit pro
voluntare sua, and revocare. Of this Fleta likewise thus writes: Dominicu^ est
multiplex. Est aute^ Dominicu^ proprie terra ad mensa^ assignata, and
villenagium quod traditur villanis ad excolendum, and terra precario dimissa,
quae tempestivie and pro voluntate domini poterit revocari: and sicut est de
terra commissa, tenenda quam diu commissori placuerit, poterit and dici
Dominicum de quo quis babet liberu^ tenementu^, and alius usufructum: and etia^
ubi quis habet liberu^ tenementu^, and alius cura^ sicut de custode dici
poterit and curatore, and unde urus dicitur a jure, alius quoque ab homine.
Dominicum etiam dicitur ad differentiam ejus quod tenetur in servitio.
Dominicum est omne illud tenementum, de quo antecessor oblit se^situs ut de
feudo, nec refert cum usufructu vel sine and de quo sie ectus esset, si
viveret, recuperare posset per assisam nomine disseisinae, licet alius haberet
usum fructum: sicut dici poterit de illis qui tenent in villenagio, qui
utuntur, fruuntur non nomine proprio sed omine Domin^ sui. Flet. lib. 5. cap.
5. sect. Dominicum autem. And the reason why Copyhold is accounted Demeans, is
because they that be Tenants unto it, are judged, in law, to have no other
right, but at the will of the Lord. So that it is reputed still after a sort to
be in the Lords hands. And yet in common speech, that is called ordinarily
Demeans, which is neither free nor copy. It is farther to be noted, that Demain
is sometime used in a more special signification, and is opposite to Frank-fee.
For example, those lands, which were in the possession of King Edward the
Confessor, are called Ancient Demain, and all others be called Frank-fee.
Kitchen, fol. 98. And the Tenants which hold any of those Lands, be called
Tenants in Ancient Demain, the others, Tenants in Frank-fee. Kitchen ubi supra.
And also Tenants of the Common law, West. part 2. Symbol. titulo Fines, Sect.
25. The reason is, because Tenants in ancient Demain, cannot be sued out of the
Lords Court: Terms of the Law, Verbo ancient Demain. And the Tenants in Ancient
Demain, though they hold all by the verge, and have none other evidence, but
copy of Court roll, yet they are said to have Freehold, Kitchen, fol. 81. See
Ancient Demain.

Demain cart of an Abbot, seems to be that Cart, which the Abbot uses upon
his own Demain. Anno 6 H. 3. cap. 21.

Demurrer (demorare) comes of the French ( demeurer, i. manner in aliquo loco
vel morari) It signifies in our Common law, a kind of pawse upon a point of
difficulty in any action, and is used substantively. For in every action, the
controversy consists either in the fact, or in the law: If in the fact, that
is tried by the Jury; if in law, then is the case plain to the Judge; or so
hard and rare, as it breeds just doubt. I call that plain to the Judge,
wherein he is assured of the law, though perhaps the party and his council
yield not unto it. And in such, the Judge with his Associats proceeds to
Judgment without farther work: but when it is doubtful to him and his
Associates, then is there stay made, and a time taken, either for the Court to
think farther upon it, and to agree if they can: or else for all the Justices
to meet together in the Chequer chamber, and upon hearing of that which the
Sergeants shall say of both parts, to advise, and set down what is law. And
whatsoever they conclude, stands firm without farther remedy. Smith, de
Repub. Anglo. lib. 2. cap. 13. West calls it a Demurrer in Chancery likewise,
when there is question made whether a parties answer to a Bill of Complaint,
etc. be defective or not: and thereof reference made to any of the Bench, for
the examination thereof, and report to be made to the Court, part 2. symb.
tit. Chancery, Sect. 29.

Denariataterrae. See Farding-deal of land.

Denizen, comes of the French ( donaison, i. donatio.) And signifies in our
Common law, an Alien that is infranchised here in England by the Princes
Charter, and enabled, almost in all respects, to do as the Kings native
subjects do, namely, to purchase, and to possess lands, to be capable of any
office or dignity. Yet it is said to be short of naturalization, because a
stranger naturalized, may inherit lands by descent, which a man made only a
Denizen cannot. And again, in the Charter whereby a man is made Denizen, there
is commonly contained some one clause or other, that abridgeth him of all that
full benefit, which natural subjects do enjoy. And when a man is thus
infranchised, he is said to be under the Kings protection; or, Esse ad fidem
Regis Angliae, before which time he can enjoy nothing in England Bracton, l. 5.
tract. 5. c. 25. nu. 3. Nay, he and his goods might be seized to the Kings use,
Horn in his mirror of Justices, lib. 1. c. de la Venue de frane plege.

Deodand ( deodandum is a thing given or forfeited (as it were) to God for the
pacification of his wrath in a case of misadventure, whereby any Christian soul
comes to a violent end, without the fault of any reasonable Creature. For
example, if a Horse should strike his Keeper, and so kill him: If a man in
driving a Cart, and seeking to redress any thing about it, should so fall, as
the Cart wheel running over him, should press him to death: If one should be
felling of a Tree, and giving warning to company by, when the Tree were near
falling, to look to themselves, and any of them should be slain nevertheless
by the fall of the Tree. In the first of these cases, the Horse: in the second,
the Cart-wheel, Cart and Horses: and in the third, the Tree is to be given to
God: that is, to be and sold distributed to the poor, for an expiation of this
dreadful event, though effected by unreasonable, yea, senlesse and dead
creatures. Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 1. cap. 2. whereof also read Bracton, lib. 3.
tract. 2. cap. 5. and Britton, cap. 7. and West. part 2. symbolaeog. titulo
Indictments, Sect. 49. And though this be given to God: yet is it forfeited to
the King by law, as sustaining Gods person, and an executioner in this case, to
see the price of these distributed to the Poor, for the appeasing of God,
stirred up even against the earth and place, by the shedding of innocent blood
thereupon. Fleta says that this is sold, and the price distributed to the
Poor, for the soul of the King, his Ancestors, and all faithful people departed
this life, l. 1. c. 25. verbo, De submersis. And it seems that this Law has
an imitation of that in Exo dus, cap. 21. Si cornu petierit bos virum vel
mulierem, ita ut moriatur, lapidabitur bos, neque comedetur caro ejus, ac
dominus ejus erit innocens.

De Deoner anda pro rata portionis, is a Writ that lies where one is
distrained for a rent, that ought to be paid by others proportionally with him.
For example, a man holds ten Oxegangs of land by fealty, and ten shillings
rent of the King, and alienateth one Oxegang thereof to one, another to another
in fee. Afterward the Sheriff or other officer comes, and distraineth only
one of them for the rent: he that is distrained may have this writ for his
help, Fitzh. not. br. fol. 234.

Departer, is a word properly used of him, that first pleading one thing in
bar of an action, and being replied thereunto, does in his rejoinder, show
another matter contrary to his first Plea. Plowden in Reniger, and Fogassa,
fol. 7. and 8. And of this see diverse examples in Broke, titulo Departer de son
plee, etc.

Departers of Gold and Silver. See Finours.

De quibus sur disseisin, is a Writ of entry. See Fitzh. not. br. fol. 191. C.

Dereyn (disrationare, vel dirationare) may seem to come of the French (
disarroyer, i. confundere, turbare) to confound or turn out of order, or
(desranger,) i. to set out of order, of lastly of the Norman word (desrene) for
with the Normans (desrene) is nothing else but a proof of the denial of man's
own fact. For Rubigineus in his grand custumarie, cap. 122 and 123. makes
mention of (lex probabilis) and (lex deraisnia) legem probabilem or
(probationem) he defines to be a proof of a man's own fact, which he says he
has done, and his adversary denies. His example in this: A. sueth R. for a
Hog: saying, thou should deliver me a Hog for two shillings six pence, which
money F. paid thee: wherefore I demand my Hog. R. answers: It is true that
thou say, and I delivered thee thy Hog, which I am ready to prove.
Deraisnian he defines, to be a proof of a thing that one denies to be done by
himself; which his adversary says was done, defeating or confounding his
adversaries Assertion (as you would say) and showing it to be without, and
against reason or likelihood, which is avouched in our Common law it is used
diversely, first generally, for to prove: as Dirationavit jus suam hares
propinquior. Glanvil. lib. 2. cap. 6. and Habea probos hemmer, qui hoc viderum
and audierunt, and parati sunt hoc dirationare. Idem lib. 4. cap. 6. and
(Dirationavit terram illam in curia mea.) Idem lib. 2. cap. 20. 1. he proved
that land to be his own, etc. And (pertinentiam eam dirationavit in vita sua,
vel alio modo just perquisivit) Idem lib. 6. cap. 12. and Bracton uses it
after the same sort, in these words: Habeo sufficientem disratiocinationem and
probationem, lib. 4. tract. 6. cap. 16. and so he uses (disrationare) lib. 4.
cap. 22. and so in Westminster. 2. anno 13 Ed. pri. cap. 32. and to derein the
warranty, Old not. br. fol. 146. and to derein the warranty Paramount, anno 31
H. 8. cap. primo. And dereigner le Warranty in Plowd. casu Basset in fine 2.
partis, fol. 6, 7. and 8. a. has the same signification. So it is used, West.
2. cap. 5. anno 13 Ed. 1. in these words: And when the parson of any Church is
disturbed to demand Tithes in the next Parish, by a Writ of (Indicavit) the
patron of the Parson so disturbed to demand Tithes, shall have a Writ, to
demand the Advowson of the Tithes, being in demand: and when it is deraigned,
then shall the Plee pass in the Court Christian, as sarre forth as it is
deraigned in the Kings Court. Bracton also, lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 3. number. 1.
speaking of him that appealeth another for any Treason or Felony, has these
words: Proponat accufans appellum suum in hunc modum, sc. debet dicere se
interfuisse, and vidisse certo loco certo die, certa hora, and sci^isse ipsum
accufatum praelocutum fuisse mortem reg^s, vel se^^tionem suam, vel exercitus
sui, vel consensisse, vel anxiliant and consilium impendisse, vel ad hoc
authoritxtem praestitisse: and hoc ego juxta considerationent curiae
disrationare paratus sum. He uses it like wise as the Normans use,
(Disraisniam) for him, that offers to justify his denial: as lib. 3. tract.
2. cap. 2 S. number. 1. in these words, Rex consilio Episcoporum and bonorum mrsit
propter comitem, ut statuto die ventret ad curiam, ad disrationandum vel
defendendum se, si posset. Lastly, in some places I find the substantive
(dereinement) used in the very literal signification of the French (disrayer)
or (defranger) that is, as a man would say, turning out of course, displacing
or ferting out of order: as dereinement or departure out of Religion, anno 31
H. 8. cap. 6. and dereinment or discharge of their profession, anno 33 H. 8.
cap. 29. which is spoken of those Religious men, which forsook their orders and
professions: as also anno 5, and 6 Ed. 6. cap. 13. So does Kitchen use the
verb, fol. 152. in these words: The Leasse enters into Religion, and afterward
is dereigned. And Britton uses these words (Semounse desrenable) for a summons
that may be challenged as defective, or not lawfully made, cap. 21. Of this you
may read something more in Skene de verb. signif. verbo Disrationare; where in
one signification he confounds it with our waging and making of Law.

De son tort Demesne, seem to be certain words of form in an action of
trespass, used by way of reply to the Plee of the Defendant. For example: A.
sueth B. in action of Trespass B. answers for himself, that he did that
which A. calls a Trespass, by the commandment of C. his Master. A. says
again, that B. did it de son tort demesne, sans ceoque. C. luy commanda modo et
forma: that is, B. did it of his own wrong, without that C. commanded him in
such form, etc.

Detinet. See Debito and Debet.

Detinew (detinendo) is a Writ that lies against him, who having goods or
chattels delivered him to keep, refuses to deliver them again. See of this
Fitzh. not. br. fol. 138. To this is answerable in some sort (actio depositi)
in the Civil law. And he takes his action of detinew, that intends to
recover the thing delivered, and not the Damages sustained by the Detinew.
Kitchen, fol. 176. See the new book of Entries, verbo, Detinew.

Devastaverunt bona testatoris, is a Writ lying against Executors, for paying
Legacies and Debts without specialties, to the prejudice of the creditours that
have specialties, before the debts upon the said specialties be due. For in
this case, the Executors are as liable to action, as if they had wasted the
goods of the Testarour riotously or without cause. New Terms of Law.

Divest (Devestir) is contrary to Invest. For as Investire signifies
possessionem tradere. So (devestire) is (possessionem auferre) feud. lib. pri.
cap. 7.

Devise, alias divise, comes of the French ( diviser, i. dispertiri,
discernere, separare, distinguere) as (diverser parici et par la distribuere.)
This word is properly attributed in our Common Law to him, that bequeaths his
goods by his least Will or Testament in writing: and the reason is, because
those that now appertain only to the Devisour, by this act are distributed
into many parts. Wherefore I think it better written divise then devise,
howbeit it were not absurd, to derive this word from the French (deviser,) i.
serm^cinari, fabulari, con^ilium confer.) For in this sense it agrees in
some sort with the nature of the act of the Testator, and with the Etymology of
a Testament set down by Justinian, who says, that testamentum is ( quasimentis
testatio, titulo, de testa. ordinan, in instit. and testatio mentis cannot be
so well, as by talk and conference with our wise and skilful friends.

Devoires of Cales, anno 2 R. 2. Stat. 1. cap. 3. et anno 5. ejusdem, Stat. 2.
cap. 2. were the customs due to the King for Merchandise brought to or carried
out from Caleis, when our Staple was there. The word is French, signifying as
much as (officium) duty.

Devorce, alias, divorce (divortium) is with our Common Lawyers, accounted that
separation between two de facto married together, which is a vinculo
matrimonii, non solum a mensa and thoro. And therefore the woman so divorced,
received all again that she brought with her. This is not, but only, upon a
nullity of the marriage through some essential impediment, as consanguinity or
affinity within the degrees forbidden, precontract, impotency, or such like.
See the new Terms of Law:

DI
Diem clausit extremum, is a Writ that lies for the Heir of him that holds
Land of the Crown, either by Knights service, or in soccage, and dies, be he
under or at full age, directed to the Escheatour of the County for inquiry to
be made by him, of what estate the deceased party was seized, and who is next
heir unto him, and of what value the Land is. The form thereof and other
circumstances you may learn in Fitz. not. br. fol. 251.

Dyer, was a learned Lawyer, and Lord Chief Justice of the Common Plees, in the
days of Queen Elizabeth: who writ a Book of great account, called his
Commentaries or Reports.

Dies datus, is a respight given to the Tenant or Defendant before the Court.
Brook tisulo Continuance.

Dicker of Leather, is a quantity consisting of ten hides. The name may seem to
come from the Greek (Decas) which is also a Latin word signifying ten in
number.

Diguity Ecclesiastical (dignitas Ecclesia^tica) is mentioned in the statute
anno 26 H. 8. cap. 3. and is by the Canonists defined to be ( administratio cum
jurisdictione, and potestate te aliquae conjuncta. Glos. in cap. 1. de consuct.
in sexte) whereof you may read diverse examples in Duarynus de sacris Eccles.
minist. and benefic. lib. 2. cap. 6.

Dioces (diocesis) is a Greek word compounded of ((...)) and ((...)) and
signifies with us, the circuit of every Bishops Jurisdiction. For this Realm
has two sorts of divisions, one into Shires or Counties, in respect of
temporal policy, another into Diocesses, in respect of Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical.

Diet a rationabilis, is in Bracton used for a reasonable days journey, lib.
3. part 2. cap. 16. It has in the Civil Law diverse other significations, not
needful here to be set down. v. vocab. utriusque juris.

Dimibaque. See Haque.

Disalt, signifies as much as to disable. Litleton in his Chapter of
Discontinuance.

Disceite, See Deceit and deceptione. See the new book Entry, verbo Disceit.

Descent (Discensus) in the French (Descents) signifies in the Common law, an
order or means whereby Lands or Tenements are derived unto any man from his
Ancestors: as to makehis descent from his Ancestors: Old not. br. f. 101. is to
show how and by what degrees, the Land in question came to him from his
Ancestors: as first from his great Grandfather, to his Grandfather, from his
Grandfather to his Father, and so to him. Or in such other like sort: This
descent is either lineal or collateral. Lineal Descent is conveyed downward in
a right line from the Grandfather, to the Father, and from the Father to the
Son, and from the Son to the Nephew, etc. Collateral descent is springing out
of the side of the whole blood: as Grandfathers brother, Fathers brother, etc.
See the new Terms of Law.

Disclamer (Disclamium) is a Plee containing an express denial or refusal: as
if the Tenant sue a Replevin upon a Distress taken by the Lord, and the Lord
avow the taking of the distress, saying that he holds of him as of his Lord,
and that he distremed for rent not paid, or service not performed: then the
Tenant denying himself to hold of such Lord, is said to Disclaim: and the Lord
proving the Tenant to hold of him, the Tenant leeleth his Land. Terms of Law.
Of this see Skene de verb. fignif. verbo Disclamation. Also if a man deny
himself to be of the blood or kindred of another in his Plee, he is said to
disclaim his blood: Fitzh. not. br. fol. 197. G. See Brook titulo Diselamer. If
a man arraigned of Felony do disclaim goods, being cleared he leeseth them.
Stawnf. pl. cor. fol. 186. See the new book of Entries, verbo, Disclamer.

Discontinuance (Discontinuatio) comes of the French ( Discontinuer, i.
cessare, intermittere) and signifies in the Common law, nothing else but an
interruption of breaking off: as discontinuance of possession, or
discontinuance of process. And the large discourse that Litleton has about this
(Discontinuance) is rather to show cases wherein it is, or wherein it is not,
than to define the thing. The effect of Discontinuance of possession is this,
that a man may not enter upon his own Land or Tenement alienated, whatsoever
his right be unto it, of his own self, or by his own authority, but must bring
his Writ, and seek to recover possession by Law. Examples you may have store in
his Terms of Law, verbo Discontinuance. And in Litleton codem capite, with
whom agrees another in these words: But Discontinuance of Possession, is
indeed an impediment to a man for entering into his own Land or Tenements,
caused by the fact of one, that alienated them contrary to right, and gave
Livery and Seisin of them, whereby the true owner is left only to his action.
See the new Terms of Law, and the Institutes of the Common law, cap. 43. and
see S. Ed. Cokes Reports, lib. 3. the Case of Fines, fol. 85. b. The effect of
Discontinuance of Plee is, that the instance is fallen, and may not be taken up
again, but by a new Writ to begin the Suit a fresh. For to be discontinued, and
to be put without day, is all one; and nothing else, but finally to be
dismissed the Court of that instance. West. part 2. Symbol. tit. Fines. sect.
115. So Crompton in his diverse Jurisdictions, fol. 131. uses it in these
words: If a Justice seat be discontinued by the not coming of the Justices, the
King may renew the same by his Writ, etc. In this signification, Fitzherb. in
his not. br. uses the word diverse times: as discontinuance of Corody fol. 193.
A. To discontinue the right of his wise, fol. 191. L. and 193. L.
Discontinuance of an assise, fol. 182. D. 187. B.

Disgrading (Degradatis) is the punishment of a Clerk that being delivered to
his Ordinaty, cannot purge himself of the offense, whereof he was convicted by
the Jury^ and is nothing but the privation of him from those orders of
Clerkship that he had, as Priesthood, Deaconship, etc. Sl^^f. (...) and 138.
There is likewise ^isgrading of a Knight, Stowes Annals page 855. And it is not
to be omitted, that by the Canon Law, there be two forte of disgrading: one
summary by word only, and another solemn by devesting the party degraded of
those Ornaments and Rites; which be the ensighes of his Order or Degree.

Dismes (Decimes) is made of the French (Decimes) and signifies Tithe or the
tenth part of all the fruits, either of the earth, or beasts, or our labor,
due unto God, and so consequently to him that is of the Lords lot, and had his
share: viz. our Pastor. It signifies also the Tenths also of all spititual
livings, yearly given to the Prince (called a perpetuar Dismo. anno 2. and 3.
Edwar. 6. cap. 35.) which in ancient times, were paid to the Pope, until Pope
Urbane gave them to Richard the second, to aid him against Charles the French
King, and those other that upheld Clement the seventh against him. Polidor.
V^igil. Angl. hist. lib. 20. Lastly it signifies a tribute levied of the
Temporality. Holinshed in Henry 2. fol. 111.

Dispatigemet, Disparagatio, is by out Common Lawyers, used especially for
marching an heir in marriage under his or her degree, or against decency. See
my Institues, (...) de ^inpliis. 6.

Disseisin (Cisseisinae) comes of the French (Disseisir) and signifies in the
Common law, an unlawful dispossessing of a man of his Land, Tenement or other
immovable or incorporeal right, Institut. of the Com. Law, cap. 15. And how
far this extends, See Bracton, libro quarto, cap. tertio. And therefore the
Assizes be called Writs of Disseisin, that lie against Disseisonrs in any case.
Whereof some be termy little Writs of disseisin, being vidontiel, that is,
sneable before the Sheriff in the County Court, Old not. br. fol. 109. because
they are determined by the Snyreeve without assise, Register Original. fol.
198. b. as for Nuissanses of no great projudice. Disseisin is of two sorts;
either simple Disseisin; committed by day without force and arm. Kracton, lib.
4. cap. 4. Bricon, cap. 42. and 43. and 44. where you shall find in what
especially it is lawful, in what not, Britton cap. 53. And by Disseisin by
force, for the which see Desersour. See Fresh disseisin. See Redisseisin, and
Post disseisin. See Skine de verbo signifit. verbo disseisina. Disseisin how
many ways it is committed, See Fleta, l. 4. c. 1. (...) and when it is lawful,
cap. 2. ^n Distress (districtio, districtus) comes of the Enench (...) It
signifieth^ most commonly in the Common, law^ a compulsion in (...) and ons,
whereby to bring ^min to appear in Court, or to pay debt or duty de ^ied. The
effect where of most commonly is to devil the party distreined to reple vie the
distress, and, so to take his action of trespass against the Distreiner, or
else 10 compound neighbourly with him for the debt or duty for the which he
dissreineth, In what cases a Distress by law ful^ste The new Terms of Law, The
Civilians calbi^ (Riguorum ^^^^ionem.) Brissonius (...) lib. 14. This
compulsion is by Brittons cap. 71. divided into a distreste per) (...) and
Distress real Distress persona^ is made by surprising a man's moveable goods
and detaining them for the security of his appearance to the - sure ^ - and to
make hin Plaintiff. A Distress real is made upon immo veable goods, as the
Grand Cape; and pe^it Cape And thus it is interpreted by Hotomon de verb
foudal. verbo districtus. This differs from an Attachment in this point
(among others that ^ Distress cannot be taken by any common person, without
the compass of his own Fee E^zh^vat, br. fol. 904. except it be presently
after the cattle or other thing, is driven or bor^ out of the ground by him
that perceives it to be in danger to be distreined. New terms of the Law,
verbo distress.

District us (...) is sometime used for the circuit or territory within the
which, a man may be thus compelled to appearance. Ca. ne Romani. de electione
tu Clem. and Casson, de consuetud. Burgund, pa. 90. Britton, cap. 120. and so
likewise in Districtio in the Register original, fol. 6. b. And so, it seems
to be used in Pupilla oculi, par. 5. cap. 22. Charta de foresta. See also
Alynsing, in the Chapter licet causam 9. extra de probationibus, number. 5. and
Zasius in his, 16. council. number. 47. Distress, in the former signification, is
divided first into finite and infinite. Fining is that which is limited by Law,
how often, it shall be made to bring the party to trial of the action, as once,
twice; Old not br. fol. 43. Distress infinite is without limitation until the
party come: as against a Jury that refuses to appear super certificatione
Assisa, the Process is a (venire facias) (hebeas corpora) and distress
infinite, Old not. br. fol. 113. Then it is divided into a grand distress,
anno 52 H. 3. cap. 7 which Fitzherbert calls in Latin magnam districtiorem,
not. br. fol. 126. A. and an ordinary distress. A grand distress is that,
which is made of all the goods and chattels that the party has within the
County, Britton, cap. 26. fol. 52. But see, whether it be sometime not all one
with a distress infinite, Ide^ fol. 80. with whom also the Statute of
Marlebridge seems to agree, anno 52 H. 3. cap. 7. and cap. 9. and cap. 12.
See Old not. br. fol. 71. b. See grand distress, what things be distreinable,
and for what causes. See the New Terms of Law, ve^bo Distress. Of this also
see more in Attachement.

Distring as, is a Writ directed to the Sheriff, or any other Officer,
commanding him to distrain one for a debt to the King etc. or for his
appearance at a day. See great diversity of this Writ in the Table of the
Register, judicial, verbo distrirgas.

Divise. See D^vise.

Dividends in the Exchequer seems to be one part of an Indenture anno 10 Ed.
1. cap. 11. and anno. 28. ejusdem, Stat. 3. cap. 2.

Divorce. See Devorce.

DO
Docket, is a Brief in writing, anno 2. and 3. Ph. and Mar. cap. 6. West.
writes it (Dogget), by whom it seems to be some small piece of paper and
parchment containing the effect of a larger writing, Symbol. par. 2. tit.
Fives. Sect. 106.

Doctor and Student is a Book containing certain Dialogues between a D. of
Divinity, and a Student at the Common law, wherein are contained questions and
cases, as well of the equity and conscience used in the Common law as also a
Comparison of the Civil, Canon, and Common Law together, very worthy the
reading. The Author is said by D. Cousin in his Apology, ^o be a Gentleman,
called Saint German. The Book was written in the days of H. 8.

To do law, (facere legem) is as much as to make law, anno 23 H. 6. cap. 14.
See Make.

Dog draw, is a manifest deprehension of an offender against venison in the
Forest. There be four of these noted by M. Manwood, part 2. of his Forest
Laws, cap. 18. number. 9. viz. Stablestand, Dog-draw, Back-bear, and Bloody-hand.
Dog-draw, is when one is found drawing after a Deer by the sent of a Hound,
that he leads in his hand.

Dogger, a kind of Ship, an. 31. Ed. 3. stat. 3. cap. pri.

Dogger-fish, ibid. c. 2. seems to be Fish brought in those Shins to
Blackney-haven, etc. Dogger men, an. 2 H. 8. cap. 4.

Dogget. See Docket.

Domo reparanda, is a Writ that lies for one against his neighbor, by the
fall of whose house he fears hurt toward his own house, Reg orig. fol. 153.
for this point, The Civilians have the action de damno infacto.

Dole fish, seems to be that Fish, which the Fishermen yearly employed in the
North Seas do of custom receive for their allowance. See the statute, an. 35
H. 8. cap. 7.

Donative, is a Benefice merely given and collated by the Patron to a man,
without either presentation to the Ordinary, or Institution by the Ordinary,
or Induction by his commandment, Fitzh. not. br. fol. 35. E. See the stature,
anno 8 R. 2. cap. 4. Of this Petr. Gregor. de beneficits, cap. 11. number. 10.
has these words: Sitamen Capellaniae fundat^e per Laicos non fuerint a
Diocesano approbatae et ut (loquuntur) spiritualiz atae, non censentur
beneficia, nec ab Episcopo conferri possunt, sed sunt sub pia dispositione
fundatoris. Joh. Fab. ad Nullius. De rerum diuis: Iden fundatores et baeredes
little, possunt tales Capellanias donare sine Episcopo, cui voluerint, tanquam
profana beneficin. Guido Papaeus descis. 187. See also Gregorius, lib. 15. cap.
29. sui syntagmatis, number. 11. I sinde in the Preface of M. Gwins readings, that
as the King might of ancient times found a free Chapel, and exempt it from the
jurisdiction of the Diocesan: so he might also by his Letters Patents license a
common person, to found such a Chapel, and to ordain, that it shall be Donative
and not presentable, and that the Chaplain shall be depriveable by the Founder
and his Heirs, and not by the Bishop. And this is likest to be the original of
these Donatives in England. Fitzh. says, that there be certain Chauntries,
which a man may give by his Letters Patents, not. br. fol. 33. C. See him also,
fol. 42. B. All Bishoprics were Donative by the King. Coke lib. 3. fol. 75. b.

Dooms day (Rotulus Wintoniae) (domus D i, Coke in praefatione ad librum saum)
is a Book that was made in King Ed. the Confe^ors dates, as the Author of the
Old not. br. faith f. 15. containing in it not only all the Lands through
England, but also all the names of those, in whose hands they were at that
time, when the book was made. M. Lamberd in his explication of Saxon words
(verbo, jus Dacorum, etc.) proves out of Gervasius Tilburiensis, that this
Book was made in William the Conquerours time: with whom agrees M. Cambden in
his Bretan. page 94. pro^ing it out of Ingulphus, that flourished the same
time. And for the better commendation of the Book, it is not amiste to set down
the words of Ingulphus, touching the contents thereof. Totam terram descripsit.
Nec er at hyda in tota Anglia. quin valorem ejus and possessorem scivit, nec
lacus nec locus aliquis, q^sin in Regis rotulo extitit descriptus, ac ejus
reditus and proventus, ipsa possessio, and ejus possessor, regiae rotitiae
manifestatus, juxta taxatorum fidem qui elect^ de qualibet patria territorium
oroprium deseribebant. Ifte rotulus vocatns est Rotulus Wintoniae, and ab
Anglis pro sua generalitate, quod omnia tenementa totius terrae continuit
(Domesday cognominatur. So it is called in the statute, anno pri. Ric. 2. cap.
6. And in Ockhams lucubrations de fisci Regis ratione, which seems to be
taken out of the Book called. (Liber Rubeus) in the Exchequer, It is termed
(Liber Judicatorius) and the reason why, quia in co totius Regni descriptio
diligens continetu^: and tam de tempore Regis Edwardi, quam de tempore Regis
Willielmi sub quo factus est singulorum fundorum valentia expr. mitur.

Dorture (dormitorium) anno 25 H. 8. cap. 11. is the common room, place or
chamber, where all the Friars of one Covent slept, and lay all night.

Dote assignanda, is a Writ that lies for a Widow, where it is found by
office, that the Kings Tenent was feised of Tenements in Fee. or Fee-tail, at
the day of his death, etc. and that he holds of the King in chief, etc. For
in this case the Widow comes into the Chancery, and there makes oath, that
she will not marry without the Kings leave, anno 15 Ed. 3. cap. 4. and hereupon
he shall have this Writ to the Escheatour; for which, see the Register Original
fol. 297. and Fitzherb. not. br. fol. 263. And this sort of Widows is called
the Kings Widow. See Widow.

Dote unde nihil habet, is a Writ of Dower, that lies for the Widow against
the Tenent, which has bought Land of her Husband in his life time, whereof he
was feised solely in Fee simple or Fee tail in such sort as the issne of them
both might have inherited it. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 147. Regist. fol. 170.

Dotts admensuratione. See Admensurement. See the Reg. orig. fol. 171.

Dotkins, a kind of Coin pl. cor. fol. 37. I^seemeth to come of the Dutch word,
'Duytkin, that is, the eighth part of a Stufer or French Shilling, which in
Latin is called Solidus Gallicus.

Doubles, anno 14 H. 6. cap. 6. fignifie as much as Letters Patents, being as
it seems a French word made of the Latin (diploma.)

Double plee (duplex placitum) is that, wherein the Defendant allegeth for
himself two several matters, in bar of the action, where of either is
sufficient to effect his desire in debarring the Plaintiff. And this is nor to
be admitted in the Common law: wherefore it is well to be observed, when a P^ee
is double, and when it is not. For if a man allege several matters, the one
nothing depending of the other, the Piea is accounted double. If they be
mutually depending one of the other, then is it accounted but single. Kitchen,
fol. 223. See Brook hoc titule. But why this doubleness (for so Kitchen
calls it. fol. 234.) should be debarred, I see no reason (under correction
all things being spoken.) For a man may have two good defenses: and happily in
the issue he shall contrarily to his hope fail in proving the one, and yet be
able to carry the cause by the other. And therefore not only the Civilians,
but Bracton also says: Pluribus exceptionibus uti nemo prohibetur. libr. 5
aract. 5. cap. 5. number. 4. whom also read, libro 4. cap. 17. And Sir Thomas
Smiths reason of this scantly satisfies me, alleging this to be the course of
our proceeding, because the trial is by twelve rude men, whose heads are not to
be troubled with over many things at once, lib. 2. de Repub. Anglor. cap. 13.

Double quarrel (duplex querela) is a complaint made by any Clerk or other unto
the Archbishop of the Province, against an inferior Ordinary for delaying of
Justice in some cause Ecclesiastical: as to give sentence or to Institute a
Clerk presented, or such like. The effect whereof, is that the said Archbishop
taking knowledge of such delay, directs his Letters under his authentical
Seal, to all singular Clerks of his Province, thereby commanding and
authorizing them and every of them, to admonish the said Ordinatie, within a
certain number of days, namely 9 days, to do the Justice required, or
otherwise to cite him to appear before him or his Official, at a day in the
said Letters prefixed, and there to allege the cause of his delay. And lastly,
to intimate to the said Ordinary, that if he neither perform the thing
enjoined, nor appear at the day assigned, he himself will, without farther
delay, proceed to perform the Justice required. And this seems to be termed
a double quarrel, because it is most commonly made against both the Judge and
him at whose Petition Justice is delayed.

Dower (dos) comes of the French (dovaire) and signifies in our Common law,
two things: first, that which the Wife brings to her Husband in marriage,
otherwise called (maritagium) marriage good: next, and more commonly, that
which she has of her Husband, after the marriage determined, if she outlive
him. Glanvile lib. 7. cap. 1. Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 38. Britton. cap. 101. in
princ. And in Scotland, (dos) signifies just as much. Skene de verb. signif.
verbo Dos. The former is in French called (dot) the other dovayre and by them
latined doarium. I like wise once thought it not unreasonable, to call the
former a Dowry, and the other a Dower: but I find them confounded. For
example: Smith de rep. Anglo. pa. 105. calls the latter a dowry, and dower is
sometime used for the former: as in Britton ubi supra. Yet were it not
inconvenient to distinguish them being so diverse. The Civilians call the former
(dotem) and the latter (donationem propter nuptias.) Of the former, the Common
law books speak very little. This only is to be noted, that whereas by the
Civil Law, instruments are made before marriage, which contain the quantity of
the wives dowry, or substance brought to her husband, that he having the use
of it, during marriage, may, after certain deductions, restore it again to his
Wives Heirs or Friends, after the marriage dissolved: the Common law of
England, whatsoever chattels, moveable or immovable, or ready money she
brings, does make them forthwith her Husbands own, to be disposed of, as he
will, leaving her at his courtesy, to bestow any thing or nothing of her at
his death. The reason whereof is said to be, the holding of the Wife in
obedience to her Husband. Only if she be an inheretrice, her Husband holds
the Land but during her life, except he have issue by her: but then he holds
it by the courtesy of England during his own life. See Courtesy. And again,
if he have any Land in Fee, whereof he was possessed during the marriage, she
is to have a third thereof during her life, though she bring nothing to him,
except she do by fine release her right, during the marriage. So that here is
no great matter to be spoken of, but touching dower in the latter
signification. You must know therefore, that upon speech of marriage between
two, the Parents of both sides are commonly more careful in providing each for
his child, than the parties themselves: And that by their means there be diverse
bargains made, sometime for the conveiance of Lands, etc. to them and their
issue: And this is said to be given in Frank marriage: sometime to her, during
her life and that before, or at the marriage: If before marriage, then it is
called a Jointure. For a Jointure is a Covenant, whereby the Husband, or some
for him, is tied (ratione juncturae) in consideration of the marriage, that the
wife surviving him, shall have during her life, this or that Tenement or Lands,
or thus much Rent, yearly payable out of such Land, etc. with clause of
distress: and this may be more or less, as they do accord, Britton, cap. 110.
whom read also, cap. 102, 103, 104. for conventio vincit legem. Bracton, lib.
5. tractat. 4. cap. 9. The diversity of these Joyntures, you may see in West.
part prima symbol. l. 2. sect. 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133. But if none of
these former bargains pass before marriage, then must the Wife stick to her
Dower: and that is sometime given at the Church door, or the Chapel door, if
the marriage be by License, but not the Chamber door; and may be what the
Husband will, so it exceed not a third part of this Lands, Glanvile, lib. 6.
cap. pri. Or the half, as some say, Fitz. not. br. fol. 150. N.P. And this
Dower is either certainly set down and named, or not named, but only in
generality, as the law requires: if it be not named, then it is by law, the
third part, and called (dos legitima) Bracton, lib. 4. tract. 6. cap. 6. number.
6. and 10. Magna Charta, c. 7. or the half, by the custom of some Countries,
as in Gavelkind, Fitzh. not. br. fol. 150. O. And though it be named, it
seems that it cannot be above half the lands of the Husband, Fitzh. not. br.
fol. 150. P. And the Woman that will challenge this Dower, must make 3 things
good, viz. that she was married to her Husband, that he was in his life time
seized of the Land whereof she demands Dower, and that he is dead, Cokes
reports, lib. 2. Binghames case, fol. 93. a. Of these things see Glanvile l. 6.
c. 1, 2, and 3. Bract. l. 2. c. 38, 39, and l. 4. tract. 6. cap. 1. and 6. and
Britton cap. 101, 102, 103, 104. and Fitzherb. not. br. fol. 147, 148, 149, and
150. And this custumary Dower, seems to be observed in other nations, as well
as in ours. Hotoman verbo Dotalitium in verbis feudal. Cassan. de consuetud.
Burg. page 580. 676. 677. and de conventional. pa. 720. And to these join the
grand Custumarie of Normandy. cap. 102. where you shall perceive, that in a
manner all our law in this point is taken from the Normans. See Endowment. Of
Dower read Fleta likewise, who writes largely thereof, and has many things
worth the learning, lib. 5. cap. 23. and seq.

Dozenno. See Decennitr.

DR
Drags, anno 6 H. 6. cap. 5. seem to be wood or timber so joined together, as
swimming or floting upon the water, they may bear a burden or load of other
wares down the River.

Draw latches, anno 5 Edw. 3. cap. 14. and anno 7. Rich. 2. cap. 5. Master
Lamberd, in his Eirenarch. lib. 2. cap. 6. calls them Miching thieves, as
Wasters and Roberdjemen mighty thieves, saying, that the words be grown out of
use.

Dreit Dreit, signifies a double right, that is jus possessionis, and jus
Domini. Bracton, lib. 4. cap. 27. and lib. 4. tract. 4. cap. 4. and lib. 5.
tract. 3. cap. 5.

Dry exchange, anno 3 H. 7. cap. 5. (Cambium siccum) seems to be a cleanly
term invehred for the disguising of foul usury, in the which something is
pretended to pass of both sides, whereas in truth nothing passes but on the
one fide: in which respect it may well be called dry. Of this Ludovicus Lopes
tracbat. de contract: and negotiatio. lib. 2. cap. pri. Deinde postquam,
writes thus, Cambium est reale vel siccn^. Cambium reale dicitur, quod
consistentiam very Cambit realem habet, et Cambium per or ans, et Cambium
minutum. Cambium autem siccum est Cambium non habens existentiam Cambii, sed
apparentiam ad instar arboris exsiccatae, quae humorae vitali jam carens,
appaerentiam arboris habet non existentiam. Summa Syl. Verbo Usura, quaest. 6.
Est ergo Cambium siccum uxta hanc acceptionem (in qua etiam accipitur in
extrav. Pii quinti) idem quod Cambium fictum. Non autem habet propriam naturam
Cambii, sed mutui et usurae. At vero secundum Laurentium de Navarra in commento
de usuris et Cambiis citatam, Cambium siccum in alia acceptione minus communi
summum est ^ambium, in quo Campsor prius dat quam accipiat. Dicitur autem isto
modo ficcum, quia sine praevia acceptione dat Campsor. Quod tamen, ut sic
acceptum (autore Sylvestro) licite celebratur aliquando. Quiatun^ verum et
reale Cambium est diffe ens genere ab eo Cambio, in quo Campsor prius recipit.
Quiae in isto Campsor semper primo dat et de^nde accipit.

Drift of the Forest, seems to be nothing but an exact view or examination,
what cattle are in the Forest: that it may be known whether it be overcharged
or not, and whose the beasts be. This drist, when, how often in the year, by
whom, and in what manner it is to be made, See Manwood, part 2, of his Forest
Laws, cap. 15.

Drait d' Advorizen. See Recto de advocatione Ecclesiae.

Droit. close. See Recto clausum.

Droit de dower. See Recto dotis.

Droit: sur disclaimer. See Recto sur diselaimer.

Droit patens. See Recto patens.

DU
Duces tecum, is a Writ commanding one to appear at a day in the Chancery, and
to bring with him some piece of evidence, or other thing, that the Court would
view. See the new book of Entries, verbo Duces tecum.

Duke (Dux) comes of the French word (Duc.) In signifies in ancient times
among the Romans, (Ductorent exercitus) such as led their armies, who if by
their prowess they obtained any famous victory, they were by their Soldiers
saluted (Imperatores) as Hotoman, verbo Dux, de verbis feudal. proves out of
Livy, Tully, and others. Sithence that they were called duces, to whom the King
or people committed the custody or regiment of any Province. Idem, cod. And
this seems to proceed from the Lombards or Germans, Sigon. de reg' no Ital.
l. 4. In some Nations this day the Soveroigns of the Country are called by
this name, as Duke of Russia, Duke of Sweden. Here in England Duke is the next
in secular dignity to the Prince of Wales. And (as M. Cambden says) heretofore
in the Saxons times, they were called Dukes, without any addition, being but
mere officers and leaders of Armies. After the Conqueror came in, there were
none of this title until Edward the thirds days, who made Edward his son Duke
of Cornwall. After that there were more made, and in such sort, that their
titles descended by inheritance unto their posterity. They were created with
solemnity, ( per cincturam gladii, cappaeque and circuli aurei in capite
impositionem, vide Camd. Britann. page 166. Zazium, de feudis part 4. number. 7.
et Cassan. de consuetud. Burg. page 6. et 10. and Ferns glory of generosity,
page 139.

Duchy court, is a Court, wherein all matters appertaining to the Duchy of
Lancaster, are decided by the decree of the Chancellor of that Court. And the
original of it was in Henly the fourths days, who obtaining the Crown by
deposing Richard the second, and having the Duchy of Lancaster by descent in
the right of his mother, he was seized thereof as King, and not as Duke. So
that all the liberties, franchises, and Jurisdictions of the said Duchy
passed from the King by his grand Seal, and not by Livery or Attournment: as
the possessions of Ever wick, and of the Earldom of March, and such others did,
which had descended to the King by other Ancestors than the Kings, but at last,
Henry the fourth, by authority of Parliament passed a Charter, whereby the
possessions, liberties, etc. of the said Duchy were severed from the Crown:
Yet Henry the seventh reduced it to his former nature, as it was in Henry the
fifts days. Cromptons Jurisd. fol. 136. The officers belonging to this Court,
are the Chancelour, the Attorney, Recelver general, Clerk of the Court, the
Messenger. Beside these there be certain Assistants of this Court: as one
Attorney in the Exchequer, one Attorney of the Duchy in the Chancery, four
Learned men in the Law, retained of Council with the King in the said Court. Of
this Court, M. Gwin^ in the Preface to his Readings thus speaks. The Court of
the Duchy (or County Palatine of Lancaster) grew out of the grant of King
Edward the third, who first gave the Duchy to his Son John of Gaunt, and
endowed it with such Royal right, as the County Palatine of Chester had: And
for as much, as it was afterward extinct in the person of King Henry the
fourth, by reason of the union of it with the Crown, the same King suspecting
himself to be more rightfully Duke of Lancaster, than King of England,
determined to save his right in the Duchy whatsoever should befall of the
Kingdom: and therefore he separated the Duchy from the Crown, and settled it
so in the natural persons of himself and his Heirs, as if he had been no King
or Politic body at all: In which plight is continued, during the reign of King
Henry the fifth, and Henry the sixth that were descended of him. But when King
Edward the fourth had by recovery of the Crown) recontinued the right of the
house of York, he seared not to appropriate that Duchy to the Crown again: and
yet so, that he suffered the Court and Officers to remain as he found them. And
in this manner, it came together with the Crown, to King Henry the seventh, who
liking well of that Policy of King Henry the fourth (by whose right also he
obtained the Kingdom) made like separation of the Duchy, as he had done, and
so left it to his posterity, which do yet enjoy it.

Dum fuit infra aetatem, is a Writ which lies for him, that before he came to
his full age, made a Feofment of his Land in Fee, or for term of life, or in
tail, to recover them again from him, to whom he conveyed them, Fitz. not. br.
fol. 192.

Dum non fuit compos mentis, is a Writ that lies for him, that being not of
sound memory, did alien any Lands or Tenements in Feesimple, Fee-tail, for term
of life, or of years, against the alience. Fitzherb. not. br. fol. 202.

Duplicat, is used by Crompton, for a second Letters Patent, granted by the
Lord Chancellor, in a case, wherein he had formerly done the same: and was
therefore thought void. Cromptons Jurisd. fol. 215.

Dures (Duritia) comes of the French ( dur, i. durus, veldurete, 1. duritas)
and is in our Common law, a Plee used in way of exception, by him that being
cast in prison at a man's suit, or otherwise by beating, or threats hardly used,
seals any Bond unto him during his restraint. For the Law holds this not
good: but rather supposes it to be constrained. Broke in his Abridgement
joyneth Dures and Manasse together, i. duritiam and minas, hardness and
threatening. See the new Book of Entries, verbo Dures. And the New Terms of Law.

EA
EAldermans (Aldermannus) among the Saxons, was as much as Earl among the
Danes. Cambden, Britan. page 107. If ye go to the true etymology of the word,
me thinkoth it should sound more generally, so much as (...) with the
Graecians, or Senator with the Romans: who were rather Counselors at large,
than bestowed upon any particular office, as Comites were. See Coun. ie. And
that signification we retain at this day almost in all our Cities, and
Boroughs, calling those Aldermen, that are Associates to the Chief Officer in
the common Council of the Town, anno 24 H. 8. cap. 13. or sometime the chief
Officer himself, as in Stawnford.

Earl (Comes) in M. Cambdens opinion, page 107. is a word made by the Danes of
(Ealderman) a word of the Saxons. M. Lamberd seems notwithstanding to
acknowledge, that Earl is originally a Saxon word, Explica. of Saxon words,
verbo Paganus: and interprets it (Satrapam) which word the Romans borrowing
of the Persians, applied to those that were praefecti provinciarum. M.
Verstegan in his restitution of decayed Intelligence, deriveth it from two
Netherland words ( ear, i. honor) and ( ethel, i. nobilis) wherein I leave the
Reader to his own judgment. This title in ancient time, was given to those
that were Associates to the King in his Counsels and Marshal actions, (as Comes
was to those that followed the Magistrates in Rome, and executed their offices
for them as their Deputies, and died always with the man) Zasius has of this
word thus much: Comitum originem in Doctoribus non invenimus; sed noveris eam
dignitatem vetustissimam esse. Nam Cor. Tacitus in libello de Germania scribit
apud priscos usu fuisse receptum, ut cuilibet Principi seu Duci exercitus
duodecim comites assignarentur: ideo dictos, quia comitarentur eos, and a Ducum
latere non decederent. Comitatum it aque originem Germanis moribus or tum esse
dictus receptissimus author testis est. Quapropter quod in duodecimo libro
codicis aliqui tituli de Comitibus largitionum, etc. inscribuntur, usurpationem
Imperatoris ex Germanorum ritibus sumptum credo. But the Conqueror (as M.
Cambden says) gave this dignity in Fee to his Nobles, annexing it to this or
that County or Province, and allotted them for their maintenance a certain
proportion of money rising from the Princes profits, for the pleadings and
forfeitures of the Province. For example, he brings an ancient Record in
these words: Henricus 2. Rex Angliae his verbis Comitem creavit: Sciatis nos
fecisse Hugonet Bigot Comitem de Nortfolk. sc. de tertio denario de Norwic. and
Nortfolk, sicut aliquis Comes Angliae libertus com^tatum suum tenet. Which
words (says the same Author) an old book of Battle Abbey thus expounds:
Consuetudinaliter per totam Angliam mos antiquitus inoleverat, Comites
provinciarum tertium denarium sibi obtinere, inde Comites dicti. And another
book without name more fully. Comitatus a Comite dicitu^, aut vice versa. Comes
autem est, quia tertiam portionem little, quae de placitis proveniunt, in
quolib^t Comitatu percipit^ Sed non omnes Comites ista percipiunt: sed bit
quibus Rex baereditario aut personaliter concessit. You may read M. Fern in
Lacy's nobility, something to his effect, page 12. But he says, that one Duke
or Earl had diverse Shires under his government, as a Viceroy, and had
Lieurenants under him in every particular Shire called a Sheriff. That one Earl
was dignified by the appellation, of more than one Sheriff, it appears by
diverse of our ancient Statutes, as namely by the sentence of Excommunication,
pronounced by the Bishops, against the infringers of the great Charter, and
Charter of the Forest, anno 38 H. 3. Roger Bigot is named Earl both of
Northfolk and Southfolk, and anno 1 Ed. 3. Thomas Earl of Lancaster and
Leycester. Humfrey Bohun, Earl of Hereford and Essex. Dyer, fol. 285. number. 39.
At these days, as long since, the Kings of England make Eearls by their
Charters, of this or that County, giving them no authority over the County, nor
any part of the profit rising of it, but only some annual stipend out of the
Exchequer, rather for honors sake, than any great commodity. And these be in
other Nations accounted Earls improperly, Quia illi dicuntur vere Comites,
quibus datur Comitatus in feudum: illi Comites abusive, qui non habent
administrationem. Vincentius de Franchis, descis 115. number. 7. The manner of
creating Earls is by girding them with a Sword. Camden, page 107. but see the
solemnity thereof described more at large in Stowes annals, page 1121. The
occasion why these Earls in latter times have had no sway over the County,
whereof they bear their name, is not obscurely signified in Sir Tho. Smith, l.
2. cap. 14. where he says, that the Sheriff is called Vicecomes as (Vicarius
Comi^is) following all matters of Justice, as the Earl should do: and that
because the Earl is most continually attendant upon the King, in his wars or
otherwise. So that it seems that Earls by reason of their high employments,
being not able to follow also the business of the County, were delivered of
all that burden, and only enjoyed the honor, as now they do. And the Sheriff
though he be still called Vice-comes, yet all he does, is immediately under the
King, and not under the Earl. See County, and see Hotoman. de verb. feudal.
verb. Comes: and Cassan. de consuetud. Burg. page 12.

Easement, (esamentum is a service that one Neighbor has of another by
Charter or prescription without profit, as a way through his ground, a sink, or
such like. Kitchen fol. 105. which in the Civil law is called Servitus praedii.

EE
Eele fares, alias Eele Vare, anno 25 H. 8. be the fry or brood of Eeles.

EG
Egyptians, (Aegyptiani) are in our Statutes and Laws of England, a conterfeit
kind of Rogues, that being English or Welsh people, accompany themselves
together, disguising themselves instrange robes, blacking their faces and
bodies, and framing to themselves an unknown Language, wander up and down, and
under pretense of telling of Fortunes, curing diseases, and such like, abuse
the ignorant common people, by stealing all that is not too hot or too heavy
for their carriage. anno 1. and 2 Philip. and Mar. cap. 4. anno 5 Eli. cap. 20.
These are very like to those whom the Italians call Cingari: of whom Franciscus
Leo in suo thesauro fori Ecclesiastici part prim. cap. 13. thus writes:
Cingari, qui corrupto vocabulo, quandoque etiam Saraceni nominantur, and
permissione principum ac aliorum dominorum, per Italium vagantur, nec unquam
viderum parts infidelium, minusque, legem Mahometi noverunt: sed sunt fere
omnes Itali, and male habituati, ex rebus furtivis vivunt, ac fraudulent is
earum permutationibus and ludis, in quibus ut plurimum frauds committunt, and
sunt baptizati.

EI
Ejectione custodiae, Ejectment de guard, is a Writ which lies properly against
him, that casts our the Guardian from any land, during the minority of the
Heir. Regist. orig. fol. 162. Fizth. not. br. fol. 139. Terms of the Law, verbo
Guard. There be two other writs not unlike this: the one is termed Droit de
guard, or right of guard, the other Ravishment de guard. Which see in their
places.

Ejectione firmae, is a Writ which lies for the Lessee for term of years, that
is cast out before the expiration of his term, either by the leassour or a
stranger. Regist. fol. 227. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 220. See Quare ejecit infra
terminum. See the new book of Entries, verbo Ejectione firmo.

Einecia, is borrowed of the French, ( Aisne, i. primogenitus) and signifies
in our Common law, Eldership. Statute of Ireland, anno 14 Hen. 3. Of this see
M. Skene de verb. signif. verbo. Eneya.

Eire, alias, Air, (Iter. Bract. lib. 3. c. 11. in Rubrica) comes of the old
French word ( Err, i. iter) as ( a grand err, i. magnis ^ineribus.) It
signifies in Britton, cap. 2. the Court of Justices Itinerants: and Justices
in Air, are those only, which Bracton in many places calls (Justiciarios
itinerantes) of the Air, read Britton ubi supra, who expresses the whole
course of it. And Bracton lib. 3. tractat. 2. cap. 1. and 2. The Air also of
the Forest is nothing, but the Justice Seat, otherwise called: which is or
should by ancient custom, he held every three year by the Justices of the
Forest, journying up and down to that purpose. Cromptons Jurisd. fol. 156.
Manwood part prima of of his Forest laws, page 121. See Justice in Eyr. Read
Ske^e de verborum significa. verbo Iter: whereby, as by many other places, you
may see great affinity between these two Kingdoms in the administration of
Justice and Government.

EL
Election de Clerk (Electione clerici) is a Writ, that lies for the choice of
a Clerk, assigned to take and make bonds called statute Merchant: and is
granted out of the Chancery: upon suggestion made, that the Clerk formerly
assigned, is gone to dwell in another place, or has hinderance to let him from
following that business, or has not land sufficient to answer his
transgression, if he should deal amiss, etc. Fitzh. na. br. fol. 164.

Elegit, is a Writ judicial, and lies for him that has recovered debt, or
damages in the Kings Court, against one not able in his goods to satisfy: and
directed to the Sheriff, commanding him that he make delivery of half the
parties lands or tenements, and all his goods, Oxen and Beasts for the Plough
excepted, Old not. br. fol. 152. Regist. orig. fol. 299. and 301. and the table
of the Register Judicial, which expresses diverse uses of this Writ. The author
of the new Terms of Law says, that this Writ should be sued within the year,
whom read at large for the use of the same.

Elk, a kind of Ewe to make Bows of, anno 33 H. 8. cap. 9.

EM
Empanel (Impanellare, Ponere in assisis and Juratis comes of the French (
Pan, i. Pellis) or of ( Panneau) which signifies sometime as much as a Pane
with us, as a Pane of glass, or of a window. It signifies the writing and
entering the names of a Jury into a parchment Shedule or Roll or Paper, by the
Sheriff, which he has summoned to appear for the performance of such public
service, as Juries are employed in. See Panel.

Emparlance, comes of the French. (Parler) and signifies in our Common law, a
desire or petition in Court of a day to pause, what is best to do. The
Civilians call it (petitionem induciarum) Kitchen, fol. 200. interprets it in
these words: If he imparl or pray continuance. For praying continuance is
spoken interpretative in that place, as I take it. The same Author makes
mention of Emparlance general, fol. 201. and Emparlance special, fol. 200.
Emparlance general seems to be that which is made only in one word, and in
general terms. Emparlance special, where the party requires a day to
deliberate, adding also these words. Salvis omnibus advantagiis tam ad
jurisdictionem Curia quam ad breve and narrationem, or such like: Britton uses
it for the conference of a Jury upon the cause committed unto them, cap. 53.
See Imparlance.

Emprovement. See Improvement.

EN
Encheson, An. 50. Ed. 3. cap. 3. is a French word, signifying as much as
occasion, cause, or reason wherefore any thing is done. See Skene de verbo.
significat. verbo Encheson.

Encroachment or Accrochment, comes of the French ( Accrocher, i.
apprehendere, inuncare, harpagare) and that comes of ( Crochure, i. aduncitas)
or crochu, i. aduncus) Encrochment, in our Common law, signifies an unlawful
gathering in upon another man. For example, if two men's grounds lying together,
the one presses too far upon the other: or if a Tenant owe two shillings rent
service to the Lord, and the Lord takes three: So Hugh and Hugh Spencer
encroched unto them royal power and authority, anno prim. Ed. 3. in prooem.

Enditement Indictamentum) comes of the French ( Enditer, i. defer nomen
alicujus, indicare) or from the Greek (...), because M. Lamberd will have it
so. Eirenar. l.b. 4. cap. 5. page 468. It signifies in our Common law, as much
as (Accusatio) in the Civil Law, though it have not in all points the like
effect. West. part. 2. symb. titulo, Inditements, defines it thus: An
Indictment is a Bill or Declaration made in form of Law (for the benefit of the
Commonwealth) of an accusation for some offense, either criminal or penal,
exhibited unto Jurours, and by their Verdict found and presented to be true,
before an Officer having power to punish the same offense. It is an accusation,
because the Jury that inquireth of the offense, does not receive it until the
party that offers the Bill, appear so far in it, as to subscribe his name,
and offers his oath for the truth thereof. It differs from an Accusation in
this, that the preferrer of the Bill is no way tied to the proof thereof upon
any penalty, if it be not pround, except there appear conspiracy. Wherefore,
though moved by M. Wests authority, I call it an Accusation: yet I take it to
be rather (Denunciatio) because it is office done by the great Enquest, rather
that of a free intent to accuse. Of this you may read S. Tho. Smith de Repup.
Anglor. lib. 2. cap. 19. and Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 2. cap. 23, 24, 25, 26, etc.
Usque 34. and M. Lamberds Eirenarcha, lib. 4. cap. 5. whence you may receive
good satisfaction in this matter.

Endowment, (dotatio) comes of the French (Douaire) and lignifieth the
bestowing or assuring of a Dower. See Dower. But it is sometime used
Metaphorically, for the setting forth or severing of a sufficient portion, for
a Vicar toward his perpetual maintenance, when the Benefice is appropriate^.
See Appropriation. And the Statute, An. 15. R. 2. c. 5.

Endowment de la plus belle part is where a man dying seized of some lands,
holding in Knights service, and other some in socage, the Widow is sped of her
Dower, rather in the lands holding in soccage, than Knights service. Of this
read Litleton more at large, lib. 1. cap. 5.

Enfranchisement, comes of the French ( Franchise, i. libertas.) and is in a
manner a French word of it self: it signifies in our Common law, the
incorporating of a man in any society, or body politic. For example, he that
by Charter is made Denizen of England, is said to be infranchised; and so is he
that is made a Citizen of London, or other City, or Burgess of any Town
Corporate, because he is made partaker of those liberties that appertain to the
Corporation, whereinto he is infranchised. So a villain is infranchised, when
he is made free by his Lord, and made capable of the benefits belonging to the
freemen.

Englecerie (Engleceria) is an old abstract word, signifying nothing else but
to he an Englishman. For example, if a man be privily slain or murdered, he
was in old time accounted (Francigena) which word comprehends every alien,
until Englecerie was proved: that is, until it were made manifest, that he was
an Englishman. A man may marvel, what meaning there might be in this: but
Bracton clears the doubt, who in his third book tract. 2. cap. 15. number. 3.
tells us, that when Canutus the Danish King, having settled his estate here in
peace, did at the request of our Barons, disburden the land of his army,
wherein he accounted his greatest safety: and conditioned with them, that his
Contrymen which remained here, should continue in peace: and the more to
secure that, that for every Francigena (under which word, (as is above said) he
comprehended all outlandish men and women, and especially Danes) that was
secretly murdered, there should be levied to his Treasury 66 marks out of the
village, where the murder was committed, or out of the Hundred, if the Village
were not able to pay it: and further, that every man murdered, should be
accounted Francigena, except Englecery were proved: which, how it was to be
proved, look the seventh Number in the same Chapter. And see also Horns mirror
of Justices, lib. 1. cap. del office del coroner, and Fleta lib. 1. cap. 30.
This Engleceris, for the abuses and troubles that afterward were perceived to
grow by it, was clean taken away, by a Statute made Anno 14. Edward. 3. capite
quarto.

Enheritance. See Inheritance.

Enquest (Inquifitio) is all one in writing with the French word, and all one
in signification, both with the French and Latin. Howbeit, it is especially
taken for that inquisition, that neither the Romans, nor French men ever had
use of, that I can learn. And that is the Enquest of Jurors, or by Jurie, which
is the most usual trial of all causes, both Civil and Criminal in our realm.
For in causes Civil, after proof is made on either side, so much as each party
thinks good for himself, if the doubt be in the fact, it is referred to the
discretion of twelve indifferent men, empaneled by the Sheriff for the purpose:
and as they bring in their Verdict, so judgment passes. For the Judge faith,
the Jurie finds the fact thus: then is the Law thus: and so we judge. For the
Enquest in causes criminal, see Jurie; and see Sir Thomas Smith de Repub.
Anglor. lib. 2. cap. 19. An Enquest is either of office, or at the mise of the
party. Stawn. pl. cor. lib. cap. 12.

Entendment comes of the French ( entendiment, i. intellectus, ingenium.) It
signifies in our Common law, so much as the true meaning or signification of a
word or sentence. See of this Kitchen, fol. 224.

Entayl (feudum talliatum) comes of the French ( entaille, i. inscisus) and in
our Common law, is a substantive abstract, signifying Feetail, or Fee-intailed.
Litleton in the second Chapter of his Book, draws Fee-tail from the verb
Talliare (which, whence it comes, or whether it will, I know not) whereas in
truth it must come from the French ( taille, i. sectura,) or ( tailler, i.
scindere secare.) And the reason is manifest, because Fee-tail in the Law, is
nothing but Fee abridged, scanted or currelled, (as you would say) or limited
and tied to cettain conditions. Taille in France is metaphorically taken for a
tribute or subsidy. v. Lupanum de Magistratibus Francorum. lib. 3. cap. Talea.
See Fee. See Tail.

Enterpleder (Interplacitare) is compounded of two French words ( enter, i.
inter) and ( pleder, i. disputare) and it signifies in our Common law, as much
as cognitio praejudicialis in the Civil Law: that is, the discussing of a point
incidently falling out, before the principal cause can take end. For example,
two several persons, being found Heirs to Land, by two several offices in one
County, the King is brought in doubt to whether livery ought to be made: and
therefore before Livery be made to either, they must enterplead; that is,
formerly try between themselves, who is the right Heir. Stawnf. praeroga. cap.
12. See more examples in Broke titulo Enterpleder.

Entire tenancie, is contrary to several Tenencie, signifying a sole possession
in one man: whereas the other signifies joint or common in more. See Broke
several Tenencie. See the new book of Entries, verbo Entier tenancie.

Entry (Ingressus) comes of the French ( entree, i. introitus, ingressus,
aditus) and properly signifies in our Common law, the taking possession of
Lands or Tenements. See Plowden. Assise of fresh force in London, fol. 93. b.
It is also used for a Writ of possession, for the which, see Ingressu. And read
West also part 2. Symbol: titulo Recoveries, Sect. 2. and 3. Who there shows
for what things it lies, and for what things it lies not. Of this Britton in
his 114. Chapter writes to his effect. The Writs of entry savor much of the
right of poverty. As for example, some be to recover customs and services: in
the which are contained these two words (solet and debet) as the Writs Quo
jure, Rationalibus divisis, rationabili est overio, with such like. And in this
place of entry there be three degrees: The first is, where a man demands
Land or Tenements of his own seisin, after the Term is expired. The second is
where one demands Lands or Tenements, let by another, after the Term expired.
The third, where one demands Lands or Tenements of that Tenent, that had
entry by one, to whom some Ancestor of the Plaintiff did let it for a Term now
expired. According to which degrees, the Writs for more fit remedy are varied.
And there is yet a fourth form, which is withour degrees, and in case of a more
remote Seisin, whereunto the other three degrees do not extend. The Writ in the
second degree is called a Writ of entry in le per: and a Writ in the third
degree is called a Writ of entry in le per and cui: and the fourth form
without these degrees, is called a Writ of entry in le post^^ that is to say,
after the disseisin which such a one made to such a one. And if any Writ of
entry be conceived out of the right case, so that one form be brought for
another, it is abateable. The form of the first degree is such, Praecipe
Willielmo quod reddat Petro manerium de B. cum pertinentiis quod ille definet
pro termino, qui est elapsus. The second is such: Praecipe Petro quod reddat
Willielmo manerium, etc. in quod ille non habuit ingressum nisi per patrem aut
matrem, avunculum, vel amitam, vel cognatum, avum vel proavum dicts Petri qui
dictum manerium dimisit pro termino, qui est elapsus. The third form is such:
Praecipe Johanni quod reddat Petro manerium de S. in quod ille non habuit
ingressum nisi per T. cui tal^s pater vel matter, vel alius antecessor aut
cognatus idem dimisit, cujus haeres est ipse Petrus, pro termino, qui est
elapsus. And the form without the degrees is such: In quod non habuit
ingressum, nisi post lessam, quam talis pater aut matter (sic ut supra) cujus
haeres ille est, inde fecit pro termino, qui est elapsus. And in those four
degrees be comprehended all manner Writs of entry, which be without certainty
and number. Thus far Britton: by whom you may perceive, that those words
(solet and debet) and also those other words (in le per) (in le per and cui)
and (in le post) which we meet with many times in books shortly and obscurely
mentioned, do signify nothing else, but diverse forms of this Writ, applied to
the case, whereupon it is brought, and each form taking his name from the said
words contained in the Writ. And of this read Fitzh. in his not. br. fol. 193.
and 194. This Writ of entry differs from an Assise, because it lies for the
most part against him, who entered lawfully, but holds against Law: whereas an
Assise lies against him that unlawfully disseised: yet sometime a Writ of
entry lies upon an entrusion. Regist. orig. fol. 233. b. See the new book of
Entries, verbo Enter brevis fol. 254. colum. 3. I read of a Writ of entry in
the nature of an Assise. Of this Writ in all his degrees, read Fleta, lib. 5.
cap. 34. and s^q.

Entrusion (Intrusio) in our Common law, signifies a violent or unlawful
entrance into Lands or Tenements, being utterly void of a possessor, by him
that has no right, nor spark of right, unto them, Bracton, lib. 4. cap. 2. For
example, if a man step in upon any Lands, the owner whereof lately dyed, and
the right Heir neither by himself or others, as yet has taken possession of
them. What the difference is between Abator and Intrudor, I do not well
perceive, except an Abatour he be that step peth into land void by the death of
a Tenent in Fee, and an Entrudor that does the like into lands, etc. void by
the death of the Tenent for Terms of life or years. See Fitzh. not. br. fol.
203. F. The author of the new Terms of Law would have abatement Latined,
(Interpositionem, aut intro tionem per interpositionem) and to be restrained to
him that enters before the Heir after the decease of a Tenent for life, though
the new book of Entries, fol. 63. C. and 205. D. and 519. C. by his confession
does Latin (Abatement) by this word (Intrusionem.) See Abatement. See
Disseisin. See Britton cap. 65. Entrusion is also taken for the Writ brought
against an Intrudor, which see in Fitzh^nat. br. fol. 203.

Entrusion de guard, is a Writ, that lies where the Infant within age entered
into his his lands and holds his Lord ont: for in this case, the Lord shall
not have the Writ (De communi custodia) But this. Old not. br. fol. 90.

Enure, signifies to take place or effect, to be availeable. Example: A
Release shall enure by way of extinguishment. Litleton, cap. Release. And a
Release made to a Tenent for Term of life, shall inure to him in the Reversion.

ER
Erius, alias Iris, is the Flower de lyce, whose diverse kinds you have
expressed in Gerards Herbal. lib. 1. cap. 34. The root of this is mentioned
among Merchandise or Drugs to be garbled, anno 1 Jacob. cap. 19.

Ermins seems to come of the French ( Ermine, i. mus araneus.) It signifies
a Furre of great price.

Erminstreat, see Watlingstreat.

Errant (Itinerans) comes of the French ( Error, i. errare) or the old word (
Err, i. Iter.) It is attributed to Justices of circuit, p. cor. fol. 15. and
Baylifes at large. See Justices in Eyr. and Baylife. See also Eyr.

Error (Error) comes of the French ( Erreur) and signifies more specially in
our Common law, an error in pleading, or in the Process, Brook, titulo Error.
And thereupon the Writ, which is brought for remedy of this oversight, is
called a Writ of error, in Latin, De errore corrigendo: thus defined^ by
Fitzh. not. br. fol. 20. A Writ of Error is that properly, which lies to
redress false judgment given in any Court of Record, as in the Common bench,
London, or other City, having power (by the Kings Charter or prescription) to
hold Plee of debt. See the new book of Entries, verbo Error. or trespass above
the sum of twenty shillings. This is borrowed from the French practice, which
they call (proposition d'erreur.) Whereof you may read in Gregorius De
appellation. page 36. In what diversity of cases this Writ lies, see the
Register original in the Table, verb. Errore corrigendo, and Register judicial
fol. 34. There is likewise a Writ of Error to reverse a Fine. West. part 2.
sect. symbol. titulo Fines. 151.

Errore corrigendo. See Error.

ES
Escawbio, is a license granted to one for the making over of a Bill of Echange
to a man over Sea. Register. Original. fol. 194. a.

Escape (escapium) comes of the French ( eschapper, i. aufugere, effugere.)
and signifies in the Law, a violent or prive evasion out of some lawful
restraint. For example, if the Sheriff upon a Capias directed unto him, take
one, and endeavor to carry him to the Gaol, and he in the way, either by
violence or by slight, break from him: this is called an escape. pl. cor. fol.
70. Many examples might be brought out of him and others, but the thing is
plain: Stawnf. lib. 1. cap. 26. pl. cor. names two kinds of Escapes,
voluntary and negligent: Voluntary is, when one arresteth another for Felony
or some other crime, and afterward lets him go whither he lists. In which
escape the party that permits it, is by Law guilty of the fault committed by
him that escapes, be it Felony, Treason, or Trespass; Negligent escape is,
when one arrested, and afterward escapes against his will that arrested him,
and is not pursued by fresh suit, and taken again, before the party pursuing
has lost the sight of him: Idem cap. 27. But there read more of this matter,
for there be doubts worth the consideration. And of the course of punishment by
the Civil Law in this point, read in Practica criminali Claudii de Battandier.
reg. 143. read also Cromptons Justice fol. 35. b. and fol. 36. and 37. and read
the new Terms of Law. There is an escape of beasts likewise: and therefore he
that by charter, is quietus de escapio in the forest, is delivered of that
punishment, which by order of the forest, lies upon those whose beasts be
found within the land forbidden: Cromptons Jurisdict. fol. 196.

Eschequer (Scaccarium) comes of the French ( Eschequier, i. abacus, tabula
lusoria) and signifies the place or Court of all receipts belonging to the
Crown, and is so termed as I take it, by reason that in ancient times, the
accomptants in that Office used such Tables as Arithmetitians use for their
calculations, for that is one signification of (Abacus) amonst others. Polydor.
Virgil. lib. 9. hist. Anglc. says, that the true word in Latin is Statarium,
and by abuse called Scaccarium. In mine opinion it may well seem to be taken
from the German word (Schatz) signifying as much as (Thesaurus) or (Fiscus.)
And from this fountain no doubt) springs the Italian word (Zecch^^)
signifying a mint: and (Zecherit alias Zechieri) the Officers thereunto
belonging, Descis. Ge^uen. 134. M. Came. in his Britan. page 113. says, that
this Court or office took the name a tabula ad quam assidebant, proving it out
of Gervasius Tilburiensis, whose words you may read in him. This Court is taken
from the Normans, as appears by the Grand Custumarie, cap. 56. where you may
find the Eschequier thus described. The Eschequier is called an assembly of
High Justiciers, to whom it appertains to amend that which the Bailiffes, and
other meaner Justiciers have evil done, and unadvisedly judged: and to do right
to all men without delay, as from the Princes mouth: Skene de verbo.
Significatione, verbo (Scaccarium) has, out of Paulus Aemilius these words:
Saccarium dicitur quasi S. at arium, quod homines ib^ in jure sistantur, vel
quod sit stataria and perennis curia, cum caeterae curiae essent indictivae,
nec loco, nec tempore state: where he says also of himself, that in Scotland
the Eschequer was stable, but the other Session was deambulatorie, before James
the fist: qui instituit Statariam curiam, cum antea esset indictiva: he adds
farther: Others think that Scaccarium is so called a similitudine ludi
Scaccorum, that is the play of the Chests: because many persons meet in the
Chequer, pleading their causes one against the other, as if they were fighting
in arraied battle: Others think that it comes from an old Saxon word (Scata)
as writes S. Thomas Smith, which signifies Treasure, taxation, or Imposts,
whereof account is made in the Chequer. This Court consists, as it were, of
two parts: whereof one is conversant especially in the judicial hearing and
deciding of all causes appertaining to the Princes Cofers, anciently called
Scaccarium computorum, as Ockam testifies in his lucubrations: the other is
called the receipt of the Exchequer, which is properly employed in the
receiving and payment of money. Crompton in his Jurisdictions, fol. 105.
defines it to be a Court of Record, wherein all causes touching the revenues
of the Crown are handled. The officers belonging to both these, you may find
named in M. Camddens Britannia, cap. Tribunalia Angliae, to whom I refer you.
The Kings Exchequer which now is settled in Westminster, was in diverse Counties
of Wales, anno 27 H. 8. cap. 5. but especially cap. 26.

Escheate (Eschaeta) comes of the French ( escheoir, i. cadere, accidere,
excidere,) and signifies in our Common law, any lands, or other profits, that
fall to a Lord within his Manor by way of forfeiture, or the death of his
Tenent, dying without Heir general, or especial; or leaving his Heir within
age, or unmarried, Magna Charta, c. 31. Fitzh. not. br. f. 143. T, etc. Escheat
is also used sometime for the place circuit within the which the King, or other
Lord, has escheats of his Tenants, Bracton, lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 2. and
pupilla oculi part 2. cap. 22. Escheat thirdly, is used for a Writ, which
lies, where the Tenent having estate of Feesimple in any Lands or Tenements
holden of a superior Lord, dies seized without Heir general or especial. For
in this case the Lord brings this Writ against him that possesses these
Lands after the death of his Tenent^ and shall there by recover the same in
lieu of his services. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 144. These that we call Escheats,
are in the Kingdom of Naples called Excadentia, or bona excadentiala, as: Baro
locat excadentias eo modo quo locatae fuerunt ab antiquo: it a quod in nullo
debita servitia minuantur, and non remittit Gallinam debitam: Jacobutius de
Franchis in praeludiis ad feudorum usum. tit. 1. number. 29. and number. 23. v.
Maramae singularia, verbo Excademia. And in the same signification, as we say
the Fee is escheated, the Feudists use feudum aperitur. lib. 1. feudal. titulo,
18.. 2. titul. 15. and titul. 26.. 4.

Escheatour (Escaetor) comes of (Escheat) and signifies an officer that
observes the Escheats of the King in the County, whereof he is Eseheatour, and
certifieth them into the Exchequer: This officer is appointed by the L.
Treasurer, and by Letters Patents from him, and contineth in his office but one
year, neither can any be Escheatour above once in three years, anno 1 H. 8.
cap. 8. and anno 3. ejusdem cap. 2. See more of this officer and his authority
in Cromptons Justice of peace. See anno 29 Ed. 1. The form of the Escheatours
oath, see in the Register original. fol. 301. b. Fitzh. calls him an officer
of record, not. br. fol. 100. C. because that which he certifieth by virtue of
his office, has the credit of a Record. Officium escaetriae, is the
Escheatourship. Regist. orig. fol. 259. b.

Escuage (Scutagium) comes of the French ( escu, i. clypeus) a buckler, or
shield. In our Common law, it signifies a kind of Knights service, called
service of the Shield, whereby the Tenent holding, is bound to follow his Lord
into the Scottish or Welsh wars, at his own charge: for the which see Chivalrie.
But note, that Escuage is either uncertain or certain. Escuage uncertain, is
properly Escuage, and Knights service, being subject to homage, fealty, ward
and marriage, so called, because it is uncertain how often a man shall be
called to follow his Lord into those wars, and again, what his charge will be
in each journey. Escuage certain, is that which yearly pays a certain rent in
lieu of all services, being no further bound than to pay his rent, called a
Knights-fee, or the fourth part of a Knights-fee, according to his land, and
this leeseth the nature of Knights service, though it hold the name of Escuage,
being in effect, Soccage. Fitzh. na. br. fol. 84. C.

Esnecy (Aesnecia) is a prerogative given to the eldest Comparcener, to choose
first, after the inheritance is divided, Fleta, lib. 5. cap. 10.. in divisionem.

Esples (Expletia) seem to be the full profits that the ground or land
yields, as the Hay of the Meadows, the Feed of the Pasture, the corn of the
Earable, the Rents, Services, and and such like issues: Ingham. It seems to
proceed from the Latin (Expleo) The profits comprised under this word, the
Romans call properly accessiones. Nam accessionem nomine intelliguntur ea gener
aliter omnia, quae ex re, de qua agitur, orta sunt, veluti fructus, partus, and
omnis causa rei, and quaecunque ex re procedunt. lib. 2. p. De in diem
adjectio, lib. 50. p. Ad Trebel. lib. 61.. hiis etiam. p. de furt. See the new
Terms of Law.

Esquier (Armiger) is in letters little altered from the French ( Esouier, i.
scutiger) It signifies with us a Gentleman or one that bears arms, as a
testimony of his nobility and gentry. S. Thomas Smith is of opinion, that at
the first, these were Bearers of arms to Lords and Knights, and by that had
their name and dignity. Indeed the French word is sometime translated (Agaso)
that is, a Boy to attend or keep a Horse; and in old English Writers, it is
used for a Lackey, or one that carries the Shield or Spear of a Knight. Mast.
Cambden in his Britannia, page 111. has these words of them; having spoken of
Knights: Hiis proximi fuere Armigeri, qui and scutiferi, hominesque ad arma
dicti, qui vel a clypeis gentilitiis, quae in nobilitatis insignia gestant: vel
quia principibus and ma oribus illis nobilibus ab armis erant, nomen traxerunt.
Olim enim ex hiis duo unicuique militi serviebant, galeam clypeumque gestabant,
etc. Hotoman in the sixth Chapter of his Disputations upon the Feodssaith, that
these which the French men call (Escuiers) were 1 Military kind of vassal having
jus scuti, which is as much to say (he there interprets himself) as that they
bare a Shield, and in it the ensigns of their family, in token of their
Gentility or dignity.

Essendt quietum de telonio, is a Writ that lies for Citizens and Burgesses of
any City or Town that have a Charter or prescription to exempt them from toll,
through the whole Realm, if it chance they be any where exacted ^he same, Fitz.
not. br. fol. 226. Reg. fol. 258.

Essoin (essonium) comes of the French ( essome or exonnie, i. causarius
miles) he that has his presence forborne or excused upon any just cause, as
sickness or other encumbrance. It signifies in our Common Law, and allegement
of an excuse for him that is summoned, or sought for to appear, and answer to
an Action real, or to perform suit to a Court Baron, upon just cause of
absence. It is as much as (excusatio) with the Civilians. The causes that serve
to essoin any man summoned, be diverse and infinite: yet drawn to five heads:
whereof the first is (ulira mare) the second (de terra sancta) the third (de
malo veniendi) which is also called the common Essoin, the fourth is (de malo
lecti) the fifth (de servitio Regis.) For further knowledge of these, I refer
you to Glanvile, in his whole first book, and Bracton, lib. 5. tract. 2. per
totum, and Britton, c. 122, 123, 124, 125. and to Horns Mirror of Justices,
lib. 1. cap. des Essoins, who makes mention of some more essoins touching the
service of the King celestial, then the rest do, and of some other points not
unworthy to be known. Of these Essoins you may read further in Flet. l. 6. c.
8. and seq. and that these came to us from the Normans, is well showed by the
Grand Custumary, where you may find in a manner all said, that our Lawyers have
of this matter, cap. 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45.

Essoins and profers, anno 32 H. 8 cap. 21. See Profer.

Essonio de malo lecti, is a Writ directed to the Sheriff, for the sending of
four lawful Knights to view one that has essoined himself de malo lecti,
Regist. orig. fol. 8. b.

Establishment of dower seems to be the assurance of dower, made to the Wife
by the Husband or his friends, before or at marriage. And assignement is the
setting it out by the Heir afterward, according to the Establishment, Britton,
cap. 102. and 103.

Estandard or Standard, comes of the French (estandart) or estandart, i.
signum, vexillum. It signifies an Ensign in war, as well with us as with
them. But it is also used for the principal or standing measure of the King, to
the scantling whereof, all the measures thorowout the Land, are, or ought to be
framed by the Clerk of the Market, Anlneger; or orher Officer, according to
their functions. For it was established by the Statute of Magna Charta, an. 6
H. 3. cap. 9. That there should be but one scantling of Weights and Measures
through the whole Realm, which is sithence confirmed by A^co 14 Ed. 3. cap. 12.
and many other Statutes; as also, that all should be fitted to the Standard,
sealed with the Kings Seal. It is not called a Standard without great reason:
because it stands constant and immovable, and has all other Measures coming
toward it for their conformity, even as Soldiers in field, have their
Standard, or Colors for their direction in their march or skirmish. Of these
Standards and Measures, read Britton, cap. 30.

Estate, comes of the French ( estat, i. conditio) and signifies especially
in our Common law, that Title or Interest, which a man has in Lands, or
Tenements, as estate simple, otherwise called Fee-simple, and estate
conditional, or upon condition, which is, (as Litleson says, libro 3. caput
5.) either upon condition in Deed, or upon condion in Law. Estate upon
condition in Deed is, where a man by Deed indented, infeoffeth another in Fee,
referving to him, and to his Heirs yearly, a certain Rent, payable at one
Feast, or at diverse; upon condition, that if the Rent be behind etc. that it
shall be lawful to the Feoffor, and to his Heirs, to enter in the Lands or
Tenements, etc. Estate upon condition in Law, is such as has a consideration
in the Law annexed to it, though it be not specified in writing. For example,
if a man grant to another by his Deed, the Office of a Parkership for Term of
his life, this estate is upon condition in the Law, or employed by Law, viz. if
the Parker so long, shall well and truly keep the Park, etc. I read also of an
estate particular, which is an estate for life, or for years, Parkins
Surrenders, 581.

Estopel, seems to come from the French ( estouper, i. oppilare, obturare,
stipare, obstipare) and signifies in our Common Law, an impediment or bar of
an Action growing from his own fact, that has, or otherwise might have had his
Action; for example: A Tenent makes a Feofment by collusion to one: the Lord
accepts the services of the Feoffee: by this he debarreth himself of the
wardship of his Tenants Heir, Fitzh. not. br. fol. 142. K. Diverse other
examples might be showed out of him, and Broke h. titulo. Sir Edward Coke, lib.
2. casu Goddard, fol. 4. b. defines an estopel to be a bar or hinderance
unto one to plead the truth, and restrains it not to the impediment given to
a man by his own Act only, but by another also. lib. 3. The case of Fines,
fol. 88. a.

Estovers (Estoverium) comes of the French ( estouver, i. fovere) and
signifies in our Common law, nourishment or maintenance. For example: Bracton,
lib. 3. tractat. 2. cap. 18. number. 2. uses it for that sustenance, which a man
taken for Felony, is to have out of his lands or goods for himself and his
family, during his imprisonment: and the statute, anno 6 Ed. prim. cap. 3.
uses it for an allowance in meat or cloth. It is also used for certain
allowances of wood, to be taken out of another man's woods. So it is used West.
2. cap. 25. anno. 13. Edw. 1. M. West. part 2. symbol. titulo Fines. Sect. 26.
says, that the name of Estovers ontaineth House-bote, Hay-bote, and Plowbote,
and Plowbote: as if he have in his grant these general words: D^ rationabili
esto verio in bos^is, etc. he may thereby claim these three.

Estrepement, or Estrepament, (estrepementum) comes of the French word (
estropier, i. mutilare, obtruncare) the which word the French men have also
borrowed of the Italians, or rather Spaniards, with whom ( Estropear,
signifies to set upon the rack. It signifies in our Common law, spoil made by
the Tenant for Term of life, upon any Lands or Woods, to the prejudice of him
in the reversion, as namely in the statute anno 6 Edw. 1. cap. 13. And it may
seem by the derivation, that Estrepament is properly the unmeasurable soaking
or drawing of the heart of the Land by plowing or sowing it continually,
without manuring, or other such usage, as is requisite in good Husbandry. And
yet ( Estropier signifying nutilare) it may no less conveniently be applied to
those, that cut down Trees, or lop them farther than the Law will bear. This
signifies also a Writ, which lies in two sorts: the one is, when a man having
an Action depending (as a fordom, or dum fuit infra atatem, or Writ of right,
or any such other) wherein the Demandant is not to recover damages, sueth to
inhibite the Tenant for making waste (during the suit.) The other sort is for
the Demandant, that is adjudged to recover seisin of the Land in question, and
before execution, sued by the Writ Habere facias seisinam, for fear of waste to
be made before he can get possession, sueth out this Writ: See more of this, in
Fitzherbert not. br. fol. 60. and 61. See the Register orig. fol. 76. and the
Register, judicial. fol. 33.

Estreat (extractum vel extracta) comes of the French (Traict) which among
other things signifies a figure or resemblance; and is used in our Common law,
for the copy or true note of an original writing. For example, of amercements
or penalties set down in the Rolls of a Court, to be levied by the Bailiff or
other Officer, of every man for his offense. See Fitzh. not. br. fol. 57. H. I.
K. and 76. A. And so it is used Westminster. 2. cap. 8. anno 13 Ed. 1.

Estrey (extrahura) in our Common Law, signifies any beast not wild, found
within any Lordship, and not owned by any man. For in this case, if it being
cried, according to Law, in the Market towns adjoining, shall not be claimed by
the owner within a year and a day, it is the Lords of the soil. See Britton,
cap. 17. See Estrajes in the Forest, anno 27 H. 8. cap. 7. New book of Entries.
verbo Trespass c^^icernant estrey.

EV
Evidence; (evidentia) is used in our Law generally for any proof, be it
testimony of men or instrument. Sir Thomas Smith uses it in both sorts, lib.
2. cap. 17. in these words: Evidence, in this signification: is Authentical
writings of contracts after the manner of England, that is to say, written,
sealed, and delivered. And lib. 2. cap. 23. speaking of the prisoner that
stands at the bar, to plead for his life, and of those that charge him with
Felony, he says thus: then he tells what he can say: after him likewise all
those, who were at the apprehension of the prisoner, or who can give any
Indices or tokens, which we call in our language (Evidence) against the
malefactor.

EX
Examiner in the Chancerie, or Star Chamber, (examinator) is an Officer in
either Court, that examineth the parties to any suit upon their oaths, or
witnesses producted of either side: whereof there be in the Chancery two.

Exception, (exceptio) is a stop or stay to an Action, being used in the Civil
and Common Law, both alike, and in both divided into dilatory and peremptory.
Of these see Bracton, lib. 5. tract. 5, per totum: and Britton cap. 91, 92.

Exchange (excambium, vel cambium) has a peculiar signification in our Common
law, and is used for that compensation which the Warrantor must make to the
Warrantee, value for value, if the Land warranted be recovered from the
Warrantee. Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 16. and lib. 1. cap. 19. It signifies also
generally as much as (Permutatio) with the Civilians, as the Kings Exchange,
anno 1 Hen. 6, cap. 1, and 4. and anno 9 Edw. 3. statut. 2. cap. 7. which is
nothing else but the place appointed by the King for the exchange of Bullion,
be it gold or silver, or plate, etc. with the Kings coin. These places have
been diverse heretofore, as appears by the said statutes. But now is there
only one, viz. The Tower of London conjoined with the Mint. Which in time
past might not be, as appears by anno 1 Henrici 6. cap. 4.

Exchequer, see Eschequer.

Excheator, see Escheator.

Excommunication (excommunicatio) is thus defined by Panormitan: Excommunicatio
est nihil aliud quam censura a Canone vel Judice Ecclesiastico prolata and
inflicta, privans legitima communione sacramentoram, and quandoque hominum. And
it is divided in majorem and minorem. Minor est, per quam quis a Sacramentorum
participatione conscientia vel sententia arcetur. Major est, quae non solum a
Sacramentorum, verum etiam fidelium communione excludit, and ab omni actu
legitimo separat and dividit. Venatorius de senten. excom.

Excommunicato capiendo is a Writ directed to the Sheriff for the apprehension
of him who stands obstinately excommunicated for forty days: for such a one
not seeking absolution has or may have his contempt certified or signified
into the Chancery, whence issues this Writ, for the laying of him up without
Bayl or Mainprise, until he conform himself. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 62. and anno
5 Eliz. cap. 23. and the Regist. orig. fol. 65, 67, and 70.

Excommunicato deliberando is a Writ to the under Sheriff, for the delivery of
an excommunicate person out of prison, upon certificate from the Ordinary, of
his conformity to the Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical. See Fitzherb. not. br. fol.
63. a. and the Register, fol. 65, and 67.

Excommunicato recipiendo is a Writ, whereby persons excommunicate, being for
their obstinacy committed to prison, and unlawfully delivered thence, before
they have given caution to obey the authority of the Church, are commanded to
be sought for and laid up again. Regist. orig. fol. 67, a.

Executione facienda, is a Writ commanding Execution of a judgment: the
diverse uses whereof see in the Table of the Register judicial, verbo Executione
facienda.

Executione facienda in Withernamium, is a Writ that lies for the taking of
his cattle that formerly has conveyed out of the County the cattle of another;
so that the Bailiff having authority from the Sheriff to Replevy the cattle so
conveyed away, could not execute his charge. Reg. orig. fol. 82. b.

Execution (executio) in the Common Law, signifies the last performance of an
Act, as of a fine, or of a judgment. And the Execution of a fine, is the
obtaining of actual possession of the things contained in the same, by virtue
thereof: which is either by entry into the Lands, or by Writ: whereof see West
at large- part. 2. Symbol. titulo Fines, Sect. 136, 137, 138. Executing of
Judgments and Statutes, and such like, see in Fitzh. not. br. in Indice 2,
Verbo Execution. S. Edw. Coke, vol. 6, casu Blumfield, fol. 87, a. makes two
sorts of Executions: one final, another with a (Quousque) tending to an end. An
Execution final is that which makes money of the Defendants goods, or
extends his Lan is, and delivers them to the Plaintiff. For this the party
accepts in satisfaction, and this is the end of the suit; and all that the
Kings writ commands to be done. The other sort with a (Quousque) is tending
to an end, and not final: as in the case of (capias ad satisfaciendum, etc.)
this is not final, but the body of the party is to be taken, to the intent and
purpose to satisfy the Demandant: and his imprisonment is not absolute, but
until the Defendant do satisfy, Idem, ibid.

Executour (executor) is he that is appointed by any man in this last Will and
Testament, to have the disposing of all his substance according to the con^ent
of the said Will. This Executor is either particular or universal. Particular,
as if this or that thing only be committed to his charge; Universal if all.
And this is in the place of him whom the Civilians call Haeredem, and the Law
accounts one person, with the party whose Executor he is, as having all
advantage of action against all men, that he had, so likewise being subject to
every man's Action as far a himself was. This Executor had his beginning in
the Civil Law, by the constitutions of the Emperors, who first permitted
those, that thought good by their wills to bestow any thing upon good and godly
uses, to appoint whom they pleased to see the same performed: and if they
appoin^ed none, then they ordained that the Bishop of the place should have
authority of course to effect it, lib. 28. c. de Episcopis and Clericis. And
from this in mine opinion, time and experience has wrought out the use of
these universal Executors, as also brought the Administration of their goods
that dye without Will, unto the Bishop.

Exemplificatione is a Writ granted for the exemplification of an Original. See
the Register original fo. 290.

Ex gravi querela, is a Writ that lies for him unto whom any Lands or
Tenements in Fee, within a City, Town, or Borough, being devisable, are devised
by Will, and the Heir of the Devisour enters into them, and detaineth them
from him. Register original, fol. 244. Old Natura brevium, fol. 87. See
Fitzherb. not. br. fol. 198, L.

Exigendarie of the Common bank (Exigendarius de banco communi) is otherwise
called Exigenter, anno 10 Hen. 6. cap. 4. and is an officer belonging to that
Court. For the which see Exigenter.

Exigent, (Exigenda) is a Writ that lies where the Defendant in an Action
personal cannot be found, nor any thing within the County, whereby to be
attached or distrained, and is directed to the Sheriff, to proclaim and call
five County days one after an other, charging him to appear under the pain of
Outlawrie. Terms of the Law. This Writ lies also in an indictment of Felony,
where the party indicted cannot be found. Smith de republ. Angl. lib. 2. cap.
19. It seems to be called an Exigent, because it exacteth the party, that is,
requires his appearance or forthcoming to answer the Law, for if he come not
at the last days proclamation, he is said to be quinquies exactus, and then is
outlawed. Cromptons Jurisd. fol. 188. And this M. Manwood also sets down
for the Law of the Forest, part. 1. of his Forest laws, page 71. See the new
book of Entries, verbo Exigent.

Exigenter (Exigendarius) anno 18 Hen. 6. cap. 9, is an officer of the Court of
Common plees, of whom there be four in number: They make all Exigents and
proclamations in all Actions, where Process of outlawry does lie, and Writs
of Supersede ^s, as well as the Pronotaries, upon such Exigents as were made in
their offices.

Ex mero motu are words formally used in any Charter of the Prince, whereby he
signifies, that he does that which is contained in the Charter, of his own
will and motion, without petition or suggestion made by any other. And the
effect of these words are to bar all exceptions that might be taken unto the
instrument wherein they be contained, by alleging that the Prince in passing
that Charter was abused by any salse suggestion. Kitchen, fol. 152.

Exoneratione sectae, is a Writ that lies for the Kings Ward to be
disburthened of all suit, etc. to the County, Hundred, Leet, or Court Baron,
during the time of his wardship. Fitz. not. br. fol. 158.

Ex part latis, is a Writ that lies for a Bailiff or Receiver, that having
Auditots assigned to hear his account, cannot obtain of them reasonable
allowance, but is cast into prison by them. Regist. fol. 137. Fitzh. not. brev.
fol. 129. The manner in this case is to take this Writ out of the Chancerie,
directed to the Sheriff, to take four Mainpervours to bring his body before the
Barons of the Exchequer at a day certain, and to warn the Lord to appear at the
same time. New Terms of the Law, verbo Account.

Expectant is used in the Common law with this word ( fee) and thus used it is
opposite to Fee simple. For example, Lands are given to a Man and his Wife in
Frank-marriage, to have and to hold to them and their Heirs. In this case they
have Fee-simple. But if it be given to them and the Heirs of their body, etc.
they have Tail, and Fee expectant. Kitchen, fol. 153. Matthaeus de afflict is
uses the Ad; ective (expectativa) substantively in the same signification,
Descis. 292. number. 2. p. 412.

Explees, see Espleese.

Expeditate (expeditare) is a word usual in the Forest, signifying, to cut out
the balls of the great dogs feet, for the preservation of the Kings game. Every
one that keeps any great Dogs not expeditated, forfeiteth to the King three
shillings four pence, Cromptons Jurisdict. fol. 152. M. Manwood uses the same
word, part prim. of his Forest Laws, page 205, and page 212. he sets down
the manner of expeditating Dogs heretofore, viz. Quodtres ortell;
abscindantur sive pellota de pede anteriori; that is, that the three claws of
the fore-foot on the right side shall be cut off by the skin: whereunto he also
adds out of the same ordinance, called the Assise of the Forest, that the
same manner of expeditating of Dogs shall be still used and kept, and none
other. Quaere whence it grows that Master Crompton and he differ; the one
saying that the ball of the foot is cut out: the other, that the three
fore-clawes are pared off by the skin.

Expensis militum levandis, is a Writ directed to the Sheriff, for levying
allowance for the Knights for the Parliament. Regist. orig. fol. 191. b.

Expensis militu non levandis ab hominibus de antiquo dominico, nec a nativis,
is a Writ whereby to prohibit the Sheriff from levying any allowance for the
Knights of the Shire, upon those that hold in ancient Demesne, etc. Reg. orig.
fol. 261. b.

Extend (extendere) comes of the French ( estendre, i. dilatare, dispandere,
distendere) and signifies in our Common law, to value the Lands or Tenements
of one bound by Statute, etc. that has forfeited his bond, to such an
indifferent rate, as by the yearly rent the Obligor may in time be paid his
debt. The course and circumstances of this see in Fitz. h. not. br. fol. 131.
Brief d'execution sur statut Merchant.

Extendi facias, is a Writ ordinarily called a Writ of Extent, whereby the
value of Lands, etc. is commanded to be made and levied in diverse cases, which
see in the Table of the Register original.

Extent (extenta) has two significations, sometimes signifying a Writ or
commission to the Sheriff for the valuing of Lands, or Tenements. Register
judicial, in the Table of the Book. Sometime the Act of the Sheriff or other
Commissioner upon this Writ. Brook, titulo Extent. fol. 313.

Extinguishment, in our Common law, signifies an effect of consolidation. For
example, if a man have due unto him a yearly rent out of any Lands, and
afterward purchase the same Lands, now both the property and rent are
consolidated, or united in one Possessor, and therefore the rent is said to be
extinguished. In like manner it is, where a man has a Lease for years and
afterward buyeth the property, this is a consolidation of the property and the
fruits, and is an extinguishment of the Lease. See the Terms of Law.

Extirpatione, is a Writ judicial that lies against him, who after a verdict
found against him for Land, etc. does maliciously overthrow any house upon it,
etc. and it is twofold, one ante judicium, the other post judicium: Register
judicial fol. 13.56.58.

Extortion (Extortio) signifies in our Common law, an unlawful or violent
wringing of money or money-worth from any man. For example, if any Officer by
terrifying any the Kings subjects in his office, take more than his ordinary
duties, he commits, and is inditeable of Extortion: To this (by M. Wests
judgment) may be referred the exaction of unlawful Usury; winning by unlawful
Games, and (in one word) all taking of more than is due, by color, or pretense
of right: as excessive toll in Milners, excessive prizes of Ale, Bread,
Victuals, Wares, etc. West. part 2. Symbol. titulo Indictments, Sect. 65. M.
Manwood says, that Extortion is Color officii, and not virtute officii, part
1. of his Forest laws, page 216. M. Crompton in his Justice of Peace, fol. 8.
has these words in effect: Wrong done by any man, is properly a Trespass: but
excessive wrong done by any is called Extortion: and this is most properly in
officers, as Sheriffs, Majors, Bailiffes, Escheatours, and other Officers,
whatsoever, that by color of their Office work great oppression, and excessive
wrong unto the Kings subjects, in taking excessive reward, or fees, for the
execution of their office. Great diversity of cases touching Extortion, you may
see in Cromptons Justice of Peace, fol. 48. b. and 49. and 50. See the
difference between color officii, and virtute vel ratione officii. Plow. casu.
Dives, fol. 64. a. This word is used in the same signification in Italy also.
For Cavalcanus de brachio regio, part 5. number. 21. thus describes it: Extortio
dicitur fieri quando Judex cogit aliquid sibi dari quod non est debitum, vel
quod est ultra debitum: vel ante tempus petit id, quod post administratam
justitiam debetur.

Extreats. See Estreats.

Air. See Eire.

FA.
FAculty, (Facultas) as it is restrained from the original and active
signification, to a particular understanding in Law, is used for a privilege,
or especial power granted unto a man by favor, indulgence and dispensation,
to do that which by the Common law he cannot do: as to eat flesh upon days
prohibited, to marry without Banes first asked; to hold two, or more
Ecclesiastical Livings; the Son to succeed the Father, in a Benefice, and such
like. And for the granting of these, there is an especial Officer under the
Archbishop of Canterbury, called (Magister ad Facultates) the Master of the
Faculties.

Fag, anno 4 Ed. 4. cap. 1.

Faint and false action, seem to be Synonyma in Litleton, fol. 144. for (faint)
in the French tongue signifies as much as (feigned) in English.

Faint pleader (falsa placitatio) comes of the French (feint) a Participle of
the Verb ( feindre i. simulare, fingere) and ( pledoir, i. placitare.) It
signifies with us, a false covenous, or collusory manner of pleading, to the
deceit of a third party, anno 34. and 35. H. 8. cap. 24.

Fair, alias Feire, (feria) comes of the French (feire) and signifies with
us, as much as (Nundinae) with the Civilians: that is a solemn, or greater sort
of Market, granted to any Town by privilege, for the more speedy and
commodious provision of such things, as the subject needs, or the utterance
of such things, as we abound in, above our own uses and occasions: both our
English and the French word seems to come of (Feriae) because it is always
incident to the privilege of a Fair, that a man may not be arrested or molested
in it for any other debt, than first was contracted in the same, or at least
was promised to be paid there, anno 17 Ed. 4. cap. 2. and anno 1 R. 3. cap. 6.

Fair-pleading, see Beaw-pleader.

Faitours, seems to be a French word antiquated, or something traduced. For
the modern French word is ( faiseur, i. factor.) It is used in the Statute,
anno 7 R. 2. cap. 5. And in the evil part, signifying a bad doer. Or it may not
improbably be interpreted an idle liver, taken from (faitardise) which
signifies a kind of number or sleepy disease, proceeding of too much
sluggishnesse, which the Latins call (veternus.) For in the said statute it
seems to be a Synonymon to Vagabond.

Falk-land, alias Folk-land. See Copyhold, and Freehold.

False imprisonment (falsum imprisonamentum) is a trespasse^ committed against
a man, by imprisoning him without lawful cause: it is also used for the Writ
which is brought upon this trespass, Fitzh. not. br. fol. 86. K. and 88. P. v.
Broke h. t. See the new book of Entries, verbo False imprisonnement.

Falso judicio, is a Writ, that lies for salse judgment given in the County,
Hundred: Court Baron, or other Courts, being no Court of Record, be the Plea
real or personal, Regist. orig. fol 15. Fitzh. not. br. f l. 17. See the new
book of Entries, verbo False judgment.

False prophecies. See Prophecies.

Falso re^urno brevium, is a Writ lying against the Sheriff for false returning
of Writs, Reg. ^^dic. fol. 43. b.

Falsify, seems to signify as much, as to prove a thing to be false,
Perkins Dower, 383, 384, 385.

Farding, or farthing of gold, seems to be a Coin used in ancient times,
containing in value the fourth part of a Noble, viz. twenty pence silver, and
in weighth the sixth part of an ounce of gold, that is, of five shillings in
silver, which is three pence and something more. This word is found, anno 9 H.
5. statut. 2. cap. 7. thus: Item, that the King do to be ordained good and just
weight, of the noble, half noble and farthing of gold, with the rates necessary
to the same, for every City, etc. By which place it plainly appears to have
been a Coin as well as the noble and half noble.

Farding deal, alias Farundel of Land (Quadrantata terrae) signifies the
fourth part of an Acre, Cromptons Jurisdict. f. 220. Quadrantata terrae is read
in the Regist. orig. fol. 1. b. where you have also Denariata and obolata,
solidata and librata terrae; which by probability must rise in proportion of
quantity from the farding deal, as an half penny, penny, shilling, or pound
rise in value and estimation: then must obolata be half an acre, denariata an
acre, solidata twelve acres, and librata twelve score acres. And yet I find
viginti libratas terrae vel reditus. Register orig. fol. 94. a. and fol. 248.
b. Whereby it seems that Librata terrae is so much as yields twenty
shillings per annum; and centum solidatas terrarum tenementorum and redituum,
fol. 249. a. And in Fitzherb. not. br. fol. 87. f. I find these words, viginti
libratas terrae vel reditus, which argues it to be so much Lands as twenty
shillings per annum. See Furlong.

Fate or Fat, is a great wooden Vessel which among Brewers in London is
ordinarily used at this day, to measure Malt by, containing a Quarter, which
they have for expedition in measuring. This word is read, Anno 1 H. 5. cap. 10.
and anno 11 H. 6. cap. 8.

FE
Fealty (Fidelitas) comes of the French feaulte, i. fides; and signifies in
our Common law, an oath taken at the admittance of every Tenent, to be true to
the Lord of whom he holds his Land. And he that holds Land by this only
oath of fealty, holds in the freest manner that any man in England under the
King may hold. Because all with us that have Fee, hold per fidem and fiduciam,
that is, by fealty at the least. Smith de Republ. Anglor. lib. 3. cap. 8. for
fidelitas est de substantia feudi, as Duarenus says, de feud. cap. 2. number. 4.
and Matthaeus de afflictis decis. 320. number. 4. page 465. says, that fidelitas
est substantiale feudi, non servitium. The particulars of his oath, as it is
used among the Feudists, you may read well expressed by Zasius in his Tractare
de feudis, part 7. number. 15, and 16. which is worth the comparing with the
usual oath taken here in our part of Britanie. This fealty is also used in
other Nations, as the Lombards and Burgundians. Cass^nae us de consuet.
Burgund. page 419, and 420. And indeed the very first creation of this Tenure,
as it grew from the love of the Lord toward his followers, so did it bind the
Tenent to fidelity, as appears by the whole course of the Feods. And the
breach thereof is loss of the Fee. Duarenus in Commentariis feudorum, cap. 14.
number. 11. and Wesenbecins in tract. de feudis, cap. 15. number 4. and seq. Antonius
Contius in methodo feudorum cap. Quibus modis feudum amittitur. Hoteman in his
Commentaries De verbis feudalibus) shows a double fealty: one general, to be
performed in every subject to his Prince: the other special, required only of
such, as in respect of their Fee, are tied by this oath toward their
Landlords: both we may read of in the Grand Custumary of Normandy, being of
course performed to the Duke, by all resient within the Duchy. The effect of
the words turned into Latin by the Interpreter, is this: Fidelitatem autem
tenentur omnes residentes in Provincia Duci facere and servare: Unde tenentur
sc. ei innocuos in omnibus and fideles exhibere, nec aliquid ipsum incommodi
procurare: nec ejus inimic is praebere, contra ipsum consilium vel juvamen: and
qui ex hoc inventi fuerint ex causa manifesta, notabiles and traditores
Principis reputantur. Et omnes eorum possessiones perpetuae Principi
remanebunt, si super hoc convicti fuerint vel damnati: Omnes enim in Normania
tenentur Principi fidelitatem observare. Unde nullus homagium vel fidelitatem
alicujus potest recipere nisi salva Principis fidelitate. Quod etiam est in
eorum receptbone specialiter exprimendum. Inter Dominos autem alios and homines
fides taliter debet observari, quod neuter in personam alterius person^lem
violentiam, seu percutionis injectionem cum violentia, debet irrogari. Si quis
enim eorum ex hoc fuerit accusatus in curia and convictus, feudum omne debet
amittere, etc. This fealty special is with us performed either by Freemen or
by Villains. The form of both see anno 14 Ed. 1. stat. 2. in these words: When
a Freeman shall do fealty to his Lord, he shall hold his right hand upon a
book, and shall say thus: Hear you my Lord R. that I. P. shall be to you both
faithful and true, and shall owe my fealty to you for the Land that I hold of
you at the Terms assigned: So help me God and all his Saints. When a Villain
shall do fealty unto his Lord, he shall hold his right hand over the book, and
shall say thus: Hear you my Lord A. that I. B. from this day forth unto you
shall be true and faithful, and shall owe you fealty for the Land that I hold
of you in Vilienage, and shall be justified by you in body and goods: So help
me God and all his Saints. See the Regist. orig. fol. 302. a.

Fee (Feodum, alias Feudum) comes of the French ( fief, i. praedium
beneficiarum, vel res cliextelaris) and is used in our Common law, for all
those lands which we hold by perpetual right: as Hotoman well notes, verb.
Feodum, de verbis feudalibus. Our ancient Lawyers, either not observing whence
the word grew, or at least, not sufficiently expressing their knowledge, what
it signified among them, from whom they took it. Feudum, whence the word (
Fief, or Fee comes, signifies in the German language ( beneficium cujus
nomine opera quaedam gratiae testificandae causa debentur, Hot. disput. cap.
1.) And by this name go all Lands and Tenements, that are held by any
acknowledgement of any superiority to a higher Lord. They that write of this
subject, do divide all Lands and Tenements, wherein a man has a perpetual
estate to him and his Heirs, etc. into Allodium and Feudum. Allodium is defined
to be every man's own land, etc. which he possesses merely in his own right,
without acknowledgement of any service, or payment of any rent unto any other,
and this is a property in the highest degree, and of some it is called (
Allaudium ab a privativa particula, and laudum vel laudatio, ut sit praedium
cujus nullus author est nifi deus. Est enim laudare vel Novio test, nominare.
Quod and Budaeus docuit ad Modestinum. 1. Herennius 63. p. de haere. institut.
Prataeus, verbo Allaudium. Hotoman in verb. feud.) Feudum is that, which we
hold by the benefit of another, and in the name whereof we owe service, or pay
rent, or both, to a superior Lord. And all our land here in England (the
Crown-land which is in the Kings own hands in the right of his Crown excepted)
is in the nature of Feudum or Fee, for though many a man has land by descent
from the Ancestors, and many another has dearly bought land for his money, yet
is the land of such nature, that it cannot come to any, either by descent or
purchase, but with the burden that was laid upon him, who had novel Fee, or
first of all received it as a benefit from his Lord, to him and to all such, to
whom it might descend, or any way be conveyed from him. So that if we will
reckon with our Host (as the proverb is) there is no man here, that has
directum dominium, i. the very property or demain in any Land, but the Prince
in the right of his Crown. Cambd. Britan. page 93. for though he that has Fee,
has jus perpetuum and utile domixium: yet he owes a duty for it: and
therefore is it not simply his own. Which thing I take those words, that we use
for the expressing of our deepest rights in any Lands or Tenements, to import:
for he that can say most for his estate, says thus: I am seized of this or
that land or tenement in my demain as of Fee. Seisitus inde in dominico meo ut
de feudo, and that is as much, as if he said, it is my demain or proper land
after a sort: because it is to me and mine Heirs for ever: yet not simply mine,
because I hold it in the nature of a benefit from another, yet the statut an.
37 H. 8. c. 16. uses these words of lands invested in the Crown: but it
proceeds from the ignorance of the nature of this word ( Fee for see cannot
be without fealty sworn to a superior, as you may read partly in the word
(Fealty) but more at large in those that write de feudis: and namely Hotoman,
both in his Commentaries and Disputations. And no man may grant, that our King
or Crown owes fealty to any superior but God only. Yet it may be said, that
land, etc. with us is termed fee in two respects: one, as it belongs to us
and our Heirs for ever; and so may the Crown Lands be called Fee: the other as
it holds of another, which is, and must be far from our Crown. Britton c. 32.
defines fee to this effect. Fee is a right consisting in the person of the
true Heir, or of some other, that by just title has purchased it. Fletz,
says, that Feudum est quod quis tenet ex quacunque causa sibi and haeredibus
suis, sive sit tenementum, sive reditus qui non proveniunt ex camera, and alio
modo dicitur feudum, sicut ejus qui feoff at, and quod quis tenet ab alio sicut
dicitur: talis tenet de tali tot seuda per servitium militare, lib. 5. cap. 5..
Feudum autem. And all that write de feudis, do hold that (Feudataerius) has
not an entire property in his fee: Nay it is held by right learned men, that
these Fees were at the first invention or creation of them, either all or some
of them temporary, and not perpetual and hereditary, Jacobutius, de Franchis in
praeludio feud. cap. 2. number. 133. The divisions of fee in diverse respects are
many, and those though little known to us in England, yet better worthy to be
known, than we commonly think. But for our present purpose, it is sufficient to
divide Fee into two sorts, Fee-absolute otherwise called Fee-simple, and
Fee-conditional, other-wise termed Fee-tail. Fee simple (Feudum simplex) is
that whereof we are seiled in these general words, To us and our Heirs for
ever. Fee-tail, Feudum taliatum, is that whereof we are seized to us and our
Heirs with limitation that is, the Heirs of our body, etc. And Fee-tail is
either general or special. General is, where land is given to a man and the
Heirs of his body. The reason whereof is given by Litleton, cap. 2. lib. 1.
because a man seized of land by such a gift, if he marry one or more wives, and
have no issue by them, and at length marry another by whom he has issue, this
issue shall inherit the land. Fee-tail special is that, where a man and his
wife be seized of lands to them and the Heirs of their two bodies. The reason
is likewise given by Litleton in the same place, because in this case, the Wife
dying without issue, and he marrying another, by whom he has issue, this issue
cannot inherit the land, being specially given to such heirs, etc. This
Fee-tail has the original from the statute of Westminster 2. cap. pri. which
was made anno 13 Edw. 1. Yet see Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 5. number. 3. in his
verbis: Item quaedam absoluta and larga, and quaedam stricta and coarctata,
sicut certis haeredibus. To whom add Plowden, casu Willion, fol. 235, a, b,
and seq. for before that statute, all land given to a man and his Heirs, either
general or special, was accounted in the nature of Fee, and therefore held to
be so firmly in him to whom it was given, that any limitation notwihstanding,
he might alienate and fell it at his pleasure: much like that which the
Civilians call Nudum praeceptum, binding rather by counsel and advice, than
compulsion or restraint. And this thing seeming unreasonable to the wisdom of
our Realm, because so a man meaning well to this or that posterity of himself
or his friends, might be forthwith deceived of his intention, the said statute
was made for redress of this inconvenience, whereby it is ordained, that if a
man give lands in fee, limiting the Heirs to whom it shall descend, with a
reversion to himself or his Heirs for default, etc. that the form and true
meaning of his gift, shall be observed. Wherefore in what conscience our
Lawyers have invented means, so easily to cut off this form of gift, it is to
be considered. He that has Fee then, holds of another by some duty or other,
which is called service, and of this service and the diversity thereof; See
Chivalrie^ and Service. He that will learn from what fountain these Feuds or
Fees did first spring, let him read Antonius Contius his first chapter de
methodo feudorum, where he shall receive great light for his guide into so
obscure a dungeon. See Liege. This word, (Fee) is sometimes used with us, for
the compass or circuit of a Lordship or Manner, Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 5. in
these words: In eadem villa and de eodem feodo. Thirdly it is used for a
perpetual right incorporeal: as to have the keeping of Prisons in Fee, eod.
fol. 6. Old not. brev. 41. Foster in Fee, eod. fol. 6. Rent granted in fee,
eod. fol. 8. Sheriff in fee, anno 28 Ed. 1. stat. 3. cap. 8. Lastly, Fee
signifies reward or ordinary duty that a man has given him for the execution
of his office, or the performance of his industry in his art or science: as
the Lawyer or the Physician is said to have his Fee, when he has the
consideration of his pains taken, the one with his Client, the other with his
Patient.

Fee expectant, is by the Feudists termed feudum expectativum, or expectativa,
substantively used, Mathaeus de Afflictis decis. 292. number. 2. page 417. See
expectant.

Fee-ferm (fendi firma) is acompound of Fee, whereof see (Fee) and ( ferme, i.
colonia, villa praedium, rusticum) of (Ferme) comes ( Fermier du Prince, i.
manceps, redemptor publicorum vectigalium, Publicanus) Fee-ferm signifies in
our Common law, land held of another in Fee, that is in perpetuity to himself
and his Heir, for so much yearly rent, as it is reasonably worth, more or
less, so it be the fourth part of the worth, old tenures. See exposition of
the Statute of Gloucester, anno 6 Edw. 1. without homage, fealty, or other
services, other than be especially comprised in the Feofment; but by Fitzh. it
seems that the third part of the value may be appointed for the rent, or the
finding of a Chaplain to sing divine Service, etc. not. br. fol. 210. C. And
the nature of it is this, that if the rent be behind and unpaid for the space
of two years, then the Feoffor or his Heirs have action to recover the lands as
their demesnes: Britton cap. 66. number. 4. but observe out of West. symbol. part
1. lib. 2. sect. 463. that the Feofment may contain services and suit of Court,
as well as rent. And the Author of the new Terms of law says, That Fee-ferm
owes Fealty, though not expressed in the Feofment, for that fealty belongs
to all kind of Tenures. This is near the nature of that which among the
Civilians is called ager vectigalis, qui in perpetuum licetur, i. hac lege ut
quam diu pro eo vectigal pendatur tam diunique ipsis qui conduxerunt, ueque iis
qui in locum eorum successerunt, auferri cum liceat, li. 1. p. si ager
vectigalis, etc.

Feed (feida, alias faida) signifies in the German tongue, Guerram, i.
capitales in micitias vel bellum, Hotoman disputat. de feudis, cap. 2, b.
Foemina dic^tur faidam non facere, Gloss. in. ult. de lege Conradi, lib. 2. de
feudis, by reason that Women by the law are not subject to warfare, to battle,
or proclamation made for that cause. Skene de verbo significa. verbo Affidatio.
Master Lambert in his exposition of Saxon words writes, it Feeth, and says
likewise that it signifies Capitales inimicitias. And also that Feud, used now
in Scotland and the North pates of England, is the same, that is, a combination
of kindred, to revenge the death of any of their blood, against the killer and
all his race.

Felony (felonia) seems to come of the French Felonnie, i. impetuositas,
atrocitas, immisericordia. Felonia says Hotoman, de verbis feudalibus, non
praescise contumaciam vasalli in dominum, hujusve in vasallum perfidia^^
(significat, ver in quodvis capitale facinus. And again, Felonia Gothis and
Longobardis dicitur quod Germanis body Schelmarey, Litinis Scelus. Sir Edward
Coke says thus, Ideo dicta est felonia, qua fieri debet felleo animo, li. 4.
fol. 124. b. Hostiensis in sua summa, titulo De Feudis. And others speak of
this to this effect: Felonia, alias falonia, est culpa vel injuria, propter
quam vassallus amittit feudum. Sed haec respicit Dominum fendi. Est and alia
fallonia quae non respicit Dominum: sc. quando vassallus interficit fratrem vel
filium suum, vel filium fratris, vel aliud crimen commi sit quod pa ric dii
appellatione continetur, and plures aliae fallonlae tam resp. cientes Dominum,
quam alios propter quas feudum amittitur ^bi notantur. We account any offense
Felony, that is in degree next unto petit treason, and compriseth diverse
particulars under it, as murder, theft, killing of a man's self, Sodometry,
Rape, wilful burning of houses, and diverse such like, which are to be gathered
especially out of statutes, whereby many offenses are daily made felony, that
before were not. Felony is discerned from lighter offenses by this, that the
punishment thereof is death. Howbeit this is not perpetual. For petit larcenie,
(which is the stealing of any thing under the value of twelve pence) is felony,
as appears by Broke, titulo Coren. number. 2. his reason is, because the
Indictment against such a one must run with these words, (felonice cepit) and
yet is this not punished by death, though it be loss of goods. Any other
exception I know not, but that a man may call that felony, which is under petit
treason, and punished by death. And of this there be two sorts: one lighter,
that for the first time may be releeved by Clergy, another that may not. And
these you must also learn to know by the Statutes: for Clergy is allowed,
where it is not expressly taken away. Of these matters read Stawnfords first
book of his pl. cor. from the end of the second Chapter, to the 39. and the
Statutes, whereby many offenses be made felony, since he writ that learned
Book. See also Lamberds Justice of peace, lib. 2. cap. 7. in a Table drawn for
the purpose. As also lib. 4. cap. 4. page 404, and Cromptons in hi-Justice of
Peace, fol. 32. etc. Felony is also punished by loss of Lands not entailed,
and goods or chattels, as well real as personal; and yet the Statutes make
difference in some cases touching Lands, as appears by the Statute, anno 37
H. 8. cap. 6. Felony ordinarily works corruption of blood, though not wh^re a
Statute ordains an offense to be Felony and yet withal says, that it shall
not work corruption of blood. As anno 39 Elizab. cap. 17. How many ways Felony
is committed, See Cromptons Justice of peace, page 32, etc.

Feyr, See Fair.

Felo de se, is he that commits felony by murdering himself. See Cromptons
Justice of Peace, fol. 28. and Lamberds Eirenarcha. lib. 2. cap. 7. page 243.

Fencemoneth, is a month, wherein it is unlawful to hunt in the Forest,
because in that month the Female Deer do faun: and this month begins 15.
days before Midsomer, and ends 15 days after. So that to this month there
be 31 days. See Manwood part prim. of his Forest laws, page 80. but more at
large part secunda cap. 13. per totum. It is also called the defense month,
that is, the forbidden month, and the word defense is used in like sort, West.
2. cap. 47. anno 13 Ed. 1. in these words: All waters where Salmons be taken,
shall be in defense for taking of Salmons from the Nativity, etc.

Fennycric, or rather Fene-greek (Foenum Graecum) is a medicinal plant or herb,
so called, because it grows like Hey, and comes out of Greece. Of this you
may read more in Gerards Herbal. lib. 2. cap. 48;. The feed thereof is reckoned
among drugs that are to be garbled, anno 1. Jacob. cap. 19.

Feofment (feoffamentum) by the opinion of S. Tho. Smith de Repub. Anglor. lib.
3. cap. 8. and M. West part prim. symbol. lib. 2. Sect. 280. is descended from
the Gottish word (Feudum) which you have interpreted in (Fee) and signifies
(donationem feudi.) But (as M. West also adds) it signifies in our Common
law, any gift, or grant of any Honors, Castles, Manors, Mesuages, Lands, or
other corporeal and immovenble things of like nature, unto another in
Fee-simple, that is, to him and his Heirs for ever, by the delivery of seisin
and possession of the thing given, whether the gift be made by word or writing.
And when it is in writing, it is called a deed of feofment, and in every
feofment the giver is called the Feoffour (feoffator,) and he that receives by
virtue thereof, the Feoffee (feoffatus) and Litleton says, that the proper
difference between a Feoffour and a Donour is, that the Feoffour gives in
Fee-simple, the Donour in Fee-tail, lib. 1. cap. 6.

Feodarie, alias, Feudarie, alias, feudatarie, (feudatarius) is an officer
authorized and made by the Master of the Court of Wards and Liveries, by
Letters patents under the Seal of that office. His function is to be present
with the Escheatour at the finding of any office, and to give evidence for the
King as well concerning the value, as the tenure, and also to survey the land
of the Ward, after the office found and to rate it. He is also to assign the
Kings Widows their Dowers, and to receive all the rents of the Wards lands,
within his circuit, and to answer them to the Receiver of the Court of Wards
and Liveries. This officer is mentioned anno 32 H. 8. cap. 46.

Ferdfare, significat quietantiam eundi in exercitum. Fleta, libr. pri. cap. 47.

Ferdwit, significat qui^tantiam murdri in exercitu. Fleta, libr. pri. cap. 47.

Ferm ( firma comes of the French ( Ferme, i. colonia, villa praedium,) and
signifies with us, house or land, or both, taken by indenture of lease, or
lease parol. It may likewise not unaptly be conjectured, that both the French
and English word came from the Latin (firmus) for (locare ad firmum) I find
sometime to signify with others, as much as (to set or let to farm) with us.
The reason whereof may be in respect of the sure hold they have above tenants
at will, v. vocabul. utriusque juris, verbo afflictus. The Author of the new
Terms of law, deriveth this word from the Saxon (feormian) which signifies, to
feed or yield victual. For in ancient time the reservations were as well in
victuals as money, which I leave to the judgment of the Reader. How many ways
ferm is taken, See Plowden, casu Wrothesley, fol. 195. a. b.

Feudarie. See Feodarie.

FI
Fieri facias, is a Writ judicial, that lies at all times within the year and
day, for him that has recovered in an Action of Debt or Damages, to the
Sheriff, to command him to levy the Debt, or the Damages, of his goods,
against whom the recovery was had. This Writ has beginning from West. 2. c.
18. anno 13 Ed. 1. See Old not. br. fol. 152. See great diversity thereof in
the Table of the Register Judicial. verbo Fieri faci^^s.

Fifteenth (Decimaquinta) is a tribute, or imposition of money laid upon a
City, Borough, and other Town through the Realm, not by the polle; or upon this
or that man, but in general, upon the whole City or Town; so called, because it
amounts to one fifteenth part of that, which the City or Town has been
valued at all of old. This is now a days imposed by Parliament: and every Town
through the Realm, great or less knows what a fifteenth for themselves does
amount unto, because it is perpetual: whereas the subsidy, which is raised of
every particular man's lands or goods, nust needs be uncertain, because the
estate of every several man is so ticklish and uncertain. And in that regard am
I driven to think that this fifteenth is a rate anciently laid upon every Town
according to the land or circuit belonging unto it; whereof M. Cambden has
many mentions in his Britannia. In stead of the rest, take a few, page 168. of
Wels in Somersetshire he writes thus: Quo tempore, ut testatur censualis
Angliae liber, Episcopus ipsum oppidum tenuit, quod pro quinquaginta hidis
geldavit: And page 171. of Bathe. Geldabat pro viginti hidis, quando Schira
geldabat. Thirdly, page 181. of old Sarisbury thus: Pro quinquaginta hidis
geldabat. And these rates were taken out of Doomsday in the Eschequer; so that
this seemed in old time, to be a yearly tribute in certainty, whereas now,
though the rate be certain, yet it is not levied but by Parliament. See Task.
See Quinsieme.

Filazer (filazarius) comes of the French Filace, i. filum filacium. It is an
officer in the Common plees, whereof there be fourteen in number. They make o^t
all original process, as well real, as personal and mixed: and in actions
merely personal, where the Defendants be returned or summoned, there goes out
the distress infinite until appearance. If he be returned Nihil, then Process
of Capias infinite, if the Plaintiff will, or after the third Capias, the
Plaintiff may go to the Exigenter of the Shire, where his Original is grounded,
and have an Exigent or proclamation made. And also the Filazer makes forth all
Writs of view in causes, where the view is prayed: he is also allowed to enter
the imparlance, or the general issue in common actions, where appearance is
made with him, and also judgment by confession in any of them before issue be
joined: and to make out Writs of Execution thereupon. But although they entered
the issue, yet the Protonotary must enter the judgment, if it be after Verdict.
They also make Writs of Supersedeas, in case where the Defendant appears in
their offices, after the Capias awarded.

Filctale: see Sothale.

File (Filacium) is a thread or wire, whereon Writs or other Exhibits in Courts
are fastened, for the more fafe keeping of them.

Finders, anno 18 Edw. 3. stat. 1. cap. unico. anno 14 Rich. 2. cap. 10. seem
to be all one with those, which in these days we call Searchers.

Fine (finis) comes of the French ( fin, i. finis) and has diverse
applications in our Common law: sometimes being used for a formal or
ceremonious conveyance of Lands or Tenements, or (as West says, titulo Fines,
sect. 25.) of any thing inheritable, being in esse tempore finis, to the end to
cut off all controversies. ( West. part 2. symbol. sect. 1. defines a Fine in
this signification: covenants made before Justices, and entered of Record. And
out of Glanvile thus, lib. 8. cap. 1. Finis est amicabilis compositio and
finalis concordia, ex consensu and licemia Domini Regis, vel ejus
Justiciariorum. And lib. 9. cap. 3. Talis concordia finalis dicitur, eo quod
finem imponit negetio, adeo ut neutra pars litigantium ab eo de ^^tero poterit
recedere. And out of Bracton, lib. 5. tract. 5. cap. 28. number. 7. thus; Finis
ideo dicitur finalis concordia, quia imponit finem litibus, and est exceptio
per emptoria. The Author of the new Terms of law, defines it to be a final
agreement had between persons concerning any Land or rent, or other thing,
whereof any suit or Writ is between them hanging in any Court. See the new Book
of Entries, verbo Fines. This fine is of so high a nature, that Bracton, lib.
3. cap. 7. number. 3. has these words of it: Item immediate pertinet ad Regem
querela finis factae in curia Domini Regis, and non observata. Et est ratio,
quia nemo potest finem interpretari nisi ipse Rex, in cujus curia fines fiunt.
See also, anno 27 Ed. prim. stat. prim. cap. 1. The Civilians would call this
solemn contract, transactionem judicialem de re immobili, because it has all
the properties of a transaction, if it be considered in his original use. v.
Wesemb. parat. titulo de transact. For it appears by the Writers of the
Common law, above named, that it is nothing but a composition or concord
acknowledged and recorded before a competent Judge, touching some hereditament
or thing immovable, that erst was in controversy between those that be
parties to the same concord: and that for the better credit of the transaction,
being by imputation made in the presence of the King, because, it is levied in
his Court: and therefore does it bind Women covert being parties, and others
whom ordinarily the Law disableth to transact, only for this reason, that all
presumption of deceit or evil meaning is excluded, where the King is privy to
the Act. But discourse of wit and reason, has in time wrought other uses of
this concord, which in the beginning was but one: as namely, to secure the
title that any man has in his possession against all men: to cut off Intails,
and with more certainty to pass the Interest or the Title of any Land or
Tenement, though not controverted, to whom we think good, either for years or
in Fee. In so much that the passing of a Fine, in most cases, now is it but
mera fictio juris, alluding to the use for the which it was invented, and
supposing a doubt or controversy, where in truth none is: and so not only to
work a present prescription against the parties to the concord, or fine, and
their Heirs, but within five years against all others, not exexpresly excepted
(if it be levied upon good consideration and without covine) as Women covert,
persons under 21 years, or prisoners, or such as be out of the Realm at the
time when it was acknowledged. Touching this matter, see the statutes, anno 1
Rich. 3. cap. 7. anno 4 H. 7. cap. 24. anno 32 H. 8. cap. 36. and anno 31 Eliz.
cap. 2. This fine has in it five essential parts: the original writ taken out
against the Conizour: the Kings License giving the parties liberty to accord,
for the which he has a fine called the Kings Silver, being accounted a part of
the Crowns revenue. Thirdly, the concord it self, which thus begins: Et est
concordia talis, etc. Fourthly, the note of the fine, which is an abstract of
the original concord, and begins in this manner: Sc. Inter R. querentem, et
S. et Euxorem ejus, deforciantes, etc. Fifthly, the foot of the fine, which
begins thus: Haec est sinalis concordia facta in Curia domini Regis, apud
West. a die Paschae in quindecim dies, anno etc. So as the foot of the fine
includes all, containing the day, year, and place, and before what Justice the
concord was made. Coke vol. 6. casu Teye, fol. 38, et 39. This fine is either
simgle or double: A single fine, is that by which nothing is granted or rendered
back again by the Cognizees to the Cognizours, or any of them. A double fine
contains a grant and render back again, either of some rent, common, or other
thing, out of the land or of the land it self, to all, or some of the
Cognizours, for some estate, limiting thereby many times Remainders to
strangers, which be not named in the Writ of covenant. West. ubi supra, Sect.
21. Again, a fine is of the effect, divided into a fine executed, and a fine
executory. A fine executed is such a fine, as of his own force gives a present
possession (at the least in law) unto the Cognizee, so that he needs no writ
of (Habere facias seisinam) for the execution of the same, but may enter; of
which sort is a fine (sur cognizance de droit come ceo que il ad de son done)
that is upon acknowledgement, that the thing mentioned in the concord be jus
ipsius cognizati, ut illa quae idem habet de dono Cognitoris. West. Sect. 51.
K. and the reason of this seems to be, because this fine, passes by way of
release of that thing, which the cognizee has already (at the least by
supposition) by virtue of a former gift of the Cognizor, Cokes Reports, lib. 3.
the case of sines, fol. 89. b. which is, in very deed, the surest fine of all.
Fines executorie be such, as of their own force do not execute the possession
in the Cognizees, as fines sur cognizance de droit tantum, fines sur done,
grant, release, confirmation, or render. For if such fines be not levied, or
such render made unto them, that be in possession at the time of the fines
levied, the cognizees must needs sue Writs of (Habere facias seisinam)
according to their several cases, for the obtaining of their possessions,
except at the levying of such executory fines, the parties unto whom the estate
is by them limited, be in possession of the lan is passed thereby: for in this
case such fines do inure by way of extinguishment of right, nor altering the
estate of possession of the Cognizee, but perchance bettering it, West. ubi
supra, sect. 20.

Touching the form of these Fines, it is to be considered upon what Writ or
Action the concord is to be made, and that is, most commonly, upon a Writ of
Covenant: and then first there must pass a payr of Indentures between the
Cognizour and Cognizee, whereby the Cognizour covenanteth with the Cognizee, to
pass a Fine unto him, of such or such things by a day set down. And these
Indentures, as they are first in this proceeding, so are they said to lead the
Fine; upon this Covenant the Writ of Covenant is brought by the Cognizee
against the Cognizour, who thereupon yields to pass the Fine before the
Judge, and so the acknowledgement being recorded, the Cognizour and his Heirs
are presently concluded, and all strangers not excepted, after five years once
passed. If the Writ whereupon the Fine is grounded, be not a Writ of Covenant,
but of Warrantia chartae, or a Writ of right, or a Writ of mesn, or a Writ of
Custom and Services (for all these Fines may also be founded. ( West. ubi
supra, sect. 23.) then this form is observed: the Writ is served upon the party
that is to acknowledge the Fine, and then he appearing does accordingly. See
Dyer, fol. 179. number. 46.

This word (Fine) sometime signifies a sum of money, paid for an In-come to
Lands or Tenements let by Lease: sometime an amends, pecuniary punishment, or
recompense upon an offense committed against the King and his Laws, or a Lord
of a Manor. In which case, a man is said, facere finem de transgressione cum
Rege, etc. Register Jud. fol. 25. a. and of the diversity of these Fines, with
other ma^ter worth the learning, see Cromptons Justice of peace, fol. 141. b.
143.144. and Lamberds Eirenarcha, libr. 4. cap. 16. page 555. But in all these
diversity of uses, it has but one signification; and that is a final
conclusion or end of differences between parties. And in this last sense,
wherein it is used for the ending and remission of an offense, Bracton has it,
lib. 2. cap. 15. number. 8. speaking of a Common fine that the County pays to
the King, for false judgments, or other trespasses, which is to be assessed by
the Justices in Eyr before their departure, by the oath of Knights and other
good men, upon such as ought to pay it: with whom agrees the Statute, anno 3
Ed. pri. cap. 18. There is also a Common fine in Leets. See Kitchen, fol. 13.
a. v. Common Fine. See Fleta, lib. 1. cap. 48.

Fines pro licentia concordandi, anno 21 H. 8. cap. 1. See Fine.

Fine force, seems to come of the French Adjective (fin) and the substantive
( force, i. vis. The adjective (fin) signifies sometime as much as crafty,
wily; or subtle; sometime as much, as artificial, curious, singular, exact, or
perfect, as Rien contrefa^ct fin, i. nihil simulatum aut ad imitationem
alterius expressum, potest esse exactum, vel ita absolutum, quin reprehensionem
vel offensionem incurrat, as it is set down in that work, truly regal,
entitled (...). page 115. so that this (fine force) with us, seems to
signify an absolute necessity or constraint, not avoidable, and in this sense
it is used, Old not. br. fol. 78. and in the statute anno 35 H. 8. cap. 12. in
Perkins Dower. fol. 321. and Plowden, fol. 94. Coke vol. 6. fol. 111. a.

Fine adnullando levato de tenemento quod fuit de antiquo dominico, is a Writ
to Justices, for the disanulling of a fine levied of lands holden in ancient
demesne, to the prejudice of the Lord, Regist. orig. fol. 15. b.

Fine capiendo pro terris, etc. is a Writ lying for one, that upon conviction
by a Jury, having his lands and goods taken into the Kings hand, and his body
committed to prison, obtains favor for a sum of money, etc. to be remitted
his imprisonment; and his lands and goods to be re-delivered unto him. Reg.
orig. fol. 142. a.

Fine levando de tenementis tentis de Rege in capite, etc. is a Writ directed
to the Justices of the common plees, whereby to license them to admit of a fine
for the sale land, holding in capite, Reg. orig. fol. 167. a.

Fine non capiendo pro pulchre placitando, is a Writ to inhibit officers of
Courts to take fines for fair pleading, Reg. orig. fol. 179. See pleder.

Fine pro redisseisina capienda, etc. is a Writ, that lies for the release of
one laid in prison for a re-disseisin, upon a reasonable fine, Reg. original,
fol. 222.

Finarie. See Blomarie.

Finours of gold and silver, be those that purify, and part those Merals from
other coar^er, by fire and water, anno 4 H. 7. cap. 2. They be also called
Patters in the same place, sometime Departers.

Fire-bote, for the composition look Hay-boot. It signifies allowance or
Estovers of Woods, to maintain competent fire for the use of the Tenent.

First fruits (primitiae) are the profits of every Spiritual living for one
year, given in ancient time to the Pope throughout all Christendom: but by the
statute an. 26 H. 8. cap. 3. translated to the Prince, for the ordering
whereof, there was a Court erected, anno 32 H. 8. cap. 45. but this Court was
dissolved anno pri. Mar. sess. 2. cap. 10. and sithence that time, though those
profits be reduced again to the Crown by the Statute anno 1 Eliz. cap. 4. yet
was the Court never restored, but all matters therein wont to be handled, were
transferred to the Exehequer. See Annats.

Fishgarth, anno 23 H. 8. cap. 18.

Fitche. See Furre.

Fitzherberd, was a famous Lawyer in the days of King Henry the eighth, and
was chief Justice of the Common plees, he wrote two worthy Books, one an
Abridgement of the Common Laws, another entitled De Natura Brevium.

FL
Fledwit, comes of the Saxon word (Fled) that is a fugitive, and (wit), which
some make but a termination signifying nothing of it self: howbeit others say,
it signifies a reprehension, censure or correction: It signifies in our
ancient Law a discharge or freedom from amercements, when one having been an
Outlawed fugitive, comes to the peace of our Lord the King, of his own
accord. Rastal. Exposition of words: or being licensed: New Terms of Law. See
Bloodwit, and Childwit: See Fletwit.

Fleet (Fleta) a famous prison in London, so called (as it seems) of the
River, upon the side whereof it stands, Cambden Britannia. page 317. Unto
this none are usually committed, but for contempt to the King and his Laws, or
upon absolute commandment of the King, or some of his courts, or lastly upon
debt, when men are unable or unwilling to satisfy their Creditours.

Flemeswit, or rather (Flehenswit) comes of the Saxon word (Flean) which is a
contract of (Flegen) that is, to fly away. It signifies with our Lawyers, a
liberty or Charter, whereby to challenge the Cattle or amercements of your man
a fugitive: Rastal, Exposition of words. See Bloodwit. Fleta writes this word
two other ways, as Flemenes frevie, or Flemesfreict he, and interprets it,
habere catalla fugitivorum: lib. 1. cap. 47.

Fleta is a feigned name of a learned Lawyer, that writing a Book of the Common
laws of England, and other antiquities in the Fleet, termed it thereof Fleta.
He seems to have lived in Edward the seconds time, and Edward the thirds,
idem lib. 1. cap. 20.. qui ceperint, lib. 2. cap. 66,. item quod nullus.

Fletwit alias Fredwit, Skene de verborum significatione, verb. Melletum,
says, that Flitchtwit is a liberty to Courts, and to take up the amercements
pro melletis, he gives the reason, because Flitcht is called Flitting, in
French Melle, which sometime is conjoined with handstroke. And in some books,
Placitum de meltis is called, the moot or plee of beating or striking.

Flight, see Finer.

Florences, an. 1 R. 3. cap. 8. a kind of cloth so called.

Flotson, alias Flotzam is a word proper to the Seas, signifying any goods that
by shipwreck be lost, and lie floting or swimming upon the top of the water,
which which Jetson and lagon and shares, be given to the Lord Admiral, by his
Letters Patents. Jetson is a thing cast out of the Ship, being in danger of
wreck, and beaten to the Shore by the waters, or cast on the Shore by the
Mariners. Coke vo. 6, fol. 106. a Lagon, alias Lagam, vel Ligan, is that which
lies in the bottom of the Sea. Coke ibid. Shares are goods due to more by
proportion.

FO
Foder (fodrum) signifies in our English tongue, a coarse kind of meat for
Horses; and other Cattle. But among the Feudists it is used for a prerogrative
that the prince has, to be provided of corn and other meat for his horses by
his subjects, toward his Wars or other expeditions. Arnoldus Clapmarius, de
arcunis Imperii, lib. 1. cap. 11. And read Hotomaa, de verbis feudalidus,
literaf.

Folgheres, or rather Folgers, be followers, if we interpret the word
according to the ^rue signification. Bracton says it signifies, Eos qui alii
deserviunt, Lib. tertio, tract. 2. cap. 10.

Folkmoot, is a Saxon word, compounded of Folk, i. populus, and Gemeitan, i.
convenire. It signifies (as M. Lambe^t says in his exposition of Saxon words,
verbo Conventus) two kind of courts, one now called the County court, the other
called the Sheriffs Turn. This word is still in use among the Londoners, and
signifies, celebrem ex omni civitate conventum. Stow in his Survey of London.
But M. Manwood in his first part of Forest laws, page 111. has these words:
Folkemore is the Court holden in London, wherein all the folk and people of the
City did complain on the Mayor and the Aldermen, for mis-government within the
City.

Forbarre, is for ever to deprive, anno 9. Rich. 2. ca. 2.

Force (forcia) is a french word, signifying ( vim, nervositatem, fortitudin^m,
virtutem in our Common law, it is most usually applied to the evil part, and
signifies unlawful violence. West. thus defines it: Force is an offense, by
which violence is used to things or persons, part 2. symbol. titulo,
Indictments, Sect. 65. where also he divides it thus: Force is either simple
or compound. Simple is that which is so committed, that it has no other crime
adjoined unto it; as if one by force do only enter into another man's
possession, without doing any other unlawful act here. Mixed force, is that
violence, which is committed with such a fact, as of it self only, is criminal;
as if any by force enter into another man's possession, and kill a man; or
ravish a woman there etc. he farther divides it into true force, and force
after a sort, and so proceeds to diverse other branches worth the reading, as
forceable entry, forceable detaining, unlawful assembly, Rowtes, Riots,
Robellions, etc.

Forceable det aining or witholding of possession, is a violent act of
resistance by strong hand of men weaponed with harness, or other action of
fear, in the same place, or elsewhere, by which the Lawful entry of Justices or
others, is barred or hindered, West. part 2. symb. titulo, Inditements. Sect.
65. M. of this see Cromptons Justice of pe. ce. fol. 58. b. etc. usq. ad. 63.

Forcible entry (Ingressus, mann forti factua) is a violent actual entry into
a house or land, etc. or taking a distress of any person weaponed, whether he
offer violence or fear of hurt to any there, or furiously drive any out of the
possession thereof: West. par. 2. symb. titulo, Indictments. sect. 65. L. of
this see Cramptons Justice of peace f. 58. b. 59. etc. usq. 63. It is also used
for a writ grounded upon the Stat. a^. 8. H. 6. c. 9. whereof read Fiaz. not.
br. at large f. 248. See the new book of Entries, verbo Forcible Entry. See
Lamb. definition in ^emain ^as^^s. Firen. l. 2. ca. 4. page 145.

Forem (fa^infocus) comes of the French ( forain, i. exterus, extornus.) it
is used adjectively in our Common law, and joined with diverse substantives in
senses not unworthy the exposition, as Forain matter, that is matter triable in
another County, pl. co. fol. 154. or matter done in another County. Kitchen,
fol. 126. For. inplea, (forinsecum placi^um) is a refusal of the Judge as
incompetent, because the matter in hand was not within his precincts: Kitchen
fo. 75. and an. 4. H. 8. cap. 2. and anno 22 ejusdem, cap. 2. and. 14. Foreign
answer, that is, such an answer as is not triable in the County where it is
made, an. 15. Han. 6. ca. 5. Foreign service (forinsecum servitium) that is,
such service, whereby a mean Lord holds over of another, without the compasie
of his own fee. Broke^titulo Tenur^^, fo. 251. number. 12. et 28. et Kitchen fol.
209. or else that which a Tenent performs either to his own Lord, or to the
Lord paramount one of the fee. For of these services Bracton speaks thus:
lib. 2. cap. 16. n^. 7. Item su^t quedam forvitia, quae dicuntur forinsoca,
(...) sunt in charta de feoff mento expressa et nominata: et quae ideo dici
possut forinfeca, quia perti nent ad Dominum R^gem, et non ad Dominum
capitalem, nisi cum in propria persona profectus fuerit in servi^i^: volnisi
cum pro servitio suo satisfecerit domina Regi quocu^ que modo, et fiunt (...)
certis temporibus; cum casus et necessitas evene^it, et varia habent nomina et
divorsa: Quando^ enim vominantur fori^s^^a, Large sumpto vocabitlo, quo ad
sorvitium Domint Regis; quandoque scutaginm, quandoque servitium Domini Regis,
et ideo forinsecum dici potest, quia st at capitur foris, sive extra servitium
quod fit Domino capitali. v. Brook, Tavuras 28.95. Fore in service seems to
be Knights service, or Es^uage uncertain. P^rkins Reservation 650. Foreign
attachment, Attachiamentum forinsoeum, is an attachment of foreiners goods
found within a Liberty or City for the satisfaction of some Citised to whom the
said foreiner owes money.

Foreign apposer, (forinsecarum oppositor) is an officer in the Exchequer, to
whom all Sheriffs and Bailiffs do repair, by him to be opposed of their green
wax, and from thence draws down a charge upon the Sheriff and Bailiff to the
Clerk or the pipe.

Forest (foresta) is a French word signifying a great or vast wood. Lieu
forestier et sauvage: locus-sylvestris et saltuosus. The writers upon the
Common law define it thus: Foresta est locus ubi ferae inhabitant vel
includuntur. Gloss. in ca. cum dilecti. extra. de donatio, et Felinus in cap.
Rodulphus, versu, quid antem foresta. extra de rescriptis, speaks to the same
effect. Some other writers do say it is called foresta, quasi ferarum statio,
vel tuta mansio ferarum. But as it is taken with us, M. Manwood, in his second
part of Forest Laws, ca. 1. nu. 1. thus defines it: A forest is a certain
territory of woody grounds and fruitful pastures, privileged for wild beasts,
and fouls of forest, chase, and warren, to rest and abide in in the safe
protection of the King, for his princely delight and pleasure: which territory
of ground so privlieged, is meered and bounded with unremoveable marks, meers,
and boundaries, either known by matter of record, or else prescription, and
also replenished with wild beasts of Venery, or chase, and with great coverts
of vert, for the succor of the said wild beasts, to have their abode in: for
the preservation and continuance of which said place, together with the vert
and venison, there are certain particular laws, privileges, and officers
belonging to the same, meet for that purpose, that are only proper unto a
Forest, and not to any other place. The same definition he has, part 1. pa.
139. which though it have many superfluities, yet it well expresses the nature
of the thing, especially the explication adjoined, which there is set down by
the said Author in both places, in his first part, page 16. where he fetches a
forest from such overgrown antiquity, alleging for it the 2 book of Kin. ca.
2. ver. 24. and ca. 19. ver. 23. and the 104 Psalm, verse. 20. the 131. verse. 6.
he takes license to sport himself; for though our English translation have
the word Forest, to express the vastness of the desert; yet if we look to the
original idiome, we shall find no more reason to call those places forests,
than either chases or parks.

The manner of making forests, as the same Author well sets down, part 1.
page 142. is this: The King sends out his Commission under the broad Seal of
England, directed to certain discreet persons, for the view, perambulation,
meering and bounding of the place that he minds to afforest. Which returned
into the Chancery, proclamation is made throughout all the shire where the
ground lies, that none shall hunt or chase any manner of wild beasts within
that precinct, without the Kings special license, after which he appoints
ordinances, laws and officers, fit for the preservation of the vert and
venison: and so becomes this a forest by matter of record. The properties of a
forest are these in special: first a forest as it is truly and strictly taken
cannot be in the hands of any but the King: the reason is given by M. Manwood,
because none has power to grant commission to be a justice in Eire for the
forest, but the King, par. 1. page 87. The second property be the Courts, as
the Justice sent every three years, the Swainmoot thrice every year, Idem eod.
page 90. et part 2. ca. 1. nu. 4. et 5. and the attachment once every forty
days, Idem eod. page 92. The third property may be the officers belonging unto
it, for the preservation of the vert and venison, as first the Justices of the
forest, the Warden or Keeper, the Verders, the Foresters, Agistours, Regarders,
Bailiffs, Bedels, and such like, which you may see in their places, See
Manwood, part 2. ca. 1. nu. 4. and 5. But the chief property of a Forest, both
by Master Manwood part 1. pa. 144. and Master Crompton, pa. 146. is the
Swainemore? which, as they both agree, is no less incident unto it, than the
court of Pie owders to a Fair. Other Courts and Offices are not so requisite,
in those forests that are in the hands of subjects, because they be not truly
forests. But if this fail, then is there nothing of a forest remaining but it
is turned into the nature of a Chase. See Chase. I read of thus many forests in
England: The forest of Windsor in Berkshire, Cambd. B^it. page 213. of
Pickering, Crompt. 190. of Shirwood, idem, fol. 202. of Englewood in
Cumberland, an. 4. Hen. 7. ca. 6. and Crompton fol. 42. of Lancaster, idem,
fol. 196. of Wolmore, Stowes Annals, pa. 462. of Gillingham, idem, pa. 113.
Knaresborow, an 21. H. 8. c. 17. of waltham, Cambd. pa. 328. of Breden, idem,
page 176. of Whitehart, idem, p. 150. of Wiersdale, idem pa. 589. and
Lownesall, ibidem. of Deane, idem, pa. 266 and an. 8. H. 6. c. 27. and an. 19.
Hen. 7. ca. 8. of Saint Leonards in Southsex, Manwood part 1. pa. 144. of
Waybridge and Sapler, Idem, codem, pa. 63. of Whitvey, pa. 81. Of Fekenham,
Camden pa. 441. of Rockingham, idem, page 396. Forest de la mer, idem, page
467. of Huckstow, idem, page 456. of Hay, Manwood part 1. pa. 144. of
Cants^lly, eadem page of Ashdowne in the County of Sussex, an. 37. H. 8. ca.
16. Forests of Whittilwood and Swasie in the County of Northampton, an. 33. H.
8. cap. 38. Of Fronselwood in the County of Somerset, Coke li. 2. Cromwels
case, fo. 71. b. I hear also of the forest of Exmore in Devonshire. There may
be more, which he that lists may look for.

Forester (forestarius) is a sworn officer of the forest, appointed by the
Kings letters patents to walk the forest both early and late-watching both the
vert and the venison, attaching and presenting all trespassers against them,
within their own bayliwick or walk: whose oath you may see in Crompton, fo.
201. And though these letters parents be ordinatily granted, but quam diu been
se gesserint, yet some have this grant to them and their heirs, and thereby are
called Foresters or fosters in fee: Idem fol. 157. and 159. and Manwood part
1. page 220. whom in Latin Crompton calls Foresta rium feudi fo. 175.

Fore-judger, (forisjudicatio) signifies in the Common law, a Judgment,
whereby a man is deprived, or put by the thing in question. It seems to be
compounded of fors, i. praeter, and juger, i. ^udicare. Bracton, lib. 4. tract.
3. cap. 5. has these words: Et non permittas quod A. capitalis dominus feudi
illius, habeat custodiam haeredis, etc. quia in Curia nostra forisjudicatur de
custodia, etc. So does Kitchen use it, fol. 29. and Old not. brev. fol. 44, and
81. and the Stat. An. 5. E. 3. c. 9. and an. 21 R. 2. c. 12. Forjudicatus with
Authors of other nations signifies as much as Banished, or as Deportatus in
the ancient Roman law, as appears by Vincentius de Franchis, descis. 102.
Mathaeus de Afflictis, l. 3 feud. Rub. 31. p. 625.

Foregoers be Purveyors going before the King or Queen being in progress, to
provide for them, anno 36. Ed. 3. c. 5.

Forfeiture (forisfactura) comes of the French word Forfaict, i. scelus: but
signifies in our language, rather the effect of transgressing a penal Law,
than the transgression it self, as forfeiture of Eschears, anno 25 E. 3. ca. 2.
statut. de Proditionibus. Goods confiscate, and goods forfeited differ, Staw.
pl. Co. f. 186. where those seem to be forfeited that have a known owner,
having committed any thing whereby he has lost his goods; and those
confiscate, that are disavowed by an offender as not his own, nor claimed by
any other. I think rather, that forfeitute is more general, and confiscation
particular, to such as forfeit only to the Princes Exchequer. Read the whole
chapter, li. 3. ca 24. Full forfeiture, plena forisfactura otherwise called
plena vita, is forfeiture of life and member, and all else that a man has.
Manwood part 1. p. 341. The Canon Lawyers use also this word, For forisfactura
sunt pecuniariae pocnae delinquentium. Glos. in c. Presbyteri. extrade poenis.

Forfeiture of marriage (forisfactura maritagii) is a writ lying against him,
who holding by Knights service, and being under age and unmarried, refuses her,
whom the Lord offers him, without his disparagement; and marries another.
Fitz. not. br. fo. 141. H. I. K. L. Register original. fol. 163. b.

Forseng, quietantiam prioris prisae designat: in hoc enim delinquunt Furgenses
Londonenses, cum prisas suas ante prisas regis faciunt. Fleta. lib. 1. ca. 47.

Forgery see here next following, Forger of false deeds.

Forger of false deeds comes of the French Forger, i. accudere fabricare,
conflare, to beat on an anvile, to fashion, to bring into shape; and signifies
in our Common law, either him that frandulently makes and publishes false
writings, to the prejudice of any man's right, or else the writ that lies
against him that commits this offense. Fitz. not. br. fo. 96. b, c, calls
it a writ of Deceit. See Terms of Law, verbo Forger, and Wests Symb. part 2.
Indictments, Sectio 66. See the new book of Entries, verbo Forger. de faits.
This is a branch of that which the Civilians call Cremen falsi, Nam falsarius
est, qui decipiendi causa sc^ipta publica falsificat. Speculator. de crimine
falsi. Falsicrimen proprie dicitur, quod utilitatis privatae causa factum est.
Connanus, li. 5. ca. 7. nu. 4. Ad esse falsitatis tria requir untur: mutatio
veritatis, dolus, and quod alteri sit nocivum. Quorum si alterum desit falsitas
non est pu ibilis. Hostiensis, et Azo in suis summis.

Forister. See Forester.

Formdon (Breve formatum donationis) is a writ that lies for him, that has
right to any ands or tenements by virtue of any entail, growing from the
Statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 1. It lies in three sorts, and accordingly is caled;
forma donations, or formdon in the descender, formdon in the reverter, or
formdon in the remainder. Formdon in the descender lies for the recovery of
lands, etc. given to the one and the heirs of his body, or to a man and his
wife, and the heirs of their two bodies, or to a man and his wife being Cousin
to the Donour, in franck, marriage, and afterward alienated by the Donee. For
after his decease his heir shall have this writ against the renent or alienee.
Fitz. not. br. fol. 211. He makes three sorts or this formdon in the
descender: The first is, in the manner now expressed: The second is, for the
heir of a Coparcener, that alienateth and dies, fo. 214. the third is called
by him (In simul tenuit) fol. 216. which lies for a Coparcener or heir in
Gavelkind, before partition, against him, to whom the other Goparcener or heir
has alienated and is dead. Formdon in the Reverter, lies for the Donour or
his heirs, where land entailed to certain and there issue, with condition for
want of such issue to revert to the Donour and his heirs, against him to whom
the Donee alienateth, after the issue extinct, to which it was entailed, Fitz.
not. br. fol. 219. Formedon in the remainder lies where a man gives lands in
tail, the remainder to another in tail, and afterward the former tenent in tail
dies without issue of his body, and a stranger abateth, then he in the
remainder shall have this writ. Fitz. not. br. f. 217. See the Register
original, fol. 238, 242, 243. Of this, see the new book of Entries, verb.
Formdon.

Forsechoke, seems to signify originally as much as forsaken, in our modern
language, or derelictum, with the Romans. It is especially used in one of our
Statutes, for land or tenements seized by the Lord, for want of services due
from the tenent: and so quietly held and possessed beyond the year and day. As
if we should say, that the tenent which seeing his land or tenements taken
into the Lords hand, and possessed so long, takes not the course appointed by
law to recover them, does in due presumption of Law disavow or forsake
whatsoever right he has unto them. See the Statute, anno 10. Edward. 1. cap.
unico.

Forstall, is to be quit of amerciaments and cattels arrested within your land,
and the amerciaments thereof coming. New terms of law.

Forstalling (forstallatio) is partly French, for ( estaller is in that tongue,
as much as (merces exponere, expedice, explicare) or to show wares in a Market
or Fair. It signifies in our Common law, the buying or bargaining for any
victuals or wates coming to be sold toward any Fair or Market, or from beyond
the Seas toward any City, Port, Haven, Creek, or road of this Realm, and before
the same be there, anno 51. H. 3. stat. 6. West. part 2. Symbol. titulo
indictments, sect. 64. Forstaller, in Crompton^ Jurisdiction fol. 153. is used
for stopping of a Deer broker out of the Forest, from returning home again, or
laying between him and the Forest, in the way that he is to return: See
Regratours and Engrossers. See Cromptons Justice of peace, fol. 69. a. The
Author of the new terms of Law defines it thus. Forstalling (Forstallamentum)
is the buying of Corn, Cattle, or other Merchandise by the way as it comes
toward the Fair or Market to be sold, to the intent to sell the same again at a
more high and deer price. Fleta says thus of it, significat obtrusionem viae
vel impedimentum transitus and fugae averiorum. lib. 1. cap. 47.

Fortescue was a learned Lawyer, and Lord Chanceller in Henry the 6. days; who
writ a book in the commendation of our Common Laws.

Fortlet (forte letum) comes near the French ( fortlet, i. valenticulus,
forticulus) and signifies in our Common law, a place of some strength, Old.
not. br. fol. 45. This in other Countries is written (fortalitium) and
signifies (castrum.) Scraderus select. and practabil. quaest. sect. 12. number.
7, and 8.

Fother, is a weight of twenty hundred, which is a wain or cart load. Speight
in his Annot. upon Chawcer.

Fourche (Afforciare) seems to come of the French ( Fourchir, i. ti^ubare
lingua) and signifies in our Common law, a putting off, prolonging, or delay
of an action. and it appears no unpleasant Metaphor: for as by stammering, we
draw out our speech, not delivering that we have to say in ordinary time, so
by fourching we prolong a suit that might be ended in a shorter space. To
fourch by essoin, Westminster. 1. cap. 24. anno 3. Edw. pri. where you have words to
this effect: Coparceners, Jointenants, and Tenants in common, may not fourch by
essoin, to essoin severally, but have only one essoin, as one sole tenent may
have. And anno 6. Edw. 1. ca. 10. You have it used in like sort.

Foutgeld, is a word compounded of these two German words ( fous, i. pes) and (
gyldan, i. solvere) and it signifies an amercement for not cutting out the
balls of great dogs feet in the Forest. See Expeditate. And to be quit of
footgeld is a privilege to keep dogs within the Forest, unlawed, without
punishment or controlement, Cromptons Jurisd. fol. 197 Manwood part pri. of
his Forest Laws, page 86.

Fowls of warren. See Warren.

Founder, is he that melts metal, and makes any thing of it by casting it
into a mould, etc. anno 17. Rich. 2. cap. 1. derived of the verb (fundere) to
power.

FR
Franthise (libertas, franchesia) comes of the French (franchise) so
signifying: it is taken with us for a privilege, or an exemption from ordinary
jurisdiction, and sometime an immunity from tribute. It is either personal or
real, Crompt. Jurisd. fol. 141. that is belonging to a person immediately, or
else by means of this or that place, or Court of immunity, whereof he is either
chief, or a member. In what particularly things franchises commonly consist,
See Britian, cap. 19. Franchise royal anno 15. R. 2. ca. 4. et anno 2. H. 5.
cap. 7. in fine, seems to be that, where the Kings writs run not: as Chester
and Durham, they are called Seignories royal, anno 28. H. 6. cap. 4. The author
of the new Terms of law, says that franches royal is, where the King grants
to one and his heirs that they shall be quit of toll or such like: See
franchise in the new book of Entries. See Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 5. See Sac.

Frank almoin (libera Eleemozyna) in french (frank Ausmone) signifies in our
Common law, a tenure or title of lands. Britton cap. 66. number. 5. says thus of
it: Frank almoyne is lands or tenements bestowed upon God, that is, given to
such people, as bestow themselves in the service of God, for pure and perpetual
alms: whence the Feoffours or givers cannot demand any terrestiall service, so
long as the lands, etc. remain in the hands of the Feoffees. With this agrees
the grand Costumary of Normandy, cap. 32. Of this you may read Bracton at
large, lib. 2. cap. 5. and 10. See Fitzh. not. br. fol 211. See the new book of
Entries, verbo, Frank almoin. But Britton makes another kind of this land,
etc. which is given in alms, but not free alms: because the tenants in this
are tied in certain services to the Feoffour, Britton ubi supra.

Frank bank (francus bancus) in true french ( franc bank signifies, word for
word, a free bench or seat: and among our Law-writers it seems to be used for
Copyhold lands, that the wife being espoused a virgin, has after the decease
of her husband for her dower, Kitchen fol 102. Bracton lib. 4. tract. 6. cap.
13. nu. 2. has these words: Consuetudo est in partibus illis, quod uxores
maritorum defunctorum habeant francum bancum suum de terris sockmaxnorum, et
tenent nomine dotis, Fitz. calls it a custom, whereby in certain Cities the
wife shall have her husbands whole lands, etc. for her dower, Not. br. fol.
150. P. See Plowden casu Newis fol. 411.

Frank chase (Libera chasea) is a liberty of feee chase, whereby all men having
ground within that compass, are prohibited to cut down wood, or discover, etc.
without the view of the Forester, though it be his own Demesne, Cromptons
Jurisdictions, fol. 187.

Frank fee (feudum francum, seis liberum) is by Broke tit. Demesne. number. 32.
thus expressed: That which is in the hand of the King or Lord of any Manor,
being ancient demesne of the Crown ( viz. the Demesns) is called frank fee, and
that which is in the hands of the tenants, is ancient demeasn only: see the
Register orign. fol. 12. a. Whereby it seems, that that is frank fee, which a
man holds at the Common law to himself and his heirs, and not by such service
as is required in ancient demesne, according to the custom of the manor. And
again I find in the same book fol. 14. b. a note to this effect, that the lands
which were in the hands of King Edward the Saint, at the making of the book
called Doomesday, is ancient demesne: and that all the rest in the Realm is
called frank fee: with the which note Fitzherb. agrees, not. br. fol. 161. E.
So that all the land in the Realm, by this reason, is either ancient demesne, or
frank fee. The new expounder of the Law terms defines frank fee, to be a
tenure in fee simple, of lands pleadable at the Common law, and not in ancient
demesne: See Fachineus, li. 7. c. 39. who defines it feudum francum esse, pro
quo nullum servitium praestatur Domino: with whom agrees Zasius de feudis
part 12. saying, that therefore it is fedum improprium, quia ab omni fervitio
liberum.

Frank ferme (firma libera) is land or tenement, wherein the nature of fee is
changed by feofment, out of Knights service, for certain yearly services, and
whence neither homage, wardship, marriage, nor relief may be demanded, nor any
other service not contained in the feo meant. Britton ca. 66. number. 3. see Fee
ferme.

Frank law (libera lex) See Cromptons Justice of peace, fol. 156. b. where you
shall find what it is, by the contrary. For he that for an offense, as
conspiracy, etc. leeseth his frank law, is said to fall into these mischiefs:
first, that he may never be impaneled upon any jury, or assise, or otherwise
used in testifying any truth. Next, if he have any thing to do in the Kings
Court, he must not approach thither in person, but must appoint his Attorney,
Thirdly, his lands, goods, and chattels must be seized into the Kings hands:
and his lands must be estreaped, his trees rooted up, and his body committed to
prison. For this, the said Author cites the book of Assizes 2 fol. 59.
Conspiracy. F. 11.24 Edw. 3. fol. 34. See Conspiracy.

Frank marriage (liberum maritagium) is a tenure in tail special, growing from
these words in the gift comprised: Sciant etc. me M. H. de W. dedisse and
concessisse, et praesenti charta mea confirmasse I. A. filio meo, and Margeriae
uxori ejus, filiae verae T. N. in liberum maritagium unum messuagium, etc.
West. part 1. Symb. li. 2. sect. 303. The effect of which words is, that they
shall have the land to them, and the heirs of their bodies, and shall do
fealty to the donour, until the fourth degree. Se new terms of law. Glanvile
li. 7. ca. 18. and Bracton li. 2. ca. 7. number. 4. where he divides maritagium,
in liberum and servitio obligatum. See Marriage. Fleta gives this reason why
the heirs do no service until the fourth descent, ne donatores vel eorum
haeredes per homagum receptionem, a reversione repellantur. And why in the
fourth descent and downward, they shall do service to the donour, quia in
quarto gradu vehementer praesumiter, quod terra non est pro defectu haeredum
donatariorum reversura, libro tertio. ca. 11. in princ.

Frank pledge ( franciplegium is compounded of ( frank, i. liber) and ( pleige,
i. fidejussor) and signifies in our Common law, a pledge or surety for
freemen. For the ancient custom of England for the preservation of the
public peace, was, that every free born man, at fourteen years of age, after
Bracton (religious persons, Clerks, Knights, and their eldest sons excepted)
should find surety for his truth toward the King and his subjects, or else be
kept in prison, whereupon a certain number of neighbors became customably bound
one for another, to see each man of their pledge forth coming at all times, or
to answer the transgression committed by any broken away. So that whosoever
offended, it was forthwith inquired in what pledge he was, and then they of
that pledge, either brought him forth within 31. days to his answer, or
satisfied for his offense. This was called Frank pledge, causa qua supra, and
the circuit thereof was called Decenna, because it commonly consisted of 10.
households: And every particular person thus mutually bound for himself and his
neighbors, was called Decennier, because he was of one Decenna or another:
This custom was so kept, that the Sheriffs, at every county court, did from
time to time take the oaths of young ones, as they grow to the age of 14 years,
and see, that he were combined in one dozen or another whereupon this branch of
the Sheriffs authority was called visus Franciplegii, view of Frank pledge,
See the stat. for view of Frank pledge made an. 18. E. 2. See Decennier,
Leetview of Frank pledge, and Freoborghe. That this discipline is borrowed by
us of the Roman Emperors, or rather Lombards, appears most manifestly in the
second book of Feuds, ca. 53. upon which if you read Hotoman, with those
Authors that he there records, you will think your labor well bestowed.
Read more of this, viz. what articles were wont to be inquired of in this
Court, in Horns mirror of Justices, lib. 1. ca. de la veneu des francs pleges,
and what these articles were in ancient times, see in Fleta lib. 2. cap. 52.

Fredwit. See Fletwit.

Free chapel ( libera Capella by some opinion, is a Chapel founded within a
Parish for the service of God, by the devotion and liberality of some good man,
over and above the mother Church, unto the which it was free for the
parishioner^, to com, or not to come, and endowed with maintenance by the
founder and thereupon called free: I have heard others say, and more probably,
that those only be free Chapels, that are of the Kings foundation, and by him
exempted from the Jurisdiction of the Ordinary: but the King may license a
subject to found such a Chapel, and by his Charter exempt it from the
Ordinaries visitation also. That it is called free in respect it is exempted
from the Jurisdiction of the Diocesan, appears by the Register original, fol.
40. and 41. These Chapells were all given to the King: with chaunteries, anno
1. Edw. 6. ca. 14. Free chapel of Saint Martin le grand. an. 3. Ed. 4. capite
quarto, et an. 4. E. quarti c. 7.

Free hold (liberum tenementum) is that land or tenement, which a man holds
in fee, fee tail, or at the least, for term of life, Bract. lib. 2. ca. 9. The
new expounder of the Law terms says, that freehold is of two sorts. Freehold
in deed, and freehold in law: Freehold in deed, is the real possession of land
or tenements in fee, fee tai^ or for life. Freehold in law, is the right that a
man has to such land or tenements before his entry or seizure. I have heard it
likewise extended to those offices, which a man holds, either in fee, or for
term of life. Britton defines it to this effect. Franck tenement is a
possession of the soil, or services issuing out of the soil, which a free man
holds in fee to him and his heirs, or at the least, for term of his life,
though the soil be charged with free services or other, cap. 32. Freehold is
sometime taken in opposition to villenage. Bract. lib. 4.37. and 38. M. Lamberd
(in his explication of Saxon words, verbo Terra and scripto) says, that land
in the Saxons time was called either Bockland, that is holden by book or
writing: or Folcland, that is holden without writing: The former he reports,
was held with far better conditions, and by the better sort of tenants, as
Noblemen and Gentlemen, being such as we now call free hold: the later was
commonly in the possession of clowns, being that which we now call at the will
of the Lord: I find in the Register judicial, fol. 68. a. and in diverse other
places, that he which holds land upon an execution of a Statute Merchant,
until he be satisfied the debt, tenet ut libe um tenementum sibi and
assignatis suis, and fol. 73. b. I read the same of a tenent per elegit; where
I think the meaning is not, that such tenants be freeholders, but as
freeholders for their time, that is, until they have gathered profits to the
value of their debt. Freeholders in the ancient Laws of Scotland, were called
Milites. Skene de verb. signif. verb. Milites: The D. and Student says, that
the possession of land, after the law of England is called frank tenement, or
freehold. fol. 97. a.

Frenchman (Francigenia) was wont to be used for every outlandish man. Bracton,
li. 3. tract. 2. cap. 15. See Englerecy.

Frendwite, vel Infeng. significat quietantiam prioris prisae ratione convivii,
Fleta, lib. 1. cap. 47.

Frendles man, was wont to be the Saxon word for him, whom we call an outlaw.
And the reason thereof I take to be: because he was upon his exclusion from
the Kings peace and protection, denied all help of frien as after certain
days. Nam forisfecit amicos. Bract. lib. 3. tract. 2. ca. 12. nu. 1. whose
words are these. Talem vocant Angli (utlaugh) and alio nomine antiquitus solet
nominari, sc: Frendles man: and sic viaetur quod foris fecit amicos: and unde
si quis talem post utlagariam and expulsionem scienter paverit, receptaverit,
vel scienter communicaverit aliquo modo, vel receptaverit, vel occultaverit,
eadem paena puniri debet, qua puniretur utlagatus: ita quod careat omnibus
bonis suis and vita, nisi Rex ei parcat de sua gratia.

Fresh disseisin (Frisca disseisina) comes of the french ( Fraiz. i. recens)
and disseisir i. possessione e^cere) It seems to signify in our Common law,
that disseisin that a man may seek to defeat of himself and by his own power,
without the help of the king or Judges, Britton. c. 5. and that such desseisin,
as is not above 15. days old. Bract. lib. 4. cap. 5. whom you may read at
large of this matter, concluding that it is arbitrarie, and so does Britton,
ca. 65. but ca. 43. he seems to say, that in one case it is a year. See him
also, ca. 44.

Fresh fine, is that which was levied within a year past, West. 2. ca. 45. an.
13. Ed. 1.

Fresh force (frisca fortia) is a force done within forty days, as it seems
by Fitzh. not. br. fol. 7. C. For if a man be disseised of any lands or
tenements, within any City or Borough, or deforced from them after the death of
his Ancestor, to whom he is heir: or after the death of his tenent for life or
in tail: he may within forty days after his title accrued, have a Bill out of
the Chancerie to the Mayor, etc. See the rest.

Fresh suit recens insecutio) is such a present and earnest following of an
offendour, as never cease from the time of the offense committed or espied,
until he be apprehended. And the effect of this, in the pursure of a Felon,
is, that the party pursuing shall have his goods restored him again: whereas
otherwise they are the kings. Of this see Stawnf. pl. cor. li. 3. ca. 10. and
12. where you shall find handled at large what sure is to be accounted fresh,
and what not. And the same Author in his first book, cap. 27. says, that fresh
suit may continue for seven years. See Cokes reports, lib. 3. Rigew. i^s case.
Fresh suit, seems to be either within the view or without: for M. Manwood
says, that upon fesh suit within the view, Trespassers in the Forest may be
attached by the officers pursuing them, though without the limits and bounds of
the Forest, part 2. cap. 19. number. 4. fol. 121.

Froborgh, alias Fridburgh, alias Frithborg (Frideburgum) comes of two Saxon
words ( Freo, i. liber, ingenuns) and ( borgh, i. fidejussor) or of ( Frid, i.
pax, and ( Borgha, 1. sponsor) this is otherwise called after the french (Frank
pledge) the one being in use in the Saxons time, the other sithence the
Conquest: wherefore for the understanding of this, read Franck pledge. That it
is all one thing, it appears by M. Lamberd in his explication of Saxon words,
verbo Centuria? And again in the laws of king Edward, set out by him, fol. 132.
in these words: Praeterea est quaedam summa et maxima securitas, per quam omnes
statu firmissimo sustinentur: viz. ut unusquisque stabiliat se sub
fidejussionis securitate, quam Angli vocant (Freeborghes) soli tamen
Eboracenses, dicunt eandem Tienmannatale) quod sonat latin december hominum
numerum. Haec securitas hoc modo fiebat, quod deomnibus villis totius regni sub
decennals fidejussione debebant esse universi: ita quod si unus ex december
forisfecerit, novem ad rectum eum haberent: quod si aufugeret, daretur lege
terminus ei 31. dierum: ut quaesitus interim and inventus, ad justitiam Regis
adduceretur, and de suo illico restauraret damnum quod fecerat. Etsi ad hoc
forisfaceret, de corpore suo, justitia fieret. Sed si infra praedictum terminum
invenire non posset, etc. as in the book: Bracton makes mention of
(Fridburgum) lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 10. in these words: Archiepiscopi,
Episcopi, Comites, and Barons, and omnes qui habent Soc, and Sak, Tol, and
Team, and hujusmodi libertates, milites suos and proprios servientes, armigeres
sc. dapiferos, and pincernas, camerarios, coquos, pistores, sub suo Fridburgo
habere debent. Item and isti suos Armigeros, and alios sibi servientes. Quod si
cui forisfecerint, ipsi domini sui habeant cos ad rectum, and si non habucrint,
solvant pro cis forisfacturam. Et sic observandum erit de omnibus aliis, qui
sunt de alicujus manupastu. Out of these words, I learn the reason, why great
men were not combined in any ordinary Dozeine, and that is, because they were a
sufficient assutance for themselves, and for their menial servants: no less
than the ten were one for another in ordinary Dozeins. See Frank pledge: See
Skene de verborum significatione verb. Freiborgh. Fleta writes this word
(Fruhborgh) and uses it for the principal man, or at the least, for a man of
every Dozein. Frithborgh (says he) est laudabilis homo testimonit liber vel
servus, per quem omnes juxta ipsum commorantes firmior^ pace sustententur sub
stabilitate fidejussionis ejus vel alterius per denarium numerum, unde quilibet
quasi plegius alterius: ita quod si unus feloniam fecerit, novem tenentur ipsum
ad standum recto praesentare. Lib. 1. cap. 47. sect. Frithborgh. See Roger
Hoveden, part poster. suorum annal. in Henrico secundo, fol. 345. a.b.

Friar frater) comes of the French (friar) there be four orders reckoned of
them, anno 4 H. 4. cap. 17. viz. Minors, Augustines, Preachers, and Carmelices,
the four principal orders, of which the rest descend. See in Zechius de Repub.
Ecc. pa. 380. Look Linwood titule de relig. domibus, cap. 1. verbo, Sancti
Augustine.

Friar observant (frater observans) is an order of Franciscans: for the better
understanding or whom, it is to be noted, that of those four orders mentioned
in the word (Friar) the Franciscans, are minores tam Observantes quam
conventuales and Capuchini. Zecchus de Repub. Eccl. tract. de regular. cap. 2.
These Friars observants, you find sooken of anno 25 H. 8. cap. 12. who be
called observants, because they are not combined together in any Cloister,
Covent, or Corporation, as the conventuals are: but only tie themselves to
observe the Rites of their Order, and more strictly than the Conventuals do:
and upon a singularity of zeal, separate themselves from them, living in
certain places, and companies of their own choosing. And of these you may read
Hospinian de orig. and progress. Monachatus. fol. 878. cap. 38.

Friperer, is taken from the French (fripier) interpolator, one that scowreth
up and cleanses old apparel to sell again. This word is used for a bastardly
kind of broken, anno 1 Jacob. cap. 21.

Frithborgh. See Freeborgh.

Frithsoken, signifies surety of defense, as Saxon says in the description of
England, cap. 12. It seems to come of these two Saxon words, frith, or frid,
or ( fred, i. pax) and ( soken, i. quaerere) Fleta terms it frithsokne, vel
forsokne, yielding this reason, Quod significat lib^rtatem habendi franci
plegii.

FU
Fuer (fuga) comes of the French ( fuir, i. fugere) though it be a verb, yet
it is used substantively in our Common law, and is twofold: fuer in feit, (in
facto) when a man does apparently and corporally fly, and fuer in ley, (in
lege) when being called in the County, he appears not until he be outlawed:
for this is flight in interpretation of Law. Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 3. cap. 22.

Fugitives goods, (bona fugitivorum) be the proper goods of him that flies
upon Felony, which after the flight lawfully found, do belong to the King. Coke
vol. 6. fol. 109. b.

Furlong, (ferlingum terrae) is a quantity of ground containing twenty Luggs or
Poles in length, and every Pole sixteen foot and a half, eight of which
Furlongs make a Mile, Anno 35 Edward. prim. cap. 6. It is otherwise the eighth
part of an Acre. See Acre. In the former signification the Romans call it
(stadium,) in the larter (jugerum.) This measure which we call a Pole, is also
called a Perch, and differs in length according to the custom of the
Country. See Perch.

Furre (furrura) comes of the French ( fourrer, i. pelliculare) to line with
skins. Of Fur I find diverse strange kinds in the Statute, anno 24 H. 8. cap.
13. as of Sables, which is a rich Fur of color between black and brown, being
the skin of a beast called a Sable, of quantity between a Pole-cat, and an
ordinary Cat, and of fashion like a Pole-cat, bred in Russia, but most and the
best in Tartaria. Lucerns, which is the skin of a Beast so called, being near
the bigness of a Wolf, of color between red and brown something mailed like a
Cat, and mingled with black spots, bred in Muscovia and Russia and is a very
rich Fur. Genets, that is the skin of a beast so called, of bigness between a
Cat and a Weezle, mailed like a Cat, and of the nature of a Cat, bred in Spain.
Whereof there be two kinds, black, and gray; and the black the more precious
Fur, having black spots upon it hardly to be seen. Foines, is of fashion like
the Sable, bred in France for the most part: the top of the Fur is black, and
the ground whitish. Mattern, is a beast very like the Sable, the skin something
coarser it lives in all Countries that be not too cold, as England, Ireland,
etc. and the best be in Ireland. Miniver, is nothing but the bellies of
Squirels, as some men say: others say, it is a little vermin like unto a
Weezle, milk white, and comes from Moscovie. Fitch, is that which we otherwise
call the Pole-cat here in England. Shanks, be the skin of the shank or leg of a
kind of Kid, which bears the Fur, that we call Budge. Calaber, is a little
Beast, in bigness, about the quantity of a Squirrel, of color gray, and bred
especially in High Germany.

G
GA
GAbel (gabella, gablum) comes of the French gabelle, i. vectigal) and has
the same signification among our old Writers, that (gabelle) has in France,
for M. Cambden in his Britannia, page 213. speaking of Wallingford has these
words: Continebat 276. hagas, i. domos reddentes novem libras de gablo: and
page 228. of Oxford these: Haec urbs reddebat pro telonto and gablo, and aliis
consue udinibus per annum Regi quidem viginti libras, and sex sextarios mellis:
Comiti vero Algaro december libras. Gabella (a Cassanaeus defines it, de consuet.
Burgund. page 119.) Est vectigal quod solvitur pro bonis mobilibus, id est. pro
hiis quae vehuntur. distinguishing i. from Tributum, quia tributum est p oprie
quod fis co vel Principi solvitur pro rebus immobilibus.

Gage, (vaedium) comes of the French ( gager. i. dare pignus, pignore certare)
and is it self a French word nothing changed, but in pronunciation. It
signifies with us also, a pawn or pledge, Glanvile, lib. 10. cap 6. where he
says thus: Quandoque res mobiles ponuntur in vadium, quandoque res immobiles,
and a little after that, thus: Invadtatur res quandoque ad terminum, quandoque
sine termino. Item quandoque invadiatur res aliqua in mortuo vadio, quandoque
non. And from that Chapter to the end of the twelfth in the same book, he
handles this only thing. Though the word (gage) be retained as it is a
substantive, yet as it is a verb the use has turned the G. into W. so as it is
oftener written (wage:) as to wage deliverance that is, to give security that a
thing shall be delivered. For if he that distrained, being sued, have not
delivered the Cattle that were distrained, then he shall not only avow the
distress, but (gager deliverance) i. put in surety, that he will deliver the
Cattle distrained. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 74. D. and 67. F. whom see also fol.
67. F. G. yet in some cases, he shall not be tied to make this security: as if
the Cattle died in pound. Kitchen, fol. 145. or if he claim a propriety in the
Cattle sued for. Terms of the Law. To wage law what it is see in his place,
verbo, Law. See Mortgage.

Gager deliverance. See Gage.

Gayle. See Gaol.

Gainage, (Wain agium) is ^eer to the French ( Gaignage, i. quaestus, lucrum)
and signifies in our Common law, the land held by the baser kind of Sokemen or
Villeins. Bracton, lib. 1. cap. 9. where he has these words, speaking
observants: Et in hoc legem habet contra dominos, quod stare possunt in judicio
contra eos de vita and membris propter saevuiam dominorum, vel propter
intolerabilem injuriam. Ut si eos destruant, quod salvum non possit eis esse
Wainagium suum. Hoc autem verum est de illis servis, qui tenent in antiquo
dominico coronae. And again, lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 1. Miles and liber homo non
amerciabitur nisi secundum modum delicti, secundum quod delictum fuit magnum
vel parvum, and salvo contenemento suo: Mercator vero non nisi salva mercandiza
sua: and villanus, non nisi salvo Wainagio suo. This in West. 1. cap. 6. anno.
3. Ed. prim. is called Gaynure: and again, cap. 17. and in magna charta, cap.
14. it is called Wainage. I find it in the Old not. br. fol. 117. called
Fainor, v.z. in these words: The Writ of Aile was praecipe, etc. quod reddat
unam bovatam terrae, and unam bovatam marisci: and ^he Writ was abated for that
the oxegang is always of a thing that lies in gainor. I think this word was
used of lands usually plowed, because they that had it in occupation, had
nothing of it but the profit and fruit raised of it by their own pains, toward
their sustenance, nor any other title, but at the Lords will. Gainor again in
the same book, fol. 12. is used for a Sokeman, that has such land in his
occupation. In the 32. Chapter of the Grand Custumary of Normandy: Gergneurs
be ruricolae qui terras eleemozynatas possidem: and Britton uses gainer, for
to plow or till, fol. 65. a. and 42. b. West part 2. symbol. titulo
Recoveries, sect. 3. has these words: A praecipe quod reddat lies not in
Bovata marisci, 13 Ed. 3. fol. 3. nor de selione terrae. Edw. 1. for the
uncertainty, because a selion, which is a land, sometime contains an acre,
sometime half an acre, sometime more, and sometime less. It lies not of a
garden, cotage, or croft. 14. Assis. 13.8 H. 63.22. Ed. 4.13. de virgata
terrae. 41.43.13 Ed. 3. de fodina, de minerade, mercatu. 13 E. 3. for they be
not in demesne: but in gain, etc. Lastly, in the statute of distresses in the
Exchequer, anno 51 Hen. 3. I find these words. No man of religion, nor other,
shall be distreined by his beasts that gain the land.

Galege, (galicae) seems to come of the French, (galloches,) which signifies
a certain kind of shoo worn by the Gauls in foul weather of old times. I find
it used for some such Implement, anno 4 Ed. 4. cap. 7. and anno 14. and 15 H.
8. c. 9. where is written plainly, Galoches.

Galingal (cyperus) is a medicinal herb, the nature and diversity whereof is
expressed in Gerards Herbal, lib. 1. cap. 22. The root of this is mentioned for
a drugge to be garbled, anno 1 Jacob. cap. 19.

Gallihalpens, were a kind of coin forbidden by the statute, anno 3 H. 5. cap.
1.

Galloches. See Galege.

Galls (Gallae) be a kind of hard fruit like a nut, but rounder, growing of the
Tree called in Latin (galla) The diverse kinds and uses whereof Gerard
expresses in his Herbal, lib. 3. c. 34. This is a drug to be garbled. an. Ja.
c. 19.

Gaol (gaola) comes of the French ( Geole, i. caveola) a cage for birds, but
is metaphorically used for a prison. Thence comes (Geolier) whom we call
Gayler or Jailer.

Garb (Garba) comes of the French ( garb, altas, gerbe, i. sascis.) It
signifies with us, a bundle or sheaf of corn. Charta de Foresta, cap. 7. and
garba sagittarum, is a sheaf of arrows. Skene de verb. significat. verbo,
Garbae.

Garbling of bow-staves, anno 1 R. 3. cap. 11. is the sorting or culling out
the good from the bad. As garbling of Spice, is nothing but to purify it from
the dross and dust that is mixed with it. It may seem to proceed from the
Italian (garbo) that is, finesse, neatness.

Guard (Custodia) comes of the French (guard) being all of one signification.
It signifies in our Common law, a custody or care of defense: but has diverse
applications: sometimes to those that attend upon the safety of the Prince,
called Yeoman of the Guard: sometime to such as have the education of children
under age, or of an Idiot: sometime to a Writ touching Wardship. Which writs
are of three sorts: one called a right of Guard or Ward, in French, droit de
guard, Fitzh. not. br. fol. 139. The second is ejectment de guard, Idem fol. 139.
L. The third, is ravishment de guard, Idem fol. 140. F.G. See Gardein, see Ward.

Gardein (Custos) comes of the French (Gardien) and yet the German (Warden) is
near unto it. It ligniheth generally him, that has the charge or custody of
any person or thing: but most notoriously him, that has the education or
protection of such people, as are not of sufficient discretion, to guide
themselves and their own affairs, as Children and Idiots: being indeed as
largely extended, as both ( Tutor and Curator) among the Civilians. For where
as Tutor is he, that has the government of a youth, until he come to fourteen
years of age, and Curator, he that has the disposition and ordering of his
substance afterward, until he attain to five and twenty years: or that has the
charge of a frantic person during his lunacie: the common Lawyers use but
only Gardien or Guardian for both these. And for the better understanding of
our English law in this thing, you must know, that as Tutor is either
Testamentarius, or a Praetore datus est ex lege Atilia, or lastly, legitimus:
so we have three sorts of Gardens in England: one ordained by the Father in
his last will, another appointed by the Judge afterward, the third cast upon
the Minor by the law and custom of the land. Touching the first, a man having
goods and Chattels never so many, may appoint a Gardein to the body or person
of his child, by his last Will and Testament, until he come to the age of
fourteen years, and so the disposing or ordering of his substance, until what
time he thinks meet, and that is most commonly to the age of 21 years. The
same may he do, i^ he have lands, to never so great a value, so they hold not
in capite of the King, nor o^ any other Lord, by Knights service. And in the
former case, if the Father appoint no Gardein to his Child, the Ordinary may
appoint one to order his movables and chattels, until the age of fourteen
years: at which time he may choose his Guardian, accordingly as by the Civil Law
he may his Curator. For we hold all one rule with the Civilians in this case:
and that is, Invito curator non datur. And for his Lands, if he hold any by
Copy or Court-rol, commonly the Lord of the Fee appoints him a Guardian,
until he come to the age of fourteen years, and that is one, next of kind to
the Minor of that side, that can hope for least profit by his death. If he hold
by charter in socage, then the next of kind on that side by which the land
comes not is the Guardian: and hereupon called guardian in socage. And that
which is said here of socage seems to be true likewise in petit sergeantie,
anno vicesimo octavo Ed. vardi primi, statuto primo. And the reason of this,
Fortescue gives in his book, entitled, A commendation of the politic laws
of England, cap. 44. viz. because there might be suspicion, if the next kinsman
on that side by which the land descends, should have the custody and
education of the Child, that for desire of his land, he might be entised to
work him some mischief. Lastly, if a man die seized of lands, holding by
Knights service, leaving his heir in minority, that is, under 21 years: the
Lord of the Fee has by Law, the custody both of the heir an^ his land, until
he come to age. See the statute, anno 28 Ed. prim. statut. prim. And the reason
of this, Fortescue likewise gives, for that he to whom by his Tenure he owes
Knights service, when he can perform it, is likeliest to train him up in
martial and ingenious discipline, until he be of ability. But Polidore Virgil
in his Chronicle, lib. 16. says, that this was Novum vectigalis genus
excogitatum to help Henry the third, being oppressed much with poverty, by
reason he received the Kingdom much wasted by the Wars of his Ancestors: and
therefore needing extraordinary help to uphold his estate: yet the 33 Chapter
of the Grand Custumary, makes mention of this to have been used by the
Normans: and I think this the truer opinion. Here it is to be observed, whether
land in Knights service hold in capite, or of another Lord, or some of the
King, and some of another. If of the King, whether of the King alone or not,
all is one. For the King in this case is Guardian to the heirs both person and
land by his prerogative. Stawnford praerogat. cap. 1. If he hold of a common
Lord, it is either of one alone, or more; if of one only, then is he Guardian
of both person and Lands; if of more, then the Lord of whom he holds by the
elder Tenure, is Guardian of the person, and every one of the rest has the
custody of the land holden of himself. If the priority of the Tenure cannot be
discerned, then is he Guardian of the person, that first happeth him. Terms of
the law. Stawnf. ubi supra, whom you may read more at large: which Author fol.
19. makes mention of Gardeyn in feit, and Gardeyn in droit: that is, in deed,
and in law: I take the first to be him that has purchased, or otherwise
obtained the ward of the Lord of whom the Land holds: The second, him that
has the right by his inheritance and seignorie, Old not. br. fol. 94. Then is
there Gardeyn per cause de guard, which is he that has the wardship of a Minor,
because he is Guardian of his Lord, being likewise in minority, Stawnford ubi
supra, fol. 15. Of this you may read Skene de verb. signif. verbo Varda, by
whom you may learn great affinity, and yet some difference between the Law of
Scotland, and ours in this point.

Guardia, is a word used among the Feudists, for the Latin (Custodia) and
Guardianus seu guardio dicitur ille, cui custodia commissa est, lib. Feudo. 1.
titulo 2. and titulo 11.

Gardeyn of the Spiritualities, (Custos spiritualium, vel spiritualitatis) is
he to whom the spiritual jurisdiction of any Diocese is committed, during the
vacancie of the Sea, an. 25 H. 8. c. 21. And I take, that the Guardeyn of the
Spiritualties, may be either Guardein in law, or Jure Magistratus, as the
Archbishop is of any Dioces within his Province, or Guardian by delegation, as
he whom the Archbishop or Vicar general does for the time depute.

Gardeyn of the peace, (Custos pacis.) See Conservatour of the peace.

Gardeyn of the Cinque ports, (Gardianus quinque portuum) is a Magistrate that
has the jurisdiction of those Havens in the East part of England, which are
commonly called the Cinque ports, that is, the five Havens: who there has all
that jurisdiction, that the Admiral of England has in places not exempt. The
reason why one Magistrate should be assigned to these few Havens, seems to
be, because they in respect of their situation, anciently required a more
vigilant care, than other Havens, being in greater danger of invasion by our
enemies, by reason that the Sea is narrower there than in any other place. M.
Cambden in his Britannia, page 238. says, That the Romans, after they had
settled themselves and their Empire here in England, appointed a Magistrate, or
Governor over those East parts, whom they rearmed Comitem littoris Saxonici
per Britanniam, having another that did bear the same title on the opposite
part of the Sea: whose office was to strengthen the Sea Coasts with Munition,
against the outrages and robberies of the Barbarians. And farther signifies
his opinion, that this Warden of the Cinque ports, was first erected amongst
us, in imitation of that Roman policy. See Cinque ports.

Gare, anno 31 Ed. 3. cap. 8. is a coarse wool full of staring hairs, as such
as grows about the pesil or shanks of the Sheep.

Garnishment, comes of the French ( Garnir, i. instruere.) It signifies in
our Common law, a warning given to one for his appearance, and that for the
better furnishing of the cause and Court. For example, one is sued for the
detinue of certain Evidences or Charters, and says, that the Evidences were
delivered unto him, not only by the Plaintiff, but by another also: and
therefore prays, that that other may be warned to plead with the Plaintiff,
whether the said conditions be performed, yea, or no. And in this petition he
is said to pray Garnishment. New book of Entries, fol. 211. colum. 3. Terms of
the Law. Cromptons Jurisd. fol. 211. which may be interpreted either warning of
that other, or else furnishing of the Court with parties sufficient, thoroughly
to determine the cause: because until he appear and join, the Defendant (as
Fitzherb. says) is, as it were, out of the Court, not. br. fol. 106. G. and
the Court is not provided of all parties to the action. I am the bolder thus to
interpret it, because I find Britton in the same mind, cap. 28. where he says,
That contracts be some naked, and sans garnment, and some furnished, or to use
the literal signification of his word, apparelled: but a naked Obligation
gives no action, but by common assent. And therefore it is necessary or
needful, that every Obligation be apparelled. And an obligation ought to be
apparelled with these sive sorts of garnements, etc. Howbeit, I read it
generally used for a warning in many places, and namely, in Kitchen, fol. 6.
Garnisher le court, is to warn the Court. And reasonable garnishment in the
same place, is nothing but reasonable warning: and again, fol. 283. and many
other Authors also. But this may be well thought a Metonymy of the effect,
because by the warning of parties to the Court, the Court is furnished and
adorned.

Garrantie. See Warrantie.

Garter (Garterium) comes of the French ( Jartiere or Jartier, i. periscelis,
fascia poplitaria) It signifies with us both in diverse Statutes, and
otherwise, one especial Garter, being the ensign of a great and Noble Society
of Knights, called Knights of the Garter. And this is (...), as Poeta among the
Graecians, was Homer, among the Romans, Virgil, because they were of all others
the most excellent. This high order (as appears by M. Camden, page 211.) and
many others, was first instituted by that famous King Edward the third, upon
good success in a skirmish, wherein the Kings Garter (I know not upon what
occasion) was used for a token. I know that Polydore Virgil casts in another
suspicion of the original: But his grounds, by his own confession, grew from
the Vulgar opinion: yet as it is, I will mention it as I have read it. Edward
the third, King of England, after he had obtained many great victories; king
John of France, king James of Scotland, being both prisoners in the Tower of
London at one time; and king Henry of Castile, the Bastard expulsed, and Don
Pedro restored by the Prince of Wales, did upon no weighty occasion first erect
this order in Anno 1350. viz. He danceing with the Queen, and other Ladies of
the Court, took up a Garter that happened to fall from one of them: whereat
some of the Lords smiling, the king said unto them, That ere it were long, he
would make that Garter to be of high reputation, and shortly after instituted
this order of the Blew Garter, which every one of the order is bound daily to
wear, being richly decked with Gold and precious stones, and having these words
written, or wrought upon it: Honi soit qui maly pence: which is thus commonly
interpreted: Evil come to him that evil thinks. But I think it might be
better thus: Shame take him that thinks evil. See knights of the Garter. M.
Fern in his glory of generosity agrees with M. Camden, and expressier sets
down the victories, whence this order was occasioned: whatsoever cause of
beginning it had, the order is inferior to none in the world, consisting of 26.
martial and heroical Nobles, whereof the king or England is the chief, and the
rest be either Nobles of the Realm, or Princes of other Countries, friends and
confederates with this Realm; the Honor being such, as Emperors and kings of
other Nations, have desired, and thankfully accepted it; he that will read more
of this, let him repair to M. Camden, and Polydore, and M. Fern, fol. 120. ubi
supra.

The Ceremonies of the chapter proceeding to election, of the investures and
robes, of his installation, of his vow, with all such other Observations, see
in M. Segars new book entitled Honor military and civil, lib. 2. cap. 9.
fol. 65. Garter also signifies the principal kings at Arms, among our
English Heralds, created by king Henry the fifth, Stow. page 584.

Garthman, anno 13 R. 2. stat. 1. ca. 19. and anno 17. ejusd. ca. 9.

Gavelet, is a special and ancient kind of Cessavit used in Kent, where the
custom of Gavell kind continues: whereby the tenent shall forfeit his Lands
and tenements to the Lord of whom he holds, if he withdraw from him his due
rents and services. The new Expounder of Law Terms, whom read more at large: I
read this word, anno 10. Edw. 2 cap. unico. where it appears to be a Writ
used in the Hustings at London. And I find by Fleta that it is used in other
liberties, as the Hustings of Winchester, Lincoln, York, and the Cinque ports,
lib. 2. cap. 55. in principio.

Gavelkind, is, by M. Lamberd in his exposition of Saxon words, verbo, Terra et
scripto, compounded of three Saxon words, gyfe, call, cin: omnibus cognatione
proximis data. But M. Verstegan in his restitution of his decayed intelligence,
cap. 3. called it (Gavelkind) quasi, give all kind, that is, give to each child
his part. It signifies in our Common law, a custom whereby the Land of the
Father is equally divided at his death amongst all his Sons, or the Land of the
Brother equally divided among the Brethren, if he have no issue of his own:
Kitchen fol. 102. This custom is said to be of force in diverse places of
England, but especially in Kent, as the said Author reports, showing also
the cause why Kentish men rather use this custom, than any other Province,
viz. because it was a composition made between the Conqueror and them, after
all England beside was conquered, that they should enjoy their ancient
customs, whereof this was one. For. M. Camden in his Britannia, page 239.
says in express words thus: Cantiani ea lege Gulielmo Normanno se dediderunt,
ut patrias consuetudines illaesas retinerent, illamque imprimis quam Gavelkind
nominant. Haec terrae quae eo nomine censentur, liberis masculis ex aequis
portionibus dividuntur, vel faeminis, si masculi non fuerint: adding more worth
the noting, viz. Hanc haereditatem, cum quintum decimum annum attigerint,
adeunt, and sine Domini consensu, cuilibet, vel dando, vel vendendo, alienare
licet. Hac filii parent thus furti damnatis in id genus fundis succedunt, etc.
This custom in diverse Gentlemen's lands, was altered at their own petition, by
Act of Parliament, anno 31 H. 8. cap. 3. But it appears by 18 H. 6. cap. pri.
that in those days there were not above thirty or forty persons in Kent, that
held by any other Tenure. See the new Terms, Gavelet, and Gavelkind.

Gawgeour, (gaugeator) seems to come of the French ( Gawchir, i. in gyrum
torquere.) It signifies with us an Officer of the Kings, appointed to examine
all Tons, Hogsheads, Pipes, Barrels, and Tercians of Wine, Oil, Honey,
Butter, and to give them a mark of allowance, before they be sold in any place.
And because this mark is a circle made with an iron Instrument for that
purpose: It seems that from thence he takes his name. Of this Office you may
find many Statutes: the first whereof is, anno 27 Ed. 3. commonly called the
Statute of provision, or Purveyours, cap. 8.

GE
Geld, signifies with the Saxons, pecunia vel tributum. See Gyld.

Genets, alias Jenets. See Furre.

Gentleman, (generosus) seems to be made of two words, the one French, (
gentil, i. honestus, vel honesto loco natus:) the other Saxon (Mon) as if you
would say, a man well born. The Italian follows the very word, calling those
(gentil homini) whom we call Gentlemen. The Spaniard keeps the meaning,
calling him Hidalgo, or Hijo d'algo, that is, the son of some man, or of a man
of reckoning. The French men call him also gentil homme: so that Gentlemen be
those, whom their blood and race does make noble and known. (...) in Greek, in
Latin, Nobiles. Smith de Repub. Anglor. lib. 1. cap. 20. under this name are
all comprised that are above Yeomen: so that Noblemen be truly called
Gentlemen. But by the course and custom of England, Nobility is either major
or minor: the greater contains all titles and degrees from Knights upward: the
lesser all from Barons downward. Smith ubi supra, cap. 21. The reason of the
name, as I take it, grows from this, that they observe gentilitatem suam,
that is, the race and propagation of their blood, by giving of arms, which the
common sort neither does, nor may do. For by the Coat that a Gentleman gives,
he is known to be, or not to be descended from those of his name, that lived
many hundred years since. Howbeit, that this is neglected, where substance
fails to maintain the countenance. For many of great birth fall to poverty,
whose posterity living and laboring in want, have small encouragement, to look
after the titles of their Ancestors, and so in time slip into the number of the
ignoble sort: yet if they by their virtue or fortune, can again advance
themselves to sufficient ability, the Herald out of his observations can
restore them to the Coat of their Progenitors, and now and then help them to
one, that their Ancestors never ware. Gentiles homines, see in Tiraquel. de
Nobilitate, cap. 2. page 53. Tully in his Topickes thus says of this matter.
Gentiles sunt, qui inter se codem sunt nomine ab ingenuis oriundi, quorum
majorum nemo servitutem servivit, qui capite non sunt diminuti. And in the
first book of his Tusc. questions, he calls Tullum Hostilium, one of the
Kings of Rome, gentilem suum.

General Issue. vid. Issue.

Gestu and fama, is a Writ. Lamb. Eirenarcha, lib. 4. cap. 14. page 531.

GI
Gigge milles, were for the fulling of Woollen Cloth, and forbidden Anno 5
Edward 6. cap. 22.

Gild, alias Geld (gildare) comes from the Saxon word ( Gildan, i. solvere
Lamb. in his explication of Saxon words says, verbo, Contubernalis. It is used
as a verb, and as a substantive also, and as it is a substantive, it is latined
Gilda, and signifies a Tribute, or sometime an amercement, or thirdly, a
Fraternity or Company, combined together with orders and laws made among
themselves by the Princes license. M. Camden cites many antiquities, by which
it appears to signify a tribute or tax, as page 135. 139. 159. 168. 178. M.
Crompton in his Jurisdictions. fol. 191. shows it to be an amercement, as
foot geld, and fol. 197. he interprets it to be a prestation within the
Forest, in these words: To be quit of all manner of Gelds, is to be discharged
of all manner of prestations to be made for gathering of sheves of Corn, of
Lamb, and of Wool to the use of Foresters. Again, M. Camden, page 349. dividing
Suffolk into three parts, calls the first Gildable, because tribute is thence
gathered; the second libertatem S. Edmundi: the third libertatem S.
Etheldredae. And the Statutes, anno 27 Ed. 3. Stat. 2. cap. 13. and anno 11 H.
7. cap. 9. use Gildable in the same sense, and so does the Statute, anno 27 H.
8. cap. 26. From this M. Lamberd, ubi supra, is likewise persuaded, that the
common word ( Gild or ( Gildhall does proceed, being a Fraternity or Communalty
of men gathered into one combination, supporting their common charge by a
mutual contribution: And in the Register original, fol. 219. b. I read Gildam
mercatoriam, that is the Gild Merchant, which I have heard to be a certain
liberty or privilege belonging to Merchants, whereby they are enabled to hold
certain plees of Land within their own Precincts. This word (Gildes) or
(Guildes) is so used anno 37 Ed. 3. cap. 51. and anno 15 R. 2. cap. 5. And
Gildbalda Teutonicorum, is used for the fraternity of Easterling Merchants in
London, called the Stilyard, anno 22 Hen. 8. cap. octavo.

Ginger (Zinziber) is a spice well known, being the root of a plant that
grows in hot Countries, as Spain, Barbary, etc. The true form whereof you
have expressed in Gerards Herbal, lib. 1. cap. 38. This is a spice whose root
is to be garbled, anno 1 Jacob. cap. 19.

Gynny peper (piper de Ginnea) is otherwise called Indian peper, of the place
whence it comes. The nature and farther description whereof you have in
Gerards Herbal, lib. 2. cap. 66. This you have mentioned among druggs and
spices to be garbled, in the Statute, 1 Jacob. cap. 19.

Gisarms: anno 13 Ed. 1. stat. 3. cap. 6. is a kind of weapon. Fleta writes it
Sisarms, lib. 1. cap. 24.. item quod quilibet.

GL
Glawnce Ore, Plowden casu Mines fol. 320. b.

Glanvil was a learned Lawyer, that was chief Justice in Henry the seconds
days, and writ a Book of the Common laws of England, which is the ancientest
of any extant touching that subject. Stawnf. praerog. cap. prim. fol. 5. He was
then called in Latin Ranulphus de Glanvilla. He dyed in Richard the first his
days at the City of Acres in the Coast of Jury, being with him in his voyage
to the Holy Land. Plowden, casu Stowel, folio, 368. b.

GO
Go, is used sometime in a special signification in our Common law: as to go to
God, is to be dismissed the Court. Brook, titulo. Fayler de records, number. 1. Go
forward, seems also to be a sign given by a Judge to the Seargeant or
Counselor, pleading the cause of his Clyent, that his cause is not good. For
when he stands upon a point of Law, and hears those words of the Judges
mouth, he takes understanding, that he loses the Action. Smith de Repub.
Anglo. lib. 2. cap. 13. To go without day, is as much as to be dismissed the
Court, Kitchen, fol. 193.

Good behavior. See Good abearing.

Good abearing, (Bonus gestus) is, by an especial signification, an exact
carriage or behavior of a subject, toward the King and his liege people,
whereunto men upon their evil course of life, or loose demeanure, are sometimes
bound. For as M. Lamberd in his Eirenarcha, lib. 2. cap. 2. says: he that is
bound to this, is more strictly bound than to the peace: because, where the
peace is not broken without an affray, or battery, or such like: this surety
(de bono gestu) may be forefeited by the number of a man's company, or by his or
their weapons or harness: Whereof see more in that learned Writer in the same
Chapter, as also in M. Cromptons Justice of peace, fol. 119. b. 120. 121. 122.
123. 124. 125. 126. 127.

Good Country, (Bona patria) is an Assise, or Jury of Countrymen or good
neighbors: Skene de verbo signif. verbo, Bona patria.

GR
Graffer (grafarius) signifies as much as a notarie or Scrivener. It comes of
the French ( greffier, i. scriba, actuarius.) This word is used in the Statute,
anno 5 H. 8. cap. 1.

Grains (grana paradisi, alias Cardamomum) is a spice medicinable and
wholesome, whereof you may see diverse kinds in Gerards Herbal, lib. 3. cap.
148. These are comprised among merchandise that be to be garbled. Anno 1 Jac.
cap. 19.

Grand Assise. See Assise, and Magna Assisa.

Grand Cape. See Cape and Attachment.

Grand Sergeanty. See Chivalrie, and Seargeanty.

Grand distress: (Magna districtio) is a distress taken of all the lands, and
goods, that a man has within the County or Bayliwick, whence he is to be
distrained: Fleta lib. 2. cap. 69.. penult: See Distress. This word is used
anno 51 H. 3. cap. 9. This falls out when the Defendant has been attached,
and yet appears not upon his Attachment; or when he appears and afterward
makes default. For then the Sheriff is commanded to distrain the Defendant, by
all his goods and cattels, and to answer the King the issues of his Lands.

Grange (grangia) is a house or building, not only where Corn is laid up, as
Barns be, but also where there be stables for Horses, stalles for O^^n (...)
both ^r cattle, styes for Hogs, and other things necessary for husbandry,
Lindwood (...) emms de judiciis verbo, Grangiis, in glossa.

Gra^^ (Concessio, gran^um) Glanvile, signifies specially in our Common law, a
gift in writing of such a thing, as cannot aptly be passed or conveyed by word
only: as Rent, Reversions, Services, Advowsens in gross, Common in gro^e,
Villein in gross, Tithes, etc. or made by such persons, as cannot give but by
deed, as the King, and all bodies politic: which differences be often in
speech neglected, and then is it taken generally for every gift whatsoever,
made of any thing by any person, and he that grants it, is named the
Crantour, and he to whom i^ is made, the Grantee, West. part 1. symbol. lib.
2. Sect. 334. A thing is said to lie in grant, which cannot be assigned without
deed, Coke, lib. 3. Lincoln Coll. case, fol. 63. a.

Great men, are sometimes understood of the Laity of the higher-house of
Parliament, as an. 43 Ed. 3. cap. 2. and an. 8 R. 2. in prooem. and sometime of
the Knights, etc. of the lower house, as anno 2 R. 2. stat. 2. in principio.

Gree (comes of the French ( Gre, i. sententia, beneplacitum.) It signifies
in our Common law, contentment or good liking: as to make gree to the parties,
is to satisfy them for an offense done, anno 1 Rich. 2. cap. 15.

Greachbreach, is breaking of the peace. Saxon in the description of England
cap. 11. v. Rastal. titulo Exposition of words. The new Expounder of Law Terms
writes it (Grichbreach) and gives it the same signification. See Greve.

Green bewe, is all one with vert, Manwood part 2. of his Forest laws, cap. 6.
number. 5. See Vert

Green wax, seems to be used for estreats delivered to the Sheriffs out of
the Exchequer, under the Seal of that Court, to be levied in the County, anno
42. Ed. 3. cap. 9. and anno 7 H. 4. cap. 3. See Foreign apposer.

Greve (praepositus) is a word of power and authority, signifying as much as
Dominus, or praefectus. Lamberd in his Exposition of Saxon words, ve bo
Praefectus. where he seems to make it all one with (Reve) as I think
undoubtly it is: The Saxon word is Gerefa, whereof we have diverse words
compounded, as Shyreeve, Portgreeve, etc. which were wont of the Saxons to be
written Soyrgerefa: Portgerefa. See Shyreeve and Portgreve. See Roger Hoveden
part poster. suorum annal. fol. 346. b. where he says thus: Greve dicitur,
ideo quod jure debeat grithe, i. pacem ex illis facere, qui patriae inferunt
Vae, i. m^seriam vel malum.

Gritbreach is a breach of peace. For Grita is a word of the old Angles,
signifying peace. Roger Hoveden part post. suorum annal. fol. 346. b. See
Greachbreach.

Grils, anno 22 Ed. 2. cap. 2.

Grocers, be Merchants that ingrosse all Merchandise vendible, anno 37 Ed. 3.
cap. 5.

Groom, anno 33 H. 8. cap. 10. (Valletus) is the name of a servant that serves
in some inferior place. M. Verslegan in his Restitution of decayed
intelligence says, that he finds it to have been in times past a name for
youths, who albeit they served, yet were they inferior to men servants, and
were sometimes used to be s^nt on foot or errands, serving in such manner as
Lackeyes do now.

Growm, anno 43 E. 3. cap. 10. seems to be an Engine to stretch Woollen cloth
withal after it is woven.

GU
Guydage (Guydagium) is that which is given for safe conduct through a strange
territory, Cassanaeus de consuetud. Burgun. page 119. whose words be these: Est
Guidagium quod datur alicui, ut tuio conducatur per loca alterius.

Guylde. See Gyld.

Guylhalda Teutonicorum. See Gild.

Gule of August (Gula Augusti) anno 27 Ed. 3. stat. 3. cap. unico. Fitzh. not.
br. fol. 62. I. alias Goule de August. Plowd. casu Mines, fol. 316. b. is the
very day of Saint Peter ad vincula, which was wont, and is still within the
limits of the Roman Church, celebrated upon the very Kalends of August. Why it
should be called the Gule of August, I cannot otherwise conjecture, but that it
comes of the Latin (gula) or the French (gueulae) the throat. The reason of
my conjecture is in Durands rational^ divinorum, lib. 7. cap. de festo Sancti
Petri ad vincula, who says, that one Quirinus a Tribune, having a Daughter
that had a disease in her throat, went to Alexander then Pope of Rome, the
sixth from Saint Peter, and desired of him to borrow, or see the chains that
Saint Peter was chained with under Nero: which request obtained, his said
Daughter kissing the said chain, was cured of her disease, and Quirinus with
his family was baptized. Tunc dictus Alexander papa (says Durand) hoc festum
in Kalendis Augusti celebrandum instituit, and in honorem beati Petri Ecclesiam
in urbe fabricavit, ubi vincula ipsa reposuit, and ad vincula nominavit; and
Kalendis Augusti, dedicavit. In quafestivate, populus illic ipsa vincula hedie
osculatur. So that this day being before called only the Kalends of August,
was upon this occasion afterward termed indifferently, either of the
instrument that wrought this miracle, S. Peter's day ad vincula, or of that part
of the maiden whereon the miracle was wrought, the Gule of August.

Gustwit seems to be compounded of Gult, i. noxa, and wit; which is said by
some skilful men to be an ancient termination of the words in the Saxon tongue,
fignifying nothing in it self, but as dom or hood, and such like be in these
English words Christendom, and Manhood, or such others. Others say, and it is
true, that wit signifies blame or reprehension. Gultwit (as Saxon in his
Description of England, cap. 11. does interpretet it) is an amends for
trespass.

Gust Hospes) is used by Bracton for a stranger or guest that lodges with us
the second night: lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 10. In the laws of Saint Edward, set
forth by Master Lambert number. 27. it is written Gest. Of this see more in
Uncothe.

Gum (gummi) is a certain clammy or tough liquor, that in manner of a sweaty
excrement issues out of trees, and is hardened by the Sun. Of these there be
diverse sorts brought over Seas, that be drugs to be garbled, as appears by
the statute, Anno 1 Jacob. cap. 19.

Gutter-tile alias Corner-tyle, is a tyle made three-corner-wise, especially to
be laid in Gutters, or at the corners of the tyled houses; which you shall
often see upon Dove-houses, at the four corners of their roofs, anno 17 Ed. 4.
cap. 4.

HA
HAbeas corpus is a Writ, the which a man indicted of some trespass before
Justices of peace, or in a Court of any franchise, and upon his apprehension
being laid in prison for the same, may have out of the Kings bench thereby to
remove himself thither at his own costs, and to answer the cause there, etc.
Fitzh. not. br. fol. 250. h. And the order is in this case, first to procure a
Certiorari out of the Chancery, directed to the said Justices, for the removing
of the Indictment into the Kings Bench, and upon that, to procure this Writ to
the Sheriff, for the causing of his body to be brought at a day: Reg. jud. fol.
81. where you shall find diverse cases wherein this Writ is used.

Habeas corpora, is a Writ that lies for the bringing in of a Jurie, or so
many of them, as refuse to come upon the (venire facias) for the trial of a
cause brought to issue, Old. not. br. fol. 157. See great diversity of this
Writ, in the table of the Register Judicial, verbo, habeas corpora; and the new
book of Entries, verbo codem.

Habendum, is a word of form in a deed of conveyance, to the true understanding
whereof, you must know, that in every deed of conveyance, there be two
principal parts, the Premises, and the Habendum. The office of the Premises
is, to express the name of the Grantor, the Grantee, and the thing granted, or
to be granted. The office of the (habendum) is to limit the estate, so that the
general implication of the estate, which by construction of law passes in the
Premises, is by the (habendum) controlled and qualified. As in a Lease to two
persons, the (habendum) to one for life, the remainder to the other for life
alters the general implication of the joint tenancie in the Freehold, which
should pass by the Premises, if the (habendum) were not. Coke, vol. 2.
Bucklers case fo. 55. See Use.

Habere facias seisinam, is a Writ Judicial, which lies, where a man has
recovered lands in the Kings Court, directed to the Sheriff, and commanding him
to give him seisin of the land recovered, Old not. br. fol. 154. Terms of the
Law: whereof see great diversity also in the table of the Register Judicial,
verbo. Habere facias seisinam. This Writ is issuing sometime out of the Records
of a fine executory, directed to the Sheriff of the County, where the land
lies, and commanding him to give to the Cognizee or his heirs, seisin of the
land, whereof the Fine is levied, which Writ lies within the year after the
Fine, or Judgment upon a (Scire facias) and may be made in diverse forms, West.
part 2. symb. titulo Fines, Sect. 136. There is also a Writ called Habere
facias seisinam, ubi Rex habuit annum, diem and vastum, which is for the
delivery of lands to the Lord of the Fee, after the King has taken his due of
his lands, that was convicted of Felony, Register origin. fol. 165.

Habere facias visum, is a Writ that lies in diverse cases, where view is to be
taken of the lands or tenements in question. See Fitzh. not. br. in Indice,
verbo (View) See Bracton, lib. 5. tract. 3. cap. 8. and lib. 5. part 2. cap.
11. See view. See the Register Judicial, fol. 1, 26, 28, 45, 49, 52.

Haber^ects (Hauberiteus pannus) magn. chart. cap. 25. and Pupilla oculi, part
5. cap. 22.

Hables, is the plural of the French (hable) signifying as much as a Port or
Haven of the Sea, whence Ships do set forth into other Countries, and whither
they do arrive, when they return from their voyage. This word is used anno 27
Hen. 6. cap. 3.

Haerede deliberando alii qui habet custodiam terrae, is a Writ directed to the
Sheriff, willing him to command one having the body of him, that is ward to
another, to deliver him to him, whose ward he is by reason of his land. Regist.
orig. fol. 161. b.

Haerede abducto, is a Writ that lies for the Lord, who having the wardship of
his tenent under age by right, cannot come by his body, for that he is conveyed
away by another. Old not. br. fol. 93. See Ravishment de Guard, and Haerede
rapto, in Regist. orig. fol. 163.

Haeretico comburendo, is a Writ that lies against him, that is an heretic,
viz. that having been once convinced of heresy by his Bishop, and having
abjured it, afterward falls into it again, or into some other, and is
thereupon committed to the secular power. Fitz. not. br. fol. 269.

Haga, is used as a kind of Latin word for a house. I find in an ancient book
sometime belonging to the Abbey of Saint Augustines in Canterbury, that King
Stephen sent his Writ to the Sheriff and Justices of Kent, in this manner;
Stephanus Rex Anglorum Vicecomiti et Iusticiariis de Kentsalutem. Praecipio
quod faciatis habere Ecclesiae sancti Augustini and monachis hagam suam quam
Gosceoldus eis dedit, ita been and in pace and justae and quiet and libere,
sicut eam eis dedit in morte sua coram legalibus testibus, etc.

Hagbut. See Haque and Haquebut.

Hay boot, seems to be compounded of ( Hay, i. Sepes) and ( Bote, i.
compensatio) The former is French, and the second is Saxon. And although it do
fall out sometime, that our words be so compounded: yet it is rare. Wherefore
it may be thought peradventure to come as well from (Hag) and (Boot) which be
both Saxon words. It is used in our Common law for a permission to take thorns
and freeth to make or repair hedges.

Half haque. See Haeque.

Half merk (dimidia merka) seems to signify a noble. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 5.
where he says, that in case a Writ of right be brought, and the seisin of the
Demandant, or his Ancestor, alleged, the seisin is not traversable by the
Defendant, but he may tender or profer the half mark for the enquiry of this
seisin, which is as much to say in plainer Terms, that the Defendant shall not
be admitted to deny, that the Demandant, or his Ancestor, was seized of the
Land in question, and to prove his denial, and that he shall be admitted to
tender half a Mark in money, to have an enquiry made whether the Demandant,
etc. were so seized or not. And in this signification I read the same words in
the old English natura brevium, fol. 26. b. viz. Know ye that in a Writ of
right of Advowzen brought by the King, the Defendant shall not profer the half
Mark, no Judgment final shall be given against the King, etc. Whereof Fitzh.
ubi supra. M. gives the reason because in the Kings case, the Defendant shall
be permitted to traverse the seisin by license obtained of the Kings Sergeant.
To this effect, See Fitz. not. br. fol. 31. C.D.E.

Half seal, is used in the Chancery for the sealing of Commissions unto
Delegates, appointed upon any appeal in Ecclesiastical or Marine causes, anno 8
Eliz. cap. 5.

Half tongue. See Medietas linguae.

Halymote, alias, Healgemot, is a Court Baron. Manwood part prima of his
Forest laws, page 111. and the Etymology is the meeting of the Tenants of one
Hall or Manor. M. Gwins Preface to his Reading, which for the esteem thereof,
is by copies spread into many men's hands.

Hallage, is a Fee due for clothes brought for sale to Blackwel-hal in London.
Coke, vol. 6. fol. 62. b.

Hamlet (Hameletum) is a diminutive of (Ham) which signifies habitationem.
Cambden. Brit. page 149. and 354. The French ( hameau, i. viculus) is also near
unto it. Kitchen has Hamel in the same sense, f. 2.15. who also uses hampsel
for an old house or cottage decayed, fo. 103. Hamlet (as Stow uses it in Ed.
3.) seems to be the seat of a Freeholder. For there he says, that the said
King bestowed two Manors and nine Hamlets of land upon the monastery of
Westminster, for the keeping of yearly obits for his Wife Queen Eleanor
deceased.

Hameling of dogs, or hambling of dogs, is all one with the expeditating of
dogs. Manwood part prim. of his Forest laws, page 212. and part 2. cap. 16.
number. 5. where he says, this is the ancient term that Foresters used for that
marter; whence this word might be drawn, I dare not resolve, but it is not
improbable, that hameling is quasi, hamhalding, that is, keeping at home, which
is done by paring their feet so, as they cannot take any great desight in
running abroad. See Expeditate.

Hampsel. See Hamlet.

Hamsoken. See Homesoken. M. Skene de verb. significa. writes it Haimsuken,
and deriveth it from (Haim) a German word, signifying a house or dwelling, and
(Suchen) that is to seek, search, or pursue. It is used in Scotland for the
crime of him, that violently, and contrary to the Kings peace, assaulteth a man
in his own house: which (as he says) is punishable equally with ravishing of a
Woman, significat quietantiam misericordiae intrationis in alienam domum vi
and injuste. Fleta, lib. pri. cap. 47. See Homesoken.

Hand in and Hand out, anno 17 Ed. 4. cap. 2. is the name of an unlawful game.

Hand-full, is four inches by the standard, anno 33 H. 8. cap. 5. etc.

Hankwit alias (Hangwit) or (Hengwit) comes of the Saxon words ( Hangen, i.
pendere) and (wit) whereof read in Gultwit: Rastal in the title, Exposition of
words says, It is a liberty granted unto a man, whereby he is quit of a Felon
or Thief hanged without judgment, or escaped out of custody. I read it
interpreted, mulcta pro homine injuste suspenso. Or whether it may be a
liberty, whereby a Lord chalengeth the forfeiture due for him, that fordoth
himself within his Fee or not, let the Reader consider. See Blood-wit.

Hanper (haneperium) haneper of the Chancery, anno 10 R. 2. cap. prim. seems
to signify as fiscus originally does in Latin. See Clerk of the Hanaper.

Hanse (as Ortelius in the Index of his Additament to his Theater, ver.
Ansiatici) says is an old Gothish word; where he shows not the
interpretation. It signifies a certain society of Merchants, combined together
for the good usage and safe passage of Merchandise from Kingdom to Kingdom.
This society was, and (in part) yet is, endued with many large privileges of
Princes, respectively within their territories. It had four principal seats, or
staples: where the Almain or Dutch Merchants being the Erectours of this
society, had an especial house, one of which was here in London, called
Gildhalda Teutonicorum, or in our Common language, the Steelyard. Of this you
may read more in the place of Ortelius above mentioned.

Haope comes of the French happer, i. rapio, cum quadam velo citate capio, and
the French seems to come from the Greek (...). It signifies in our Common
law the same thing as to hap the possession of a deed poll. Litleton, fol. 8.

Haque, is a hand-gun of about three quarters of a yard long, anno 33 Henr. 8.
cap. 6. and anno 2. and 3 E. 6. cap. 14. There is also the half-haque or
demy-haque. See Haquebut.

Haquebut is that piece of artillery or gun which we otherwise call an
harquebuse: being both French words. Anno 2. and 3 Ed. 6. cap. 14. and anno 4.
and 5 Phil. and Mar. cap. 2.

Hariot, alias heriot (heriotum) in the Saxon heregeat, a little altered, which
is drawn from here, i. exercitus. And a heriot in our Saxons time signifies a
tribute given to the Lord, for his better preparation toward War: Lambert innis
explication of Saxon words, verbo Hereotum. The name is still retained, but the
use altered: for whereas by Master Lamberts, opinion, ubi su^ra, it did signify
so much as relief does now with us, now it is taken for the best chattel that a
Tenent has at the hour of his death, due unto the Lord by custom, be it horse,
ox, cattle, or any such like. Master Kitchen distinguishes between Heriot
service and Heriot custom, fol. 133 and 134: For interpretation whereof, you
shall find these words in Brook, titulo Hariot, number. 5. Hariot after the death
of the Tenent for life is Hariot custom. For Hariot service is after the death
of Tenent in Feesimple. The new Expounder of the Law Terms says, That Hariot
service (in some man's opinion) is often expressed in a man's grant or deed, that
he holds by such service, to pay Hariot at the time of his death, that
holds in Fee-simple. Hariot custom is, where Hariots have been paid time out
of mind, by Custom. And this may be after the death of the Tenent for life.
See Plowden, fol. 95 b. 69, a, b. Bracton says, that Heriotum est quasi
relevium, li. 2. cap. 36. See Relief. But Britton cap. 69. says, That Heriot
is a reward made by the death of a Tenent, to any Lord, of the best beast found
in the possession of the Tenent deceased, or of some other, according to the
ordinance or assignement of the party deceased, to the use of his Lord: which
reward touches not the Lotd at all, nor the heir, nor his inheritance, neither
has any comparison to a Relief: for it proceeds rather of grace or good will
than of right, and rather from Villeins than Freemen. See Dyer, fol. 199. number.
58. to the same effect. This in Scotland is called Herrezelda compounded of
(herr,) i. dominus, herus) and zeild, i. gift) Skene de verbo. signific. verbo
Herrezelda.

Heart, is a Sagge of five years old complete, Manwood part 2. of his Forest
Laws, cap. 4. number. 5. which he has out of Budeus de philologia lib. 2. And if
the King or Queen do hunt him, and he escape away alive, then afterward he is
called a Heart royal. And if the Beast by the Kings or Queens hunting be chased
out of the Forest, and so escape; Proclamation is commonly made in the places
thereabout, that in regard of the pastime, that the Beast has showed to the
King or Queen, none shall hurt him, or hinder him from returning to the Forest;
and then is be a Heart royal proclaimed. Idem, eodem.

Hawberk comes of the French ( Haubert, i. lorica) whereupon, he that holds
land in France, by finding a Coat or Shirt of Mail, and to be ready with it,
when he shall be called, is said to have Hauberticum feudum; whereof Hotoman
writes thus: Hauberticum feudum gallica lingua vulgo dicitur pro (loricatum)
i. datum vasallo ea condition, ut ad edictum loricatus sive cataphractus
praesto sit. Nam ut lorica latinis proprie and minus usitate est, tegmen de
loro factum, quo majores in bello utebantur, quem admodum Servius Honoratus
scribit in libro Aeneidum 11. f^equentissime autem pro aenea armatura integra
usurpatur: sic apud Gallos Haubert proprie loricam annulis contextam
significat, quam vulgus Cotte de maille appellat. Haec Hot. in verbis feudal.
verbo Hauberticum feudum. Hauberk with our Ancestors seems to signify, as in
France, a Shirt or Coat of Male, and so it seems to be used, anno 13 Ed. pri.
stat. 3. cap. 6. Though in these days the word is otherwise written, as
(Halbert) and signifies a weapon well enough known.

Haward alias Hayward, seems to be compounded of two French words ( Hay, i.
Sepes) and ( Guard, i. Custodia.) It signifies with us, one that keeps the
common Herd of the Town: and the reason may be, because one part of his office
is to look that they neither break, nor crop the hedges of enclosed grounds. It
may likewise come from the German ( herd, i. armentum) and ( bewarren, i.
custodire.) He is a sworn Officer in the Lords Court: and the form of his oath
you may see in Kitchen fol. 46.

Hawkers, be certain deceitful fellows, that go from place to place, buying and
selling, Brass, Pewter, and other merchandise, that ought to be uttered in
open Market. The appellation seems to grow from their uncertain wandering,
like those that with Hawks seek their game, where they can find it. You find
the word, anno 25 H. 8. cap. 6. and anno 33. ejusdem cap. quarto.

HE
Headborow, is compounded of two words ( Heosodi, i. caput,) and ( Bor. he. i.
pignus) It signifies him that is chief of the Frank-pledge: and him that had
the principal government of them within his own pledge. And as he was called
Headborow, so was he also called Burowhead, Bursholder, Thirdborow, Tithing
man, Chief pledge or Borowelder, acording to the diversity of speech in diverse
places. Of this see M. Lamberd in his Explication of Saxon words, verbo
Centuria: and in his Treatise of Constables; and Smith de Repub. Anglo. lib. 2.
cap. 22. It now signifies Constable. See Constable.

Healfang, is compounded of two Saxon words ( Hals, i. collum) and ( fang, i.
capere, captivare.) See Pylory.

Heir (Haeres) though, for the word, it be borrowed of the Latin; yet, it has
not altogether the same signification with us, that it has with the Civilians,
for whereas they call him (haeredem) qui ex testamento succedit in universum
jus testatoris: the common Lawyers call him heir, that succedeth by right of
blood, in any man's Lands or Tenements in Fee, for there is nothing passes with
us jure haereditatis, but only Fee. Movables, or chatels immovable, are
given by Testament, to whom the Testator lists, or else are at the
disposition of the Ordinary, to be distributed as he in conscience thinks
meet, Glossa in Provinciali constitut. Ita quorundam, De testamentis verbo, Ab
intestato. And whether a man enjoy moveable goods and chatels, by will, or the
discretion of the Ordinary, he is not with us called an Heir: but only he
that succeeds either by restament, or right of blood in fee. Cassanaeus in
consuetud. Burg. page 909. has a distinction of haeres, which in some sort
well accords with our law: For he says, there is haeres sanguinis and
haereditatis. And a man may be haeres sanguinis with us, that is, heir
apparentto his Father, or other Ancestor: and yet may upon displeasure, or mere
will be defeated of his inheritance, or at the least, the greatest partthereof.

Heir loom, seems to be compounded of heir and loom, that is, a frame,
namely to weave in. The word by time is drawn to a more general-signification
than at the firstit did bear, comprehending all implements of household, as
namelytables, presses, cupbords, bedsteads, wainscot, and such like, which by
the custom of some Countries, having belonged to a house certain descents, and
are never inventaried after the decease of the owner, as Chattels, but accrue
to the heir with the house it self. This word is twice metaphorically used in
that Divine speech, made by that most worthy and complete nobleman, the Earl
of Northampton, against that hellish, oughly, and damnable Treason of
Gunpowder, plotted to consume the most virtuous King that ever reigned in
Europe, together with his gracious Queen and precious posterity, as also the
three honorable Estates of this renowned kingdom.

Heck is the name of an Engine to take fish in the river of Owse by York: anno
23. H. 8. cap. 18.

Heinfare, alias Hinefair, (discessio famuli a Domino.) The word is compounded
of Hine, a Servant, and Fare, an old English word, signifying a passage.

Henchman, or heinsman, is a Germane word, signifying Domesticum. aut unum de
familia. It is used with us for one that runs on foot, attending upon a man
of honor or worship. anno 3. Edw. 4. cap. 5. anno 24. Henric. 8. cap. 13.

Hengwite, significat quetantiam meserecordiae de latrone suspenso absque
consideratione: Fletali. 1. ca. 47. See Hankwit.

Herald (heraldus) is borrowed by us of the French herault, and in M.
Virstigans judgment proceeds originally from two Dutch words, here, i.
exercitus; and healt, i. pugil maganimus. As if he should be called the
champion of the army, having by especial office to challenge unto battle or
combat, With us it signifies an officer at arms, whose function is to
denounce War, to proclaim peace, or otherwise to be employed by the King in
marshall messages, or other business. The Romans called them plurally
Feciales. Master Stow in his Annals deriveth them from heroes, page 12. which
he has from other that writ of that subject, whose conjecture I leave to the
Reader. Their office with us is described by Polydore, lib. 19. in this sort,
speaking of the Knights of the Garter, he says, Habent insuper apparitores
ministros, quos heraldos dicunt: quorum praefectus armorum Rex vocitatur: hii
belli and pacis nuncii. Ducibus, Comitibusque a Rege factis insignia aptant, ac
little funer a curant. He might have added further, That they may be the Judges
and examiners of Gentlemen's arms; that they martial all the solemnities at
the coronations of Princes, manage combats, and such like. There is also one
and the same use of them with us, and with the French nation, whence we have
their name. And what their office is with them, See Lupanus lib. prim. de
Magist. Francorum, ca. Heraldi. There be diverse of them with us, whereof three
being the chief, are called Kings at arms. And of them Garter is the
principal, instituted and created by Henry the fifth. Stows Annals page 584.
whose office is to attend the Knights of the Garter at their solemnities, and
to martial the solemnities of the funerals of all the greater Nobility, as of
Princes, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, and Barons. Yet I find in
Plowden casu Reniger et Fogassa. That Edward the fourth granted the office of
King of Heralds to one Garter, cum feudis et proficuis ab antiquo etc. fol.
12. b. The next is Clarentius, ordained by Edward the fourth: for he attaining
the Dukedom of Clarence, by the death of George his brother, whom he beheaded
for aspiring to the Crown, made the herald, which properly belonged to the Duke
of Clarence, a King at arms, and called him Clarentius. His proper office is,
to martial and dispose the funerals of all the lesser Nobility, as Knights and
Esquires, through the realm of the South side or Trent. The third is Norry, or
Northroy, whose office is the same on the North side of Trent, that Clarentius
has on this side: as may well appear by his name, signifying the Northern
king, or king of the North parts. Beside these there be six other properly
called Heralds, according to their original, as they were created to attend
Dukes, etc. in martial expeditions, viz. York, Lancaster, Somerset, Richmond,
Chester, Windlesour. Lastly there be four other, called Marshalls or Purse
vants at arms, reckoned after a sort in the number of Heralds, and do
commonly suceed in the place of the Heralds, as they die, or be preferred: and
those be Blew Mantle, Rougecrosse, Rougedragon, and Percullis. The Feciales
among the Romans were Priests, Nam Numa Pompilius divini cultus institutionem
in octo parts divisit, and ita etiam sacerdotum octo ordines constituit, etc.
Septimam partem sacrae constitutionis collegio eorum adjecit, qui Feciales
vocantur. Erant autem ex optimis domibus viri electi, per omne ipsi vitae
tempus sacrati, quorum parts in eo versabantur, ut fidei publicae inter
populos praeessent: neque justum aliquod bellum fore censebatur: nisi id per
Feciales esset indictum. Qui ut Festus ait, a faciendo quod belli pacisque
faciendae apud eos jus esset, Feciales dicti sunt. Corasius Miscel. juris
civil. lib. 1. cap. 10. number. 12.

Herbage (herbagium) is a French word, and signifies in our Common law, the
fruit of the earth provided by nature for the bit or mouth of the cattle. But
it is most commonly used for a liberty that a man has to feed his cattle in
another man's ground, as in the forest, etc. Cromptons Jurisdiction fol. 197.

Herbenger, comes of the French heberger, or esberger, hesberger, i. hospitio
excipere. It signifies with us, an Officer of the Princes Court, that
allotteth the Noblemen and those of the household their Lodgings. It signfieth
also in Kitchen, an Innekeeper, fol. 176.

Hereditaments (hereditamenta) seem to signify all such things immovable, be
they corporeal or incorporeall, as a man may have to himself and his heirs by
way of inheritance Vide anno 32. Henr. 8. cap. 2. or not being otherwise
bequeathed, do naturally and of course descend to him which is our next heir
of blood, and fall not within the compass of an executor or administrator, as
chattels do.

Heriot, see Hariot.

HI
Hide of land (hida terrae) Saxonice hideland^s, is a certain measure or
quantity of land, by some men's opinion, that may be plowed with one plow in a
year, as the author of the new terms says, verbo Hidage. By other men it is an
hundred acres. By Beda (who calls it Familiam) it is as much as will maintain
a family. Crompton in his jurisdiction, fol. 220. says, that it consists of
an hundred acres, every acre in length forty perches, and in breadth four
perches, every perch sixteen foot and a half. And again fol. 222. A hide of
land contains an hundred acres, and eight hides, or eight hundred acres
contain a Knights fee. Of this read more in Master Lamberts Explication of
Saxon words, verba Hida terrae. See Carve.

Hide and gain, Old not. Brev. fo. 71. Coke lib. 4. Tirringhams case,
signifies earable land. See Gainage.

Hidage (hidagium) is an extaordinary tax to be paid for every hide of land.
Bracton lib. 2. cap. 6. writes thus of it: Sunt etiam quaedam communes
praestationes, quae servitia non dicuntur, nec de consuetudine veniunt nisi cum
necessitas intervenerit, vel cum Rex venerit: sicut sunt Hidagia, Coragia, et
Carvagia: et alia plura de necessitate et ex consensu communi totius regni
introducta, and quae ad Dominum feudi non pertinent, etc. Of this read the new
Expounder of Law Terms, who says that Hidage is to be quit, if the king shall
tax all the lands by hides, and yet also grants it to be the tax it self,
saying that it was wont to be an usual kind of taxing, as well for provision of
armor, as payments of money.

Hinefare, see Heinfare.

Hidel, 1. H. 7. ca. 6. seems to signify a place of protection as a
sanctuary,

Hierlome, see Heirlome.

Hine, seems to be used for a Servant at husbandry, and the master-hine a
servant that overseeth the rest. Anno 12. Richard 2. cap. quarto.

Hoblers (hobellarii) are certain men that by their tenure are tied to maintain
a little light Nagge, for the certifying of any invasion made by enemies, or
such like peril toward the sea side, as Porchmouth, etc. Of these you shall
read, anno 18. Edward. 3. stat. 2. ca. 7. and anno 25. ejusd. stat. 5. ca. 8.

Hoghenhine, is he that comes guestwise to an house, and lies there the
third night. After which time he is accounted of his family in whose house he
lies: and if he offend the kings peace his host must be answerable for him.
Bracton lib. 3. tract. 2. ca. 10. In the Laws of king Edward set forth by
Master Lambert, he is called Agenhine: where you may read more of this matter.

Hithe (hitha) is a petty haven to land wares out of vessels or boats: New book
of Entries, fol. 3. colum. 3.

HO
Hogshead, is a measure of wine or oil containing the fourth part of a tun,
that is 63 gallons, an. 1. R. 3. ca. 13.

Holstings, see Hustings.

Homage (Homagium) is a French word, signifying Fidem clientularem.) For in the
original grants of land and tenements by way of fee, the Lord did not only tie
his tenants or feed men to certain services, but also took a submission, with
Promise and oath, to be true and loyal to him, as their Lord and Benefactor.
This submission was and is called homage: the form whereof you have in the
second Statute anno 17. Edw. 2 in these words: when a free man shall do homage
to his Lord, of whom he holds in chief, he shall hold his hands together
between the hands of his Lord, and shall say thus; I become your man from this
day forth for life, for member, and for worldly honor, and shall owe you my
faith for the land I hold of you: saving the faith, that I do owe unto our
Sovereign Lord the King, and to mine other Lords. And in this manner the Lord
of the fee, for which homage is due, takes homage of every tenent, as he
comes to the land or fee. Glanvile lib. 9. cap. 1. except they be women, who
perform not homage but by their husbands, (yet see Fitzherbert, that says the
contrary in his not. br. fol. 157. F.) Read Glanvile more at large in the said
first Chapter, with the second, third and fourth; The reason of this M. Skene
gives de verbo significatione, verbo Homagium, viz. because Homage especially
concerns service in war. He says also, that consecrated Bishops, do no
homage, but only fidelity: the reason may be all one. And yet I find in the
Register. orig. fol. 296. a. that a woman taking livery of lands holden by
Knights service, must do homage, but not being jointly infeossed, for then she
does only fealty. And see Glanvile in the end of the first chapter of his
ninth book touching Bishops consecrated, whom he denies to perform homage to
the King for their Baronie, but only fealty. Fulbeck reconcileth this fol. 2C.
a. in these words. By our law a religious man may do homage, but may not say
to his Lord, Ego devenio home vester, because he has professed himself to be
only Gods man, but he may say, I do unto you homage, and to you shall be
faithful and loyal. See of this Britten cap. 68. Homage, is eithes new with
the fee, or ancestrel: that is, where a man and his Ancestors, time out of
mind, have held their lands by homage to their Lord, whereby the Lord is tied
to warrant the land unto his tenent. Newterms of the Law. This homage is used
in other Countries as well as ours, and was wont to be called Hominium. See
Hotom. de verbis feudalibus, verbo. Homo. Skene divides it into liegium and
non liegium, de verb. signif. v. Homage: for the which see Liege, and Hotoman,
disputatione de feudis tertia. Homage is sometime used for the jury in the
Court Baron, Smith de Repub. Anglo. lib. 2. cap. 27. the reason is, because it
consists most commonly of such as owe homage unto the Lord of the fee. And
these of the Feudists are called pares curiae, sive curiis, sive domus sic
dicuntur enim convassalli sive compares, qui ab eodem patrono feudum
receperunt, vel qui in eodem territorio feudum habeut. Hotoman. Of this Homage
you may read in the nine and twentieth chapter of the grand Custumary of
Normandy, where you shall understand of other sorts of homage, used by them,
and strange unto us. Whereunto join Hotoman, disputat. de feudis, in diverse
places, and namely Columna 860. c. hiis verbis: Deinceps de nota l^ommii and
feudal tiae subjectionis videamus. Omnium quidem video esse commune, ut dexter
as tanquam in soedei ibus jungerent: plerumqne etiam ut dexteris aversis,
osculum praebereut, interdum ut ambas manus junctas patrono contrectandas
praeberent: supplicum et deditiorum nomine, qui velatas manus porrigebant. And
page 861. hiis verbis: Multis Galliae atque etiam Angliae moribus constisutum
est (Quod ex Anglico Littletoneo intelleximus) ut hominium servili et
suppliciveneratione, ac plane tanquam a dedititiis praestetur. Nam vasallus
discinctus, nudo capite ad pedes sedentis patroni pro, ectus, ambas manus
junctas porrigit, quas dum Dominus suis manibus amplectitur: haec verba
pronunciat: Here, ve^io in tuum hominium et sidem, et homo tuus fio ore et
manibus: tibique juro ac spondeo sidelem me tibi f^lis, um eorum fendorum
nomine, quae tuo beneficio accepi, etc. Whereunto you may add him, colum. 819.
g. 822. s. et 857. b et d. et f. of homage in Scotland, read M. Skene de verb.
signtf. verbo Homaegium. To whom you may also join a plentiful discourse in
speculo Durandt, commonly called speculator among the Civilians, tit. De feudis.

Homagio respectuando, is a writ to the escheator, commanding him to deliver
seisin of lands to the heir that is at full age, notwithstanding his homage not
done: which ought to be performed before the heir have livery of his lands,
except there fall out some reasonable cause to hinder it. Fitzher. not. br.
fol. 269.

Homine eligendo ad custodiendam peciam figilli pro mercatoribus aediti, is a
writ directed to a Corporation, for the choice of a new man to keep the one
part of the Seal, appointed for Statutes Merchant, when the order is dead,
according to the Statute of Acton Burnel, Regist. original, fol. 178. a.

Homine replegiando, is a writ for the bayl of a man out of prison: which in
what cases it lies, and what not, see Fitz. natura brev. fo. 66. See also the
Register origin. fo. 77. See the new book of Entries, verto, Homine replegiando,

Homine capto in Withernamium, is a writ to take him that has taken any
bondsman or woman, and led him or her out of the County so that he or she cannot
be replevied according to Law. Reg. orig. fo. 79. a. See Withernam.

Fomicide (homicidium) is the slaying of a man: and it is divided into
voluntary and casual: homicide voluntary is that which is deliberated and
committed of a set mind and purpose to kill: Homicide voluntary is either with
precedent malice, or without. The former is murder, and is the felonious
killing through malice prepensed, of any person living in this Realm under the
Kings protection, West part 2. Symbol. tit. Inditements, Sect. 37. etc. usque
ad 51. where you may see diverse subdivisions of this matter. See also Glanvile,
l. b. 14. cap. 3. Bract. lib. 3. tract. 2. ca. 4.15. and 17. Brit. ca. 5.6.7.
see Murder, Manslaughter, and Chancemedly.

Homesoken, alias hamsoken. Hamsoca is compounded of Ham, i. habitatio, and
soken, i. quaerere. It is by Bracton, lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 23. thus defined:
Homesoken dicitur invasio domus contra pacem Domini Regis. It appears by
Rastal in the title, Exposition of words, that in ancient times some men had an
immunity to do this: for he defines Homesoken to be an immunity from
amercement from entering into houses violently, and without license: which thing
seems so unreasonable, that me thinks he should be deceived in that his
exposition. I would rather think, it should be a liberty or power granted by
the King to some common person, for the cognizance or punishment of such a
transgression: for so I have seen it interpreted, in an old note that I have
given me by a friend, which he had of an expert man toward the Exchequer, but
of what authority I know not. See Hamsoken.

Hondhabend, is compounded of two Saxon words ( hond, id est hand, and habend.
i. having) and signifies a circumstance of manifest theft, when one is
deprehended with the thing stolen in his hand, Bract. lib. 3. tractat. 2. cap.
31. and 54. who also use the handberend for the same, eodem, cap. 8.

Honor (honor) is beside the general signification, used especially for the
more noble sort of Seigniories, whereof other inferior Lordships or Mannours
do depend, by performance of customs and services, some or other, to those
that are Lords of them. And I have reason to think, that none are Honors
originally, but such as are belonging to the King. Howbeit they may afterward
be bestowed in fee upon other Nobles. The manner of creating these Honors may
in part be gathered out of the Statutes, anno 34 Hen. 8. ca. 5. where Hampton
Court is made an Honor: and anno 33. ejusdem, ca. 37. et 38. whereby Amptill
and Grafton be likewise made Honors: and anno 37. ejusdem, cap. 18. whereby
the King has power given by his Letters patents, to erect four several
Honors, of Westminster, of kingston upon Hull, Saint Osithes in Essex, and
Dodington in Barkeshire. This word is also used in the selfsame signification
in other nations. See ca. licet causam, extra de probationibus, and Minsinger
upon it, nu. 4. In reading I have observed thus many honors in England: The
honor of Aquila, Camdens Britan. page 231. of Clare, page 351. of Lancaster,
page 581. of Tickhill, pa. 531. of Wallingford, Nottingham, Boloine,
Magnacharta, ca. 31. of West Greenewish, Camden, page 239. of Bedford, Pupil
oculi. part 5. ca. 22. of Barhimsted, Brook titulo Tenure, number. 16. of
Hwittam, Camden pa. 333. of Plimpton, Cromptons Jurisd. fo. 115. of Crevecure,
and Hagenet Fobert, anno 32, Hen. 8. cap. 48. of East-Greenewish, of Windsor in
Barkshire, and of Bealew in Essex. anno 37 H. 8. cap. 8. of Peverel in the
County of Lincoln, Regist. origin. fo. 1.

Horngeld is compounded of Horn and Gildan or Gelder, i. Solvere. It signifies
a tax within the forest to be paid for horned beasts, Cromptons Jurisdict. fo.
197. And to be free thereof, is a privilege granted by the king unto such as he
thinks good, Idem, ibidem; and Rastall, in his Exposition of words.

Horse de son fee, is an exception to avoid an action brought for rent, issuing
out of certain land, by him that pretends to be the Lord, or for some
customs and services: for if he can justify that the land is without the
compass of his fee, the action falls, v. Brook hoc titulo.

Hospitallers (Hospitalarii) were certain knights of an Order, so called,
because they had the care of hospitals, wherein Pilgrims were received. To
these Pope Clement the fifth transferred the Templers, which Order by a Council
held at Vienna in France, he suppressed, for their many and great offenses, as
he pretended. These Hospitallers be now the knights of Saint John of Malta,
Cassan. Gloria mundi, part. 9. considerat. 5. This constitution was also obeyed
in Edward the seconds time here in England, and confirmed by parliament. Thom.
Walsingham in hist. Ed. 2. Stowes Annals, ibidem. These are mentioned, an. 13
Ed. 1. ca. 43. and an. 9 Henrici 3. ca. 37.

Hostelers (Hostellarius) comes of the French ( Hosteler, i. Hospes) and
signifies with us, those that otherwise we call In keepers, anno 9 Ed. 3.
stat. 2. cap. 11.

Hotchepot (in partem positio) is a word that comes out of the Low Countries,
where (Hutspot) signifies flesh cut into pretty pieces, and sodden with herbs
or roots, not unlike that which the Romans called farraginem. Festus. Litleton
says, that literally it signifies a puding mixed of diverse ingrediments: but
metaphorically a comixtion, or putting together of lands for the equal
division of them being so put together. Examples you have diverse in him, fo.
55. and see Britton, fol. 119. There is in the Civil law Collatio bonorum
answerable unto it, whereby if a Child advanced by the Father in his life time,
do after his Fathers decease, challenge a Child's part with the rest, he must
cast in all that formerly he had received, and then take out an equal share
with the others. Decollatio bonorum, p. lib. 37. titulo. 6.

House-bote, is compounded of House, and Bote, i. compensatio. It signifies
Estovers out of the Lords wood to uphold a tenement or house.

House-robbing, is the robbing of a man in some part of his house, or his
booth, or tent in in any fair or market, and the owner, or his wife, children,
or servants being within the same: for this is felony by anno 23 H. 8. cap. 1.
and anno 3 Ed. 6. cap. 9. yea, now it is felony though none be within the house
anno 39 Eliz. cap. 15. See Burglary. See West. part. 2. sym. tit. Inditements,
sect. 67.

HU
Hudegeld. significat qui tantiam trcnsgressionis illatae in servum
transgredientem. Fleta lib. cap. 47. Quaere whether it should not be Hindegeld.

Hue and Cry (Hutesium and Clamor) come of two French words (Huier) and Crier)
both signifiing to shout or cry aloud. M. Manwood part 2. of his Forest laws,
cap. 19. number. 11. says, that Hew is Latin, meaning belike the Inter^ection:
but under reformation, I think he is deceived; this signifies a pursuit of one
having committed felony by the highway, for if the party robbed, or any in the
company of one murdered or robbed, come to the Constable of the next Town, and
will him to raise Hue and Cry, or to make pursuit after the offendour
describing the party, and showing as near as he can, which way he is gone, the
Constable ought forthwith to call upon the Parish for aid in seeking the
felon, and if he be not found there, then to give the next Constable warning,
and he the next, until the offendour be apprehended, or at the least, until he
be thus pursued to the Sea side. Of this read Bract. lib. 3. tract. 2. ca. 5.
Smith de Repub. Anglo. lib. 2. cap. 20. and the statute, anno 13 Ed. 1. statute
of Winchest. cap. 3. and a. 28 Ed. 3. cap. 11. and anno 27 Eliz. cap. 13. The
Normans had such a pursuit with a Cry after offenders as this is, which they
called Haro: whereof you may read the Grand Customarie, cap. 54. Some call it
Harol: the reason whereof they give to be this, that there was a Duke of
Normandy, called Roll, a man of great justice and severity against grievous
offenders: and that thereupon when they follow any in this pursuit, they cry
Ha-Rol, as if they should say, Ah Roll where art thou that were wont to redress
this, or what would thou do against these wretches, if thou were now living?
But in truth I think it comes from Harier, i. flagitare, inquietare, urgere.
Hue is used alone, anno 4 Ed. pri. stat. 2. This the Scots call Huesium, and M.
Skene de verb. signif. verb. Huesium, says, that it comes of the French Oyes,
i. Audite: making one etymology of this and the cry used before a
Prolamation. The manner of their Hue and cry, she there describes it, is that
if a robbery be done, a horn is blown, and an out-crie made: after which, if
the party fly away, and not yield himself to the Kings Bailiff, he may be
lawfully slain, and hanged up upon the next gallows. Of this Hue and Cry, see
Cromptons, Justice of peace, fol. 160. b.

Huissers. See Usher.

Hundred (Hundredum) is a part of a Shire so called originally, because it
contained ten tithings called in Latin Decennas: These were first ordained by
King Alfred the 29. King of the West Saxons. Stows annal, page 105. of these
thus speaks M. Lamb. in his Explic. of Saxon words, verbo. Centuria: Aluredus
rex, ubi cum Guthruno Daco foedus inierat, prudentissimum illud olim a Jethrone
Moysi datum secutus consililium, Angliam primus in satrapias, Centurias, and
Decurias, partitus est. Satrapiam, Shire a shyran (quod partiri significat)
nomin^ vit: Centuriam, Hundred: and Decuriam, Toothing sive Tienmantale, i.
Decemvirale collegium appellavit: atque iisdem nominibus vel hodie vocantur,
etc. And again afterward: Decrevit tum porro Aluredus liberae ut conditionis
quisque in Centuriam ascriberetur aliquam, atque in Decemvirale aliquod
conjiceretur collegium. De minoribus negotiis Decuriones ut judicarent: ac si
quae esset res difficilior, ad Centuriam deferrent: difficilimas denique and
maximi momenti lites, Senator et praepositus in frequenti illo ex omni satrapia
cenvontu componerent. Modus autem judicandi quis fuerit, Ethelredus Rex, legem,
quas frequenti apud Vanatingum senatu sancivit, capite 4. hiis fere verbis
exponit. In singulis Centurits com^tia sunto, atque liberae conditionis viri
duodeni, aetate superiores, una cum praeposito, sacra tenentes juranto, se adeo
virum aliquem innocentem haud damnaturos, sontemve absoluturos. This form of
dividing Counties into Hundreds for better Government, howsoever it is
attributed to king Alfred here with us: yet he had it from Germany, whence he
and his came hither. For there Genta or Centena is a jurisdiction over a
hundred towns, and contains the punishment of Capital crimes. Andraeus
Kitchen, in his tractat. de sublimi and regio territorii jure, cap. 4, page
123. where he also shows out of Tacitus, de situ et moribus Germa. that this
division was usual amongst the Germans before his days. By this you
understand the original and old use of Hundreds, which hold still in name, and
remain in some sort of combination, for their several services in diverse
respects, but their jurisdiction is abolished, and grown to the County Court,
some few excepted, which have been by privilege annexed to the Crown, or
granted unto some great subject, and so remain still in the nature of a
Franchise. And this has been ever sithence the Statute anno 14 Ed. 3. stat. 1.
cap. 9. whereby these Hundred Courts formerly fermed out by the Sheriff to
other men, were reduced all, or the most part, to the County Court, and so have
and do remain at this present. So that where you read now of any Hundred
Courts, you must know that they be several franchises, wherein the Sheriff
has not to deal by his ordinary authority, except they of the Hundred refuse
to do their office. See West. part 1. symbol. lib. 2. Sect. 288. See Turn.
The new expounder of Law terms says, that the Latin Hundredum is sometime
used for an immunitie or privilege, whereby a man is quit of money or customs
due to the Governor, or hundreders.

Hundreders (Hundredarii) be men impaneled, or fit to be empaneled, of a Jurie,
upon any Controversy, dwelling within the Hundred where the land lies, which
is in question, Cromptons Jurisd. fol. 217. and anno 35 Henrici 8. ca. 6. It
signifies also him that has the jurisdiction of a Hundred, and holds the
Hundred Court, anno 13 Ed. pri. cap. 38. an. 9 Ed. 2. stat. 2. and an. 2. Ed.
3. cap. 4. and sometime is used for the Bailiff of an Hundred. Horn in his
mirror of Justices, lib. 1. ca. del office del coroner.

Hundred laghe, signifies the Hundred Court, from the which all the officers
of the Kings Forest were freed by the Charter of Canurus, ca. 9. Mannwood,
part 1. page 2.

Huers. See Conders.

Huseans, comes of the French ( houseaux, i. ocrea) a boot, it is used in the
Statute an. 4. Ed. 4. cap. 7.

Hustings (Hustingum) may seem to come from the French ( Haulser, i. tollere,
attollere, suberigere) for it signifies the principal and highest Court in
London, anno 11 H. 7. cap. 21. et Fitz. not. br. fol. 23. See anno 9 Ed. pri.
cap. unico. Other Cities and Towns also have had a Court of the same name, as
Winchester, Lincoln, York, and Sheppey, and others, where the Barons or
Citizens have a Record of such things as are determinable before them. Fleta,
libro 2. cap. 55.

Husfastne, is he that houldeth house and land, Bract. lib. 3. tra. 2. ca. 10.
His words be these: Et in franco plegio esse debet omnis, qui terram tenet et
domum, qui dicuntur Hustfastene, et etiam alii qui illis deserviunt, qui
dicuntur Folgheres, etc.

IA
IArrock, an. 1. R. 3. ca. 8. is a kind of cork so called.

ID
Identitate nominis, is a writ that lies for him who is upon a Capias or
Exigent, taken and committed to prison for another man of the same name:
whereof see the form and farther use, in Fitz. not. br. fol. 267. See the
Regist. original, fol. 194.

Idiot, and he that afterward becomes of insane memory, differs in diverse
cases,, Coke, fol. 154. b. lib. 4. See here following Idiota inquirenda.

Idiota inquirenda vel examinanda, is a writ that is directed to the Excheator,
or the Sheriff of any County, where the King has understanding that there is
an Idiot, naturally born so weak of understanding, that he cannot govern or
manage his inheritance, to call before him the party suspected of Idiocie, and
examine him: And also to enquire by the oaths of 12. men whether he be
sufficiently witted to dispose of his own lands with discretion or not, and to
certify accordingly into the Chancerie: For the King has the protection of
his Subjects, and by his prerogative the government of their lands and
substance, that are naturally defective in their own discretion. Statut. de
praerogrativa Regis editum, anno 17 Ed. 2. cap. 8. whereof read Stawnf.
praerog. ca. 9. and of this writ, read Fitz. not. br. fol. 232. See the Regist.
origin. fol. 267.

JE
Jetzon. See Flotzon.

Jeofaile, is compounded of three French words, I'ay faille, i. ego lapsus sum:
and signifies in our common law, an oversight in pleading, touching the which
you have a Statute anno 32 H. 8. ca. 30. whereby it is enacted, that if the
Jury have once passed upon the issue, though afterward there be found a Jeofail
in the pleading, yet judgment shall likewise be given according to the verdict
of the Jurie. See Brook, tit. Repleder. The Author of the new Terms of law
says, that a Jeofaile is when the parties to any Suit, have in pleading
proceeded so far, that they have joined issue, which shall be tried, or is
tried by a Jury or inquest, and this pleading or issue is so badly pleaded or
joined, that it will be error if they proceed; Then some of the said parties
may by their Council show it to the Court, as well after verdict given, and
before judgment, as before the Jury be charged: the showing of which defects
before the Jury charged, was often when the Jury came into the Court to try
the issue, then the Council which will show it, shall say: This inquest you
ought not to take: and if it be after verdict, then he may say: To judgment
you ought not to go: and because of this many delays grew in Suits, diverse
Statutes are made to redress them: viz. 32 H. 8. cap. 30. and others in Q.
Elizabeth's days, and yet the fault little amended,

IG
Ignoramus, is a word properly used by the grand Enquest empaneled in the
inquisition of causes criminal tnd public: and written upon the Bill, whereby
any crime is offered to their consideration, when as they mislike their
evidence, as defective, or too weak to make good the presentment. The effect of
which word so written is, that all farther inquity upon that party for that
fault, is thereby stopped, and he delivered without farther answer. It has a
resemblance with that custom of the ancient Romans: where the judges, when they
absolved a person accused, did write A. upon a little table provided for that
purpose, i. Absolvimus: if they judged him guilty, they writ C. id est,
Condeninamus: if they found the cause difficult and doubtful, they writ N. L.
id est, Non liques. Asconius Redianus in oration. pro Milone. Alexander ab
Alexandro, Genial. dierum lib. 3. cap. 14.

IK
Ikenild-street, is one of the four famous ways that the Romans made in
England, taking the beginning ab Icenis, which were they that inhabited Northf.
Southf. and Cambridgeshire, Camden Britan. fol. 343. See Watlingstreet.

IM
Imparlance (interlocutio vel interloquela) is a petition made in Court upon
the Count of the Demandant by the Tenent, or Declaration of the Plaintiff by
the Defendant, whereby he craveth respite, or any other day to put in his
answer. See Brook titulo Continuance. See Dies Da^us. Imparlance seems to be
general or special: special imparlance is with this clause, Salvis omnibus
advantagiis tam ad jurisdictionem curiae, quam breve and narrationem. Kitchen,
fol. 200. Then general in reason must be that, which is made at large without
inserting that or the like clause. See Emperlance.

Impeachment of waste (impetitio vasti) comes of the French ( empeschement, i.
impedimentum) and signifies with us, a restraint from committing of waste upon
lands or tenements. See waste.

Implements, comes of the French ( emploier, i. insumere in re aliqua) it
signifies with us, things tending to the necessary use of any Trade, or
furniture of household.

Impost, is a French word, signifying tribute, coming of the verb ( imposer,
i. injungere, irregare) It signifies with us, the tax received by the Prince
for such Merchandise, as are brought into any haven from other Nations, anno 31
Elizabeth, cap. 5. And I think it may in some fort be distinguished from
Custom, because Custom is rather that profit, which the Prince makes of wares
shipped out of the land: yet they may be confounded.

Improvement. See Approve.

IN
In casu consimili, is a writ. See Casu consimili

In casu proviso, is a writ. See Casu proviso.

Incident (incidens) signifies a thing necessarily depending upon another, as
more principal: For example, a Court Baron is so incident to a Manor, and a
Court of Piepowders to a Fair, that they cannot be severed by grant: for if a
Manor or Fair be granted, these Courts cannot be severed, Kitchen, fol. 36.

Incroche (incrociarie) See Encrochments. Admirals, and their Deputies do
incroche to themselves Jurisdictions, etc. anno 15 R. 2. cap. 3.

Indenture (indentura) is a writing comprising some contract between two, and
being indented in the top answerable to another that likewise contains the
same contracts: this the Latins called (...), or (...), which among the
Civilians, is defined to be, scriptura inter creditorem and debitorem
indentata, in cujus scissura literis capitalibus haec dictio (...), or plurally
(...), and it differs from (...), quia hoc man^ unius tantum, puta debitoris
scribitur, and penes debitorem relinquitur, Pruinc. constitut. de offic.
archidiaco. cap. pri. verbo In scrip^is. vid. Gothofr. in notis ad l. 27.. 3.
p. ad leg. Corn. de falls.

Indicavi, is a Writ or Prohibition that lies for a patron of a Church, whose
Clerk is defendant in Court Christian, in an action of Tithes commenced by
another Clerk, and extending to the fourth part of the Church, or of the Tithes
belonging unto it; for in this case, the suit belongs to the Kings Court, by
the Statute, West. 2. cap. 5. wherefore the Patron of the Defendant, being like
to be prejudiced in his Church and advowzen, if the Plaintiff obtain in the
court Christian, has this means to remoove it to the Kings Court; Reg. orig.
f. 35. b. See Old not. br. fol. 31. and the Regist. fol. 35. and Britton cap.
109. fol. A.

Indictments (Indictamentum) See Indightment.

Indivisium, is used in the common Law, for that which two hold in common
without partition, Kitchen fol. 241. in these words: He holds pro indiviso
etc.

Indorsementum (indorsamentum) signifies in the Common law, a condition
written upon the other side of an obligation, West. part. 2. symb. Sect. 157.

Infang, alias infeng, significat quietantiam prioris prisae ratione convivii,
Flet. lib. 1. cap. 47.

Infangthef, Hingfangthefe, or Infangtheof, is compounded of three Saxon words,
the preposition (In) (fang or fong, to take or catch) and (theft) it signifies
a privilege or liberty granted unto Lords of certain Manors, to judge any thief
taken within their fee. Bract. lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 8. In the laws of King
Edward, set out by M. Lamberd, nu. 26. you have it thus described: Infangthefe,
Iustitia cognoscentis latronis sua est, de homine suo, si captus fuerit super
terram suam: Illi vero qui non habent has consuetudines, coram justicia regia
rectum faciant in Hundredis, vel in Wapentachiis, vel in Scyris: The definition
of this see also in Britton, fol. 90. b. and Roger Hoveden, part poster.
saorum annalium, fol. 345. b. and M. Skene de verborum significat. verbo
Infangthefe, who writes of it at large, reciting diversity of opinions
touching this and outfangthief: Fleta says that in (fangtheef) for so he
writes it, dicitur latro captus in terra alicujus seisitus aliquo latrocinio
de suis propriis hominibus, lib. 1. ca. 47.. Infangtheef.

Information. See Enditement. See new Terms of Law.

Informer (informator) in French (informature) is an officer belonging to the
Exchequer or Kings Bench, that denounces or complains of those that offend
against any pennal Statute. They are otherwise called promotors, but the men
being bashful of nature, do blush at this name: these among the Civilians are
called delatores.

Informatus nonsum, is a formal answer of course made by an Attorney, that is
commanded by the Court to say what he thinks good in the defense of his
Client, by the which he is deemed to leave his Client undefended, and so
judgment passes for the adverse party. See the new book of Entries, titulo,
Nonsum informaus. And Judgment 12.

Ingressu, is a Writ of Entry, that is, whereby a man seeks entry into
Lands or Tenements; it lies in many diverse cases wherein it has as many
diversities of forms. See Entry. This Writ is also called in the particular,
praecipe quod reddat: because those be formal words in all Writs of entry. The
Writs as they lie in diverse cases, are these, described in the Old not. br.
Ingressu ad terminum qui praeteriit, fol. 121. Origin. Regist. fol. 227. which
lies where the Lands or Tenements are let to a man for term of years, and the
Tenant holds over his term: Ingressu dum non fuit compos mentis, fol. 223.
original. Regist. fol. 218. which lies were a man sells Land or Tenement
when he is out of his wits, etc. Ingressu dum fuit infra atatem, fol. 123.
Register original. fol. 228. which lies where one under age sells his Lands,
etc. Ingressu super disseisina in le quibus, fol. 125. Register origin. fol.
229. which lies where a man is disseised and dies, for his heir against the
disseisour. Ingressu in per, fol. 126. origin. Regist. fol. 229. Ingressu sur
cui in vita, fol. 128. original. Register, fol. 239. both which see in Entry.
Ingressu causa matrimonii praelocuti, fol. 130. original. Register, fol. 233.
which see, Causa matrimonii praelocuti. Ingressu in casu proviso, fol. 132.
Regist. origin. fol. 235. which see, Casu proviso. Ingressu cui ante divor^ium,
fol. 130. original. Register, fol. 233. for which see, Cui ante divortium.
Ingressu in consimili casu, fol. 233. original. Register, fol. 236. for which
see, Consimili casu. Ingressu sine consensu capituli, fol. 128. original.
register, fol. 230. for which see, Sine assensu capituli. Ingressu ad communem
legem, fol. 132. original. Register, fol. 234. which lies, where the Tenent
for term of life, or of another life, Tenant by courtesy, or Tenant in Dower
makes a feofment in fee, and dies; he in reversion shall have the foresaid
writ against whomsoever that is in the land, after such feofment made.

Engrossing of a fine, is making the Indentures by the Chirographer, and the
delivery of them to the party unto whom the cognizance is made, Fi zh eb. not.
br. fol. 147. A.

Ingrosser (ingrossator) comes of the French Grosseur, i. crassitudo, or
Grosier, i. Solidarius venditor. It signifies in the Common law, one that
buyeth corn growing, or dead victual, to sell again, except Barley for malt,
Oats for Oatmeal, or victuals to retail, badging by license, and buying of
oils, spices, and victuals, other than fiish ot salt, anno 5. Edw. 6. cap. 14.
anno 5. Elizab. cap. 14. anno 13. Elizab. cap. 25. these be M. Wests words,
part 2. symbol. titulo Inditements. Sect. 64. Howbeit this definition rather
does belong to unlawful engrossing, than to the word in general. See Forstaller.

Inheritance (haereditas) is a perpetuity in ands or tenements to a man and his
heirs. For Littleton ca. 1. li. 1. has these words: And it is to be
understood, that this word (inheritance) is not only understood, where a man
has inheritance of Lands and Tenements by descent of heritage, but also every
fee simple, or fee tail that a man has by his purchase, may be said
inheritance: for that, that his heirs may inherit him: Several inheritance is
that, which two or more hold severally, as if two men have land given them, to
them and the heirs of their two bodies, these have joint estate during their
lives, but their heirs have several inheritance, Kitchen, fol. 155. See the new
Terms of law, verbo Enheritance.

Inhibition (Inhibitio) is a writ to inhibit or forbid a Judge from farther
proceeding in the cause depending before him. See Fitz. not. br. fo. 39. where
he puts prohibition and inhibition together: inhibition is most commonly a
writ issuing out of a higher Court Christian to a lower and inferior, upon an
appeal, anno 24 H. 8. cap. 12. and prohibition out of the Kings Court to a
Court Christian, or to an inferior Temporal Court.

Injunction (injunctio) is an interlocutory decree out of the Chancerie,
sometimes to give possession unto the Plaintiff, for want of appearance in the
Defendant, sometime to the Kings ordinary Court, and sometime to the Court
Christian, to stay proceeding in a cause, upon suggestion made, that the rigor
of the law, if it take place, is against equity and conscience in that case.
See West. part 2. symb. titulo Proceeding in Chancery, Sect. 25.

Inlawgh (Inlagatus, vel homo sub lege) signifies him that is in some franck
pledge, of whom take Bractons words, li. 3. tract. 2. ca. H. nu. 5. Minor vero,
and qui infra aetatem duodecim annorum fuerit, utlagari non potest nec extra
legem pont: quiae ante talem aetatem non est sub lege aliqua, nec in decenna,
non magis quam foemina, quae utlagari non potest quiae ipsa non est sub lege,
i. Inlowghe anglice: sc. in franco plegio sive decenna sicut masculus duodecim
annorum and ulterius, etc. Inlaughe, significat hominem subjectum lege, Fleta,
lib. 1. cap. 47.

Inlagary (Inlagatio) is a restitution of one outlawed, to the Kings
protection, and to the benefit or estate of a subject, Bracton, lib. 3. tract.
2. cap. 14. nu. 6, 7, 8. Britton, cap. 13.

Inmates, are those that be admitted to dwell for their money jointly with an
other man, though in several rooms of his Mansion house, passing in and out by
one door, and not being able to maintain themselves, which are inquiral in a
Leet, Kitchen, fol. 45. where you may read him at large, who be properly
Inmates in intendment of law, and who not.

Imprison, anno 18. Ed. 3. statu. 4. cap. unico. seems to signify so much as
an attempt, coming of the French (Empris) which is all one with (Enterpris) an
enterprite.

Inquirendo, is an authority given to a person or persons, to inquire into
something for the Kings advantage; which, in what cases it lies, see the
Register original, fol. 72.85.124.265.266.179.267.

Inquisition (Inquisitio) is a manner of proceeding in matters criminal, by the
office of the Judge, which Hostiensis defines thus: Inquisitio nihil aliud est
quam alicujus criminis manifesti ex bono and aequo Judicis competentis canonice
facta investigatio, ca. qualiter, de accusatio. in the Decretales: this course
we take here in England by the great inquest before Justices in Air. See Air;
and the places in Bracton and Britton there noted. Inquisition is also with us,
used for the King in temporal causes and profits, in which kind it is
confounded with Office, Stawnford praerogativ. fol. 51. See office.

Inrolement (Irrotulatio) is the Registring, recording or entering of any lawful
act in the Rolls of the Chancerie, as recognisance acknowledged, or a Statute,
or a Fine levied. See West. part 2. symbol. titulo Fines, Sect. 133.

Insimul tenuit, is one species of the writ called a Formdon. See Formdon.

Intakers, be a kind of Thieves in Ridesdall, anno 9. H. 5. ca. 8. so called,
as it seems, because they dwelling within that liberty, did receive in such
booties of cattle or other things as the out parters brought in unto them. See
Out parters.

Interdiction (Interdictio) is used in the Common law, in the same
signification that it has in the Canon law, where it is thus defined:
Interdictio est censura ecclesiastica prohibens administrationem divinorum: c.
quod in te: de poenitent: and remiss. in the Decretals: and thus is it used,
an. 24. H. 8. ca. 12.

Interpleder. See Enterpleder.

Intrusion (intrusio) by Bracton lib. 4. cap. 2. is thus defined: Intrusio est,
ubi quis, cui nullum jus competit in re nec scintilla Iuris, possessionem
vacuam ingreditur, quae nec corpore nec animo possidetur, sicut haereditatem
jacentem antequam adita fuerit ab haerede, vel saltem a domino capitali ratione
custodiae, vel ratione eschaetae si forte haeredes non existant, vel si post
mortem alicujus per finem factum, ^^l per modum donationis, ubi successio sibi
locum vendicare nonpossit, vel si post mortem alicujus qui tenuit ad vitam
debeat tenemen um reverti ad proprietarium, ponat quis se in seisinam antequam
tenementum illud veniat ab illis ad quem pertinere deberet ex praedictis
causis, with whom agrees Fleta, lib. 4. cap. 30. sect. 1. and 2. See Britton
cap. 65. to the same effect. See the new book of Entries, verb. Entrusion. See
Entrusion. See Disseisin: the Author of new Terms of law would have intrusion
especially after the tenant for life is deceased. Verbo Abatement, and
abatement in all other cases: But I find not any Latin word for Abatement, but
intrusio; so that 1 rather think these two English words to be Synonyma: and
Fleta, cap. supra citato, seems direct against this his opinion.

Intrusione, is a Writ that lies against the Intruder: Regist. fol. 233.

Inventarie (inventarium) is a description or repertory orderly made of all
dead men's goods and Cattels, prized by four credible men or more, which every
Executor or Administrator ought to exhibit to the Ordinary, at such times as
he shall appoint the same. West. part prim. Symb. lib. 2. sect. 696. where
likewise you may see the form. This Inventary proceeds from the Civil Law;
for whereas by the ancient Law of the Romans, the Heir was tied to answer all
the Testators debts, by which means heritages were prejudicial to many men and
not profitable: Justinian to encourage men the better to take upon them this
charitable office, ordained, that if the Heir would first make and exhibit a
true Inventary of all the Testators substance coming to his hand, he should be
no further charged, than to the value of the Inventary: l. ult. Cod. de Jure
deliberando.

Invest (investire) comes of the French word (Invester) and signifies to
give possession. Hear Hotoman de verbis feudalibus, verbo Investitura:
Investitura barbarum nomen, barbaricam quoque rationem habet. Nam, ut ait
Feudista, lib. 2. tit. 2. Investitura proprie dicitur quando hasta vel aliquod
corporeum traditur a domino; with us we use likewise to admit the Tenant, by
delivering them a verge or rodd into their hands, and ministering them an oath,
which is called Investing: Others define it thus, Investitura, est alicujus in
suum jus introductio.

Inure, signifies to take effect: as the pardon inureth: Stawnf. praerog. fol.
40. See Enure.

JO
Joynder, is the coupling of two in a suit or action against another: Fitzh.
not. br. fol. 118. H. 201. H. 221. and H. in many other places, as appears in
the Index, verbo Joynder.

Joint tenants (fimul tenentes) liber intrationum, titulo Formdon in vieu. 3.
be those that come to and hold Lands or Tenements by one title pro indiviso, or
without partition. Littleton, lib. 3. cap. 3. and Terms of Law: See Tenants in
common.

Joining of issue (Junctio exitus) See Issue.

Jointure (Junctura) is a covenant whereby the husband or some other friend in
his behalf, assure^h unto his wife, in respect of marriage, lands, or tenements
for term of her life, or otherwise. See West. part. 2. Symbol. lib. 2. titulo
Covenants, sect. 128. and the new exposition of the law Terms: It seems to be
caled a Jointure, either because it is granted ratione juncturae in matrimonio,
or because the land in Frank marriage, is given jointly to the Husband and the
Wife, and after to the Heirs of their bodies, whereby the Husband and Wife be
made joint tenants during the coverture. Coke lib. 3. Butler and Bakers case,
f. 27. b. See Frank marriage. Jointure, is also used as the abstract of Joint
tenants, Coke lib. 3. the Marquess of Winchesters Case, fol. 3. a. b. Junctura,
is also by Bracton and Fleta used for joining of one bargain to another, Fleta
lib. 2. cap. 60. touching the self-same thing: and therefore jointure in the
first signification, may be so called, in respect that it is a bargain of
livelihood for the wife: adjoined to the contract of marriage.

Journ Choppers, anno 8 Hen. 6. cap. 5. be regraters of yarn. Whether that we
now call (yarn) were in those days called (journ) I cannot say; but (Choppers)
in these days are well known to be changers, as choppers of Churches, etc.

Journeyman, comes of the French (Journee) that is a day, or days work,
which argues that they were called Journeymen, that wrought with others by the
day, though now by Statute it be extended to those likewise, that covenant to
work in their occupation with another by the year, anno quinto Elizabeth, cap.
quarto.

IS
Issue (Exitus) comes of the French ( Issir, i. emanare) or the Substantive (
Issue, i. exitus, eventus.) It has diverse applications in the common Law:
sometime being used for the children begotten between a man and his wife:
sometime for profits growing from an amercement or fine, or expenses of suit:
sometime for profits of lands or tenements: West. 2. anno 13. Edw. prim. cap.
39. sometime for that point of matter depending in suit, whereupon the parties
join and put their cause to the trial of the Jury: and in all these it has but
one signification, which is an effect of a cause proceeding, as the children be
the effect of the marriage between the Parents: the profits growing to the King
or Lord from the punishment of any man's offense, is the effect of his
transgression: the point referred to the trial of twelve men, is the effect of
pleading or process. Issue, in this last signification, is either general, or
special; General issue seems to be that, whereby it is referred to the Jury
to bring in their verdict, whether the Defendant have done any such thing, as
the Plaintiff lays to his charge. For example, if it be an offense against
any Statute, and the Defendant plead, not culpable: this being put to the Jury,
is called the General issue: and if a man complain of a private wrong which the
Defendant denies, and pleads, no wrong nor disseisin, and this be referred to
the 12. it is likewise the General issue, Kitchen, fol. 225. See the Doctor and
Student, fol. 158. b. The Special issue then must be that, where special matter
being alleged by the Defendant for his defense, both the parties join
thereupon, and so grow rather to a Demurrer, if it be quaestio Juris, or to
trial by the Jury, if it be quaestio facti; See the new Book of Entries, verbo
Issue.

JU
Juncture. See Jointure.

Jure patronatus. See the new Book of Entries, verbo Jure patronatus in quare
impedit. fol. 465. col. 3.

Jurie (Jurata) comes of the French ( Jurer, i. jurare) it signifies in our
Common law, a company of men, as 24. or 12. sworn to deliver a truth upon such
evidence as shall be delivered them touching the matter in question. Of which
trial who may and who may not be empanelled, see Fitzh. not, brev. fol. 165. D.
And for better understanding of this point, it is to be known, that there be
three manner of trials in England: one by Parliament, another by Battle, and
the third by Assize or Jury, Smith de Repub. Anglorum, lib. 2. cap. 5, 6, 7.
touching the two former read him, and see Battle and Combat, and Parliament:
the trial by Assise (be the action civil or criminal, public or private,
personal or real) is referred for the fact to a Jury, and as they find it, so
passes the Judgment, and the great favor that by this the King shows to
his Subjects more than the Princes of other Nations, you may read in Glanvil,
lib. 2. cap. 7. where he called it Regale beneficium clement is principis de
consilio procerum populis indultum, quo vitae hominum and Status integritats
tam salubriter consulitur; ut in jure, quod quis in libero soli tenemento
possidet, retinendo, duelli casum declinare possint homines ambiguum, etc. see
the rest. This Jury is not used only in Circuits of Justices Errant, but also
in other Courts, and matters of Office, as if the Escheatour make inquisition
in any thing touching his Office, he does it by Jury or Inquest; if the Coroner
inquire how a subject found dead, came to his end, he uses an Inquest, the
Justices of Peace in their Quarter Sessions, the Sheriff in his County and
Turn, the Bailiff of a Hundred, the Steward of a Court Leet, or Court Baron, if
they inquire of any offense, or decide any cause between party and party, they
do it by the same manner. So that where it is said that all things be triable
by Parliament, Battle, or Assise; Assise in this place is taken for a Jury or
Enquest, empanelled upon any cause in a Court where this kind of trial is used:
and though it be commonly deemed, that this custom of ending and deciding
causes proceed from the Saxons and Britons, and was of favor permitted unto us
by the Conqueror: yet I find by the grand Customarie of Normandy, cap. 24.
that this course was used likewise in that Country. For Assise is, in that
Chapter, defined to be an assembly of wise men, with the Bailiff, in a place
certain at a time assigned forty days before, whereby Justice may be done in
causes heard in the Court. Of this custom also, and those Knights of Normandy,
Johannes Faber makes mention, in the Rubrique of the Title de militari
testamento: in Institut. this Jury, though it appertain to most Courts of the
Common law, yet is it most notorious in the half-year Courts of the Justices
errants, commonly called the great Assizes, and in the quarter Sessions, and in
them it is most ordinarily called a Jury. And that in civil causes: whereas in
other Courts, it is oftener termed an Enquest, and in the Court Baron the
Homage. In the general Assise, there are usually many Juries, because there be
store of causes both civil and criminal commonly to be tried, whereof one is
called the Grand Jury, and the rest Petit Juries: whereof it seems there
should be one for every Hundred, Lamb. Eirenar. lib. 4. cap. 3. page 384. The
Grand Jury consists ordinarily of 24. grave and substantial Gentlemen, or
some of them Yeomen, chosen indifferently out of the whole Shire by the
Sheriff, to consider of all Bills of Indictment preferred to the Court: which
they do either approve, by writing upon them these words, Billa vera, or
disallow, by writing, Ignoramus: such as they do approve, if they touch Life
and Death, are farther referred to another Jury to be considered of, because
the case is of such importance: but others of lighter moment, are upon their
allowance, without more work, fined by the Bench, except the party travers the
Indictment, or challenge it for insufficiency, or remove the cause to a higher
Court by Certiorari, in which two former cases it is referred to another Jury,
and in the latter transmitted to the higher, Lamb. Eir. li. 4. ca. 7. and
presently upon the allowance of this Bill by the Grand Enquest, a man is said
to be indicted. Such as they disallow, are delivered to the Bench, by whom they
are forthwith cancelled or torn. The Petit Jury consists of twelve men at the
least, and are empaneled, as well upon criminal as upon civil causes; those
that pass upon offenses of Life and Death, do bring in their verdict either
guilty or not guilty; whereupon the Prisoner, if he be found guilty, is said to
be convicted, and so afterward receives his judgment, and condemnation: or
otherwise is acquitted and set Free. Of this read Fortes. cap. 27. Those that
pass upon civil causes real, are all, or so many as can conveniently be had,
of the same Hundred, where the land or tenement in question does lie, and four
at the least. And they upon due examination bring in their verdict either for
the Demandant, or Tenent. Of this see Fortescue, cap. 25, 26. According unto
which, judgment passes afterward in the Court where the cause first began:
and the reason hereof is, because these Justices of Assise, are in this case,
for the ease of the Country, only to take the verdict of the Jury, by the
virtue of the writ called (Nisi prius) and so return it to the Court where the
cause is depending. See (Nisi prius) Join with this the chapter formerly cited
out of the Custumary of Normandy, and that of King Etheldreds laws, mentioned
by Master Lamberd, verbo Centuria, in his explication of Saxon words. And by
these two words you shall perceive, that as well among these Normans, as the
Saxous, the men of this Jury were Associates and Assistants to the Judges of
the Court, in a kind of equality, whereas, now adays they attend them in
great humility, and are, as it were, at their command for the service of the
Court: the words set down by M. Lamberd are these: In singulis centuriis
comitia sunto, atque liberae conditionis viri duodeni aetate superiores, un a
cum praeposito sacra tenentes, juranto, se aedeo virum aliquem innocentem hand
condemnaturos, sontemve absoluturos: to this join also the 69. chapter of the
said Custumary. See Enquest. See 12. Men. See Lamberds Eirenarch. lib. 4. cap.
3. page 384.

Juris utrum, is a writ that lies for the incumbent, whose predecessor has
alienated his lands or tenements; the diverse uses of which writ, see in Fitzh.
not. br. fol. 48.

Jurisdictiou (Jurisdictio) is a dignity which a man has by a power to do
Justice in causes of Complaint made before him. And there be two kinds of
Jurisdictions, the one that a man has by reason of his fee, and by virtue
thereof does right in all plaints concerning his fee: The other is a
Jurisdiction given by the Prince to a Bailiff: this division I have in the
Custumary of Normandy, cap. 2. which is not unapt for the practice of our
Commonwealth, for by him whom they call a Bailiff, we may understand all that
have commission from the Prince to give judgment in any cause. The Civilians
divide jurisdictionem generally in imperium and jurisdictionem: and imperium in
merum et mixtum. Of which you may read many especial tractats written of them,
as a matter of great difficulty and importance.

Justes, comes of the French ( Joustes, i. decursus) and signifies with us,
contentions between Martial men by spears on horsback, anno 24 H. 8. cap. 13.

Justice (Justiciarius) is a Freneh word, and signifies him that is deputed by
the King to do right by way of judgment: the reason why he is called Justice,
and not Judex, is because in ancient time the latin word for him was
(Justitia) and not (Justiciarius) as appears by Glanv. lib. 2. cap. 6. Roger
Hoveden part. poster. suorum annalium, fo. l 413. a. and diverse other places,
which appellation we have from the Normans, as appears by the Grand
Custumary, cap. 3. And I do the rather note it, because men of this function
should hereby consider, that they are or ought to be, not (Justi) in their
judgments, but in abstract (ipsa justitia) howbeit I hold it well, if they
perform their office in concreto. Another reason why they are called
Justiciari^ with us, and not Judices, is, because they have their authority by
deputation, as Delegates to the King, and not jure magistratus; and therefore
cannot depute others in their stead, the Justice of the Forest only excepted,
who has that liberty especially given him by the Statute anno 32 H. 8. cap.
35. for the Chancellor, Marshal, Admiral, and such like, are not called
Justiciarii, but Judices: of these Justices you have diverse sorts in England,
as you may perceive here following. The manner of creating these Justices, with
other appurtenances, read in Fortescue cap. 51.

Justice of the Kings bench (Justiciarius de Banco Regis) is a Lord by his
office, and the chief of the rest; wherefore he is also called Capitalis
Justiciarius Angliae: his office especially is to hear and determine all plees
of the Crown: that is, such as concern offenses committed against the crown,
dignity, and peace of the King; as treasons, felonies, mayhems, and such like,
which you may see in Bracton, lib. 3. tractat. 2. per totum, and in Stawnf.
treatise entitled, The plees of the Crown, from the first chapter to the fifty
one of the first Book. But either it was from the beginning, or by time is come
to pass, that he with his Assistants, hears all personal actions, and real
also, if they be incident to any personal action depending before them: See
Cromptons jurisd. fol. 67. etc. Of this Court Bracton lib. 3. ca. 7. nu. 2.
says thus: Placita vero civilia in rem and personam in Curia domini Regis
terminanda, coram diversis Justiciariis terminantur: Habet enim plures curias
in quibus diversae actiones terminantur; and illarum curiarum habet unam
propriam, sicut aulam regiam, and justiciariios capitales qui proprias causos
Regis terminant, and aliorum omnium par querelam vel per privilegium sive
libertatem; ut si sit aliquis qui implacitari non debeat, nisi coram domino
Rege. This Justice (as it seems) has no patent under the broad Seal. For so
Cromp. says, ubi supra. He is made only by Writ, which is a short one to this
effect; Regina Johanni Popham militi salutem. Sciatis quod constituimus vos
Justiciarium nostrum capitalem, ad placita coram nobis terminandum, durante
bene-placito nostro, Test, etc. And Bracton in the place now recited, speaking
of the Common Plees, says, that Sine Warranto jurisdictionem non habet, which
(I think) is to be understood of a Commission under the great Seal. This Court
was first called the Kings Bench, because the King sat as Judge in it in his
proper Person, and it was moveable with the Court. See anno 9 H. 3. cap. 11.
More of the jurisdiction of this Court, see in Crompton ubi supra. See Kings
Bench. The oath of the Justices see in the Statute, anno 18 Edw. 3. stat. 4.
See Oatb.

Justice of common plees (Justiciarius communium placitorum) is also a Lord by
his Office, and is called (Dominus Justiciarius communium placitorum) and he
with his assistants originally did hear and determine all causes at the Common
law, that is, all civil causes between common persons, as well personal as
real, for which cause it was called the Court of Common Plees, in opposition to
the Plees of the Crown, or the Kings Plees, which are special and appertaining
to him only. Of this, and the Jurisdiction hereof, see Cromptons jurisdiction,
fol. 91. This Court was always settled in a place, as appears by the Statute
anno 9 H. 3. cap. 11. The oath of this Justice and his Associates, see anno 18
Edw. 3. Stat. 4. See Oath.

Justice of the Forest (Justiciarius Forestae) is also a Lord by his Office,
and has the hearing and determining of all offenses within the Kings Forest,
committed against Venison or Vert; of these there be two, whereof the one has
jurisdiction over all the Forests on this side Trent: the other of all beyond.
The chiefest point of their Jurisdiction, consists upon the articles of the
Kings Charter, called Charta de Foresta, made anno 9 H. 3. which was by the
Barons hardly drawn from him, to the mitigation of over cruel ordinances made
by his predecessors. Read M. Camdens Brit. page 214. See Protoforestarius. The
Court where this Justice sits and determines, is called the Justice seat of
the Forest, held every three years once, whereof you may read your fill in M.
Manwoods first part of Forest laws, page 121. and 154. and page 76. He is
sometimes called Justice in Air of the Forest. See the reason in Justice in
Air. This is the only Justice that may appoint a Deputy per statutum, anno 32
H. 8. cap. 35.

Justices of Assise (Justiciarii ad capiendas Assisas) are such as were wont by
special Commission to be sent (as occasion was offered) into this or that
County, to take Assizes: the ground of which polity, was the ease of the
Subjects: For whereas these actions pass always by Jury, so many men might not
without great hinderance be brought to London, and therefore Justices for this
purpose were by Commission particularly authorized, and sent down to them. And
it may seem that the Justices of the Common Plees had no power to deal in this
kind of business, until the statute made anno 8 Richard 2. cap. 2. for by that
they are enabled to take Assizes, and to deliver Gaols. And the Justices of the
kings Bench have by that Statute such power affirmed unto them, as they had one
hundred years before that: Time has taught by experience, that the better sort
of Lawyers, being fittest both to judge and to plead, may hardly be spared in
term time to ride into the Country about such business: and therefore of
later years, it is come to pass, that these commissions (ad capiendas Assisas)
are driven to these two times in the year out of term, when the Justices and
other may be at leisure for these Controversies also: whereupon it is also
fallen out, that the matters wont to be heard by more general Commission of
Justices in Eyr, are heard all at one time with these Assizes: which was not so
of old, as appears by Bracton, l. 3. c. 7. 2. nu. Habet etiam Justiciarios
itinerantes de Comitatu in Comitatum, quandoque adomnia placita, quandoque; ad
quaedam specialia, sicut Assisas, etc. et ad Gaolas deliberandas, quandoque ad
unicam, vel duas, and non plures. And by this means the Justices of both
Benches, being justly to be accounted the fittest, of all others and others
their Assistants, as also the Sergeant at law may be employed in these
affairs, who as gravest in years, so are they ripest in judgment, and
therefore likest to be void of partiality, for being called to this dignity,
they give over practice, anno 8 R. 2. cap. 3. but this always to be remembered,
that neither Justice of either Bench, nor any other, may be Justice of Assise
in his own Country, anno 8 R. 2. cap. 2. and anno 33 H. 8. cap. 24. Lastly,
note, that in these days, though the self same men disparch business of so
diverse natures, and all at one time, which were wont to be performed by diverse,
and at several times, yet they do it by several commissions, Cromptons
jurisdictions, fol. 210. For those who be in one word called Justices of
Circuit, and twice every year pass, by two and two, through all England have
one Commission to take Assizes, another to deliver Gaols, another of Oyer and
Terminer. That Justices of Assise, and Justices in Air did anciently differ,
it appears anno 27 Ed. 3. cap. 5. and that Justices of Assise, and Justices
of Gaol delivery were diverse, it is evident by anno 4 Ed. 3. cap. 3. The oath
taken by Justices of Assise, is all one with the oath taken by the Justices of
the Kings Bench. Old abridgement of Statutes, titulo Sacramentum
Justiciariorum. See Oath.

Justices of Oyer and Terminer, (Justiciarii ad audi^ndum and Terminandum) were
Justices deputed upon some especial or extraordinary occasion, to hear and
deter mine some or more causes. Fitzherbert in his natura brevium says, that
the Commission a'Oyer and Terminer, is directed to certain persons upon any
great assembly, insurrections, heinous demeanure, or trespass committed. And
because the occasion of granting this commission should be maturely weighed, is
provided by the Statute anno 2 Ed. 3. cap. 2. that no such commission ought to
be granted, but that they shall be dispatched before the Justices of the one
Bench or other, or Justices errants, except for horrible trespasses, and that
by the special favor of the King. The form of this commission, see in Fitzh.
nature. brev. fol. 110.

Justices in Air (Justiciarii itinerantes) are so termed of the French ( Err,
i. iter) which is an old word, as ( a grand err, i. magnis itineribus)
proverbially spoken; the use of these in ancient time, was to send them with
Commission into diverse Counties, to hear such causes especially, as were termed
the Plees of the Crown, and therefore I must imagine they were so sent abroad
for the ease of the Subjects, who must else have been hurried to the Kings
Bench, if the cause were too high for the County Court. They differed from the
Justices of Oyer and Terminer, because they (as is abovesaid) were sent upon
some one, or few especial cases, and to one place: whereas the Justices in
Air, were sent through the Provinces and Counties of the land, with more
indefinite and general Commission, as appears by Bracton, lib. 3. cap. 11,
12, 13, and Britton, cap. 2. And again, they seem to differ in this, because
the Justices of Oyer and Terminer, (as it is before said) were sent
uncertainly, upon any uproar or other occasion in the country: but these in
Air (as M. Gwin sets down in the Preface to his Reading) were sent but
every seven year once with whom Horn in his mirror of Justices, seems to
agree, lib. 2. cap. queux point estre actourrs, etc. and lib. 2. cap. des
peches criminels, etc. al suyte de Roy, etc. and li. 3. ca. de Justices in
Air: where he also declar^th what belonged to their office. These were
instituted by Henry the 2. as M. Camden in his Britannia witnesses, page 104.
And Roger Hoveden, part posteri. annalium, fol. 313. b. has of them these
words: Justiciarii itinerantes constituti per Henricum secundum, i. qui divisit
regnum suum in sex parts, per quarum singulas tres Justiciarios itinerantes
constituit, quorum nomina haec sunt, etc.

Justices of Gaol delivery (Justiciarii ad Gaolas deliberandas) are such as are
sent with Commission, to hear and determine all causes appertaining to such as
for any offense are cast into the Gaol, part of whose authority is, to punish
such, as let to Mainprise those prisoners, that by law be not baileable by the
Statute de finibus, cap. 3. Fitz. not. br. fol. 151. I. These by likelihood in
ancient time, were sent to Countries upon this several occasion. But afterward
Justices of Assise were likewise authorized to this, anno 4 Ed. 3. cap. 3.
Their oath is all one with other of the Kings Justices of either Bench, Old
Abridgement of Statutes, titulo Sacramentum Justiciariorum. See Oath.

Justices of laborers, were Justices appointed in those times, to redress the
frowardness of laboring men, that would either be idle, or have unreasonable
wages. See anno 21 Edvardi 3. cap. primo. anno 25 ejusd. cap. 8. and an. 31
ejusd. cap. 6.

Justices of Nisi prius, are all one now adays with Justices of Assizes: for
it is a common Adjournment of a cause, in the Gommon Plees to put it off to
such a day, Nisi prius Justiciarit venerint ad eas part, ad capiendas Assisas:
and upon this clause of Adjournment, they are called Justices of Nisi Prius, as
well as Justices of Assizes; by reason of the writ or action that they have to
deal in: their Commission you may see in Cromptons Jurisdictions, fol. 204. yet
M. Crompton makes this difference between them, because Justices of Assise
have power to give judgment in a cause, but Justices of Nisi prius, only to
take the verdict. But in the nature of both their functions this seems to be
the greatest difference, because Justices of Nisi prius have to deal in causes
personal as well as real, whereas Justices of Assise, in strict acception, deal
only with the possessory writs called Assizes.

Justices of trial baston, alias of trayl baston, were a kind of Justices
appointed by King Edward the first, upon occasion of great disorder grown in
the Realm, during his absence in the Scottish and French wars; they are called
in the Old not. brev. fol. 52. Justices of trial Baston, but by Holynshed and
Stow, Ed. pri. of Trail baston, or trailing or drawing the staff, as Holynshed
says: Their office was to make inquisition through the Realm by the verdict of
substantial Juries, upon all officers, as Majors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs,
Escheators and others, touching extortion, briberies, and other such
grievances, as intrusions into other men's lands, and Barratours that used to
take money for beating of men, and also of them whom they did beat: by means of
which inqusitions many were punished by death, many by ransom, and so the rest
flying the Realm, the land was quieted, and the King gained great riches toward
the supporting of his wars. Inquire farther of the name. Baston is thought by
some to be the beam of a pair of Scoales or Weights: And this is in this place
metaphorically applied to the just peising of recompense for offenses
committed. My poor opinion is, that the etymology of this title or addition
grows from the French ( Treilles, i. cancelli,) bars or lettises of what
thing soever, a grate with cross bars, or of the singular ( Treille, i.
pargula,) an house, arbor, a rail or form, such as vines run upon, and
(Baston) a staff or pole, noting thereby, that the Justices employed in this
Commission, had authority to proceed without any solemn Judgment Seat, in any
place either compassed in with railes, or made Booth or Tent-wise, set up with
staves or poets without more work, wheresoever they could apprehend the
malefactors they sought for. See libro Assisarum, folio 57.141.

Justices of Peace (Justiciarii ad pacem) are they that are aprointed by the
kings Commission, with others, to attend the peace of the County where they
dwell: of whom some upon special respect are made of the Quorum, because some
business of importance may not be dealt in without the presence or assent of
them or one of them. Of these it is but folly to write more, because they have
so many things appertaining to their Office, as cannot in few words be
comprehended. And again Justice Fitzherbert sometime sithence, as also Master
Lamberd and Master Crompton of late, have written Books of it to their great
commendation, and fruitful benefit of the whole Realm. See also Sir Thomas
Smith de repub: Anglorum lib. 2. cap. 19. They were called Gardians of the
Peace, until the 36. year of king Edward the third, cap. 12. where they be
called Justices. Lam. Eirenarcha lib. 4. cap. 19. page 578. Their oath see also
in Lamberd, lib. 1. cap. 10.

Justices of Peace, etc. within Liberties, Justiciarii ad pacem infra
libertates, be such in Cities and other Corporate Towns, as those others be of
any County, and their authority or power is all one within their several
precincts, Anno 27 H. 8. cap. 25.

Justicies, is a Writ directed to the Sheriff, for the dispatch of Justice in
some especial cause, wherewith of his own authority he cannot deal in his
County Court, lib. 12. cap. 18. whereupon the Writ de Excommunicato
deliberando, is called a Justicies in the Old not. brev. fol. 35. Also the
Writ, de homine replegiando, eodem fol. 41. Thirdly, the Writ, de secunda
superoneratione pasturae, eodem fol. 73. Kitchen fol. 74. says, that by this
writ called Justicies, the Sheriff may hold plee of a great sum, whereas of
his ordinary authority he cannot hold plees but of sums under forty
shillings. Crompton fol. 231. agrees with him. It is called a Justicies,
because it is a commission to the Sheriff ad Justiciandam aliquem, to do a man
right, and requires no return of any certificate of what he has done. Bracton
lib. 4. tract. 6. cap. 13. number. 2. makes mention of a Justicies to the Sheriff
of London, in a case of Dower. See the new book of Entries, Justicies.

Justification (Justificatio) is an upholding or showing a good reason in
Court, why he did such a thing as he is called to answer, as to Justify in a
cause of Replevin, Broke, titulo Replevin.

KE.
KEeper of the great Seal (Custos Magni Sigilli) is a Lord by his Office, and
called Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England, etc. and is of the Kings privy
Council, under whose hands pass all Charters, Commissions, and Grants of the
King, strengthened by the great or broad Seal. Without the which Seal, all such
Instruments by Law are of no force; for the King is in interpretation and
intendment of Law, a Corporation, and therefore passes nothing firmly, but
under the said Seal. This Lord Keeper by the Statute anno 5 Eliz. cap. 18. has
the same and the like place, authority, pre-eminence, Jurisdiction, execution
of Laws, and all other Customs, Commodities, and advantages, as has the Lord
Chancellor of England for the time being.

Keeper of the privy Seal (Custos privati Sigilli) is a Lord by his Office,
under whose hands pass all Charters signed by the Prince, before they come to
the broad or great Seal of England. He is also of the Kings privy Council. He
seems to be called Clerk of the privy Seal, anno 12 Rich. 2. cap. 11. But of
late days I have known none to bear this Office, by reason the Prince thinks
good, rather to keep his Seal in his own hands, and by private trust to commit
it to his principal Secretary, or some such one of his Council as he thinks
fit for that function.

Keeper of the Touch, anno 2 H. 6. cap. 14. seems to be that Officer in the
Kings Mint, which at this day is termed the Master of the Assay. See Mint.

Keeper of the Forest (Custos Forestae) is also called Chief Warden of the
Forest, Manwood part prim. of his Forest laws, page 156. etc. and has the
principal government of all things belonging thereunto: as also the check of
all Officers belonging to the Forest. And the Lord Chief Justice in Eyr of the
Forest, when it pleases him to keep his Justice Seat, does forty days before,
send out his general Summons to him, for the warning of all under Officers, to
appear before him at a day assigned in the Summons. This see in Manwood ubi
supra.

KI
King (Rex) is thought by M. Camden in his Britan. page 105. to be contracted
of the Saxon word Cyninge, signifying him that has the highest power and
absolute rule over our whole Land: and thereupon the King is in intendment of
Law cleared of those defects that Common persons be subject unto. For he is
always supposed to be of full age, though he be in years never so young,
Cromptons Jurisdictions, fol. 134. Kitchen fol. 1. He is taken as not subject
unto death, but is a Corporation in himself that lives ever, Crompton ibidem.
Thirdly, he is above the Law by his absolute power, Bracton lib. 1. cap. 8.
Kitchen fol. 1. And though for the better and equal course in making Laws, he
do admit the three Estates, that is, Lords Spiritual, Lords Temporal, and the
Commons unto Counsel, yet this in diverse learned men's opinions, is not of
constraint, but of his own benignity, or by reason of his promise made upon
oath at the time of his Coronation. For otherwise were he a Subject after a
sort, and subordinate, which may not be thought without breach of duty and
loyalty. For then must we deny him to be above the Law, and to have no power of
dispersing with any positive law, or of granting especial Privileges and
Charters unto any, which is his only and clear right, as Sir Thomas Smith well
expresses, lib. 1. cap. 3. de Repub. Anglica. and Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 16.
number. 3. and Britton ca. 39. For he pardons life and limme to Offenders
against his Crown and Dignity, except such as he binds himself by Oath not to
forgive. Stawnf. pl. Cor. l. 2. ca. 35. And Habet omnia jura in manu sua,
Bracton l. 2. c. 24. nu. 1. And though at his Coronation he take an Oath, not
to alter the laws of the Land, yet this Oath notwithstanding he may alter, or
suspend any particular Law that seems hurtful to the public Estate.
Blackwood in Apologia Regum, cap. 11. See Oath of the King. Thus much in short,
because I have heard some to be of opinion, That the Laws be above the King.
But the Kings Oath of old you may see in Bracton lib. 3. cap. 9. nu. 2. for the
which look in Oath of the King. The Kings Oath in English you may see in the
old Abridgement of Statutes, titulo Sacram. Regis. Fourthly, the Kings only
Testimony of any thing done in his presence, is of as high nature and credit as
any Record. Whence it comes, that in all Writs or Precepts sent out for the
dispatch of Justice, he uses none other Witness but himself, always using
these words under it, Test me ipso. Lastly, he has in the right of his Crown
many Prerogatives above any common person, be he never so potent or honorable:
whereof you may read you fill in Stawnfords Tractate upon the Statute thereof
made, anno 17 Ed. 2. though that contain not all by a great number. What the
Kings power is, read in Bracton lib. 2. cap. 24. nu. pri. and 2.

King of Heralds (Rex Haraldorum) is an Officer at Arms, that has the
preeminence of this Society. See Herald. This officer of the Romans was called
Pater Patratus.

Kings Bench (Bancus Regius) is the Court or Judgment Seat where the King of
England was wont to sit in his own person: and therefore was it moveable with
the Court or Kings household. And called Curia Domini Regis, or Aula R^gia, as
Master Gwin reports in the Preface to his Readings; and that in that and the
Exchequer, which were the only Courts of the King, until Henry the Thirds
days, were handled all matters of Justice, as well Civil as Criminal; whereas
the Court of Common Plees might not be so by the Statute anno 9 H. 3. cap. 11.
or rather, by Master Gwins opinion, was presently upon the grant of the great
Charter severally erected. This Court of the Kings bench was wont in ancient
times to be especially exercised in all Criminal matters and Plees of the
Crown, leaving the handling of private contracts to the County Court. Glanvil.
lib. 1. cap. 2, 3, 4, and lib. 10. cap. 18. Smith de Repub. Anglicana, lib. 2.
cap. 11. and has President of it, the Lord Chief Justice of England, with
three or four Justices assistants, four or five as Fortescue says, cap. 51.
and Officers thereunto belonging, the Clerk of the crown, a Praenatory, or
Protonotary, and other six inferior Ministers or Atturneys. Camb. Britan. page
112. See Latitat. How long this Court was moveable, I find not in any Writer:
But in Brittons time, who wrote in K. Ed. the 1. his days, it appears it
followed the Court, as M. Gwin in his said preface well observes out of him.
See Justice of the Kings Bench.

Kings silver, is properly that money, which is due to the King in the court of
Common Plees, in respect of a license there granted to any man for passing a
fine. Coke vol. 6. fol. 39. a. and 43. b.

Kintall of woad, iron, etc. is a certain weight of Merchandise, to the value
of an hundred, or something under or over, acording to the diverse uses of sundry
nations. This word is mentioned by Plowden in the case of Reniger and Fogassa.

KN
Knave is used for a manservant, anno 14 Edward. 3. stat. 1. ca. 3. and by M.
Verstigans judgment, in his restitution of decayed intelligence, ca. 10. is
borrowed of the Dutch enapa, cnave or knave, which signify all one thing. And
that is some kind of officer or servant: as scild-knapa was he that bore the
weaon or shield of his superior, whom the Latins call Armigerum: and the
Frenchmen, Escuyer.

Knight (miles) is almost one with the Saxon Cnight, i. administer; and by M.
Camdens judgment, page 110. derived from the same. With us it signifies a
Gentleman, or one that bears arms, that for his virtue, and especially
martial prowess, is by the King, or one having the Kings authority, singled
(as it were) from the ordinary sort of Gentlemen, and raised to a higher
account or step of dignity. This among all other Nations, has his name from
the horse: because they were wont in ancient time to serve in wars on
horseback. The Romans called them Equites. The Italians at these days term
them Cavallieri. The Frenchmen Chevalliers. The German, Reiters. The Spaniard,
Gavellaros, or Varones a Cavallo. It appears by the Statute, anno 1 Ed. 2.
cap. 1. that in ancient times, Gentlemen having a full Knights fee, and holding
their land by Knights service, of the King, or other great person, might be
urged by distress, to procure himself to be made knight, when he came to man's
estate, for the answerable service of his Lord in the kings wars. To which
point you may also read M. Camden in his Britann. page 111. But these customs
be not now much urged: this dignity in these days being rather of favor
bestowed by the Prince upon the worthier sort of Gentlemen, than urged by
constraint. The manner of making knights (for the dignity is not hereditarie)
M. Camden in his Britan. page 111. shortly expresses in these words: Nostris
vero temporibus, qui Equestrem dignitatem suscipit, flexis genibus educto
g'adio leviter in humero percutitur. Princeps his verbis Gallice affatur: Sus
vel sois Chevalier au nom de Dieu, id est, Surge, aut, Sis eques in nomine Dei.
The Solemnity of making knights among the Saxons, M. Stow mentions in his
Annals, page 159. See the privileges belonging to a Rnight in Ferns Glory of
Generosity, page 116. Of these Knights there be two sorts: one Spiritual,
another Temporal. Cassanaus in gloria mundi, part 9. Considerat, 2. of both
these sorts, and of many subdivisions, read him in that whole part. The
Temporal, or second sort of Knights M. Fern in his Glory of generosity, page
103. makes threefold here with us. Knights of the Sword, Knights of the Bath,
and Knights of the Soverain Order, that is, of the Garter: of all which you may
read what he says. I must remember that mine intent is but to explain the
terms especially of our common Law. Wherefore such as I find mentioned in
Statutes, I will define as I can. M. Skene de verbor. significat. verbo
Milites, says, that in the ancient Laws of Scotland, Freeholders were called
Milities, which may seem to have been a custom with us also, by diverse places
in Bracton, who says, that Knights must be in Juries, which turn Freeholders
do serve.

Knights of the Garter (Equites Garterii) are an Order of Knights, created by
Edward the third, after he had obtained many notable victories (King John of
France, and King James of Scotland being both his prisoners together, and Henry
of Castile the Bastard expulsed out of his Realm, and Don pedro being restored
unto it by the Prince of Wales, and Duke of Aquitane, called the Black Prince)
who for furnishing of this Honorable Order, made a choice out of his own
Realm, and all Christendom, of the best, and most excellent renowned Knights
in Virtues and Honor, bestowing this dignity upon them, and giving them a Blew
Garter, decked with Gold, Pearl, and precious Stones, and a Buckle of Gold to
wear daily on the left leg only, a Kirtle, Crown, Cloak, Chaperon, a Collar,
and other stately and magnifical apparel, both of stuff and fashion, exquisite
and heroical, to wear at high Feasts, as to so high and Princely an Order was
mere. Of which order, he and his successors, Kings of England, were ordained
to be the Sovereigns, and the rest fellows and brethren to the number of
twenty six, Smith de Repub. Anglo. lib. prim. cap. 20. I have seen an ancient
monument, whereby I am taught that this Honorable Company is a College or a
Corporation, having a Common Seal belonging unto it, and consisting of a
Sovereign Guardian, which is the King of England, that always governs this
order by himself or his Deputy, of twenty five Companions called Knights of the
Garter, of fourteen secular Chanons that be Priests, or must be within one year
after their admission: 13. Vicars also Priests, and 26. poor Knights, that have
no other sustenance or means of living but the allowance of this house, which
is given them in respect of their daily Prayer to the Honor of God, and
(according to the course of those times) of Saint George. There be also certain
officers belonging to this order, as namely, the Prelate of the Garter, which
office is inherent to the Bishop of Winchester, for the time being, the
Chancellor of the Garter, the Register, who is always Dean of Windsor. The
principal King at Arms called Garter, whose chief function is to manage, and
marshal their Solemnities at their yearly Feasts and installations. Lastly, the
Usher of the Garter, which (as I have heard) belongs to an Usher of the
Princes Chamber, called Black rod. There are also certain ordinances or
Constitutions belonging unto this Society, with certain forfeitures, and
sometime penances for the breakers of them; which constitutions concern either
the Solemnities of making these Knights, or their duties after their creation,
or the Privileges belonging to so high an order, but are too large for the
nature of this poor Vocabularie. The site of this College, is the Castle of
Windsour, with the chapel of Saint George, erected by Edward the Third, and the
Chapter house in the said Castle. Howbeit the yearly Solemnity or Prfoession
may be, and is, by the Sovereigns direction, performed at the Court,
wheresoever it lies, upon Saint Georges day. Master Camden says, that this
order received great ornament from Edward the fourth. See M. Ferns glory of
Generosity, page 120. See Garter. Hospinian in his book de origin and
progressu Monachatiu, makes mention of this honorable order, terming it by
ignorance of our tongue ordinem Carteriorum equitum; and Charteriorum equitum;
which you may read, cap. 307. as also Bernardus Girardus in his history, lib.
15. cap. 185.

Knights of the Bath (milites balnei, vel de balneo) are an order of Knights
made within the Lists of the Bath, girded with a Sword, in the ceremony of his
creation. Ferns glory of generositie, page 105. These are spoken of, anno 8
Edw. 4. cap. 2. But I had an old Monument lent me by a friend, whereby it
appears, that these knights were so called of a Bath, into the which (after
they had been shaven and trimmed by a Barber) they entered, and thence, the
night before they were Knighted, being well bathed, were taken again by two
Esquiers commanded to attend them, dried with fine linen clothes, and so
apparelled, and led through many solemn ceremonies, viz. confessing their sins,
watching and praying all night in a Church or Chapel, with many other, to the
order of knighthood the next day. So that by the same reason these seemed to be
termed knights of the Bath, by which knights made out of the field in these
days are called knights of the Carpet, because in receiving their Order, they
commonly kneel upon a carpet.

Knights of the Order of S. John of Jerusalem

Milites Sancti Johannis Hierosolumitani) were otherwise called knights of the
Rhodes: being an Order of knighthood that had beginning about the year of the
Lord 1120. Honorius then Pope of Rome: Cassanaeus de Gloria Mundi, part 9.
Consideratione 4. And Master Fern in his Glory of Generosity, page 127. They
had their primary foundation and chief abode first in Jerusalem, and then in
Rhodes, where many of them lived under their Principal, called the Master of
Rhodes, until they were expelled thence by the Turk, Anno 1523. Si^hence which
time their chief Seat is at Malta, where they have done great exploits against
the Infidels, but especially in the year 1595. These, though they had their
beginning and especiallest abode first at Hieru^alem, and next in Rhodes, yet
they increased both in number and Revenues, living after the Order of Friars
under the rule of Saint Augustine, and were dispersed into France, Spain,
Alverne, Campany, England and Ireland. Of these mention is made in the Statute,
Anno 25 Her. 8. cap. 2. and anno 26 ejusdem cap. secundo. And it appears that
they in England had one general Prior, that had the government of the whole
Order within England and Scotland, Regist. orig. fol. 20. b. But toward the
end of Henry the eighths days, they in England and Ireland being found
overmuch to adhere to the Bishop of Rome against the King, were suppressed, and
their Lands and Goods referred by Parliament to the Kings disposition, anno 32
Hen. 8. cap. 24. The occasion and the propagation of this order more especially
described, you may read in the Treatise entitled the Book of Honor and Arms,
lib. 5. cap. 18. written by Master Richard Johnes.

Knights of the Rhodes, anno 32 H. 8. cap. 24. See Knights of the Order of S.
John.

Knights of the Temple (otherwise called Templers) Templarii was an Order of
Knighthood, created by Gelasius the Pope, about the year of our Lord, 1117. and
so called, because they dwelt in a part of the buildings belonging to Temple.
These in the beginning dwelling not far from the Sepulcher of the Lord
entertained Christian Strangers and Pilgrims charitably, and in their Armor led
them through the Holy Land, to view such things as there were to be seen,
without fear of Infidells adjoining. This Order continuing and increasing by
the space of 200 years, was far spread in Christendom, and namely here in
England. But at the last, the chief of them at Jerusalem, being (as some men
say) found to fall away to the Sarazens from Christianity, and to abound in
many vices, the whole Order was suppressed by Clemens quintus, which was about
King Edward the 1. days, and their substance given partly to the Knights of
the Rhodes, and partly to other Religious. Cassan. de gloria mundi, part 9.
Consid. 5. And see anno prim. Edw. 1. cap. 24. Others write, that in truth
their destruction grew from leaning to the Emperor against the Pope of Rome,
whatsoever was pretended. Joach. Stephanus de jurisdictione, lib. 4. cap. 10.
nu. 18. See Templers.

Knights of the Shire (Milites Comitatus) otherwise be called Knights of the
Parliament, and be two Knights, or other Gentlemen of worth, that are chosen in
pleno Comita^u, by the Freeholders of every County that can dispend 40
shillings per annum, and be resident in the Shire, anno 10 H. 6. cap. 2. and
anno 1 H. 5. cap. 1. upon the Kings Writ, to be sent to the Parliament, and
there by their Counsel to assist the common proceedings of the whole Realm.
These when every man that had a Knights fee, were custumarily constrained to be
a Knight, were of necessity to be mlietes gladio cincti for so runs the
tenure of the writ at this day. Crompton Jurisdict. fo. pri. But now there
being but few Knights in comparison of former times, and many men of great
livings in every County, Custom bears that Esquires may be chosen to this
Office, anno 23 H. 6. cap. 6. so that they be resident within the County, anno
H. 6. cap. 7. and anno 1 H. 5. cap. prim. For the observations in choice of
these Knights, see the Statutes, anno 7 H. 4. cap. 15. and anno 11 ejusdem,
cap. 1. and anno 6 Hen. 6. cap. 4. and anno 23 H. 6. ca. 15. and the new Book
of Entries, verbo Parliament, nu. 1. Their expenses during the Parliament are
born by the County, anno 35 Hen. 8. cap. 11.

Knight Marshal (Marescallus hospitii reg^i) is an Officer in the King House,
having jurisdiction and cognizance of any transgression within the Kings House
and Verge, as also of Contracts made within the same House, whereunto one of
the House is a party: Regist. orig. fo. 185. a, b. et fo. 191. b. whereof you
may there read more at large.

Knights fee, (feudum militare) is so much inheritance as is sufficient yearly
to maintain a Knight with convenient Revenue, which in Henry thirds days was
15 pounds, Cambdeni Britan. page 111. Or 180 acres of Land or 800 acres, eodem.
But Sir Thomas Smith in his Repub. Ang. li. prim. cap. 18. rateth it at forty
pound. And I find in the Statute for Knights, anno prim. Ed. 2. cap. prim. that
such as had twenty pounds in fee, or for term of life per annum, night be
compelled to be Knights. Master Stowe in his Annals page 285, says, there were
found in England at the time of the Conqueror sixty thousand, two hundreds and
eleven Knights fees: others say 60215. whereof the religious Houses before
their suppression were possessed of 28015. Knights fee is sometime used for the
Rent that a Knight paye^h for his fee to his Lord, of whom he holds. And this
is an uncertain sum: some holding by forty shillings the shield, some by twenty
shillings, as appears by Bracton lib. 5. tract. prim. ca. 2.

Knighton gylde, was a Gylde in London, consisting of ninteen Knights, which
King Edgar founded, giving unto them a portion of void ground lying without the
walls of the City, now called Portsokenward. Stowe in his Annals, page 151.

LA
LAborariis, is a Writ that lies against such, as having not whereof to live,
do refute to serve: or for him that refuses to serve in Summer where he served
in Winter, Orig. Regist. fol. 189 b.

Laches comes of the French ( Lascher, i. laxare, or lasche, i. frigidus,
ignavus, flaccidus) It signifies in our Common law, negligence: as no Laches
shall be adjudged in the Heir within age, Litleton, fo. 136. and Old not. br.
fol. 110. where a man ought to make a thing, and makes it not, I of his laches
cannot have an Assise, but I must take mine Action upon the Case.

Lagon, see Flotzon.

Laisedlists, an. 1 R. 3. ca. 8.

Land tenent, anno 14 Edw. 3. stat. 1. ca. 3. and anno 23 ejusdem, cap. 1. and
26. ejusdem stat. 5. cap. 2. See Terre-tenent, and anno 12 R. 2. ca. 4. and an.
4 H. 4. c. 8. It is joined with this word (Possessor) as Synonymon, v. anno 1
H. 6. ca. 5. See Terretenant.

Lants de crescentia Walliae traducexdis absque custuma, etc. is a Writ that
lies to the Customer of a Port, for the permitting one to pass over Woolls
without Custom, because he has paid Custom in Wales before, Register, fol.
279.

Lapse, (Lapsus) is a slip or departure of a right of Presenting to a void
Benefice, from the original Patron neglecting to present within six months unto
the Ordinary. For we say, that Benefice is in lapse or lapsed, whereunto he
that ought to present has omitted or slipped his opportunity, anno 13 Elizab.
cap. 12. This lapse grows as well the Patron being ignorant of the avoidance,
as privy, except only upon the Resignation of the former Incumbent, or the
Deprivation upon my cause comprehended in the Statute, anno 13 Eliz. cap. 12.
Panor. in ca. quia diversitatem, number. 7. de concess. praebend. Rebuffus de
devolut. in praxi benesiciorum. Lancelotus de collation: lib. 1. Institut.
Canon. Tempus autem. In which Cases the Bishop ought to give notice ^o the
Patron.

Larceny (Laricinium) comes of the French ( Larcen, i. furtum, detractio
alicui.) It is defined by West. part 2. Sym. titulo Inditements, to be theft
of personal goods or chattells, in the Owners absence: and in respect. of the
thing stolen, it is either great or small. Great Larcenny is, wherein the
things stolen though severally, exceed the value of 12 d. and Petit Larceny, is,
when the goods stolen, exceed not the value of 12 d. hitherto M. West. But he
differs from Bracton lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 32. nu. 1. Of this see more in
Stawnf. pl. cor. li. 1. cap. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.

Laghsl^te, is compounded of ( lah, i. lex) and ( slite, i. ruptum) and
signifies mulctam ruptae vel violatae legis, Lamb. explication of Saxon words,
verbo Mulcta.

Last, is a Saxon word, signifying a burden in general, as also particularly a
certain weight: for as we say a last of Hering, so they say, Ein last corns,
last wines, etc. chence comes Lastage, which see in Lestage. A Last of Hering
contains ten thousand, anno 31. Ed. 3. stat. 2. cap. 2. A Last of ^itch and
tar, or of ashes, contains 14 parrells, anno 32 H. 8. cap. 14. A Last of
hides, anno 1 Jac. ca. 33. contains 12 dozen of hides or skins.

Latitat, is the name of a Writ, whereby all men in personal actions, are
called originally to the Kings Bench, Fitz. natura brevium, fol. 78. M. And it
has the name from this, because in respect of their better expedition, a man
is supposed to lurk, and therefore being served with this writ, he must put in
security for his appearance at the ^ay, for latitare, est se malitiose
occultaere a nimo fraudandi creditores suos agere volentes. l. Eulcinius,. Quid
sit latitare. p. Quibus ex eausis in possessionem eatur: But to understand the
true original of this Writ, it is to be known, that in ancient time, whilst
the Kings Bench was moveable, and followed the Court of the King, the Custom
was, when any man was to ^e sued, to send forth a Writ to the Sheriff of ^^e
County where the Court lay, for the calling ^im in: and if the Sheriff
returned, Non est inventus in Baliva nostra, etc. then was there a second Writ
procured forth, that had these words, (Testatum est ^um latitare, etc.) and
thereby the Sheriff wills to attach him in any other place where he might be
found. Now when the tribunal of the Kings Bench came to be settled at
Westminster, the former course of Writ was kept for a long time, first sending
to the Sheriff of Middlesex to summon the party, and if he could not be found
there, then next to apprehend him wheresoever. But this seeming too troublesome
for the Subject, it was at last devised, to put both these wits into one, and
so originally to attach the party complained of upon a supposall or fiction,
that he was not within the County of Middlesex, but lurking elsewhere, and that
therefore he was to be apprehended in any place else. where he was presumed to
lie hidden, by a Writ directed the Sheriff of the County where he is suspected
to be. And by this Writ a man being brought in, is committed to the Marshall of
that Court, in whose custody when he is, then by reason he is in the same
County where the Kings Bench is, he may be sued upon an Action in that Court,
whereas the original cause of apprehending him, must be a pretense of some
deceit or contempt committed, which most properly of old belonged to the
cognizance of that Court. I have been informed, that the bringing of these
Actions of Trespass so ordinarily to the Kings Bench was an invention of
Counselors, that because only Sergeants may come to the Common Pleas Bar,
found a means to set themselves on work in that Court. The form of this Writ is
such: Jacobus Dei gratia Angliae Franciae, Scotiae, and Hibernia Rex, fidei
defonsor, etc. Vicecomisi Cantabridgiae salutem. Cum Vicecomiti nostro
Middlesexiae nupar praeceperimus, quod caperct Thomam T. and Willielmum W. si
invents fuissent in Baliva sua, and eos salvo custodiret, ita quod haberet
copora eorum coram nobis apud Westminster die Veneris proximo post octavas
Sanctae Trinitatis, ad respondendum Roberto R. de placito transgressionis,
cumque Vicecomes noster Middlesexiae, ad diem illum nobis returnaverit, quod
praedicti Tho. T. and Willielmus W. non sunt i^venti inbaliva sua, super quo ex
part praedicti Roberti in curia nostra coram nobis sufficienter testatum est,
quod praedicti Thomas and Willielmus latitant and discurrunt in Comitatu tuo.
Idcirco tibi praecipimus quod capias eas, si inventi fuerint in baliva tua, and
eos salvo custodias, ita quod habeas corpora eorum coram nobis apud
Westminster, die Martis proximo post tres septimanas, eodem Trinitatis, ad
respondendum praefato Roberto de placito pradicto, and habeas ibi tunc hoc
breve. Test Johanne Papham apud Westminster. Roper.

Launcegay, anno 7 Richard. secundi, cap. 13.

Law, (lex) comes of the Saxon (lah,) the general signification is plain,
only this I thought to note, that the Law of this Land has Leen variable. For
first, Dunwallo Mulmutius otherwise Molincius a Britain, that being Duke of
Co^nwall, reduced the whole Land formerly severed by civil wars, into the State
of a Monarchy, made certain wholesome Laws which long after were called
Mulmutius Laws and by Gyldas translated out of the British tongue into Latin,
Stow in his Annals, p. 16. Of these there remain yet certain heads, recorded by
our Historiographers as follows. 1. Ut Deorum templa, and civitates hominum
consequantur tantam dignitatem, ne quis illo confugiens extrahi possit,
antequam ab eo quem laeserat, veniam impetraverit. 2. Ut hujusmodi priv^legium
immunitatis habeant etiam ipsae viae q^^^ ducunt ad templa and ad urbes. 3. Imo
et jumenta quoque illa, quae res rusticae subveniunt. 4. Denique colonorum
aratra ip sa tali praerogativa libertatis perfruantur. 5. Ho^ amplius, ut ne
qua terra vacaret cultur^, neve populus inopia rei frumentariae premeretur, aut
^a miniseretur, si pecora sola oecuparent agros qui ab hominibus coli debent.
6. Constituit quot aratra quaelibet dioecesis haberet: ac poenam statui iis,
per quos ill^ numerus aratrorum foret dimunitus. 7. Item vetuit, bovem aratorem
pro debito pecuniae assignari debitoribus, si alia bona debitoris essent. Itae
fore, ne compendii causa homines pecuarii agros incultos redderent: sic etiam
fore, ne quid earum rerum quas natura praebet, hominibus usquam deesse passet.
Rich. Vitus, historiarum Britann^a. l. 3. n. 1. And of these Laws we find no
obscure remanets in our laws now in use. See Mag na Charta cap. 1. et cap. 14.
See Sanctuary. See Peace. Then was there a Law called Merchenlage, whereby the
Mercians were governed, being a Kingdom in the heart of the Land, containing
those Countries, that be now called Northampton shire, Leichestershire,
Rutland-shire, Lincolnshire, Nottingham-shire, and Derby-shire, Camden Britan.
page 94. whose power was great in the Heptarchie of the Saxons, until at the
last they were conquered by the West Saxons, and made subject to them. Polydor.
in Angl. Hist. lib. 5. But whereas the name of these Laws favors of the
Saxons time, it is reported by others that Martia a very learned Queen, and
wife to Quintelinus a Britton King, was the Author of them long before the
Saxons set foot into England. Rich. Vitus, histo. Brittan. li. 3. number. 14. who
also says that Alfrea the Saxon King translated both these, and also those of
Mulmutius into the English or Saxon tongue. Thirdly, there was the law of the
West Saxons, called West Saxenlage, and the law of the Danes, when they set
foot into the Realm, called Denelage. And of these Laws, Edward made one Law,
as some write, whereby he ruled his Kingdom. But M. Camden ubi supra, speaking
nothing of Mulmutius laws, says out of Gervasius Tilburiensis, that of the
other three William the Conqueror chose the best, and to them adding of the
Norman laws, such as he thought good, he ordained laws for our kingdom, which
we have at this present, or the most of them.

Law has an especial signification also, wherein it is taken for that which is
lawful with us, and not else where. As tenent by the courtesy of England, an.
13 Ed. 1. c. 3. and again, to wage Law, vadiare legem: and to make law, facere
legem, Bracton l. 3. tract. 2. c. 37. is to challenge a special benefit, that
the Law of this Realm affords in certain cases: whereof the first, sc.
vadiare legem, is to put in security, that he will make law at a day assigned,
Glanvile lib. 1. cap. 9. and to make law, is to take an oath, that he owes not
the debt challenged at his hand, and also to bring with him so many men as the
Court shall assign, to avow upon their oath, that in their Consciences he has
sworn truly. And this law is used in actions of debt, without specialty, as
also where a man coming to the Court, after such time, as his Tenements for
default, be seized into the Kings hands, will deny himself to have been
summoned, Glanvile, l. b. 1. cap. 9. and 12. And see Bracton ubi supra, number. 1.
v. Kitchen fol. 164. See the new exposition of law Terms, verbo (Ley) this is
borrowed from Normand^, as appears by the Grand Customary, cap. 85. But Sir
Edward Cook says, it springs originally from the Judicial law of God, lib.
4. of his Reports, Slades Case, fol. 95. b. alleging the 22 Chapter of Exodus,
verse 7. Whether so or not, the like Custom is among the Feudists: by whom
they that come to purge the Defendant are called (Sacramentales) libro Feud. 1.
titulo 4. sect. 3. and titulo 10. and titulo 26.

Law of Arms (jus militare) is a Law that gives precepts and rule how rightly
to proclaim war, to make and observe leagues and truce, to set upon the enemy,
to retire, to punish offenders in the Camp, to appoint soldiers their pay, to
give every one dignity to his desert, to divide spoils in proportion, and such
like, for farther knowledge whereof, read those that write de ^re belli.

Law day, signifies a Leet, Cromptons jurisdict. fol. 160. and the County
Court, anno 1 Edw. 4. cap. 2.

Lawles man, is he qui est extra legem, Bracton, lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 11.
number. prim. See Outlaw.

Law of Marque. See Reprisalls. This word is used anno 27 Edw. 3. stat. 2. cap.
17. and grows from the German word March, i. limes, a bound or limit. And the
reason of this appellation is, because they that are driven to this law of
reprisall, do take the Goods of that people of whom they have received wrong,
and cannot get ordinary Justice, when they can catch them within their own
territories or precincts.

Law Merchant, is a Privilege or special law differing from the Common law of
England, and proper to Merchants and summary in proceeding, anno 27 Edw. 3.
stat. 8, 9, 19, et 20. anno 13 Edward 1. stat. tertio.

Lawing of dogs (expeditatio canum) See Expeditate. Mastifs must be lawed every
three year, Crompton jurisdict. fol. 163.

LE
Leasi (lessa) comes of the French ( laysser, i. linquere, relinquere,
smittere, permittere:) It signifies in our Common law, a demise or letting of
lands or tenements, or right of Common, or of a Rent, or any hereditament unto
another, for term of years or of life, for a rent reserved. And a lease is
either written, called a lease by Indenture, or made by word of mouth, called a
lease paroll. See the new terms of the law. The party, that lets this lease,
is called the Leassour, and the party to whom it is let, the Lessee. And a
lease has in it six ponts: viz. words importing a demise, a leassee named, a
commencement from a day certain, a term of years, a determination, a
reservation of a rent, Cook vol. 6. Knights Case fol. 55. a.

Leet (leta) is otherwise called a law day, Smith de Repub. Anglor. lib. 2.
cap. 18. the word seems to have grown from the Saxon (Lethe) which as
appears by the laws of King Edward set out by M Lambard, number. 34. was a Court
of Jurisdiction above the Wapentake or Hundred, comprehending three or four of
them, otherwise called Thryhing, and contained the third part of a Province or
Shire. These Jurisdictions one and other be now abolished, and swallowed up in
the County Court, except they be held by prescription. Kitchen, fol. 6. or
Charter in the nature of a Franchise, as I have said in (Hundred.) The liberty
of Hundreds is rare, but many Lords, together with their Courts Baron, have
likewise Leets adjoined, and thereby do enquire of such transgressions, as are
subject to the enquiry and correction of this Court: whereof you may read your
fill in Kitchen, from the beginning of this book to the fifth Chapter, B^itton,
cap. 28. But this Court, in whose Manor soever it be kept, is accounted the
kings Court, because the authority thereof is originally belonging to the
Crown, and thence derived to inferior persons, Kitchen, fol. 6. Justice Dyer
says, that this Leete was first-derived from the Sheriffs, Turn, fol. 64. And
it enquireth of all offenses under high treason, committed against the Crown
and Dignity of the king; though it cannot punish many, but must certify them
to the Justices of Assise, per Statut. anno 1. Ed: 3. cap. ult. Kitchen, fol.
8. but what things be only inquirable, and what punishable, see Kitchen in the
charge of a Court Leet, fol. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
See also the Statute, anno 8. Ed. 2. The Jurisdiction of Bailiffs in the Duchy
of Normandy, within the compass of their Provinces, seems to be the same,
or very near the same, with the power of our Leet, cap. 4. of the grand
Custumary.

Legacy (legatum) is a particular thing given by last will and testament. For
if a man dispose or transfer his whole right or estate upon another, that is
called Haereditas by the Civilians, and he to whom it is so transferred, is
termed haeres. Howbeit our common Lawyers call him Heir to whom all a man's
lands and hereditaments do descend by right of blood. See Heir. See
Hereditaments.

Leproso amovendo, is a writ that lies for a Parish to remove a Leper or
Lazar, that thrusts himself into the company of his neighbors, either in
Church or other public meeting, and comes with them to their annoyance or
disturbance. Regist. orig. fol. 267. Fitz, not. Brev. fo. 234.

Lestage, alias lastage, (lastagium) proceeds from the Saxon word ( last. i.
onus) and is a Custom challenged in Fairs and Markets, for carrying of things.
Rastals Exposition of words: or a Custom challenged in cheapings or Fairs.
Saxon in the description of England, cap. 11. Lastage anno 21. R. 2. cap. 18.
seems to be the balance of a ship. Fleta terms it Lesting, saying quod
significat acquietantiam Le stagii lib. 1. cap. 47. Lesting.

Letters of Exchange, (literae Cambitoriae, vel literae Cambii) Regist. orig.
fol. 194. a.

Letters patents (literae patentes) be Writings sealed with the broad Seal of
England, whereby a man is authorized to do or enjoy any thing that otherwise
of himself he could not, anno 19. H. 7. cap. 7. And they be so termed of their
form, because they be open with the Seal hanging, ready to be showed for the
confirmation of the authority given by them. If any will say, that Letters
patents may be granted by Common persons, I will not greatly contend. For I
find that to be true in Fitz. not. br. fol. 35. E. Howbeit they be called
rather patents in our Common speech, then Letters patents. Letters patents to
make Denizens, anno 32. Hen. 6. cap. 16. yet for difference sake, the kings
letters patents be called letters patents royal. Anno 2 Hen. 6. cap. 10. There
is likewise a writ patent, Fitzh. not. br. fol. 1. and seqq.

Levari facias, is a writ directed to the Sheriff, for the levying of a Sum of
money upon lands and tenements of him that has forfeited a Recognizance, etc.
Regist. origin. fol. 298. b. and 300. b.

Levari facias damna de disseisitoribus, is a writ directed to the Sheriff, for
the levying of damages, wherein the disseisour has formerly been condemned to
the disseisee. Regist. fol. 214. b.

Levari facias residuum debiti, is a writ directed to the Sheriff, for the
levying of a Remanant of a debt upon lands and tenements, or chattels of the
debtor, that has in part sasatisfied before, Regist. orig. fol. 299.

Levari facias quando vicecomes returnavir quod non habuit emptores, is a writ
commanding the Sheriff to sell the goods of the debtor, which he has already
taken and returned that he could not sell them, and as much more of the debtors
goods, as will satisfy the whole debt. Register, orig. fol. 300. a.

Letter of Attorney (litera Atturnatus) is a writing authorizing an Attorney,
that is, a man appointed to do a lawful act in our steeds, West. part. prim.
symbol. lib. 2. sect 559. It is called in the civil law ( mandatum, or
procuratorum.) There seems to be some difference between a letter of
Attorney, and a warrant of Attorney. For whereas a letter of Attorney is
sufficient, if it be sealed and delivebefore sufficient witness, a warrant of
Attorney, must be acknowledged and certified before such persons, as fines be
acknowledged in the Country, or at the least before some Justice or Sergeant.
West. part 2. symbol. tit. Recoveries. sect. 1. F. See the Statute, anno 7 R.
2. cap. 13.

Letters of Marque. See Marque and law of Marque. See Reprisals. See an. 14.
Hen. 6. cap. 7.

Letters patents of summons for debt, anno 9. H. 3. cap. 18.

Levy (Levare) comes of the French ( Lever, i. allevare, attollere) It is used
in our Common law, for to set up any thing, as to levy a mill, Kitchen, fol.
180. or to cast up, as to levy a ditch, Old. not. br. fol. 110. or to gather
and exact, as to levy money. See Levarifacias.

LI
Libell (Libellus) literally signifies a little book, but by use it is the
original declaration of any action in the civil law, an. 2 H. 5. cap. 3. and
anno 2 Ed. 6. ca. 13. It signifies also a criminous report of any man cast
abroad, or otherwise unlawfully published in writing, but then for difference
sake, it is called an infamous libel, famosus libellus.

Libello habendo. See Copia libelli deliberanda.

Libera Chasea habenda, is a writ Judicial, granted to a man for a free chase
belonging to his Manor, after he has by a Jury proved it to belong unto him,
Register Judicial. fol. 36. and 37.

Liberate, is a warrant issuing out of the Chancery to the Treasurer,
Chamberlanes, and Barons of the Exchequer, or Clerk of the Hamper, etc. for the
payments of any annual pension or other sums granted under the broad Seal, v.
Brook, titulo Tail d'Exchequer. nu. 4. Reg. orig. fol. 193. a. b. or sometime
to the Sheriff, etc. not. br. fol. 132. for the delivery of any lands or goods
taken upon forfeits of Recognisance, Fitz. not. br. fol. 131, and 132, v. Coke
lib. 4. Fulwoods case, fo. 64, 66. and 67. It is also to a Jayler from the
Justices, for the delivery of a Prisoner that has put in bail for his
appearance, Lamb. Eiren. lib. 3. ca. 2.

Liberate probanda, is a writ that lies for such as be challenged for Slaves,
and offer to prove themselves free, to the Sheriff, that he take security of
them for the proving of their freedom before the Justices of Assise, and
provide, that in the mean time they be quiet from their vexations, that
challenge them for Slaves. Fitzh. not. brev. fol. 77. See Nativo habendo.

Libertatibus allocandis, is a writ that lies for a Citizen or Burgess of any
City, that contrarily to the liberties of the City or Town whereof he is, is
impleaded before the Kings Justices, or Justices errants, or Justice of the
Forest, etc. that refuses, or deferreth to allow his privilege, Origi. Regist.
fol. 262. Fitz. not. br. fol. 229.

Libertatibus exigendis in itinere, is a writ, whereby the King wills the
Justices in Air, to admit of an Attorney for the defense of another man's
liberty, etc. before them. Regist. orig. fol. 19. b.

Libertas (lbertas) is a privilege held by grant or prescription, whereby men
enjoy some benefit or favor beyond the ordinary subject. Liberties royal what
they be, see in Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 5. Broke hoc titulo. See Franchise.

Librata terrae, contains four Oxegans, and every Oxegange 13. A^^s. Skene de
verb. signif. verbo Bovata terra. See Farding deal of land.

License to go to election, (Licentia eligendi, Regist. fol. 294.) See Conge
d'eslire.

License to arise, (licentia surgendi) is a liberty given by the Court to a
tenent, that is essoined de malo lecti in a real action. For the law is, that
in this case he may not arise out of his bed, or at least go out of his
chamber, until he have been viewed by Knights thereunto appointed, and so upon
view of his sickness, have a day assigned him to appear, or else lie until he
be licensed by the Court to arise. And the reason of this is, as I take it,
because it may appear whether he caused himself to be essoined deceitfully, yea
or not: and therefore if the Demandant can prove, that he be seen out of his
chamber, walking up and down his grounds, or else going abroad unto any other
place, before he be viewed or have license of the Court, he shall be adjudged
to be deceitfully essoined, and to have made default. Of this see Bracton, lib.
5. tract. 2. ca. 7, 10, and 12. and Fleta, li. 6. ca. 10. Horn in the second
book of his Mirror, ca. des Essoynes, says, that the adverse party may grant
licentiam surgendi to his adversary thus essoyned. And if he will not, the king
upon just cause may.

Licentia surgendi, is the writ whereby the Tenent essoined de malo lecti,
obtains liberty to rise. See License to arise. See the Register, fo. ^.

Licentia transfretandi, is a writ or warrant directed to the keepers of the
port at Dover, etc. willing them to let some pass quietly over sea, that has
formerly obtained the kings license thereunto, Register original fol. 193. b.

Lieutenent (locum tenens) is a French word, signifying as much as Legatus. It
is compounded of lieu, id est, locus, and tenir, id est, tenere. It signifies
with us, him that occupies the Kings place, or represents his person, as the
Lieutenent of the kings of Ireland, anno 4. H. 4. cap. 6. So it is used an. 2
and 3 Edward 6. cap. 2. whence that officer seems to take his beginning. But
I read also in Master Man^ woods first part of Forest laws, page 113. that the
Lord chief Justice in Air of the Forest, and the chief warden also, have their
lieutenents in the forest. So that though a Lieutenant be most ord^nary and
most properly used for the deputy of a king, yet is it sometime extended to
their deputies that be but lieutenants to the King.

Lieutenent of the ordinance, anno 39 Eliza. cap. 7.

Liege (ligius) is a word borrowed from the Feudists, and has two several
significations in our common Law, sometime being used for Liege Lord, an. 34
and 35 H. 8. cap. 1. and an. 25 ejusdem, cap. 3. and sometime for Liege man, an.
10 R. 2. ca. 1. and an. 11 ejusdem, cap. 1. Liege-lord is he that acknowledges
no superior, Duarenus in commentar. de Consuctud n. Feudorum, cap. 4. nu. 3.
Liegeman is he that owes legeancie to his Liege lord. Master Skene, de verbo
signif. verbo Ligeantia, says, that it is derived from the Italian word Liga,
i. a Band, league, or obligation. In whom read more of this matter.

Ligeancie, is such a duty or fealty as no man may owe or bear to more than one
Lord. Jdem eodem, number. 4. I find also this definition of ligeancie, in the
graund Custumary of Normandy, ca. 13. Ligeantia est, ex qua domixo tenentur
vasalli sui contra omnes homines qui mori possunt and vivere, proprii corporis
praeberi consilsi and auxilii juvamentum, and ci se in omnibus innocuos
exhibere, nec ei adversantinm partem in aliquo confovere. Dominus etiam eosdem
tenetur regere, protegere and defensare: eosque secundum ura and consuetudines,
and leges patriae pertractare. This is otherwise called legietas, Cassand. de
Consustud. Burgund. page 420 and 421. This word is used in the Statutes of our
realm, as the Kings liege people, anno 14 Hen. 8. ca. 2. Of the oath of
legeancy, Jacobutius de Franchis, in praeludio Feudorum, ca. 2. number. 138, has
these words: Praestatur hoc ligeum homagium in manibus regis vel Imperatoris,
genibus flexis, positis manibus junct is in manibus Domini, dicendo; Ego juro
homagium tibi Domin. ut ae modo sim homo ligeus vester, contra omnem hominem,
qui potest vivere: verba sunt pulchra. Andr. de Isern. in cap. 1. in verbo
Omnem. Colum. prima de novo forma fidelita: and hoc ligenm homagium videmus
praestari domino Regi tantum: quiacum per id efficiatur homo solius illius, cui
juratur, ut dixit Hostiensis in ca. ex diligenti. de Simon. alunon potest
praestari, i. quia illius solius esse similiter non potest; non n. esse potest
duorum in solidum l. si ut certo.. si duobus vehiculum. p. commodati. secundum
And. in dicto ca. 1. omnem. et. Bald. hic in 7 divis. and Alvar. in 13.
divisione. Non ligeum vero dicitur, quando quis jurat fidelitatom Domino,
excepta aliqua persona: viz Domino superiori, vel antiquiore: Hactenus
Jacobutius; where you may read more touching this point. As also in Hotomans
Disputations, De Feudis, page 816 fol. 829. etc.

Ligeance (Ligeantia) see Liege. It sometime signitieth the dominions or
territoritie of the liege Lord: as anno 25 Ed. 3. stat. 2. Children born out of
the liegeance of the King.

Lierw^test mulcta adulteriorum, Fleta li. 1. ca. 47. It is used for a liberty
whereby a Lord challenges the penalty of one that lies unlawfully with his
bondwoman: see Lotherwit.

Limitation of assise (limitatio assisae) is a certain time set down by
Statute, wherein a man must allege himself or his auncestourto have been seized
of lands sued for by a writ of Assise. See the Statute of Merton. cap. 8. an.
20 Hen. 3. and Westminster. 1. ca. 38. and anno 32. H. 8. ca. 2. and an. 1. M. 1.
page ca. 5. See also Theloals Digest of writs, li. 10. ca. 2. So it is used in
Old Not. Br. fol. 77. in these words; The writ de consuetudinibus et servitiis
lies, where I or mine ancestors, after the limication of Assise, were not
seized of the Customs, etc. But before the Limitation of Assise we were
seized, etc.

Lindwood was a Doctor of both Civil and Canon Laws, and Dean of the Arches: he
was Ambassador for Henry the fifth into Portugal, anno 1422. as appears by
the preface to his Commentary upon the Provincials.

Litleton was a Lawyer of great account, living in the days of King Edward the
fourth, as appears by Stawnf. praerogat. ca. 21. fo. 72. He wrote a book of
great account, called Litletons Tenure, which Hotoman in his Commentary de
verbis Feudalibus, verb. Foedum, thus commmendeth: Stephanus Pasquerius
excellentivir ingenio, and inter Parisienses causidicos dicendi facultate
praestans, libellum mihi Anglicanum Litletonum dedit, quo Feudorum Anglicorum
jura exponuntur, ita incondite absurte et inconcinne scriptum, ut facile
appareat verum esse quod Polydor. Virgilius in Anglica Historia scribit,
stulsitiam in eo libro cum malisia et caluminiandi studio certare.

Literae ad faciendum attornatum pro secta facienda. See in the Register
original. fol. 172. Literae de annua pensione, eodem 266 and 307. Litera patens
ad faciendum generalem atturnatum quia infirmus, eodem fo. 21. Litera per quam
Dominus remittit curiam suam Regi, cod. fol. 4. Literae de requestu, eodem fol.
129. Literaet Canonici ad exercendam jurisdictionem loco suo, fo. 305. Literae
patentes ad conferendum Beneficia, domino in remotis agente, fol. 305. Literae
adinnotescendum recuperationem Regis de ecclesia omnibus quorum interest, fol.
305. Literae patentes Regis quod Abbas ad totam vitam suam possit facere
Attornatos generales, fol. 21. Literae procuratoriae fol. 205, 306. Literae
Regiae deprecatoriae, pro annua pensione, fol. 307. All these you may see in
their places and understand the meaning of them as occasion shall require.

Livery (Liberatur.) is drawn from the French livre, i. insigne, gestamen,
Centuriale discrimen, nota Centurialis, turmalis. Or else from livrer, id est,
tradere, and accordingly has three significations: in one it is used for a
suit of Cloth or other stuff that a Gentleman gives in Coats, Cloaks, Hats,
or Gowns, with Cognizance or without, to his Servants or followers, Anno 1
Rich. 2. cap. 7. et anno 20. ejusdem, cap. 1, et 2. and anno 7 Hen. 4. cap. 14.
and anno 8 Edw. 4. cap. 2. et anno 7 ejusdem, cap. 14. and anno 13 ejusdem,
cap. 3. and anno 8 H. 6. ca. 4. and anno 8 Ed. 4. cap. 3. and anno 3 H. 7. cap.
1. and 12. and anno 11 e usdena, cap. 3. and anno 19 ejusdem, cap. 14. In the
other signification it betokens a delivery of possession unto those Tenants
which hold of the King in Capite, or in Knights service, for the King by his
prerogative has primier seysini, or the first possession, of all lands and
tenements so holden of him: anno 52 Henry. 3. cap. 16. and an. 17 Ed. 2. cap.
3. that is, when any such Tenant dies, the King forthwith enters, and holds
it until the Heir do his homage, and so pray this land to be delivered unto
him. Which act in the King is called Livery, and Livery in this signification
is either general or special, Stawnf. praerogat. fol. 12. et cap. 3. Livery
general seems to be that which is made in general words, and therefore may
easily be missued. Livery special is that, which contains in it a pardon of
oversights committed by the Tenent in suing out his Livery, by which pardon the
missuing is dispensed with. Stawnf. page 67. ca. Travers. 20. See the
Institutes and grounds of the Common law, Chapter the thirtieth, of general and
special Liveries. Liverie in the third signification is the writ which lies
for the Heir, to obtain the possession or seisin of his Land at the Kings
hands. Which see in Fitz. not. brev. fol. 155.

Livery of seisin (deliberatio seisinae) is a delivery of possession of Land or
Tenement, or other things corporeal (for of things incorporeal no Livery of
seisin may be) unto one that has right, or a probality of right unto them. For
as Bracton says, Traditio debet esse vestita et non nuda: sc. quod traditione
praeced at vera causae, vel idputativa, qua transeat Dominicum. Lib. 2. cap.
18. nu. 3. West. part 1. symbol. li. 2. sect. 169. calls this a Ceremouy in
the Common law, used in the Conveyance of Lands or Tenements, etc. where you
may see the usual form hereof particularly set down, whereunto join the new
Exposition of Law terms.

Lieutenant, see Lieftenant.

Lieutenant of the Tower, seems to have been an Officer under the Constable,
an. H. 4. cap. 15.

LO
Locus partitus, signifies a division made between two Towns or Countries, to
make trial in whether the Land or place in question lies. Fleta lib. 4. cap.
15. nu. 1.

Local, (localis) signifies in our Common law, as much as tied or annexed to
a place certain. Example; the thing is local, and annexed to the freehold:
Kitchen folio 180. And again in the same place, An action of trespass for
battery, etc. is transitory, not local, that is, not needful that the place of
the battery should be set down as material, in the Declaration: or if it be set
down, that the Defendant should traverse the place set down, by saying he did
not commit the battery in the place mentioned in the Declaration and so avoid
the Action. And again fol. 230. the place is not local, that is, not material
to be set down in certainty. And the guard of the person, and of the lands
differs in this, because the person being transitory, the Lord may have his
Ravishment de Guard, before he be seized of him; but not of the Land, because it
is local. Perkins Grants, 30.

Lobbe, is great kind of North sea fish, an. 31 Ed. 3. stat. 3. ca. 2.

Lodemanage, is the hire of a Pslot for conducting of a ship from one place to
another.

Loich fish, as Lob, Ling, Cod, an. 31 Ed. 3. stat. 3. cap. 2.

Lodeworks, is one of the works belonging to the stanneries in Cornwall; for
the which read M. Cambdens Britan. in his title of Cornwall, page 119. See
Stremework.

Lollards (Lollardi) were in account and reputation of those times, Heretics
that abounded here in England, in the days of Edward the third, and Henry the
fifth, an. 2 H. 5. cap. 7. whereof Weekliefe was the chief, as Stow says in
his Annals, pa. 425. who by this report went bare footed, and basely clothed,
to wit in base russet garments down to the Heels: they preached, and especially
against Monks and other religious men. Of these read more in him, and others
that writ of those times. The name Lindwood deria Lolio, quia sicut lolium
inficit segetes: sic Lollardi multociens inficinnt fideles simplices inter quos
conversantur, in ca. finali. de Haereticis, verbo Lollardiae. But Tritemius in
his Chronicle deduceth the name from one Gualter Lolhard a German, as the first
Author of that Sect, living about the year of our Redemption 1315.

Lord (Dominus) by Master Cambdens opinion, is a contract of Lafford, which is
the Danish word for dominus. It is a word of honor with us, and is used
diversely. Sometime being attributed to a man that is noble by birth or
creation, which sort are otherwise called Lords of the Parliament. Sometime to
those that be so called by the courtesy of England, as all the Sons of a Duke,
or the eldest son of an Earl. Sometime to men honorable by office, as Lord
Chief Justice, etc. And sometime to a mean man that has fee, and so
consequently the homage of Tenants within his Manor, for by his Tenants he is
called Lord, and by none other, and in some places for distinction sake he is
called Landlord. It is used nevertheless by the Writers of the Common law most
usually in this signification: and so is it divided into Lord above, and Lord
measn. Lord Measn is he that is owner of a Manor, and by virtue thereof has
Tenants holding of him in fee, and by copy of Court-roll, and yet holds
himself over a Superior Lord, who is called Lord above, or Lord paramount, Old
not. br. fol. 79. Although I think none simply to be accounted Lord paramount
but the Prince: because all other hold mediately or immediately of him, and he
of none, In this signification I like wise read, Very Lord, and very Tenent,
eodem fo. 42. and Brook titulo Heriot, n. 1. where I think, very Lord is he
which is immediate Lord to his Tenent: and him to be Very Tenent to that Lord
of whom he immediately holds. So that if there be Lord above, Lord measn and
Tenant, the Lord above is not very Lord to the Tenent, nor the tenent very
tenent to the Lord above.

Lord in gross, Fitzh. not. brev. fol. 3. is he that is Lord having no manor,
as the King in respect of his Crown, idem fol. 5. f. See him also fo. 8. a, b.
where I find a Case wherein a private man is Lord in gross, viz. a man make a
gift in tail of all the land he has, to hold of him, and dies; his heir has
but a Seignory in gross.

Lorimersy an. 1 Richard 2. cap. 12 is one of the Companies of London, that
makes Bits or Briddles of Horses, and such like: the name seems to be taken
from the Latin Lorum, and is elsewhere written Lorinors.

Lotherwit, alias Leyerwit, is a liberty or privilege to take amends of him
that defiles your Bondwoman without license. Rastals expositinn of words. It
is an amends for lying with a Bondwoman. Saxon in his description of England,
cap. 11. Some think it should be rather written Legerwit; for Ledger is the
Saxon word for a Bed; or Logherwit, of the old word Logher, being of the same
signification. See Bloodwit and Lyerwit.

LU
Lusernes, see Furre.

Lushoborow, is a base coin used in the days of King Edward the third: coined
beyond Seas to the likeness of English money, and brought in to deceive the King
and his subjects. To avoid the which, it was made Treason for any man wittingly
to bring in any such, anno 25 Edward the third, stat. 4. cap. secundo.

MA
MAcegriefs, alias Macegrefs, be such as willingly buy and sell stolen flesh,
Briton cap. 29. fol. 71. b. Cromptons Justice of Peace, fol. 193. a.

Magna assisa eligenda, is a Writ directed to the Sheriff, to summon four
lawful Knights before the Justices of Assise, there upon their Oaths to choose
twelve Knights of the vicenage, etc. to pass upon the great Assise between A.
Plaintiff, and B. Defendant, etc. Regist. orignal, fol. 8. a.

Magna Charta, called in English the great Charter, is a Charter containing a
number of Laws ordained the ninth year of Henry the third, and confirmed by
Edward the first. The reason why it was termed Magna Charta, was either for
that it contained the sum of all the written laws of England; or else that
there was another Charter called the Charter of the Forest, established with
it, which in quantity was the lesser of the two. I read in Holinshed, that K.
John, to appease his Barons, yielded to Laws, or Articles of Government, much
like to this great Charter; but we now have no ancienter written law, than
this, which was thought to be so beneficial to the Subject, and a Law of so
great equity in comparison of those which were formerly in use, that King Henry
the third was thought but hardly to yield unto it, and that to have the 15th
penny of all the movable goods both of the Spiritualty and Temporalty throughout
his Realm. Holinshed in Hen. the 3d. And though this Charter consist not of
above 37 Charters of Laws: yet is it of such extent, as all the laws we have is
thought in some sort to depend of it Polydor. and Holinshed ubi supra.

Mahim (Mahemium) comes of the old French (Mehaigne) as M. Skene says de
verbor. significat. verbo Machanium, and signifies a corporal hurt, whereby a
man loses the use of any Member, that is, or might be any defense unto him in
Battle. The Canonists call it Membrimutilationem, as the eye, the hand, the
foot, scalpe of the head, his foretooth; or as some say, of any finger of his
hand, Glanvile lib. 14. cap. 7. See Bracton at large, lib. 3. Tractat. 2. cap.
24. number. 3. and Britton cap. 25. and Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 1. cap. 41, and the
new exposition of Lawterms, and the Mirror of Justices, cap. d'Homicid. The
grand Customary of Normandy cap. 6. calls it Mahaignium, and defines it to
be Enormen laesionem. All agree, that it is the loss of a Member or the use
thereof. And membrum, as Cassan. de consuetu. Burgund. page 168. defines it
out of Baldus, Est pars corporis habens destinatam operationem in corpore;
where you may read more of this point. But if you will see it largely
discussed, look Ugolinus de irregularitatibus, cap. 4. sect. 3, 4, 5. also read
M. Skene ubi supra.

Mainour, alias manor, alias meinoure, seems to come of the French ( manier,
i. manu tractare, attrectare) or else of Amener, i. abducere. It signifies in
our Common law, the thing that a Thief takes away or steals. As to be taken
with the Manor, Pl. cor. fo. 179, is to be taken with the thing stolen about
him: and again fo. 194. It was presented, that a Thief was delivered to the
Viscount together with the Mainour. And 3ly, fo. 186, If a man be indicted,
that he feloniously stole the goods of another, where in truth they be his own
goods: and the goods be brought into the Court, as the Mainour, and it be
demanded of him, what he says to the goods: and he disclaim them; though he be
quitted of the felony, he shall lose the goods. And again, fo. 149. If the
Defendant were taken with the Manor, and the Manor be carried to the Court,
they in ancient times would arraign him upon the Manor, without any appeal or
indictment: I find this word used in the Old not. brev. fol. 110. in this sort:
where a man makes a thing by Manor or leavying, or estopping, in such Case he
shall have assise: where it signifies handy labor, and is but an abbreviation
of Mainovery.

Mainvre, see Minoverye.

Mainprise (manucaptio) is compounded of two French words, Main, 1. manus, and
prius, id est captus, which is a participle of the verb prendre, id est,
capere, excipere, captare. It signifies in our common Law, the taking or
receiving a man into friendly custody, that otherwise is or might be committed
to the mercy of the prison, upon security given for his forth-comming at a day
assigned: as to let one to mainprise, Old not. bre. f. 42. is to commit him to
them that undertake his appearance the time appointed. And they that do thus
undertake for any, are called Mainpernours, because they do receive him into
their hands. Pl. Co. fol. 178. Of this sort is the word Mainpernable, which
signifies him that has committed such an Offense, as by law he may be thus
bayled: for in many Cases a man is not mainpernable: whereof see Brook titulo
Mainprise, per totum, and Fitzh. not. brev. fol. 249. and seq. Master Manwood
in his first part of his Forest laws, pa. 167. makes a great difference
between Bayl and Mainprise. For he that is mainprised (quoth he) is always
said to be at large, and to go at his own liberty out of ward, after the day is
set to mainprise, until the day of his appearance, by reason of the said
several summons, or otherwise. But otherwise it is where a man is let to bayl
to four or two men, by the Lord Justice in Eyr of the Forest, until a certain
day. For there he is always accounted by the Law to be in their ward and
custody for the time. And they may if they will, keep him in ward or in prison
all that time, or otherwise at their will So that he that is so bayled, shall
not be said by the Law to be at large, or at his own liberty. Thus far Master
Manwood. The Myrrour of Justices makes a difference also between pledges and
Mainpernours, saying, that pledges are more general, and that Mainpernours are
body for body, lib. 2. c. de Trespass venial, and lib. 3. cap. des Pledges and
Mainpernours. When Mainprises may be granted and when not, see Cromptons
Justice of Peace, fol. 136, etc. usque 141. and Lambert, Eirenarch. lib. 3.
cap. 2. page 336, 337, 338, 339, 340. See also Britton, fol. 73. a. cap. des
Pledges and Mainpernours. The Author of the Mirror of Justices says, that
Pledges be those that bayl or redeem any thing but the body of a man: and that
Mainpernours be those that free the body of a man. And that Pledges therefore
belong properly to real and mixed actions, and Mainpernours to personal.

Maintenance (manutentio, vel manutenentia) is a French word, and signifies an
upholding of a cause, or person, metaphorically drawn from the succouring of a
young Child that learneth to go by ones hand. In our Common law it is used in
the evil part, for him that secondeth a Cause depending in suit between
others, either by lending of money, or making Friends for either party, toward
his help. Anno 32 Hen. 8. cap. 9. And when a man's act in this kind is by Law
accounted Maintenance, and when not, See Brook titulo Maintenance: and Kitchm
fol. 202, and seq. and Fitzh. natura brev. fo. 172. and Cromptons
Jurisdictions, fol. 38. The writ that lies against a Man for this offense is
likewise called Maintenance: Terms of the Law, verbo Maintenance. Special
Maintenance, Kitchen fol. 204. seems to be maintenance most properly so
termed. Of this see Cromptons Justice of peace, fo. 155. b. and the New Book of
Entries, verbo Maintenance. Maintenance, v. Novos terminos juris.

Make (facere) signifies in the Common law to perform or execute: as to make
his Law, is to perform that law which he has formerly bound himself unto, that
is, to clear himself of an Action commenced against him by his oath, and the
Oaths of his Neighbors. Old not. brev. fol. 161. Kitchen fol. 192. Which Law
seems to be borrowed of the Feudists, who call these men that come to swear
for another in this Case, Sacramentales. Of whom thus says Hotoman, in verbis
Feudal. Sacramentales a Sacramento, id est, juramento diceb antur ii, qui
quamvis rei de qua ambigebatur, testes non fuissent, tamen ex ejus, cujus res
agebatur, animi sententia, in eadem quae ille verba jurabant: illius videlicet
probitate and innocentia confisi. Nam tuum demum adhibebantur, cum testes nulli
extarent. See the rest. The formal words used by him that makes his Law, are
commonly these: Hear O ye Justices, that I do not owe this sum of money
demanded, neither all nor any part thereof, in manner and form declared: so
help me God, and the contents of this Book. To make services or custom, is
nothing else but to perform them. Old not. brev. folio 14. To make Oath, is to
take Oath.

Maletent, in the Statute called the confirmation of the liberties of, etc.
anno 29 E. 1. cap. 7. is interpreted to be a toll of forty shillings for every
sack of Wool. Srow in his Annals calls it a Maletot, page 461. See also the
Statute de Tallagio non concedendo, an. 35 ejusdem stat.

Malin, see Marle.

Manbote signifies a pecuniary compensation for killing of a man. Lambert in
his Exposition of Saxon words, verbo Aestimatis. Of which read Roger Hoveden
also, in part poster, suorum annal. f. 344. a, b.

Mandamus, is a writ that lies after the year and day, whereas in the mean
time the writ called Diem clausit extremum, has not been sent out to the
Escheatour, for the same purpose for the which it should formerly have been
sent forth, Fitzh. not. brev. fol. 253. B. See Diem clausit extremum. Mandamus
is also a charge to the Sheriff, to take into the Kings hands, all the lands
and tenements of the Kings widow, that against her oath formerly given, marieth
without the Kings consent, Register fol. 295. b. See widow.

Mandatum, is a commandment judicial of the King, or his Justices, to have any
thing done for the dispatch of Justice, where of you shall see diversity in the
Table of the Register judicial. verbo Mandatum.

Manor, (Manerium) see meth to come of the French ( manoir i. domicilium,
habitatio) M. Skene de verb. signif. verb. Manerium, says it is called mane
ium quasi manurium, because it is labored with handy work by the Lord himself.
It signifies in our Common law, a rule or government, which a man has over
such as hold Land within his fee. Touching the original of these Manors, it
seems that in the beginning, there was a certain compass or circuit of
ground, granted by the King unto some man of worth (as a Baron or such like)
for him and his Heirs to dwell upon, and to exercise some Jurisdiction more or
less within that compass, as he thought good to grant, Performing him such
services, and paying such yearly rent for the same, as he by his grant
required: and that afterward this great man parcelled his Land to other meaner
men, injoining them again such services and rents, as he thought good, and by
that means as he became Tenent to the King, so the inferiors became Tenants
unto him. See Perkins Reservations 670. and Andrew Horns Book entitled the
Mirror of Justices, l. 1. cap. du. Roy Alfred. See the definition of a Manor.
Fulb. fol. 18. And this course of benefiting or rewarding their Nobles for good
service, have our Kings borrowed from the Emperors of Rome, or the Lombard
Kings, after they had settled themselves in Italy as may well appear by Antonius
Contius in methodo feudorum, c. 1. de origin. and libris Feudorum. And I find
that according to this our custom, all lands holden in fee throughout France,
are divided into Fiefz, and arrierifiefz, where of the former are such as are
imediatly granted by the K. the second such as the Kings feudataries do again
grant to others, Gregorti Syntagm. lib. 6. ca. 5. nu. 3. But the inconstancy
of man's estate, and the mutability of time has brought to pass, that those
great men, or their posterity, have alienated these Mansions, and lands so
given them by their Prince, and others that had none, have by their wealth
purchased many of them: And again, that many for capital offenses, have
forfeited them to the King, and that thereby they still remain in the Crown, or
are bestowed again upon others: so that at these days, many be in the hands of
mean men, such as by their skill in Law, or Physic, by Merchandise, Grazing,
or such other good husbandry, have gathered wealth, and enabled themselves to
purchase them of those, that by descent received them from their ancestors, in
greater abundance, than wit to keep them. But whosoever possesses these
Manners, the liberty belonging unto them is real and predial; and therefore
remains still, though the owners be changed. In these days a Manner rather
signifies the Jurisdiction and royalty incorporeal, than the land or site.
For a man may have a Manner in gross (as the law terms it) that is, the right
and interest of a Court Baron, with the perquisites thereunto belonging: and
another or others have every foot of the land thereunto belonging. Kitchen,
fol. 4. Broke hoc titulo per totum. Bracton, lib. 4. ca. 31. number. 3. divides
manerium, in capitale and non capitale. See Bracton, lib. 5. tractat. 5. ca.
28. nu. pri. See Fee. The new ex^ ositor of Law terms faith, that Manner is a
thing compounded of diverse things, as of a house, land earable, pasture,
meadow, wood, rent, advonzen, Court Baron, and such like. And this ought to be
by long continuance of time, to the contrary whereof man's memory cannot
discern, etc.

Mansio; (Mansio) as Bracton defines it, lib. 5. cap. 28. nu. pri. is a
dwelling consisting of one or more houses, without any neighbor. And yet he
grants forthwith, that Mansio Mansioni pessit esse vicinata. I find it most
commonly used for the Lords chief dwelling house within his fee, whether it
have neighbors adjoining or not, otherwise called the capital mesuage.
Bracton, lib. 2. ca. 26. or the chief Manner place. Mansio amongst the ancient
Romans, was a place appointed for the lodging of the Prince, or Soldiers in
their journey, furnished with convenient entertainment by the neighbors
adjoining. And in this sense we read primam mansionem, for the first nights
lodging, and so in order. It is probable that this word (Mansion) does in some
construction signify so much land as Beda calls Familiam in his
Ecclesiastial History. For Master Lamberd in his explication of Saxon words,
verb. Hida terrae, says, that that which he calls familiam, others ^ince
call Manentem, vel mansam. Mansus and Mansum I read of in the Feudists, which
as Hotoman says, in verbis feudalibus, est neque domus, neque area, neque
hortus, sed ager certi modi ac mensurae. And again, in Commentariis Feudorum,
lib. p. tit. 4. verse. de Manso. Agri deserti et inculti certa mensura dabantur
cultoribus quasi in emphyteusin, ut culti et meliorati, feudi jure a vasallis
possiderentur. In contractu autem vasalli nonnunquam incrementum, i. melior
ationem omnem sive recipsebant, sive per culturam, sive per inaedificationem ea
melioratio fieret, etc. And Cassaneus, de consuetnd. Burg. pa. 1195, defines
it thus: Mansus est, quantum quis cum uno pari bonum laborare possit. Proving
it out of Bartolus, in lib. si ita p. de auro and argen. legato: in fine ligis.
Read Master Skene, de verb. signif. verbo Mansus. I read the Lacine word mansia
in the same signification; as namely in the Charter granted by King Kanulphus
to Ruchin the abbot of Abington, which Sir Edward Cook sets down in his book
de Jure regis ecclesiastico.

Manslaughter (homicidium) is the unlawful killing of a man without prepensed
maice: as when two, that formerly meant no harm one to another, meet together,
and upon some sudden occasion falling out, the one kills the other. West
part 2. symb. titulo Inditements, sect. 44. it differs from murder, because
it is not done with foregoing malice: and from chance-medly, because it has a
present intent to kill. And this is selony, but admits Clergy for the first
time, Stawnf. bl. Cor. li. 1. ca. 9. and Britton cap. 9. It is confounded with
murder in the Statute, an. 28 Ed. 3. ca. 11.

Mantyle (mantile) comes of the French manteau, and signifies with us a long
robe, an. 24 H. 8. ca. 13.

Manucaptio, is a writ that lies for a man who taken for suspicion of felony,
and offering sufficient Bayl for his appearance, cannot be admitted thereunto by
the Sheriff, or other having bower to let to mainprise. Fitz. not. brev. fol.
249. See Mainprise. How diversely it is used, see the Register original, in the
Table.

Manuel (manuelis) is a thing whereof present profit may be made, Stawnf.
praerog. fo. 54. And a thing not manuel, is that whereof no present profit may
be made, but hereafter when it falls, ibid.

Manumission (manumissio) is a freeing of a Villein or slave out of his
bondage. The form of this in the time of the Conqueror, Master Lambert in hi,
(...) fol. 126. sets down in these words: Si quis velit servum suum liberum
facere, tradat eum Vicecomiti, per manum dexteram, in pleno comitatu, et
quietum illum clamare debet a jugo servitutis suae per manumissionem: et
ostendat ei liberas portas, et vias, et tradat illi libera arma, scilicet
lanceam et glad^um: et deinde liber homo efficitur. Some also were wont to be
manumitted by Charter of manumission: Vide Brook, titulo Villenage, fol. 305.
The new Expositour of Law Terms makes two kinds of manumission: one expressed,
another employed. Manumission expressed, is when the Lord makes a Deed to his
Villein to infranchise him by this word Manumittere. The manner of manumitting
in old time was thus: The Lord in presence of his neighbors took the bondman
by the head, saying, I will that this man be free; and therewith shoved him
forward out of his hand. Manumission employed is, when the Lord makes an
obligation for payment of money to him at a certain day, or sueth him, where he
might enter without sure, or grants him an Annuity, or leaseth land unto him
by Deed, for years, or for life, and such like.

Manutenentia is a writ used in case of maintenance. Reg. original, fo. 182 et
189. See Maintenance.

Marches (Marchia) be the bounds and limits between us and Wales, or between us
and Scotland: anno. 24 Hen. 8. cap. 9. Camb. page 453 and 606. and the marches
of Scotland are divided in^o West and middle Marches, anno 4 Henr. 5. cap. 7.
et anno 22 Edward. 4. cap. 8. It seems to be borrowed from the German March,
i. limes: Camdens Britan. pa. 27. or it may be from the French Marque, id est
signum, being the notorious distinction of two diverse countries or Territories.
It is used in the Statute, anno 24 Hen. 8. cap. 12. generally for the precincts
of the Kings dominions.

Marchers, be the noble men dwelling on the Marches of Wales or Scotland; who
in times past (as Camden says, page 453) had their private laws, much like as
if they had been Kings, which now be worn out. Of these Marchers you may read
anno 2 H. 4. ca. 18. et anno 26 Hen. 8. cap. 6. and anno 1 Edward. 6. ca. 10.
where they are called Lord Marchers. See an. 27 H. 8. ca. 26. how these were
extinguished.

Mareshall (Marescallus) is a French word, signifying as much as Tribunus
scelerum, or Tribunus militum with the ancient Romans, or (...) with the
Grecians, or (...), Tiraquel. de nobilitate, c. 8. p. 42. n. 17. The French
word may seem also, among many other that they have, to proceed from the German
Marschalk, id est, equitum magister: which Hotomon, in verbis feudalibus, verbo
Marschalkus, deri^eth from the old word March, signifying an house. With whom
agrees Lupanus, de Magistratibus Franciae, lib. 1. cap. Marcshallus. Others
make it of these two Saxon words, Mar, id est, equus, and scalch, id est,
praefectus: Or as Master Verstegan faith, from Mare, the general appellation of
all horses, as Horse is now in English: and Scalc, which in the ancient
language of the Netherlanders, he affirms to signify a kind of servant, as
Scalco does at this day among the Italians, being originally a Dutch word. With
us there be diverse officers of this name, but one most noble of all the rest,
who is called Lord or Earl Marshal of England; of whom mention is made in
diverse Statutes, as an. 1 H. 4. cap. 7 et 14. and anno 13 Ri h. 2. cap. 2. his
office consists especially in matters of war and Arms, as well with us, as
in other Countries; whereof you may read in Lupanus ubi supra: and Tilius lib,
2. cap. de Conestabili, Mariscallo, etc. But he that would know the office of
our Lord Marshal, had need, beside the few Statutes which concern him, to read
his Commission, and also to have access to the Heralds, who out of their
antiquities are able to discover much, that by prescription belongs unto this
office. The next to this is the Marshal of the Kings house, whose especial
authority is, according to Britton, and M. Gwin, in the preface to his reading,
in the Kings place to hear and determine all plees of the Crown, and to punish
faults committed within the verge, and to hear and determine suits between
those of the Kings household, and others within the verge, Cromp. Jurisdictions,
f. 102. Of him you may read, Fitz. not. br. f. 241. b. and an. 18 Edward 3.
stat. 2. ca. 7. and an. 27 Edw. 3. stat. 2. ca. 6. and an. 2 H. 4. c. 23. and
an. 15 H. 9. ca. 1. Fleta. says, That the office of the Marshal of the Kings
house belongs to the Earl of Norffolk in fee, and that he may appoint, with
the Kings consent, a Knight under him to execute the office: which office he
also describes to be especially, to execute the judgments and decrees of the
Steward, and to have the keeping of the prisoners, lib. 2. cap. 4. and read
further of his office in the fifth chap. of the said Book, which is to dispose
of the Lodging in the Kings household under the Chamberlain, and to clear the
Verge of Strumpets, etc. anno 5 H. 3. statut. 5. Then be there other inferior
Officers of this name: as Marshal of the Justices in Eyr, anno 3 Edw. 1. cap.
19. Marshal of the Kings Bench, anno 5 Ed. 3. ca. 8. and this is he which has
the Custody of the Prison, called the Kings Bench in Southwark, Fitzh. not.
brev. fol. 251. I. And these inseriour Marshals be either ad placitum, or in
fee, Kitchen fol. 143. I find also in Fleta lib. 2. ca. 15. mention of a
Marshal of the Kings Hall, whose office is, when the Tables be prepared and
Clothes laid, to call out both those of the Household and Strangers, according
to their worth, and decently to place them, to reject unworthy persons, to know
the number of the Hall, and to testify it at the next account, to see Dogs
kept out, to save the Alms from filching, to see silence kept, and every man
competently served with meat and drink, and when the Court removes, to appoint
every of the Household his lodging. There is also a Marshal of the Eschequer,
anno 51 H. 3. stat. 5. to whom the Court commits the custody of the Kings
Debtors during the Term-time, to the end they may be; farther imprisoned, if
they clear not their Debts. He also assigns Sheriffs, Escheatours, Customers,
and Collectors, their Auditors before whom they shall account. He has all
inquisitions taken before Escheators virtute officii delivered unto him, to be
delivered by him to the Treasurers Remembrancer.

Mareshalsee (Marescaltia) is the Court of the Marshal, or word for word) the
seat of the Marshal; whom see Cromptons jurisd. fol. 102. It is also used for
the Prison in Southwark, the reason whereof may be, because the Marshal of the
Kings house, was wont perhaps to sit there in judgment. See the Statute, anno
9 R. 2. ca. 5. and anno 2 Henry 4. cap. 23.

Martial law, is the Law that depends upon the voice of the King, or the
Kings Lieutenant in wars. For howbeit, the King for the indifferent and equal
temper of Laws to all his Subjects, do not in time of Peace make any laws, but
by the consent of the three estates in Parliament: yet in wars, by reason of
great dangers rising of small occasions, he uses absolute power: in so much as
his word goes for Law. And this is called Martial law, Smith de Repub. Angl.
li. 2. cap. 3. See Law of Arms.

Marriage (Maritagium) signifies not only the coupling together of a man and
wife, but also the interest of bestowing a ward or a widow in marriage. Magna
Charta cap. 6. anno 9 Hen. 3. and Bracton lib. 2. cap. 3. and also it
signifies land given in marriage, Bracton lib. 2. cap. 34, and 39. And in this
signification the same Author says, that Maritagium est aut liberum aut
servitio obligatum. li. 2. cap. 7. number. 3, and 4. Liberum maritagium disitur,
ubi donator vult quod terra sic data, quieta sit and libera ab omni seculari
servitio, quod ad Dominum feudi possit pertinere: and its quod ille, cui sic
data fuerit, nullum omnino inde faciat servitium usque ad tertium haeredem, and
usque ad quartum gradum: ita quod tertius haeres sic inclusivus. See the rest.
See also Skene de verbo significat. verbo Maritagium, who is worth the reading.

Maritagio amisso per desaltam, is a writ for the Tenent in Franck marriage, to
recover lands, etc. whereof he is deforced by another, Reg. fol. 171.

Maritagio forisfacto, is a writ. See For is factura Maritagii.

Mark (merca) comes of the Saxon (Mearc) which signifies a piece of money
worth thirty silver pence. Lamb. explication of Saxon words, verbo Mancusa:
what it now signifies in our coin, every man knows. But in ancient times I
find a mark of gold, which was the quantity of eight ounces. Stowes Annals page
32. and again page 691. 12 marks of Gold Troy weight, the which was 200 pounds
of English money, after which rate every mark valued 16 pounds 13 shillings
four pence. M. Skene de verbo signif. verbo Merke, says, that in tractatu de
ponderibus and mensuris, a mark signifies an ounce weight, or half a pound,
whereof the Dram is the eight part, like as the ounce is the eight part of a
mark; citing Cassanaeus de consuet. Burgund. Rub. prim.. 7. verbo. Solz
Turnoys. hiis verbis. Solidus (inquit) in jure capitur pro auro, quorum 72.
faciunt libram auri, and duodecim unciae faciunt libram, and octo unciae mercam.

Market (mercatus) comes of the French ( march. i. emporium, forum
nundinarium) it signifies with us, the same thing, and also the liberty or
privilege whereby a Town is enabled to keep a market, Old not. brev. fol. 149.
So does Bracton use it, lib. 2. cap. 24. number. 6. and lib. 4. cap. 46. where he
shows that one market ought to be distant from another, Sex leucas and
dimidiam, and tertiam partem dimidiae. The reason thereof both he and Fleta
gives in these words: Quia omnes rationabiles dietae constant ex 20
milliaribus. Dividatur ergo dieta in tres parts: prima autem matutina detur
euntibus versus mercatum: secunda detur ad emendum and vendendum: quae quidem
sufficere debet omnibus, nisi sint forte mercatores statarii qui meroes
deposuerint and exposuerint suerint venales, quibus necessaria erit prolexior
mora in mercatu: and tertia pars relinquitur redeuntibus de mercatu ad propria.
Et quae quident omuia necessa erit facere de die, non de nocte, propter
insidias and incursum latronum, ut omnia sint in tuto, etc. lib. 4. cap. 28..
Item refert.

Marle, is a kind of stone or chalk, which men in diverse Countries of this
Realm, cast upon their Land to make it the more fertile It is some where called
Malin, anno 17 Edw. 4. cap. 4.

Marque, seems to be a French word signifying notam, vel signum, or else to
come from the German ( march i. limes,) it signifies in the ancient Statutes
of our Land, as much as reprisals, as anno 4 H. 5. cap. 7. Marquis and
Reprisals are used as Synonyma. And Letters of Marquis are found in the same
signification in the same Chapter. The reason may be, because the griefs
whereupon these Letters are sought and granted, are commonly given about the
bounds and limits of every every Country: or at least the remedy for the same
is likest there to be had by some sudden inrode, and happing of such recompense
of the injury received as may most conveniently be lighted upon. See
Reprisalls. See Marches.

Marquis (Marchio) by the opinion of Hotom. verbo Marchio, in verbis
feudalibus, comes of the German March i. limes signifying originally as much
as (Custos limitis) or (Comes and praefectus limitis: of these Zasius thus
writes: de Marchione nihil compertum est, nisi quod Gothicum vocabilum
putamus. And afterward thus: Hujusmodi Marchionum (sive ut nos appellamus)
Margraphiorum origo in limitaneos, praepositos, sive duces referenda:
Margraphii dicti quod limitibus, quos vulgo marken, appellamus, graphii, td
est, praepositi fuerunt etc. For in those Territories, that have naturally no
bounds of great strength or defense, there is need of wise and stout men toward
their borders, for the keeping out of Neighbor enemies. But here in England
though we have a L. Warden of the Marches northward, and a Warden of the Cinque
Ports toward the South-east, and were wont to have Lord Marchers between us and
Wales that served this turn, yet those which we call Marquises, are Lords of
more dignity, without any such charge; and are in honor and account next unto
Dukes. At this day I know but one in England, and that is the Marquis of
Winchester, being of that noble family of the Powlets. See Cassanaeus, de
consuetud. Burg. page 15.

Marrow, was a Lawyer of great account that lived in Henry the seventh this
days, whose learned Readings are extant, but not in print. Lambert Eirenarch
lib. 1. cap. 1.

Marterns, see Furre.

Master of the Rolls (Magistri rotulorum) is an Assistant unto the Lord
Chancellor of England, in the High Court of Chancery, and in absence hears
Causes there, and gives Orders, Cromptons Jurisdiction, fol. 41. His Title in
his Patent, as I have heard, is, Clericus parvae bagae, Custos rotulorum, and
domus conversorum. This Domus conversorum is the place where the Rolls are
kept, so called because the Jews in ancient time, as there were any of them
brought to Christianity, were bestowed in that House seperately from the rest
of their Nation. But his office seems originally to have sprung from the safe
keeping of the Rolls or Records of Indictments passed in the Kings Courts, and
many other things. He is called Clark of the Rolls, anno 12 Rich. 2. cap. 2.
and in Fortescue his Book, cap. 24. and no where Master of the Rolls, until
anno 11 H. 7. cap. 20. and yet an. 11. ejusdem cap. 25. he is also called
Clark, In which respect Sir Thomas Smith, l. 2. cap. 10. de Repub. Angl. well
says, That he might not unfitly be called Custos Archivorum. He seems to
have the bestowing of the offices of the six Clarks, anno 14, and 15 Henry the
eight, cap. 1.

Master of the Mint, an. 2 Hen. 6. cap. 14. he is now called the warden of the
Mint, whose office see in Mint.

Master of the Court of Wards and Liveries, is the chief and principal officer
of the Court of Wards and Liveries named and assigned by the King, to whose
Custody the Seal of the Court is committed. He at the entering upon his office
takes an oath before the Lord Chancellor of England, well and truly to serve
the King in his Office, to minister equal Justice to rich and poor, to the best
of his cunning, wit and power, diligently to procure all things which may
honestly and justly be to the Kings advantage and profit, and to the
augmentation of the rights and Prerogative of the Crown, truly to use the Kings
Seal appointed to his Office to endeavor to the uttermost of his power to see
the King justly answered, of all such profits, rents, revenues, and issues, as
shall yearly rise, grow, or be due to the King in his Office from time to time,
to deliver with speed such as have to do before him, not to take or receive of
any person any gift or reward in any Case or matter depending before him, or
wherein the King shall be party, whereby any prejudice, loss, hinderance, or
disherison shall be or grow to the King, an. 33 H. 8. cap. 33.

Master of the Horse, is he that has the rule and charge of the Kings stable,
being an Office of high account, and always bestowed upon some Noblemen both
valiant and wise. This Officer under the Emperors of Rome was called Comes
sacri stabuli. The master of the Horse is mentioned, anno 39 Eliz. ca. 7. and
an. 1 Edw. 6. cap. 5.

Master of the Posts, is an Officer of the Kings Court, that has the
appointing, placing and displacing of all such through England as provide Post
horse for the speedy passing of the K. messages and other businesses, in the
thorow-fair towns where they dwell: as also to see that they keep a certain
number of convenient Horses of their own, and when occasion is, that they
provide others therewith to furnish such as have warrant from him to take
Posthorses, either from or to the Seas, or other borders or places within the
Realm. He likewise has the care to pay them their wages, and make their
allowance accordingly as he shall think meet. This Officer is mentioned an. 2
E. 6. cap. 3.

Master of the Armoury, is he that has the care and oversight of his Majesty's
Armor for his person or Horses, or any other provision or store thereof in any
standing Armouries: with command, and placing or displacing of all inferior
Officers thereunto appertaining. Mention is made of him, anno 39 Elizabeth,
cap. 7.

Master of the Jewel-house, is an Officer in the Kings household of great
credit, being allowed bouge of Court, that is, diet for himself and the
inferior Officers, viz. Clarks of the Jewel-house, and a special lodging or
Chamber in Court, having charge of all plate of Gold, of Silver double or
parcel guilt, used or occupied for the Kings or Queens board, or to any Officer
of account attendant in Court, and of all Plate remaining in the Tower of
London, of Chains and loose Jewels not fixed to any garment. Mention is made of
this Officer, an, 39 Eliz. c. 7.

Master of the Kings Household, (magister hospitii) is in his just Title called
Grant master of the Kings Household, and bears the same Office that he did,
that was wont to be called Lord Steward of the Kings most honorable Household,
anno 32 Henry 8. cap. 39. Whereby it appears, that the name of this Officer
was then changed, and Charles Duke of Suffolk, President of the Kings Council,
then enjoying that office, was so to be called ever after, so long as he should
possess that office.

Master of the Ordinance, anno 39 Eliz. ca. 7. is a great officer, to whose
care all the Kings Ordinance and Artillery is committed, being some great man
of the Realm, and expert in marshal affairs.

Master of the Chancery, (Magister Cancellariae) is an assistant in Chancery to
the L. Chancellor or L. Keeper of the Broad Seal in matters of Judgment. Of
these there be some ordinary, and some extraordinary: of ordinary there be
twelve in number, whereof some sit in Court every day throughout each Term, and
have committed unto them (at the Lord Chancellors discretion) the interlocutory
report, and sometimes the final determination of causes there depending.

Master of the Kings Musters, is a Martial Officer in all royal armies most
necessary, as well for the maintaining of the Forces complete, well armed and
trained, as also for prevention of such frands, as otherwise may exceedingly
waste the Princes Treasure, and extremely weaken the Forces. He has the
oversight of all the Captains and Bands, and ought to have at the beginning
delivered unto him by the Lord General, perfect Lists and Rolls of all the
forces both horse and foot, Officers, etc. with the rates of their allowances
signed by the Lord General, for his direction and discharge in signifying
warrants for their full pay. This Officer is mentioned in the Statute, anno 2
Edw. 6. cap. 2. and Muster master general, anno 35 Eliz. cap. 4. who so
desires to read more of him, let him have recourse to Master Digs his
Stratioticos.

Master of the Wardrobe (magister garderobae) is a great and principal Officer
in Court, having his habitation and dwelling house belonging to that Office,
called the Wardrobe near Puddle wharfe in London. He has the charge and
custody of all former Kings and Queens ancient robes remaining in the Tower of
London, and all Hangings of Arras, Tapestrie, or the like, for his Majesty's
houses, with the bedding remaining in standing Wardrobes, as Hampton Court,
Richmond, etc. He has also the charging and delivering out of all either
Velvet or Scarlet allowed for Liveries, to any of his Majesty's Servants of the
Privy Chamber, or others. Mention is made of this Officer, anno 39 Elizab. cap.
7.

Matterin deed, and matter of record, are said to differ, Old not. brev. fol.
19. where matter in deed, seems to be nothing elle but a truth to be proved,
though not by any Record: and matter of Record, is that which may be proved by
some Record. For example: if a man be sued to an exigent, during the time he
was in the Kings wars, this is matter in deed, and not matter of record. And
therefore says the book) he that will allege this for himself, must come
before the Scire facias for execution be awarded against him. For after that,
nothing will serve but matter of Record; that is, some error in the process
appearing upon the Record. Kitchen, fol. 216. makes also a difference between
matter of Record, and a specialty, and nude matter; where he says, that nude
matter is not of so high nature, as either a matter of Record, or a specialty,
otherwise there called matter in deed; which makes me to think, that nude
matter is a naked allegation of a thing done, to be proved only by witnesses,
and not either by Record, or other specialtie in writing under Seal.

Maugre, is shuffled up of two French words (Mal) and (Gre) i. animo iniquo) it
signifies with us, as much as in despite, or in desof ones teeth, as the wife
maugre the husband, Litleton, fol. 124. that is, whether the husband will or
not.

ME
Mean (Medius) signifies the middle between two extremes, and that either in
time or dignity. Example of the first, his action was mean betwixt the
disseisin made to him and his recovery: that is, in the interim. Of the second
there is Lord Mean and Tenent. See Mesn.

Mease (Mesuagium) seems to come of the French ( Maison or rather (Meix)
which word I find in Cassanaeus de consuet. Burgund. page 1195. and interpreted
by him Mansus: what Mansus is, see Mansion. it signifies house, Kitch. fol.
239. and Fitz. not. br. fo. 2. C. See Mesuage.

Medlefe, Cromptons Justice of peace. fol. 193. is that which Bracton, calls
medletum) li. 3. tract. 2. cap. 35. It seems to signify quarrels, scuffling,
or brawling, and to be derived from the French ( mesler. i. miscere, turbare.)

Mere (Merus) though an Adjective, yet is it used for a Substantive,
signifying mere right, Old not. br. fol. 2. in these words: And know ye, that
this Writ has but two issues: that is to say, joining the mise upon the mere:
And that is, to put himself in the great assise of our Sovereign Lord the King,
or to join battle. See Mise.

Mesurement. See Admesurement.

Medietas linguae, signineth an enquest empaneled upon any cause, whereof the
one half consists of Denizens, the other of Stranggers. It is called in
English the half tongue, and is used in Plees, wherein the one party is a
Stranger, the other a Denizen. See the Stat. an. 28. Ed. 3. cap. 13. and an.
27. ejusdem stat. 2. c. 8. commonly called the Statute of the Staple, et an. 8.
H. 6. cap. 29. et anno 2 H. 5. cap. 3. and anno 11 H. 7.21. and anno. 1. and 2.
Phil. et Mar. cap. 8. And before the first of these Statutes was made, this was
wont to be obtained of the King by grant made to any company of Strangers, as
Lombards, Almaines, etc. Stawnford, pl. cor. lib. 3. cap. 7.

Medio acquietando, is a writ judicial, to destrain a Lord for the acquitting
of a mean Lord from a rent, which he formerly acknowledges in Court not to
belong unto him Register judicial, fol. 29. b.

Melius inquirendo, is a writ that lies for a second inquiry, as what lands
and tenements a man died seized of, where partial dealing is suspected upon
the writ, Diem clausit extremum. Fitz. not. br. fol. 255.

Merchenlage, was one of the 3. sorts of laws, out of which the Conq. framed
Laws unto us, mingled with those of Normandy, Camd. Brit. p. 94. who also p.
103. shows that in the year of our Lord 1016. this land was divided into
three parts, whereof the West Saxons had one, governing it by the Laws called
West Saxon Laws, and that contained these nine Shires, Kent, Southsex,
Southrey, Barkeshire, Hampshire, Wiltshire, Somerset, Dorset, and Devonshire.
The second by the Danes, which was governed by the Laws called Denelage, and
that contained these fifteen Shires: York, Darby, Nottingham, Liecester,
Lincoln, Northampton, Bedford, Buckingham, Hartford, Essex, Middlesex, Northf.
Southf. Cambridge, Huntington. The Third was ponessed and governed by the
Mercians, whose Law was called Merchenlage; which were these eight, Gloucester,
Worcester, Hereford, Warwick, Oxenford, Chester, Salop, and Stafford. See Law.

Mercy (Miserecordia) signifies the arbitrament or descretion of the King or
Lord, in punishing any offense, not directly censured by the law. As to be in
the grievous mercy of the King, anno 11 H. 6. cap. 6. is to be in hazard of a
great penalty. See Misericordia.

Measondue, (domus Dei) comes of the French (maison de dieu) by which names
diverse Hospitals, are named. You find the word, anno 2 and 3. Philip et Mar.
cap. 23. in fine.

Mese. See Mease.

Measn (med us) seems to come from the French ( maisne, i. minor natu) it
signifies in our Common law, him that is Lord of a manor, and thereby has
Tenants holding of him, yet holding himself of a Superior Lord. And therefore
it seems not absurdly to be drawn from the French ( mainsne because the
Lordship is created after the higher, whereof he holds. Mesn also signifies
a writ, which lies where there is Lord, mesn, and Tenent, the Tenent holding
of the mesn by the same services, whereby the mesn holds of the Lord, and the
Tenent of the mesn is distrained by the superior Lord, for that his service or
rent, which is due to the Mesn. Fitzherbert, not. brev. fol. 135. See Mesnaltie.

Mesnaltie (medietas) comes of Mesn, and signifies nothing but the right of
the Mesntas, the Mesnaltie is extinct, Old not. br. fol. 44. if the Mesnaltie
descend of the Tenent, Kitchen, fol. 147. For farther understanding whereof,
take these words out of the Custumary of Norm. Medietate tenentur feuda, quando
aliqua persona intervenerit inter Donimum and tenentes. Et hoc modo tenent
omnes postnati, mediante ante nato.

Messenger of the Exchequer, is an officer there, of which sort there be four
in that Court, that be Pursuivants attending the lord Treasurer, to carry his
Letters and Precepts. See Pursuivant.

Mesuage (mesuagium) is a dwelling house, West. part 2. symb. titulo. Fines.
Sect. 26. But by the name of a mesuage may pass also a Curtilage, a Garden, an
Orchard, a Dove-house, a Shop, a Mill, as parcel of an house, as he himself
confirms out of Bracton, lib. 5. cap. 28. Sect. prim. and Plowden, fol. 199.
170, 171. and of himself he avoncheth the like of a Cottage, a Tossed, a Chamber,
a Celler, etc. yet may they be demanded by their single names. Mesuagium in
Scotland, signifies the principal dwelling place or house within a Baronie,
which in our land is called a Manor house, Skene de verb. signific. verbo,
Mesuagium, where he cites Valentine Leigh, that in his Book of Survey he
affirms Mesuagium, to be the tenement or land earable; and the dwelling house
or place, or Court Hall thereof, to be called Site, in Latin called Situs.

MI
Mile (miliare) is a quantity of a thousand paces, otherwise described to
contain eight Furlongs, and every furlong to contain Forty lugs or poles, and
every lug or pole to contain 16. foot and a half, anno 35 Eliz. cap. 6.

Mildervix, anno 1 Jacob. cap. 24.

Mindbruch, is hunting of honor and worship. Saxon in his description of
England, ca. 71.

Miniver. See Furre.

Minoverie, anno 7 R. 2. ca. 4. seems to be compounded of two French words (
main, i. manus) and ( ouvrer, i. operari) and to signify some trespass or
offense committed by a man's handie-work in the Forest, as an engine to catch
Deer. Briton uses the verb (meinoverer) for to occupy and manure land, cap.
40. and cap. 62. main-ovre, for handie-work. It is not unlike, that our English
(manure) is abbreviated of the French.

Mint, comes of the German word ( meunk. i. pecunia, moneta) and it signifies
with us, the place where the Kings Coin is formed, be it Gold or Silver, which
is at this present, and long has been, the Tower of London, though it appear
by diverse Stories, and other Antiquities, that in ancient times, the Mint has
been also at Caleis, an. 21 R. 2. cap. 16. and an. 9 H. 5. stat. 5. cap. 5. The
Officers belonging to the Mint, have not been always alike. At this present
they seem to be these: The Warden, who is the chief of the rest, and is by his
office to receive the Silver of the Goldsmiths, and to pay them for it, and to
oversee all the rest belonging to this function. His fee is an hundred pounds
per annum. The Master-worker, who receives the Silver from the Warden, causes
it to be melted, and delivers it to the moniers, and takes it from them
again, when it is made. His allowance is not any set fee, but according to the
pound weight. The third is the Controller, who is to fee that the money be made
to the just assise, to over-see the officers, and control them, if the money
be not as it ought to be: his fee is one hundred marks per annum. Then is the
Master of Assay, who weighs the Silver, and sees whether it be according to
standard: his yearly fee is also an hundred marks. Then is the Auditor to take
the accounts, and make them up Auditor-like. Then is the Surveyor of the
melting, who is to see the Silver cast out, and not to be altered after it is
delivered to the Melter: which is after the Assay master has made trial of it.
Then is the Clerk of the Irons, who sees that the Irons be clean, and fit to
work with. Then the Graver, who graveth the stamps for the moneys. Then the
Smiters of Irons, who after they be graven, smites them upon the money. Then
the Melters, that melt the Bullion, before it come to the coining. Then the
Blanchers, who do aneal, boil, and cleanse the money. The Porter, who keeps
the gate of the mint. The Provost of the mint, who is to provide for all the
moniers, and to over-see them. Lastly, the moniers, who are some to sheer the
money, some to forge it, some to beat it abroad, some to round it, some to
stamp or coin it. Their wages is not by the day or year, but uncertain,
according to the weight of the money icoyned by them. Other officers that have
been n former time, are said now to be out of use.

Misaventure, or misadventure, comes near the French ( mesadventure, i.
infortunium) In out Common law, it has an especial signification for the
killing of a man, partly by negligence, and partly by chance. As if one
thinking no harm, dissolutely throws a stone wherewith he kills another; or
shooreth an arrow, etc. For in this case he commits not felony, but only
loses his goods, and has pardon of course for his life. Stawnf. pl. cor. lib.
1. ca. 8. Britton ca. 7. distinguishes between Aventure and misaventure.
Aventure he makes to be mere chance, as if a man being upon or near the
water, be taken with some sudden sickness, and so fall in, and is drowned, or
into the fire, and be burned to death. Misaventure he makes, where a man
comes to his death by some outward violence, as the fall of a tree, or of a
gate, the running of a cart-wheel, the stroke of a horse, or such like. So that
misaventure in Stawnfords opinion, is construed somewhat more largely, than
Britton understands it. West. part 2. symbol. titulo Indictment, sect. 48.
makes homicide casual, to be merely casual, or mixed. Homicide by mere chance,
he defines, sect. 49. to be, when a man is slain by mere fortune, a against the
mind of the killer; as if one hewing, the Axe flies often the haft, and kills
a man. And this is all one with Brittons misaventure. Homicide by chance mixed
he defines, sect. 50. to be, when the killers ignorance or negligence is
joined with the chance: as if a man loppe Trees by a high way side, by which
many usually travel, and cast down a bough, not giving warning, etc. By which
bough, a man passing by, is slain.

Miscontinuance, Kitchen, fol. 231. See Discontinuance.

Mise (misa) is a French word signifying as much as (expensum) in Latin, and
the Latin word (Misa) is so used in Kitchen, fol. 144. and in West. part 2.
symb. titulo, Proceedings in Chancery, Sect. 21. F. It is used anno 2. and 3.
Edw. 6. ca. 36. for a sum of money paid by the Kings tenants in certain
Counties in Wales according to their several customs. In the Statute 33 H. 8.
c. 13. it is used plurally for certain cunumary gratuities sent to the Lord
Marchers of Wales, by their Tenants, at their first coming to their lands. And
an. 4. et 5. Ph. and Mar. cap. 11. Mise is used in an action of right or
property, for the point whereupon the parties proceed to trial, either by
Assise or batel; as issue is in an action personal; if the Mise be upon battle,
Litleton, fo. 102. and in the Old not. br. fol. 2. you have these words: Know
ye, that this writ has but two Issues: that is to say, joining the mise upon
the mere, and that is to put himself into the great Assise of our Sovereign
Lord the King, or to join battle. See anno 37 Ed. 3. ca. 16. To join the mise
upon the mere, is as much to say, as to join the mise upon the clear right, and
that in more plain terms is nothing else, but ^o join upon this point, whether
has the ^ore right, the Tenent or Demandant. Litleton, lib. 3. cap. 8. fol.
101. b. This word in ^ome other place is used for a Participle, signi^ing as
much as (cast or put upon) in English, which appears by Sir Edw. Cokes report
in Stafsins case, vol. 6. fol. 124. a.

Misericordia, is used in the Common law, for an arbitrary punishment, Bracton,
li. 4. tractat. 5. cap. 6. in these words: Item siquis in misericordiam
incider^t pro disseisina, non remanebit misericordia exigenda, si ille qui
amiserit, quaesiverit convictionem. Kithin, fol. 78. out of Glanvile says
thus: Est autem misericordia, quia quis per uramentum legalium hominum
amerciatus est, ne aliquid de suo honor abilicontenemento amittat. Which saying
you have in a manner word for word, Glanv. l. 9. ca. 11. Fitzh. says, that it
is called misericordia, because ie ought to be very moderate, and rather less
than the offense, according to the tenure of the great Charter, cap. 14. This
says Fitzherbert in his not. brev. in the writ de moderata misericordia, fol.
75. A. I. Misericordia is to be quit of misericors, that is, discharged of all
manner of amercements, that may a man fall into within the Forest. See M.
Cromptons Jurisdictions, fol. 196. See Amerciament. See Mercy, and Moderata
misericordia.

Miskenning, i. changing of speech in Court. Saxon in the description of
England, ca. 11.

Misnomer, is compounded of the French (mes) which in composition always
signifies as much as (amiss) and ( nomer, i. nominare) It signifies in our
Common law, the using of one name for another, or mis-terming. ^ro^e, titulo
Misnomer.

Misprision (misprisio) comes of the French ( Mespris, i. fastidium,
contemptus.) It signifies in our Common law, neglect, or negligence, or
oversight: As for example, misprision of treason, or of felony, is a neglect
or light account showed of treason or felony committed, by not revealing it,
when we know it to be committed; Stawnf. pl. cor. l. 1. ca. 19. which read at
large: or by letting any person committed for treason or felony, or suspicion
of either, to go before he be indicted. Also Misprision of Clerks, anno 8 H. 6.
ca. 15. is a neglect of Clerks in writing, or keeping Records. Thirdly, anno 14
Ed. 3. ca. 6. stat. prim. by misprision of Clerks no process shall be
admitted. Misprision of treason, is the concealment, or not disclosing of known
treason, for the which the offenders are to suffer imprisonmen^ during the
Kings pleasure, lose their goods, and the profits of their lands, during their
lives. Crompton in his Justice of Peace, cap. Misprision of felony, fol. 40.
West, part 2. symb. titulo Inditements, Sect. 63. in fine. Misprision of
felony, seems only finable by the Justices, before whom the party is
attainted. Cromptons Justice of Peace, ubi supra. The Justices of the Common
place have power to assess fines and amerciaments upon persons offending for
misprisions, contempts or negligences, for not doing or mis-doing any thing, in
or concerning fines, West, part 2. symbol. titulo Fines. Sect. 133. Justices
of Assise shall amend the defaults of Clerks, misprising of a Syllable or
Letter or writing, Cromptons jurisdictions, fol. 20^. But it is to be noted,
that other faults may be accounted misprisions of Treason or Felony, because
certain latter Statutes do inflict that punishment upon them h^t of old has
been inflicted upon misprisions, whereof you have an example, an. 14 El. cap. 3.
of such as coin foreign Coyns not current in this Realm, and of their Procurers,
Aiders, and Abetters. And see the new exposition of Law-terms. Misprision
signifies also a mistaking, anno 14 Edw. 3. stat. pri. cap. 6.

Misses. See Mise.

Misuser, is an abuse of liberty or benefit; As he shall make fine for his
misuser, Old not. br. fol. 149.

Mystery, (mysterium) comes of the Latin (mysterium) or rather from the
French ( mestier, i. ars, artificium) an art, or occupation.

Mittendo manuscriptum pedis finis, is a writ Judicial, directed to the
Treasurer and Chamberlains of the Exchequer, to search and transmit the foot of
a Fine, acknowledged before Justices in Eyr, into the Common plees, etc. Reg.
orig. fol. 14. a, b.

Mittimus, signifies a Precept sent by the King out of his Bench, to those
that have the custody of fines levied, that they send them by a day assigned to
his Bench, West, part 2. symb. titulo Fines. Sect. 138. F. and 154. B. and
also to the Exchequer for certificate that Judgment is given for the livery of
Lands to such or such a one, out of the Kings hands: whereupon he is dismissed
also out of the Exchequer, anno 5 R. 2. cap. 15. of diverse other uses and
applications of this (Mittimus) see the Register original in the Table of the
Book.

MO
Moderata misericordia, is a Writ that lies for him that is amerced in Court
Baron or other, being not of Record, for any transgression or offense beyond
the quality of a fault. It is directed to the Lord of the Court, or his
Bailiff, commanding them to take a moderate amerciament of the party; and is
founded upon Magna Charta, cap. 14. Quod nullus liber homo amercietur nisi
secundum qualitatem delicti, etc. The rest touching this writ, see in Fitzh.
not. brev. fol. 75. See Misericordia.

Modo and forma, are words of Art in a Process, and namely in the answer of the
Defendant, whereby he denies himself to have done the thing laid to his
charge, modo and forma declarata, Kitchen fol. 232. It signifies as much as
that clause in the Civil law, Negat allegata, prout allegantur, esse vera.

Moitie comes of the French (moitie, id est, coaequa vel media pars) and
signifies the half of any thing, Littleton, folio 125.

Monks Cloths, anno 20 Hen. 6. cap. 20.

Moniers (monetarii) Regist. orig. fol. 262. b. and anno 1 Edw. 6. ca. 15. be
ministers of the Mint, which make and coin the Kings money. It appears by some
Antiquity which I have seen, that in ancient times our Kings of England had
Mints in most of the Countries of this Realm. And in the Tractate of the
Exchequer, written by Ockham, I find, that whereas Sheriffs ordinarily were
tied to pay into the Exchequer, the Kings Sterling, for such debts as they were
to answer, they of Northumberland and Cumberland were at liberty to pay in any
sort of money, so it were silver. And the reason is there given, because those
two Shires, monetarios de antiqua institutione non habent.

Monstrance de droyt, is as much as to say, as showing of his right. It
signifies in our Common law, a suit in Chancery to be restored to Lands or
Tenements, that indeed be mine in right, though they were by some office found
to be in possession of another lately dead. See Stawnf. praerog. cap. 21. at
large, and Broke, titulo Petition. Of this also read Sir Edward Cokes, Reports,
lib. 4. fo. 54. b. etc. The Wardens of the Sadlers Case.

Monstraverunt, is a writ that lies for tenants that hold freely by Charter in
ancient Demean, being destreined for the payment of any toll or imposition,
contrary to their liberty, which they do or should enjoy, which se in Fitzh.
na. br. f. 14.

Moriam, is all one in signification with the French ( morion, i. cassis) a
headpiece: which word the Frenchman borrows from the Italian (morione) anno
4 and 5 Phil. and Mar. cap. 2.

Morling, alias mortling, seems to be that wool which is taken from the skin
of a dead sheep, whether dying of the rot, or being killed, anno 27 H. 6. c. 2.
This is written Morkin, an. 3 Jac. c. 18.

Mort d'ancester. See Assise.

Mortgage (mortuum vadium, vel mortgagium) is compounded of two French words
(mort, id est, mors) and (gage, id est, pignus, merces.) It signifies in our
Common law, a pawn of land or tenement, or any thing moveable, laid or bound
for money borrowed, peremptorily to be the Creditours for ever, if the money be
not paid at the day agreed upon. And the Creditour holding land or tenement
upon this bargain, is in the mean time called Tenent in mortgage. Of this we
read in the grand Customary of Normandy, ca. 113. in these words: Notandum
insuper est, quod vadiorum quoddam vivumqu, oddam mortuum nuncupatur. Mortuum
autem dicitur vadium, quod se de nihilo redimit and acquietat; ut terra tradita
in vadium pro centum solidis, quam cum obligator retrahere voluerit, acceptam
pecuniam restituet in solidum. Vivum autem dicitur vadium, quod ex suis
proventibus acquiratur; ut terra tradita in vadium pro centum solidis usque
tres annos, quae elapso tertio anno, reddenda est obligatori, vel tradita in
vadium, quousque pecunia recepta de ejusdem proventibus fuerit persoluta.
Glanvile likewise lib. 10. cap. 6. defines it thus, Mortuum vadium dicitur
illud, cujus fructus vel reditus interim percepti in nullo se acquietant. So
you see by both these Books, that it is called a dead gage, because whatsoever
profit it yields, yet it redeemeth not it self by yielding such profit,
except the whole sum borrowed be likewise paid at the day. See Skene de verb.
significat. eodem. He that lays this pawn or gage, is called the Mortgager,
and he that takes it, the Mortgagee, West, part 2. symb. titulo Fines. Sect.
145. This, if it contain excessive usury, is prohibited, anno 37 H. 8. c. 9.

Morimain (manus mortua) is compounded of two French words, ( mort, i. mors)
and ( main, i. manus) It signifies in the Common law, an alienation of Lands
or Tenements to any Corporation, Guild, or Fratemity, and their Successors, as
Bishops, Parsons, Vicars, etc. which may not be done without license of the
King, and the Lord of the Manor. The reason of the name proceeds from this,
as I conceive it, because the services and other profits due for such lands, as
Escheats, etc. comes into a dead hand, or into such a hand as holds them,
and is not of power to deliver them, or any thing for them back again. Magna
Charta, cap. 36. and anno 7 Ed. pri. commonly called (the Statute of Mortmain)
and anno 18 Edw. 3. statut. 3. cap. 3. and anno 15 Rich. 2. cap. 5. Polydor.
Virgil in the seventeenth Book of his Chronicles, makes mention of this Law,
and gives this reason of the name. Et legem hanc manum mortuam vocarunt,
quodres semel datae collegiis sacerdotum, non utique rursus venderentur, velut
mortuae, hoc est, usui aliorum mortalium in perpetuum ademptae essent. Lex
diligenter servatur, sic ut nihil possessionum ordini sacerdotali a quoquam
detur, nisi Regio permissu. But the former Statutes be something abridged by
anno 39 Elizabeth. cap. 5. by which the gift of land, etc. to Hospitals, is
permitted without obtaining of Mortmain. Hotoman in his Commentaries de verbis
feudal. verbo Manus mortua has these words, Manus mortua locutio est, quae
usurpatur de iis, quorum possessio, ut ita dicam, immortalis est: quia nunquam
haeredem habere desinunt. Qua de causa res nunquam ad priorem dominum
revertitur. Nam manus pro possessione dicitur, mortua pro immortali. Sic
municipium dicitur non mori, l. An usus fructus, 56. D. de usufr. ligat.
quoniam hominibus aliis succrescentibus, idem populi corpus videtur. l.
proponebatur. 76. D. de Judiciis: Haec Hotomanus; and read the rest.
Amortizatio est in manum mortuam trar slatio Principis jussu. Petrus Belluga in
speculo principum, fol. 76. Jus amortizationis est licentia capiendi ad manum
mortuam. Idem, eodem, where you may read a learned Tractate, both of the
beginning and nature of this Doctrine. To the same effect you may read Cass. de
consuet. Burg. page 348, 387, 1183, 1185, 1201, 1225, 1285, 1218, 1274. M.
Skene de verbo signif. says, that Dimittere terras ad manum mortuam, est idem
atque dimittere ad multitudinem sive univer sitatem, quae nunquam moritur:
idque per (...), seu a contrario sensu, bebecause Communalties never die.

MU
Murtuarie (mortuarium) is a gift left by a man at his death, to his parish
Church, for the recompense of his personal Tithes and Offerings not duly paid
in his life time. And if a man have three, or more cattle of any kind, the best
being kept for the Lord of the fee as a Heriot; the second was wont to be given
to the Parson in right of the Church, ca. statutum, De consuetu, in provincial,
Touching this you have two Statutes; one anno 13. Edw pri. commonly called
Circumspecte agatis: whereby it appears, that Mortuaries are suable in the
Court Christian; the other, anno 21 H. 8. ca. 6. whereby is fet down an order
and rate in money for Mortuaries.

Mulier, as it is used in the Common law, seems to be a word corrupted, and
used for (Melior) or rather the French (Melieur.) It signifies the lawful
issue preferred before an elder Brother born out of Marrimonie; an. H. 6. ca.
11. Smith de repub. Anglo. lib. 3. ca. 6. But by Glanvile, lib. 7. ca. 1. the
lawful issue seems rather (Mulier) then (Melior) because it is begotten (e
muliere) and not (ex Concubine) for he calls such issue filios mulierates,
opposing them to Bastards. And Britton, cap. 70. has friar mulier, i. the
Brother begotten of the wife, opposite to friar bastard. This seems to be
used in Scotland also: For Master Skene, de verborum significat. verbo
Mulieratus filius, says, that Mulieratus filius is a lawful son, begotten of a
lawful wife. Quia mulieris appellatione uxor continetur. l. Mulieris 13. and
ibidem. Glossa de verborum significatione.

Mulmutins laws. See Law.

Multure (Molitura, vel Multura) comes near the French (Moulture) and
signifies in our Common law, the toll that the Miller takes, for grinding of
corn.

Murage (Muragium) is a toll or tribute to be levied for the building or
repairing of public edifices or walls. Fitzherberts Not. Brev. fo. 227. d.
Murage seems also to be a liberty granted by the King to a town, for the
gathering of money toward walling of the same. Anno 3 Edw. 1. ca. 30.

Murder (murdrum) is borrowed of the French ( Meurtrier, i. Carnifex, homicide)
or ( Meurtre, i. internecio, homicidium. The new Expositor of the Law-Tearms
draws it from the Saxon word (Mordren) signifying the same thing. It
signifies in our Common law a wilful and felonious killing of another upon
prepensed malice, anno 52 H. 3. ca. 25 West, part 2. symbol. titulo
Inditements, Sect. 47. Bracton, li. 3. tract. 2. ca 15. nu. 1. defines it to
be, homicidium, quod nullo praesente, nullo sciente, nullo audiente, nullo
vidente, clam perpetratur. And of the same mind is Britton, cap. 6. as also
Fleta, lib. 1. cap. 30. Yet Fleta says also, That it was not murder, except
it were proved the party slain were english, and no stranger. But as Stawnf.
says, pl. Cor. li. 1. cap. 2. the Law in this point is altered by the Statute,
anno 14 Edward 3. cap. 4. and murder is now otherwise to be defined. When a
man upon prepensed malice kills another, whether secretly or openly, it
makes no matter: or be he an English man, or a foreiner living under the Kings
protection. And prepensed malice is here either express or implied: Express,
when it may be evidently proved that there was formerly some evil will implied:
when one kills another suddenly having nothing to defend himself, as going
over a stlle, or such like, Cromptons Justice of peace, in the Chapter of
Murder, fol. 19. b. See Master Skene, de verbor. significat. Verbo Murdrum.
This by the Latin interpreter of the grand Custumary of Normandy, is called
Multrum, cap. 68. See Were.

Muster comes of the French ( moustre, i. specimen, spectamen, exemplum) as
feire moustre generale de toute son armee, is as much as lustrare exercitum.
The signification is plain. Mustred of record, anno 18 Henr. 6. cap. 19.
seems to be dare nomen, or to be introlled in the number of the Kings
soldiers. Master of the Kings musters, anno 2 Ed. 6. cap. 2, see Muster.

Muster-master general, anno 35. Elizab. cap. 4. See Master of the Kings
Musters,

NA
NAam (Namium) seems to come from the Dutch word nemmen, i. capio. It
signifies in our Common law, the taking or apprehending of another man's
moveable goods: and is either lawful or unlawful. Lawful naam is nothing else
but a reasonable distress, proportionable to the value of the thing distreined
for: and this naam was anciently called either vif or mort, quick or dead,
according as it is made of dead or quick chatels. Lawful naam is so, either by
the Common law, or by a man's particular fact: by the Common law, as when one
takes another man's beasts damage feisant in his grounds: by a man's particular
fact, as by reason of some contract made, that for default of payment of an
annuity agreed upon, it shall be lawful to distrein in such or such lands,
etc. Horns Mirror of Justices, lib. 2. ca. de vec. de naam, where you may read
of other circumstances required in lawful naam, viz. of what thing or of what
things first, in what manner, on what days, and at what houses it ought to be
made: with other points worth the reading, for the understanding of our Law
Antiquities. See Withernam.

Nasse, anno 4 Hen. 7. ca. 21. seems to be the proper name of Orford Haven.
Whether it be so termed of the boats or water Vessels that lie there, or not,
let the Reader judge. But nasselle is in French a kind of small boat.

Nativo habendo is a writ that lies to the Sheriff for a Lord, whose Villein
claimed for his inheritance, is run from him, for the apprehending and
restoring of him to his Lord again: Regist. orig. fol. 87. Fitz. not. brev. fo.
77. See Liberate probanda.

Naturalization. See Denizen.

NE
Ne admittas, is a writ that lies for the Plaintiff in a Quare impedit, or him
that has an action of Darrein presentment depending in the common Bench, and
fears that the Bishop will admit the Clerk of the Defendant, during the suit
between them. And this writ must be sued within six months after the avoydance.
Because after the six months the Bishop may present by lapse. Register
original, fol. 31. Fitz. not. brev. fol. 37. where see the rest.

Negative pregnant (Negativa praegnans) is a negative implying also an
affirmative. As is a man being impleaded, to have done a thing upon such a day,
or in such a place, denies that he did it modo and forma declarata, which
implies nevertheless, that in some sort he did it. Or if a man be said to
have alienated land, etc. in fee, he denying that he has alienated in fee,
seems to confess that he has alienated in some other sort. Dyer, fol. 17.
nu. 95. See Brook hoc titulo, and Kitchen, fol. 232. And see the new exposition
of law terms. And read also in some Civilians, of Assirmativa praegnans, and
that is, quae habet in se inclusivam negativam. Et hoc importare videntur
dictiones (Solum and tanti^m, qua implicant negativam) Pacianus, De
probationibus, lib. 1. cap. 31. number. 16. fol. 93.

Neif (nativa) comes of the French ( Naif, i. naturalis, vel nativus) it
signifies in our Common law, a Bondwoman, anno 1 Ed. 6. cap. 3. the reason is,
because women become bound rather nativitate, than by any other means.

Ne injuste vexes, is a Writ that lies for a Tenent, which is distrained by
his Lord, for other services than he ought to make, and is a Prohibition to the
Lord in it self, commanding him not to distrain. The especial use of it is,
where the Tenent has formerly prejudiced himself by performing more services,
or paying more rent without constraint, than he needed. For in this Case, by
reason of the Lords seisin, he cannot avoid him in avowry: and therefore he is
driven to this Writ as his next remedy, Regist. orig. fol. 4. Fitz. not. brev.
fol. 10.

Ne Vicecomes color mandati Regis quemquam amoveat a possessione ecclesiae
minus just; Regist. orig. fol. 61.

NI
Nient comprise, is an exception taken to a Petition as unjust, because the
thing desired is not contained or comprehended in that Act or Deed, whereupon
the Petition is grounded. For example, one desires of the Court, to be put in
possession of a House formerly among other Lands, etc. adjudged unto him. The
adverse party pleads, that this Petition is not to be granted, because though
he had a judgment for certain Lands and Houses: yet the House into the
possession whereof he desires to be put, is not contained among those for the
which he had judgment. See the New Book of Enteries, titulo Nient comprise.
This seems to be especially to hinder execntion.

Nifle, anno 3 Ed. 4. cap. 5.

Nihil, anno 5 R. 2. stat. 1. cap. 3. is a word set upon a Debt illeviable, by
the foreign Apposer in the Exchequer.

Nihil dicit, is a failing to put in answer to the Plea of the Plaintiff by the
day assigned, which if a man do commit, judgment passes against him, as
saying nothing why it should not

Nisi prius, is a Writ Judicial, which lies in Case, where the Enquest is
paneled, and returned before the Justices of the Bank, the one party or the
other making Petition, to have this Writ for the ease of the Country. It is
directed to the Sheriff, commanding that he should cause the men impaneled to
come before the Justices in the same County, for the determination of the Cause
there, except it be so difficult, that it need great deliberation. In which it
is sent again to the Bank, v. anno 14 Edward. 3. cap. 15. The form of the Writ
see in Old not. br. fol. 159. and in the Register judicial, fol. 7. and 28. and
75. See the New Book of Entries, verbo, Nisi prius. And it is called (Nisi
prius) of these words comprised in the same, whereby the Sheriff is willed to
bring to Westminster, the men empaneled, at a certain day, or before the
Iustistices of the next Assizes: Nisi die Lunae apud talem locum prius
venerint, etc. whereby it appears, that Justices of Assizes, and Justices of
(Nisi prius) are differing. And Justices of (Nisi prius) must be one of them,
before whom the Cause is depending in the Bench, with some other good man of
the County associated unto him, Fitzherb. not. brev. fol. 240. E. which he
takes from the Statute of York, anno 12 Ed. 2. See Westminster. 2. cap. 30. anno 13
Edw. prim. and anno 27 ejusdem, cap. 4. and anno 2 Edw. 3. cap. 17. and anno 4
ejusdem, cap. 11. and anno 14 ejusdem, cap. 16. and anno 7 Rich. 2. cap. 7. and
anno 18 Eliz. cap. 12.

NO
Nobility (Nobilitas) in England compriseth all Dignities above a Knight. So
that a Baron is the lowest degree thereof. Smith de Repub. Anglor. lib. prim.
ca. 17. Bartolus in his Tractate de Nobilitate, which he compiled upon the Law,
Si ut proponis C. de dignitatibus, libro 12. rehearses four Opinions de
Nobilitate, but rejects them, and himself defines it thus, Nobilitas est
qualitas illata per principatum tenextem, qua quis ultra honestos plebeios
acceptus ostenditur. But this definition is too large for us, except we will
account Knights and Banerets inter plebem, which in mine opinion were too
haish. For Equites among the Romans were in a middle rank, inter Senatores and
plebem.

Nocumento. See Nuisance.

Nomination (nominatio) is used by the Canonists and Common Lawyers, for a
power that a man by virtue of a Manor or otherwise, has to appoint a Clerk to
a Patron of a Benefice, by him to be presented to the Ordinary. New Terms of
the Law.

Non-ability, is an exception taken against the Plaintiff or Demandant upon
some cause, why he cannot commence any suit in Law, as Praemunire, Outlawry.
Villenage, or Excommunication, or because he is a Stranger born. The Civilians
say, That such a man has not personam standi in judicio. See Brook, hoc
titulo. See Fitz. not. brev. fo. 35. a. fo. 65. d. fo. 77. c. The new Expositor
of Law Terms teckoneth six causes of Non-ability, as if he be an Outlaw, a
Stranger born, condemned in a Praemunire, professed in Religion excommunicate,
or a Villein. Howbeit the second cause holds only in Actions real or mixed,
and not in personal, except he be a Stranger and an enemy.

Non admittas. See ne admittas.

Nonage, is all the time of a man's age under one and twenty years in some
cases, or fourteen in some, as marriage. See Brook titulo Age. See Age.

Non capiendo Clericum, see Clericum non capiendo.

Non-claym, Cromptons Jurisdict. fo. 144, seems to be an exception against a
man that claims not within the time limited by Law, as within a year and day,
in case where a man ought to make continual Claim, or within five years after a
Fine levied. Vide Cook, lib. 4. in Pr^oemio. See Continual claim.

Non compos mentis, it is of four sorts: First, he that is an Idiot born. Next,
he that by accident afterward wholly loses his wits. Thirdly, a Lunitick,
that has sometime his understanding, and sometime not. Lastly, he which by his
own Act depriveth himself of his right mind for a time, as a Drunkard: Coke
lib. 4. fo. 124. b.

Non distringendo, is a Writ comprising under it diverse particulars, according
to diverse Cases, all which you may see in the Table of the Register origin.
verbo non distringendo.

Non est culpabilis, is the general Answer to an Action of Trespass, whereby
the Defendant does absolutely deny the fact imputed unto him by by the
Plaintiff, whereas in other especial Answers, the Defendant grants a Fact to
be done, and allegeth some reason in his defense, why he lawfully might do it.
And therefore whereas the Rhetoricians, comprise all the substance of their
discourses, under three Questions, An sit, quid sit, quale sit, this Answer
falls under the first of the three: all other Answers are under one of the
other two. And as this is the general Answer in an Action of Trespass, that is,
an Action criminal civilly prosecuted: so is it also in all Actions criminally
followed, either at the suit of the King or other, wherein the Defendant
denies the crime objected unto him. See the New Book of Entries, titulo Non
culpabilis, and Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 2. cap. 62.

Non est factum, is an Answer to a Declaration, whereby a man denies that to be
his Deed, whereupon he is impleaded. Broke, hoc titulo.

Non implacitando aliquem de libero tenemento sine brevi, is a Writ to inhibit
Bailiffs, etc. from distreining any man without the Kings Writ, touching his
Freehold, Register fol. 171. b.

Non intromittendo quando breve praecipe in capite subdole impetratur, is a
Writ directed to Justices of the Bench, or in Eyr, willing them not to give one
hearing, that has under the color of intitling the King to Land, etc. as
holding of him in Capite, deceitfully obtained the Writ called Praecipe in
capite; but to put him to this Writ of Right if he think good to use it,
Register original, fol. 4. b.

Non Mercandizando victualia, in a Writ directed to the Justices of Assise,
commanding them to inquire whether the Officers of such a Town do sell Victuals
in gross, or by retayl, during their Office, contrary to the Statute, and to
punish them, if they find it true. Regist. fol. 184.

Non molestando, is a Writ that lies for him, which is molested contrary to
the Kings Protection granted him, Register fol. 24.

Non omittas, is a Writ lying where the Sheriff delivers a former Writ to a
Bailiff of a Franchise, within the which the party, on whom it is to be served,
dwells, and the Bailiff neglects to serve it: for in this Case the Sheriff
returning, that he delivered it to the Bailiff, this shall be directed to the
Sheriff, charging him himself to execute the Kings commandment, Old not. brev.
fol. 44. of this the Regist. orig. has three sorts, fol. 82. b. and 151. and
the Register judic. one, folio 5 and 56.

Non penendo in Assisis and Juratis, is a Writ founded upon the Stat. Westminster. 2.
ca. 38. and the stat. Articuli super Chartas, cap. 9. which is granted upon
diverse causes to men, for the freeing them from Assizes and Juries. See Fitz.
not. brev. fol. 165. See the Regist. fol. 179, 100, 181, 183.

Non precedendo ad Assisam Rege inconsulto, is a writ to stop the Trial of a
Cause appertaining unto one, that is in the Kings service. ^ c. until the
Kings pleasure be farther known, Register fol. 220. a.

Non residentia pro clericis regis, is a Writ directed to the Ordinary,
sharging him not to molest a Clerk employed in the Kings service, by reason of
his non residence. Regist. orig. folio 58. b.

Non suit, is a renunciation of the suit by the Plaintiff or demandant, when
the matter is so far proceeded in, as the Jury is ready at the Bar, to deliver
their verdict, anno 2 H. 4. cap. 7. See the New Book of Entries, verbo Nonsute.
The Civilians term it Litis renunciationein.

Non solvendo pecuniam ad quam Clericus mu^ctatur pro non residentia, is a Writ
prohibiting an Ordinary to take a pecuniary mulct, imposed upon a Clerk of the
King for Nonresidence, Reg. orig. fol. 59.

Non-tenure, is an exception to a count, by saying that he holds not the Land
specified in the count, or at the least some part of it, anno 25 Edw. 3.
statut. 4. cap. 16, West. part 2. Symbol. titulo Fines, Sect. 138. makes
mention of Non tenure general, and Non tenure special. See the New Book of
Entries, Verbo Non tenure, where it is said, that especial Non tenure is an
exception, alleging that he was not Tenent the day whereon the writ was
purchased. Non tenure general is then by Likelihood, where one denies himself
ever to have been Tenent to the Land in question.

Non sum informatus. See Informatus non sum.

Non sane memory (Non sanae memoriae) is on exception taken to any Act
declared by the Plaintiff or Demandant to be done by another, whereupon he
groundeth his Plaint or Demand. And the Contents of this Exception be, that the
party that did that Act (being himself or any other) was not well in his wits,
or mad when he did it. See the New Book of Entries, titulo nonsane memory, and
Dum non fuit compos mentis. See also, supra Non compos mentis.

Non term (non terminus) is the time of Vacation between Term and Term. It was
wont to be called the times or days of the Kings peace, Lamb. Archaiono. fol.
126. and what these were in the time of King Edward the Confessor, see there.
This time was called (Justicium) or (Feriae) among the Romans, or (dies
nefasti) Ferias appellari notum est tempus illud, quod forensibus negotiis and
jure dicendo vacabat. Earum autem aliae solennes erant, alia repentinae.
Brisson. de verb. signif. lib. 6. vide Wesenbec: paratit. De Feriis, number. 6.

Note of ^ Fine (nota finis) is a brief of a fine made by the Chirographer,
before it be engrossed. The form whereof see in West. part 2. Symbol. titulo
Fines, Section 117.

Novel assignment (nova assignatio) is an assignment of time or place, or such
like, otherwise than as it was before assigned. In Brook you may find these
words in effect, titulo Deputy, number. 12. See novel assignment of Trespass in a
new place after Bar pleaded, Brock tit. Trespass, 122. and novel assignment in
a Writ de ejectione custodiae, titulo Ejectione custodiae, number. 7. See
Assignment.

NU
Nuae matter. See Matter.

Nun (Nonna) is the French word (nonnain) or (nonne) something altered, which
signifies a holy or confecrated Virgin, or a woman that has by vow bound her
self to a single and chaste life, in some place and Company of other women,
separated from the world, and addicted to an especial service of God, by
Prayer, Fasting, and such like holy exercises. If we would know whence this
word came into France, Saint Hierome makes it an Egyptian word, as Hospinian
records of him, in this Book De origin and progressu monachatus, fol. 2.

Nuper obiit, is a Writ that lies for a Coheir being deforced by her Coheir
of Lands or Tenements, whereof the Grandfather, Father, Uncle, or Brother to
them both, or any other their Common Ancesters died seized of an Estate in
Fee-simple. See the form of the Writ, Origin. Regist. fol. 226, etc. Fitzh.
not. brev. fol. 197. If the Ancestor died sessed in Fee tail, then the Coheir
deforced shall have a Formedon. Idem, ibid.

Nuisance, (nocumentum) comes of the French ( nuire, i. nocere.) It signifies
in our Common law, not only a thing done, whereby another man is annoyed in his
free Lands or Tenements, but especially the Assise or Writ lying for the same,
Fitzh. not. brev. fol. 183. And this Writ (de Nocumento) or of Nuisance, is
either simply, De nocumento, or de parvo nocumento; and then it is Vicountiel.
Old not. brev. fol. 108, and 109. and Fitz. nature. brev. ubi supra, and fol.
184. Britton calls it Nosance, whom also read, cap. 61, and 62. M. Manwood
part 2. of his Forest laws, cap. 17. makes three sorts of Nuisance in the
Forest: The first is Nocumentum commune, the second, Nocumentum speciale, the
third, Nocumentum generale; which read with the rest of that whole Chapter. See
the Register orig. fol. 197, and 199.

Nutmegs (nux myristica, vel nux muscata) is a spice well known to all. It
grows of a Tree like a Peach-tree, and is enclosed in two Husks, whereof the
inner Husk is that spice which we call Mace. Of this who will may read more in
Gerards Herbal, lib. 3. cap. 145. It is mentioned among spices that are to be
garbled, anno 1 Jacob. cap. 19.

O
OB
OBedientiae, was a Rent, as appears by Roger Hoveden part poster. suorum
annalium, fol. 430. in these words: Ut ergo eis, sc. regularibus, adimatur
opportunitas evagandi, prohibemus, ne reditus quos obedientias vocant, ad
firmam teneant, etc. Obedidientia in the Common law is used for an Office or
the administration of an Office, ca. cum admonasterium, 6. extra de statu
monacho: and cano. regula. And thereupon the word (obedientiales) is used in
the provincial constitutions for those which have the execution of any Office
under their Superiors, cap. prim. de statu, regula. For thus says Lyndwood in
his gloss upon that word: H^i sunt qui sub obedientia suorum Praelatorum sunt,
and habent certa officia administranda inte rius vel exterius. It may be that
some of these Offices called obedientiae, consisted in the collection of rents
or pensions: and that therefore those Rents were by a Metonymie called
obedientia, quia colligebantur ab obedientialibus.

Oblitions, (oblationes) are thus defined in the Canon law. Oblationes
dicuntur, quaecunque a piis fidelibusque Christianis offeruntur Deo and
Ecclesiae, sive res soli, sive mobiles sint. Nec refert an legentur testamento,
an aliter donentur, cap. clerici. 13. quaest. 2. Read more of these in
Duarenus. de sacr. eccl. minister. ac benefi. cap. tertio.

Oblagation (obligatio) and Bill be all one, saving that when it is in English,
it is commonly called a Bill, and when it is in Latin, an Obligation. West,
part 1. Symbol. lib. 2. sect. 146. True it is, that a Bill is obligatory, but
we commonly call that an Obligation, which has a Condition annexed. The former
Author in the same place says thus farther. An Obligation is a Deed, whereby
the Obligor does acknowledge himself to owe unto the Obligee a certain sum of
money, or other thing. In which, besides the parties names, are to be
considered the thing due, and the time, place, and manner of payment, or
delivery. Obligations be either by matter in Deed or of Record. An Obligation
by matter in Deed, is every Obligation not acknowledged and made in some Court
of Record. Hithetto Master West.

OC
Occupavit, is a Writ that lies for him, which is ejected out of his Land or
Tenement in time of war: as a Writ of Novel disseisin lies for one ejected in
time of peace. Ingham. Brief de novel disseisin.

Octo tales. See Tales. See Brook tit. Octo tales.

OD
Odio and atia, anno 3 Ed. 1. cap. 11. is a Writ sent to the Undersheriff, to
inquire whether a man being committed to Prison upon suspicion of murder, be
committed upon malice or evil will, or upon just suspicion, Register orig.
fol. 133. b. See Bracton lib. 3. part 2. cap. 20.

OF
Office (Officinm) does signify not only that function, by virtue whereof a man
has some employment in the affairs of another, as of the King, or other Common
person; but also an Inquisition made to the Kings use, of any thing by virtue
of his Office who inquireth. And therefore we oftentimes read of an Office
found, which is nothing but such a thing found by Inquisition made ex officio.
In this signification it is used anno 33 H. 8. cap. 20. and in Stawnfords
praerog. fol. 60, and 61. where to traverse an Office, is to traverse the
Inquisition taken of Office. And in Kitchen fol. 177. to return an Office, is
to return that which is found by virtue of the office; See also the new Book of
Entries, verbo office pur le Roy. And this is by a Metonymy of the effect: And
there be two sorts of Offices in this signification, issuing out of the
Exchequer by Commission, viz. an Office to entitle the King in the thing
inquired of, and an Office of instruction; which read in Sir Edward Cokes
Reports, vol. 6. Pages Case, fol. 52. a, b. Office in fee, is that which a man
has to himself and his heirs, anno 13 Edward 1. cap. 25. Kitchen folio 152.
See Clerk.

Official (Officialis) is a word very diversely used. For by sundry Civilians of
other Countries, that write in these days, it appears to be applied in many
places, to such as have the sway of temporal Justice. Aegidius Bossius in
pract. crim. tit. De officialibus corruptis, etc. But by the ancienter Civil
law, it signifies him that is the Minister or Apparit or of a Magistrate or
Judge. lib. 1.. si quis ultro. p. de quaestio. and Co. de filiis officialium,
etc. lib. 12. In the Canon law it is especially taken for him, to whom any
Bishop does generally commit the charge of his spiritual Jurisdiction. And in
this sunse one in every Dioces is (officialis principalis) whom the Statutes
and Laws of this Kingdom call Chanceller, anno 32 H. 8. cap. 15. The rest, if
there be more, are by the Canon law called officiales foranei. glos. in Clem.
2. de Rescriptis, but with us termed Commissaries (Commissarii) as in the
Statute of H. 8. or sometimes (Commissiarii foranei) The difference of these
two powers you may read in Lyndwood, titulo de sequestra posses. ca. 1. verbo
Officialis. But this word (official) in our Statutes and Common law, signifies
him, whom the Archdeacon substituteth in the executing of his Jurisdiction, as
appear eth by the Statute above mentioned, and many other places.

Officiariis non faciendis vel amovendis, is a Writ directed to the Magistrates
of a Corporation, willing them not to make such a man an Officer, and to put
him out of the Office he has, until enquiry be made of his manners, according
to an Inquisition formerly ordained. Register original, fol. 126. b.

ON
Oner ando pro rata portionis, is a Writ that lies for a joint renent, or
renent in Common that is distreyned for more rent, than the proportion of the
Land comes unto. Reg. orig. fol. 182. b.

OP
Open Law, (Lex manifesta, Lex apparens) is making of Law, which by Magna
Charta cap. 28. Bailiffs may not put men unto upon their own bare assertions,
except they have Witnesses to prove their imputation.

OR
Orchel. anno 1 R. 3. cap. 8. Orchall, anno 24 H. 8. cap. 2. and anno 3 and 4
Ed. 6. cap. 2. seemetst to be all one with Cork.

Ordinance of the Forest (Ordinatio Forestae) is a Statute made touching Forest
causes in the 34 year of Edward 1. See Assise.

Ordinary (Ordinarius) though in the Civil law, whence the word is taken, it
does signify any Judge that has authority to take knowledge of Causes in his
own right, as he is a Magistrate, and not by deputation: yet in our Common law,
it is most commonly, and for ought I remember, always taken for him, that has
ordinary jurisdiction in causes Ecclesiastical. See Brook hoc titulo. Linwood
in cap. exterior, titulo de Constitutionibus, verbo Ordinarii, says, quod
Ordinarius habet locum principaliter in Episcopo, et aliis superioribus, qui
soli sunt universales in suis ju isdictionibus, sed sunt sub eo ali^ordinarii,
hii viz. quibus competit jurisdictio ordinaria de jure, privilegio vgl
consuetudine, etc. v. c.

Ordinatione contra servientes, is a Writ that lies against a Servant for
leaving his Master against the Statute, Register original, fol. 189.

Ordel (Ordalium) is a Saxon word, signifying as much as Judgment, in some
men's opinions compounded of two Saxon words (or) a privative as (a) in Greek,
and ( dael, 1. pars) It signifies as much as expers: but it is artificially
used for a kind of purgation practiced in ancient times: whereby the party
purged, was judged expers criminis, called in the Canon law purgatio vulgaris,
and utterly condemned. There were of this two sorts, one by fire, another by
water. Of these see M. Lamberd in his explication of Saxon words, verbo
Ordalium, where he expresses it at large, with such superstitions as were used
in it. Of this you may like wise read Holinshed in his description of Britain,
fol. 98. and also M. Manwood part pri. of his Forest laws, page 15. But of all
the rest, Hotoman especially, disput. de feud. p. 41. where of five kind of
proofs which he calls feudales probationes, he makes this the fourth,
calling it explorationem, et hujus furiosae probationis 6. genera fuisse
animadvertit, per flammam, per aquam, perferrum candens, per aquam vel gelidam,
vel ferventem, per sorts, et per corpus Domini, of all which he allegeth
several exemples out of History, very worthy the reading. See M. Skene also de
verbor. significatione, verbo (Machamium) This seems to have been in use here
with us in Henry the seconds days, as appears by Glanvile, lib. 14. c. 1 and
2. Read also of this in M. Verstegans Restitution of decayed intelligence, cap.
3. page 63. and seq.

Orfgild, aliis Cheapegeld, is a restitution made by the Hundred or County, of
any wrong done by one that was in plegio. Lamberd, Archaion, page 125. and 126.

Org is, anno 31. Ed. 3. stat. 3. cap. 2. is the greatest sort of North
seafish, now a days called Organ ling.

Oredelf, is a liberty whereby a man claims the Ore found in his soil. New
exposition of Terms.

Ortelli. is a word used in the book termed (pupilla oculi) in the chapter
containing the Charter of the Forest, part 5. cap. 22. and signifies the
claws of a dogs foot, being taken from the French, orteils des pieds, i.
digiti pedum, the Toes.

OS
Osmonds, anno 32. Henr. 8. cap. 14.

OT
Oath of the King (Juramentum Regis) is that which the King takes at his
Coronation, which in Bract. is set down in these words: Debet Rex in
coronatione sua, in nomine Jesu Christi praestito sacramento haec tria
promittere populo sibi subdito: Inprimis se esse praecepturum and pro viribus
opem impensurum ut ecclesiae dei et omni populo Christiano vera pax omnisuo
tempore observetur. Secundo, ut rapacitates et omnes inquietates omnibus
gradibus interdicat. Tertio, ut in omnibus judciis aequitatem praecipat and
misericordiam, ut indulgeat ei suam misericordiam clemens and misericors Dens,
and ut per justitiam suam firma gaudeant pace universi. And in the old
abridgment of Statutes set out in King Henry the eighths days, I find it thus
described. This is the oath that the King shall swear at his Coronation: That
he shall keep and maintain the right, and the liberties of the Holy Church, of
old time granted by the righteous Christian Kings of England; and that he
shall keep all the Lands, Honors, and Dignities righteous and free of the
Crown of England in all manner whole, without any manner of minishment, and the
rights of Crown hurt, decayed or lost, to his power shall call again into the
ancient estate; and that he shall keep the peace of the Holy Church, and of the
Clergy, and of the people with good accord: and that he shall do in all his
judgments equity, and right justice, with discretion and mercy: and that he
shall grant to hold the Laws and customs of the Realm, and to his power keep
them, and affiem them, which the folk and people have made and chosen: and the
evil Laws and customs wholey to put out: and steadfast and stable peace to
the people of this Realm, keep, and cause to be kept to his power: and that he
shall grant no Charter, but where he may do it by his oath. All this I find in
the foresaid Book, titulo Sacramentum Regit, and Charter of Pardon, quinto.

Oath of the Kings Justices is, That they well and truly shall serve the King,
and that they shall not assent to things that may turn to his damage or
disinheritance. Nor that they shall take no fee nor livery of none but the
King. Nor that they shall take gift or reward of none that has ado before
them, except it be meat and drink of small value, as long as the plce is
hanging before them, nor after for the cause. Nor that they shall give counsel
to none in matter that may touch the King, upon pain to be at the Kings will,
body and goods. And that they shall do right to every person, notwithstanding
the Kings Letters, etc. Anno 18. Ed. 3. statut. 4. which the old abridgement
makes to be anno 20. ejusdem statu^o perse.

Otho was a Deacon Cardinal of S. Nichens in carcere Tulliani, and Legate for
the Pope here in England, anno 22 H. 3. whose constitutions we have at this
day: Stows An. p. 303. and see the first constitution of the said Legate.

Othobonus was a Deacon Cardinal of S. Adrian, and the Popes Legate here in
England, anno 15 Hen. 3. as appears by the award made between the said King
and his Commons, at Kenelworth; his constitutions we have at this day in use.

OU
Ouch, anno 24 H. 8. cap. 13.

Ouster le main (Amovere manum) word for word, signifies to take off the hand,
though in true French, it should be (Oster la main) It signifies in the common
Law a Judgment given for him that tends a travers, or sueth a Monstrance de
droit, or petition. For when it appears upon the matter discussed, that the
King has no right nor title to the thing he seized, then Judgment shall be
given in the Chauncery, that the Kings hands be amoved, and thereupon Amoveas
manum shall be awarded to the Escheator: which is as much, as if the judgment
were given that he shall have again his land. v. Stawnf. praerog. ca. 24. See
anno 28 Ed. 1. stat. 3. ca. 19. it is also taken for the writ granted upon this
petition. Fitz. not. br. fol. 256. C. It is written oter le maine, anno 25 Hen.
8. cap. 22.

Ouster le mer (ultra mare) comes of the French ( oultre, i. ultra) and ( le
mer, i. mare) and it is a cause of excuse or Essoin, if a man appear not in
Court upon Summons. See Essoin.

Out fangthief, alids uifangthef, is thus defined by Bracten, lib. 3. tra. 2.
ca. 34. Vifangthef dicitur latro extraneus veniens aliunde de terra aliena, and
qut captus fuit in terra ipsius, qui tales habet libertaces, but see Eritton
otherwise, fol. 91. b. It is compounded of three Saxon words ( out, i. extra) (
fang, i. capto vel captus) and ( Thef, i. fur.) It is used in the common law,
for a liberty or a privilege, whereby a Lord is enabled to call any man
dwelling within his own fee, and taken for felony in any other place, and to
judge him in his own Court. Rastals expos. of words.

Oenliy of services. is an equality when the Tenent paravail owes as much to
the mesn, as the mesn does to the Lord paramont. Fitz. not. br. folio 136. A. B.

Outlawry (utlagaria) is the loss or deprivation of the benefit belonging to a
subject: that is, of the Kings protection and the Realm. Bractor, lib. 3.
tract. 2. cap. 11. number. pri. and nu. 3. Forisfacit utlagatus omnia quae pacis
sunt: Quia a tempore quo utlagatus est, caput gerit lupinum, ita quod ab
^mnibus intersici possit and impune: maxim si se defenderit, velfugerit, ita
quod difficilis sit ejus captio, and nu. 4. Si autem non fugerit, necse
defenderit cum captus fuerit: extunc erit in manu domini Regis mors, and vita,
and qui taliter captum interfecerit, respondebit pro co sicut pro alio, v. c.

Outparters anno 9 H. 5. cap. 8. seems to be a kind of thieves in Ridesdall,
that ride abroad at their best advantage, to fetch in such cattle or other
things, as they could light on without that liberty: some are of opinion, that
those which in the forenamed Statute are termed out-parties, are at this day
called outputters, and are such as set matches for the robbing of any man or
house: as by discovering which way he rides or goes, or where the house is
weakest and fittest to be entered. See Intakers.

Outryders, seem to be none other but Bailiffs errants, employed by the
Sheriffs or their fermers to ride to the farthest places of their Counties or
Hundreds, with the more speed to summon to their County or Hundred Courts such
as they thought good to work upon, anno 14. Edw. 3. stat. 1. ca. 9.

OX
Oxgang of land (bovata terrae) Six Oxgangs of land, seem to be so much as six
oxen will plough. Cromptons Jurisd. fol. 220. but an oxegang seems properly
to be spoken of such land as lies in gainour, Old. not. br. fol. 117. M. Skene
de verb. signif. (verbo Bovata terrae) says, that an oxen gate of land should
always contain 13. acres, and that 4. oxengates extends to a pound land of old
extent. See Librata terrae.

OY
Oyer and Terminer, (audiendo and terminando) in true French (Ovir and
terminer) is, in the intendment of our Law, a Commission especially granted to
certain men, for the hearing and determining of one or more causes. This was
wont to be in use upon some sudden outrage or insurrection in any place.
Cromptons jurisd. fol. 131, and 132. See The Statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 29. anno
13. Edv. 1. who might grant this commission. And see Fitzherb. not. br. fol.
100. for the form and occasion of the writ, as also to whom it is to be
granted, and whom not. See Broke, titulo, Oyer and determiner.

Oyer de Record (Audire Recordium) is a petition made in Court, that the Judges
for better proofs sake, will be pleased to hear or look upon any Record.

P
PA
PAcking whites. anno 1. R. 3. cap. 8.

Pain fort and dur (paena fortis and dura) is in true French (peine fort and
dure.) It signifies in our common Law, an especial punishment for those, that
being arraigned of felony, refuse to put themselves upon the ordinary try all
of God and the Country, and thereby are mute, or as mute in interpretation of
law. This (as Stawnf. thinks pl. cor. lib. 2. cap. 60.) is founded upon the
Statute of Westminster. prim. ca. 12. anno 3. Ed. prim. His reason is, because
Bracton, who writ before that Parliament, makes no mention of it: and Britton
writes after that time, touching it in his 4. chapter, fol. 11. viz. in words
to this effect: If they will not acquit themselves, let them be put to their
penance until such time as they do desire trial, and let the penance be
such: viz. Let them be bare legged, without girdle, and without hat or cap, in
their coat only, and lie in prison upon the naked earth day and night. And let
them eat no bread, but of barley and brand, nor drink any other than water, and
that upon that day when they cat not. And let them be chained. Stawnford in his
said 60. chapter of his second book, expounds it more plainly and
particularly in this sort. And note, that this strong and hard pain shall be
such: sc. He shall be sent back to the prison whence he came, and laid in some
low dark house, where he shall lie naked upon the earth, without any litter,
rushes, or other clothing, and without any raiment about him, but only
something to cover his privy members. And he shall lie upon his back with his
head covered and his feet. And one arm shall be drawn to one quarter of the
house with a cord, and the other arm to another quarter: and in the same
manner let it be done with his legs: and let there be laid upon his body iron
and stone, so much as he may bear, or more: and the next day following, he
shall have three morsells of barley bread without drink: and the second day he
shall have drink three times: and as much at each time, as he can drink, of the
water next unto the prison door, except it be running water, without any bread.
And this shall be his diet until he die.

Palatin. See County Palatin. See Cassan, de consuctud. Burg. page 14.

Palingman, anno 11. Henr. 7. cap. 22.

Panell (panellum) comes of the French ( pan, i. pellis, or paneau) a piece
or pain, as we call it in English. It signifies in our common law, a shedule
or roll, containing the names of such Jurors, as the Shyreeve provideth to
pass upon any trial. Register orig. fol. 223. a. Kitchen, fol. 266. See Broke
hoc titulo. And thereupon the empannelling of a Jury, is nothing but the
entering of them into the Shyreeves roll or book.

Paunage (pannagium) is a toll or contribution. Fitz. not. br. fol. 227. D.
See Pawnage.

Parramounte, alias peremounte, comes of these two French words ( par, i. per)
and ( Monter, i. ascendere) It signifies in our law, the highest Lord of the
fee: for there may be a Tenant to a Lord, that holds over of another Lord,
and the former of those is called, Lord mesn, the second Lord paramount. And a
Lord paramount (as it seems by Kitchen, fol. 289) consists only in
comparison; as one man may be great being compared with a lesser, and little
being compared with a greater: and as Genus among Logicians, may be in diverse
respects both genus, and species. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 135. M. So that none
seems simply to be Lord paramount, but only the King, as Genus summum is
simply Genus. For the King is Patron paramount to all the benefices in England,
Doctor and student, ca. 36. See Paravaile, Manner, and Fee.

Paravail alias Peravaile, is compounded of two French words ( par, i. per) and
( aveller, i. dimitteree, demittere.) It signifies in our common Law, the
lowest Tenant, or him that is tenant to one who holds his fee over of
another. So is it used, pl. cor. fol. 197. and Fitzh. not. br. fol. 135 M. See
Paramounte. See Mesn.

Parcellmakers, are two officers in the eschequer, that make the parcells of
the escheators accounts, wherein they charge them with every thing they have
levied for the Kings use, within the time of their office, and deliver the same
to one of the Auditors of the court, to make an account of the escheator
thereof.

Parceners. See Coparceners.

Parcinarie (participatio) comes of the French ( partir, i. dividuum facere.
It signifies in our common Law, a holding or occupying of land by more pro
indiviso, or by joint tenants, otherwise called Coparceners, of the French (
parsonier, i. parciarius, particeps.) For if they refuse to divide their common
inheritance, and choose rather to hold it jointly, they are said to hold in
parcinarie. Litl. fol. 56. and 57. This by the Feudists and Lombards is termed
(adaequatio, vel paragium) And among the ancient Romans, particulones, sic enim
anthore Nonio, a veteribus cohaeredes inter se dicebantur, quod paries invicem
facerent. Spigelius.

Pardon (pardonatio) is a French word, signifying as much as pax, venia,
gratia. It is used most notoriously in our common Law, for the remitting or
forgiving of a felonious or other offense committed against the King: This
pardon is twofold: one ex gratia Regis, the other, per course de ley, by course
of law. Stawnf. pl. cor. fol. 47. Pardon ex gratia Regis, is that, which the
King in some special regard of the person or other circumstance, shows or
affords upon his absolute prerogative or power. Pardon by course of Law, is
that which the law in equity affords, for a light offense, as homicide
casual, when one kills a man having no such meaning, Westminster. part 2. symbel.
titulo, Inditements. sect. 46. Of this see the new book of Entries, verba
Pardon.

Pardoners, anno 22 H. 8. c. 12. were certain fellows that carried about the
Popes Indulgences, and sold them to such as would buy them, against whom
Luther, by Sleydans report, incensed the people of Germany, in his time
exhorting them, ne merees tam viles tantiemerent.

Park (parcus) comes of the French ( parquer, i vallo, vel fossa cicundare.)
It signifies with us, a piece of ground enclosed and stored with wild beasts
of chase. Which a man may have by prescription or the Kings grant. Cromptons
Jurisd. fol. 148. M. Manwood part pri. of his Forest laws, page 148. defines
it thus: A park is a place for privilege for wild beasts of venery, and also
for other wild beasts, that are beasts of the Forest, and of the chase, tam
sylvestres, quam campestres. And all those wild beasts are to have a firm peace
and protection there. So that no man may hurt or chase them within the park
without license of the owner of the same. Who also fol. 149. says thus: A park
is of another nature, than either a chase or a warren is. For a park must be
enclosed, and may not lie open: for if it do, that is a good cause of seizure
of the same into the hands of the King, as a thing forfeited, as a free chase
is, if it be enclosed. And moreover, the owner cannot have an action against
such as hunt in his park, if it lie open. See Forest, See Chase, See Warren.
This word Park, Baldwinus deriveth a paradiso, enmque locum esse dicit, in quo
varia animalia ad usum voluptatis, aut venationis includuntur and possidentur,
adempta naturali liberate. Adtis. de rerum divis. in Institutionib.

Parco fracto, is a writ which lies against him, that violently breaks a
Pound, and takes out beasts thence, which, for some trespass done upon
another man's ground, are lawfully impounded. Register original. fol. 166.
Fitzh. not. br. fol. 100.

Parish (parochia) comes of the greek ((...), i Accolarnm conventus,
accolaius, sacra vicinia) it is used in the Canon law, sometime for a
Bishopric. But in our common Law it signifies the particular charge of a
secular Priest. For every Church is either Cathedral, Coven nal, or
parochial. Cathedral is that, where there is a Bishop seated, so called a
Cathedra: Coventual, consists of Regular Clerks, professing some order of
religion, or of Deane and chapter, or other college of spiritual men. Parochial
is that which is instituted for the sayingof divine Service, and ministering the
holy Sacraments to the people dwelling within a certain compass of ground near
unto it. Our Realm was first divided into Parishes by Honorius Archb. of
Canterbury, in the year of our Lord 636. Cambd. Britan. page 104. Of these
Parish Churches, I find there were in England in the days of H. 8. the number
of 45000 Hotoman in his disputations de feudis, cap. 2. makes mention of this
word (parochia) out of Pomponius Letus in these words. Nam sic quoque Pomponins
Letus ve^e^em consuetudinem fuisse scribit, eamque ab Imperatore Constantino
repetitam, ut Ducibus, praefectis, tribunis qui pro augendo Imperio
consenuerant, darentur agri, vill^que, at necessaria suppeterent, quoad
viverent, quas parochias vocabant And a little after: verum inter feuda et
parochias hoc interest, quod kae pl^rumque senthus et veteranis, plerisque
emeritae militiae dabantur, qui cum de Rep. been meriti essent, publico
beneficio reliquum vitae sustentabant: aut si quod bellum uasceretur, evocari
non tam milites, quam magistr militum viderentur. Feuda vero plurimum Juvenibus
robustis and primo flore aetatis, qui militiae munus sustinere poterant,
imovero and ut possent and ut vellent, etc.

Parliament (parlamentum) is a French word signifying originally as much as
(Collocutio) or (colloquium) but by use, it is also taken for those high Courts
of Justice throughour the Kingdom of France, where men's causes and differences
are publicly determined without farther appeal. Whereof there be seven in
number: as Paris, Tolouse, Gresnoble in Daulphine, Aix in Provence, Bordeaux,
Dijon in Bourgogn, and Roan in Normandy. Vincentius Lupanus de Magist. Franc.
lib. 2. cap. Parlamentum, number, 28. whereunto Gerard de Hailon adds the
eighth, viz. Rhenes in Brettagne.

In England we use it for the assembly of the King and the 3 Estates of the
Realm, viz. the Lords Spiritual, the Lords temporal, and Commons, for the
debating of matters touching the Commonwealth, and especially the making and
correcting of Laws, which assembly or Court is of all other the highest, and of
greatest authority, as you may read in Sir Thom. Smith. de Repub. Auglo. l. c.
1. and 2. Camd. Britan. page 112. and Crompions Jurisd. fol. pri. and seq. The
institution of this Court Polydor Virgil, lib. 11. of his Chronicles, refers
after a fort to Henry the first: yet confessing that it was used before, though
very seldom. I find in the former Prologue of Grand Customary of Normandy,
that the Normans used the same means in making their Laws. And I have seen a
Monument of Antiquity, showing the manner of holding this Parliament in the the
time of King Edward the son of King Ethelred, which (as my note says) was
delivered by the descreeter sort of the Realm unto William the Conqueror, at
his commandment, and allowed by him. This writing begins thus. Rex est
caput, principium, and finis parlamenti, and ita non habet parem in suo gradu.
Et sic ex rege solo primus gradus est. Secundus gradus est ex Archieviscapis,
Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus per Bavoniam tenentibus. Tertius gradus est, de
procuratoribus cleri. Qu^rtus gradus est de Comitibus, Baronibus, and al is
Magnatibus. Quintus gradus est de militibus Comitatuum. Sextus gradus est de
civibus and Burgensibus: and ita est Parlamentum ex sex gradibus; sed scienduml
cet aliquis dictorum quinque graduum post Regem absens fuerit, dum tamen omnes
praemoniti fuerint per rationabiles summonitiones, parlamentum nihilo minus
censetur esse plenum. Touching the great authority of this Court, I find in
Stowes Annals, page 660. that Henry the sixth directing his privy seal to
Richard Earl of Warwick, thereby to discharge him of the Captainship of Callis,
the Earl refused to obey the Privy Seal, and continued forth the said office,
because he received it by Parliament. But one example cannot make good a
doctrine. And of these two one must needs be true, that either the King is
above the Parliament, that is, the positive laws of his Kingdom, or else that
he is not an absolute King, Aristotle lib. 3. Politico. c. 16. Andtherefore
though it be a merciful policy and also a politic mercy (not alterable
without great peril) to make laws by the consent of the whole Realm, because
so no one part shall have cause to complain of a partiality: yet simply to bind
the Prince to or by these laws, were repugnant to the nature and constitution
of an absolute monarchy. See Bracton, lib. 5. tract. 3. cap. 3. number. 3. and
Cassan de consuet. Burg. page 335. and Tiraquel. in his book De Nobilitate cap.
20. page 68. number. 26. See the Statute anno 31 Henr. 8. cap. 8. in proaemio, and
many excellent men more, that handle this point. That learned Hottoman in his
Francogallia, does vehemently oppugn this ground, as some other that write in
corners: but he is so clean overbern by the pois of reason, that not only many
meaner men for Learning triumph over him in this case, but himself, as I have
credibly heard, upon the sight of his fault, cried God and the world mercy for
his offense in writing that erroneous and seditious book. The Emperors of Rome
had their semestria consilia, and their praetorium or place of Council bailded
by Augustus in his palace, and thereupon called (palatinm) afterward termed
(Consistorium) where they, as in their principull court, did both determine the
greatest sort of their causes, and also made their constitutions. And here had
they assisting them many of the wisest of their Empire, whom Augustus first
called (Consiliarios) Alexander Severus afterward (scriniorum principes) others
after that (palatinos) and then (comites consistorianos) And these men in this
respect, were endued with great honor, and enjoyed many privilege. Yet were
but the assistants to the Emperor to advise him, not chalenging any power over
him, or equal with him. More touching the course and order of this Parliament,
see in Cromptons Jurisd. fol. pri. and seque and Vowel alias Hocker, in his
book purposely written of this matter. See King.

Parole (Loquela) is a French word, signifying as much as (Dictio, allocutio,
sermo, vox,) It is used in Kitchen, fol. 193. for a plea in Court. It is also
sometime joined with lease, as Lease parol, that is, Lease per parole, a lease
by word of mouth.

Parson (Parsona) comes of the French (Person) It peculiarly signifies with
us the Rector of a Church: the reason whereof seems to be, because he for
his time represents the Church, and sustaineth the person thereof, as well in
suing as being sued in any action touching the same. See Fleta, l. 9. ca. 18.
Parson imp rsonee (parsona impersonata) is he that is in possession of a
Church, whether appropriated or not appropriated, for in the new book of
Entries, ver. Aid in Annuity, you have these words, Et praedictus A. dicit,
quod ipse est persona praedicta Ecclesiae de Simpersonata in eidem ad praesent
a^ionem F. patronissae, etc. So I have reason to think, that persona is the
patron, or he that has right to give the Benefice, by reason that before the
Lateran Council he had right to the tithes, in respect of his liberality used
in the erection or endowment of the Church, quasi sustineret personam
Ecclesiae, and he persona impersonata, to whom the benefice is given in the
Patrons right. For I read in the Register judicial, personam impersonatam, for
the Rector of a benefice presentative and not appropriated, fol. 34. b. and see
Dyer fol. 40. number. 72. where he says, that a Dean and Chapter, be persons
impersonees of a benefice appropriated unto them, who also fol. 221. number. 19.
plainly shows, that persena impersonata is he that is inducted, and in
possession of a Benefice. So that persona seems to be termed impersonata,
only in respect of the possession that he has of the benefice of Rectory, be
it appropriated or otherwise by the act of another. And yet I have talked with
men of good opinion in the common Law, that hold only the proprietary of a
benefice to be the person personee. But if that were true, he should rather be
called person parsonnier, i. partiarius vel particeps fructuum, because the
Vicar has some part toward his pains in serving the cure. For (parsonnier) in
the French tongue, is (partiarius) or (particeps.)

Parts finis nihil habuerunt, etc. is an exception taken against a fine
levied. Cooks reports lib. 3. the case of fines fol. 88. a. b.

Parters of gold and silver. See Finours

Partitione facienda, is a writ that lies for those, which hold lands or
tenements pro indiviso, and would sever to every one his part, against him or
them that refuse to join in partition as Coparceners and Tenants in Gavell
kind, Old. not. br. fol. 142. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 61. Register orig. fol.
76.316. and Register judicial fol. 80. and the new book of Entries, verbo
partition.

Partlet, seems to be some part of a man's attire, as namely, some loose
collar of a dublet, to be set on or taken off by it self, without the bodies,
as men's bands or women's neckerchiefs be, which are in some places, or at least
have been within memory, called partlets. This word is read in the Statute,
anno 24 H. 8. ca. 13. and seems to be a dimunitive of the word (part.)

Parvo nocumento is a writ. See Nuisance.

Passage (passagium) is a french word signifying transitum, tranfitionem,
meatum. It signifies in our common Law, the hire that a man pays for being
transported over sea, anno 4. Ed. 3. cap. 7. or over any river, West. 2. cap.
25. anno 13 Ed. pri.

Passagio, is a writ to the keepers of ports, to let a man pass over, that
has license of the King, Register original. fol. 193. b. 194. a.

Passeport is compounded of two French words (Passer) i, perambulare transire)
and (port) i. portus) It signifies with us, a license made by any that has
authority, for the lafe passage of any man from one place to another. anno 2.
Ed. 6. ca. 2.

Pasuage, pasuagium. See Paunage.

Patent (literae patentes) is different from a writ, Cromptons Jurisd. fol.
126. The Coroner is made by writ, and not by patent. See Letters patents. See
also Literae patentes in the table of the Register, where you shall find the
form of diverse patents.

Patron (Patronus) is used in the Civil Law, for him that has manumitted a
servant, and thereby is both justly accounted his great benefactor, and
challenges certain reverence and duty of him during his life: see the title De
jure patronatus, in the Digist: with the Feudists it is used pro authore feudi.
Hotom. verbo Patronus, in his commentary de verbis feudal. In the canon Law, as
also in the feuds, and our common Law, It fignifyeth him that has the gift of
a benefice. And the reason is, because the gift of Churches and benefices
originally belonged unto such good men, as either builded them, or else endowed
them with some great p^rt of the revenew belonging unto them. De jure
patronatus in the Decretals. Such might well be called Patrons, as builded the
Church, or enriched it: but these that now have the gift of a benefice, are
more coramonly patronized by the Church, though against her will, always
selling their presentations as deerly as they can: and therefore may be called
Patroni a patrocinando, as Mons a movendo. Patronum faciunt dos, aedificatio,
fundus, says the old verse. Of lay patrons one writes thus, Quod autem a
supremis pontificibus proditum est, (ca. cum dilectus, extra de jure
patronatus) laicos babere praesentandi clericos Ordinariis: hoc singulari
favore sustinetur, ut allectentur laici, invitentur, and inducantur ad
constructionem ecclesiarum (c. quoniam. codem) Nec omni ex part j^s patronatns
spitituale censert debes. sed temporale potius spirituali annexum (glos. in c.
piae mentis, 16. qu. 7.) These be Corasius words in his paraphrase ad
sacerdotiorum materiam, part pri. cap. 2. and part 4. cap. 6. in principio,
he thus writes of the same matter. Patroni in jure Pontificio dicuntur qui
alicujus ecclesiae extruendae, ant alterius cujuscunque fundationis
ecclesiasticae authors fuerunt, ideoque praesentandi and offerendi clericum
jus habent, quem ecclesiae vacanti praeesse, and in ea collatis teditibus frui
velint. Acquirunt autem hic jus, qui de Episcopi consensu vel fundant
ecclesiam, hoc est, locum in quo templum extruitur, assignant, vel ecclesiam
aedificant, vel etiam constructas ecclesias ante consecrationem dotant, ut non
valde sit obscuruw, jus patronatus quo de agimus, finire, jus esse praesentandi
clericum ad ecclesiam vacantem ex gratia ei concessum, qui consentiente
Episcopo, vel construxit, vel dot avit ecelesiam.

Pannage (Pannagium, alias pasnagium) or (pennagium) as it is latined (in
pupilla oculi) may be probablythought to come of the French (panez) or (panets)
which is a root something like a parsnep, but somewhat less and ranker in
taste, which hogs in France feed upon, though it be eaten by men also; and the
French may seem to come of the Latin (panicium) i. that which men use in the
stead of bread (Isidorus) or (panicium) of the French. It signifies in our
common Law, the money taken by the Agistors for the feed of hoggs with the mast
of the Kings forest. Cromp. Jurisd. fol. 165. West. 2. cap. 25. anno 13. Ed.
prl. with whom M. Manwood part pri. of his forest laws, agteeth in these
words: Agistment is properly the common of herbage of any kind of ground or
land, or woods, or the money due for the same: and pawnage is most properly the
mast of the woods, or lands, or hedge-rowes, or the money due to the owner of
the same for it. But this learned man in his second part, cap. 12. where he
writes at large of this, deriveth the word from the Greek (...) at the which
(I think) he smiled himself when he set it down. Linwood defines it thus:
Pannagium est pastus pecorum in nemoribus et in sylvis, utpote de glandibus and
aliis fructibus arborum sylvestrium, quarum fructus aliter non solent colligi.
titulo de decimis. cap. sancta, verb. Pannagiis. M. Skenede verborum signif.
calls it pannagium, and defines it to be the duty given to the King for the
pasturage of swine in the forest. The french word for this same thing is
(panage) or (glandee) i. glandatio vel glandium collectio, et pastio suum ex
glandibus. And we surely take it from the French; whence they had it, or what
etoymolgie they make of it, let themselves look.

PE
Peace (pax) in the general signification is opposite to war or strife. But
particularly it signifies with us, a quiet and harmless carriage, or behavior
toward the King and his People. Lamberd eirenarcha. li. 1. cap. 2. pa. 7. And
this is one way provided for all men by oath, as you may read in Franck pledge,
but more especially in case, where one particular man, or some few go in danger
of harm from some other. For upon his oath made thereof before a Justice of
peace, he must be secured by good bond. See Lamb. eirenarcha. lib. 2. ca. 2.
page 77. See also Cromptons Justice of peace, fol. 118. b. etc. usque f. 129.
This among the Civilians is called cautio de non offendendo. Gail de pace publ.
lib. pri. ca. 2. nu. 1.

Peace of God and the Church, (pax Dei and ecclesiae) is anciently used for
that rest which the Kings subjects had from trouble and suit of law, between
the terms, See Vacation.

Peace of the King, anno 6. R. 2. stat. pri. ca. 13. is that peace and security
both for life and goods, which the King promises to all his Subjects or others
taken to his protection. See Suit of the Kings peace. This point of policy
seems to have been borrowed by us from the Feudists, for in the second book
of the seuds, there is a chapter viz. 53. chapter entitled thus. De pace
tenenda inter subditos, et juramento firmanda, et vindicanda, et de paena
judictbus opposite a qui eum vindicare et justitiam facere neglexerint, the
contents of which chapter is a Constitution of Frederick the first, as Hotoman
there proves, expounding it very learnedly and like himself. Of this Kings
peace, Roger Hoveden sets down diverse branches, part poster. suorum
annalium, in H. 2. fol. 144. a. b. and fol. 430. b. he mentions a form of an
oath which Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury, and chief Justice of England in R.
the first his days, sent through the whole realm, to be taken by the Kings
subjects. See Deciners. See Surety of peace. There is also the peace of the
Church, for which see Sanctuary. And the peace of the Kings highway which is
the immunity that the Kings highway has, from all annoyance or molestation.
See watlin street. The peace of the plow, whereby the plow and plow cattle are
secured from distresses. For which, see Fitz. not. br. fol. 90. A. B. So Fayres
may be said to have their peace, because no man may in them be troubled for any
debt elsewhere contracted. See Fair.

Pedage (pedaginm) signifies money given for the passing by foot or horse
through any country. Extra de Censibus, ca. Innovamus. I read not this word in
any English writer, but only the author of the book called pupilla occuli part
9. ca. 7. A. D. I. I think we rather use passage for it. Pedagia dicuntur quae
dantur a transeuntibus in locum constitutum a principe. Et capiens pedagium
debet dare salvum conductum, et territorium ejus tenere securum. Baldus in
usibus Feudorum, de pa. jura fir. sect. Conventionales. Cassan. de consuetud.
Burg. pa. 118. has these words, Pedaginm a pede dictum est, quod a
transeuntibus solvitur, etc.

Peer (pila) seems properly to be a fortress made against the force of the
sea, for the better security of ship, that lie at harbor in any haven. So is
the peer of Dover described in M. Camd. Bris. page 259 in meo.

Peers (pares) comes of the French ( per, i. par) It signifies in our
common Law, plurally those, that are empaneled in an Enquest, upon any man for
the convicting and clearing him of any offense, for the which he his called in
question. And the reason thereof is, because the course and custom of our
nation is, to try every man in this case by his equals. West. pri. cap. 6.
anno 3. Edw. prim. So Kitchen uses it fol. 78. in these words Mais fi le
amerciament soit assirre per pares. And this word in this signification, is not
in use with us only, but with other nations also. For pares sunt convasalli,
quorum sententi^ vasallus propter felo-xiam est condemnatus. Barklaius de
Regno, lib. 4. cap. 2. Fit pares sunt qui ab ecdem domino feudum tenent, lib.
prim. Feudor. cap. 26. But this word is most notoriously used for those that be
of the Nobility of the Realm, and Lords of the Parliament, and so it is used in
Stawnf. pl. of the Crown, lib. 3. cap. Trial per les Peers, being the first.
The reason whereof is, because though there be a distinction of degrees in our
Nobility, yet in all public actions, they are equal: as in their voices in
Parliament, and in passing upon the trial of any Noble man, etc. This
appellation seems to be borrowed from France, and from those twelve Peers,
that Charles the Great (or Lewis the younger, in some men's opinion) instituted
in that kingdom, which be next unto the King, and are of like dignity among
themselves touching their power in public affairs. Or whom you may read
Vincentius Lupanus de magist. Francia, lib. 1. cap. Pares Franciae. So that
we, though we have borrowed the appellation, and applied it with some reason
to all that are Lords of the Parliament, yet we have no set number of them,
because the number of our Nobles, may be more or less, as it pleases the King.

Pelota, is a word used in the book called (pupilla oculi) part 5. ca. 22.
signifying the ball of the foot, of the French (pelote) i. pila.

Pein fort and dure. See Pain fort et dure.

Pelt wool, is the woll pulled off the skin or pelt of dead sheep, anno 8 H.
6. cap 22.

Penon, anno 11 R. 2. cap. prim. is a Standard, Banner or Ensign, carried in
war. It is borrowed from France: for pennon in the French language signifies
the same thing. See Baronet: ye read this word, anno 11. R. ca. 1.

Penue: See Baye.

Peper (Piper) is a spice known in a manner to every child, being the fruit of
a plant, that is between a tree and a herb: of whose diversities and nature you
may read Gerards herball, lib. 3. cap. 146. This is set among merchandise that
are to be garbled. anno 1. Jacob. cap. 9.

Peper lowse, anno 32. H. 8. cap. 14.

Per, cui, and post. See Entry.

Perambulatione facienda, is a writ that is sued out by two or more Lords of
Manners, lying near one another, and consenting to have their bounds severally
known. It is directed to the Shyreeve, commanding him to make perambulation,
and to set down their certain limits between them. Of this read more at large
in Fitz. not. br. fol. 133. See Rationalibus divisis. See the Regist. orig.
fol. 157. and the new book of Entries, verbo, Perambulatione facienda.

Perch (pertica) is a French word. signifying a long pole. It is used with us
for a rod or Pole of sixteen foot and a half in length. Whereof Forty in
length, and four in breath make an acre of ground. Cromptons Jurisdict. fol.
222. Yet by the custom of the country it may be longer, as he there says. For
in the Forest of Sherwood it is 25. foot, fol. 224. M. Skene de verbor. signif.
verbo, Particata terrae, says, that particata terrae is a Rood of land: where
he has also these words in effect: Three beer corns without tails set together
in length, make an inch: of the which corns one should be taken off the middle
ridge, another of the side of the ridge, another of the furrow. Twelve inches
make a foot of measure: three foot and an inch make an elne; six elnes long
make one fall, which is the common lineal measure, and six elnes long, and six
broad, make a square and superficial fall of measured land. And it is to be
understood, that one rod, one raip, one lineall fall of measure, are all one,
for each one of them contains six elnes in length. Howbeir, a rod is a staff
or pole of wood, a rasp is made of tow or hemp. And so much land as fall
thunder the rod or raip at once, is called a fall of measure, or a lineal fall:
because it is the measure of the line or length only, Like as the superficial
fall is the measure both of length and breadth. Item, ten falls in length, and
four in breadth, make a Rood; four Roods make and acre, etc. This is the
measure of Scotland, whereof you may read more in the same place.

Perdonatio utlagariae, in the Register judicial, fol. 28. is the form of
pardon for him, that for not coming to the Kings court is outlawed, and
afterward of his own accord yields himself to prison.

Peremptory (peremptorius) comes of the verb (perimere) to cut off, and
joined with a substantive (as action or exception) signifies a final and
determinate act without hope of renewing. So Fitzh. calls a peremtory action,
not. br. fol. 35. P. fol. 38. M. fol. 104. O. Q R. fol. 108. D. G. and non-sute
peremptory. idem eodem, fol. 5. N. F. fol. 11. A peremptory exception. Bracton
li. 4. cap. 20. Smith derep. Anglorum, li. 2. cap. 13. calls that a
preremptory acception, which can make the state and an issue in a cause.

Perinde valere, is a dispensation granted to a Clerk, that being defective in
his capacity to a benefice or other ecclesiastical function, is de facto
admitted unto it. And it has the appellation of the words which make the
faculty as effectual to the party dispensed with, as if he had been actually
capable of the thing for which he is dispensed with at the time. of his
admission.

Perkins was a learned Lawyer. fellow and bencher of the inner Temple, that
lived in the days of Edw. the 6. and Queen Mary. He wrote a book upon diverse
points of the common Law of very great commendation.

Permutatione Archidiaconatus and ecclesiae eidem annexe, cum ecclesia et
praebenda, is a writ to an Ordinary commanding him to admit a clerk to a
benefice upon exchange made with another Regist. orig. fol. 307. a.

Pernour of profits comes of the French verb. ( prendere. i. acciper^) and
signifies him that takes: as pernour of profits, anno 1 H. 7 ca. pri. Pernour
de prosits, et cesti que use is all one, Coke, li. i. casu Chu^ley. fol. 123.
a. See Pernour, anno 21. R. 2. ca. 15.

Per quae ervitia is a writ judicial issuing from the note of a fine, and lies
for the cognizee of a manner, seignory, chief rent, or other services to compel
him that is tenant of the land at the time of the note of the fine levied, to
atturn unto him. West part 2. symbol. titulo Fines-Sect. 126. To the same
effect speaks the old. not. br. fol. 155. See also the new book of Entries.
verbo per quae servitia.

Perquesite (perquesitum) signifies in Bracton, any thing purchased, as per
quisitum facere. lib. 2. cap. 30. numb. 3. and lib. 4. cap. 22. perquisites of
court, be those profits that grow unto the Lord of a manner, by virtue of his
Court Baron, over and above the certain and yearly profits of his land, as
escheats, marriages, goods purchased by villeins, fines of copy holds, and such
like. New Terms of the Law.

Person. See Parson.

Personable, signifies as much as inhabled to hold or maintain plee in a
court. For example: the demaundant was judged personably to maintain this
action. Old. not. br. fol. 142. and in Kitchen fol. 214. The tenent pleaded
that the wife was an alien born in Portingall without the ligeance of the King,
and judgment was asked whether she would be answered. The Plaintiff says: she
was made personable by Parliament, that is, as the Civilians would speak it,
habere personam standi in judicio. Personable is also as much as to be of
capacity to take any thing granted or given. Plowden, casu Colthirst. fol. 27.
b.

Personal (personalis) has in our common Law, one strange signification, being
joined with the substantive, things, goods, or Chatels: as things personal,
goods personal, Chatels personal, for thus it signifies any corporeal, and
moveable thing belonging to any man, be it quick or dead. So it is used in
Westminster. par. 2. symbol. titulo Inditements, sect. 58. in these words. Theft is
an unlawful fellonious taking away another man's moveable personal goods. And
again, fol. 61. Larcency is a felonious taking away of another man's moveable
personal goods; and Kitchen fol. 139. in these words: Where personal things
shall be given to corporation: as a horse, a cow, an ox, sheep, hogs, or other
goods, etc. and Stawnford pl. cor. fol. 25. Contrectatio rei alienae, is to be
understood of things personal: for in things real it is not felony, as the
cutting of a tree is not felony. The reason of this application, see Chattel.

Personalty (personalitas) is an abstract of personal. The action is in the
personalty, old. not. br. fol 92. that is to say, brought against the right
person, or the person against whom in law it lies. I find these contrary words
(Personalitas and impersonalitas) in the Author of the book called vocabularius
utriusque juris: as for example, Personalitas significatur per has dictiones,
tu, mihi, ego, tibt, cum alio significato quod probbialiter oencluditur: and si
nullo modo concludatur, tunc est impersonalttas, quia actum vitiat, pront ratio
dictat, verbi gratia. ego stipulor: constituis te mihi scluturum debitum a
Titio mihi debitum. Tu respondes, Satisfiet. Haec impersonalitas non contrahit
obligationem.

Persons ne Praebendaries ne seront, charges as quinsimes, etc. is a writ that
lies for prebendaries or other spiritual persons, being distreined by the
shyreeve, or collectors of fifteenths, for the fifteenth of their goods, or to
be contributory to taxes. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 176.

Pestarable wares, seem to be such ware, as pester and take up much room in a
shipp, anno 32. H. 8. cap 14.

Peter pence (Denarii Sancti Petri) otherwise called in the Saxon tongue
Romefeoh. i. the fee of Rome, or due to Rome, and also Romescot and Rome
penning, was a tribute given by ^n as King of the West Saxons being in
pilgrimage at Rome, in the year of our Lord 720. which was a penny for every
house. Lamberds explication of Saxon words verbo Numus. whom see also fol. 128.
in St. Edw. Laws nu. 10. where it is thus written. Omnes qui habent 30.
denariatus vivae pecuniae in domo sua de suo proprio, Anglorum lege dabit
denarium Sancti Petri and lege Danorum, dimidiam markam: Iste vero, denarius
debet summoniri in solemnitate Apostolorum Petri et Pauli^^ et colligi ad
festivitatem, quae dicitur ad vincula: ita ut ultra illum diem non detineatur.
Si quispiam detinuerit, ad Justiciam Regis clamor deferatur, quoniam denarius
hic Regis eleemozyna est, Justicia vero faciat denarium reddere, and
forisfacturam Episcopi et Regis. Quod si quis domos plures habueris, de illa,
ubi residens fuerit in festo Apostolorum Petri et Pauli denarium reddat. See
also King Edgars laws, fol. 78. ca. 4. which contains a sharp constitution
touching this matter. Stow. in his Annals, page 67. says, that he that had 20.
penniworth of goods of one manner cattle in his house, of his own proper, was
to give a penny at Lammas yearly. See Romescot.

Petit Cape. See Cape.

Petit Larceny (parvum latrocinium) See Larceny.

Petit treason (parva traditio) in true French is ( petit trabizon, i. proditio
minor) treason in a lesser or lower kind. For whereas treason in the highest
kind, is an offense done against the security of the common wealth, Westminster.
part. 2. symb. titulo Indictment, sect. 63. petit treason is of this nature,
though not so expressly as the other. Examples of petit treason you shall find
to be these: if a servant kill his Master, a wife her husband, a secular or
religious man his prelat, anno 25. Edw. 3. cap. 2. Whereof see more in Stawn.
pl. cor. lib. 1. cap. 2. See also Cromptons Justice of peace, fol. 2. where he
adds diverse other examples to those of Stawnford. For the punishment of petit
treason, see the Statute an. 22. H. 8. cap. 14. and Crompton ubisupra.

Petition (petitio) has a general signification for all entreaties made by an
inferior to a superior, and especially to one having jurisdiction. But most
especially it is used for that remedy, which the subject has to help a wrong
done, or pretended to be done by the King. For the King has it by
prerogrative, that he may not be sued upon a writ. Stawn. praer. cap. 15. whom
also read cap. 22. And a petition in this case is either general, or special.
It is called general, of the general conclusion set down in the same, viz. que
le Roy lui face droit et reison, that the King do him right and reason:
whereupon follows a general indorsement upon the same, soit droit fait aux
partis, let right be done to the parties. Petition special is, where the
conclusion is special for this or that: and the Indorsement to this is
likewise special. See the rest cap. 22.

Petra lanae, a stone of wool. See Stone.

PH
Philiser, See Filazer.

PI
Piccage (piccagium) is money paid in fairs for breaking of the ground to set
up booths or standings.

Picle, alias pitle, seems to come from the Italian ( piccolo, vel picciolo,
i. parvus minutus) and signifies with us a little small close, or enclosure.

Pienour, comes of the French ( Pionnier, i. fossor) and signifies such
laborers, as are taken up for the Kings host, to cast trenches, or undermine
forts. Anno 2. and 3. Ed. 6. cap. 20.

Piepowders court (Curiae pedis pulverizati) comes of two French words ( pied,
i, pes) and pouldreux, i. pulverulentus) It signifies a court held in fairs
for the redress of all disorders committed within them: which because it is
summary, de plano, and fine figura judicii, it has the name of dustie feet,
which we commonly get by sitting near the ground: of this see Cromptons Jurisd.
fol. 221. Read M. Skene de ver. signif. verbo Pedu^ulversus, which word he
reports to signify a vagabond, especially a merchant, which has no place of
dwelling, where the dust may be wiped off his feet or shoes, and therefore
must have justice summarily ministered unto him, viz. within three flowings and
three ebbings of the sea. Bract. calls it Justitiam pepoudrous, li. 5. tract.
1. c. 6. nu. 6. Of this court read the Statute anno 17 Edw. 4. ca. 2.

Pille of Foddray in the County of Lancaster, anno 2 H. 6. ca. 5. seems to
be a creek, and called pille by the idiom of the Country for pile; for the
which see Pile.

Pillorie (Collistrigium, Pillorium) comes of the French (Pilori) which may
seem to smell of the greek, and to proceed from ((...)) because one standing on
the pillory, puts his head through a kind of a door, i. janua: and (...)
video: it signifies all one thing with it, saving that the French is used for
a tumbrell, as well as for that which we call the pillorie, there is a Statute
made of the pillory, anno 51 H. 3. wherein you may see who were then subject to
this punishment. This was among the Saxons called Healsfang, of (Heals) a neck,
and (Fang) to take, Lamb, explication of Saxon words, verbo Mulcta.

Pipe (pipa) seems to be a roll in the exchequer, otherwise called the great
roll, anno 37 Ed. 3. cap. 4. See Clerk of the pipe. It is also a measure of
wine or oil, containing half a tun, that is six score and six gallons, anno 1
R. 3. cap. 13.

Piscarie (piscaria) comes of the French ( pescharie, i. piscatio) It
signifies in our common Law, a liberty of fishing in an other man's waters.

Pittle. See Picle.

PL
Placard, anno 2. and 3. Ph. and Mar. cap. 7. is a license whereby a man is
permitted to maintain unlawful games.

Plaint (Querela) is a French word, signifying as much as questus, querimonia.
In our Common law, it is used for the propounding of any action personal, or
real in writing. So it is used in Brook, titulo, Plaint in Assise; and the
party making this plaint, is called Plaintiff: Kitchen, fol. 231.

Plea (placitum) comes of the French ( ploid, i. lis, controversia.) It
signifies in our Common law, that which either party allegeth for himself in
Court. And this was wont to be done in French from the Conquest, until Edward
3. who ordained them to be done in English. a. 36. cap. 15. Pleas are divided
into pleas of the Crown, and Common pleas. Pleas of the Crown in Scotland be 4.
robbery, rape, murder, and wilful fire, Skene de verb. sign. verb. Placitum.
With us they be all suits in the Kings name, against offenses committed against
his Crown and dignity, Stawnf. pl. cor. cap. 1. or against his Crown and peace.
Smith de repub. Angl. li. 2. cap. 9. And those seem to be treasons, felonies,
misprisions of either, and mayhem. For those only does that reverend Judge
mention in that tractat. Common pleas be those that be held between Common
persons. Yet by the former definitions, these must comprise all other, though
the King be a party. Plea may farther be divided into as many branches as
Action, which see. For they signify all one. Then is there a Foreign plea,
whereby matter is alleged in any Court that must be tried in another. As if one
should lay Bastardy to another, in a Court Baron. Kitchen, fol. 75. The word
(placitum) is used by the Commentours upon the Feuds in the same signification
that pleas be with us. And (Placitare) with them is (littgare, and causas
agere.) Hotom. in verb. feudal. verb. Placitare.

Pledge (Plegius) comes of the French ( Pleige, i. fidejussor) Pleiger aucun,
i. fidejubere pro aliquo, In the same signification is Plegius used by
Glanvile, Libro decimo, capite quinto, and Plegiatio for the act of suretiship
in the interpreter of the Grand Customary of Normandy, capite 60. Plegii
dicuntur personae quae se obligant ad hoc, ad quod qui eos mittit tenebatur.
And in the same Book, capit. 89 and 90. Plegiatio is used as Glanvile before
does use it. Salvi plepii, be used for Plegii, Pupil. oculi, part quint.
capit. 22. Charta de foresta. This word Plegius is used also for Frank pledge
sometime, as in the end of William the Conquerours Laws, set out by Master
Lambard in his Archaionum. fol. 125. in these words, Omnis homo qui voluerit se
tenere pro libro, sit in plegio, ut plegius cum habeat ad usticiam, si quid
offenderit, etc. And these be called capital pledges. Kitchen, fol. dectm^. See
Frank pledge.

Plena forisfactura, and plena vita, see Forfeiture.

Plegiis acquietandis is a Writ that lies for a surety, against him for whom
he is surety, if he pay not the money at the day. Fitzherb. not. br. folio 137.
Regist. original, 158. a.

Plenartie, is an abstract of the adjective (plinus) and is used by our Common
Lawyers in matters of benefices. Wherein plenarty and vacation be merely
contrary. Stawnford, prerogativ. cap. octavo, fol. 32. Westminster. secundo, capit.
quint. anno 13 Edvard. prim.

Plevin (Plevina) comes of the French ( plevine, i. sponsi.)

See Replevin.

Plite of Lawn, etc. anno 3 Edw. 4. cap. 5. seems to be a certain measure, as
a yard, or elle, etc.

Plonkets, anno 1 R. 3. cap. 8. is a kind of woollen cloth.

Pluries, is a Writ that goes out in the third place. For first goes out the
original Capias: which if it speed not, then goes out the Sicut alias: and if
that fail, then the Pluries. See Old not. br. fol. 33. In the writ De excom.
captendo see in what diversity of cases this is used in the Table of the
original Register.

PO
Pole. See Perch.

Polein, anno 4. Ed. 4. cap. 7. seems to be a sharp or picked top set in the
forepart of the shoe or boot. This fashion was first taken up in Richard the
seconds days, the picks being made so long as they were tied up to the knees
with silver or golden chains, and forbidden by Edw. the fourth. Stow. page 4.

Policy of assurance, is a course taken by those which do adventure wares or
merchandise by sea, whereby they, loath to hazard their whole adventure, do
give unto some other a certain rate or proportion, as ten in the hundred, or
such like, to secure the safe arival of the ship, and so much wares at the
place agreed upon. So that if the ship and wares do miscarry, the assurer
makes good to the venturer so much as he promised to secure, as 20, 30, 100.
more or less: and if the ship do safely arive, he gains that clearly which
the venturer compoundeth to pay him. And for the more even dealing between the
venturer and the securer in this case, there is a certain Clerk or Officer
ordained to set down in writing the sum of their agreement, that they
afterward differ not among themselves upon the bargain. This is in coarse
Latin elsewhere called assecuratio. This term you have anno 43 Eliz. cap. 11.

Pondage. See Poundage.

Pone, is a writ whereby a cause depending in the County court, is removed to
the Common Bank. Old not. br. fol. 2. See in what diversity of Cases it is
used, in the table of the Original Register.

Pone per vadium, is a writ commanding the Shyreeve to take surety of one for
his appearance at a day assigned: of this see five sorts in the table of the
Register Judic. verb, Pone per vadium.

Ponendis in assisis, is a writ founded upon the statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 38.
and upon the statute Articuli super chartas, c. 9. which statutes do show, what
persons, Vicounts ought to impanel upon Assizes, and Iuries, and what not: as
also what number he should empanel upon Iuries and Inquests, which see in the
Regist. orig. fol. 178. a. and in Fitz. not. br. fol. 165.

Ponendum in ballum, is a writ whereby to will a Prisoner held in Prison to be
committed to bail in cases baylable. Regist. orig. fol. 133. b.

Ponendo sigillnm ad exceptionem, is a writ whereby the King wills Justices,
according to the statute of West. 2. to put their seals to exceptions laid in
against the Plaintiffs declaration by the Defendant.

Pontage (pontagiuns) is a contribution toward the maintenance or re-edifying
of bridges, Westminster. 2. cap. 25. anno 13 Ed. pri. It may be also toll taken to
this purpose of those that pass over bridges, anno 39 Eliz. cap. 24. anno 1 H.
8. cap. 9. and see the Statute anno 22 H. 8. cap. 5.

Pontibus reparandis, is a writ directed to the Shyreeve, etc. willing him to
charge one or more to repair a bridge, to whom it belongs. Register orig.
fol. 153. b.

Portgreve (portgrevius) is compounded of two words (port) and greve) or
(grave) i. praefectus. It signifies with us the chief Magistrate in certain
Coast towns, and as M. Camden says in his Britan, page 325. the chief
Magistrate of London, was termed by this name: instead of whom Richard the
first ordained two Bailiffs: but presently after him, King John granted them a
Mayor for their yearly Magistrate.

Porter of the door of the Parliament house, is a necessary Officer belonging
to that high Court, and enjoys the privileges accordingly. Cromptons jurisd.
fo. 11. Perter in the Circuit of Justices, is an Officer that carries a verge
or white rod before the Justices in Air, so called, a portando virgam, an. 13
Ed. 1. ca. 24.

Porter bearing verge (virgator) before the Justices of either bench, anno 13
Edv. 1. cap. 41. See Vergers.

Portomote is a word compounded of ( port, i. portus) and the Saxon ( Gemertan,
i. convenire) or of the French ( mot, i. dictio, verbum) It signifies a Court
kept in Haven towns, as Swainmot in the forest. Manwood, part prim. of his
forest laws, page 111. It is sometimes called the Portmoot Court, an. 43 Eli.
cap. 15.

Portsale, anno 35 H. 8. cap. 7. i. sale of fish presently upon return in the
haven.

Possession (possessio) is used two ways in our Common law. First for lands
and inheritance: as, he is a man of large possessions. In which signification
it is also used among the Civilians, sc. for the thing possessed, l.
possessionum: Cod. commun. utriusque Judic. Next, for the actual enjoying of
that, which either in truth or pretense is ours. And in this signification,
there is possession indeed, and possession in law: pl. cor. fol. 198. The
example there is this: before or until an office be found, the King has only
possession in law, and not in deed, speaking of the lands escheated by the
attainder of the owner. See Praerog. fol. 54. and 55. In this signification
also, there is an unity of possession, which the Civilians call
Consolidationem. Take an example out of Kitchen fol. 134. If the Lord purchase
the tenancy held by Heriot service. then the Heriot is extinct by unity of
possession: that is, because the seigneury and the tenancy be now in one man's
possession. Many divisions of possession you may read in Braclon, lib. 2. cap.
17. per totum.

Post. See Per.

Post diem, is a return of a writ after the day assigned for the return: for
the which the Custos brevium has four pence, whereas he has nothing, if it be
returned at the day: or it may be the fee taken for the same.

Post fine, is a duty belonging to the King for a fine formerly acknowledged
before him in his Court, which is paid by the Cognizee, after the fine is fully
passed, and all things touching the same wholly accomplished. The rate thereof,
is so much and half so much, as was paid to the King for the fine, and is
gathered by the Shyreeve of the County where the land, etc. lies, whereof the
fine was levied to be answered by him into the Exchequer.

Post term, is a return of a writ, not only after the day assigned for the
return thereof, but after the term also, which may not be received by the
Custos brevium, but by the consent of one of the Judges: it may be also the sea
which the Custos brevium takes, for return thereof, which is twenty pence.

Postea is a word used for a matter tried by Nisi prius, and returned into the
Court of common pleas for Judgment, and there afterward recorded. See
Plowden, casu Saunders, fol. 211. a. See an example of this in Sir Edw. Cokes
Reports, volum. 6. Rowlands Case, fol. 41. b. and 42. a. See Custos brevium.

Post disseisen (post disseisina) is a writ given by the Statute of We. 2. cap.
26. and lies for him that having recovered lands or tenements by (praecipe
quod reddat) upon default, or reddition, is again disseised by the former
disseisour. Fitzherb. not. br. fol. 190. see the writ that lies for this in
the Register original, fol. 208. a.

Posteriority (posterioritas.) is a word of comparison and relation in tenure,
the correlative whereof is prioritie. For a man holding lands or tenements of
two Lords, holds of his auncienter Lord by priority, and of his later Lord by
posteriority. Stawn. praerog. fol. 10, and 11. when one Tenent holds of two
Lords, of the one by priority, of the other by posteriority, etc. Old not. br.
fol. 94.

Pourchas (perquisitum) comes of the French ( pourchasser, i. sollicitare,
ambire:) it signifies the buying of lands or tenements with money, or other
agreement, and not the obtaining of it by title or descent. Conjunctum
perquisitum, Joint purchase. Regist. original fol. 143. b.

Pour fair proclaimer, que null enject fimes ou ordures en fosses ou rivers
pres cities, etc. is a writ directed to the Mayor, Shyreeve, or Bailiff of a
City or Town, commanding them to proclaim, that none cast filth into the
ditches, or places near adjoining: and if any be cast already, to remove it.
This is founded upon the Statute an. 12 Rich. 2. ca. 13. Fitz. not. br. fol.
176.

Pourparty (propars, propartis, vel propartia) is contrary to (pro indiviso)
For to make pourparty is to divide, and sever the lands that fall to Parceners,
which before partition they hold jointly, and pro indiviso. Old not. br. fol.
11.

Pourpresture (pourprestura, vel porprestura, vel paraprestura) seems to come
from the French ( pourpris, i. conseptum) It is thus defined by Glanvile, lib.
9. cap. 11. Pourprestura est proprie, quando aliquid super Dominum Regem
injuste occupatnr. Ut in Dominicis Regis, vel in viis publicis obstructis, vel
in aquis publicis transversis a recto cursu: vel quando aliquis in civitate
super regiam plateam aliquid aedificando occupaverit: and generaliter, quoties
aliquid fit ad nocumentum Regii tenementi, vel Regiae viae, vel civitatis,
Cromp. in his Jurisd. fol. 152. defines it thus, Pour presture is properly
when a man takes unto himself or incroacheth any thing that he ought not,
whether it be in any jurisdiction, land, or fraunchis: and generally, when any
thing is done to the Nuisance of the Kings tenants. Et idem, eodem, fol. 203
says to the same effect, but more at large. See Kitchen, fol. 10. and Manwood,
part prim. of his forest laws page 269. and part 2. cap. 10. per totum. See
Skene de verbo. signif. verb. Purpesture. Where he makes three sorts of this
offense: one against the King, the second against the Lord of the fee, the
third against a Neighbor by a Neighbor lying near unto him.

Pour seisir terres la femme que tient en Dower, etc. is a writ whereby the
King feiseth upon the land, which the wife of his Tenent that held in Capite,
deceased, has for her dowry, if she mary without his leave, and is grounded
upon the Statute of the Kings prerogative, cap. 3. see Fitzh. fol. 174.

Poursuyvant, comes of the French ( poursuivere, i. agere, agitare, persequi)
It signifies the messenger of the King attending upon him in wars, or at the
Council table, the Star chamber, Exchequer, or Commission court, to be sent
upon any occasion, or message, as for the appehension of a party accused, or
suspected of any offense committed. Those that be used in Marshal causes, be
called Perswivants at arms, anno 24 Henr. 8. cap. 13. whereof there be four in
number of special names, which see in Herald. And M. Stowe speaking of Richard
the third his end, page 784. has these words: For his body was naked to the
skin, not so much as one clout about him, and was trussed behind a Pursuyvant
at arms, like a hog or a calf, etc. The rest are used upon other messages in
time of peace, and especially in matters touching jurisdiction. See Herald.

Purveyour (provisor) comes of the French ( Pourvoire, i. providere,
prospicere.) It signifies an officer of the King or Queen, or other great
personage that provideth corn and other victual, for the house of him whose
officer he is. See magna charta. cap. 22. and 3 Ed. prim. cap. 7. and cap. 31.
and anno 28 ejusdem. Articuli super chartas. 2. and many other Statutes
gathered by Rastal under this title.

Powldavis, anno 1 Jacob. ca. 24.

Power of the County, (posse comitatus) by M. Lamberds opinion in his Eirenar.
li. 3. cap. 1. fol. 309, contains the aid and attendance of all Knights,
gentlemen, yeomen, laborers, servants, apprentises, and villains: and likewise
of Wards, and of other young men above the age of fifteen years, within the
County, because all of that age are bound to have harness, by the statute of
Winchester. But women, ecclesiastical persons, and such as be decrepit, or do
labor of any continual infirmity, shall not be compelled to attend. For the
statute 2 Hen. 5. cap. 8. (which also works upon the same ground) says, that
persons sufficient to travel, shall be assistant in this service.

Pound (parcus) seems to signify generally any inclusure of strength to keep
in beasts: but especially, with us, it signifies a place of strength to
restrain cattle being distrained or put in for any trespass done by them,
until they be replevied or redeemed. And in this signification it is called a
pound overt, or open pound, being builded upon the waste of some Lord within
his fee, and is called the Lords Pound. For he provideth it to his use, and the
use of his tenants. See Kitchen fol. 144. It is divided into pound open, and
pound close: pound open or overt, is not only the Lords pound, but a backside,
court, yard, pasture, or else whatsoever, whither the owner of any beasts
impounded may come to give them meat and drink without offense, for their being
there, or his coming thither: pound close is then the contrary, viz. such a
one as the owner cannot come unto, to the purpose aforesaid, without offense:
as some close house, or such like place.

Poundage, is a Subsidy granted to the King of all manner of merchandises of
every merchant denizen and alien, carried out of this Realm, or brought into
the same by way of Merchandise, to the value of twelve pence in every pound,
an. 12 Ed. 6. cap. 13. an. 31 Elizab. cap. 5. anno 1 Iacobi, cap. 33.

PR
Pray age. See Age prier.

Pray in aid. See Aid.

Prebend (praebenda) is the portion, which every member or Canon of a Cathedral
church receives in the right of his place, for his maintenance. And though use
has wrought the Latin word into the nature of a Substantive: yet I think it
originally to be an Adjective, or Participle, and to have been joined with (
pars or portio) as (Canonica portio) which is in manner all one in
signification. Howbeit (Canonica portio) is properly used for that share which
every Canon or Prebendary receives yearly out of the common stock of the
Church: and praebenda is a several benefice rising from some temporal land, or
church appropriated, toward the maintenance of a Clerk, or member of a
collegiat Church; and is commonly surnamed of the place, whence the profit
grows. And Prebends be either simple, or with dignity. Simple Prebends be
those, that have no more but the revenew toward their maintenance: Prebends
with dignity are such, as have some jurisdiction annexed unto them, according
to the diverse orders in every several Church. Of this see more in the title, De
Praebendis and dignitat. in the Decretals. Alciat says, that (Praebenda) in
the plural number, and neuter gender was anciently used: as now (Praebenda) in
the singular number, and feminine gender is used. parerg. cap. 43.

Praebendary (praebendarius) is he that has a praebend. See Prebend.

Precept (praeceptum) is diversely taken in the Common law, sometime for a
commandment in writing sent out by a Justice of peace, or other for the
bringing of a person one or more, or records before him: of this you have
examples of diverse in the table of the Reg. Judicial: And this use seems to
be borrowed from the customs of Lombardy, where praeceptum signifies
scripturam, vel inftrumentum. Hot. in verbis feudal. and libro 3.
Commentariorum, in libros feudorum, in praefatione. Sometime it is taken for
the provocation, whereby one man inciteth another to commit a felony, as theft,
or murder. Stawnf. pl. cor. fol. 105. Bracton calls it (praeceptum) or
(mandatum) lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 19. whence a man may observe three
diversities of offending in murder, Praeceptum, fortia, consilium: praeceptum,
being the instigation used before hand; fortia, the assistance in the fact, as
help to bind the party murdered, or robbed; consilium, advise either before, or
in the deed. The Civilians use (mandatum) in this case, as appears by Angelus
in tracta. de male ficiis, verse. Sempronium Mandatorem.

Praeceptories, an. 32 H. 8. cap. 24. were benefices in a kind, and termed
preceptories, because they were possessed by the more eminent sort of the
Templers, whom the chief master by his authority created, and called
(praeceptores Templi) Joach. Stepha. de Jurisdict li. 4. ca. 10. nu. 27. See
Comaund^y.

Praecipe quod reddat, is a writ of great diversity touching both the form and
use, for better declaration whereof see Ingressus, and Entry. This form is
extended as well to a writ of right, as to other writs of entry, or possession.
Old not. br. fo. 13. and Fitzher. not. br. fol. 5. And it is called sometime a
writ of right close, as a praecipe in capite, when it issues out of the Court
of Common plees for a Tenent holding of the King in chief, as of of his Crown,
and not of the King, as of any honor, castle, or manor. Register orig. fol. 4.
b. Fitz. not. br. fol. 5. F. Sometime a writ of Right patent: as when it
issues out of any Lords Court, for any of his Tenants deforced against the
deforcer, and must be determined there. Of this read more at large in Fitz.
not. br. in the very first chapter or writ of all his book.

Praemunire, is taken either for a writ, or for the offense whereupon this writ
is granted. The one may well enough be understood by the other. It is therefore
to be noted, that the Church of Rome under pretense of her supremacy and the
dignity of Saint Peter's chair, grew to such an incroaching, that there could
not be a benefice (were it Bishopric, Abbathy, or other) of any worth here in
England, the bestowing whereof could escape the Pope by one means or other. In
so much, as for the most part he granted out Mandates of Ecclesiastical
livings, before they were void, to certain persons by his Bulls, prerending
therein a great care to see the Church provided of a Successor before it
needed. Whence it grew that these kinds of Bulls were called (Gratiae
expectativae) or (Provisiones) whereof you may read a learned discourse in
Duarenus, that worthy Civilian, in his tractate De beneficiis, lib. 3. ca. 1.
and in his treatise De immunitate ecclesiae Gallicanae. These provisions, were
so rife with us, that at the last, King Edw. the third, that heroical Prince,
not disgesting so intolerable an oppression, made a statute in the 25 year of
his reign, stat. 5. cap. 22. and another stat. 6. ejusdem anni cap. p^i. and a
third anno 27. against those that drew the Kings people out of the Realm, to
answer of things belonging to the Kings Court; and another anno 28. statu. 2.
c. 1, 2, 3, and 4. to the like effect: whereby he greatly restrained this
liberty of the Pope. Yet such was the wantonness that grew out of his power,
and the impatience of Princes in those days, that he still adventured the
continuance of these provisions: in so much as King Richard the second made
likewise a statute against them in the Twelfth year of his reign, ca. 15. and
the 13 year stat. 2. cap. 2. making mention of the said first Statute of Edward
the third, ratifying the same, and appointing the punishment of those that
offended against it, to be perpetual banishment, forfeiture of their lands,
tenements, goods, and chattels, as by the same does more at large appear. And
again in the 16 year of his reign, cap. 5. to meet more sully with all the
shifts invented to defraud these former Statutes, he expresses the offense
more particularly, and sets the same punishment to it, that he ordained in
the last former Statute. For there toward the end he has these words, if any
purchase or pursiew, or do to be purchased or siewed in the Coure of Rome, or
elsewhere, any such translations, processes and sentences of excommunication,
Bulls, Instruments, or any other things, etc. After him K. Henr. the fourth in
like manner grieved at this importunie by other abuses not fully met with in
the former Statutes in the second year of his reign cap. 3. and 4. adds
certain new cases, and lays upon the offenders in them the same censure,
whereunto for shortness sake I refer you: admonishing likewise to add the
statute, an. 9 ejusdem cap. pri. and an. 7. cap. 9. and 8. and anno 9 ejusdem
cap. 8. and anno 3 H. 5. cap. 4. Out of which statutes have our Professors of
the Common law, wrought many dangers to the Jurisdiction Ecclesiastital,
threatening the punishment contained in the statute anno 27 Edw. 3. and 38
ejusdem, almost to every thing that the court Christian deals in, pretending
all things dealt within those Courts to be the disherison of the Crown, from
the which, and none other fountain, all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction is now
derived: whereas in truth Sir Tho. Smith says very rightly and charitably,
that the uniting of the Supremacy Ecclesiastical and Temporal in the King,
utterly voideth the use of all those statutes. Nam cessante ratione cessat lex.
And whatsoever is now wrought or threatened against the Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical, by color of the same, is but in emulation of one Court to
another: and by consequent a derogation to that authorit from which all
Jurisdiction is now derived and the maintenance whereof was by those Princes
especially purposed. But of this read Sir Thomas Smith, lib. 3. de Rep. Ang.
cap. 9.

Some later statutes do cast this punishment upon other Offenders: as namely
the statute, anno 1 Eliz. cap. prim. upon him that denies the Kings supremacy
the second time, etc. and the statute anno 13 Eliz cap. 2. upon him that
affirms the authority of the Pope: or that refuses to take the oath of
Supremacy, and the Statute an. 13 Eliz. ca. 1. such as be seditious talkers of
the inheritance of the Crown, or affirm the Queen; Majesty to be an heritique.
And the word is applied most commonly to the punishment first ordained by the
statutes before mentioned, for such as transgressed them: but in latter times
imposed upon other offenses. For that, where it is said that any man for an
offense committed shall incur a praemunire, it is meant, that he shall incur
the same punishment which is inflicted against those that transgress the
statute made, an. 16 R. 2. c. 5. which is commonly called the statute of
praemunire, which kind of reference is not unusual in our statutes. For example,
I show only the statute, anno 5 Elizabeth, cap. 5. where it is enacted, that if
any man preach or teach by writing, that the common counsel of the Realm do by
that statute forbid flesh to be eaten, as of necessity for the saving of man's
soul, that he shall for such preaching, etc. be punished as they be, which be
spreaders of false news: having reference thereby to those statutes which
contain the punishment of such offenders.

Now touching the Etymology of this word (Praemuuire) some think it proceeds
from the strength given to the Crown by the former statutes, against the
usurpation of forain and unnateral power: which opinion may receive some ground
from the statute, anno 25 Edward 3. stat. 6. cap. pri. But other think it to
grow from the verb (Praemonere) being barbarously turned into (praemunire)
which corruption is taken from the rude Interpreters of the Civil and
Canon-laws, who indeed do use the effect (Praemunire) many times for the
efficient cause (Praemonere) according to the proverb: He that is well warned,
is half armed. And of this I gather reason from the form of the writ, which is
thus conceived in the Old not. br. fol. 143. Praemunire facias praefatum
praepositum and I. R. precuratorem, etc. quod tunc sint coram nobis, etc. for
these words can be referred to none, but parties charged with the offense.

Praepositus ville, is used sometime for the Constable of a town, or petit
Constable. Crom. Iurisd. fol. 205. howbeit the same author fol. 191. seems to
apply it otherwise, for there quatuor homines praepositi, be those four men,
that for every town must appear before the Justices of the Forest in their
circuit It is used sometime for a Reeve. See Reeve.

Praerogative of the King (praerogativa regis) is that especial power,
preeminence, or privilege that the King has in any kind over and above other
persons, and above the ordinary course of the Common law, in the right of his
Crown. And this word Praerogativa is used by the Civilians in the same sense.
l. Rescriptum. 6. Sect. 4. n. de bono. and muner. But that privilege that the
Roman Emperor had above common persons, they for the most part comprised sub
jurefisci^^ de jurefisci, per totum tit. and Co. li. 10. tit. 1. Among the
Feudists this is termed (jusregalium, jus regaliorum, vel a nonnullis jus
regeliarum) But as the Feudists, sub jure regalium, so our Lawyers (sub
praerogativa regis) do comprise also, all that absolute height of power that
the Civillians call (majestatem, vel potestatem, vel jus imperii) subject only
to God: which regalia the Feudists divide into two sorts, majora and minora
regalia. For to use their own words, Quaedam regalia, dignitatem,
praerogat^^am, and imperii praeeminentiam spectant: quaedam vero ad utilitatem,
and comidum pecu. niarium immediate attinent: and haec proprie fiscalia sunt,
and adjus fisci pertinent. Peregr: de jure fisci, li. 1. cap. 1. nu. 9. See
also Arnoldus Chapmarius. de arcanis imperii, lib. 1. cap. 11. and s^qq. who
seems to make difference between majectatem, and jus regaliorum. Others make
those (majora regalia) that appertain to the dignity of the Prince, and those
minera, which enrich his coffers. Regnerus Sixtinus, de jure rega. cap. 2. By
this it appears, that the statute of the Kings prerogative made, anno 17 Ed.
2. contains not the sum of the Kings whole prerogative, but only so much
thereof, as concerns the profit of his cofers growing by virtue of his regal
power and crown; for it is more than manifest, that his prerogative reaches
much farther: yea, even in the matters of his profit, which that statute
especially consists of. For example, it is the Kings prerogative to grant
protection unto his debtours against other creditours, until himself be
satisfied. Fitz. not. br. fol. 28. B. to distrein for the whole rent upon one
tenent, that has not the whole land. Idem fol. 235. A. to require the
Ancestors debt of the heir, though not especially bound. Brit. ca. 28. fol. 65.
b. to cease upon money paid by his debtour into a Court, for the satisfaction of
an executor. Plowden, fol. 322. a. to permit his debtours to siew for their
debts by a (Quo minus) in the Exchequer. Perkins Graunts. 5. to be first paid
by one that owes money both to him and others, Dyer, fol. 67. an. 20. to take
the Lands of accountants into his hands for his own satisfaction. Plowd. casu
Alms. fol. 321. and 322. to take his action of account against executors,
codem fol. 320. not to be tied to the demand of his rent. Coke. li. 4. fol. 73.
a. Now for those regalities which are of the higher nature (all being within
the compass of his prerogative, and justly to be comprised under that title)
there is not one that belonged to the most absolute prince in the world, which
does not also belong to our King, except the customs of the nations so differ
(as indeed they do) that one thing be in the one accounted a regality, that in
another is none. Only by the custom of this Kingdom, he makes no laws without
the consent of the three Estates, though he may quash any law concluded by
them. And whether his power of making laws be restrained (de necessicate) or of
a godly and commendable policy, not to be altered without great peril, I leave
to the judgment of wiser men. But I hold it inconerowlable, that the King of
England is an absolute King. And all learned Politicians do range the power of
making laws, inter insignia summae and absolutae potestatis. Majora autem
regalia sunt haec: clausula plenitudinis potestatis, and ex ea aliquid
statuere, leges condere, ac eas omnibus and singulis dare, bellum indicere,
belli indicendi licentiam alii dare, pronunciare it a ut a sent entia appellari
non possit, committere sive delegare alicui causam cum clausula appellatione
remota, cognoscere de crimine laesae majestatis, legitimare per rescriptum eos
qui extra legitimum matrim nium nati sunt, ad famam honores, and natales in
integrum restituere, veniam aetatis dare, creare Duces, Marchiones, Comites,
regnum in feudum concedere. Huc referri potest jus erigendi scholam, quae hodie
Universit as vel Academia appellatur, etiam jus creandi doctores, gradu
licentiae aliquem insigniendi, creandi magistratus, tabelliones, sive notarios,
jus dandi insignia nobilitatis, sive nobiles creandi, jus cudendae monetae,
nova vectigalia instituendi, vel instituta vectigalia augendi; Sixtinus
ubisupra. So that those other which are mentioned in libris feudorum, and the
Interpreters of them are (at the least for the most part) justly called regalia
minora, as armandiae, viae, publicae, flumina navigaentia, portus, ripalia,
vectigalia, monetae, mulctarum poenarumque compendia, bona vacantia, bona que
indignis aufer entur, bona eorum qui incestum matrimonium contrahunt, bona a
imnatorum, and postscriptorum, angariae et parangariae, extraordinariae ad
expeditionem imperatores collationes, potestas creandornm magistratuum ad
justiciam exequendam, argentartae, palatia, in civitatibus constituta,
piseationum reditus, falinarum reditus, bona commitentium crimen laesae
majestatis, thesaurus inventus. By setting down these regalities of both sorts,
as they are accounted in the Empire, and other foreign Kingdoms, they may be the
more easily compared with our Kings prerogatives, and so the differences noted
between us and them. And whereas some things are before reckoned both (inter
regalia majora, et minora) the Reader must understand that this may be in
diverse respects. For example, the power of raising a tribute, or of coining
money, is inter majora: but the profit that grows to the Prince by the one or
other, is (inter minora) Now may there also be noted out of books a great
number of prerogatives belonging to the King of this land, which do not bring
profit to his coffers immediately, and therefore may be accounted inter regalia
majora, or at the least, in a middle or mixed nature, or inter majora et minora,
because by a consequent they tend to the increase of the Kings Exchequer. Of
these such as I have observed in reading, I will set down as they come to my
hands, without farther curiosity in dividing. It is the Kings prerogative that
he may not be sued upon an ordinary Writ, as tenent to lands, but by petition.
Plowd. casu Walsingham, f. 553. to have a necessary consent in the approbation
of all benefices. Idem, casu Grendon, fol. 499. to waive and to demur, and to
plead to the issue, or to waive the issue, and to demur upon the plee of the
advers parts, yet not to change the issue another term after he and the advers
part be once at issue. Idem, casu Willion. fol. 23.6. a. and casu Mines fol.
322. a. to be received in a suit before issue joined upon an (aid prier) Idem,
casu Duchy of Lancaster, fol 221. b. to be never in nonage, codem f. 218. b.
that a man indicted may not wage battle with him Idem casu nimes fol. 335. b.
that no man upon any right may enter upon him being in possession, but must be
put to suit. Dyer, f. 139. nu. 33 to seize the lands of his tenants that
alienate without license, Plowd. casu Mines, fol. 322. a. that no subject may
wage his law against him. Broke. chose in action, 9 Coke, lib. 4. fol. 93. to
present in the right of the youngest coparcener being his ward before the
elder. Plowd. casu Mines, fol. 332. b. and fol. 333. a. that a benefice by
institution is not full against him. Coke Digbies c. f. 79. a. not to find
pledges for the persecuting of any action. For he cannot be amerced. Fitzh. na.
br. f. 31. F. and fo. 47. C. To sue in what Court he will. Fitz. na. b. f. 7.
B. and 32. E. To sue the writ Ne adm ttas after 6 months. Reg. or. f. 31. a.
That a man's villain having remained in his ancient demesne by the space of a
year, may not be recovered by the writ, (de nativo habendo) Fitzh. not. br.
fol. 79. A. To grant an office with the (habendam post mortem alterius) Dyer,
fol. 295. nu. 1. to shorten the ordinary time of summons (being 15 days) in
writ of right, Brit. ca. 121. To give what honor or place he lists to his
subjects. anno 31 H. 8. cap. 10. To be owner of a forest. See Forest. To have
free warren. See Warren. Not to be owted of his freehold. Cromptons justice of
peace, fol. 59. b. et 16. a. To araign a man being both a Traitor and a Felon,
rather upon the Treason, than upon the Felony, because he may have the whole
Escheats. idem eodem fol. 99. a. To warrant the day of appearance to his
subject being in his service, and summoned to appear at a day certain. Fitzh.
not. br. fol. 17. a. Diverse of these, and many others did belong (fisco
imperatorum) which you may find in the Digest: de jure fisci, et Co. lib. 10.
tit. 1. Besides these also many more may be observed to belong unto our King,
out of the laws, which I leave to their collection which are of longer reading,
and more painful industry.

Prerogative of the Archbishop of Canterbury, or York (prerogativa
Archiepiscopi Cantuariensis seu Eboracensis) is an especial preeminence that
these Sees have in certain cases above ordinary Bishops within their Provinces.
And that of the Archbishop of Canterbury principally consists of these points.

First, in the confirmation of all elections made of Bishops by the Dean and
Chapter of all Cathedral Churches, as also the consecration of them.

Next in a power of visiting his whole Province, of assembling Synods, of
supplying the defects and negligences of inferior Bishops, of receiving
appeals from their Courts, of assigning coadjutors to those Bishops that grow
weak and insufficient to discharge their function, of appointing Vicars general
to those that have either none, or an insufficient man employed in that office;
and of dispensing in all Ecclesiastical cases, wherein the laws bear
dispensation: of taking oath of every Bishop, at his confirmation, to perform
canonical obedience unto the Sea of Canterbury. But these seem to belong unto
him by an ordinary Archiepiscopal authority.

Certain other things there be, that appertain unto him more than ordinarily to
other Archbishops: as the original calling of any person, in any cause
belonging to spiritual jurisdiction, out of any part of his Province, though
not appealed. But this point is now limited by the Statute made, anno 23 H. 8.
cap. 9.

The receiving of an appeal from the lowest Judge Ecclesiastical within his
Province immediately. The appointing of a Keeper or Guardian of the
spiritualties during the vacancy of any Bishopric. By which means all
Episcopal rites of the Diocese, for that time do belong unto him: as
Visitation, Institution to benefices, and such like.

The visitation of every Dioces within his province, when and in what order it
pleases him. As also of all other privileged Churches. The probat of
Testaments, and granting of Administrations, in case where the party deceased
has goods of any considerable value out of the Diocese wherein he dies. And
that value is ordinarily five pounds, except it be otherwise by composition
between the said Archbishop, and some other Bishop: as in the Diocese of London
it is ten pounds.

The probat of every Bishops Testament, or the administration of his goods,
dying intestate, though not having any goods, chattels, or debts without the
compass of his own jurisdiction. The bestowing of any one dignity or Prebend in
any Cathedral church upon the creation of a new Bishop, that himself thinks
good to make choice of.

There may be more particulars of this prerogative, that I know not: but these
may be sufficient to express the thing that I desire to declare. Who so
desires to read these more more at large, and other privileges of this Church
in temporal matters, may resort to the book entitled, De antiquitate
Britannicae Ecclesia, and nominatim de privilegiis Ecclesiae Cantuariensis
historia, and especially to the eighth chapter of the said book, pa. 25.

Prerogative Court (curia Praerogativa Archiepiscopi Cantuariensis) is the
Court wherein all Wills be proved, and all Administrations taken, that belong
to the Archbishop by his prerogative, which see in Prerogative. And if any
contention do grow between two or more touching any such Will or
Administration, the cause is properly debated and determined in this Court. The
Judge of this court is called Judex Curia praerogativ^ Cantuariensis. The
Archbishop of York has also the like power and court, which is termed his
Exchequer, but far inferior to this in countenance and profit.

Prescription (praescriptio) is a course or use of any thing for a time beyond
the memory of man, as the exposition of the Law terms does define it. Kitchen,
fol. 104. says thus: Prescription is, when for continuance of time, whereof
there grows no memory, a particular person has particular right against
another particular person. And custom is, where by continuance of time beyond
memomory, diverse persons have gotten a right: with whom agrees Sir Edward
Coke, lib. 4. fol. 32. a. And usage is by continuance of time the efficient
cause of them both, and the life of both prescription and custom. Thus says
Kitchen. But as in the Civil law, so I think likewise in the common,
Prescription may be in a shorter time. As for example, where the Statute, anno
1 H. 8. cap. 9. says, that all actions popular must be sued within three years
after the offense committed, and the Statute anno 7 ejusdem, cap. 3. That four
years being past after the offense committed in one case, and one year in
another, no suit can be commenced, and the Statute 31 Elizabeth, cap. 5. says,
(by way of correcting the two former Statutes) that all actions, etc. brought
upon any Statute, the penalty whereof belongs to the King, shall be brought
within two years after the offense committed, or else be void. And the statute
anno 39 Eliz. cap. prim. and secund. says, that actions brought after two
years by any common person, or after three years by the King alone for decay of
husbandry or tillage, shall be of no force. Whosoever offends, against any
such statute, and does escape uncalled for two years, or three years, in one
case of the two later of these three statutes, may justly be said to have
prescribed an immunity against that action. The like may be said of the statute
made anno 23 Elizabeth. cap. primo, which says, that all offenses comprised in
that statute made in the 13 year of Elizab. cap. 2. are inquirable before both
Justices of peace and of Assise, within one year and a day, after the offense
committed: Also the title that a man obtains by the passing of five years
after a fine acknowledged of any land, or tenements, may justly be said to be
obtained by prescription. And whereas the Statute anno 8 R. 2. ca. 4. says,
that a Judge or Clerk convicted for false entering of plees, etc. may be fined
within two years; the two years being ended, he prescribes against the
punishment of the said Statute; and whereas the Statute anno 11 H. 7. says,
that he which will complain of maintenance or embracery, whereby perjury is
committed by a lury, must do it within six days, those six days ended the
parties prescribe: and whereas the Statute anno 5 Ed. 6. says that a man being
not indicted within 3 months of any offenses there mentioned touching Service
and Sacraments, he shall be clear from thence forward: the three months being
ended, he prescribes: and the same may be said of the Statute anno 5 Ed. 6.
cap. 5. which says, that a man shall not be indicted of any offense there
mentioned touching the decay of tillage, after three years. And whereas it is
ordained by the statute anno 8 H. 6. cap. 9. that those which keep possession
of lands by force after 3 years possession held by themselves and their
ancestors, shall not be subject to the arbitrament of Disseisours there set
down. I hold this a prescription likewise against those censures. v. anno 23 H.
6. cap. 15. Lastly a servant prescribes liberty after a year. Bracton, li. 1.
ca. 10. nu. 3. and the right that is gotten in any Stray to a Lord of a manor,
no man claiming it within the year and day after proclamation made, is an
usucapion, or prescription. See Action perpetual and temporal. And see
Cromptons Justice of peace, fol. 173. b. ubi habebis festum. But see one rule
for all in Lam. Eirenarch. lib. 4. cap. 5. page 469. Of this prescription and
the learning touching the same, you may read a solemn report in S. Edwards
Cooks, and Luttrels case, vol. 4. f. 84. b. and seq.

Presentation (Praesentatio) is used properly for the act of a patron offering
his Clerk to the Bishop, to be instituted in a benefice of his gift: the form
whereof see in the Register original, fol. 322. a.

Presentment. is a mere denunciation of the Jurors themselves, or some other
Officer, as Justice, Constable, Searcher, Surveyours, etc. (without any
information) of an offense inquirable in the Court whereunto it is presented.
See Lamberd Eirenarcha. lib. 4. cap. 5. page 467. President (praeses) is used
in the Common law for the Kings Lieutenant in any Province or Function, as
President of Wales, of York, Barwick, Presient of the Kings Council: Anno 22
Hen. 8. cap. 8. and anno 24 Hen. 8. cap. 3, and 14.

Preignotary (Protonotarius) is a word that seems to be made either of two
French words, prime or prim^er, i. primus, and Notaire, i. Notarius, tabellio:
Or of two Latin words, prae and notarius, quasi primus aut principalis
notarius. The office is likewise borrowed from the later Romans, who made his
name of half Greek and half Latin, viz. (...) i. primus, principalis, and
Notarius. It is used in our Common law, for the chief Clerks of the Kings
Courts, whereof three be of the Common plees, and one of the Kings Bench. For
the Pregnotary of the Common plees, anno 5 H. 4. cap. 14. is termed the chief
Clerk of that Court. He of the Kings Bench records all actions civil sued in
that Court, as the Clerk of the Crown-office does all criminal causes. Those of
the Common plees do enter and inroll all manner of Declarations, pleadings,
assizes, and judgments: and all actions the same term that the appearance is
made. Also they make out all judicial writs, as the Venire facias after issues
joined, and Habeas corpus for the bringing in of the Jury, after it is returned
upon the Venire facias. They also make forth writs of executions and of seisin,
writs of Supersedeas, for appearance to Exigents, as well as the Exigents and
writs of privileges, for removing of causes from other inferior Courts of
Record, in case where the party has cause of privilege. Also writs of
Procedendo, of Scire facias in all cases, and writs to enquire of damages: and
all process upon prohibitions, and upon writs of Audita quaerela and false
judgment. Finally, they inroll all Recognisances acknowledged in that Court,
and all common Recoveries, and may make exemplifications of any record the same
term, before the roles be delivered from them.

Prender comes of the French trendere, i. accipere, acceptare, capere,
prehendere. It signifies in our Common law, sometime a power or right to take
a thing, before it be offered; as such things as lie in Prender, or such as lie
in render: West part 2. titule Fines, Sect. 126. where you have these words:
If the Lord grant the services of his Tenent by fine or otherwise the Lord
before atturnment shall have such things as lie in Prender: as the ward of the
body of the heir and of the Land: escheats, etc. but not such things as lie in
render, as rents and reliefs, heriots, and other services. For he cannot avow
for them before the attournment.

Prender de Baron signifies literally in barbarous French to take a Husband:
But it is used in our Common law, as an exception to disable a woman from
pursuing an Appeal of murder against the Killer of her former Husband, Stawnf.
pl. cor. lib. 3. cap. 59. The reason whereof, whether it be, because by her
second marriage, she may justly be thought to have given up the interest she had
in her former husband, or for that she is now covert again, or for both, I
leave to consideration.

Prender del profits signifies verbatim to take the profits. It signifies
substantively the taking of the profits. See Cromptons jurisdict, folio 185.
See Pernour of profits.

Pressed, is used for some duty in money to be paid by the Sheriff upon his
account in the Exchequer, anno secundo and tertio Ed. 6. cap. 4.

Pressed money is so called of the French word ( Pressed, i. explicatus, tromptus,
expeditus) for that it binds those, that have received it, to be ready at all
times appointed.

Primage, is a duty due to the Mariners and Sailors for the loading of any ship
at the setting forth from any Haven, anno tricesimo secundo Henrici octavi,
capitulo decimo quarto.

Primier seisin (prima seisina) ad verbum, signifies the first possession. It
is used in the Common law, for a branch of the Kings Prerogative, whereby he
has the first possession of all lands and tenements through the Realm holding
of him in chief, whereof his tenant dyed seized in his demeasn as of fee; and
so consequently the rents and profits of them, until the heir, if he be of
age, do his homage, if he be under years, until he come to years. See Stawnf.
praerog. capite tertio, and Bracton, libro quarto, tract. 3. cap. prim.

Primo beneficio. See Beneficio.

Prince (Princeps) is a French word, and taken with us diversely, sometime for
the King himself, but more properly for the Kings eldest son, who is Prince of
Wales, as the eldest Son to the French King is called Dolphire, both being
Princes by their nativity. Master Fern in the glory of generosity, page 138.
For Edward the first, to appease the tumultuous spirits of the Welch-men, who
being the ancient Indigene of this Land, could not in long time bear the yoke
of us, whom they call Strangers, sent his wife being with child into Wales.
Where at Carnarvan she was delivered of a Son, thereupon called Eaward of
Carnarvan, and afterward asked the VVelsh-men, seeing they chought much to be
governed by strangers, if they would be quietly ruled by one of their own
nation; who answering him, Yea: Then quoth he, I will appoint you one of your
own Countrymen, that cannot speak one word of English, and against whose life
you can take no just exception: and so named unto them his son born in
Carnarvan not long before. From which time it has continued, that the Kings
eldest Son (who was before called Lord Prince, St ronf. praerog. cap. 22. fol.
75.) has been called Prince of Wales. Stowes Annals page 303. See anno
vicesimo septimo Henrici octavi, cap. 26. et anno 28 ejusdem cap. 3.

Principality of Chester, anno 21 Rich. 2. cap. 9. See County palatin^, and
Cromptons diverse jurisdictions, fol. 137.

Prior perpetual, or dative et removeable, an. 9 R. 2. cap. 4. and anno 1 Ed.
4. cap. 1. paulo ante finem. Lord prior of Saint John's of Jerusalem, anno 26 H.
8. cap. 2.

Priors aliens (Priores alieni) were certain religious men, born in France, and
governors of religious houses, erected for outlandish men here in England:
which were by Henry the fifth thought no good members for this land, after such
conquest obtained by him in France, and therefore suppressed. Whose livings
afterward by Henry the sixth, were given to other Monasteries, and houses of
learning. Stowes Annals, page 582. See anno 1 H. 5. cap. 7. but especially to
the erecting of those two most famous colleges, called the Kings Colleges of
Cambridge and Faton.

Priority (prioritas) signifies in our common law, an antiquity of tenure in
comparison of another not so ancient. As to hold by priority, is to hold of a
Lord more anciently than of another. Old not. br. fol. 94. So to hold in
posteriority, is used by Stawnf. praerog. cap. 2. fol. 11. And Crompton in his
jurisdiction fol. 117. uses this word in the same signification. The Lord of
the priority shall have the custody of the body; etc. fol. 120. If the tenent
hold by priority of one, and by posteriority of another, etc. To which effect
see also Fitzh. not. br. fol. 142. Bartolus in his Tractate, de insigniis et
armis, uses these very words, prioritas et posterioritas, concerning two that
beat one coat armor.

Prisage, seems to be that custom or share, that belongs to the King, out
of such merchandise as are taken at sea, by way of lawful prize, anno 31 Eliz.
cap. 5.

Prisage of Wines, anno 1 H. 8. cap. 5. is a word almost out of use, now called
Butlerage, it is a custom whereby the Prince challenges out of every bark
laden with wine, containing less than forty tun, two tun of wine at his price.

Prise (prisa) comes of the French ( prenare, i. capere) It signifies in our
Statutes, the things taken by purveyours, of the Kings subjects. As anno 3 Edw.
1. cap. 7. et anno 28 ejusdem stat. 3. cap. 2. It signifies also a custom due
to the King, anno 25 ejusdem cap. 5. Register origin. folio 117. b.

Prisoner (priso) comes of the French prisonn^er, and signifies a man
restrained of his liberty upon any action civil or criminal, or upon
commandment. And a man may be prisoner upon matter of Record, or matter of
fact: prisoner upon matter of record is he, which being present in Court, is by
the Court committed to prison, only upon an arest, be it of the Shyreeve,
Constable, or other. Stawnf. pi. cor. li. pri. ca. 32. fo. 34, et 35.

Privy, comes of the French ( prive, i. familiaeris) and signifies in our
Common law, him that is partaker, or has an interest in any action, or thing:
as privies of blood, Old not. br. fol. 117. be those that be linked in
consanguinity. Every heir in tail is privy to recover the land intayled, eodem
fol. 137. No privity was between me and the tenent, Littleton fol. 106. If I
deliver goods to a man to be carried to such a place, and he after he has
brought them thither, does steal them, it is felony: because the privity of
delivery is determined, as soon as they are brought thither. Stawn. pl. co.
lib. prim. cap. 15. fol. 25. Merchants privy be opposite to Merchants
strangers, anno 2 Edw. tertii, cap. 9. and cap. 14. and anno ejusdem, stat. 2.
cap. 3. The new Expositour of law-terms makes diverse sorts of privies: as
privies in estate, privies in deed, privies in law, privies in right, and
privies in blood. And see the examples he gives of every of them. See Perkins
Conditions, 831, 832, 833. and Sir Edward Cook lib. 3. Walkers case, fol. 23.
a. and lib. 4. fol. 123. b. and 124. a. where he makes four kinds of privies,
viz. privies in blood, as the heir to his Father, etc. privies in
representation, as executors or administratours to the deceased: privies in
estate, as he in the reversion, and he in the remainder, when land is given to
one for life, and to another in fee: the reason is given by the Expositour of
law-terms, for that their estates are created both at one time. The fourth sort
of privies are privies in tenure: as the Lord by escheat: that is, when the
land escheateth to the Lord for want of heirs, etc.

Privy seal (privatum sigillum) is a seal that the King uses sometime for a
warrant, whereby things passed the privy signet and brought to it, are sent
farther to be confirmed by the great Seal of England: sometime for the strength
or credit of other things written upon occasions more transitory and of less
continuance, than those be that pass the great seal.

Privilege (privilegium) is defined by Cicero in his Oration pro domo sua, to
be lex privata homini irrogata. Frerotus in paratit lis ad titulum decretal^um
de privilegiis thus defines it: privilegium est jus singular, hoc est,
privata lex quae uni homini, vel loco, vel Collegio, and similibus aliis
conceditur: cap. priv legia, distinct. 3. priva enim veteres dixere quae nos
singula dicimus. Infit Agellius, li. 10. ca. 20. Idioque privilegia, modo
beneficia, modo personales constitutiones dicuntur, etc. It is used so likewise
in our Common law, and sometimes for the place, that has any special immunity.
Kitchen, fo. 118. in the words: where debtors make feign dgifts and feoffments
of their land, and goods to their friends, and others, and betake themselves to
privileges, etc. Privilege is either personal or real: a personal privilege is
that, which is granted to any person, either against, or beside the course of
the Common law: as for example, a person called to be one of the Parliament,
may not be arested, either himself, or any of his attendance, during the time
of the Parliament. A privilege real is that, which is granted to a place, as to
the Universities, that none of either may be called to Westminster hall, upon
any contract made within their own precincts. And one toward the Court of
Chancery cannot originally be called to any Court but to the Chancery, certain
cases excepted. If he be, he will remove it by writ of Privilege grounded upon
the statute anno 18 Edward the third, See the new book of Entries, verbo
Privilege.

Probat of Testaments (probatio testamentorum) is the producting, and
insinuating of dead men's Wills before the ecclesiastical Judge, Ordinary of the
place, where the patty dies. And the Ordinary in this case is known by the
quantity of the goods, that the party deceased has out of the Dioces, where he
departed. For if all his goods be in the same Dioces, then the Bishop of the
Dioces, or the Archdeacon (according as their composition, or prescription is)
has the probat of the Testament: if the goods be dispersed in diverse Dioceses,
so that there be any sum of note (as five pounds ordinarily) out of the Dioces
where the party led his life: then is the Archbishop of Canterbury the ordinary
in this case by his prerogative. For whereas in old time, the will was to be
proved in every Dioces, wherein the party deceased had any goods: it was
thought convenient both to the subject, and to the Archiepiscopal See, to make
one proof for all before him, who was and is of all the general ordinary of his
Province. But there may be anciently some composition between the Archbishop
and an inferior ordinary, whereby the sum that makes the prerogative is above
five pound. See Praerogative of the Archbishop. This probat is made in two
sorts, either in common form, or pertestes. The proof in common form, is only
by the oath of the executor, or party exhibiting the Will, who swears upon
his credulity, that the Will by him exhibited, is the last Will and Testament
of the party deceased. The proof per testes is when over and beside his oath,
he also produces witnesses, or makes other proof, to confirm the same, and
that in the presence of such as may pretend any interest in the goods of the
deceased, or at the least in their absence, after they have been lawfully
summoned to see such a Will proved, if they think good. And the later course is
taken most commonly, where there is fear of strife, and contention between the
kindred or friends of the party deceased about his goods. For a Will proved
only in common form, may be called into question any time within thirty years
after by common opinion, before it work prescription.

Procedendo, is a writ whereby a plee, or cause formerly called from a base
Court to the Chancery, Kings bench, or Common plees, by a writ of privilege or
certiorare, is released, and sent down again to the same Court, to be proceeded
in there, after it appears that the Defendant has no case of privilege, or
that the matter comprised in the Bill, be not well provided, Brook, hoc titulo,
and Terms of the law: Cook vol. 6. fol. 63. a. See an. 21 R. 2. ca. 11. in
fine, letters of procedendo, granted by the Keeper of the privy seal. See in
what diversity it is used in the table of the original Register, and also of
the Judicial.

I^roces (processus) is the manner of proceeding in every cause, be it
personal, or real, civil, or criminal, even from the original writ to the end.
Britton fol. 138 a. wherein there is great diversity, as you may see in the
table of Fitz. not. br. verbo Process, and Brooks Abridgement, hoc titulo. And
whereas the writings of our Common Lawyers sometime call that the Process, by
which a man is called into the Court, and no more: the reason thereof may be
given, because it is the beginning, or the principal part thereof, by which the
rest of the business is directed, according to that saying of Aristotle,(...)

Diverse kinds of Process upon Inditements before Justices of the peace, See in
Cromptons Justice of peace, fol. 133, b. 134.135. But for orders sake, I refer
you rather to M. Lambard is his tractat of Processes adjoined to his
Eirenarcha, who according to his subject in hand, divides criminal Process,
either into Process touching causes of treason, or felony, and Process touching
inferior offenses: the former is usually a capias, capias alias, and
exigifacia^. The second is either upon indictment, or presentment, or
information: that upon indictment or presentment, is all one, and is either
general, and that is a venire facias, upon which if the party be returned
sufficient, then is sent out a Distringas infinite until he come: if he be
returned with a Nihil babet, then issues out a Capias, Capias aliis, Capias
pluries, and lastly, an Exigi facias. The special process is that, which is
especially appointed for the offense by statute. For the which he refers his
reader to the eighth chapter of his fourth book, being very different.

Processum continuando, is a writ for the continuance of a Process after the
death of the chief Justice, in the writ of oyer and terminer. Register
original. fol. 128. a.

Prochein amy (proximus amicus, vel propinquier) is word for word, a near
friend. It is used in our Common law, for him that is next of kin to a child
in his nonage, and is in that respect allowed by law, to deal for him in the
managing his affairs: as to be his Guardian, if he hold of any in socage, and
in the redress of any wrong done unto him, be it by his Guardian, if he be
ward, and hold in Chivalry, or any others. Stat. West. pri. cap. 48. 3 Ed. pri.
and Westminster. 2. cap. 15. anno 13 Ed. pri.

Proof, alias Prove, is used for an Enquest, anno 28 Ed. 3. cap. 13.

Proclamation (Proclamatio) signifies a notice publicly given of any thing,
whereof the King thinks good to advertise his subjects. So it is used anno 7
Rich. 2. cap. 6. Proclamation of rebellion is a public notice given by the
officer, that a man not appearing upon a Subpoena, nor an attachment, in the
Starchamber or Chancery, shall be reputed a rebel, except he render himself by
a day assigned, Cromptons jurisd. fol. 92. See Commission of rebellion.

Proclamation of a fine, is a notize openly and solemnly given at all the
Assizes, that shall be holden in the County within one year after the
engrossing of the fine; and not at the four general quarter sessions. And these
Proclamations be made upon transcripts of the fine, sent by the Justices of the
common plees, to the Justices of Assise, and the Justices of peace. West. part.
2. symbo. titulo Fines sect. 132. where also you may see the form of the
Proclamation. Proclamare est palam, et valde clamare, used by Tully, Livie, and
the Civilian. p. Quibus ad liberta proclamare non licet. And Proclamator
signifies him qui litem intendit, vel causamagit. Cicero de oratore, lib. pri.
Non enim causidicum nescio quem, neque proclama^orem, aut rebulam hoc sermon
conquirimus, etc. I read in Fitz. not. br. fol. 85 C. that the Kings
proclamation is sufficient to stay a subject from going out of the Realm. See
the force of proclamations in an. 31 H. 8. c. 8. see also proclamations in
diverse cases. New book of Entries. verb. Proclamations.

Proctors of the Clergy (procuratores cleri) are those which are chosen and
appointed to appear for Cathedral, or other Collegiate Churches, as also for
the common Clergy of every Dioces, at the Parliament, whose choice is in this
sort. First, the King directs his writ to the Archbishop of each Province
for the summoning of all Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, cathedral and collegiat
churches, and generally of all the Clergy of his Province, after their best
discretion and judgment, assigning them the time and place in the said writ.
Then the Archbishops proceed in their accustomed course. One example may serve
to show both. The Archbishop of Canterbury upon his writ received, directs
his letters to the Bishop of London as his Dean provincial, 1 sect. statuimus
de poenis and verb. tauquam in glos. first citing himself peremptorily: and
then willing him to cite in like manner all the Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons,
cathedral and collegiate churches, and generally all the Clergy of his Province
to the place, and against the day prefixed in the writ. But directs withal
that one Proctor sent for every cathedral or collegiate Church, and two for the
body of the inferior Clergy of each Dioces may suffice. And by virtue of these
Letters authentically sealed, the said Bishop of London directs his like
Letters severally to the Bishop of every Diocese of the Province, citing them
in like sort, and commanding them not only to appear, but also to admonish the
said Deans, and Archdeacons personally to appear, and the Cathedral and
collegiat Churches, as also the common clergy of the Diocese to send their
Proctors to the place, and at the day appointed; and also wills them to
certify the Archbishop the names of all and every so monished by them, in a
Shedule annexed to their Letters certificatory. The Bishops proceed
accordingly, and the Cathedral and collegiat Churches, as also the Clergy make
choice of their Proctors: which done, and certified to the Bishop, he returns
all answerably to his charge at the day. These Proctors of the Clergy,
howsoever the case of late days is altered, had place and suffrage in the
lower house of Parliament, as well as the Knights, Citizens, Barons of the
Cinque ports, and Burgesses. For so it plainly appears by the statute anno 21
R. 2. cap. 2. and cap. 12. And sithence they were removed, the Church has
daily grown weaker and weaker: I pray God that in short time she famish not,
but that her liberties be better maintained.

Procurator, is used for him that gathers the fruit of the benefice for
another man. anno 3 R. 2. stat. 1. cap. 2. And procuracy is used for the
specialty, whereby he is authorized. Ibid. They are at this day in the West
parts called Proctors.

Profer (profrum vel proferum) is the time appointed for the accounts of
Shyreves, and other officers in the Exchequer, which is twice in the year, anno
51. H. 3. statute quins. And it may be gathered also out of the Regist. fol.
139. in the writ De Atturnato Vicecomitis pro profro faciendo. I read also of
profers, anno 32 H. 8. cap. 21. in these words: Trinity term shall begin the
Monday next after Trinity Sunday, whenever it shall happen to fall, for the
keeping of the essoynes, profers, returns, and other ceremonies heretofore used
and kept. In which place (profer) seems to signfie the offer or endeavor to
proceed in action by any man, whom it concerns so to do. See Britton. cap. 2.
fol. 50. b. and 55. a. and fol. 80. b. and Fleta lib. 1. cap. 38. sect.
Utlagati et seq.

Profer the half mark. See Half mark.

Profession (professio) is in the Common law, used particularly for the entering
into any religious Order of Friars, etc. New book of Entries, verbo Profession.

Profits apprender. See Prender.

Prohibition (prohibitio) is a writ framed for the forbidding of any Court,
either spiritual or secular, to proceed in any cause there depending, upon
suggestion, that the cognition thereof belongs not to the said Court. Fitz.
not. br. fol. 39. G. but is most usually taken, especially in these days, for
that writ which lies for one that is impleaded in the Court Christian, for a
cause belonging to the temporal jurisdiction, or the cognizance of the Kings
court, whereby as well the party and his Council, as the Judge himself, and the
Register, or forbidden to proceed any farther in that cause: for that it
appertains to the dis-inheritage to the Crown of such right as belongs unto
it. In how many cases this lies, see Broke hoc titulo, and Fitz. na. br. fol
93. and seq. This writ, and the praemunire, might in these days well be
spared: for they were helps to the Kings inheritance and Crown, when the two
swords were in two diverse hands. Whereas now both the Jurisdictions being
settled in the King, there is small reason of either, except it be to weary the
subject by many quirks and delays, from obtaining his right: of this
prohibition, you may read Bracton also lib. 5. tract. 5. cap. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,
9, 10, 11, 12. who says, that it lies not after sentence given in any cause,
however the case is altered: and again, the statute made, anno 50 Ed. 3. which
ordains, that above one Prohibition should not lie in one cause. See the
diversity of prohibitions in the table of the original Regist. See the new book
of Entries, verbo Prohibition, and Fitz. na. br. fol. 39.

Prohibtio de vasto directa parti, is a writ judicial directed to the tenent,
and prohibiting him from making waste upon the land in controversy, during the
suit. Register judicial, fol. 21. It is sometime made to the Shyreeve, the
example whereof you have there next following.

Pro indiviso, is a possession, and occupation of lands, or tenements belonging
unto two or more persons, whereof none knows his several portion, as
coparceners before partition. Bracton lib. 5. tracta. 2. cap. pri. nu. 7.

Prolocutour of the Convocation house (prolocutor domus convocationis) is an
officer chosen by persons Ecclesiastical publicly assembled by the Kings writ
at every Parliament. And as there be two houses of Convocations so be there two
prolocutors, one of the higher house, the other of the lower house, who,
presently upon the first Assembly, is by the motion of the Bishops, chosen by
the lower house, and presented to the Bishops for their prolocutour, that is,
the man by whom they mean to deliver their resolutions to the higher house, and
to have their own house especially ordered and governed. His office is to cause
the Clerk to call the names of such as are of that house, when he sees cause,
to cause all things propounded to be read by him, to gather the suffrages, and
such like.

Promoters, (promotores) be those which in popular and penal actions do defer
the names, or complain of offenders, having part of the profit for their
reward. These were called among the Romans, Quadruplatores, or Delatores. They
belong especially to the Exchequer and the Kings bench. Smith de repub. Angl.
li. 2. ca. 14.

Pro patribus liberandis, is a writ for the partition of lands between
coheirs, Register original, fol. 316.

Prophecies (prophetiae) be in our common law, taken for wisardly foretellings
of matters to come, in certain hidden and enigmatical speeches. Whereby it
falls out many times, that great troubles are stirred in our Commonwealth,
and great attempts made by those, to whom the speech framed, either by the
description of his cognizance, arms, or some other quality, promises good
success, anno 3 Ed. 6. cap. 15. and anno 7 ejusdem, cap. 11. and anno 5
Elizab. ca. 15. But these for distinctions sake are called false, or
fantastical prophecies.

Property (proprietas) signifies the highest right that a man has or can have
to any thing, which is no way depending upon any other man's courtesy. And this
none in our Kingdom can be said to have in any lands or tenements, but only
the King in the right of his Crown. Because all the Lands through the Realm,
are in the nature of fee, and do hold either mediately or immediately of the
Crown. See Fee. This word nevertheless is in our Common law used for that
right in lands and tenements, that common persons have, because it imports as
much as (utile dominium) though not (directum.)

Proprietate probaenda, is a writ. See the original Regist. fol. 83. a. and 85.
b. It lies for him, that will prove a property before the Shyreeve. Brooks
Property. 1. For where a property is alleged, a replegiare lies not. Idem
ibidem.

Proprietarie (proprietarius) is he that has a property in any thing, but is
most nototiously used for him, that has the fruits of a benefice, to himself
and his heirs or succescessors, as in time past Abbots and Priors had to them
and their Successors. See Appropriation.

Pro rata portionis. See Onerando prorata portionis.

Proection (protectio) has a general and special signification. In the general
it is used for that benefit and safety, that every subject or Denizen, or alien
specially secured, has by the Kings laws. And thus it is used, an. 25 Edw.
tertii, capite 22. Protection in the special signification is used for an
exemption, or an immunity given by the King to a person, against suits in law,
or other vexations, upon reasonable causes him thereunto moving, which I take
to be a branch of this prerogative. And of this protection, Fitzh. makes two
sorts in his not. br. fol. 28. The first form or sort he calls a protection,
cum clausula, Volumus, whereof he mentions four particulars; A protection,
quia profecturus, for him that is to pass over sea, in the Kings service: A
protection quia moratur, for him that is abroad in the Kings service upon the
sea, or in the marches, anno 7 H. 7. cap. 2. A protection for the Kings debtor,
that he be not sued or attached until the King be paid his debt; See anno 15
Ed. 3. This some Civilians call moratoriam: which see In singularibus Marantae,
verb. Princeps, p. 79. col. 2. And a protection in the Kings service beyond the
seas, or on the marches of Scotland: whereof you may read something anno 1 R.
2. cap. 8. See the Regist. orig. fol. 23. and Britton, cap. 123. The second
form of protection, istermed cum cl^usula, Nolumu^: which is granted most
commonly to a spiritual company for their immunity from taking of their cattle
by the Kings ministers. But it may be granted also to one man spiritual or
temporal. Of these things read the same Author: and the forms of these writs.
See also in the Register Original, fol. 22. and 23. And see the new expositour
of law terms, to what action the Kings protection does not extend. See also the
new book of Entries, verbo protection.

Protonotarie, (protonotarius) See Preignetary.

Protestation (protestatio) is (as Justice Walsh defines it) a defense of
safeguard to the party, which makes it from being concluded by the act he is
about to do, that issue cannot be joined upon it. Plowden, fol. 276. b. whereof
see the Regist. orginal, fol. 306. b. And see Protest.

Protest (protestari) has two diverse applications, one is by way of cautell,
to call witness (as it were) or openly to affirm, that he does either not at
all, or but after a sort yield his consent to any act, as unto proceeding of a
Judge in a Court, wherein his jurisdiction is doubtful, or to answer upon his
oath farther than he by law is bound. See Plowden, casu G^esbroke, fol. 276. b.
and the Register original, fol. 306. b. Another is by way of complaint to
protest a man's bill: For example, if I give money to a merchant in France,
taking his Bill of Exchange to be repayed in England, by one whom he assigns
me, if at my coming I find not my self satisfied to my contentment, but either
delayed or denied, then I go into the burse or some open concurse of Merchants,
and protest that I am deceived by him. And thereupon if he has any goods
remaining in any man's hands within the Realm, the Law of Merchants is, that I
be paid out of them.

Prouver (Probator.) See Approuver, anno 5 H. 4. cap. 2. See Approvours.

Province (Provincia) was used among the Romans for a Country without the
compass of Italy, gained to their subjection by the sword, whereupon the part
of France next the Alps was so called of them, when it was in their dominion,
and of that carries the same name at this present: But with us a Province is
most usually taken for the circuit of an Archbishops Jurisdiction, as the
Province of Canterbury, and the Province of York, anno 32 H. 8. ca. 23. and
anno 33 ejusdem, cap. 31. yet it is used diverse times in our statutes for
several parts of the Realm.

Provincial (provincialis) is a chief goververnor of an order of Friars, anno
quar. Hen. quar. cap. 17.

Protoforesta^ius, was he whom the ancient Kings of this Realm made chief of
Wind for Forest, to hear all causes of death, or mayhem, or of slaughter, or of
the Kings Deer within the Forest. Camden Brit. page 213. See Justice of the
Forest.

Prove. See Proof.

Provision (proviso) is used with us, as it is used in the Canon law, for the
providing of a Bishop, or any other person of an Ecclesiastical living, by the
Pope, before the Incumbent be dead. It is also called gratia expectativa, or
Mandatum de providendo. The great abuse whereof in the Pope through all
Christendom heretofore, you may read, not only in Duarenns de sacris ecclesiae
ministeriis, and beneficiis, l. 3. cap. 2. but also for England particularly,
in diverse statutes of the Realm. viz. anno 35 Ed. 3. cap. 22. stat. 4. and
statu. 5. commonly called the statute de provisionibus, and anno 27 ejusdem,
cap. 1. and anno 38 ejusdem stat. 2. cap. pri. and 2, 3, 4. and anno 38
ejusdem, and anno 2 Rich. 2. cap. 7. and anno 3 ejusdem, cap. 3. and anno 7
ejusdem, cap. 12. and anno 12 ejusdem, cap 15. and anno 13 ejusdem, stat. 2.
cap. 2, and 3. and anno 16 ejusdem, cap. 5. and anno 2 Henr. 4. cap. 3, et 4.
et anno 5 ejusdem, cap. prim. et anno 7 ejusdem, cap. 6, et 8. et anno 9
ejusdem, cap. 8. and anno 3 Henr. 5. cap. quar. See Praemunire.

Provisour (Provisor) is he that sueth to the court of Rome for a provision,
Old not. br. fol. 143. See Provision.

Proviso, is a condition inserted into any deed, upon the observance whereof
the validity of the deed consists, which form of condition seems to be
borrowed from France, for, Pourvieu Gallicum semper conditionem inducit.
Tiraquel. tome 3. page 316. Our common Lawyers say, that it sometime signifies
but a covenant, whereof you have a large dispute in the second Book of Sir
Edward Cooks Reports in the Lord Cromwels case. It has also another
signification in matters Judicial: as if the Plaintiff or demandant desist in
prosecuting an action, by bringing it to a trial, the defendant or tenent may
take out the venire factas to the Shyreeve: which has in it these words,
Proviso quod, etc. to this end, that if the Plaintiff take out any writ to that
purpose, the Sheriff shall summon but one Jury upon them both. See Old natura
brev. in the writ Nisi prius, fo. 159.

PU
Purchase. See Pourchas.

Purfles of a woman's gown, anno 33 H. 8 cap. 5.

Purgation (purgatio) is a clearing of a man's self from a crime, whereof he is
probably and publicly suspected, and thereof denounced to a Judge. Of this
there was great use in England, touching matter of Felony imputed to Clerks in
former time, as appears by Stawnf. pl. cor. li. 2. cap. 48. See Clergy. It is
still observed for matter pertaining to the Ecclesiastical court, as suspicion,
or common fame of incontinency, or such like. Purgation is either Canonical
(canonica) or vulgar (vulgaris) Canonical is that which as prescribed by the
Canon law: The form whereof is usually in the Spiritual court, the man
suspected taking his oath that he is clear of the fault objected, and bringing
so many of his honest Neighbors, being not above twelve, as the court shall
assign him, to swear upon their consciences and credulity, that he swears
truly, or has taken a true oath. Vulgar purgation was by fire or water, or by
combat, used by infidels and Christians also, until by the Canon law it was
abolished, tit. 15. depurgatione Canon. et vulga. in Decretalibus. Combat,
though it be less in use than it was, yet it is, and may be still practiced by
the Laws of the Realm, in cases doubtful, if the defendant chu^e rather the
combat than other trial. See Ordell. See Combat.

Purlue, is all that ground near any Forest, which being made Forest by Henry
the second, Richard the first, or King John, were by perambulation granted by
Henry the third, severed again from the same. Manwood part 2. of his Forest
laws, cap. 20. And he calls this ground either pouralce. i. perambulationem,
or purliu, purluy, which he says, be but abusively taken for pourallee, ubi
supra, number. 3. But with the license of that industrious and learned Gentleman,
I am bold to say, that this word may be no less fitly made of two French words,
( pur, i. purus) and ( lieu, i. locus) and my reason is, because that such
grounds as were by those Kings subjected to the Laws and Ordinances of the
Forest, are now cleared and freed from the same: for as the Civilians call that
purum locum, qui sepulchrorum reli^ioni non est obstrictus: sect. 9. de reruus
divisin institution. so no doubt, in imitation of that very point, our
ancestors called this purlieu, i. purum locum, because it was exempted from
that servitude or thraldom that was formerly laid upon it. So ager purus est,
qui neque sacer, neque sanctus, neque religiosus, sed ab omnibus hujusmodi
nominibus vacare videtur, lib. 2. sect. 4. p. de religio, et sumptibus funerum.
And therefore Master Crompton: Purraile is not much amiss, fol 153. of his
Iurisdict. because we may also derive it from the French words, pur and allee,
that is as much as to say, as a clear or a free walk or passage. And where it
is sometime called Pouralee, that may and does come from pur, and alee, i.
itio, profectio, ambulatio: because he that walks or courseth within that
compass, is clear enough from the laws or penalties incurred by them which
hunt within the precincts of the Forest. See the statute, anno 33 Edw. prim.
stat. 5.

Pourlie man, is he that has ground within the purlieu, and being able to
dispend forty shillings by the year of Freehhold, is upon these two points
licensed to hant in his own purlieu: Manwoo^ part 1 of his Forest laws, page
151 and 157. but what observations he must use in his hunting, see him, page
180, 181, 186. See him likewise, part 2. ca. 20. number. 5, 8, 9, etc. See
Purlieu.

Purpresture, See Pourpresture.

Pursey, anno 43 Eliz. cap. 10.

Purswivant, See Poursuivant.

Purveyours. See Pourveyours.

Pyker, alias Pycar, a kind of ship: anno 31 Edw. 3. stat. 2. cap. 2.

Q
QUadragesima, is the first Sunday in Lent, so called (as I take it) because it
is the fourtieth day before Easter. The sunday before that is Quinquagesima:
the second before, Sexagesima; the third septuagesima.

Quae plura is a writ that lies where an inquisition has been made by an
Escheator in any county, of such Lands or Tenements as any man dyed seized of,
and all that was in his possession be not thought to be found by the office.
The form whereof see in the Register original, fol. 293. and in Fitz. not. br.
fol. 255. It differs from the writ called melius inquirendo. as Fitzh. there
says, because this is granted, where the Escheator formerly proceeded by
virtue of his office: and the other, where he found the first office by virtue
of the writ called Diem clausit extremum. See the new Book of Entries, verbo
Quae plura.

Querens non invenit plegium, is a return made by the Sheriff, upon a writ
directed unto him, with this condition inserted: Si A. fecsrit B. securum de
loquela sua prosequenda, etc. Fitzherbert, Not. brev. fol. 38. o.

Quae servitia is a Writ. See per quae servitia.

Quale jus is a writ judicial that lies where a man of religion has judgment
to recover Land, before execution be made of the judgment, for this writ must
between Judgment and execution, go forth to the Escheator, to enquire whether
the religious person has right to recover, or the judgment is obtained by
collusion between the Demandant and the Tenant, to the intent that the true
Lord be not defrauded. See Westminster. 2. Came. 32. Cum Viri religiosi, etc. The form
of this writ you may have in the Register judicial, fol. 8, 16, 17, et 46. And
in the Old not. br. fol. 161. See the new book of Entries, verbo, Quale jus.

Quare ejecit infra terminum, is a writ that lies for a Leassee, in case where
he is cast out of his Ferm before his term be expired, against the Feoffee or
leassour that ejecteth him. And it differs from the Ejectione firma, because
this lies where the leassor after the lease made infeoffeth another, which
ejecteth the leassee. And the Ejectione firma lies against any other stranger
that ejecteth him. The effect of both is all one, and that is, to recover the
residue of the term. See Fitzh. not. brev. fo. 197. See the Register original,
fol. 227. And the new book of Entries, verbo, Quare ejecit infra terminum.

Quare impedit is a writ that lies for him who has purchased a manor, with
an advowsen thereunto belonging, against him that disturbeth him in the right
of his advowsen, by presenting a Clerk thereunto when the Church is void. And
it differs from the writ called Assisa ultimae praesentationis; because that
lies where a man or his Ancestors formerly presented, and this for him that is
the purchasor himself. See the Expositour of the terms of the Law, and Old not.
brev. fol. 27. Bracton, lib. 4. tractat. 2. cap. 6. Britton, ca. 92. and Fitzh.
not. br. fol. 32. and the Register original, fol. 30. where it is said, That a
Quare impedit is of a higher nature than Assisa ultimae praesentationis,
because it supposes both a possession and a right. See at large the new Book
of Entries, verbo, Quare impedit.

Quare incumbravit, is a writ that lies against the Bishop, which within six
months after the vacation of a Benefice, conferreth it upon his Clerk, whilst
two others be contending in law for the right of presenting. Exposition of the
Terms of Law, Old not. br. fol. 30. and Fitzh. not. br. fol. 48. Regist.
origin. fo. 32..

Quare intrusit matrimonio non satisfacto, is a writ that lies for the Lord
against his Tenant being his Ward, that after covenable marriage offered him,
marieth another, and enters nevertheless upon his Land, without agreement
first made with his Lord and Guardian. Terms of the Law.

Quare non permittie, is a writ that lies for one that has right to present
for a turn against the Proprietary. Fleta, lib. 5. cap. 16.

Quarentine (quarentina) is a benefit allowed by the Law of England, to the
widow of a landed man deceased, whereby she may challenge to continue in his
capital message or chief Mansion house by the space of forty days after his
decease. Of this see Bracton, lib. 2. ca. 40. And if the heir or any other
attempt to eject her, she may have the writ De Quarentina habenda, Fitzh. not.
brev. fo. 161. See anno 9 H. 3. cap. 7. and anno 20. cap. 1. and Britton, cap.
103. M. Skene de verborum significatione, verbo Quarentina viduarum, deriveth
this word from the French quaresme. Who also have this custom called lo
quaeresme des refues granted to widows after the decease of their husband: as
he proves out of Papon in his Arests, lib. 15 titulo des dots. cap. 7. and li.
10. tit. Substitutiones, cap. 30. Of this read Fleta also, lib. 5. cap. 23.

Quarentina habenda, is a writ that lies for a widow to enjoy her Quarentine.
Register original fo. 175.

Quare non admisit, is a writ that lies against the Bishop, refusing to admit
his Clark that has recovered in a plee of advowsen. The further use whereof
see in Fitz. not. br. fo. 47. and Register origin. fo. 32. See the new book of
Entries, verbo quare non admisit.

Quare obstruxit, is a writ that lies for him who having a servitude to pass
through his Neighbors ground, cannot enjoy his right, for that the owner has
so strengthened it. Fleta li. 4. cap. 26 sect. Item si minus.

Quarter Sessions: is a Court held by the Justices of Peace in every County,
once every quarter. The jurisdiction whereof how far it exceeds, is to be
learned out of M. Lamberts Eirenarcha. Sir Thomas Smith, de republ. Angl. li.
2. cap. 19. But to these you may add the late Statutes of the Realm, for their
power daily increases. Originally it seems to have been erected only for
matters touching the peace. But in these days it extends much further. That
these Sessions should be held quarterly, was first of all ordained (so far as I
can learn) by the statute anno 25 E. 3. statut. 1. cap. 8. Of this read
Lamberts Eirenarcha, the fourth book throughout, where he sets them out both
learnedly and at large.

Quash ( quassare, comes of the French quasser, i. quassare, conquassare, It
signifies in our Common Law, to overthrow: Bracton lib. 5, tractat. 2. cap. 3.
nu. 4.

Quecbord, anno 17 Ed. 4. ca. 2.

Que est mesme, signifies verbatim, Which is the self same thing. It is used
in our Common law as a word of art in an action of Trespass, or of like
nature, for a direct justification of the very act complained of by the
Plaintiff as a wrong. For example, in an action of the case, the Plaintiff
says that the Lord threatened his Tenants at will in such sort, as he drove
them to give up their tenures. The Lord for his defense pleads That he said
unto them, That if they would not depart, he would sue them as the Law would.
This being the same threatening that he used, or to speak artificially que est
le mesme, the defense is good. Of this see Kitchen in the chapter, que est le
mesme, fol. 236. where you may have many like examples.

Que estate, word for word signifies, quem statum. It signifies in our Common
law a plee, whereby a man entituling another to land, etc. says, That the same
estate he had, himself has from him. For example, in a quare impedit the
Plaintiff allegeth, That such four persons were seized of Lands, whereunto the
Advowsen in question was appendant in fee, and did present to the Church, and
afterward the Church was void, que estat del, etc, that is, which estate of the
four persons, he says also, that he has now during the vacation, by virtue
whereof he presently, etc. Brook titulo Que estate, fol. 175, and 176. But it
is harder to know, when this Que estate is to be pleaded, than to understand
what it is, as by him may appear. See the new book of Entries, verb. Que estate.

Queen (Regina) is either he that holds the Crown of this Realm by right of
blood, or else she that is married to the King. In the former signification she
is in all construction the same that the King is, and has the same power in
all respects. In the other signification she is inferior, and a person exempt
from the King: for she may sue and be sued in her own name. Yet that she has
is the Kings, and look what she loses, so much departs from the King.
Stawnf. praerog. cap. 2. fol. 10. in sine. See Kitchen, fo. 1. b. See Cook lib.
4. Copyhold cases fo. 23. b. Angusta was the like among the Romans, howbeit
not ejusdem juris in all things.

Queens silver, See Kings silver.

Quem redditum reddat, is a writ judicial that lies for him to whom a rent
seck, or rent charge is granted, by fine levied in the Kings court, against the
Tenent of the land, that refuses to atturn unto him, thereby to cause him to
atturn. See Old not. br. fo. 156. and west, part. 2. symbol. titulo Fines,
sect. 125. See the new book of Entries, verb. quem reditum reddit.

Querela frosca fortiae, is a writ, See Fresh force.

Querela coram regi et consilio descutienda et terminanda, is a writ whereby
one is called to justify a complaint of a trespass made to the King and
himself before the King and his Council, Regist origf 124 b.

Questus est nobis, etc. is the form of a writ of Nuisance, which by the statute
ax. 13 Ed 1. ca. 24. lies against him to whom the house or other thing that
breeds the Nuisance, is alienated: whereas before that Statute, this action
lay only against him that first levied the thing to the hurt of his Neighbor.
See the Statute.

Quia improvide, seems to be a Supersedeas granted in the behalf of a Clark
of the Chancery, sued against the privilege of that Court, in the Common plees,
and persued in the exigend. See Dyerf. 33 n 18.

Quid juris clamat, is a writ judicial, issuing out of the Record of the fine,
which remains with the Custos brevinm of the Common place, before it be
engrossed (for afterward it cannot be had) and it lies for the Grantee of a
Reversion or Remainder, when the particular tenant will not atturn. West, part
2. symb. tit. Fines, sect. 118. Whom see further. See the Register judicial,
36, 57. And the new book of Entries, Verbis Quid juris clamat.

Quinquagesima Sunday, is always the next Sabbath before Shrovetyde: so called
because it is the fivetieth day before Easter. The reason of this appellation
whosoever desires to know, he may find diverse such as they be, in Durandi
rationali Divinorum, Capit. de Quinquagesima. Sexagesima Sunday is the next
Sabbath before Quinquagesima, so called in the opinion of the said Author,
because the number of sixty consists of six times ten: six having reference
to the six works of mercy, and ten, to the ten Commandments. Septuagesima is
the next before Sexagesimi, and is instituted and so called, as Durand likewise
says, for three things: and (to use his own words: Primo, propter redemptionem
Sabbati, vel secundum alios, quinta furiae, in qua sancti patres stat uerunt
jejunari. Secundo, propter repraesentationem, quoniam repraesentat septuaginta
annos captivitatis Babylonicae. Tertio, propter significationem, quoniam per
hoc tempiis significatur deviatio, exilium, et tribulatio totius humani generis
ab Adam usque ad finem mundi: quod quidem exilium sub revolutione septem dierum
peragitur, et sub septem millibus annornm includitur. But of these three days
you may read him at large, that have a mind to learn of him. I only take
occasion to note, what time of the year they be, because I find them spoken of
in our ancient Lawwriters, as Brit. 23. and such like.

Quite claim (quiet clamantia, vel quieta clamantia) is a release or
accquit^ing of a man for any Action that he has, or might have against him.
Bracton, li. 5. tract. 5. c. 9. nu. 9, li. 4. tract. 6. ca. 13. nu. pri.

Quittance (qutetantia) See Acquitance.

Quid pro quo, is an artificial speech in the Common law, signifying so much as
the Greek (...) among the Civilians, which is a mutual protestation or
performance of both parties to a contrnct: as a horse and ten pound between the
buyer and the seller, Kitchen, fo. 184.

Quinsieme (decima quinta) is a French word signifying a fifteenth. It is used
in our Common law, for a tax laid upon the subjects by the Prince, anno 7 Hen.
7. ca. 5. So termed, because it is raised after the fifteenth part of men's
Lands, or Goods. See Fifteenth, and Tax. The Fifteenth, as Crempton says in
his Jurisd. fol. 21. is levied more commonly in these days by the yards of
Land: and yet in some places by goods also: and note also, that he there says,
that it is well known by the Exchequer Roll, what every town through England is
to pay for a fifteenth. Sometime this word qninsieme is used for the 15 day
after any feast, as Quinsieme of Saint John's Baptist, anno 13 Ed. prim. ca. 3.
et anno decimo ostavo ejusdem capit. prim.

Quod ei def rceat, is a writ that lies for the tenent in tail, tenent in
dower, or tenent for term of life, having lost by default, against him that
recovered, or against his heir. Exposition of terms. See Brook hoc tit. See the
Reg. origin. fo. 171. and the new book of Entries, verbo Quod ei deforceat.

Quod permittat, is a writ that lies for him that is disseised of his Commune
of pasture, against the heir of the disseisour being dead. Terms of the Law.
Briton, cap. 8. says, That this writ lies for him, whose Auncestour died
seized of commune of pasture, or other like thing annexed to his inheritance,
against the Deforceour. See Brook hoc titulo. See the Register origin. fo. 155.
and the new book of Entries, verbo Quod permittat.

Quod Clerici non eligantur in officio ballivi, etc. id est, a writ that lies
for a Clark, which by reason of some Land he has, is made, or in doubt to be
made either Bailiff, Bedell, or Reeve, or some such like officer. See Clerico
infra sacres, etc. See the Register orig. fol. 187. Fitzh. not. br. fo. 175.

Quod Clerici beneficiati de Cancellaria, is a writ to exempt a Clark of the
Chancery from contribution toward the proctors of the Clergy in Parliament.
Register origin. fo. 261. a

Quod persona, nec Praebendarti, etc. is a writ that lies for spiritual
persons that are distreined in their spiritual possessions, for the payment of
the fifteenth with the rest of the parish. Fitz. not. br. fol. 176.

Quod non permittat. See Consuetudixibus, and servitiis.

Quo jure, is a writ that lies for him that has land, wherein another
challenges commune of pasture time out of mind. And it is to compel him to
show by what title he challenges this Commune of pasture. Fitzherberts natura
brevium fo. 128. Of this see Briton more at large, cap. 59. See the Regist.
orig. fo. 156. and the new book of Entries, verbo Quo jure.

Quo minus, is a writ that lies for him that has a Grant of House-bote and
Hey-bote, in another man's woods, against the Granter making such waste, as the
Grantee cannot enjoy his grant, Old not. br. fol. 148 Terms of law: see Brook,
hoc titulo. See Kitchen, fol. 178. b. This writ also lies for the Kings Farmer
in the Exchequer, against him to whom he sells any thing by way of bargain
touching his farm. Perkins Graunts, 5. For he supposes that by the breach of
the vendee he is disabled to pay the King his Rent.

Quo warranto is a writ that lies against him, which usurpeth any Fraunchis or
liberty against the King, as to have wayfe, stray, fair, market, court baron,
or such like, without good title. Old not br. fol. 149. or else against him
that intrudeth himself as heir into Land, Bracton, lib. 4. tractat. 1. cap. 2.
numb. 3. See Brook hoc titulo. You may read of this also anno 18 Ed. prim.
Stat. 2, and 3. et anno 30 ejusdem. And the new book of Entries. Quo warranto.

R
RA
RAch vintage, anno 32 H. 8. c. 14. is a second vintage or voyage for wines by
our Merchants into France, etc. For rackt wines, that is, wines cleansed and so
purged that it may be and is drawn from the lees. From this voyage our
Merchants commonly return about the end of December, or beginning of January.

Radknights. See Roadknights.

Ran, is a Saxon word, signifying so open a spoiling of a man, that it cannot
be denied. Lamb. Archan. fol. 125. defines it thus, Ran dicitur aperta rapina,
qua negari non potest.

Ransom (redemptio) comes of the French (raacon) or (rencon) i. (redemptio)
It signifies properly with us, the sum paid for the redeeming of a Captive:
and sometime a great sum of money to be paid for the pardoning of some heinous
crime. Anno pri. H. 4. cap. 7. Note, that when one is to make a Fine, and
Ransom, the Ransom shall be treble to the Fine. Cromptons Justice of peace,
fol. 142. a. and Lamb. Eirenarch. lib. 4. cap. 16. pa. 556. Horn in his mirror
of Justices, makes this difference between amerciament, and ransom, because
ransom is the redemption of a corporal punishment, due by law to any offense,
lib. 3. cap. de amerciament taxable.

Rape (rapus vel rapa) is a part of a County, signifying as much as a Hundred.
As Southsex is divided into six parts, which by a peculiar name are called
rapes, viz. the Rape of Chichester, of Arundel, of Brember, of Lewis, of
Puensey, of Hastings. Cambden Britan. page 225. whom also see page 229. These
parts are in other places called Tythings, Lathes, or Wapentakes. Smith de
repub. Angl. li. 2. ca. 16.

Rape (raptus) is a felony committed by a man in the violent deflowring of a
woman, be she old or young, Briton ca. 1. whereof West part 2. Symb. titulo
Inditements, sect. 54, has these words, Copulation violent, is termed a rape
or ravishment of the body of a woman against her will: which is carnal
knowledge had of a woman, who never consented thereunto before the fact, nor
after. (And this in Scotland ought to be complained of the same day or night
that the crime is committed. Skene, de verborum significa. verbo raptus. His
reason, quia lapsu diei hoc crimen praescribitur.) This offense is with us
Felony in the principal, and his ayders, anno 11 Hen. 4. cap. 13. anno pri. Ed.
4. ca. 1. West 2. ca. 13. But Fleta says, That the complaint must be made
within forty days, or else the woman may not be heard, Lib. 3. cap. 5. sect.
praeterea. And carnal knowledge of a woman under ten years old, is felony, Anno
8 Elizabeth, ca. 6. Thus far Master West. Of the diversity of Rapes, see
Cromptons Justice of peace, fol. 43. b. and 44. See Ravishment. The Civil law
uses raptus in the same signification. And rapere virginem vel mulierem, est
ei vim infer et vila re, Co. li. de raptu virginis.

Raptu^haeredis, is a writ lying for the taking away of an heir holding in
socage: and of this there be two sorts, one when the heir is married, the other
when he is not. Of both these see the Register original, fol. 163. b.

Rastall was a Lawyer of reverend account that lived in Queen Mary's days, and
was a Justice of the Common plees: he gathered the statutes of the Land into an
abridgement, which carries his name at this day. He is also the Author of the
new book of Entries.

Ratification (ratificatio) is used for the confirmation of a Clerk in a
Prebend, etc. formerly given him by the Bishop, etc. where the right of
patronage is doubted to be in the King. Of this see the Register original, fol.
304.

Rationabili part bonorum, is a writ that lies for the wife, against the
Executors of her Husband, denying her the third part of her Husbands goods,
after debts, and funeral charges defrayed, Fitzh. not. br. fo. 222. Who there
cites the eighteenth chapter of Magna Charta, and Glanvile, to prove that
according to the Common law of England, the goods of the deceased, his debts
first paid, should be divided into three parts, whereof his wife to have one,
his chldren the second, and the executors the third. Fitzherbert says also,
that this writ lies also as well for the children as for the wife. And the
same appears by the Regist. original, fol. 142. b. I have heard some learned
men say, that it has no use but where the custom of the Country serves for
it. See the new book of Entries, verbo Rationabili part, and rationabili part
bonorum.

Rationabilibus divisis, is a writ which lies in case, where two Lords in
diverse towns have their seigneuries joining together, for him that finds his
waste by little and little to have been encroached upon within memory of man,
against the other that has encroached, thereby to rectify the bounds of their
Seigneuries. In which respect Fitzherbert calls it in his own nature, a writ
of right. The old Natura brevium says also, that this is a Iusticies, and may
be removed by a pone out of the County, to the Common bank. See further the
form and use of this writ in Fitzherberts natura brevium, fo. 128. and in the
Reg. fo. 157. b. and in the new book of Entries, verbo rationalibus divisis.
The Civilians call this, Judicium finium regundorum.

Ravishment (raptus) comes of the French ravissement, i. direptio, ereptio,
raptie, raptus, raptura; and signifies in our law, an unlawful taking away
either of a woman, of an heir in ward. Sometime it is used also in one
signification with rape, viz. the violent deflowring of a woman. See Rape. And
thereupon is the writ called ravishment de guard, otherwise called de haerede
abducto lying for the Lord, whose tenent by reason of his tenure in Knights
service being his ward, is taken and conveyed from him. See Fitz. not. br. in
the writ De recto de custodia, fo. 140. f. See also the old Not. br. fo. 92,
93, and 94. See the new book of Entries, verb. Rape, and ravishment de guard.

Raw, anno 4 Edw. 4. cap. 1.

Rawnge, comes of the French ( ranger i. astituere, ordinare) or else the
substantive' rang, i. ordo, series.) It is used in our Common law both as a
verb (as, to rawnge) and also as a substantive (as to make rawnge) Charta de
Foresta, cap. 6. The word is appropriated to the Forest, signifying the office
of the Rawnger. The Rawnger is a sworn officer of the Forest, of which sort
there seem to be twelve, Charta de foresta ca. 7. whose authority is partly
declared in his oath, set down by M. Manwood, part pri. of his Forest laws,
page 50. in these words, You shall truly execute the office of a Rawnger in the
Purluise of B. upon the borders of the Kings Forest of W. you shall rechase and
with your hound drive back again the wild beasts of the Forest as often as they
shall raunge out of the same Forest into your Purlieuse. You shall truly
present all unlawful hunting, and hunters of wild beasts and venery, as well
within the Purlieuse, as within the Forest. And these and all other offenses
you shall present at the Kings next court of Attachments, or Swainmote, which
shall first happen, so help you God; but the same Author sets down his
office more particularly in his second part, cap. 20. number. 15, 16, and 17. The
sum whereof is this. A Rawnger is an Officer of the Forest, or to the Forest,
but not within the Forest, having no charge of vert, but only of venison that
comes out of the Forest into his charge, or part of the pourallee, to safe
conduct them back again. And therefore in those Forests that have no
pourallees, there to be no Rawngers, but Foresters serve the turn. This Rawnger
is made and appointed by the King his Letters patents under the great seal, and
for his better encouragement in his duty, he has a yearly fee of twenty pound
or thirty pound paid out of the Exchequer, and certain fee Deer both red and
fallow. His office consists chiefly in these three points, ad perambulan dum
quotidie per terras deafforestatas, ad videndum, audiendum et inquirendum, tam
de malefactis, quam de malefactoribus in Balliva sua: ad resugandum feras
forestae tam veneris quam chaseae de terris deafforestatis, in terras
afforestatas: et ad praesentandum omnes transgressiones Forestae in terris
deafforestatis factas, ad poximas curias illius forestae tentas.

Rawsom, see Rausom.

Ray seems to be a word attributed to cloth never colored or dyed, v. anno
11 H. 4. ca. 6.

RE
Realty, see Royalty.

Reasonable aid (rationabile auxilium) is a duty that the Lord of the fee
claims of his tenants holding by Knights service or in socage, to mary his
daughter, or to make his son Knight. West 1. ca. 39. See Aid. See Frook, titulo
Reasonable aid.

Reattachment (Reattachiamentum) is a second attachment of him that was
formerly attached, and dismissed the Court without day, as by the not coming
of the Justices, or some such like casualty. Brook tit. Reattachment: where he
makes Reattachment general, and a Reattachment special. Reattachment general
seems to be, where a man is reattached for his appearance upon all writs of
assise lying against him. Brook eodem, number. 18. Then special must be for one or
more certain, Register Judicial, fo. 35. See the new book of Entries, verbo
Reattachment.

Rebellion (rebellio) is a French word, signifying the taking up of arms
against the King or present Estate. This French comes from the Latin
(rebellio) which signifies a second resistance of such as being formerly
overcome in battle by the Romans, yielded themselves to their subjection. The
Frenchmen and we use it generally for the traitorous taking up of arms against
the Estate, be it by natural subjects, or by others formerly subdued. Read more
of this, lib. 3. Feudorum, ca. 61. and Hot^man upon the same Chapter. See the
writ of Rebellion. Rebel is sometime attributed to him that wilfully breaks
a law, anno 25 Ed. 3. cap. 6. and anno 31 ejusdem, stat. 3. cap. 2. Sometime to
a Villein disobeying his Lord, anno 1 R. 2. cap. 6.

Rebellious Assembly, is a gathering together of twelve persons or more,
intending or going about, practicing or putting in ure unlawfully of their own
authority to change any laws or statutes of this present Realm, or to destroy
the enclosure of any Park or ground enclosed, or banks of any fish ponds, pool,
or conduit, to the intent the same shall remain void, or to the intent
unlawfully to have common, or way in any of the said grounds, or to destroy the
Deer in any Park, or any Warren of conies, or dove-houses, or fish in any
ponds, or any House, Barns, Mills, or Bays, or to burn stacks of corn, or to
abate rents, or prices of victuals, anno pri. Mar. 12. and anno 1 Eliz. cap.
17. See West. part 2. symb. titulo Inditem. Sect. 65. And Cromptons Justice of
peace, fol. 41. b.

Rebutter, comes of the French ( Bouter, i. pellere, impellert, propellere,
intrudere) and signifies in our Common law the same thing. For example, a man
gives land to him and the issue of his body, to another in fee with warranty.
And the Donee leaseth out his Land to a third for years. The heir of the Donour
impleadeth the Tenant, alleging that the Land was in tail to him. The Donee
comes in, and by virtue of the warranty made by the Donor, repelleth the
Heir, because though the land were intailed to him, yet he is bei^ to the
warrantee likewise: and this is called a Rehutter. See Brook, titulo bar,
number. 23. And again, if I grant to my Tenent to hold sine impetitione vasti, and
afterward I implead him for waste made, he may debar me of this action, by
showing my grant. And this is likewise a Rebutter, idem eodem number. 25. See the
new book of Entries, verbo Rebutter.

Renant, an. 32 H. 8. ca. 2.

Recaption (recaptio) signifies a second distress of one formerly distreined
for the self same cause, and also during the plea grounded upon the former
distress. It likewise signifies a writ lying for the party thus distre^ned,
the form and further use whereof you may see in Fitz. not. br. fol. 71. and the
Regist. orig. fo. 86. and the Register Judicial fo. 69. and the new book of
Entries, verb. Recaption.

Receyver ( receptor, or receptator) generally and indefinitely used, is as
with the Civilians, so also with us, used commonly in the evil part, for ^uch
as receive stolen goods from thieves, and conceal them, li. 1. p de
receptatoribus. But annexed to other words, as the receiver of rents, etc. it
signifies many times an officer of great account, belonging to the King, or
other great personage. Cromptons Jurisdict. fol. 18. There is also an officer
called the Receiver of Fines, who receives the money of all such as compound
with the King in the office of the Finances, for the buying of any lands or
tenements holden in Capite. West. part 2. symb. titulo Fines, sect. 106.
Receiver of all offices accountable, an. 1 Ed. 4. cap. 1.

Receiver general of the Duchy of Lancaster, is an office belonging to the
Duchy Court, that gathers in all the revenues, and fines of the lands of the
said Duchy, and of all forfeitures and assessements, or what else is thence to
be received.

Receiver general of the Court of Wardt and liveries, is an officer belonging
to that Court, that is to receive all rents, revenues, and fines of the lands
belonging to his Majesty's Wards, as also the fines for licenses to the Kings
widows to mary, of custer le maine sued out, and for idiots and lunaticks land,
and finally all other profits whatsoever, in money arising to his Majesty, out
of, or by reason of the Court of Wards and liveries.

Receiver general of the Muster Rolls, anno 35 Eliz. ca. 4.

Receiver general of the Duchy of Lancaster, of the Wards and liveries, anno
39 Elizab. cap. 7.

Receyt, See Resceit.

Recluse (Reclusus) is he, that by reason of his order in religion, may not
stir out of his house or cloister. Littleton fol. 92.

Recognisance, (Recoguitio) comes of the French ( Recogneisance, i. agnitio,
recognitio) and in our Common law is thus defined. A Recognisance is a bond of
Record, testifyng the recognizour to owe unto the recognizee a certain sum of
money, and is knowledged in some court of Record, or before some Judge, or other
officer of such Court, having authority to take the same: as the Masters of the
Chancery, the Judges of either Bench, Barons of the Exchequer, Justices of
peace, etc. And those that be mere Recognisances are not sealed, but enrolled.
And execution by force thereof is of all the recognisors goods, and chatells,
except the draught beasts, and implements of husbandry, and of the moiety of
his Lands. West. part pri. symb. li. 2. titulo Recognisances, sect. 149. And
of these you may see there great diversity of Presidents.

Note farther, that a Recognisance, though in the special signification, it do
but acknowledge a certain debt, and is executed upon all the goods, and half
the lands of the recognisour: yet by extention it is drawn also to the Bonds,
commonly called Statute Merchant, and Statute of the Staple: as appears by
the Register orginal, fol. 146, 151, and 252. and by West. ubi supra, and
others. See Statute Merchant, and Statute Staple.

Recognisance has yet another signification, as appears by these words in
the Statute, West. 1. cap. 36. anno 3 Ed. 1. It is provided also, and agreed,
that if any man be attainted of disseisin done in the time of our King that now
is, with robbery of any manner of goods, or movables, by recognisance of
Assise of novel disseisin, the judgment shall, etc. In which place it is used
for the verdict of the twelve men impaneled upon an Assise, which twelve are
also called recognitors of the Assise, Littleion fol. 72. So also Bracton
called them, lib. 5. tractat. 2. cap. 9. nu. 2. in these words: In essonio ver^
reddendo exigentur omnes illi, quos causa tetigerit: sicut partice^^,
Warrantus, and alii ut supra. Recognitores in assisis, Juratores in Juratis,
Inquisitores inquisitionibus, etc. And again lib. 3 tract. 1. cap. 11. number. 16.
See the Statute anno 20 Ed. prim. stat. 4. See the new book of Entries, ver.
Recognisance.

Recognitione adnullanda per vim, and duritiem facta, is a writ to the Justices
of the Common Bench, for the sending of a Record, touching a recognisance,
which the recognisour suggesteth to be acknowledged by force and hard dealing,
that if it so appear, it may be disannulled, Register original, folio 183. a. b.

Recognitors (recognitores) is a word used for the Jury empaneled upon an
assise. The reason why they be so called, may be, because they acknowledge a
disseisin by their verdict. See Bracton lib. 5. tract. 2. cap. 9. nu. 2. and
lib. 3. tract. prim. cap. 11. number. 16.

Record (recordum) comes of the Latin (recordari.) The word is both French
and English, and in both tongues signifies an authentical or uncontrollable
testimony in writing, Briton, cap. 27. and Lamb. Eirenarch. lib. 1. cap. 13. In
the grand Custumary of Normandy, there are several Chapters of diverse Records,
expressing whose presence in each of the Courts, is sufficient to make that
which is enacted to be a record, viz. the 102. Chapter, where you have words to
this effect. The record of the Kings Court, is a record of things done before
the King. All things done before the King. so he have one other witness. This
record may he and other make: if he himself will not make it, it may be made by
three others. And his person may not be impeached (or excepted against) either
in this or any other thing. The next chapter, viz. the 103. shows how many
persons suffice to make a Record in the Exchequer. The next how many in an
assise, etc.

I find not that we in our Courts, (especially the Kings Courts) stand much
upon the numbers of Recorders or witnesses for the strength of the testimony
which the Record works: but that we take it sufficient which is registered in
each Court. Glanvile, lib. 8. cap. 8. Bracton, lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 37. number.
4. Bretton in the Proeme of his book says, that the Justices of the Kings
Bench have a Record, the Coroner, Vicounr, Justices of the Exchequer, Justices
of the Gaol delivery, the Steward of England, Justices of Ireland, Justices of
Chester, Justices assigned by the Kings letters patents, in those causes they
have Commission to take knowledge of. All which (as I take it) must be
understood with that caveat of Brook, titulo (Record) number. 20. and 22. that an
act committed to writing in any of the Kings Courts, during the term wherein it
is written, is alterable, and no record: but that term once ended, and the said
act duly enrolled, it is a record, and of that credit, that admits no
alteration, or proof to the contrary. Yet see Sir Edward Cooks Reports lib. 4.
Rawlius case, fol. 52. b. anno 12 Ed. 2. cap. 4. It is said, that two Justices
of either Bench have power to record Non-sutes, and defaults in the Country. It
appears by Bracton, lib. 5. tract. 2. cap. 1. et 11. that quatuor milites
habent recordum, being sent to view a party essoined de malo lecti, and lib. 5.
tract. 1. cap. 4. nu. 2. that Serviens Hundredi habet recordum in testimonio
proborum hominum, And in the Statute of Carleil, made anno 15 Ed 2. it is said,
that one Justice of either Bench, with an Abbot or Prior, or a Knight, or a man
of good fame or credence, has a record in the view of one that is said by
reason of sickness, to be unable to appear personally for the passing of a
fine. And anno 13 H. 4. cap. 7. et anno 2 H. 5. cap. 3. that two Justices of
peace, with the^ Shyreeve, or Under-shyreeve, have power to record, what they
find done by any in a riot, or rout, etc.

That which is before mentioned out of Briton touching the Shyreeve, seems to
be limited by Fitzh. not. br. fol. 81. D. Who allows him a record in such
matters only, as he is commanded to execute by the Kings Writ, in respect of
his office. And thence it comes that Kitchen fol. 177. says, that the
Escheator and Shyreeve, be not Justices of record, but officers of record, In
which words he signifies, that their testimony is authentical only in some
certain things that are expressly enjoined them by virtue of their Commission,
as Ministers to the King in his higher Courts, whereas Justices of record have
in generality a record for all things within their cognizance done before them
as Judges, though not expressly or particularly commanded. Fitzh. in his Not.
br. fol. 82. in principio, something explaineth this point, writing to this
effect: Every act that the shyreeve does by virtue of his commission, ought to
be taken as matter of Record, no less than the Justices of peace. His reasons
be two: the former, because his patent is of record: the other, because he is a
conservatour of the peace. And then he adds, that the plees held before him
in his County be not of record. Yet is the County called a Court of record,
Westminster. 2. cao. 3. anno 13 Ed 1. But it seems by Briton, cap. 27. that it is
only in these causes, whereof the shyreeve holds plee by especial writ; and
not those that he holds of course or custom. And in that case also it may be
gathered out of the same Author, that he has a record, but with the testimony
of those annexed, that be suitors to the Court. Which seems to agree with
Bractons words above specified. Scrviens Hundredi habet recordum in testimonio
proborum hominum. And to this purpose read Glanvile, l. 8. c. 8, 9, et 10. One
Justice upon view of forcible detinue of land, may record the same by statute,
anno 15 R. 2. cap. 2. the Mayor, and Constables of the staple, have power to
record recognisances of debt taken before them, anno 10 H. ^. ca. 1.

Brook, titulo (Record) seems to say, that no Court ecclesiastical is of
record: how truly, it is to be inquired. For Bishops, certifying bastardy,
bigamy, excommunication, the vacancy or plenarty of a Church, a marriage, a
divorse, a spiritual intrusion, or whether a man be professed in any religion,
with other such like, are credited without farther enquiry or controlment. See
Brook titulo Bastardy. See Fleta, lib 6. cap. 39, 40, 41, 42. Lamb. Eirenarcha,
lib. pri. cap. 13. Glanvile, lib. 7. cap. 14, et 15. the Register original,
fol. 5. b. Bracton, lib. 5. tractat. 5. cap. 20. nu. 5. Briton, cap. 92, 94,
106, 107, and 109. Doct. and Stud. lib. 2. cap. 5 but especially Cosius
apology, part pri. cap. 2. And a testament showed under the seal of the
Ordinary is not traversable, 36 H. 6.31. Perkins Testament, 491. Fulb. paral.
fol. 61. b. But it may be that this opinion grows from a difference between
that law, whereby the court Christian is most ordered, and the Common law of
this Land. For by the Civil or Canon law, no instrument or record is held so
firm, but that it may be checked by witnesses able to depose it to be untrue.
Co. plus valere quod agitur quam quod simulate concipitur, ca. cum Johannes 10.
extra: de fide instrumentorum. Whereas in our Common law against a record of
the Kings court, after the term wherein it is made, no witness can prevail.
Briton cap. 109. Coke lib. 4. Hinds case, fol. 71. lib. assisarum. fol 227.
nota 21. This reconciliation may be justified by Brook himself, titulo
Testaments number. 4.8. and 14. and by Glanvile, lib. 8. cap. 8.

The King may make a Court of record by his grant. Glanvile, lib. 8. cap. 8.
Briton, cap. 121. as for example, Queen Elizabeth of worthy memory, by her
Charter dated 26 Aprilis, anno 3. regni sui, made the Consistoty court of the
University of Cambridge a court of record.

There are reckoned among our common Lawyers three sorts of Records: viz. A
record judicial, as attainder, etc. A record ministerial upon oath, as an
office found. A record made by conveyance by consent, as a fine, deed enrolled,
or such like. Coke lib. 4. Andrew Ognels case, fol. 54. b.

Recordare facias, or recordari facias, is a writ directed to the Shyreeve, to
remove a cause depending in an inferior court, to the Kings bench, or common
plees, as out of a court of ancient Demeasn, Hundred, or County, Fitz. not. br.
fol. 71. B. out of the county court, idem fol. 46. B. or other courts of
record, idem fol. 71. C. and 119. K. Howbeit, if you will learn more exactly,
where and in what cases this writ lies, read Brook in his Abridgement, titulo
Recordare et pone. It seems to be called a recordare, because the form is
such, that it commands the Shyreeve to whom it is directed, to make a record
of the proceedings by himself, and others, and then to send up the cause. See
the Register, verbo Recordare, in the table of the original Writs. See
Certiorari. See Accedas ad Curiam.

Recorder (recordator) comes of the French ( recordeur, i. talis persona quae
in Ducis curia a judicio faciendo non debet amoveri.) Grand Custumary of Norm.
cap. 107. and 121. Whereby it appears, that those which were necessary ludges
to the Duke of Normandies courts, were called Recorders: and who they were, is
showed in the ninth chapter of the said book. And that they, or the greater
part of them, had power to make a record, it is evident in the chapter 107.
Here in England a Recorder is he, whom the Mayor or other Magistrate of any
City, or Town corporate, having jurisdiction, or a Court of record within their
precincts by the Kings grant, does associate unto him for his better direction
in matters of Justice and proceedings, according unto law. And he is for the
most part a man well seen in the common law.

Recordo et processu mittendis, is a writ to call a Record, to gether with the
whole proceeding in the cause out of one court into the Kings court. Which see
in the Table of the Register original, how diversely it is used.

Record Utlagariae mittendo, is a writ Judicial, which see in the Register
judicial, fol. 32.

Recovery, (Recuperatio) comes of the French Reconvrer, i. Recuperare. It
signifies in our common law, an obtaining of any thing by Judgment, or trial
of Law, as evictio does among the Civilians. But you must understand, that
there is a true recovery and a figned. A true recovery is an actual or real
recovery of any thing, or the value thereof by Judgment: as if a man sued for
any land, or other thing moveable or immovable, and have a verdict, and
Judgment for him. A feigned recovery is (as the Civilians call it) quaedam
fictio juris, a certain form, or course set down by Law, to be observed for the
better assuring of Lands or tenements unto us. And for the better understanding
of this, read West. part 2. symbol. titulo Recoveries, sect. pri. who says,
that the end, and effect of a recovery, is to discontinue and destroy Estates
tayls, Remainders, and Reversions, and to bar the former owners thereof. And in
this formality there be required three parties, viz. the Demandant, the Tenent,
and the Vouchee. The Demandant is he that brings the Writ of Entry, and may
be termed the Recoverer: The Tenent is he, against whom the writ is brought,
and may be termed the Recoveree. The Vouchee is he, whom the Tenent voucheth,
or calls to warranty for the Land in demand. West. ubi supra. In whom you may
read more touching this matter.

But for example, to explain this point, a man that is desirous to cut off an
Estate tail in lands or tenements, to the end, to sell, give, or bequeath it,
as himself sees good, uses his friend to bring a writ upon him for this Land.
He appearing to the writ says for himself, that the Land in question came to
him, or his ancestors, from such a man or his ancestor, who in the conveyance
thereof, bound himself and his heirs to make good the title unto him or them to
whom it was conveyed. And so hers allowed by the court to call in this third
man to say what he can for the justifying of his right to this land, before he
so conveyed it. The third man comes not: whereupon the land is recovered by
him that brought the writ: and the Tenent of the land is left for his remedy to
the third man that was called and came not in to defend the Tenent. And by this
means the entayl which was made by the Tenent, or his Ancestor, is cut off by
judgment hereupon given: for that he is pretended to have no power to entayl
that land, whereunto be had no just title, as now it appeared: because it is
evicted, or recovered from him.

This kind of recovery is by good opinion, but a snare to deceive the people.
Doctor and Stud. cap. 32. diai. pri. fol. 56. a. This feigned recovery is also
called a common recovery: And the reason of that Epitheton is, because it is a
beaten and common path to that end, for which it is ordained, viz. to cut off
the estates above specified. See the new book of Entries, verbo, Recovery.

I said before, that a true recovery is as well of the value, as of the thing:
for the better understanding whereof, know, that (in value) signifies as much
as (Illud quod interest) with the Civilians. For example, if a man buy land of
another with warranty, which land a third person afterward by suit of Law
recovereth against me, I have my remedy against him that sold it me, to recover
in value, that is, to recover so much in money as the land is worth, or so much
other land by way of exchange. Fitzh. not. brev. fol. 134. K. To recover a
warranty, Old not. brev. fol. 146. is to prove by judgment that a man was his
warrant against all men, for such a thing.

Recto is a writ, called in English a writ of right, which is a writ of so high
a nature, that whereas other writs in real actions, be only to recover the
possession of the land, or tenements in question, which have been lost by our
ancestor, or our selves, this aims to recover both the seisin, which some of
our Ancestors or we had, and also the property of the thing, whereof our
Ancestor died not seized, as of fee, and whereby are pleaded, and tried both
their rights together, viz. as well of possession, as property. In so much as
if a man once lose his cause upon this writ, either by judgment, by assise, or
battle, be is without all remedy, and shall be excluded (per exceptionem Rei
judicatae) Bracton, lib. 5. tract. 1. cap. 1. et seq. where you may read your
fill of this writ.

It is divided into two species: Rectum patens, a writ of right patent, and
Rectum clausum, a writ of right close. This the Civilians call Judicium
petitorum. The writ of right patent is so called, because it is sent open, and
is in nature the highest writ of all other, lying always for him that has fee
simple in the lands, or tenements sued for, and not for any other. And when it
lies for him that challenges fee simple, or in what cases, See Fitzh. not.
br. fol. pri. C. whom see also fol. 6. of a special writ of right in London,
otherwis^ called a writ of right according to the custom of London. This writ
also is called Breve magnum de Recto, Register original, fol. 9. A. B. and
Fleta lib. 5. cap. 32. sect. 1.

A writ of right close, is a writ directed to a Lord of ancient Demesne, and
lies for those which hold their lands and tenements by charter in fee simple,
or in fee tail, or for term of life, or in dower, if they be ejected out of
such lands, etc. or disseised. In this case a man or his heir may sue out this
writ of right close directed to the Lord of the ancient Demesne, commanding him
to do him right, etc. in this Court. This is also called a small writ of right.
Breve parvum, Register original, fol. 9. a. b. and Briton, cap. 120. in fine.
Of this see Fitzh. likewise at large, not. br. fol. 11. et seq.

Yet note, that the writ of right patent seems farther to be extended in use,
than the original invention served: for a writ of Right of Dower, which lies
for the tenent in Dower, and only for term of life, is patent, as appears by
Fitzh. not. brev. fol. 7. E. The like may be said of diverse others that do
hereafter follow. Of these see also the Table of the Original Register, verbo
Recto. This writ is properly tried in the Lords Court between kinsmen, that
claim by one title from their Ancestor. But how it may be thence removed, and
brought either to the County, or to the Kings Court, see Fleta, lib. 6. cap. 3,
4, et 5. Glanvile seems to make every writ, whereby a man sueth for any thing
due unto him, a writ of right, lib. 10. cap. 1. lib. 11. cap. 1. lib. 12. c. 1.

Recto de dote, is a writ of Right of Dower, which lies for a woman, that has
received part of her Dower, and purposes to demand the Remanent in the same
Town, against the heir, or his Guardian, if he be ward. Of this see more in the
Old not. br. fo. 5. and Fitzh. fol. 7. E. and the Register original, folio 3.
and the new book of Entriet, verbo Droyt.

Recto de dote unde nihil habet, is a writ of right, which lies in case, where
the husband having diverse Lands or Tenements, has assured no dower to his
wife, and she thereby is driven to sue for her thirds against the heir or his
Guardian. Old not. br. fol. 6. Regist. origin. fol. 170.

Recto de rationabili part, is a writ that lies always, between privies of
blood, as brothers in Gavel-kind, or sisters, or other Coparceners, as Nephews,
or Neeces, and for land in Fee simple. For exampse, if a man lease his Land for
term of life, and afterward dies, leaving issue two Daughters, and after that
the tenent for term of life likewise dies, the one sister entering upon all
the land, and so deforcing the other; the sister so deforced shall have this
writ to recover part. Fitz. not. br. fol. 9. Regist. orig. fol. 3.

Recto quando dominus remisit, is a writ of right, which lies in case where
lands or tenements that be in the Seigneury of any Lord, are in demand by a
writ of right. For if the Lord hold no Court, or otherwise at the prayer of the
Demandant, or Tenent, shall send to the Court of the King his writ, to put the
cause thither for that time (saving to him another time the right of his
Seigneury) then this writ issues out for the other party, and has his name
from the words therein comprised, being the true occasion thereof. This writ is
close, and must be returned before the Justices of the common Banck. Old not.
br. fol. 16. Regist. original, fol. 4.

Recto de Advocatia Ecclesiae, is a writ of right, lying where a man has right
of Advowsen, and the Parson of the Church dying, a stranger presents his
Clerk to the Church, and he not having moved his action of Quare impedit, nor
darrein presentment within six months, but suffered the stranger to usurp upon
him. And this writ he only may have, that claims the Advowsen, to himself and
to his heirs in Fee. And as it lies for the whole advowsen: so it lies also
for the half, the third, the fourth part. Old not. br. fol. 24. Register
original, fol. 29.

Recto de custodia terra et haredis, is a writ that lies or him, whose Tenent
holding of him in Chivalry, dies in his nonage, against a stranger, that
enters upon the land, and takes the body of the heir. The form and farther
use whereof see in Fitz. not. br. fol. 139. and the Register original, fol. 161.

Recto sur disclaimer, is a writ that lies where the Lord in the Kings Court,
sc. in the common plees, does avow upon his Tenent, and the Tenent disclaimeth
to hold of him, upon the disclaimes he shall have this writ: and if the Lord
aver, and prove that the Land is holden of him, he shall recover the land for
ever, Old not. br. fol. 150. which is grounded upon the statute, Westminster. 2. cap.
2. anno 13 Ed. pri. which statute begins, Quia domini feudorum, etc.

Rector, is both Latin, and English, signifying a Governor. In the Common law
rector ecclesiae parochialis, is he that has the charge, or cure of a Parish
church, qui tantum jus in ecclesiae parochiali habet, quantum praelatus in
ecclesiae collegiat^, cap. ult, De Locat. and Conduct. in glos. verbo expelli
potuissent. In our common law, I hear that it is lately overruled, that rector
ecclesiae parochialis is he, that has a personage, where there is a vicaridge
endowed: and he that has a personage without a vicaridge is called persona.
But this distinction seems to be new and subtle praeter rationem. I am sure
Bracton uses it otherwise. lib. 4. tract. 5. ca. pri. in these words. Et
sciendum, quod rectoribus ecclesiarum parochialium competit Assisa qui
instituti sunt per Episcopos, and Ordinarios ut personae. Where it is plain,
that rector and persona be confounded. Mark also these words there following:
Item dici possunt rectores Canonici de ecclestis praebendatis. Item dici
possunt rectores, vel quasi, Abbates, Prieres and alii, qui habent ecclesias ad
proprios usus.

Rectus in curia, is he that stands at the bar, and has no man to object any
offense against him. Smith de repub. Angl. li. 2. cap. 3. sec. a. 6. R. 2.
stat. 1. cap 11.

Reddendum, is used many times substantively for the clause in a lease, etc.
whereby the rent is reserved to the Leassour. Coke lib. 2. Lord Cromwells case,
fol. 72. b.

Redisseisin (redisseisina,) is a disseisin made by him, that once before was
found, and adjudged to have disseised the same man of his Lands or Tenements.
For the which there lies a special writ, called a writ of redisseisin. Old not
br. fol. 106. Fitz. not. br. fo. 188. See the new book of Entries, verb.
Redisseisin.

Redisseisina, is a writ lying for a redisseisin. Reg. orig. f. 206, 207.

Reddioion, is a judicial confession, and acknowledgement that the land or
thing in demand belongs to the demandant, or at the least, not to himself. a.
34 and 35 H. 8. ca. 24. Perkins Dower, 379, 380.

Redubhours, be those that buy cloth, which they know to be stolen, and turn
it into some other form or fashion. Briton, cap. 29. Cromptons Viconat, fol.
193. a:

Reentry, comes of the French (rentrer,) i. rursus intrare, and signifies in
our Common law, the resuming, or taking again of possession, which we had erst
foregone. For example, If I make a Lease of land or tenement, I do thereby
forego the possession, and if I do condition with the Leassee, that for non
payment of the rent at the day it shall be lawful for me to reenter, this is
as much as if I conditioned to take again the lands, etc. into mine own hands,
and to recover the possession by my own fact, without the assistance of Judge
or process.

Reere County. See Rier County.

Reextent, is a second extent made upon lands or tenements, upon complaint
made, that the former extent was partially performed. Brook, titule Extents,
fol. 313.

Regard (regardum) is borrowed of the French ( Regard, or regardere, i.
aspectus, conspectus, respectus,) and though it have a general signification of
any care or diligence, yet it has also a special acceptance, and therein is
used only in matters of the Forest: and there two ways: one for the office of
the Regarder; the other for the compass of ground belonging to the regarders
office or charge. Cromptons jurisd. fol. 175.199. Toaching the former, thus
says M. Manwood, part pri. of his Forest laws. page 198. The Eire, general
Sessions of the Forest, or Justices seat, is to be holden, and kept every third
year: and of necessity before that any such sessions or Justices seat can be
holden, the Regarders of the Forest must make their Regard. And this making of
the regard must be done by the Kings writ. And the regard is (as he afterward
there says) to go through the whole horest, and every Bayliwick of the same,
to see and enquire of the trespasses of the Forest: which he compriseth in
these four, viz. ad videndum, ad inquirendum, ad imbreviandum, ad
certificandum. Of every of which branches you may read there his exposition.

Touching the second signification, the compass of the Regarders obarge is the
whole Forest, that is, all that ground which is parcel of the Forest. For there
may be Woods within the limits of the Forest, that be no parcel thereof, and
those be without the Regard, as the same Author plainly declares, part pri.
page 194. and again part 2. cap. 7. nu. 4. where he shows the difference
between these words: (Infra regardum) or (Rewardum) and infra Forestam.

Regarder, (regardator) comes of the French, Regardeur) id est, Spectator)
and signifies an Officer of the Forest. Cromptons jurisdict. 153. where it is
thus defined, A Regarder is an Officer of the Forest, appointed to surview all
other officers. He says there also, that this officer was ordained in the
beginning of King Henry the seconds days. M. Manwood in his first part of
Forest laws, page 188. thus defines him. A Regarder is an Officer of the Kings
forest, that is sworn to make the regard of the Forest, as the same has been
used to be made in ancient time. And also to view and enquire of all offenses
of the Forest, as well of vert as of venison, and of all concealments of any
offenses or defaults of the Foresters, and of all other officers of the Kings
forest, concerning the execution of their offices. He says there also, that a
Regarder may be made either by the Kings letters patents, or by any one of the
Kings Justices of the forest at his discretion in the general Eyr, or at such
time, as the regard is to be made, by virtue of the Kings writ, directed to the
Shyreeve of the County for that purpose. The form of which writ he there
sets down.

After that, page 192. he sets down his Oath in these words. You shall truly
serve our Sovereign Lord the King in the office of a Regarder in the Forest of
Waltham. You shall make the Regard of the same in such manner, as the same has
been accustomed to be made. You shall raunge through the whole Forest, and
through every Bayliwick of the same, as the Foresters there shall lead you, to
view the said Forest. And if the Foresters will not, or do not know how to lead
you, to make the regard or raunge of the Forest, that they will conceal from
you any thing that is forfeited to the King, you your, selves shall not let for
any thing, but you shall see the same forfeiture, and cause the same to be
enrolled in your roll. You shall enquire of all wastes, pourprestures, and
Asserts of the Forest, and also of concealments of any offense, or trespass in
the Forest, and all these things you shall to the uttermost of your power d^;
So help you GOD. Then you may read farther the particulars of his office, eadem
page 195. And page 207. he says, that their presentiments must be upon their
view, and so recorded, and that the Regarders of themselves have power to hear
and determine the fine, or amerciament for expeditating of dogs. See Regard.

Regio assensis, is a writ whereby the King gives his Royal assent to the
election of a Bishop or Abbot. Register origin. fol. 294. b.

Registrie (registrum) commmeth of the French ( Registre, i. liber, librarium,
codex ratiocinarius, ephemeris, commentarius) it signifies with us the office,
or books, or rolls, wherein are recorded the proceedings of the Chancery, or
any Spiritual Court. The writer and the keeper whereof is called the Register,
in Latin, Registrarins. Register is also the name of a book, wherein are
expressed all the forms of writs used at the Common law, called the Register of
the Chancery. Anno 13 Ed. pri. cap. 24. Some say it is termed Registrum, quasi
regestum. Prataeus.

Regrator (regratator) comes of the French ( regratter, i. desquamare.)
Regratter quelque vielle robe and la fair neufue) is to scour or furbish an
old garment and to make it new again. Also (regratteur) signifies as much as
(Mango) in Latin: which kind of men sold children, and to sell them the
better, mentiendi coloris artem optime callebant. Martialis and Plinius. This
word in our Common law, did anciently signify such as bought by the great, and
sold by the retayl. Anno 27 Ed. 3. stat. prim. cap. 3. but now it signifies
him, that buyeth and sells any wares, or victuals in the same market, or
fair, or within five miles thereof. Anno 5 Ed. 6. cap. 14. anno 5 Eliz. ab.
cap. 12. anno 13 Eliza. cap. 25. See Forestallers and Engrossers.

Rehabere facias seifinam quando Vicecomes liberavit seifinam de majore part,
quam deberet, is a writ judicial. Register judic. fol. 13.51. There is another
writ of this name and nature, eodem, fol. 54.

Rejoinder (rejunctio) signifies in our Common law as much as Duplicatio with
the Civilians, that is, an exception to a replication. For the first answer of
the Defendant to the Plaintiffs Bill, is called an exception: the Plaintiffs
answer to that, is called a Replication: and the Defendants to that,
Duplicacation in the Civil law, and a Rejoinder with us, especially in
Chancery. West. part 2. symbol. titulo Chancery, sect. 56. where he cites
these words out of Spigelius. Est autem rejunctio seu duplicatio, vel
allegatio, quae datur reo ad infirmandum replicationem actoris, et confirmandum
exceptionem Rei.

Relation (relatio) idem quod fictio juris, to make a nullity of a thing from
the beginning (for a certain intent) which had essence, Cook lib. 3. Butler and
Baker, fol. 28. b. which in plainer terms may be thus expounded. Relation is a
fiction of the Law, whereby something is (for a special purpose) imagined never
to have been, which in truth was. Read the rest.

Release (relaxtio) comes of the French ( Relasche, i. cessatio, rel^xatio,
laxamentum) and in our Common law is thus defined: A release is an Instrument
whereby estates, rights, titles, entries, actions, and other things be sometime
extinquish'd, sometime transferred, sometime abridged, and sometime enlarged.
Westminster. part prim. symb. lib. 2. sect. 509. And there is a Release in fact, and
a Release in law. Perkins Graunts 71. A release in fact seems to be that,
which the very words expressly declare. A release in law is that, which does
acquit by way of conseqnent, or intendment of Law. An example whereof you have
in Perkins ubi supra. Of these, how they be available, and how not, see
Littleton at large, lib. 3. cap. 8. fol. 94. of diverse sorts of these Releases
see the new book of Entries. verbo Release.

Release (relevium) comes of the French ( relever, i. relevare) and sign
fieth in our Common law, a certain sum of money, that the Tenent holding by
Knights service, grand sergeanty, or other tenure, for the which homage or
regal service is due, or by socage, for the which no homage is due, and being
at full age at the death of his Ancestor, does pay unto his Lord at his
entrance. Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 36. gives a reason why it is called a relief,
viz. quia baereditas, quae jacens. fuit per Antecessoris decessum, relevatur in
manus haeredum, and propter factam relevationem, facienda erit ab haerede
quaedam praestatio, quae dicitur Relevinm. Of this you may read Briton, cap.
69. in a manner to the same effect. Of this also speaks the Grand Cnstomary of
Normandy, cap. 34. to this effect: It is to be known, that the Lord of the fee
ought to have relief of the Lands, which he held of him by homage, when those
dye, of whom he had homage. And that this is not only proper to us in England,
or Normandy, appears by Hotoman in his Commentaries, de verbis feud. verbo
Relevium, who there defines it thus: Relevium est honorarium, quod novus
vasallus patrono introitus causa largitur, quasi morte vasalli alterius, vel
alio quo casu feudum ceciderit, quod jam a novo sublevetur: and farther
speaks of it, that which is worth the reading, and contains great knowledge
of antiquity. See the like definition in Marantae singularibus, verbo Relevium.
For the quantity of this relief, see the Great Charter, cap. 2. in these words:
If any of our Earls or Barons, or any other our tenants, which hold of us in
chief by Knights service, dye, and at the time of his death his heir is of full
age, and owes to us relief, he shall have inheritance by the old relief: that
is to say, the heir, or heirs of an Earl for one whole Earldome, one hundred
pound: the heir or heirs of a Baron for one whole Barony, one hundred marks:
the heir or heirs of a Knight for one whole Knights fee, one hundred shillings
at the most. And he that has less, shall give less, according to the old
custom of the fees. Read also Glanvile, lib. 9. cap 4. fol. 68. who says,
that in his days the relief of a Barony was not certain. The heir in franck
socage, when he comes to his full age, after the death of his Ancestor, shall
double the rent that he was wont to pay to the Lord, and that shall be in place
of relief. Old not br. fol. 94. Somewhat more hereof you may read in anno 28
Ed. prim. statut. prim. and Kitchen, fo. 145. ca. Relief, and Glanvile, lib. 7.
cap. 9. The Feudists also write of this at large. Among others Vincentius de
Franchis descis. 121. says, that Relevii solutio est quaedam extrins^ca
praestatio a consuetudiue introducta, quae non inest fendo, quodq, solvitur pro
confirmatione, seu renovatione investiturae and possessionis. See Heriot. This
Leo the Emperor Novella 13. calls (...). By the antienter Civil law it is
termed introitus, l. penult. sect. Alumno. p. de legatis. Skene de verb.
signif. says, that relief is a French word, from the Latin relevare, which is
to relieve or take up that which is fallen. For it is given by the tenent, or
vassal being of perfect age, after the expiring of the wardship to his Lord, of
whom he holds his Land by Knight service, that is, by ward and relief; and by
payment thereof he relieves, and (as it were) raises up again his lands, after
they were fallen down into his superiors hands by reason of wardship, etc.

Remainder (remanentia) signifies in our Common law, a power or hope to enjoy
lands, tenements, or rents after the estate of another expired. For example, a
man may let land to one for term of his life, and the remainder to another for
term of his life, Littleton, cap. Atturnment, fo. 113. And this Remainder may
be either for a certain term, or in fee simpse, or fee tail, as might be proved
by many places in the law writers. But in stead of the rest, take Brook, titulo
Done and Remainder, fo. 245. Glanvile, lib. 7. cap. pri. in fine has these
words: Notandum, quod nec Episcopus, nec Abbas, quia eorum Baroniae sunt, de
eleemozina Dom. Regis and antecessornm ejus, non possunt de Dominicis suis
al^quam partem dare ad remanentiam sine assensu and confirmatione Domini Regis.
Where it appears, that Dare adremanentiam, is to give away for ever. To the
same effect does he use it, cap. 9. ejusdem libri, in these words, speaking of
the Lords of Manors during the minority of their wards; Nihil tamen de
haereditate, de jure alienare possunt ad remanentiam. In the like sort does
Bracton use it, lib. 2. cap. 23. in fine, and also lib. 4. tract. 2. c. 4. nu.
4. See the New book of Entries, verbo Remainder.

Remembrancers of the Exchequer (Rememoratores) be three Officers or Clerks,
one called the Kings Remembrancer, anno 35 El. cap. 5. The other the Lord
Treasurers Remembrancer, upon whose charge it seems to lie, that they put all
Justices of that Court, as the Lord Treasurer and the rest, in remembrance of
such things as are to be called on, and dealt in for the Princes behoof. The
third is called the Remembrancer of the first fruits. Of these you may read
something anno quinto Rich. 2. stat. pri. cap. 14. and 15. to the effect above
specified. These anno 37 Ed. 3. cap. 4. be called Clerks of the Remembrance. It
seems that the name of this Officer is borrowed from the Civilians, who have
their Memorales, qui sunt notarii Cancell^riae in regno subjecti officio
Quaestoris. Lucas de penna, C. lib. 10. tit. 12. nu. 7. The Kings Remembrancer
enters in his Office all recognisances, taken before the Barons for any the
Kings Debts, for apparences, or for observing of Orders. He takes all bonds for
any of the Kings debts, or for appearance, or for observing of Orders, and
makes Process upon them for the breach of them. He writes Process against the
Collectors of customs, and subsidies, and fifteenths, for their accounts. All
informations upon penal Statutes are entered in his Office. And all matters upon
English-Bills in the Exchequer-chamber are remaining in his Office. He makes
the Bills of compositions upon penal Laws: takes the stallments of debts:
makes a Record of a Certificate delivered unto him by the Clerk of the
Star Chamber of the fines there set, and sends them to the Pipe. He has
delivered unto his Office all manner of indentures, fines, and other evidences
whatsoever, that concern the assuring of any lands to the Crown. He yearly in
crastino animarum reads in open Court the Statute for the election of
Shyreeves, and gives those that choose them their oath: he reads in open
Court the Oath of all the Officers of the Court, when they are admitted.

The Treasurers remembrancer makes process against all Shyreeves, Escheators,
Receivers, and Bailiffs for their accounts. He makes process of (Fierifacias)
and Extent for any debts due to the King, either in the Pipe, or with the
Auditors. He makes process for all such Revenew as is due to the King by
reason of his Tenures. He makes Record, whereby it appears whether Shyreeves
and other accountants pay their profers due at Easter and Michaelmas. He makes
another Record, whereby it appears whether Shyreeves and other Accountants
keep their days of prefixion. All Extreats of Fines, Issues, and Amerciaments
set in any Courts of Westminster, or at the Assizes, or Sessions, are certified
into his Office, and are by him delivered to the Clerk of Extreats to write
Process upon them. He has also brought into his Office all the accounts of
Customers, Controllers, and other accomptants, to make thereof an entry of
Record.

The Remembrancer of the first fruits, takes all compositions for first Fruits
and Tenths, and makes Process against such as pay not the same.

Remitter, comes of the French ( remettre, i. restituere, reponere) and
signifies in our Common law, a restitution of one that has two Titles to
Lands or Tenements, and is seized of them by his latter Title, unto his Title
that is more ancient, in case where the latter is defective, Fitzherber^ natura
brev. fol. 149. F. Dyer, folio 68. number. 22. This in what Case it may be granted
to any man, see in Brook titulo Remitter: and the Terms of Law. The Doctor and
Student, of this matter has these words: If land descend to him that has
right to that Land before, he shall be remitted to his better Title, if he
will. Ca. nono, fo. 19. b. See the new Book of Entries, verbo Remitter.

Render, comes of the French ( Render, i. reddere, retribuere, restituere)
and signifies in our Common law, the self-same thing. For example, this word
is used in levying of a fine. For a Fine is either single, by which nothing is
granted, or rendered back again by the Cognizee, to the Cognizour: or double,
which contains a grant, or render back again of some Rent common, or other
thing out of the Land it self to the Cognisor, etc. West. part 2. Symbol.
titulo Fines, Sect. 21, and 30. F. Also there be certain things in a Manor that
lie in Prender, that is, which may be taken by the Lord or his Officer, when
they chance, without any offer made by the Tenant, as the Ward of the body of
the Heir, and of the Land, Escheats, etc. and certain that lie in Render, that
is, must be delivered or answered by the Tenant, as Rents, Reliefs, Heriots,
and other services. Idem codem Sect. 126. C. Also some service consists in
seisance, some in Render. Perkins Reservations 696.

Rent, (reditus) comes of the French ( Rent, i. vectigal, pensitatio annua)
and signifies with us a sum of money, or other consideration issuing yearly out
of Land or Tenements. Plowden, casu Browning, fol. 132. b. and fol. 138. a.
141. b. There be three sorts of Rents observed by our Common Lawyers: that is
Rent service, Rent charge, and Rent seck. Rent service is, where a man holds
his Land of his Lord by Fealty, and certain Rent, or by Fealty, Service, and
certain Rents. Littleton lib. 2. cap. 12. fol. 44. or that which a man, making
a Lease to another for term of years, reserveth yearly to be paid him for the
same. Terms of Law, verbo Rents, who gives this Reason thereof, because it is
in his liberty, whether he will distrein or bring an action of Debt. A Rent
charge is that which a man making over an estate of his Land, or Tenements to
another, by deed indented, either in fee, or fee tail, or lease for term of
life, reserveth to himself by the said Indenture a sum of Money yearly to be
paid unto him, with clause of distress, or to him and his heirs. See Littleton
ubi supra. A Rent seck, otherwise a dry Rent, is that, which a man making over
an Estate of his Land or Tenement, by Deed indented, reserveth yearly to be
paid him without clause of Distress mentioned in the Indenture. Littleton ubi
supra. And Terms of the Law, verbo Rents. See the new Expositor of Law Terms:
See Plowden, casu Browning, fol. 132. b. See the differences between a Rent and
an Annuity, Doctor and Student, cap. 30. Dialog. primo.

Reparatione facienda, is a writ which lies in diverse cases, whereof one is,
where three be Tenants in Common, or Joint tenants, or pro indiviso, of a Mill,
or house which is fallen into decay, and the one being willing to repair it,
the other two will not. In this Case, the party willing shall have this writ
against the other two. Fitz. not. br. fol. 127. where read at large the form
and many uses of this writ, as also in the Regi. orig. fol. 153. b.

Repeal, comes of the French ( Rappel, i. Revocatio) and signifies in our
Common law, even the same, as the repeal of a Statute, Rastal, titulo Repeal.
Brook uses Repellance in this signification, titulo Rapellance.

Repleader, (Replacitare) is to plead again, that which was once pleaded
before. Rastal, titulo Repleader. See the new Book of Entries, verbo Repleader.

Replegiare. See Replevie. See Second deliverance.

Replevie (Plevina) is the bringing of the writ called Replegiari facias, by
him that has his Cattle or other Goods distreined by another for any cause,
and putting in surety to the Shyreeve, that upon the delivery of the thing
distreined, he will pursue the action against him that distreined. Terms of
Law. See Replegiare. It is used also for the bayling of a man, pl. cor. f. 72,
73, 74. and West. pri. cap. 11. and cap. 15. anno 3 Ed. 1.

Replegiare de averiis, is a writ brought by one, whose Cattle be distreined
or put in pound upon any cause by another, upon surety given to the Shyreeve to
pursue the action in law, anno 7 H. 8. cap. 4. Fitz. not. br. fol. 68. See the
Register original, of diverse sorts of this writ called Replegiare, in the
Table, verbo codem. See also the Register judicial, fol. 58. and 70. See also
the new book of Entries, verbo Replevin. See Dyer, fol. 173. un. 14.

Replevish (replegiare) is to let one to mainprise upon surety. Anno 3 Edw. 1.
cap. 11.

Replication (replicatio) is an exception of the second degree made by the
Plaintiff upon the first answer of the Defendant, West. part 2. symbol. titulo
Chancery, sect. 55. and West. 2. anno 13 Ed. pri. cap. 36. This is borrowed
from the Civilians, De replicationibus, li. 4. Institutio. titulo 14.

Report (reportus) is in our Common law a relation, or repetition of a Case
debated, or argued; which is sometime made to the Court, upon reference from
the Court to the Reporter, sometime to the world voluntarily, as Ploydens
reports, and such like.

Reposition of the Forest, was an act whereby certain Forest grounds, being
made purlieu upon view, were by a second view laid to the Forest again, Manwood
part pri. page 178.

Reprisells, (reprisalia) are all one in the Common and Civil law. Reprisalia
est potestas pignorandi contra quemlibet de terra debitoris data creditori pro
injuriis et damiis acceptis. Vocabucarius utriusque juris. This among the
ancient Romans was called (Clarigatio) of the verb ( Clarigo, i. res clare
repeto). It is called in the Statute anno 27 Ed. 3. stat. 2. cap. 17. Law of
Marque, of the German word March, i. terminus, limes. And the reason may be,
because one destitute of Justice in another territory, redresseth himself by
the goods belonging to men of that territory, taken within his own bounds.

Requests (Supplicum libelli, Curia Requistionum) is a Court of the same nature
with the Chauncery, redressing by equity the wrongs that poor men do suffer at
their hand, whose might they are not able to withstand either in Law or
otherwise. It took beginning as some men think, by commission from King Henry
the 8. before which time the Masters of Requests had no warrant of ordinary
Jurisdiction, but travailed between the Prince and Petitioners, by direction
from the mouth of the King. Guins Preface to his readings. But see Court of
Requests.

Resceyt (Receptio) seems to be an admission of a third person to plead his
right in a cause for merly commenced, between other two. See the new book of
Entries, verbo Resceit. V. Aid prier. The Civilians call this admissionem
tertii pro suo interesse. Of this you have one example in the terms of Law,
viz. if Tenant for term of life, or Tenant for term of years, bring an action:
he in the reversion comes in, and prays to be received to defend the land,
and to plead with the Demandant. Many more you may have in Brook, titulo,
Resceit, fol. 205. See Perkins Dower, 448. Receipt is also applied to an
admittance of plee, though the controversy be between two only. Brook
estoppel, in many places.

Resceyt of homage, is a relative to doing homage, for as the Tenant, who owes
homage, does it at his admission to the land: so the Lord receives it. Kitchen
fol. 148. See Homage.

Rescous (Rescussus) comes of the French ( Rescourre, se Rescourre du danger,
i. asserere se ab injuria) It signifies in our common Law a resistance against
a lawful authority: as for example, if a Bailiff, or other Officer, upon a Writ
do arrest a man, and another, upon a Writ do arrest a man, and another (one or
more) by violence do take him away, or procure his escape: this act is called,
a Rescus. Cassanaeus in his book de consuctud. Burg. has the same word coupled
with (resistentia) fol. 294. whereby it appears, that other nations do use
this word in the same signification that we do, or the very like. It is also
used for a Writ, which lies for this act, called in our Lawyers Latin (Breve
de rescussu.) whereof you may see both the form and use in Fitz. not. bre. fol.
101. and the Register original, fol. 125. See the new book of Entries, v^rbo
rescous. This rescous, in some cases is treason, and in some felony. Crompton.
Justice, fol. 54. b.

Reseiser (reseisire) is a taking again of lands into the Kings hands, whereof
a general livery, or ^^ster le main was formerly missused by any person or
persons, and not according to form and order of law. Of this see Stawnf.
praeroga. 26. where it is handled at large. See resumption.

Resiance (resiantia) seems to come of the French ( rasseoir, see Rasseoir,
is residere) and signifies a man's abode or continuance in a place. Old not.
br. fol. 85. whence also comes the participle (resiant.) that is, continually
dwelling, or abiding in a place. Kitchen, fol. 33. It is all one in truth with
Residence, but that custom of speech tyeth that only to persons ecclesiastical.

Reservation, signifies that rent or service which the granter in any grant
tyeth the grantee to perform unto him, or them, or the Lord Paramont. Perkins
reservations, per cotum.

Residence (residentia) comes of the Latin (residere) and is peculiarly used
both in the Canon and common Law, for the continuance or abode of a Parson or
Vicar upon his benefice. The default whereof (except the party be qualified,
and dispensed with) is the loss of ten pounds for every month, anno 28 Henr.
8. cap. 13.

Resignation (resignittio) is used particularly for the giving up of a Benefice
into the hands of the Ordinary, otherwise called of the Canonists
(renunciatio.) And though it signify all one in nature with the word
(Surrender) yet it is by use more restreined to the yielding up of a spiritual
living, into the hands of the Ordinary, and Surrender to the giving up of
temporal Lands into the hands of the Lord. And a resignation may now be made
into the hands of the King, as well as of the Diocesan, because he has
supremam authorit^ em Ecclesinsticam, as the Pope had in time past. Plowden,
casu Grendon, fo. 498.

Resort, is a word used properly in a writ of tail, or cousenage, as descent is
in a writ of right. Ingham.

Respectu computi Vicecomitis habendo, is a writ for the respiting of a
Shyreeves account upon just occasion, directed to the Treasurer and Barons of
the Exchequer. Register fol. 139 and 179.

Respite of homage (respectus homagii) is the forbearing of homage, which ought
first of all to be performed by the Tenent, that holds by homage. Which
respite may be occasioned upon diverse good reasons: but it has the most
frequent use in such as hold by Knights service in capite: who because the
Prince cannot be at leisure to take their homage, do pay into the Exchequer, at
certain times in the year, some small sum of money to be respited, until the
Prince may be at leisure to take it in person.

Responsions (responsiones) seems to be a word used properly and especially by
the Knights of S. John of Jerusalem, for certain accounts made unto them by
such as occupied their lands or stocks. Anno 32 H. 8. cap. 24.

Responsalis, is he that comes for another at the day assigned for his
appearance in Court, Bracton. Fleta seems to make a difference between
atturnatum, essoniatorem, and responsalem, lib. 6. cap. 11.. Officium, as if
essoniator came only to allege the cause of the parties absence, be he the
Demandant or Tenent, and responsalis came for the Tenent, not only to excuse
his absence, but also to signify what trial he meant to undergo, viz. the
Combat or the Country. lib. 6. cap. 11.. Si autem. A man in ancient time could
not appoint an Attorney for him, without warrant from the King. Fleta codem cap.
13. in fine. See Attorney. This word is used in the Canon law, Et significat
procuratorem vel cum qui absentem excusat, cap. Cum olim propter, extra. de
rescript.

Restitution (restitutio) is a yielding up again of any thing unlawfully taken
from another. It is used in the Common law, most notoriously for the setting
him in possession of Lands or Tenements, that has been unlawfully disseised of
them, which when it is to be done, and when not, see Cromptons Justice of
peace, fol. 144. b. etc. usque 149.

Restitutione extracti ab Ecclesia, is a Writ to restore a man to the Church,
which he had recovered for his sanctuary being suspected of felony. Register
orig. fol. 69. a.

Restitutione temporalium, is a Writ that lies in case, where a man being
elected, and confirmed Bishop of any Diocese, and has the Princes Royal
assent thereunto, for the recovery of the Temporalities, or Barony of the said
Bishopric, with the appurtenances. And it is directed from the King to the
Escheator of the County, the form whereof you have in the Regist. orig. fol.
294. and in Fitzb. not. br. fol. 169. Where you may read also, that it lies
for those Abbots and Priors, newly elected and confirmed, that were of the
Kings foundation.

Resummons (resummonitio) is compounded twice, that is, of re, sub, and Moneo:
and signifies a second summons, and calling of a man to answer an action,
where the first summons is defeated by any occasion, as the death of the party,
or such like. See Brook titu. Resummons, fol. 214. See of these four sorts,
according to the four diverse cases in the Table of the Register judicial, fol.
1. See also the new Book of Entries, verbo Reattachment, and Resummons.

Resumption (resumptio) is particularly used for the taking again into the
Kings hands, such Land or Tenements, as before upon false suggestion, or other
error, he had delivered to the heir, or granted by Letters patents to any man,
Brook, titule Repetance, and resumption, fol. 298. Thus it is applied, anno 31
H. 6. cap. 7. See Reseiser.

Retainer, comes of the French ( retenir, i. detinere, retinere) it
signifies in the Common law, a servant not menial nor familiar; that is, not
continually dwelling in the house of his Lord or Master, but only using, or
bearing his name or livery. This Livery was wont to consist of Hats (otherwise
Hoods) Badges, and other suits of one garment by the year, an. 1 R. 2. ca. 7.
These were taken by the Lords, many times upon purpose of maintenance, and
quarrels, and therefore they have been justly, for the better freedom of Law,
forbidden by many Statutes: as namely by anno 1 R. 2. cap. 7. upon pain of
imprisonment, and grievous forfeiture to the King: and again, anno 16 ejusd.
cap. 4. and anno 20 ejusdem, cap. 1. and 2. and anno prim. H. 4 cap. 7. by the
which, the Lords offending herein, should make ransom at the Kings will, and
any Knight or Esquire hereof duly attainted, should lose his said Livery, and
forfeit his fee forever; and any Yeoman wearing the Livery of the King, or
other Lord, should be imprisoned, and make ransom at the Kings will, only some
few excepted in the said Statute: which statute is further confirmed and
explaned, anno 2 H. 4. cap. 21. et an. 7 ejusd. cap. 14. and anno 13. ejusd.
cap. 3. et anno 8 H. 6. ca. 4. And yet this offense was so deeply rooted, that
Edward the fourth was driven to confirm the former statutes, and further to
extend the meaning of them, as appears by the statute made anno 8 Ed. 4. cap.
2. adding an especial pain of five pounds to every man that gives such Livery,
and as much to every one so retained, either by writing, oath, or promise, for
every month. Yet is not this fault so well looked unto, but that there is need
of more pregnant Laws for the redress thereof, or at the least better
execution of those, that be already made. These be by the Feudists called
(assidati.) Sic enim dicuntur, qui in alicujus fidem et. tutelam recepti sunt.
Neapol. constitu. lib. 3. titulo 7. And as our retainers are here forbidden: so
are those (affidats) in other countries.

Retraxit, is an exception against one that formerly commenced an action, and
withdrew it, or was non-sute before trial. Brook, titulo, Departure in
despite, and Retraxit, fol. 216. See also the new book of Entries: verbo
departer, and verbo retraxit.

Return (returna) comes of the French ( retour, i. reditio, reversio,
recursus) and in our common Law, has two particular applications, as namely
the teturn of a Writ by Shyreeves, and Bailiffs, which is nothing but a
certificate made to the Court, whereunto the writ directs him, of that which
he has done, touching the serving of the same Writ. And this among the
Civilians is called Certificatorium. Of returns in this signification, speak
the Statutes of Westminster. 2. cap. 39. anno 13 Ed. prim. and Tractatus contra
Vice-comites et Clericos, with diverse others, collected by Rastal, titulo
Return of Shyreeves. So is the return of an Office, Stawnf. praerog. fol. 70. a
certificate into the Court, of that which is done by virtue of his Office: See
the Statutes of days in bank, anno 51 H. 3. et anno 32 H. 8. cap. 21. And in
this signification Hilary Term is said to have four returns, viz. Octabis
Hilarii, Quindena Hilarit, crastine Purificationis, Octabis Purificaticnis: and
Easter Term to have 5. returns viz. Quindena Pascha, Tres paschae, Mense
paschae, Quinque paschae, et crastino Ascensionis; And Trinity Term 4. returns,
i. Crastino Trinitatis, Octabis Trinitatis Quindena Trinitatis, Tres
Trinitatis; And Micha^lmus Term 8. returns, sc. Octabis Michaelis, Quindena
Michaelis, Tres Michaelis, Mense Michaelis, Crastine animarum, Crastino
Martini, Octabis Martini, Quindena Martini.

The other application of this word is in case of Replevy. For if a man
distraine cattle for rent, etc. And afterward justify or avow his act, that it
be found lawful, the cattle before delivered unto him that was distrained upon
security given to follow the action, shall now be returned to him that
distrained them. Brook, titulo Return d'avers et hommes, fol. 218. you shall
find this word often used in Fitzherb. not. br. as appears in the word Return
in his table: but in all those places it has the one or the other of these two
significations.

Returno habendo, is a writ, which lies for him that has avowed a distress
made of cattle, and proved his distress to be lawfully taken for the return
of the cattle distrained unto him, which before were replevied by the party
distrained, upon surety given to pursue the action. Terms of law, verbo
Replevin,

Returnum averiorum, is a writ Judicial, granted to one impleaded for taking
the cattle of another, and unjust deteining of them centra vadium et plegies,
and appearing upon summons is dismissed without day, by reason that the
Plaintiff makes default, and it lies for the return of the cattle unto the
Defendant, whereby he was summoned, or which were taken for the security of his
appearance upon the summons. Register Judicial. fol. 4. a.

Returnum irreplegiabile, is a writ judicial sent out of the common plees to
the Shyreeve, for the final restitution or return of cattle to the owner,
unjustly taken by another as damage seisant, and so found by the jury before
Justices of Assise in the County. For which see the Regist. Judicial fol. 27.
a. b.

Reve, altas Greve (Prafectus) is made of Geresa the Saxon word for a
Governor. Lamb. explica: of Saxon words, verbo Prafectus, and that by
rejecting the first syllable, which (he says) among the Saxons is usual. It
signifies in our common Law, the Bailiff of a Fraunchis or Manor, and
especially in the West parts. Of this you may see Kitchen, fol. 43. See Greve
See Shyreeve. See also of this word M. Verstigan in his restitution of decayed
intelligence, cap. 10. speaking much to the same effect.

Revels, seems to be derived from the French word ( Reveiller, i. excitari,
vel experg^fieri) It signifies with us sports of daunsing, masking, comedies,
tragedies, and such like used in the Kings house, the houses of court, or of
other great personages. The reason whereof is, because they are most used by
night, when otherwise men commonly sleep, and be at rest. In the Kings house
there is an officer called the Master of these Reves, who has the ordering,
and dispositions of these pastimes in the Court.

Revenewe, is a French word, signifying as much as Reditio, Reversio, Reditus.
It signifies properly the yearly rent that grows to every man form his lands
and possessions.

Reversion (Reversio) signifies in the common Law, a possibility reserved to a
man's self and his heirs, to have again lands or tenements made over
conditionally unto others, upon the defect or failing of such condition. The
difference between a Remainder, and a Reversion is, that a Remainder is
general, and may be to any man but to him that grants, or conveyeth the
land, etc. for term of life only or otherwise: a Reversion is to himself from
whom the conveiance of the land, etc. proceeded, and commonly perpetual, as to
his heirs also, Littleton fol. 12. in fine. See Cook lib. 2. Sir Hugh Cholmleis
case, fol. 51. a. And yet a reversion is sometime confounded with a remainder.
Cook li. 2. Tookers case, fol. 67. b. Plowden, casu Hille, fol 170. q. What
this word Reversion in a deed does carry, See Littleton, lib. 2. cap. 12.

Revocation (Revocatio) is the calling back of a thing granted. Of these you
have diverse in the Register original, as Revocationem brevis de audiendo et
terminando. fol. 124. Revocationem praesentationis, fol. 304, et 305.
Revocationem protectionis, fol. 23. Revocationem specialium Iusticiariorum
quia, etc. fol. 205.

Reviving, is a word metaphorically applied to rents and actions, and
signifies a renewing of them, after they be extinguished: no less than if a
man, or other living creature should be dead, and restored to life. See diverse
examples in Brook, titulo, Revivings of rents, action, etc. fol. 223.

Rewardum. See Regard.

Reweye anno 43 Blizab. cap. 10.

RI
Rye, is a Saxon word signifying as much as Regnum in Latin, Camd. Britan.
Page 346.

Reins pass per le fait, is a form of an exception taken in same cases to an
action. See Brook titulo Estaunger al fait or Record.

Riens dans le guard, was a challenge to a Jury, or enquest within London, for
that four sufficient men of livelihood to the yearly value of forty shillings
above all charges within the same City, and dwelling and having within the same
ward, were not impanelled therein. But it is abrogated by the Statute, An. 7 H.
7. cap. 4.

Rier county (Retrocomitatus) seems to come of the French ( Arriere, i.
posterior) and in the Statute, Anno 2. Edwar. 3. cap. 5. is opposite to the
open county. And by comparison of that Statute with Westminster. 2. cap. 38. it
appears to be some public place, which the Shyreeve appoints for the
receipt of the Kings money after the end of his County. Fleta says, that it is
diet crastinus post comitatum, li. 2. cap. 67. R. Quia Iusticiurii.

Right, Rectum. See Recto.

Ridings, be the names of the parts or divisions of York shire, being three in
number, viz. West riding, East riding, and North riding. Cambd. Britan, page
530. This word is mentioned in the Statute, anno 22 H. 8. cap. 5, and 23 H 8.
cap. 18. and M. West. part 2. symbol. titulo Inditements says, that in
Inditements within that County, it is requisite that the town, and the Riding
be expresed, sect. 70. Q.

Right in the Court, Anno 6 R. 2. stat. 1. cap. 12. See Rectus in Curia.

Ringhead, anno 43 Elizab. cap. 10.

Riot (Riottum) comes of the French ( Riotter, i. rixari) It signifies in our
common Law the forcible doing of an unlawful act, by three or more persons
assembled together for that purpose. Westminster. part 2. symbol. titulo,
Inditements, sect. 65. P. The differences and agreements between a Riot, Rout,
and unlawful assembly, See in M. Lamb. Eirenarcha. lib. 2. cap. 5. etc. See
the Statute 1 M. 1. ca. 12. et Kitchen, fol. 19. who gives these examples of
Riots: the breach of enclosures, or banks, or conducts, parks, pownds, houses,
barnes, the burning or stacks of corn. Mr. Lamberd ubi supra, uses these
examples: to beat a man, to enter upon a possession forcibly. See Ront, and
unlawful assembly. See also Cromptons Justice of peace diverse cases of Riots,
etc. fol. 53. See Trihings.

Ripiers, (riparii) be those that use to bring fish from the sea coast to the
inner parts of the land, Camd. Britan. page 234. It is a word made of the
Latin (Ripa.)

Rize (oriza) is a kind of corn growing in Spain, Asia, and India, with the
which both good foods and medicines be made, whereof if you desire farther
knowledge, read Gerards Herbal, lib. 1. cap. 52. This is mentioned among
merchandise to be garbled, in the Statute anno 1 Jaco. cap. 19.

TO
Roag (rogus) seems to come of the French ( Rogu, i. arrogans) It signifies
with us an idle sturdy beggar, that wandering from place to place without
pasport, after he has been by Justices bestowed upon some certain place of
abode, or offered to be bestowed, is condemned to be so called, who for the
first offense, is called a Roag of the first degree, and punished by whipping,
and boring through the grissel of the right ear with an hot iron an inch in
compass: and for the second offense, is called a Roag of the second degree, and
put to death as a felon, if he be above 18 years old. See the Statute anno 14
Eliz. cap. 5. and 18 ejusdem, cap. 3. and anno 36. cap. 17. If you will know
who be Rogues, and to be punished as Rogues by law, read Lamberts Eirenarcha,
lib. 4 cap. 4. See Rout.

Robbery (robaria) comes of the French ( Rob, i. vestis) and in our Common
law, a felonious taking away of another man's goods from his person or presence,
against his will, putting him in fear, and of purpose to steal the same goods,
West. part 2. Jymbol. titulo Inditements, sect. 60. This is sometime called
violent theft, Idem, eodem, which is felony for two pence. Kitchen, fol. 16.
and 22. lib. Assis. 39. Robaria is a word also used in other Nations, as
appears by the annotations upon Mathaeus de afflictis, descis. 82. number. 6.
page 122. See Skene verbo Reif. libro de verbo. significat. See Cromp. Justice
of peace, f. 30. b.

Roberdsmen, an. 5 Ed. 3. cap. 14. and anno 7 R. 2. cap. 5. M. Lamb.
interprets them to be mighty thieves. Eirenarch. li. 2. cap. 6. page 90.

Rodknights, alias Radknights, are certain servitours, which hold their land by
serving their Lord on Horseback. Bracton li. 2. ca. 36. number. 6. says of them,
debet equitars cum Domino sus de manerio in manerium, vel cum Domint uxore. Flo
a lib. 3. cap. 14. Continetus.

Read (Pertica) is otherwise called a Perch, and is a measure of sixteen foot
and an half long, and in Staffordshire 20 foot, to measure land with. See
Perch.

Rose tyle, alias Creast tyle, is that tyle which is made to lay upon the rudge
of the house, anno 17 Ed. 4. cap. 4.

Rogation week (dies rogationum) is a time well known to all, being otherwise
called Gang-week. The reason why it is so termed, is because of the especial
devotion of Prayer and Fasting, then enjoined by the Church to all men, for a
preparative to the joyful remembrance of Christ's glorious Ascension, and the
Descension of the holy Ghost, in the form of cloven Tongues shortly after. And
in that respect the solemnization of carnal Matrimony is forbidden, from the
first day of the said week, until Trinity sunday. See Advent.

Rood of land, (roda terrae) is a certain quantity of Land being the fourth
part of an Acre. Anno 5 Eliza. cap. 5. See Perch.

Roll, alias Roll, (rotulum) comes of the French ( rouler, i. volvere,
pervolvere, rotare) whence also is the French ( Role ou Roll, i. volumen,
catalogus, codex) It signifies with us a shedule of Paper, or Parchment turned
or wound up with the hand to the fashion of a pipe. So is it used in
Stawnfplees of the Crown, fol. 11. The Chequer Roll of the Kings house, out of
the statute anno 3 H. 7. cap. 13. which signifies nothing but the Catalogue
wherein the names of the Kings Household servants are set down. And anno 5 Rich.
2. cap. 14. stat. prim. there is mention made of the great Roll of the
Exchequer, which seems otherwise to be called the Pipe. The Roules is also a
place destinated, by Edward 3. to the keeping of the rolls, or records of the
Chancery, situate between the two Temples in London, Cambden Britan page 321.
the Master whereof is the second man in Chancery, and in the absence of the
Lord Chancellor, or Keeper, sits as Judge, being commonly called the Master
of the Rolls. See Master of the Rolls.

Romescot, is compounded of Rome, and Scot, as you would say, the tribute due
to Rome: it is called by Matthaeus Westmonasteriensis, consuetudo Apostolica, a
qua neque Re^, neque Archiepiscopus, vel Episcopus, Abbas, vel Prier, aut
quilibet inregno immunis erat: and was first granted by Offa a Saxon King.
Camden. Britan. page 6. See Peter pence: and Roger Hoveden part poster, suorum
annalium, fol. 34 i. a. in Hen. secundo.

Roundlet, is a certain measure of Wine, Oil, etc. containing 18 gallons and an
half, anno 1 R. 3. cap. 13.

Rout (routa) is a French word signifying a company or flock: as ( une grande
route de gents on de cerfs, i. grex hominum, longa servorum series) It
signifies in our Common law, an Assembly of three persons or more, going on
about forcibly to commit an unlawful act, but yet do it not, Westminster. part 2.
symb. titule Indictments, sect. 65. O. M. Lamberd thus says of it: A Rout is
the same, which the Ge^manes yet call Rot, meaning a bond or great company of
men gathered together, and going about to execute, or executing indeed, any
Riot or unlawful act: and (says more) it is said properly of the multitude
that assembleth themselves in such disorderly sort, for their common quarrels.
As if the Inhabitants of a Town-ship do assemble to pull down a hedge, or pale,
to have their common, where they ought to have none, or to beat a man that has
done them some public offense or displeasure. But the Statute of 18 Ed. 3.
stat. prim. cap. unico, which gives process of outlawry against such as bring
routs into the presence of the Instices, or in any affray of the people, and
the Statute of 2 Richard 2 cap. 6. that speaks of riding in great routs to
make entry into Lands, and to beat others, and to take their wives, etc. do
seem to understand it more largely. And it is a rout whether they put their
purpose in execution or no, if so be, that they do go, ride, or move forward
after they meeting. Brook titulo Riot. 4. and 5. So (as it seems) a Rout
should be a special kind of unlawful assembly: and a Riot the disorderly fact
committed generally by any unlawful Assembly. Howsoever it be, two things are
common both to Riot, Rout, and unlawful Assembly: the one, that three persons
at the least be gathered together, for so it is commonly taken at this day, as
I have learned: the other, that they being together, do breed disturbance of
the peace, either by signification of speech, show of Armor, turbulent
gesture, or actual and express violence: so that either the peaceable sort of
men be unquietted, and feared by the fact, or the lighter sort, and busy
bodies, emboldned by the example. Thus far M. Lamberd in his Eirenarcha, libre
2. cap. 5. etc. where you may read more worth the noting, though too long to be
copied out. See Riot, and Unlawful assembly. Kitchen gives the same
definition of a Rout, fo. 20.

Rowing of clothes, anno 27. H. 8. cap. 13.

Royal assent (regius assensus) is that approbation which the King gives to a
thing formerly done by others: as to the election of a Bishop by Dean and
Chapter. Which given, then he sendeth-an especial Writ to some person for the
taking of fealty. The form of which Writ you may see in Fitzh. na. br. f. 170.
C. And also to a Bill passed by both the houses of Parliament, Cromptons
Jurisd. folio 8. which assent being once given, the Bill is indorsed with these
words, Le Roy veult, i. It pleases the King. If he refuse to agree unto it,
then thus, Le Roy avisera, i. the King will yet think of it. See Parliament.

Royalties (Regalia vel regalitates) be the rights of the King, Iura Regis.
Hotoman in verbis feudalibus, verbo, Regum Feudistae. And so are they
understood of us likewise, who otherwise call them the Kings Prerogative. See
Prerogative. And some of these be such as the King may grant unto Common
persons, some so high, as may not be separated from his own Crown privative, as
the Civilians term it, though dumulative he may. See Bracton lib. 2. cap. 5.
These be in some sort expressed in the first of Samuel, cap. 8. but these
generalities be specified more at large by those Lawyers that write of this
point. Among whom I especially commend Mathaeum de Afflictis upon the Title of
the Feuds. Quae sint regalia, being the 33. title of the third Book as some
divide them, but according to others the 56. of the second Book; where be named
in the Text 25 specialties of Royalties. See also Hotomans Commentaries in lib.
2. Feudor. cap. 56.

Rougecrosse. See Herald.

RU
Rudge washed Kersey, i. made of fleece wool washed only on the sheeps back,
Anno 35 Eliz. cap. 10.

SA
SAbles, See Furre.

Sac (Sacba vel Sacca) is a Royalty or privilege touching plee, and correction
of trespasses of men within a Manor. Rastal, titulo Exposition of words: where
he adds this reason: because (says he) Sac in English is (Encheson) in
French: as to say, for sick sack, pur quel encheson, i. for what hurt. That
which our Common Lawyers call (encheson) the true French man terms ( Achoise,
i. occasionem) as (Achoise fort grande, occasio ampla) or else may encheson
come of Encheoir, i. incidere) which we in English call an accident, or
incident. But all this is far enough from (Sac) and from the interpretation
thereof, as it is a Liberty or Privilege. Bracton has the word, as Stawnford
notes out of him, pl. cor. lib. pri. cap. 23. but neither of them both do
particularly interpret it. Bractors words he these, lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 8.
vel si sit aliquis qui de concessione Domins Regis talem habcat libertatem
(sicut sock et sack, Tolnetum, Team, Infangthefe, et Hutfanghhefe) qui inventus
fuerit seisitus de aliquo satrocinio, sicut Hondhabende et Backberend, tales
habent regalem potestatem: et unde qui tales libertates habent, habebunt
prisonam suam de talibus, quia possunt tales in Curia suae judicare. Of the
which matter he speaks also in lib. 2. cap. 24. nu. 2, and 3. and again lib.
3. traect. 2. cap. 35. But in none of these places he gives any interpretation
of the word. Saxon in his description of England defines Sack to be a
forfeiture, as does Rastol ubi supra, fol. 132 M. Cambden in his Britan. page
415. speaking of L^ncoln: has these words: Edward Confessore regnante, erant
(ex censuali libro loquor) 1070. mansiones hospitalae, et aucd-cim Legemam
habentes socan et sacam. To all these add Bracton, lib. 2. ca. 5. where he
writes thus. Sunt et aliae res quasi sacrae, quae personam Regis recipient,
et aliquando transferri non p ssunt, xisi Justiciariis Domini Regis, sicut
visus Franciplegii, placita de vetito mannio, emendatio transgressionis
Assis^rum, Iua^cium latronum, sicnt de illis qui habent sock et sack et
hujusmodi omnia, quae pertinent ad pacem, et per conser quexs ad Coronam. I am
informed, that the word (sack) in the Saxon tougue does properly signify so
much as (causa) with the Latins: whence we in English have the word (sake) as
(for whose sake) M. Skene de verb. signif. verbo, Sack, writes thus. In some
old books it is called placitum et emenda de transgressione hominum in Curia
Nostra. In the Laws of King Edward set forth by Master Lamberd, fol. 132 it is
written (Sacha) Sacha autem est, si quilibet altquem nominatim de aliquo
collumniatus fuerit, et il le negaverit, forisfactura probationis, vel
negationis (sievenerit) sua erit. Which may be called the Amercement paid by
him who denies that thing which is proved against him to be true, or affirms
that thing, the contrary whereof is true. Thus far M. Skene. Fleta of this has
these words: Sake significat acquietantiam de secta ad Comitatum, et Hundredum,
lib. 1. ca. 47.. Sake. But by all those I find not any reason of the word, that
is, why this liberty should be so called, and therefore I must leave it to
better Antiquaries or Linguists. See Roger Hoveden part poster. suorum
annalium fol 345.

Sacchius cum breckia, seems to be a service of finding a Sack and a broach
to the King by virtue of a Tenure, for the use of his Army. Bract. lib. 2.
cap. 16. n. 6.

Sack of Wool (saccus lanae is a quantity of wool, that contains 26. stone;
and a stone, fourteen pounds, anno 14 Edw. 3. stat. 1. cap. 21. See Sarplar.

Sacramento recipiendo, quod vidua Regis se non maritabit sine licentia Regis,
is a Writ or commission to one for the taking of an oath of the Kings Widow,
that she shall not marry without the Kings license. Register original, fol,
298. a.

Safe conduct. See Saulf conduct.

Salus, is a coin of Gold stamped by King Henry the sixth in France, which only
coin, with another of Blanes of eight pence a piece, was current in those
places of France, where King Henry was obeyed. Stowes Aunals, page 589.

Safe pledge (Salvus plegius) is a surety given for a man's appearance against a
day assigned Beacton lib. 4. cap. 2. nu. 2. where it is also called certus
plegius.

Sailing ware, anno prim. R. 3. cap. 8.

Sak. See Sac.

Sakeber, in Britton cap. 15. et 29. seems to be he that is robbed; or by
theft deprived of his goods: with whom Bracton also agrees, lib. 3. tracta. 2.
cap. 32. nu. 2. in these words: Fartum vero manifestum est, ubi latro
deprehensus sit seisitus de aliquo latrocino se. Hondbabende, et Backberend, et
insecutus fuerit per al^quem, cujus res illa fucrit, qui dicitur Sacaburthe,
etc. or Sathaber, as Stanford calls it pl. cor. lib. pri. cap. 21. The
interpretation of this word I find not. Only M. Skene de verbo. interpretatio
ne. verbo. (Sacreborgh) thinks it should rather be written. Sackerborgh, of (
Sacker, i. Securus) and Borgh, i. plegius, signifying a sure cautioner or
surety which one finds to another for theft, or slaughter: whereof he
offers to accuse him judicially. For in this case it behooves the pursuer to
oblige, or bind himself into the hands of the Officer, or before a ludge
competent with Sicker Borg, or sure caution, that he will pursue in form of
Law. And by this means it may be, that the accuser was wont with us to be
called Sakbere of a circumstance, because in this case he was surely bound to
pursue. Sycker is also an old English word, signifying as much as sure, secure,
or certain, and see Borowe.

Salet, is a headpiece, anno 4, et 5. Phil. et Mar. it seems to come from
the French ( Salut. i. Salus.)

Salmon sewse, seems to be the young fry of Salmon, quasi salmon issue, anno
13. Rich. 3. stat. pri. cap. 19.

Salva Gardia, is a security given by the King to a stranger, fearing the
violence of some of his subjects, for seeking his right by course of Law: the
form whereof see in the Register original, fol. 26. a. b.

Sanctuary (Sanctuarium) is a place privileged by the Prince, for the
safeguard of men's lives, that are offenders, being foanded upon the Law of
mercy, and upon the great reverence, honor, and devotion, which the Prince
bears to the place, whereunto he grants such a privilege. Of this you may
read a sufficient treatise in Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 2. cap. 38. This seems to
have taken beginning from the Cities of refuge: which Moses appointed them to
fly unto for safeguard of their lives, that had by casualtie slain a man,
Exodus cap. 21. In bastardly imitation whereof, first the Athenians, then
Romulus erected such a place of immunity, which they, and he after them called
Asylum, Polydor: Virg: de inventione rerum, li. 3. cap. 12. The Emperors of
Rome made the places of their own statues or Images, a place of refuge, as
appears. Cod. lib. 1. titulo 15. De iis qui adstatuas consugium: as also the
Churches: codem titulo 12. De iis qui ad ecclesias confugiunt, etc. But among
all other nations, our anci-ne Kings of England seem to have attributed most to
these Sanctuaries, permitting them to shelter such, as had committed both
felonies, and treasons, so that within forty days they acknowledged their
fault, and so submitted themselves to banishment: during which time if any man
expelled them, if he were Lay, he was excommunicated, if a Clerk, he was made
irregular. But after forty days no man might relieve them. Stawnf ubi supra.
See of this the new book of Entries: verb. Sanctuary: and Fleta: lib. 1 cap.
29. And how by degrees they have been taken away, you may read partly in him,
and partly in the statutes, a. 26 Hen. 8 cap. 13. et anno 28 ejusdem, cap. 7.
et anno 32 ejusd. cap. 12. et anno 33 ejudsem, cap. 15. et anno pri. Ed. 6.
cap. 12. et anno 2 ejusdem, cap. 2. et cap. 33. et anno 5 ejusdem, cap. 10. See
Abjuration.

Salarie (salarium) is a recompense or consideration made to any man for his
pains or industry bestowed upon another man's business. So called, as Pliny
says, qui tam necessarium quam sat homini. The word you have, anno 23 Ed. 3.
cap. pri.

Salmon pipe, anno 25 H. 8. cap. 7. is an engine to catch Salmons, and such
like Fish.

Sandal, anno 2 Rch. 2. cap. 1. is a merchandise brought into England. And it
seems to be a kind of wood brought out of India. For (Sandal) in French so
signifies, and in Latin it is called Santalum.

Sarkling time, or time of sarcling. Seems to be all one with hey seel. Or
the time when the Country man weedeth his Corn. And it proceeds from the
Latin sarculore, to rake or weed. Or from the French (Sarcler) which has all
one signification.

Sarplar, (sarpleralana) is a quantity of Wool. This in Scotland is called
Serpliathe and contains fourscore stone, for the Lords of the Council in anno
1527. decreed four Serpliathes of packed wool to contain sixteenscore stone of
wool, by the traffic of Merchants now used. The Merchants use to fraught for
their goods to Flanders by the Sack; to France, Spain, and England, by the
Tun, and to Danken, and the Eastern Seas, by the Serpliath. Skene de verborum
significatione, verbo Serpliat e, with us England a load of wool (as I have
been informed) consists of eighty Todde, each Todde consisting of two stone,
and each stone of fourteen pound And that a Sack of wool is in common account
equal with a Load: and a Sarplar (otherwise called a pocket) is half a Sack.
Further that a pack of wool is a Horse load, which consists of seventeen
stone, two pounds. Fleta lib. 2. cap. 12. says, that all our English measures
are compounded of the penny sterling, which weighs 32. Wheat corns of the
middle sort, and that two of those pence make an ounce, and twelve ounces a
pound in weight, or twenty shillings in number, and that eight pound of Wheat
makes a jallon, or a gallon as we now call it, and eight gallons a bushel,
and eight bushels a common quarter. Also that fifteen ounces of the quantity
aforesaid do make a Merchants pound. And that 12. such pounds and a half, make
a stone, and that fourteen stone make a weigh, and that two waighes or twenty
eight stone, make a sack of Wool, which ought to weigh a quarter of Wheat, and
that 12 Sacks make a Last. So that a weigh and a Sarpler seems to be all one,
but that the Sarpler is the case, and the weigh respects the quantity of the
Wool it self: and that a load and a sack is all one.

Saunkefin, is a phrase used by Britten, cap. 119. for the determination or
final end of the lineal race, or descent of a kindred. It seems to come from
the French ( Sorg, i. sanguis) and Fine, i. finitus.)

Sauer de default, is word for word to excuse a default. This is properly, when
a man having made default in Court, comes afterward and allegeth good cause,
why he did it, as imprisonment at the same time, or such like. New book of
Entries, verb. Sauer de default.

Saulf conduct (salvus conductus) is a security given by the Prince, under the
broad seal to a stranger, for his quiet coming in and passing out of the
Realm, touching which you may see the Statutes, anno 15 H. 6. cap. 3. and anno
18 ejusdem, cap. 18. and anno 28 Hen. 8. cap. pri. The form of this see in the
Register original, fol. 25.

SC
Stawnford, was a man very learned in the Common laws of the Land, wherein he
wrote two books, one termed the pleas of the Crown, the other the Princes
prerogative. He flourished in the days of Ed. the sixth, and of Queen Mary,
being in Queen Marics days a Judge, and knighted.

Scandalum Magnatum, is the especial name of a wrong done to any high personage
of the Land, as Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons, and other Nobles: and also of
the Chanceller, Treasurer, Clerk of the Privy Seal, Steward of the house,
Justice, of one bench or of the other, and other great Officers of the Realm,
by false news: or horrible and false messages, whereby debates and discords
betwixt them and the Commons, or any scandal to their persons might arise. anno
2 R. 2. cap. 5.

Scavage, otherwise called Shewage, is a kind of toll, or custom exacted by
Majors, Shyreeves, and Bailiffs of Cities, and Borough Towns, of Merchants for
wares showed to be sold within their Precincts which is forbidden by the
Statute, anno 19 Hen. 7. cap. 8. It comes of the Saxon word (Sceawe) to
behold or view, or to show whence is the word (Sceaw stowe) a theater or show
place, a beholding place. M. Verstigan in his restitution of decayed
Intelligences litera S.

Scire facias, is Writ judicial, most commonly to call a man to show cause unto
the Court, whence it is sent, why execution of a Judgment passed, should not
be made. This writ is not granted before a year and a day be passed after the
Judgment given, Old not. br. fol. 151. Scire facias upon a fine, lies after a
year and a day from the fine levied. Otherwise it is all one with the writ
Habere facias seisinam. West. part. 2. symb. litulo fines, sect. 137 See anno
25 Edwardi 3. sta. 5. cab. 2. v. anno 39 Elizabeth cap 7. The Register original
and judicial also in the Table shows many other diversities of this writ,
which read. See also the new bock of Entries, verb. Scire facias.

Scyra. Cambd. Britan. page 103. and 544. See Shyre.

Scot seems to come of the French ( escot, i. symbolum) Rastal says it is a
certain custom, or common tallage made to the use of the Shyreeve, or his
Bailiffs. Saxon in his description of England, cap. 11. says thus: Scot a
gadering to work of Bails: what he means God knows, I think the place is
corruptly printed. Scot (says M. Cambden out of Matthew of Westminster.) illud
dicitur, quod ex diversis rebus in unum aceru. um aggregatur. In the Laws of
William the Conqueror, set forth by M. Lamberd: fol. 125. you have these words.
Et omnis Francigena, qui temp^re Edwardi propinqui nostri fuit in Anglia,
particeps consuetudinum Anglorum, quod dicunt aue hlote and aue scote
persolvantur secundum legem Anglorum.

Scot and Lot anno 33 H. 8. cap. 19. signifies a customary tontribution laid
upon all subjects after their hability. Roger Hoveden writes it Anlote and
Anscote, in principio Henrici secundi.

Scotall (scotalla) is a word used in the Charter of the Forest, c. 7. in these
words, as Pupilla ceuli has them, part 5. cap. 22. Nullus Forestarius vel
Bedellus, facrat Scotallas vel garbas colligat, vel aliquam collectam faciat,
etc. M. Manwood part. pri. of his Forest laws, page 216, thus defines it. A
Scotall is where any Officer of the Forest does keep an Ale house within the
Forest, by color of his Office, causing men to come to his house, and there to
spend their money, for scar of having displeasure. It seems to be compounded
of Scot and Ale.

Scutagio habendo, is a writ that lies for the King and other Lord against the
Terent, that holds by Knights service, (wherein homage, sealty and escuage be
contained) being to make a voyage to war against the Scots, or French men. For
in those cases, this writ issues out to all such Tenants to serve by
themselves, or a sufficient man in their place, or else to pay, etc. See Fitz.
not. br. fol. 83. It is used in the Register original, for him to recover
escuage of others, that has either by service or fine performed his own to the
King, fol. 88. a.

SE
Sealer (Stgillator) is an Officer in Chancery, whose duty is to seal the Writs
and Instruments there made.

Sean fish, anno 1 Jacob. ses. 1. ca. 25. Sean fish, tbidem, seems to be that
fish which is taken with a very great and long net called a Sean.

Second deliverance (secunda deliberatione) is a Writ that lies for him who
after a return of Cattle replevied adjudged to him that distreined them, by
reason of a default in the party that replevied, for the replevying of the
same Cattle again, upon security put in for the redelivery of them, if in case
the distress be justified. New Book of Entries verbo Replevin in second
deliverance, fol. 522. col. 2. v. Dyer fol. 41. number 4, 5.

Secta ad Curiam, is a writ that lies against him, who refuses to perform his
suit either to the County, or Court Baron. Fitz. not. bre. fol. 158.

Secta facienda per illum qui habet eniciam partem, is a Writ to compel the
Heir that has the elders part of the cobeires, to perform service for all the
Coparceners. Regist. orig. fol. 177. a.

Secta mosendiui, is a Writ lying against him, that has used to grind at the
Mill of B. and after goes to another Mill with his Corn. Register original,
fol. 153. Fitzh, uat. br. 122. But it seems by him, that his writ lies
especially for the Lord against this frank Tenants, who hold of him by making
suit to his Mill, eodem. See the new book of Entries, verbo secta ad
molendinum. By likelihood this service is also in France: For Balduinus ad
titulum de servitutibus praediorum, in Institut. has these words: Bannalis
mola novae and barbarae servitutis species est, qua hodie passim rustici cogunt
ur una mola, quam bannalem vocamus, unoque furno uti ad quaestum Deasini, qui
fortasse praeest jurisdictioni ejus pagi.

Sectam proferre, est testimonium legalium hominum qui contractui inter eos
habito interfuerint praesentes producere. Fleta lib. 2. cap. 63.. Nullus. And
secta is used for a witness, Idem, lib. 4. cap. 16.. final. Habes tamen sectam
unam vel plures. etc.

Secta ad justiciam faciendam, is a service due for a man's fee to be persormed,
being by his fee bound thereunto. Bracton lib. 2. cap. 16. number. 6.

Secta unica tantum facienda propluribus haereditatibus, is a Writ that lies
for that Heir that is distreined by the Lord to more suits than one, in respect
of the Land of diverse Heirs descended unto him. Register original folio 177. a.

Sectis non faciendis, is a Writ, that lies for one in wardship to be
delivered of all suits of Court during his wardship, Register origin. fol. 173.
b. See other use of this writ, eodem, fol. 174. touching women that for their
Dower ought not to perform sure of Court.

Secunda superoneratione pasturae, is a writ that lies, where measurement of
pasture has been made, and he that first surcharged the common, does again
furcharge it, the measurement notwithstanding. Register original, fo. 157. Old
not. br. fol. 73.

Secundarie, (secundarius) is the name of an Officer next unto the chief
Officer: as the Secundary of the fine Office: the Secundary of the Counter:
which is (as I take it) next to the Shyreeve in London in each of the two
Counters. Secundary of the Office of the privy seal, anno 1 Ed. 4. cap. 1.
Secundaries of the Pipe two: Secundary to the remembrancers, two, which be
Officers in the Exchequer. Camden, page 113.

Securitatem inveniendi, quod se non divertat ad parts exteras sine licentia
Regis, is a writ that lies for the King against any of his subjects, to stay
them from going out of his Kingdom. The ground whereof is this, that every man
is bound to serve and defend the Commonwealth, as the King shall think meet.
Fitz. not. br. fol. 85.

Securitate pacis, is a writ that lies for one, who is threatened death or
danger, against him that threateneth, taken out of the Chancery to the
Shyreeve: whereof the form and farther use you may see in the Register orig. fo.
88. b. and Fitz. not. brev. fo. 79.

Se defendendo, is a plee for him that is charged with the death of another,
saying that he was driven unto that which he did, in his own defense, the other
so assaulting him, that if he had not done as he did, he must have been in
peril of his own life. Which danger ought to be so great, as that it appear
inevitable. As Stawnford says in his plees of the Crown, lib. 1. cap. 7. And
if he do justify it to be done in his own defense, yet is he driven to procure
his pardon of course from the Lord Chanceller, and forfeiteth his goods to the
King. As the said Author says in the same place.

Seignior (Dominus) is borrowed of the French (seigneur) It signifies in the
general signification, as much as Lord: but particularly it is used for the
Lord of the sea, or of a Manor, even as (Dominus) or (senior) among the
Feudists, is he, who grants a fee or benefit out of the Land to another. And
the reason is (as Hotoman says) because having granted the use and profit of
the land to another: yet the property, i. (Dominium) he still reteineth in
himself. See Hotoman in verbis Feudal. verbo Dominus and Senior. Seignior in
gross seems to be he that is Lord, but of no manor, and therefore can keep
no Court. Fitz. not. br. fol. 3. b. See Signorie.

Seignourage, anno 9 H. 5. stat. 2. cap. 1. seems to be a regality or
Prerogative of the King, whereby he challenges allowance of gold and silver
brought in the Mass to his Exchange, for coin.

Seignorie (Dominium) is borrowed of the French ( seigneury, i. ditio,
dominatus, Imperium, principatus, potentatus.) It signifies peculiarly with
us, a Manor, or Lordship. Seignorie de soke man's. Kitchen fol. 80. Seignorie in
gross, seems to be the Title of him that is not Lord by means of any Manor,
but immediately in his own person: as Tenure in capite, whereby one holds of
the King, as of his Crown, is seignorie in gross: because it is held of the
King for the time being, and not of the King, as of any honor, manor, etc.
Kitchtn, fol. 206. See Seignior.

Seisin (seisina) is borrowed of the French ( seisine, i. possessio,) and so it
signifies in our Common law: and to seize, is to take possession. Primier
seisin (prima seisina) is the first possession. See Primier seisin. Of the
French word (seisir) is made a Latin (seisire,) used by the Canonists, cap.
Clericis.. Nos igitur non semel de immunitate Ecclesiae, number. 6. as also the
Civilians, Guido Pap. singulo. 865. Seisire est etiam possessionem tradere.
Tiraquellas in Tractatu Le mort saisit le vif. page 53. number. 3. Seisin with our
Common Lawyers, is two fold: seisin in fact, and seisin in Law. Perkins Dower,
369.370. Seisin in fact is, when a corporal possession is taken: seisin in Law
is, when something is done, which the Law accounts a seisin, as an
Inrollment. Seisin in Law, is as much as a right to Lands and Tenements, though
the Owner be by wrong disseised of them. Perkins Tenent per le courtesy,
457.478. And it seems by Ingham, that he who has had an hours possession
quietly taken, has seisin de droit, and de claim, whereof no man may disseise
him by his own force or subtilty, but must be driven to his action.. Bref de
novel disseisin. Sir Edward Cook lib. 4. calls it seisin in Law, or seisin
actual. fol. 9. a. The Civilians call the one civilem possessionem, the other
naturalem.

Seisiua habenda quia Rex habuit annum, diem, and vastum, is a Writ that lies
for delivety of seisin to the Lord, of his Land, or Tenements, that formerly
was couvicted of felony, after the King in the right of his Prerogative, has
had the year, day, and waste. Reg. orig. fol. 165. a.

Selion (selio) is borrowed of the French ( sello, i. terra elata inter duos
sulcos) in Latin (Porca) in English a Ridge, or land. It signifies even so
with us also: and is of no certain quantity, but sometime contains half an
Acre, sometime more, and sometime less. West. part 2. symbol. titulo Recovery,
sect 3. Therefore Crompton in his jurisdictions, fol. 221. says, that a selion
of Land cannot be in demand, because it is a thing uncertain.

Seneshall (senescallus) is a French word, but borrowed from Germany, being as
Tilius says, compounded of Scal, i. servus, aut officialis, and ( Gesnid, i.
familia) we English it a Steward. As the high Seneshall, or Steward of England:
pl. cor. fo. 152. High Seneshall or steward, and South Seneshall or
Understeward, Kitchen fol. 83. is understood for a steward, or understeward of
Courts. Seneshat de l'hostel de Roy, Steward of the KINGS Household. Cromptons
Jurisdictions, fol. 102.

Senescallo and Mareshallo quod non teneant placita de libero tenemento, etc.
is a writ directed to the Steward or Marshal of England, inhibiting them to
take cognizance of any action in their Court, that concerns either Freehold,
debt, or Covenant. Register original, fol. 185. a. 191. b.

Senie, alias, Seen, (sena) is a leaf of a medicinable herb, that brings
forth stalks of a cubit high, purging Phlegmatic, Choleric, and also
Melancholic humors, without great violence. The farther use whereof you may
read in Gerrards Herbal, lib. 3. cap. 8. This is mentioned among other Drugs
and spices to be garbled, anno 1 Jac cap. 19.

Septuagesima, is a Sunday certain, and always the third Sabbath before Shrove
sunday, from the which until the Octaves after Easter, the solemnizing of
marriage is by the Canon laws forbidden. The reason whereof is given, for that
all this time until Easter, is a time of mourning for the fall of Adam, and for
the misery of man thereof ensuing. And Easter with the Octaves thereof is a
time of Christ's glorification, and so of ours also in him, for his, and by him
our conquest over death and sin. And that therefore all carnal affection onght,
during that space, to be wholly mortified in us. See Quinquagesima, see Advent,
see Rogation week.

Sequitur sub suo periculo, is a writ, that lies, where a summons
adwarrantizandum is awarded, and the Sheriff returns, that he has nothing
whereby he may be summoned. For then goes out an (Alias) and (Pluries,) And if
he come not at the (Pluries) then shall go out this writ. Old not. br. fol. 163.

Sequestration (sequestratio) is a separating of a thing in controversy from
the possession of both those that contend for it. And it is double; voluntary,
or necessary. Voluntary is that which is used by the consent of each party.
Necessary is that which the Judge of his Authority does, whether the parties
will or not. It is used also for the act of the ordinary disposing of office,
the goods and chattels of one deceased, whose estate no man will meddle with.
Dyer fol. 232. number. 5. and fol. 256. number. 8. and fol. 160. number. 42. and fol.
271 number. 26. as also in the gathering of the fruits of a Benefice void, to the
use of the next Incumbent. anno 28 H. 8. cap. 11. Fortescue, cap. 50. and in
diverse other cases.

Sequestro habendo, is a writ judicial for the dissolving of a seqnestration
made by the Bishop, at the Kings commandment of the fruits of a benefice,
thereby to compel the Parson to appear at the suit of another: for the Parson
upon his appearance may have this writ, for the release of the sequestration.
Register judicial, fol. 36. a.

Sergeants (servians) comes of the French ( sergeant, i. satelles, accensus)
a man of the Guard, a kind of Soldier, so called, because he was sepe accitus
ad res necessarias in exercitu peragendas. Calepin. M. Skene de verb. signif.
verb. Sergeant, has these words: Sergeant comes from Sergent quae est vox
composita de (Serrer) quod est, inclndere, and gent. quod pro gente, populo vel
plebe usurpatur. Itaque Serjandus disitur, qui jussu magistratus, quemlibet de
populo reum crimints in carcerem corjicit, seu includit. This word Sergeant is
diversely used in our Law, and applied to sundry offices and callings. First a
Sergeant at Law (or of the Coyfe) is the highest degree taken in that
profession, as a Doctor in the Civil law. And to these, as men best learned,
and best experienced of all others, is there one Court severed, to plead in by
themselves: (and that is the Court of Common pleas) where the Common law of
England is most strictly observed. These are made by the Kings mandat, or
Writ, directed unto them, commanding them upon a great penalty, to take upon
them that degree by a day certain therein assigned. Dyer fol. 72. number. 1. see
Count. And of these one is the Kings Sergeant, being commonly chosen by the
King out of the rest, in respect of his great learning, to plead for him in all
his causes: as namely, in causes of treason, pl. cor. li. 3. ca. pri. And of
these there may be more if it so please the King. This is called in other
Kingdoms, Advocatus Regius. Cassan. de consuet. Burgund. page 850. With what
solemnity these Sergeants be created, read Fortescue cap. 50. This word
Sergeant seems to be used in Britton for an Officer belonging to the County:
who in his first Chapter speaking of Appeals made before the Coroner, has
these words in effect: And then let the Coroner cause his appeal to be entered,
and the names of his sureties; And afterward let commandment be given to the
Sergeant of the County, where the felony was committed, that he have the body
of the persons appealed at the next County. And it is probable, that this
Officer was all one with him, whom Bracton in his fifth book cap. 4. number. 2.
calls Servientem Hundredi: of whom he has these words: Post probationem
defaltae, faciet serviens Hundredi incontinenti summonitionem, vel affidet
partibus diem, si praesentes sint, ad proximum Comitatum, etc. This is like to
be the same Officer, which in ancient time was called the Bailiff of the
Hundred, who (as is declared in Bailiff) had the like authority in his Hundred,
that the Shyreeve had in the County, though inferior to him, and to be
controlled by him, as appears by diverse ancient presidents set down by
Kitchen in his Tractat of Returns in Court Hundred, Court Baron, etc. I read
also in Bracton lib. 3. tractat. 2. cap. 28. Of the Kings Sergeant, who is like
to be also an Officer in the County, in these words: speaking of a woman
ravished, and what she ought to do for the pursuit of the Ravisher, and sic ire
debet ad prepositum Hundredi, and ad servientem Domini R^gis, and ad
coronatores, and ad Vicecomitem and ad primum comitatum faciat appellum suum.
And again eod. l. c. 32. in these words, and si sine secta cognoverit se inde
esse latronem coram vicecomite, vel coronatore, vel serviente Domini Regis,
etc. And again, lib. 5. tract. 3. cap. 4. number. 8. in these words: Quid si
servien; Domini Regis dederit partibus diem ad Comitatum, etc. And by Fleta it
seems that this Term was general to the Shyreeve, Coroner, and Bailiffs of
Counties, who in his sixth book. cap. 3. 1. has these words: Com. quis igitur
senserit dominum suum vel euriam suam sibi de recto defecisse, tunc ost ense
hoc Vicecomiti, statim praecipiat ballivo Hundredi, vel iteneranti, vel alteri
servienti Regis, quod assumptis sibi l beris, and legalibus hominibus de
viceneto illo, ad curiam illius domini, si quem, habuerit accedat, etc. And to
help this probability, I find that the Steward of a manner is termed serviens
manerii. Coke, Vol. 4. Copihold cases, fol. 21 a. Then is there a Sergeant at
arms (serviens ad arma) whose Office is to attend the person of the King. An. 7
H. 7. ca. 3. to arest Traitors, or men of worth or reckning, that do, or are
like to contemn Messengers of ordinary condition for other causes, and to
attend the Lord high Steward of England sitting in judgment upon any Traitor,
and such like. pl. cor. lib. 3. cap. pri. Of these by the Statute anno 13 R. 2.
cap. 6. there may not be above thirty in the Realm. This sort is called del
espee. In the custumary of Nor. car. 5. which read. There be also some two of
these Sergeants of the Parliament, one for the upper, another for the lower
house, whose Office seems to serve for the keeping of the Doors, and the
execution of such Commandments, especially touching the apprehension of any
offender, as either house shall think good to enioyn them. See Cromptons
Jurisdictions, fol. nono. See also Vowels, alias Hookers book of the order of
the Parliament. There is one of these that belongs to the Chancery, who is
also called a Sergeant of the Mace, as the rest may be, because they carry
Maces by their office. He of the Chancery attends the Lord Chancellor, or
Keeper in that court for the means to call all men into that Court, is either
by this Officer, or by sub poena. West. pa. 2. Symb. tit. Chauncery Sect. 17.
Then be there Sergeants that be the chief officers in their several functions,
within the Kings household, which be chief in their places, of which sort you
may read many named in the statute anno 33 H. 8 cap. 12. There is also a more
base kind of Sergeant of the Mace, whereof there is a troop in the City of
London, and other Towns corporate, that serve the Mayor or other head Officer,
both for mesnial attendance, and matter of Justice. Kitchen, fol. 143. And
these are called Serviontes ad clavam. New book of Entries, ver. scire facias:
in Mainperners, fol. 538. cap. 3.

Sergeantie (Serriantia) comes of the French ( Sergeant, i. satelles) and
signifies in our Common law, as service due to the King from his Tenent
holding by such service. For this service cannot be due to any L. from his
Tenent, but to the King only. And this is either grand or petit, as you shall
find at large set down in Chivalry. Of this also you may read Bra. l. 2. c. 16.
etc. 37. n. 5.4. et Brit. c. 66. n. 1. et 2. See Servies. M. Skene de ver.
signif. calls this Sergeantery, defining and dividing it as we do in England.

Servientihus. as certain writs touching servants, and their Masters violating
the statutes made against their abuses, which see in the Regist. orig, fo. 189.
et 190, et 191.

Service (servitium) though it have a general signification of duty toward them
unto whom we owe the performance of any corporal labor of function: yet more
especially in our Common law, it is used for that service, which the Tenent by
reason of his fee, owes unto his Lord. And so does it signify among the
Feudists also. For Hotoman thus defines it. Servitium est munus obsequit
clientelaris. verbo Servitium. De verbis feudal. or rather declares it so to
be defined, lib. feud. 2. titulo 51. Sect. 8. It is sometime called servage as
anno 1 R. 2. cap. 6. This service is either military, and noble, commonly
called Knights service: or clownish and base, commonly called Soccage, of both
which read Chiry, as also scecage. And Bracton lib. 2. ca. 16. Service is
divided by Britton into personal and real. cap. 66. where he makes wards,
marriages, homage, Reliefs, and such like, to be real services: personal, I
imagine, may those be called that are to be persormed by the person of the
Tenent, as to follow his Lord into war, etc. The Civilians divide munera in
this sort, either in personalia, or patrimonalia. Then Bracton ubi supra. number.
7. distributeth servitium in intrinsecum, and extrinsecum alias forinsecum, and
medium. Servitium intrinsecum is that, which is due to the capital Lord of the
Mannro, Forinsecum is that which is due to the King, and not to the capital
Lord, but when he goes in his own person to serve; or when he has satisfied
the King for all services whatsoever. And again in the same place he says, it
is called Fornisecum, quia fit, and capitur foris, sive extra servitium, quod
fit Domino capitali. See Foreign service. Of this read him ubi supra, more at
large, and Fleta, lib. 2. cap. 14.. Continetur. Servitia quae nec intrinseca
necforinseca sunt. Bract. handles in the same Chapter nu. 8. saying thus: sunt
etiam quaedam consuetudines, quae nec dicuntur intriasecae, nec forinsecae: sed
sunt quaed im servitia concomitantia, sicut servitia regalia, and militaria,
and etiambemagia: and adeo in cbartis non sunt exprimendae. Quia si homagium
praecesseris, et regale servitium sequitur exinde quod ad capitalem Dominum
pertinebit Relivium, et custodia, et maritagium, sive servitium sit militare,
vel seriantia propter exerci^um, etc. Here then Relief, Ward, and Marriage, be
those services, which he calls, nec intrinseca, nec forinseca, sed
concomitantia. Service is also divided into frank service, and base, or
villeinous service: the one Bracton calls (liberum servitium) the other
(servitium villanum) or (villenagium) lib. 2. cap. 8. number. pri. This
villenagium is Soccage in base tenure, as to dung the Lords ground, to serve
him so many days in harvest, to plash his hedges, etc. or else copyhold. All
other services seem to be frank. Service consiste^h some in seisance, some in
render. Perkins Reservations. 696. Service seems also to be divided into
continual, otherwise annual. and casual, or accidental. An example of the
sormer is the seisin of rent, and of the other, seisin of Relief. Sir Edward
Cokes Reports, lib. 4. Bevils case, fol. 9. a. See Copy hold. See Soccage. See
Aid.

Service secular, anno 1 Ed. 4. cap. 1. which may be contrary to spiritual.
viz. the service divine commanded to spiritual men by their founders.

Servitours of Bills, seem to be such servants or messenger; of the Marshal
belongto the Kings Bench, as were sent abroad with Bills, or Writs to summon
men to that Court, being now more ordinarily called Tipstaffs.

Servitiis acquietandis, is a Writ judicial, that lies for one distreined for
services by John, which owes and performs to Robert, for the acquital of
such services, Register judicial, fol. 27. a. et 36. b.

Sessions (Sessiones) signifies in our Common law a sitting of Justices in
Court upon their commission, as the Sessions of oyer, and terminer, pl. cor.
fol. 67. Quarter Sessions, otherwise called general Sessions, an. 5 Elizabeth
cap. 4. or open Sessions, ibidem. Opposite whereunto are especial, otherwise
called privy Sessions, which are procured upon some special occasion, for the
more speedy expedition of Justice in some cause. Cromptons Justice of peace,
fol. 110. what things be inquirable in general Sessions See Cromptons Justice
of peace, fol. 109. Petit Sessions, or Statute Sessions, are kept by the high
Constable of every Hundred, for the placing of servants, anno 5 Eliz. cap. 4.
in fine.

Sessour, an. 25 Ed. 3. cap. 6. seems to signify so much as assessing or
rating of Wages at this day.

Set Clothes, anno 27 Hen. 8. cap. 13.

Setwell, Valeriana, is a medicinal herb, the nature and diverse kinds whereof
you have in Gerards herbal, lib. 2. cap. 424. The root of this is mentioned
among drugs to be garbled, an. 1 Iac. cap. 19.

Severance, is the singling of two or more, that join in one Writ., or are
joined in one Writ, For example if two join in a Writ de Liberate probanda,
and the one afterward be nonsute, here severance is permitted; so that,
notwithstanding the nonsute of the one, the other may severally proceed.
Fitzherbert natura brevium, fol. 78. l. K. Of this see Brook, titulo Severance
and Summons, fol. 238. For it is harder to know in what cases severance is
permitted, than what it is. There is also severance of the Tenants in an
Assise, when as one or two, or more disseisours appears upon the Writ, and
not the other. New Book of Entries, fol. 81. col. 4. And severance in Attaints,
eod. fo. 95. col. 2. And severance in Debt, verbo debt. fol. 220. col. 1. see
the said Book, verbo Severance.

Seneral tail (tallium separatum) is that whereby Land is given and entayled
severally to two. For example land is given to two men, and their Wives, and
to the Heirs of their bodies begotten: the Donees have joint estate for their
two lives, and yet they have several Inheritance: because the issue of the one
shall have his moyetie; and the issue of the other, the other moyetie, Kitchen
ibid.

Several tenancy (tenura separalis) is a Plee, or exception taken to a writ,
that is laid against two as joint, which are several, Brook titulo, Several
tenancie fol. 273.

Sevantly woven, anno, 35. Eliza. cap. 10.

Sewer, has two significations with us, one applied to him that issues or
comes in before the meat of the King, or other great personage, and places
it upon the table the other to such passages, or gutters as carry water into
the sea or river in Lawyers Latin called Sewera, an. 6. H. 6. c. 5. which is
also used in common speech for commissioners authorized under the broad seal to
see drains, and ditches, well kept, and maintained in the Marish and Fenne
Countries, for the better conveyance of the water into the Sea, and the
preserving of the grass for seed of Cattle stat. an. 6. H. 6. cap. 5. It is
probable to bring this word from the French (issir) or (issue) as if we should
call them (Issuers) because they give issue or passage to the water, etc. And
the Latin word (suera) some time used in these commissions for these drains,
is a competent reason of this conjecture: See Fitz. not. brev. in Oyer and
Terminer. Yet I find in an old French Book containing the Officers of the King
of Englands Court as it was anciently governed, that he whom in Court we now
call Sewer, was called (Asseour) which may seem to come from the French (
Asseour wherein his Office in setting down the meat upon the Table is well
expressed. And Sewer as it signifies an Officer, is by Fleta latined Assessor
li. 2. c. 15. All which argues that the descent of this word is from the
French (Asseoir) as signifying a disposing or placing of any thing, or (as we
say in English) an assessing of any person toward the performance of a Duty.

Sexagesima. See Septuagesima.

SH
Shanck. See Fur.

Share. See Flotzon.

Showing is to be quit of Attachment in any Court, and before whomsoever in
plaints showed and not avowed. New exposition of law terms, verbo, Showing. See
Scavage.

Shipper, An. 1 Iac. ses. 1. cap. 33. is is a Dutch word signifying the Master
of the ship.

Shire (Comitatus, shyra) is a Saxon word, signifying Satrapian, of the verb (
scyran, 1. partiri.) Lamberd, in his explication of Saxon words, verbo
Centuaria. The word is in use so rife, that every Child understands it. Who
first thus divided this land into shires, appears by M. Cambdens Britan. page
102. in these words. Nec dum tamen florente Hepterchia, Anglia it a in
Comitatus divisa, (sic enim vulgo vocant) sed pestea, cum solus aluredus rerum
potiretur. Vt enim Germani majores nostri, test Tacito, jura per pagos
vicosque reddebant, et centeni ex plebe comites adrem admistrandam
adjungebantur: sic ille (ut ingulfi Croulandenfis verbis utar) pr mus Angliam
in Comitatus divisit, qued indiginae rapinas committerent exemplo et color
Danorum. Comitatus porro in Centurias, i. Hundreds, et Decimas, i. Tythings,
distribui fecit: praecipitque ut omnis indigena in aliqua esset Centuria, and
Decima. Praefectos etiam provinciarum, qui antea Vicedomini vocabantur, in duo
officia divtsit, viz. Iudices, nunc Iusticiarios, and Vicecomites, qui adhue
idem nomen retinent. See the rest.

Shereeve (Vicecomes) is compounded of these Saxon words ( Scyre, i. satrapia)
and ( Reeve, i. praefectus) and accordingly he is the chief Officer under the
King of his Shire, or County. See Ferme in Lacies Nobility, page 12. M.
Cambden. page 104. Thus describes his Office, Singulis vero annis, nobilis
aliquis ex incolis praeficitur, quem Vicecomitem, quasi vicarium comitis, and
nostra lingua Shyref, i. Comitatus praepositum vocamus: qui etiam comitatus,
vel provinciae Quaestor recte dici potest. Ejus enim est Publicas pecunias
provinciae suae conquirere, mulctas, irrogatas, vel pignoribus ablat is
eolligere, and aerario inferrae, Iudicibus praesto adesse, and eorum mandata
ex^qui, duodecim viros cogere, qui in causis de facto cognoscunt, et ad Iudices
referunt (Iudices enim apud nos, juris solum, non facti sunt Iudices)
condemnatos ad supplicium ducere, and in minoribus litibus cognoscere, in
majoribus autcm jus dicunt justiciarii, quos itinerantes ad Assisas vocant, qui
quotannis hos Comitatus, bis adeunt, ut de causis cognoscant, et ad carceratis
sententiam ferant. Henricus secundus hos itinerantes instituit, vel potius
restituit. Ille (ut inquit Mathaeus Parisiensis) consilio filii sui et
Episcoporum constituit Iusticiarios, per sex paertes regni, in qualibet parts
tres, qui jurarent quod cuilibet jus suum conservarent illaesum. Of the
antiquity and authority of this Officer, read Sir Edwards Cooks Reports, lib.
4. Mittons Case. The manner of appointing these Sheriffs in Henry the sixth his
days, see in Fortescue, cap. 24. fol. 53. b. The name Vicecomes comes from
the Normans, as Shyreeve comes from the Saxons. For in the fifth Chapter of
the Grand Custumary, you have (Viconte) which the Latin Interpreter turns
(Vicecomitem) whose Office you shall find in that Chapter to be very like unto
ours. The form of the Shyreeves oath, see in the Register original, fol. 331.
b. Of this read Master Skene de verborum significat. verbo Shyreeve: where he
largely describes the Office of the Shyreeve in Scotland. in a discourse worth
the reading.

Shyreeveweke of Winchester and of Essex, anno 21 R. 2. ca. 10 et 11.

Sbire Clerk, seems to be the Undershyreeve. anno 11 H. 7. cap. 15. It is
used sometime for a Clerk in the County Court, Deputy to the Undershyreeve. See
Sir Edward Cooks 4 books of Reports in Mittons case.

Shire mote. See Turn.

Shorling, and Morling seem to be words to distinguish Fells of sheep: as if
Shorling should signify the Fels after the Fleeces be shorn off the sheeps
back, and Morling the Fels flean off after they be killed or die alone. Anno 3
Edward. quart. cap. prim. et anno 4 ejusdem, capit. tertio, et anno 12 ejusdem,
cap. 5. et anno 14 ejusdem, cap. 3.

Shot, comes of the Saxon word, sceate, signifying pecuniam aut vectigal.
Lamberds explication of Saxon words, verbo Primitiae.

Shr of metal.

SI
Siout alias, is a Writ sent out in the second place, whereas the first sped
not. Cook libro quarto, folio 55. b. It is so called of these word expressed in
it. For example, lacobus Dci grati^, etc. Vicecomiti Kant salutem: Praeci^imus
tibi (sicut alt s^praecepimu^) quod non omi^tas propter aliquam lib^rtatem in
B^lliva^na, quin caming rediaris, et Capias. A.B.d. C. in Comitatu ^uo
Labourer, etc. as in the first Capias, Lamb. in his tractate of Processes in
the end of his Eirenarcht.

Sidemen, alias Questmen be those that are yearly chosen, according to the
custom of every Parish, to assist the Church-warddens in the inquiry and
presenting such offenders to the Ordinary, as are punishable in the Court
Christian.

Significavit is a writ de ex communicato sapiendo, which issues out of the
Chancery upon a Certificate given by an Ordinary of a man that stands
obstinately excommunicate by the space of forty days, for the laying him up in
Prison without Bayl, or Mainprise, until he submit himself to the authority of
the Church. And it is so called because of the word (significavit) mentioned in
the Writ (De excommunicate capiendo) which have relation to the Certificate,
sent into the Chancery by the Ecclesiastical Judge. There is also another writ
within the Regist. orig. of this name, fol. 7. a. directed to the Justice of
the Bench, willing them to stay any suit depending between such and such, by
reason of any excommunication alleged against the Plaintiff: because the
sentence of the Ordinary that did excommunicate him, is appealed from, and the
Appeal vet hangs undecided, Which see: and see Fitzher. not. br. De
excommunicato capiendo, fol. 62. N. but especially 66. A. where you may find
writs of this name in other cases.

Sine assensu capituli, is a writ that lies in case where a Dean, Bishop,
Prebendary, Abbot, Prior, or Master of Hospital, alieneth the Land held in the
right of his house, without the consent of the Chapter, Covent, or Fraternity.
For in this case his successor shall have this Writ. Fitz. not. br. fol. 195.

Si non omnes, is a writ of association, whereby if all in commission cannot
meet at the day assigned, it is permitted, that two or more of them may finish
the business. See Association. And Fitz. not. brev. fol. 185. and 111. C. and
Register origin. fol. 202, 206. and 124.

Sirecognescant, is a writ that lies for a Creditor against his Debtor for
money numbered, that has before the Shyreeve in County Court, acknowledged
himself to owe unto his Creditour such a sum received of him in numer at is
pecuniis. The form of the writ is this: Rex Vicecomiti salutem Praec. tibi
quodsi A. recognosca^ se debere R. 40. solid sine ulteriori dilatione, tunc
ipsum dist^ing as ad praedictum debitum eidem R. sine disatione reddendum.
Test, etc. Old not. brev. fol. 68.

SK
Skawe, anno 4 Ed. 4. cap. 1.

Skyvinag^, anno 27 H. 6. cap. 2. a proper name, signifying the precincts of
Caleis.

SL
Sluse (exclusa) is a frame to keep, or let water out of a ground.

SO
Soc (soca) is word signifying a power, or liberty of Jurisdiction, as
appears by these words out of Bracton, Sunt quidam Barons, and alii
libertatem habentes, sc. soc, and sac. Tol and Thian, Infangthefe, and
Vtfangthefe, and isti possunt judicare in Curia sua, eum qui inventus fueris
insra libertatem suam seisitus de aliquo latrocinio manifesto. et li. 3.
Tractat. 2. cap. 8. In the laws of King Edward set out by M. Lamberd, fol. 132.
you have these words, Socha est quod fi aliquis querit aliquid in terra sua,
etiam furtum, sua est Justicia, si inventum fuerit, an non. Saxon in the
Description of Britany, cap. 11. says, that Sock is a suit of Court and that
thereof comes Soken. But the signification of the word (as I have been
credibly informed) is as much as Inquisitio which we in modern English, term
(seeking.) Of this (Sok) Skene de verborum signify. speaks to this effect.
Sok is an old word used in Charters and feoffments, which in sundry old Books
containing the municipal Law of this Realm, is called Secta de hominibus suis
in curia, secundum consuetudinem Regni. So after my opinion he that is
inscoffed with Sok (which now we call Soit (but we in England Suit) has power
to hold Courts within his own Barony, in which, hemines sui should give Soit.
Thus far M. Skene. Of this Fleta has these words. In hujusmodi vero maneriis
(speaking of the Kings Manors) erant olim liberi homines libere tenentes,
quorum quidam cum per potentiores e tenemintis suis ejecti fuerant, and eadem
postmodum in villenagium tenenda resumpserunt: and quia hujusmodi tenentes
cultores Regis esse dinoscuntur, eis provisa fuit quies nesectas facerent ad
Comitatus vel Hundredos, vel ad aliquas inquisitiones, Assisas vel Juratas,
nisi in Manerio tantum, aum tamen proterra, quorum congregationem tunc socam
appellarunt; and hinc est qued Socmanni hodie dicuntur esse. A soco enim
derivantur, quorum tenementa sunt villenagium domini privilegiatum, and ideo
dicuntur glebae aserlptitii, eo quod ab hujusmedi glebis amovers non deberent,
quamdiu solverent debitas pensiones: nec compelli poterunt ad hujusmodi
tenementa tenenda contra suas voluntates, eo quodcorpora jua sunt libera. Nec
obstabit longa servitutis possessio ad libertatem extingnendam, quamvis ad
merchetum sanguinis su^ compulsus fuorit quis pro tenemento reddendo. Nulla
enim servitus ratione praescriptionis temporis potest liberum sanguinem in
servit ntem reducere, non magis quam liberum tenementum potest servum in liber
tatem, etc. By whose words it appears, that Soca is nothing else, but the
meeting or assembly of these kind of Tenants in any place within the Manor or
Liberty: wherefore he that has Soc, may seem to have such a Manor, such
Tenants, and such a liberty, belonging to his Manor and Tenants, as is here
described. Here you see diversities of opinions touching this word, one saying
that it is a power or liberty to seek after Thieves and stolen goods within a
Manor or Fee, and to do Justice upon such inquisition; others, that it is a
liberty only to have suitors to his Court; others, as Fleta, that it contains
both the former significations, and further that it is taken for the company of
Tenants, which live within such a Liberty; and are exempted from those common
services of the Prince and Country whereunto subjects are ordinarily tied. This
kind of liberty is in diverse places at this day in England, and commonly known
by the name of soke or sok n. See Soke and Sockmans.

Soccage (soccagium) comes of the French ( Soc, i. vomer, a Plowshare or
coulter.) It signifies in our Common law a tenure of Lands by or for certain
inferior or hubandry services to be performed to the Lord of the Fee. See
Institutes of Common law, 31. As I have showed in (Chivalry) all services due
for land, is either Knights-service, or soccage. So then, whatsoever is not
Knights service, is soccage: Bracton in his second book, ca. 35. nu pri,
describes it thus. Dici poterit soccagium a Soeco, and inde tenentes qui
tenent in Sockagio, Sockmanni dici poterunt, eo quod deputati sunt, ut videtur,
tamtummodo ad culturam, et quorum custodia, and maritagia ad propinquiores
parents jure sanguinis pertinebit. Et si aliquando inde de facto capiatur
homagium, quod plures contingit, non tamen habebit propter hoc dominus
capitalis custodiam, and maritag. Quia non semper sequitur homagium, licet
aliquande sequatur. M. Skene deverb. signif. verb. Socmannia, says, that
Soccage is a kind of holding of Lands when a man is infeoffed freely without
any service, ward, relief, or Marriage and pays to his Lord such duty, as is
called petit sergeantie, or when one holds land in the name of burgage, or in
libera elemozina, or otherwise in blenshe ferme, five nomine alba firmae, and
opponitur militi, qui tenet per servitium militare. Out of the place above
named in Bracton, you may find a division of Soccage, whereby it is termed
either Soccagium liberum, or villanum, frank or free Soccage, and base,
otherwise called villenage, The former is there thus defined. Soccagium liberum
est, ubi fit servitium in denariis Dominis capitalibus et nihil inde omnino
datur ad scutum et servitium Regis. Where I gather that to be free soccage
which pays a certain sum of money to the chief Lord in regard of some
tillage, or such like, and not of any Sergeantie, or eschuage. And to this
effect he writes also, lib. 2. cap. 16. nn. 9. etc. unde si tantum in denariis
et sine scutagio vel seriantiis, vel si ad duo teneatur sub disjunctione, sc.
adcertam rem dandam pro omni servitio, vel aliquam summam in denariis, id
tenementum potest dici Soccagium: si autem superaddas Scutagium, aut servitium
regale, licet ad unum obulum vel seriantiam, illud poterit dici foudum
militare. This free Socage, is also called common Socage, anno 37 H. 8. cap.
20. Socage in base tenure, or villanum Soccagium, is divided again in villanum
Soccagium, et purum villenagium: Villanum Soccagium est illud, de quo fit
certum servitium, idque ratione sui tenementi, non personae suae. Puruno
vilenagium est illud in quo praestatur servitium inceatum et inde terminatum,
abi scirt non poterit vospere, quale servitium fieri debet mane. viz. ubi quis
facere tenet us quicqui: ei praceptum fuerit. Bracton lib. 2. cap. 8. number. 3.
The oldna. br. fol. 94. makes three parts of this division. viz. Socage of
free tenure, Soccage of ancient tenure, and Soccage of base tenure. Soccage of
free tenure is (as the book says) where a man holds by free service of 12.
pence by year, for all manner of services, or by other services yearly. Soccage
of ancient tenure is of land of ancient Demesne, where no writ original shall
be sued, but the Writ of Right, that is called secundum consuetudinem manerii.
Soccage of base tenure is of those that hold in Socage, and may have none other
writ, but the Monstraverunt: and such Sock-men hold not by certain Service. And
for that are they not free Sockmen. Then again Soccage is divided into soccage
in chief, and common soccage. Socage in chief or in capite, is that which
holds of the king, as of his Crown. Fraerog. fol. 41. Common Soccage is that,
which holds of any other capital Lord, or of the King by reason of some
honor or manner. Ibidem Burgage is also a kind of Socage, see Burgage.

Sockmins (Sockmanni) are such tenants as hold their lands, and tenements by
Soccage tenure. And accordingly as you have 3. kinds of Soccage, so be there 3.
sorts of Sockmans, as Sockmans of frank tenure. Kitchen, fol. 8^. Sockmans of
ancient Demesne, old. not. br. fol. 11. and Sockmans of base tenure. Kitchen ubi
supra. But the tenants in ancient Demesne, seem most properly to be called
Sockmans, Fitzh. not. br. fol. 14. B. Brit. c. 66. n. 2.

Soke, anno 32 H. 8. cap. 15. and cap. 20. Of this Fleta says thus, Soke
significat libertatem curiae tenentium quam socam appellamus. l. 1. cap. 47..
Soke. See Roger Hoveden, part poster. suorum annalium. fol. 345. b. and See
Soc.

Soken (Soca) see Soc. and Hamsoken. Soken is latined Soca, Regiorig. fol. 1. a.

Sokereve seems to be the Lords rentgatherer in the Soke, or Soken, Fleta,
lib. 2. ca. 55. in principio.

Sole tenens (Solus tenens) is he or she which holds only in his or her own
right without any other joined. For example, if a man and his wife hold land
for their lives, the remainder to their son: here the man dying, the Lord shall
not have Heriot, because he dies not sole tenent. Kitch. fol. 134.

Solicitur (Solicitator) comes of the French (Soliciteur.) It signifies in
our Common law, a man employed to follow suits depending in Law, for the better
remembrance and more case of Atturnies, who commonly are so full of Clients and
business, that they cannot so often attend the Sergeants and Counselors, as
the case may require.

Solet et debit. See debet and solet.

Solidata terrae. See Farding deal of land.

Solace, anno 43. Elizabeth cap. 10.

Sommons alias summons (summonitio) comes of the French ( semondre, i.
vocare) It signifies in our Common law, as much as (vocatio in jas) or ciatio)
among the Civilians. And thence is our word (somner) which in French is (
semoneur, i. vocator, monitor) The Customary of Normandy for our ( summons has
semonse) ca. 61. summons of the Exchequer, anno 3 Edw. 1. cap. 19. and anno 10.
ejusdem, cap. 9. How summons is divided, and what circumstances it has to be
observed, See Fleta. li. 6. cap. 6, 7.

Sollutione feods militis Parlamenti, and solutione feodi Burgen. Parlamenti,
be Writs whereby Knights of the Parliament may recover their allowance, if it
be denied, an. 35 H. 8. ca. 11.

Sontage. Stow. page 284. is a task of forty shillings laid upon every Knights
fee.

Sorting Kersies. 3 Jacob. cap. 16.

Sothale, is a kind of entertainment made by Bailiffs to those of their
hundreds for their gain. Which sometime is called Filctable Of this Bracton
lib. 3. tractat. 1. cap. prim. has these words: De Ballivis, qui faciunt
cervicias suas, quas quandoque vocant (sothail) quandoque (fictale) ut pecunias
extorqueant ab iis qui sequntur Hundreda sua, et Balvas suas, etc. I think this
should rather be written Scotale. See Scotale.

Southvicont (Sub vicecomes) is the undersheriff. Cromptons Jurisd, fol. 5.

Sown. is a verb neuter, properly belonging to the Exchequer: as a word of
their Art, signifying so much, as to be leviable, or possible to be gathered or
collected. For example, Estreats that sown not, are such as the Sheriff by his
industry cannot get, and Estreats that sown, are such as he can gather, anno 4
H. 5. cap. 2.

SP
Speaker of the Parliament, is an Officer in that high Court, that is as it
were the common mouth of the rest: and as the honorable assembly consists of
two Houses, one called the Higher or Upper House, consisting of the King, the
Nobility, and Kings Council especially appointed for the same, the other
termed the Lower or Common House containing the Knights of the Shires, the
Citizens, Barons of the Cinque Ports, and the Burgesses of Borough Towns: so
be their also two Speakers one termed the Lord Speaker of the Higher House, who
is most commonly the Lord Chancellor of England, or Lord Keeper of the Great
Seal: the other is called the Speaker of the Lower House. And the duties of
these two you have particularly described in M. Vowels, alias Hookers Book,
entitled, The order and usage of keeping the Parliament.

Special matter in evidence. See General Issue. And Brook tit. General
issue, and special evidence.

Spiritualities of a Bishop (spiritualia Episcopi) be those profits which he
receives, as he is a Bishop, and not as he is a Baron of the Parliament.
Stawnf. pl. cor. fol. 132. The particulars of these may be the duties of his
Visitation, his benefit growing from ordering and instituting Priests,
prestation Money, that subsidium charitativum, which upon reasonable cause he
may require of his Clergy. Johannes Gregorius de Beneficis. cap. 6. number. 9.
and the Benefit of his Jurisdiction. Joachimus Stephanus de Jurisdict. lib. 4.
cap. 14. number. 14. for these reckons Exactionem Cathedratic, quartam Decimarum
and mortuariorum, et oblationum pensitationem, subsidium obaritativum,
celebrationem Spuedi, collationem viatici vel commeatus, oum Episcopus Romam
proficiscitur, jus Hospitii, Litaniam, et Processionem.

Spickenard (spica nardi, vel nardus) is a medicinal herb, whereof you may for
your further instruction read Gerards Herball. lib. 2. cap. 425. The fruit or
ear of this (for it brings forth an care like Lavender) is a drug garbable,
anno 1. Jacob. cap. 19.

Spoliation (spoliatio) is a writ that lies for an Incumbent against another
Incumbent, in case where the right of Patronage comes not in debate. As if a
Person be made a Bishop, and has despensation to keep his Rectory, and
afterward the Patron present another to the Church, which is instituted and
inducted: The Bishop shall have against this Incumbent a writ of Spolatio. in
(curt Christian. Fitzherbert, not. br. fol. 36. See Benevolence.

SQ
Squalley, anno 43. Elizab. b. cap. 10.

Squyres. See Esquires.

ST
Stable stand, is one of the four Evidences, or presumptions whereby a man is
convinced to intend the stealing of the Kings Dear in the Forest. Manwood part
2. of his Forest Laws. cap. 18. number. 9. the other three be these, Dogdrawe,
Backbear, Bloody hand And this Staplestand, is when a man is found at his
standing in the Forest, with a Cross bow bent, ready to shoot at any Deer. or
with a long Bow, or else standing close by a Tree with Greyhounds in a lease,
ready to slip, Idem eodem.

Stalkers, a kind of net, anno 13 R. 2. stat. 1. cap. 20. et anno 17. ejusdem
cap. 9.

Stallage (Stallagium) comes of the French ( Estaller, i. merces expenere,
expedire, explicare.) It signifies in our Common law, money paid for pitching
of stalls in Fair or Market. See Scavage. This in Scotland is called stallange.
Skene de verbor. signific. verbo Stallangiatores. And among the Romans it was
termed (Siliquaticum) a siliqua, primo et minimo omnium pondere apud^llam
nationem.

Stannaries (stannaria) comes of the Latin (stannum) i. tynne, signifying the
Mines and works, touching the getting, and purifying of this metal in
Cornwall, and other places. Of this read Camden, Britan. page 119, The liberties
of the stannarie men granted by Edw. 1. before they were abridged by the
Statute, anno 50 Edw. 3. see in Plowden, casu Mines. fol. 327. a. b.

Staple (Stapulum) signifies this or that Town, or City, whether the
Merchants of England by common order, or commandment, did carry their wools,
wool-fells, clothes, lead, and tin, and such like commodities of our land
for the utterance of them by the great. The word may probably be interpreted
two ways: one taking it from (staple) which in the Saxon or old English
language, signifies the stay or hold of any thing. Lamberd in his Duties of
Constables, number. 4. because the place is certain, and settled: and again, from
the French ( estape, i. forum vinarium) because to those places, whither our
English Merchants brought; their commodities, the French would also meet them
with theirs, which most o all consists in Wines: But I think this latter the
truer, because I find in the Mirror of the world written in French these
words. A Calais y avotte Estape de le lain, etc. Which is as much to say, as
the staple for wools, etc. You may read of many places appointed for this
staple in the statutes of the Land, according as the Prince by his Council
thought good to alter them, from the second year of Ed. 3. cap. 9. to the fifth
of Ed. the sixth, cap. 7. What Officers the staples had belonging to them, you
may see anno 27 Edw. 3. stat. 2. cap. 21.

Star Chamber (Camera stellata) is a Chamber at Westminster so called (as Sir
Thomas Smith conjectureth, lib. 2. cap. 4.) either because it is full of
windows, or cause at the first, all the roof thereof was decked with Images of
gilded Stars. And the latter reason I take to be the truer, because anno 25
Henry 8. capit. prim. It is written the Sterred Chamber. In this Chamber every
week twice during the term. and the very next day after Term, is there a Court
held by the Lord Chancellor or Keeper and other honorable personages of the
Realm. This Court seems to have taken beginning from the Statute, anno 3. Hen
7. ca. or. Whereby it is ordained, that the Lord Chancellor and Treasurer of
England for the time being and the Keeper of the Kings Privy Seal, or two of
them, calling to them a Bishop and a temporal Lord the Kings most Honorable
Council, and the two chief lustices of the Kings Bench, and Common place, for
the time being, or other two lustices in their absence, should have power to
call before them, and punish such misdoers, as there be mentioned. The saults
that they punish, be Routs, Riots, Forgerits Maintenances, Embraceries
Perjuries, and such other Mislemeanours, as are not sufficiently provided for
by the Common law. It appears both by Sir Thomas Smith, li. 2. de Repub.
Anglor. ca. 4. and by experience also, that at this day the whole number of the
Princes most honorable Privy Council, and such other Barons spiritual, or
temporal, as be called thither by the Prince, have place in this Court with
those above named. Of this Court thus speaks Master Gwin in the Preface to
his readings. It appears in our books of the Terms of King Edward 4. And of
the Report of Cases, happening under the usurpation of Richard the third, that
sometime the King and his Council, and sometime the Lord Chancellor, and other
great personages, did use to sit judicially in the place then, and yet called
the Star Chamber, But for as much as belike that Assembly was not ordinary,
therefore the next Kings, Henry the seventh, and his Son Henry 8. took order by
two several laws, viz. 3 Hen. 7. cap. pri. and 21 H. 8. ca. 2. That the
Chancellor assisted with others there named, should have power to hear
complaints against Retainours, Embraceours, Misdemeanors of Officers, and such
other offenses, which through the power and countenance of such as do commit
them, do lift up the head above other faults: and for the which inferior
Judges are not so meet to give correction. And because that place was before
dedicated to the like service, it has been ever since accordingly used.
Touching the Officers belonging to this Court, see Camden, page 112., et 113.

Statute (statutum) has diverse significations in our Common law. First, it
signifies a Decree or Act of Parliament, made by the Prince and three Estates,
which is the body of the whole Realm. And though it borrow the name from that
kind of Decree, which those Cities that were under the Roman Empire, made for
the particular Government of themselves, over and above the universal or common
law of the Empire: yet in nature it comes nearest to that which the Romans
called (Legem) for that, as that was made by the whole People, Noble and
Ignoble: so this is ordained by those, that represent the whole number, both of
Prince and subjects, one and other, through the whole Kingdom. The difference
nevertheless was this, that (Lex) was offered to the consideration of the
People by the Magistrate of the Senate, or Consul: but the Bills or
suggestions whence our Statutes spring; are offered by any of either house, and
so either passed or rejected. In this signification a Statute is either general
or special. Coke, lib. 4. Hollands case, fol. 76. a.

Statute, in another signification is a short speech taken for a bond: as
statute Merchant, or statute staple, anno 5 H. 4. cap. 12. The reason of which
name is, because these Bonds are made according to the form statutes expressly,
and particularly provided for the same, which direct both before what Persons,
and in what manner they ought to be made, west. part prim. symbol. lib. 2.
Sect. 151. where he defines a statute Merchant thus: A Statute Merchant is a
bond acknowledged before one of the Clarks of the statutes Merchant, and Mayor
or chief Warden of the City of London, or two Merchants of the said City for
that purpose assigned, or before the Mayor, chief Warden, or Master of other
Cities, or good Towns, or other sufficient men for that purpose appointed,
sealed with the seal of the Debtor, and of the King, which is of two pieces the
grater is kept by the said Mayor, chief Warden, etc. and the lesser piece
thereof by the said Clarks. The form of which bond, you may see in Fleta, lib.
2. cap. 64. 2. to be such; Noverint universi me, N. de tali commitatu teneri N.
in 10 Marcis solvendis cidem ad festum Pent. Anno Regni Regis, etc. et nisi
fecers, concedo quod current super me et Haeredes meos districtio, et poena
provis, in statuta Domini Regis edito apud Westminster. Datum London. tali die, anno
supra dicto. The fee for the same Seal, is for statutes knowledged in Fairs;
for every pound an halfpenny and out of Fairs a fording. The execution upon
statute Merchant, is first to take the body of the Debtor, if he be lay and can
be found: if otherwise then upon his Lands, and goods. The bond is founded upon
the Statute, anno 13 Ed. prim. stat. 4. Of this also as of the Statute staple,
see the new book of Entries, verbo statute Merchant; and read in Fleta ubi
supra more touching this matter worth the reading.

Statute staple, (to use the very words of Master West,) is either properly so
called or improperly. A Statute staple properly so called is a Bond of Record
knowledged before the Mayor of the Staple, in the presence of one of the two
Constables of the same staple, for which seal the fee is of every pound, if the
sum exceed not 100 pound, and half penny, and if it excced an 100 pound, of
every pound a farthing. And by virtue of such Statute staple, the Creditor may
forthwith have execution of the body, lands and goods of the Debtor; and this
is founded upon the Statute, anno 27 Ed. 3. cap. 9. A Statute staple improper,
is a bond of Record, founded upon the Statute, anno 23 H. 8. cap. 6. of the
nature of a proper Statute staple, as touching the force and execution thereof,
and knowledged before one of the chief Justices, and in their absence, before
the Mayor of the Staple, and Recorder of London. The forms of all these bonds
or statutes, see in West. part pri. symb: lib. 2. sect. 152, 153, 154, 155.
Statutes is also used in our vulgar talk, for the petit Sessions, which are
yearly kept for the disposing of Servants in service, by the Statute, anno 5
Elizabeth, cap. 4. See Recognisance.

Statute sessions, otherwise called Petit Sessions, are a meeting in every
Hundred of all the Shires in England, where of custom they have been used,
unto the which the Constables do repair, and others, both Householders and
servants, for the debating of differences between Masters and their Servants,
the rating of Servants wages, and the bestowing of such people in Service, as
being fit to serve, either refuse to seek, or cannot get Masters, anno 1 Eliz.
cap. 4.

Statu'o stapulae, is a writ that lies to take his body to Prison, and to
seize upon his Lands and goods, that has forfeited a bond, called Statute
staple, Regist. orig. fol. 151. a.

Statutam de laborariis, is a writ Judicial, for the apprehending of such
laborers, as refuse to work according to the Statute, Reg. judi. fol. 27. b.

Statuto Mercatorio, is a writ for the imprisoning of him, that has forfeited
a bond called the Statute Merchant, until the debt be satisfied, Regist.
origin. fol. 146. b. and of these there is one against Lay persons, ubi supra,
and another against Ecclesiastical, 148.

Stavisaker, staphis agria, vel herba pedicularis, is a medicinable herb, the
kind and virtues thereof, you have set forth in Gerards Herbal, lib. 1. cap.
130. The seed of this is mentioned among drugs to be garbled, anno 1 Jacob. ca.
19.

Stenrerie, is used for the same that Stannaries be, in the statute anno 4 H.
8. cap. 8 See Stannaries.

Sterling (Sterlingum) is a proper epitheton for money current within the Realm.
The name grows from this, that there was a certain pure Coin, stamped first
of all by the Easterlings here in England, Stows Annals page 112. The which I
rather believe, because in certain old Monuments of our English, and broken
French, I find it written Esterling; so Roger Hoveden writes it, part poster.
annalium, fol. 377. b. M. Skene de verborum sipnific. verbo Sterlingus, says
thus: Sterling is a kind of weight containing 32 corns, or grains of wheat. And
in the Canon law mention is made of five shilling; sterling and of a merk
sterling, ap. 3. de arbitriss, etc. constituit, 12. de procurator. And the
sterling penny is so called, because it weighs so many grains, as I have sundry
times proved by experience. and by the law of England the penny which is called
the sterling round, and without clipping, weighs 32 grains of wheat without
tails, whereof twenty make an ounce, and 12 ounces a pound, and eight pound
make a gallon of wine, and eight gallons makes a bushel of London, which is
the eighth part of a quarter. Hitherto M. Skene, Buchanan, lib. 6. says, that
the common People think it so termed, of Sterling a Town in Scotland. Our
Lyndwood says that it is called sterling of the bird which we call a sterling,
which as he notes, was engraven in one quarter of the coin so termed, cap.
Item quia. de testamentis. vaerb. Cent. solides, in Glos.

Stews, are those places which were permitted in England to women of prosessed
incontinency, for the proffer of their bodies to all comers: it is derived
from the French ( Estuves, i. thermae, vaporarium, Balneum) because wantons are
wont to prepare themselves to these venerous acts, by bathing themselves. And
that this is not new, Homer shows in the 8 book of his Odiss. where he
reckneth hot bathes among the effeminate sort of pleasures. Of these stews see
the statute anno 11 Hen 6. ca. pri.

Steward. See Seneschall and Stuward, Steward of the Kings house. an. 25 Ed. 3.
statute 5. cap. 21.

Stily ard ( Guilda Theutonicorum, anno 22 H. 8. ca. 8. et anno 32 ejusdem, ca.
14.) is a place in London, where the fraternity of the Easterling Merchants,
otherwise the Merchants of Hawnse and Almain, an.pri. Ed. 6. cap. 13. are wont
have their abode. See Geld. It is so called of a broad place, or Court, wherein
Steel was much sold, upon the which that house is now founded. Nathan
C^itraeus. See Hawnse.

Stone of wool (Petra lanae) see Weights. See Sarpler. It ought to weigh 14
pounds, yet in some places by custom it is more. See Cromptons Justice of
peace. f. 83. b.

Straife, alias Stray. See Estry.

Straits, anno 18 H. 6. ca. 16.

Streme works, is a kind of work in the Stanaries: for (says M. Camden, titulo
Cornwall, pa. 119.) Horum Stanario^um five metallicorum operum duo sunt genera:
Alterum Lode-works, alterum streme, works vo cant. Hoc in lecis inferioribus
est cum Fossis agendis stanni venas sectantur et fluvierum alveos subinde defl
ctunt: illud in locis aeditiorsbus, cum in montibus puteor, quod Shafts vcc int
in magnam attitudinem defodiunt, et cuniculos agunt. These you may read
mentioned, an. 27 H. 8. cap. 23.

Stirks.

Strip. See Estreapement.

SU
Suard, alias steward, senescallus) seems to be compounded of Steed and ward,
and is a word of many applications: yet always signifies an officer of chief
account within the place of his sway. The greatest of these is the Lord high
Steward of England, whose power (if those Antiquities be true which I have
read) is next to the Kings, and of that height, that it might in some sort
match the Ephori amongst the Lacedaemonians. The custom of our Commonwealth has
upon great consideration and policy brought it to pass, that this high
Officer is not appointed for any long time, but only for the dispatch of some
especial business, at the arraignment of some Nobleman in the case of
treason, or such like: which once ended, his Commission expireth. Of the high
Steward of Englands Court, you may read Cromptons Jurisd. f. 28.

I have read in an ancient Manuscript of what credit I know not, that this
Officer was of so great power in ancient times, that if any one had sought
justice in the Kings Court and not found it, he might upon complaint thereof
made unto him, take those Petitions, and reserving them to the next Parliament,
cause them there to be propounded, and not only so, but also in the presence of
the King openly to rebuke the Chancellor or any other Judge or officer whom he
found defective in yiedling Justice. And if in case the judge, or Officer so
reprehended, did allege, that his defect grew from the difficulty of the case,
insomuch as he durst not adventure upon it: then the case being showed, and so
^ound, the Lord Steward together which the Constable of England, there in the
presence of the King and Parliament, might elect five and twenty persons, or
more, or fewer, according to their discretion, and the case or cases in
question, some Earls, some Barons, some Knights, some Citizens and Burgesses,
which upon deliberation should set down, what they thought just and equal: and
their decree being read and allowed by Parliament, did stand as a Law for ever:
furthermore, if the Chancellor or other Judge or Officer, could not well
approve that the delay of Justice complained of, grew from just difficulty, by
reason that the case in question was formerly determined by Law or statute:
then might the Steward on the Kings behalf, admonish him of his negligence, and
will him to be more careful and studious, Or if there appeared malice, or
corruption then the King and Parliament was wont to remove him and assign
another of better hope to the place. Lastly if the King had about him any such
evil Councellor, as advised him to this unjust, or unanswerable to his
Majesty, as tending either to the disherison of the Crown, public hurt, or
destruction of the Subject. The office of the Steward was, taking to him the
Constable, and other great men, with some of the Commons, and giving notice to
the King of their intention to send to that Counselor, and will him to desist
from misleading the King, yea, if need so required, to charge him to stay no
longer about him, but to depart from the Court, which if he neglected to
perform, then they might send to the King and with him to remove him: and if
the King refused, then they might take him as a public enemy to the King and
Realm, seize on his goods and possessions, and commit his body to safe custody,
until the next Parliament, there to be judged by the whole Kingdom: Examples
are brought of Godwin Earl of Kent in the time of King Edward next before the
Conqueror, of Hubert Burgh Earl of the same County, in the reign of Henry the
third, and of Peter Gaveston in Edward the seconds days. But experience (as I
said) has found this Officer more dangerous then profitable, and therefore
has time taught, though not wholly to suppress him, yet to limit him to
particular occasion, and to restrain his power. Then is there the Steward of
the Kings most honorable household, anno 24 Hen. 8. cap. 13. whose name is
changed to the name of great Master, anno 32. ejusdem, cap. 39. But this
statute was repealed by anno prim. Mar. 2. Parlam. cap. 4. and the office of
the Lord, Steward of the Kings household revived: where you may at large read
diverse things touching his Office. As also in Fitz. not. br. f. 241. B. Of this
Officers ancient power, read Fleta, lib. 2. cap. 3. There is also a Steward of
the Marshalsea, pl. cor. fol. 52. and anno 33 Hen. 8. cap. 12. To be short,
this word is of so great diversity, that there is not a Corporation of any
account, or house of any honor, almost through the Realm, but it has an
Officer toward it of this name. A Steward of a manor, or of a household, what he
is or ought to be, Fleta fully describes. lib. 2. cap. 71. and 72.

Stranger, comes of the French ( estranger. i. alienate.) It signifies in
our Language generally a man born out of the Land or unknown: but in the Law,
it has an especial signification for him that is not privy, or a party to an
act: as a Stanger to a judgment: old not. brev. fol. 128. is he to whom a
ludgement does not belong: and in this signification it is directly contrary to
(party) or (privy.) See Privy.

Submarshall, (submarescallus) is an Officer in the Marshal-sea, that is,
Deputy to the chief Marshall of the Kings house, commonly called the Knight
Marshal, and has the custody of the prisoners there. Crompt. Jurisd. fol. 104.
He is otherwise called Vnder-marshall.

Subpoena, is a writ that lies to call a man into the Chancery, upon such case
only, as the Common law fails in, and has not provided for: so as the
party, who in equity has wrong, can have none ordinary remedy, by the rules
and course of the Commonlaw, West. part. 2. symbol. titulo Proceedings in
Chancery, Sect. 18. where you may read many examples of such cases, as Sub
poena lies in. There is also a Sub poena ad testificandum, which lies for the
calling in of witnesses to testify in a cause, as well in Chancery, as in
other Courts. And the name of both these proceed from words in the writ, which
charge the party called to appear at the day and place assigned, Sub poena
centum librarum, etc. I find mention of a common Sub poena in Cromptons Jurisd.
fol. 33. which signifies nothing else but such a Sub poena, as every common
person is called by into the Chancery: whereas any Lord of Parliament is called
by the Lord Chancelors letters: giving him notice of the suit intended against
him, and requiring him to appear. Crompton, cedem.

Subsidy (Subsidium) comes of the French ( Subside signifying a tax or
tribute assessed by Parliament, and granted by the Commons to be levied of every
subject, according to the value of his Land or Goods after the rate of four
Shillings in the pound for Land, and two Shillings eight pence for Goods, as it
is most commonly used at this day. Some hold opinion that this Subsidy is
granted by the Subject to the Prince, in recompense or consideration, that
whereas the Prince of his absolute power, might make Laws of himself, he does
of favor admit the consent of his Subjects therein, that all thing in their
own confession may be done with the greatest indifferency. The manner of
assessing every man's Lands or Goods, is this: First, there issues a Commission
out of the Chancery to some man of honor or worship in every County, by virtue
thereof to call unto them, the Head constables or Bailiff, of every Hundred,
and by them the Constable and three or four of the substantiallest householders
in every Town within their Hundred at a day certain: which men so called, or so
many of them, as the commissioners think good to use, do rate the Inhabitants
of their own Town, in such reasonable manner as they find meet, yet by the
discretion of the said Commissioners. And then every man after his value set
down, must at his time pay to the Collector appointed, after the rate
aforesaid, yet in ancient time, these subsidies seem to have been granted both
for other causes, as in respect of the Kings great travail and expenses in
wars: or his great favors toward his subjects: as also in other manner than
now they be: as every ninth Lamb, every ninth Fleece, and every ninth Sheaf,
anno 14 E. 3. stat. pri. cap. 20. And of these you may see great variety in
Rastals Abridgement, tit. Taxes, Tenths, Fifteenths, Subsidies, etc. whence you
may gather that there is no certain rate, but even as the two houses shall
think good to conclude, Subsidy is in the statute of the Land, sometime
confounded with custom, anno 11 H. 4. cap. 7. See Benevolence.

Surety of peace, (securit as pacis) is an acknowledging of a Bond to the
Prince, taken by a competent Judge of Record, for the keeping of the peace,
Lamberds Eirenarcha, lib. 2. cap. 2. page 77. This peace may a Justice of peace
command, either as a Minister, when he is willed so to do by a higher
authority, or as aludge, when he does it of this own power derived from his
Commission. Of both these see Lamberds Eirenarcha, lib. 2. cap. 2. pa. 77. See
Peace. See Supplicavit.

Suffragan (Suffraganeus) is a titular Bishop ordained, and assisted to aid the
Bishop of the Diocese in his spiritual function. c. Suffraganeus. Extra de
electione. For the Etymology, Suffraganei dicuntur, quia eorum suffragiis
causae Ecclesiasticae judicantur. Joach. Stephanus de jurisdict. lib. 4. cap.
16. number. 14. It was enacted anno 26 H. 8. cap. 14. that it should be lawful to
every Diocesan at his pleasure to elect two sufficient men within his Diocese,
and to present them to the King, that he might give the one of them such Title,
Style, Name and Dignity of sease in the said Statute specified, as he should
think convenient.

Suyte (Secta) comes of the French ( Suite, i. affectatio, consecutio,
sequela, comitatus) It signifies in our Common law, a following of another,
but in diverse senses, the first is a suit in Law, and is divided into suit
real, and personal. Kitchen, fol. 74. which is all one with action real and
personal. Then is there suit of Court, or suit service; that is an attendance
which a Tenent owes at the Court of his Lord. Fitz. not. brev. in Indice.
verbo Suite, suyte service and suyte real, anno 7. H. 7. cap. 2. The new
Expositour of Law terms, makes mention of four sorts of suits in this
signification. Suit covenant, suit custom, suit real, and suit service. Suit
covenant, he defines to be, when your Ancestor has covenant with mine
Ancestor, to sue to the Court of mine Ancestors. Suit custom, when I and my
Ancestors have been seized of your own, and your Ancestors suit, time out of
mind, etc. Sutereal, when men come to the Sheriff, Turn, or Leet, to which
Court all men are compelled to come, to know the Laws, so that they may not be
ignorant of things declared there, how they ought to be governed. And it is
called real, because of their allegiance. And this appears by common
experience, when one is sworn: his oath is that he shall be a loyal and
faithful man to the King. And this suit is not for the Land that he holds
within the County, but by reason of his person and his abode there, and ought
to be done twice a year: for default whereof he shall be amerced and not
distrained. I think this should be called ratherregal or royal, because it is
performed to the King for (royal.) The French word in the usual pronuntiation
comes near to real, the letter (o) being almost suppressed. See Leet, Suyte
service, is to sue to the Sheriff, Turn or Leet, or to the Lords Court from
three weeks to three weeks by the whole year. And for default thereof a man
shall be distrained, and not amerced. And this suit service is by reason of the
tenure of a man's Land. Then does suit signify the following of one in chase,
as fresh suit. West. 1. cap. 46. a. 3 Edw. 1. Lastly, it signifies a Petition
made to the Prince, or great personage.

Suyte of the Kings peace (secta pacis Regis) anno 6 R. 2. stat. 2. cap. pri.
and anno 21 ejnsdem, cap. 15. and anno 5 Hen. 4. ca. 15. is the persuing of a
man for breach of the Kings peace, by treasons, insurrections, rebellions, or
trespasses.

Summoneas, is a Writ Judicial of great diversity, according to the diverse
cases wherein it is used, which see in the Table of the Register Judicial.

Summoner (summonitor) signifies one used to call or cite a man to any Court.
These by the Common law, ought to be boni, that is by Fleta his Judgment,
liberi homines, and ideo boni, quia terras tenentes, qued sint coram talibus
Justiciarits ad certos diem and ^locum secundum mandatum Justiciariorum
Vicecomiti directum, parati inde facere recognitionem, lib. 4. cap. 5.. Et cum.

Summons (summonitio) see Summons. Common Summons. Marlb. cap. 18. anno 52 Hen.
3. it l.

Summons in terra petita, Kitch. fol. 286. is that Summons which is made upon
the Land, which the party at whose suit the summons is sent forth, seeks to
have. Summons ad warrantizandum. Dyer, fol. 69. nu. 3^.

Sumage (Sumagium) seems to be toll for carriage on horseback, Crompton,
Jurisd. fol. 191. For where the Charter of the Forest, cap. 14. has these
words: for a horse that bears loads every half year, a half penny: the Book
called Pupilla oculi, uses these words: pro uno equo portante summagium, per
dimidium annum obolum. It is otherwise called a Seam. And a Seam in the Western
parts is a Horseload.

Superoneratione pasturae, is a writ Judicial that lies against him who is
impleaded in the County, for the over-burthening of a Common with his cattle,
in case where he is formerly impleaded for it in the County, and the cause is
removed into the Kings Court at Westminster.

Supersedeas, is a writ which lies in diverse, and sundry cases, as appears
by the Table of the Register original, and the Judicial also, and by Fitzh.
not. bre. fol. 226. and many other places noted in the Index of his Book, verbo
Snpersedeas. But it signifies in them all a command or request to stay or
forbear the doing of that, which in appearance of Law, were to be done, were it
not for the cause whereupon the Writ is granted. For example: a man regularly
is to have surety of peace against him, of whom he will sweat that he is
asraid, and the Justice required hereunto cannot deny him. Yet if the party be
formerly bound to the peace, either in Chancery, or elsewhere, this writ lies
to stay the lustice from doing that, which otherwise he might not deny.

Super statutum, Edward 3. verse. servants and laborers, is a writ that lies
against him, who keeps my servants departed out of my service against Law.
Fitz. not. fol. 167.

Super statuto de York quo null sera viteller, etc. is a writ lying against him,
that occupyeth vittelling either in gross or by retail in a City, or Borough
Town, during the time he is Major, etc. Fitz. not. brev. fol. 172.

Super statuto, anno pri. Ed. 3. cap. 12 and 13. is a writ that lies against
the Kings Tenent holding in chief, which alienateth the Kings Land without the
Kings license. Fitzh. not. brev. fol. 175.

Super statuto facto pour Seneshall and Marshall de Roy, etc. is a writ lying
against the Steward, or Marshall, for holding plee in his Court of Freehold, or
for trespass, contracts not made within the Kings household. Fitzherbert not.
brev. fol. 241.

Super statuto de Articulis Cleri, cap. 6. is a writ against the Sheriff or
other Officer, that distraineth in the Kings highway, or in the glebe Land
anciently given to Rectories. Fitz. not. brev. fol 173.

Super praerogativa Regis, cap. 3. is a writ lying against the Kings widow for
marying without his license. Fitzherbert, not. brev. fol. 174.

Supplicavit, is a writ issuing out of the Chancery for taking the surety of
peace against a man. It is directed to the Justices of peace of the County, and
the Sheriff: and is grounded upon the Statue, anno pri. Edw. 3. cap. 16. which
ordains, that certain persons in Chancery shall be assigned to take care of
the peace. See Fitzh. not. bre. fol. 80. This writ was of old called Breve de
minis, as Master Lamberd in his Eirenarcha, notes out of the Regist. orig.
fol. 88.

Sur cui in vita, is a writ that lies for the heir of that woman, whose
fiusband having alienated her Land in fee, she brings not the writ Cui in
vita for the recovery of her own Land, for in this case her heir may take this
writ against the Tenent after her decease. Fitzherbert, natura brev. folio 193.
B.

Surgeon. comes of the French ( Surgeon, i. Chirurgus, vulnerarius)
signifying him that deals in the mechanical part of Physic, and the outward
cures performed with the hand. The French word is compounded of two Greek words
((...) i. manus, and (...), i. opus.) And therefore are they not allowed to
minister inward medicine. See Statute 32 Hen. 8. cap. 4. and Master Powltons
new Abridgement, titulo Surgeons.

Surcharger of the Forest, is he that does common with more Beasts in the
Forest, than he has right to common withal, Manwood part 2. of his Forest
Laws, cap. 14. nu. 7.

Surplusage (surplusagium) comes of the French ( surplus, i. corollarium,
additamentum.) It signifies in the Common law, a superfluity or addition more
than needs, which sometime is a cause that a Writ abateth. Brook, titulo
Nugation and Supersluity, fol. 100, Plowdens casu Dives contra Maningham, fol.
63. b. It is sometime also applied to matter of account, and signifies a
greater disbursement, than the charge of the Accomptant amounts unto.

Surrcjoynder, is thus defined by West. part 2. symb. titulo Supplications,
sect. 57. A Surrejoynder, is a second defense of the Plaintiff; action,
opposite to the Defendants Rejoinder. And therefore (as he says) Hotoman
calls it Triplicationem, quae est secunda actoris defensio, contra Rei
duplicationem opposita. Not Hotoman only calls this triplicationem: but the
Emperor himsel. De Replicationibus, libro 4. Institut. titulo 14.

Surrender (sursum redditio) is an Instrument testifying with apt words, that
the particular Tenent of Lands or Tenements for life, or years, does
sufficiently consent and agree that he which has the next or immediate
Remainder, or Reversion thereof, shall also have the particular estate of the
same in possession: and that he yields, and gives up the same unto him. For
every surrender ought forhwith to give a possession of the things surrendered,
West. part 1. lib. 2. Sect. 503. where you may see diverse presidents. But
there may be a surrender without writing. And therefore there is said to be a
surrender in deed, and a su^render in Law. A surrender in deed, is that which
is really and sensibly performed. Surrender in Law is in intendment of Law by
way of consequent, and not actual, Perkins Surrender, fol. 606. and seq. as if
a man have a lease of a farm, and during the term, he accept of a new lease,
this act is in Law a surrender of the former, Coke vol. 6. fol. 11. b.

Sursise (supersisae) anno 32 H. 8. cap. 48. seems to be an especial name
used in the Castle of Daver, for such penalties, and forfeitures, as are laid
upon those that pay not their duties or rent for Castleward at their days, an.
32 H. 8. cap. 48. Bracton has it in a general signification, lib. 5. tract. 3.
cap. 1. nu. 8. and Fleta, lib. 6. c. 3. in prin.

Surveiour (supervisor) is compounded of two French words ( sur, i. super) and
( veior, i. cernere, intueri, despicere, prospicere, videre.) It signifies in
our Common law, one that has the overseeing or care of some great personages
lands, or works. As the Surveiour general of the Kings manors, Cromptons
Jurisd. fol. 106. And in this signification it is taken, anno 33 H. 8. cap. 39.
where there is a Court of Surveyours crected. And the Surveyour of the Wards
and Liveries, West. part 2. symbologr. titulo Chancerie. Sect. 136. which
Officer is erected anno. 33 H. 8. cap. 22. who is the second Officer by his
place in the Court of Wards and Liveries, assigned and appointed by the King.
His Office seems especially to consist in the true examination of the Lands
belonging to the Kings wards, that the King be not deceived. At the entrance
into his Office, he takes an Oath ministered unto him by the Master of that
Court: which see anno 33 H. 8. ca. 39.

Surveior of the Kings Exchange, anno 9 H. 5. stat. 2. cap. 4. was an Officer,
whose name seems in these days to be changed into some other. For I cannot
learn that there is any such now

Survivour, is compounded of two French words ( sur, i. super) and ( viure, i.
aetatem agere, vivere) whence also comes the compound ( surviure, i.
superesse.) It signifies in our Common law, the longer liver of two joint
Tenants. See Brook, titulo Joynt-tenents, fol. 33. or of any two joined in the
right of any thing.

Suspension, (suspensio) is used for a temporal stop of a man's right, and
differs from extinguishment in this, that a right of estate suspended
reviveth again, but extinguished it dies for ever. Boook, titulo
Extinguishment and Suspension, fol. 314. Suspension is also used in our Common
law, sometimes as it is used in the Canon law, pro minori Excommunicatione. As
anno 24 H. 8. ca. 12. See Excommunication.

Suspirall, seems to be a Spring of water passing under the ground, toward a
Conduit or Cestern, anno 35 H. 8. cap. 10. and to be derived from the Latin
(suspirare) or the French ( souspirer, i. ducere suspiria.) And indeed the word
it self is French: for (suspiral) in that Tongue signifies (spiramentum
cavernae) the mouth of a Cave or Den: or the tunnel of a Chimney.

Swainmot, alias Swainmote, (Swainmotum) signifies a Court touching matters of
the Forest, kept by the Charter of the Forest, thrice in the year: anno 3 Hen.
octav. cap. 18. it is called also a Swainmote: what things be inquirable in the
same, you may read in Cromptons Iurisdict. fol. 180. who says, that this Court
of Swainmote is as incident to a Forest, as the Court of a Pie-powder to a
Fair: with whom agreeeth M. Manwood, part pri. of his Forest-laws, page 144.
The word seems to be compounded of (Swain) and (mot) or (Gemot.) For Swain,
as M. Manwood says ubisupra page 111. in the Saxons tongue signifies a
Bookland man, which at this day is taken for a Charterer, or Freeholder: and
(Gemot) as Mr. Lamberd says in his explication of Saxon words, verbo Coventus,
is Conventus, whereupon it is to be noted, as he says in the same place, that
the Swainmote is a Court of Freeholders within the Forest. Of the which you may
read him at large, page 110. etc. usque 122.

TA.
TAbling of Fines, is the making of a Table for every County, where his
Majesty's writ runs, contaning the contents of every Fine, that shall pass
in any one Term, as the name of the County, Towns, and places, wherein the
Lands or Tenements mentioned in any Fine, do lie, the name of the Plaintiff,
and Deforceant, and of every manner named in the Fine. This is to be done
properly by the Chirographer of Fines of the Common plees: who the first day of
the next Term after the engrossing of any such Fine, shall fix every of the
said Tables in some open place of the Court of the Common Plees: and so every
day of the said Term during the sitting of the said Court. And the said
Chirographer shall deliver to the Sheriff of every County, his Undersheriff or
Deputy, fair written in Parchment, a perfect content of the Table so to be made
for that Shire, in the Term that shall be next before the Assizes to be holden
in the same County, or else in the mean time between the Term, and the said
Assizes, to be set up the first day, and every day of the next Assices, in some
open place of the Court, where the Justices of Assizes then shall sit, to
contiuue there so long, as they shall sit in the said Court. If either the
Chirographer, or Sheriff fail herein, he forfeiteth five pounds. And the
Chirographers fee for every such Table is four pence, anno 23 Elizab. cap. 3.
This says West, part 2 Symbol. titulo Fines Sect. 130.

Tail (tallium) comes of the French ( Tail, i. Sectura) or the verb (
taillor, i. scindere) signifying in our Common law two several things, both
grounded upon one reason, Plowden, casu Willion, fol. 251. a. b. First it is
used for the fee, which is opposite to fee simple: by reason that it is so (as
it were) minced, or pared, that it is not in his free power to be disposed of
him which owneth it: but it is by the first giver cut or divided from all
other, and tied to the issue of the Donee. Coke lib. 4. in prooemio. And this
limitation or tail, is either general, or special. Tail general is that,
whereby lands or tenements are limited to a man, and to the heirs of his body,
begotten. And the reason of this term is, because how many soever women, the
tenent holding by his Title, shall take to his wives, one after another in
lawful matrimony, his issue by them all have a possibility to inherit, one
after the other. Tail special is that, whereby Lands or tenements be limited
unto a man and his Wife, and the Heirs of their two bodies begotten: because if
the man bury his wife before issue, and take another, the issue by his second
wife cannot inherit the Land, etc. Also if Land should be given to a man and
his wife, and to their Son and Heir John, for ever: this is tail especial. See
more of this in fee, And Liitleton, lib. pri. cap. 2. and the new book of
Entries, verbo Tail. Tail in the other signification, is that which we vul
garly call a Tallie. For it is une taille de bois, a cloven piece of wood to
nick up an account upon, for in the Statute, anno 10. Ed. pri. cap. 11. and
anno 27. ejusdem, stat. pri. cap. 2. it is termed a Tail, and anno 38 Edw. 3.
cap. 5. And so in Broke his Abridgement, titulo Taild' Exchequer, fol. 247. See
Tails.

Tails (talliae) are in these days called Talleyes, well known what they be.
Of these read in our statutes two sorts, to have been usual in the Exchequer
for a long continuance. The one is termed tails of debt, anno 1 Rich. 2. cap.
5. which are a kind of acquittance for debt paid in to the King. For example,
the University of Cambridge pays yearly ten pounds, for such things as are by
their Charter granted them in see ferm, five pounds at the Annunciation, and
five at Michaelmas. He that pays the first five pounds, receives for his
discharge a tail or talley, and he that pays the other five receives the
like. With both which, or notes of them, he repaireth to the Clerk of the Pipes
office, and there, in stead of them, receives an acquittance in parchment for
his whole discharge. Then be there also mentioned Tails of reward, anno 27 H.
8. cap. 11. and anno 33. et 34. ejusdem, cap. 16. and anno 2, et 3 Ed. 6. ca.
4. And these seem to be tails, or talies of allowances, or recompense made to
Sheriffs, for such matters, as to their charge they have performed in their
office, or for such moneys, as they by course have cast upon them in their
accounts, but could not levy them where they were due. And these, as it
seems by the said statute, anno 27 H. 8. cap. 11. were of old granted in the
Exchequer unto them, upon warrant made to the Treasurer and Chamberlains there,
by the Clerks of the Signet, upon Bill assigned by the King. But sithence the
statute, anno 2, et 3 Edw. 6. cap. 4. What the course in this case is, I am not
so well informed. Only I hear, that for some Counties these tails be still in
use; and that the warrant comes now from the Auditour of the Receites, unto
those that make these talies. And that the Sheriff with them proceeds to
those who take his final account, and there has his allowance accordingly.

Taylage (tallagium, alias, Tallage,) comes of the French (taille) which
originally signifies a piece cut out, of the whole: and metaphorically is used
for a share of a man's substance paid by way of tribute. It signifies with us,
a roll, or tax, as anno prim. Ed. 2. cap. unico. And Stowes Annals, page 445.
Thence comes Tailaigiers in Chawcer, for tax, or tollegatherers.

Taint (Attinctus) comes of the French ( teinct, i. infectus, tinctus) and
signifies either Substantively, a conviction, or Adjectively, a person
convicted of felony or treason, etc. See Attaint.

Tales, is a Latin word of known signification: It is used in our Common law
for a supply of men empaneled upon a Jury or Enquest, and not appearing, or at
their appearance, challenged by the party, or either party, if there be two, as
not indifferent, for in this case, the Judge upon petition grants a supply to
be made by the Sheriff o^ some men there present, equal in reputation to those
that were empanelled. And hereupon the very act of supplying is called a Tales
de Circumstantibus. This supply may be one or more, and of as many as shall
either make default, or else be challenged by each party, Stawnford, pl. cor.
lib. 3. cap. 5. Howbeit he that has had one Tales, either upon default or
challenge: though he may have another, yet he may not have the later to contain
so many as the former, for the first Tales must be under the principal panel,
except in a cause of Appeal, and so every Tales less than other, until the
number be made up of men present in Court, and such as are without exception to
the party, or parties. Of this see Stawnford more at large ubi supra: where
you may find some exceptions to this general rule. These commonly called
(Tales) may in some sort, and ineded are called (Meliores) viz. when the whole
Jury is challenged, as appearcth by Brook titulo, Octo tales et auter tales,
fol. 105. In whom you may likewise read many cases touching this matter.

Tales, is a proper name of a book in the Kings bench office, Cook, lib. 4.
fol. 93. b.

Tallage. See Taylage.

Talshide. See Talwood.

Talwood, vide anno 34, et 35 Henrici octavi, capit. 3. et anno 7 Edw. 6. cap.
7. et 43 El. cap. 14. Talshide ibidem. It is a long kind of shide riven out of
the tree, which shortened is made into billets.

Tartaron, anno 12 Edward 4. cap. 3. et anno 4 Henry 8. cap. 6.

Tasels, anno 4 Edward 4. cap. 1. is a kind of hard burre used by Clothiers and
Cloth Workers in the dressing. of Cloth.

Task, alias Tax, by M. Camden following the authority of Doctor Powell (whom
he greatly commends for his diligence in the search of Antiquities) is a
British word signifying tribute. Camden Britan. page 304. And it seems, it is
such a kind of tribute, as being certainly rated upon every Town, was wont to
be yearly paid. See Gild, and the places there cited out of Master Cambden. Now
it is not paid, but by consent given in Parliament, as the Subsidy is. And it
differs from Subsidy in this, that it is always certain, accordingly as it is
set down in the Chequer book, and levied in general of every Town, and not
particularly of every man. Lastly, it is a fifteenth of that substance, that
every Town was first rated at by the number of Hides of Land in the same.
Whereupon it is also called a fisteenth, vide anno 14 Edw. 3. statut. 1. cap.
20. For whereas Master Crompton in his jurisdiction, fol. says, that it is
levied sometime by goods, as well as by Lands, as also appears by the
Statute, anno 9 Hen. 4. cap. 7. I take his meaning there to be, that though
the task in the whole were at the first by the Prince proportioned by the land:
Yet the Towns men among themsel ves to make upthat sum, are at these days
sometimes valued by goods. See Fifteenth. It seems that in ancient times,
this task was imposed by the King at his pleasure, but Edward the first, anno
25. of his reign, bound himself, and his succesiors from that time forward, not
to levy it, but by the consent of the Realm, anno 25 Ed. pri. cap. 5. The word
Task may be thought to proceed from the French ( Taux, alias Tax, i.
aestimatio, pretium) for we call it also Tax: but over curiously to contend in
these derivations, may seem frivolous, considering that many words are common
to diverse peoples.

TE
Telonium, or Breve essendi quietum de Telonio, is a writ lying for the
Citizens of any City, or Bourgesses of any Town that have a Charter, or
prescription to free them from Toll, against the Officers of any Town, or
Market constraining them to pay Toll of their Merchandise, contrary to their
said grant or prescription, Fitzb. not. br. fol. 226. Hotoman, lib. 2.
commentariorum in feuda, cap. 56. verse. Vectigalia, has these words: Telonia
autem dicuntur, publicano rum stationes in quibus vectag alia recipient: sed
apud istius generis scriptores, Telonium dicitur vectigal, quod proponitum aut
riparum munitione penditur et plenumque a principibus solius exactionis causa
imperatur.

Team, alias Theme, is an old Saxon word, signifying a Royalty granted by the
Kings Charter, to a Lord of a Manor, Bracton, lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 8. of this
Saint Edwards laws, nu. 25. say thus. Quod si quisquam aliquid interciet
(idest, penes alium defend it) super aliquem, et intercitatus, non poterit
warantum suum habere, erit forisfactura sua, et Justicia similiter de
calumnintore, si defecerit. M. Skene de verborum significatione, verbo Theme,
says, that it is a power to have servants and slaves, which are called nativi,
bondi, villani, and all Baronies infeoffed with Theme, have the same power. For
unto them all their bondmen, their children, goods, and cattels properly
appertain: so to that they may dispose of them, at their pleasure. And in some
old authentike books it is written. Theme est potestas habendi nativos, ita
quod generationes villanorum vestrorum, cum eorum catallis, ubicumque
inveniantur, ad vos pertineant. Theme comes from Than. 1. servus, and
therefore sometime signifies the bondmen, and slaves, according to an old
statute and law. De Curia de Theme. Quod si quis teneat curiam de Theme, et
illa querela in illa curia movetur, ad quam Theme vocatur: non debet illa curia
clongari, sed ibidem determinari, et omnes Theme the compareant. Which is
understood of the question of liberty, when it is in doubt, whether any person
be a bondsman or free man Which kind of process should not be delayed, but
summarily decided. And the new Expositor of law terms, speaks to the like
effect, verbo Them. I read it also in an old paper written by an Exchequer man
thus translated. Theme. i. propago villanorum.

Teller, is an officer in the Eschequer, of which sort there be four in number.
And their office is, to receive all moneys due to the King, and to give to the
Clerk of the Pell a bill to charge him therewith. They also pay to all persons,
any money payable unto them by the King, by warrant from the Auditor of the
receipt. They also make weekly and yearly books, both of their receipts and
Payments which they deliver to the Lord Treasurer.

Templers (Templarii) See Knights of the Temple. These whilst they flourished
here in England, which seems to be all that time between Henry the seconds
days, until they were suppressed, had in every nation a particular Governor,
whom Bract. calls Magistrum militiae Templi. lib. 1. c. 10. Of these read M.
Camden in his Br. p, 320. See Hospitalers.

Temporalt es of Bishops (Temporalia Episcoporum) be such revenues, lands and
tenements, as Bishops have had laid to their Sees by the Kings and other great
personages of this land from time to time, as they are Barons and Lords of the
Parliament. See Spiritualties of Bishops.

Tend, seems to signify, as much as to endeavor, or offer, or show forth,
to tend the Estate of the party of the Demandant, Old not. br. fol. 123. b. to
tend to travers. Stawnf. praerog. fo. 96. to tend an averment. Brit. cap. 76.

Tender, seems to come of the French ( Tender, i. tener, delicatus) and being
used adjectively, signifies in English speech, as much as it does in French.
But in our Common law, it is used as a verb: and betokens as much, as
carefully to offer, or circumspectly to endeavor the performance of any thing
belongingunto us to tender: As rent, is to offer it at the time and place where
and when it ought to be paid. To tender his law of non summons. Kitchen, fo.
197. is to offer himself ready to make his Law, whereby to prove that he was
not summoned. See law. See make.

Tenementis legatis, is a Writ that lies to London, or other corporation,
where the custom is, that men may demise tenements by their last will, as well
as their goods and chatels, to whom they list, for the hearing of any
controversy touching this matter, and for the rectifying of the wrong, Reg.
orig. f. 244. b.

Tenant, alias tenent, (tenens) comes either of the Latin (tenere) or of the
French (tenir) and signifies in our Common law him that possesses Lands, or
tenements by any kind of right, be it in fee for life, or for years. This word
is used with great diversity of Epithits in the Law, sometime signifying or
importing the efficient cause of possession, as Tenent in Dower: which is she
that possesses land, etc. by virtue of her Dower. Kitchen, fol. 160. Tenent
per statute Merchant. Idem fol. 172. that is, he that holds land by virtue of
a Statute forfeited unto him. Tenent in frank marriage. Kitchen, fol. 158. viz.
he that holds land or tenement by reason of a gift thereof made unto him upon
marriage, between him and his wife, Tenent by the courtesy. Idem, fol. 159. i.
he that holds for his life by reason of a child begotten by him of his wife
being an Inheritrix. and born alive. Tenent per elegit, Idem. fol. 172. i. he
that holds by virtue of the writ termed Elegit, Tenent in Mortgage, Idem fol.
38. is he that holds by virtue of a mortgage or upon condition, that if the
lessor pay so much money at such a day, that he may enter, and if not, that the
seassee shall have a fee simple, fee tail, or freehold. Sometime these
Epithites import the manner of admittance: as Tenent by the Verge in ancient
deme^n. Idem fol. 81. is he that is admitted by the Rod in a Court of ancient
demesne. Sometime the evidence, that he has to show for his estate: as Tenent
by copy of Court roll, which is one admitted Tenant of any Lands, etc. within a
Manor, that time out of the memory of man, by the use and custom of the said
Manor, have been demisable, and demised to such as will take the same in fee,
fee tail, for life, years, or at will, according to the custom of the said
manor, West. part prim. symb. li. 2, sect. 646, whom read more at large. Again
Tenent by charter, is he that holds by feoffment in writing or other deed.
Kitchen fol. 57. Sometime these Epithites signify that duty which the Tenent
is to perform by reason of his tenure. As Tenent by Knight service, Tenants in
burgage, Tenent in soccage, Tenent in frank fee, tenent in villenage. Sometime
they import the estate of the Tenent or his continuance in the Land, as Tenent
in fee simple, Kitchen, fol. 150. Tenent in fee tail. Idem fol. 153. Tenent at
the will of the Lord according to the custom of the manner, Idem fo. 132, and
165. Tenent at will by the Common law. Idem eodem. Tenent upon sufferance. Idem
fol. 165. Tenent of state of Inheritance, Stawnford praeroge fol. 6. Sometime
they contain a relation toward the Lord, of whom, he holds as tenent in
chief, i. he that holds of the King in the right of his Crown, Fitzher. not.
br. fol. 5. F. Tenent of the King, as of the person of the King. Idem, eodem,
or as of some honor: eodem. Very tenent, i. he that holds immediately of his
Lord, Kitchen, fol. 99. For if there be Lord Mesn, and tenent, the tenent is
very tenent to the Mesn, but not to the Lord above. Tenent paravailes pl. cor.
197. and Fitzh. not. br. fo. 136. D. is the lowest Tenent, and farthest distant
from the Lord Paramount. It seems to be Tenent Per avail. See Dyers
Commentaries, fol. 25. nu. 156. No tenent in right to the Lord, but Tenent for
the avowry to be made. Littleton, fol. 96. Sometime they have a relation
between Tenants, and Tenants in several kinds, as Joint tenants, i. they that
have equal right in lands and tenements, and all by virtue of one title,
Litleton, lib. 3. cap. 3. Tenants in Common, be they that have equal right, but
hold by diverse titles, as one or more by gift or descent, and others by
purchase. Idem, eodem, cap. 4. Particular tenent, Stawnf. Praerog. fol. 13 that
is, he which holds only for his term, as tenent in dower, tenent by the
courtesy, or otherwise for life, West. part 2. Symbol. titulo Fines. Sect.
13. G. See anno 32 H. 8. cap. 31. and Coke in Sir William Pellams case, lib. 1.
fo. 15. a. they be termors for years or life. See Plowden, casu Colthirst, fol.
22. b. Sole tenent, Kitchen 134. i. he that has none other joined with him. If
a man and his wife hold for both their lives, and the man dies, he dies not
sole tenent, Idem; eodem. Several tenent, is opposite to joint tenants, or
tenants in common. See Several tenenoy. Tenent al praecip, is he, against whom
the writ (Praecipe) is to be brought. Cokes Reports, lib. 3. The case of Fines,
fo. 88. a. Tenent in demesne, anno 13 Ed. 1. cap. 9. anno 32 H. 8. ca. 37. is he
that holds the demeans of a manor for a rent without fervice. Tenent in
service, anno 20 Ed. 1. stat. 1 is he that holds by service, v. Britton cap.
79. in principio, and cap. 96, Car fealtic, etc. ^^el quaere, whether he may be
termed tenent in Demein, that holds some of the demeans howsoever, and he
tenent in service, which is a Freeholder to a Manor, holding by service, for
the Free-holds of a Manor are not accounted of the demesne, but only that which
the Lord keeps in his own hand, or lets out by copy, according to the
custom of the Manor. Tenent by execution, anno 32 Henry 8. cap. 5. is he that
holds Land by virtue of an execution upon any Statute, Recogn zance, etc.

Tendeheved (decanus, vedcaput december familiarum) of this see Rogen Hovedon,
part poster. suorum annalium, fol. 346, a. See Frank pledge.

Tenement, (tenementum) is diversely used in the Common law, most properly it
signieth a house, or home Stall: but in a larger sig nfication it is taken
either for house or land that a man holds of another. And joined with the
Adjective (Frank) in our Lawyers French, it contained generally lands or
houses, yea or offices, wherein we have estate for term of life, or in fee. And
in this signification, Kitchen so. 41. makes frank tenement and base estate,
opposite the one to the other. In the same sort does Britton use it, through
his whole 27 Chapter, as also Bracton does the Latin (libernm tenementum) li.
pri. ca. 5. and 6. and many other places.

Tenentibus in assist non onerandis, etc. is is a writ that lies for him to
whom a disseisor has alienated the Land whereof he disseised another, that he
be not molested for the damages awarded, if the Disseisour have wherewith to
satisfy them himself, Reg. orig. fol. 214. b.

Tenths, (Decimae) it that yearly portion or tribute, which all Livings
Ecclesiastical do yield to the King. For though the Bishop of Rome do
originally pretend right unto this revenue, by example of the High Priest among
the lews, who had tenths from the Levites, Numb. cap. 8. Hieronimus in
Ezechielem, Yet I read in our Chronicles, that these were of en granted to the
King by the Pope, upon diverse occasions, sometime for one year, some time for
more, until by the Statute, an 26 Hen. 8. ca. 3. they were annexed perpetually
to the Crown. See Disms. It signifies also a task levied of the temporalty.
Holinshed, H. 2. fol. 111.

Tenore indictamenti mittendo, is a writ wherehy the Record of an indictment;
and the process thereupon, is called out of another Court into the Chancery,
Regist. orig. fol. 169. a.

Tenure (Tenura) comes of the Norman (Tendure) as appears by the Grand
Custumary, cap. 28. where it is defined to this effect: Tenure is the manner,
whereby Tenements are holden of their Lords. What may make a Tenure, and what
not, see Perkins Reservations, 70. And in that Chapter shall you find the most
of those Tenures recited, that be now usually ^o England. In Scotland I find
that there be four manner of Tennres, which they call holding of land; the
first is ura eleemo^yna, which is proper to spiritual men, paying nothing for
it, but devota animarnm suffragia: the second they call Few, or Few ferm, which
holds of the King, Church, Barons, or others, paying a certain duty, called
Feuda firma. The chird is a hold in (Blench) as they term it, by payment of a
penny, rose, pair of guilt Spurs, or some such like thing, if it be asked, in
name of Blench, id est, nomine albae firmae. The fourth is by service of ward,
and releeve, where the Heir being minor, is in regad or custody of his Lord,
together with his lands, etc. And land holden in this fourth manner, is called
there feudum de Hauberk, or Haubert; or seudum militare, or feudum Hauberticum,
or fendum loricatum: because it is given upon condition, that the vassal
possessor thereof, shall come to the Host with a Jack, or Haubert, which is a
coat of Mail. M. Skene de verb. signif. verbo Haubert. Tenure in gross, is the
Tenure in Capite. For the Crown is called a Seignory in gross. because it
consists of a corporation of and by it self, not tied to any honor, or manor.
See Cromptons Iurisdict. f. 206. See the new book of Entries, verbo Tenure.

Term (Termiuus) fignifieth with us commonly, the bounds and limitation of
time: as a lease for term of life, or term of years, Bracton lib. 2. cap. 6.
nu. 4. But most notoriously it is used for that time, wherein the Tribunals, or
places of Judgment are open to all that list to complain of wrong, or to seek
their right by course of Law, or action. The rest of the year is called
vacation. Of these Terms there be 4 in every year: during which, matters of
Justice (for the most part) are dispatched. And this Sir Thomas Smith lib. 3.
de Rep. Ang. cap. 2. reckons as miraculous: that in less time than the third
part of the year, three Tribunals, all in one City, should rectify the wrongs
of so large and populous a Nation, as England is. Of these Terms, one is called
Hilarie Term, which begins the 23 of January, or if that be Sunday, the next
day following, and ends the 21 of February. Another is called Easter term,
which begins 18 days after Easter, and ends the Monday next after
Ascension day. The third is Trinity Term, beginning the Friday next after
Trinity Sunday, and ending the Wednesday fort night after. The fourth is
Michaelmas Term, beginning the 9th of October, or if that be Sunday, the next
day after, and ending the 18 of November.

Termor (Tenens ex termino.) is he that holds for term of years or life,
Kitchen, fol. 151. Littleton, fol. 100.

Tenra extendendae, is a writ directed to the Escheator, etc, willing him to
inquire and find the true yearly value of any land, etc. by the oath of twelve
men, and to certify the extent into the Chancery, etc. Register orig. fol,
293. b.

Terris bonts and caiallis rehabendis post purgationem, is a writ that lie th
for a Clerk to recover his lands, goods, or chatels formerly soised on, after
he has cleared himself of that seiony, upon suspicion whereof he was formerly
convicted, and delivered to his Ordinary to be purged. Register orig. fol. 68.
b.

Terris liberandis, is a writ that lies for a man convicted by attaint, to
bring the Record and Process before the King, and to take a fine for his
imprisonment, and to deliver him his lands and tenements again, and to release
him of the Scrip and Waste, Regist. orig. fol. 232. a. It is also a writ for
delivery of lands to the heir after homage, and relief performed; eodem, fol.
293. b. or upon security taken, that he shall perform them, eodem, fol. 313. b.

Terris and catallis tentis ulera debitum levatum, is a writ Judicial for the
restoring of lands or goods to a debtour that is distreined above the quantity
of the debt, Register Judicial, fol. 38. b.

Terretenent (terratenens) is he which has the natural, and actual possesssion
of the land, which we otherwise call the occupation, anno 39 Eliz. ca. 7. For
example, a Lord of a manor has a Freeholder, who lets out his free land
to another to be occupied: this Occupier is called the Terretenent, Wist: part
2. symb, tit. Fines, Sect. 137. Cromptons Inrisd. fol. 194. Britton, cap. 29.
Porkins feoffments, 231. And Petrus Belluga in sprenlo Principum. Repub. 46.
versic. Restut. vidert, nu. 9. uses this word Terrae tenentee in the same
signification. See Land tenants. Yet I have heard some lear^ed in the Law say,
that the Terienent, is the tenent in free, or copyhold, according to the custom
of the Manor, and opposite to tenent for term of years. Quaere.

Ters, is a certain measure of liquid things, as wine, oil, etc. containing the
6th. part of a tun, an. 32. H. 8. c. 14. or the 3d. part of a Pipe.

Testament (Testamentum.) See Will.

Testatum, is a writ that seems especially to lie against great personages of
the Realm, whose bodles may not be meddled with in actions of debt. And
therefore if the Sheriff return, (nibil habes in balliva mext). in a case of
execution, another writ shall be sent out into any other County, where such
personage is thought to have whence to satisfy, which is termed a Testatun,
because the Sheriff has formerly testified, that he sound nothing in his
Bayliweek to serve the turn. See Kitchen in his Returns of writs. fol. 287. b.

Test, is a word commonly used for the last part of any writ; so called,
because the very conclusion of every writ wherein the date is contained,
begins with these words (test meipso, etc.) if it be an original writ, or
if judicial, test Thom. Flemming, or Edwardo Cook, according to the Court
whence it comes. Where I may note by the way, that in Glanvile lib. pri. cap.
6. and 13. and lib. 2. cap. 4. I find the form of an original writ in the last
clause to be, test Ranulpho de Glanvilla apud Clarindon, etc. And diverse times
in the Regist. orig. Test custode Angliae: as namely, in the title
Prohibition, fol. 42. a. and Consultation, fol. 54. b.

TH
Thanus, is a made Latin word of the Saxon (thegn) which comes of ( thenian,
i. alicuiministrare.) It signifies sometime a Nobleman, sometime a free man,
sometime a Magistrate, sometime an Officer, or Minister. Lamb. in his
exposition of Saxon words, verbo Tha^us. See the place. See Vavasour, M. Skene
de verbor. significat. says, as it is the name of a dignity, and appears to be
equal with the Son of an Earl. And Thanus was a Freeholder holding his Land of
the King. And a man not taken with the fang (that is, with the manner, as we
say) accused of theft, no sufficient proof being brought against him, must
purge himself by the oath of seven and twenty men, or of 3 Thanes. Thanagium
Regis, signifies a certain part of the Kings lands, or property, whereof the
rule and government appertains to him, who therefore is called Thanus. For
Domania Regis, and Thanagia, Iidem significant. It is a Dutch word: For
(teiner) signifies a servant, and teinen to serve. And thane is likewise a
servant, and under-thane, an Inferior thane or subject. Thus far Master Skene.

Thack-tile, anno 17 Ed. 4. ca. 4. otherwise called plain tyle, is that tyle
which is made to be laid upon the side, and nor upon the rudge of a tyled
house, anno 17 Ed. 4. cap. 4.

Theme. See Team.

Theft (furtum) is an unlawful felonious taking away of another man's moveable,
and personal goods, against the owners will, with an intent to steal them.
West. part 2. symbol. titulo Inditements, sect. 58. where also he says, that
theft is from the person, or in presence of the owner, or in his absence. Theft
from the person, or in the presence of the owner, is of two sorts: the one
putting the owner in fear, the other not. Idem, eodem, sect. 59. The former is
properly called Robbery, ibid. sect. 60. The new Expounder of Law terms, verbo
Larcenie, divides theft into theft so simply called, and petit or little
theft. Whereof whereof the one is of goods above the value of twelve pence, and
is selouy, the other under that value, and is no felony. But see Felony.

Theftbote, is made of (thief) and (boete) i. compensa^io, and signifirth
properly the receiving of good; from a Thief, to the end to favor and maintain
him. The punishment whereof is ransom and imprisonment, and not loss of life
and member. Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. prim. cap. 43. And the mirror of Justices,
lib. 2. cap. des peches criminals al suit le Roye. And yet he there makes
mention of a Record alleged, which testistified a judgment of life and member
given in this case.

Thegne. See Thanus, and Thingus.

Them. See Team. It signified acquietantiam amsrciamentoruus sequelae
propriorum serverum, Fleta lib. prim. cap. 47. sect. Theme.

Thelonium. See Tholle, and Tholonium, and Toll.

Thelonio rationabili habendo pro Dominis babentibus Dominica Regis ad firmam,
is a writ, that lies for him, that has of the Kings demesne in fee ferm, to
recover reasonable toll of the Kings tenants there, if that his demesne have
been accustomed to be tolled. Regist. orig. fo. 87. b.

Thingus. Cromptons jurisd. fol. 197. seems to be used for the Saxon Thegne.
See Thanus. His words are these, speaking of a Charter or Grant made by a Lord
of a Forest. Scietis me concessisse omnibus militibus, and omnibus thingis, and
omnibus libere tenentibus, qui manent in Foresta mea de Honor de Lancaster,
quod possunt, etc. Fleta writes it Tlein, and says, quod significat liberum.

Then, significat servum. Fleta, lib. prim. cap, 47. See Thanns, and Thingus.

Thridborow, is used for a Constable, anno 28 Hen. 8. cap. 10. which also is
noted by M. Lamberd in his Tractate entitled, The duty of Constables, page 6.
which seems to be corruptly used for the Saxon ( freoborh, i. ingenuus
fidejussor,) or ( freborhesheofod, i. vas primarius) Idem, in his explication
of Saxon words, verbo, Centuaria.

Third with hawan man (trium noctium hospes) who if he did any harm, his Host,
by the laws of Saint Edward, and of the Conqueror, was answerable for the harm.
Rogerus Hoveden part poster. suorum annal. fol. 345.

Thokei of fish, anno 22 Ed. 4. cap. 2.

Tholl (Thollonium) est libertas emendi, et vendendi in terra sua. Archainom.
Lam. fol. 132. See Toll.

Thrave of corn, anno 2 Hen. 6. cap. 2. consists of two shooks: and every
shook contains six sheeves. It seems to be a word proper to the North parts.

Thrimsa, comes of (Threo) that is three, and signifies a piece of money of
three shillings. Lamb. explica. of Saxon words, verbo Thrimsa.

TI
Tilsen of saten, anno 1 Hen. 8. cap. 14.

Tincell, comes of the French ( Estincelle, i. scintilla) or the verb (
Estinceller, i. scintillare.) It signifies with us a stuff or cloth made
partly of silk, and partly of gold or silver, so called, because it glistereth
or sparkleth like stars.

Tissue, is a French word signifying as much as (woven) Cloth of Tissue, with
us cloth of silk and silver, or of silk, and gold woven together.

Tithe (Decimae) seems to be an abbreviat of (tything) being the Saxon
(Teethung) a little altered, which signifies Decuriam, Lamb, explication of
Saxon words, verbo Decuria. It fignifieth in our Common law, the tenth part of
all fruits predial, or personal, which be due to God, and so consequently to
his Minister, toward the recompense of his pains taken in instructing his
charge, how to live after Gods commandments, and his continual intercession
that he does or ought to make unto God for their both spiritual and temporal
blessings, Le^it. cap. 27. versu 30. I say the tenth part, though Covarruvias
with other learned Canonists and Schoolmen, hold the rate of tithes, not to be
necessarily the tenth part of the fruits by the moral Law of God. Yet the
better and more Theological opinion is, that they are all deceived, and that
from their error has sprung much wrong to Almighty God, and great mischief to
his Church: and that by the Law of God and nature, no contrary custom ought to
last any longer, than the Pa^^on and Parisnioner shall both think well of it.
Wherefore those customs of paying a half penny for a Lamb, or a penny for a
Calf by such as have under seven in one year, how long soever it has endured,
is but very unreasonable in these days, when both Lambs and Calves are grown
four time dearer, and more, than they were when this price was first accepted.
And therefore no man dischargech well his conscience in this point that pays
not duly the tenth of every Lamb, every Calf, and and every other thing
titheable. For by this course the Minister fares well or evil in a proportion
with his Parishioner, as it pleases God to give increase, whereas by any other
order the one or the other shall find want of indifference as the prices of
things shall rise or fall.

Tithing (Tithingum) is the Saxon word Teothung for the which see (Tithe.) It
signifies (as M Lamberd says in his Duty of Constables) the number or
company of ten men with their families, cast or knit together in a society, all
of them being bound to the King for the peaceable and good behavior of each of
their society. Of these Companies was there own chief or principal person, who
of his office was called (Teothung man) at this day in the West parts
(Tithingman) but now he is nothing but a Constable. For that old discipline of
Tithings is left long sithence. It signifies also a Court, Anno 23 Ed. 3. cap.
4. et an. 9 H. 3. cap. 35. See Chief pledge and Frank Pledge, and Decennier.
Tithing is used for a Court, Magna charta, cap. 25. and Merton, cap. 10.

TO
Todde of wool, is a quantity containing 28. pound in weight, or two Stone.

Tossed (Tostum) is a place wherein a mesuage has stood. West. part 2. symbol.
titulo Fines, Sect. 26.

Toil, comes of the French ( Toil, i. tela) and signifies with us a net or
cord to compass or take Deer.

To lange and to bred. See Bred

Toll, (Tollere) as it is a verb, signifies to defeat or take away, anno 8
Hen. 9. cap. 9.

Toll, alias Thol (Tolnetum, alias Theolonium) is a Saxon word, and has in our
Common law two significations: first it is used for a liberty to buy and sell
within the precincts of a Manor, Lamb. Archainom, fol. 132. which seems to
import so much as a Fair or Market. The words be these: Thol (quod nos dicimus
Tholonium) est scilicet quod habeat libertatem vendendiet emendi in terra sua.
In the second signification it is used for a tribute or custom paid for
passage, etc. as in Bracton. Si cui concedatur talis libertas quod quietus sit
de Theolonio and consuetudinibus dandis per totum Regnum Angliae in terra et
mari, et quod Theolonium et consuetudines capiat infra libertatem suam de
ementibus et vendentibus, etc. lib. 2. cap. 24. number. 3. But even there in the
end of the second number he has this word, Toll (as it seems) in the former
signification also, which by these words above written following a little
after, he interprets to be a liberty as well to take, as to be free from
Toll. The made Latin word (Theolonium) Cassanaeus in consuet. Burgund. page
118. deriveth a Tollendo) but I rather think it comes from the Greek ((...))
or ((...), i. vectigalium redemptio, vel etiam vectigalium exactio) Fleta has
these words of it: Tol significat acquiet antiam Theolonii ubique in Regno,
lib. pri. cap. 47. M. Skene de verb. signif. verbo Toll, says it is a custom,
and that it comes from the Greek word of the same signification ((...)) and
that he who is enfeoffed with Toll, is custom free, and pays no custom: which
is manifest by sundry old books, wherein it is written: Toll hoc est, quod vos
et homines vestri de toto homagio vestro sint quieti de omnibus mercatis, et de
Tolneto, de omnibus rebus empiis et venditis. Thus far he. Kitchen, fol. 104.
makes mention of toll through, and toll traverse, his words be to this effect:
Custom or prescription to have toll through in the High way, is not good: for
it is against the common right. But to have prescription of toll traverse, is
good. In which place the difference between the one, and the other, the new
expositour of Law Terms says to be, that toll traverse is that money, which is
taken for passing over a private man's ground. But this Author seems to differ
from Kitchen touching the lawfulness of toll through, saying, that by reason
of a Bridge provided at the cost and charge of the town, for the ease of
Travelers, he thinks it reasonable, that toll through be enacted toward the
maintenance thereof: which Writer also makes mention of toll Turn: and that
he defines to be toll paid for beasts driven to be sold, though they be not
sold indeed. Where I think, he must mean a toll paid in the return homeward
from the Fair or Market, whither they were driven to be sold. Plowden casu
Willion, fol. 236. agrees in this definition of toll traverse. And this the
Fendists call Parangariam, defining it to be Sumptus and labores ferendi
referendive alicujus causa a principe impositi, cum non per viam, sed alio
versum iter suscipitur. l. 2. Cod. de Episc. and cleri a graeco ((...)) i.
transitus per viam transversam. Gothofred. ad. l. 4. sect. 1. p. de vetera, I
find in Andrew Horns mirour of Justices, lib. 1 cap. des articles, etc. that by
the ancient law of this land, the buyers of corn or cattle in Fairs or Markets,
ought to pay toll to the Lord of the Market, in testimony of their contract
there lawfully made in open market: for that privy contracts were held
unlawful.

Toloneum, or Breve de essendi quietum de Telonen; is a writ that lies in
case, where the Citizens of any City, or Burgesses of any Town, be quit from
toll by the grant of the Kings Predecessors, or prescription: which you have at
large in Fitzh. not. br. fol. 226 See Telonium.

Tolt (Tolta) is a writ whereby a cause depending in a Court Baron, is removed
into the County court. Old not. br. fol. 2. The reason of the appellation
seems to come from the verb (Tollo) v. Coke, lib. 3. in praefatione ad
lectorem.

Tonne. See Tun.

Tonnage, is a custom or impost due for merchandise, brought or carried in
Tuns and such like Vessels, from or to other nations, after a certain race in
every Tun, anno 12 Edw. 4. ca. 3. anno 6 H. 8. ca. 14. and anno pri. Ed. 6. ca.
13. anno pri. Jacobi, ca. 33. I have heard it also called a duty due to the
Mariners for unloading their Ship arrived in any Haven, after the rate of every
Tun.

Torny. See Turney.

Totted, anno 42 Edw. 3. cap. 9. and anno 1 Ed. 6. cap. 15. is a word used of a
debt, which the foreign Apposer or other Officer in the Exchequer notes for a
good debt to the King by writing this word (Tot) unto it.

Tourn. See Turn.

Tout tempa prist and uncore est, that is to say in English, Always ready, and
is at this present: This is a kind of Plee in way of excuse or defense unto him
that is sued for withholding any debt, or duty belonging to the Plaintiff. See
of this, Broke his Abridgement, fol. 258.

TR
Traile baston. See Justices of trial baston.

Traitor (traditor, proditor) See Treason.

Transgressione, is a writ, called commonly a writ or action of Trespass. Of
this Fitzherbert in his Natura brevium, has two sorts: one Vicountiel, so
called because it is directed to the Sheriff, and is not returnable, but to be
determined in the County: The form whereof differs from the other, because it
has not these words, Quire vi and armis, etc. and this see in Fitzherberts
natura brev. fol. 84 G. The other is termed a writ of trespass upon the case,
which is to be sued in the Common bank or the Kings Bench, in which are always
used these words, vi et armis, etc. And of this you have Fitzh. not. br. f. 92.
E. See Trespass. See the diverse use of this writ in the Register original, in
the Table.

Transcript, anno 34, and 35 H. 8. cap. 14. is the copy of any original written
again, or exemplified.

Transcripto Recognitionis factae coram Justiciariis itinerantibus, etc. is a
writ for the certifying of a Recognizance, taken before Justices in Air, into
the Chancery, Regist. orig. fol. 152. b.

Transcripto pedis finis levati mittendo in Cancellariam, is a writ for the
certifying of the foot of a fine levied before Justices in Air, etc. into the
Chancery, eodem, fol. 169. et Register judicial, fol. 14.

Travers, comes of the French (Traverser, i^transfigere.) It signifies in
our Common law sometime to deny, sometime to overthrow, or undo a thing done.
Touching the former signification, take these words in Wests Symbol. part 2.
titulo Chancery, Sect. 54. An answer (says he, speaking of an answer to a bill
in Chancery) is that, which the Defendent pleads, or says in Bar to avoid
the Plaintiffs bill, or action, either by confession and avoiding, or by
denying and traversing the material parts thereof. And again, Section 55. A
replication is the Plaintiffs speech or answer to the Defendants answer, which
must affirm and pursue his bill, and confess and avoid, deny or traverse the
Defendants answer. And the formal words of this traverse are in Lawyers French
sans ceo) in Latin (absque hoc) in English (without that.) See Kitchen, fol.
227. titulo Affirmative et Negative. In the second signification I find it in
Stawnfords praerog. cap. 20. through the whole Chapter, speaking of traversing
an Office: which is nothing else, but to prove, that an Inquisition made of
goods or lands by the Escheatour, is defective and untruly made. So traversing
of an Indictment, is to take issue upon the chief matter thereof: which is none
other to say, than to make contradiction, or to deny the point of the
Indictment. As in presentment against A. for a Highway over-flown with water
for default of scowring a ditch, which he and they whose estate he has in
certain land there, have used to scowr and cleanse; A. may traverse either the
matter, viz. that there is no Highway there, or that the ditch is sufficiently
scowred: or otherwise he may traverse the cause, viz. that he has not the
land, etc. or that he and they whose estate, etc. have not used to scowr the
ditch. Lamb. Earenarcha, lib. 4. cap. 13. page 521, 522. Of Traverse, see a
whole chapter in Kitchen, fol. 240. See the new book of Entries, verbo Traverse.

Treason (traditio, vel proditio) comes of the French ( trahison, i.
proditio) and signifies an offense committed against the the amplitude and
Majesty of the Common wealth. West. part secund. symbol. titulo Indictment,
sect. 63. by whom it is there divided into High treason, which other call altam
proditionem, and Petit treason. High treason he defines to be an offense done
against the security of the Common wealth, or of the Kings most excellent
Majesty: whether it be by imagination, word or deed; as to compass or imagine
treason, or the death of the Prince, or the Queen his Wife, or his Son and Heir
apparent, or to deflowre the Kings wife, or his eldest Daughter unmarried, or
his eldest sons wife: or levy war against the King in his Realm, or to adhere
to his enemies, aiding them, or to counterfeit the Kings great Seal, privy
Seal, or money, or wittingly to bring false money into this Realm counterfeited
like unto the money of England, and utter the same: or to kill the Kings
Chancellor, Treasurer, Justice of the one bench or of the other, Justices in
Eyr, Justices of Assise, Justices of Oyer and Terminer, being in his place, and
doing of his office, anno 25 Ed. prim. cap. 2. or forging of the Kings seal
Manuel, or privy signet, privy seal, or foreign coin current within the Realm,
anno 2 Mar. cap. 6. or diminishing or impairing of money current, anno 5 Eliz.
cap. 11. et anno 14 El. ca. 3. et 18 Eliz. ca. pri. and many other actions
which you may read there and in other places particularly expressed. And in
case of this treason a man forfeiteth his lands, and goods to the King only.
And it is also called treason Paramount, anno 25 Ed. 3. ca. 2. The form of
Judgment given upon a man convicted of high treason is this. The Kings
Sergeant after the verdict delivered, craveth Judgment against the Prisoner in
behalf of the King. Then the Lord Steward (if the traitor have been noble) or
other Judge (if he be under a Peer) says thus: N. Earl of P. For so much as
thou before this time have been of these treasons indicted, and this day
arraigned for the same, and put thy self upon God and thy Peers, and the Lords
thy Peers have found thee guilty, my Judgment is, that thou shall be conveyed
unto the Tower of London, whence thou came, and from thence drawn through the
midst of London to Tiburn, and there hanged: and living thou shall be cut down,
thy bowels to be cut out and burnt before thy face, thy head cut off, and thy
body to be divided into four quarters, and disposed at the Kings Majesty's
pleasure: and God have mercy upon thee.

Petit treason is rather described by examples, than any where logically
defined: as when a servant kills his Master, or a Wife her Husband, or when
a secular or religious man kills his Prelate, to whom he owes faith and
obedience. And in how many other cases petit treason is committed, see
Cromptons Justice of peace. And this manner of treason gives forfeiture of
Escheats to every Lord within his own fee, anno 25 Edw. 3. cap. 2. Of treason
see Bracton, lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 3. nu. pri. et 2. Treason compriseth both
high and petit treason, anno 25 Ed 3. stat. 3. ca. 4.

Treasure trove (Thesaurus inventus) is as much as in true French (Tresor
trouve) i. treasure found: and signifies in our Common law, as it does in the
Civil law, id est, veterom depositionem pecuniae, cujus non extat m^m^^ia, ut
jam dominum non habcat. l. 31. sect. prim. de acquir. rerum Dom. Near unto
which definition comes Braction. lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 3. number. 4. And this
trea^ure ^ound, though the Civil law do give it to the finder, according to the
law of nature; yet the law of England gives it to the King by his Prerogative,
a^ appears by Bracton ubi supra. And therefore as he also says in the 6
Chapter, it is the Coroners office to enquire thereof by the Country to the
Kings use. And Stawnford, pl. cor. lib. prim. cap. 42. says, that in ancient
times, it was doubtful, whether the concealing of treasure found were felony,
yea or not: and that Bracton calls it gravem praesumptionem, et quasi crimen
furti. But the punishment of it at these days, as he proves out of Fitzh.
Abridgement, page 187. is imprisonment, and fine, and not life and member. And
if the owner may any ways be known, then does it not belong to the Kings
Prerogative. Of this you may read Br^ton also, cap. 17. who says, that it is
every Subjects part, as soon as he has found any treasure in the Earth, to
make it known to the Coroners of the County, or to the Bailiff, etc. See
Kitchen also fol. 40.

Treasurer, thesaurarius, comes of the French ( treserier, i. quaestor,
praefectus fisci) and signifies an Officer, to whom the treasure of another,
or others, is committed to be kept, and truly disposed of. The chiefest of
these with us, is the Treasurer of England, who is a Lord by his Office, and
one of the greatest men of the Land: under whose charge and government is all
the Princes wealth contained in the Exchequer, as also the check of all
Officers any way employed in the collecting of the Imposts, Tributes, or other
Revenues belonging to the Crown. Smith de Repub. Anglor. lib. 2. cap. 14. more
belonging to his Office, see anno 20 Edw. 3. cap. 6. et anno 31 Henr. 6. cap.
5. et anno 4 Edw. 4. cap. prim. et anno 17 ejusdem, cap. 5. et anno prim. R. 2.
cap. 8. et anno 21 Henr. 8. cap. 20. et anno pri. Ed. 6. cap. 13. Ockams
Lucubrations affirm, that the Lord chief Justice had this authority in times
past: and of him has these words: Iste excellens Sessor omnibus, quae in
inferiore vel superiore schaccio sunt, prospicio. Adnutum ipsius quaelibet
officia subjects disponuntur: sic tamen ut ad Domini Regis utilitatem justo
perveniant. Hic tameninter caterae videtur excellens, quod potest his sub
testimonio suo breve domini Regis f^cere fieri, ut de thesauor quaelibet summa
libixetur. ved us computetur quod sibi ex Domini Regis mandato pranoverit
computandum, vel si maluerit, breve suum sub aliarum testimonio faciet de his
rebus. This high Officer has by varetie of his Office at this day, the
nomination of the Eschetors yearly throughout England, and gives the places of
all Customers, Controllers, and Searchers in all the Ports of the Realm. He
sits in the Chequer Chamber, and with therest of the Court, orders things
to the Kings best benefit. He with the Barons may by Statute stall debts of
three hundred pounds and under. And by Commission from his Majesty, he with
others joined with him, lets leases for lives or years, of the lands that
came to the Crown by the dissolution of Abbeys. He by his Office gives warrant
to certain men to have their wine without impost. He takes declaration of all
the money paid into the Receipt of the Exchequer, and of all Receivers accounts.

Then is there a Treasurer of the King; household, who is also of the Privy
Council, and in the absence of the Steward of the Kings Household, has power
with the Controller and the Steward of the Marshalsea without commission to
hear and determine treasons, misprisions of treasons, murder, homicide, and
blood shed, committed within the Kings Palace. Stawnfopl. cor. l. 3. c. 5. In
the statute, an. 28 R. 2. c. 18. et 11 H. 7. ca. 16. mention is made of the
Treasurer of Calis. In Westminster. 2. cap. 8. of the Treasurer of the Exchequer, et
anno 27 Edw. 3. stat. 2. cap. 18. et anno 35 Eliz. cap. 4. of the Treasurer of
the Navy, or Treasurer of the wars, or garrisons of the Navy, anno 39 El. 7.
Treasurer of the Kings Chamber, anno 26 H. 8. cap. 3. et anno 33 ejusdem, cap.
39. Treasurer of the wars, anno 7 Henr. 3. cap. prim. anno 3. Honr. 8. cap. 5.
Treasurer for the Chancery West. part 2. symbol. titulo Fines, sect. 152.
Treasurer of the Kings Wardrope, anno 15 Edw. 3. stat. prim. cap. 3. et anno 25
ejusdem, stat. 5. cap. 21. whose office you have well set out in Fleta, lib. 2.
cap. 14. Treasurer of the County for poor Soldiers, anno 35 Eliz. cap. 4. And
most Corporations through the Kingdom, have an Officer of this name, that
receives their rents, and disburseth their common expenses.

Treat comes of the French ( traire, i. emulgere) and signifies in the
Common law, as much as taken out, or withdrawn. As a Iurour was challenged, for
that he might not dispend forty pounds, and for that cause he was treat by the
Statute, Old not. br. fol. 159. that is, removed or discharged. Bread of treat,
anno 51 H. 3. Statute of Bread, etc. what it signifies I cannot learn.

Trespass (Transgressio) is a French word, signifying a much as Mors, obitus,
excessus. The reason whereof I take to be, because in interpretation it is a
passage from one place or estate to another: for in Britton, cap. 29. I find
trespassants for passengers. In our Common law and language, it is used for any
gransgression of the law, under treason, felony, or misprission of treason, or
of fe^ony, or may be gathered out of Stawnf. pl. cor. fol. 38. where he says,
that for a Lord of the Parliament to depart from the Parliament without the
Kings license, is neither treason nor felony, but trespals. And again, fol. 31.
saying that where it was wont before the Statute made, anno prim. Edw. a called
Statutum de frangentibus prisonam, that the breach of Prison was felony, if it
were the Kings prison: it is sithence but trespass, except the Prisoner were
committed for felony. But it is most commonly used for that wrong or damage,
which is dove by a private man to the King, as in his Forest, pl. cor. lib. 2.
cap. 18. or to another private man. And in this signification it is of two
sorts: trespass general, otherwise termed, trespass vi et armis; and trespass
especial, otherwise called trespass upon the case. And this seems to be
without force. Terms of the Law. Action upon the case, as appears by Kitchen,
fol. 176. The former I take to be called general, because it rises from that
general ground in Law, and whatsoever is done by any private man's humor, vi et
armis, is an offense. The latter I call especial, because Kitchen calls the
other general: and another reason may be this, because it springs from a
particular case or fact, not contained under any other general head. And the
action lying for this trespass, is otherwise called an action upon the case,
as may be gathered out of diverse places under the title Trespass, in Brook his
Abridgement. How to distinguish the form of these writs or actions, see
Fitzherb. not. br. fol. 86. L. and 87. H. I. in an Action of trespass, this is
perpetual, that the Plaintiff sueth for damages, or the value of the burt done
unto him by the Defendant. It seems an hard thing to distinguish these two
kinds of trespasses so, as to be able to say when it is a trespass vi et
armis, and when upon the case: as may well appear to him that shall peruse this
title in Brook. But this is to be left to the experience of grave and skillful
Pleaders. I find moreover in Kitchen, so. 188. that there is a trespass local,
and trespass transitory: trespass local is that, which is so annexed to a
place certain, as if the Defendant join issue upon the place, and traverse the
place, only by saying, Absque hoc, that he did the trespass in the place
mentioned in the declaration, and aver it, it is enough to defeat the action.
Trespass transitory is that, which cannot be defeated by the Defendants
traverse of the place, saying. Without that I committed the trespass in the
place declared: because the place is not material. Examples of both you have
set down by Kitchen, in the place above named, to this effect: traverse by
(Absque boc) of trespass in battery, or goods brought in, is transitory and not
local: as it is of trees cut, and he^bs.

And therefore in trespass transitory, the place shall not make issue, neither
is it traversable: no more than is a trespass upon a case of an Assumption.
Bracton in his fourth book, cap. 34. number. 6. divides transgressionem in
majorem et minorem: which place read. See also great diversity of trespasses in
the new book of Enteries, verbo Trespass.

Trial. (triatio) is used in our Common law, for the examination of all causes
civil or criminal, according to the laws of our Realm. Of this word Stawn. pl.
cor. lib. 2. cap. 26. writes to this effect; There was a Statute made prim.
and secund. Philip. Mar. cap. 10. to this purpose. And be it farther enacted by
the anthority aforesaid, that all trials hereafter to be had, awarded or made
for any Treason, shall be had and used according to the due order and course of
the Common laws of this Realm, and not otherwise, etc. By this word (trial)
says Stawnf. in that place, some understand as well the inquest that indicteth
a man, as the inquest upon the arraignment, that attainteth or acquiteth him.
For these two make but one entire trial, that every man is to have, when he is
impeached of treason. But others have answered to this, that trial in common
speech, is the trial that a man is to have, after he is indicted, and not
before. For in Law the Indictment is naught, but the accusation against him,
which he is to make answer unto, and that being tried, it either attainteth, or
acquitteth him. So that the trial is the lssue, which is tried upon the
Indictment, and not the Indictment it self. For that is no part of the thing
which tries, but the thing which is tried, and the offense. And so this word
Trial understood in the Statute an. 33 H. 8. c. 23. where he says thus; Must
be indicted within the Shires or places where they committed their offenses,
and also tried before by the Inhabitants, or Freeholders. So he puts a
difference between Indictment and trial, as he does afterward in these words:
There to be indicted and tried of their offenses, etc. Thus far Stawnf. Sir
Tho. Smith, de Repub. Angl. lib. 2. ca. 5. says, That by order and usage of
England, there are three Trials, that is 3 ways and manners, whereby absolute
and definite Judgment is given by the Parliament, which is the highest and
most absolute, by battle and great assise: which he severally describes in
three Chapters following, though not so fully as the thing requires. But of
the great Assise, he speaks at large in the three and twentieth Chapter of
the same book. And of these Trials see more in Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 2. cap.
pri. 2. and 3. whereof he divides the great Assise into two sorts: one proper
to Barons of the Parliament, which is by 20 or 18 of their Peers: the other
common to others of lower condition, which is by 12 men, that be neighbors to
the place where the offense was committed, And of those you may read him at
large in the said Chapters there following. See Twelve men. See the New book of
Entries, verbo Trial.

Trihing (Trihinga, vel Trithinga) seems by a place in Edward the Confessors
laws, set out by Master Lamberd, nu. 34. to be the third part of a Shire or
Province, otherwise called (Letbe) which we now call (Leet.) The same Law does
M. Camden mention. page 102, and 103. This Court is above a Court Baron, and
inferior to the Shire, or County. This word is also used in the sentence of
excommunication upon the great Charter and Charter of the Forest, denounced in
the days of Edward the first, as it is latined in the book called Pupilla
oculi, part 5. cap. 22. A. I. In these words: Visus autem defranco plegio sic
fiat, sc. quod pax nostra teneatur, and quod Trihinga integra sit, sicut esse
consuevit, etc. Of this Fleta lib. 2. cap. 61. sect. final. writes thus;
Sciendnm est quod aliae potestates erant super Wapentakia, quae Tritinga
dicebantur, eo quod erat tertia pars provinciae, qui vero super eas
dominabantur, trithingreves vocabantur, quibus deferebantur causae quae non in
Wapentakiis poterant definiri in Shiram, sicque quod vecatur Hundredum, jam per
variationem locorum and idiomatu, Wapentakie appellatur; and tria vel quatuor
vel plura Hundreda solebant trithinga vocari: and quod in trithing is non
poterant diffiniri in Shiram, 1. in Comitatum deferebatur terminandum. Modernis
autem temporibus pro uuo et eodem habentur apud howines Hundreda, Wapentakia
and Trithinga. Learn whether those divisions in Yorkshire called ridings, be
not quasi trithings. Of this Roger Hoveden, part poster. suornmannal. fol.
346. b. has the same words in effect.

Treswell of double soled shoes, anno 2, and 3 Edw. 6. cap. 9. which as I have
heard, should rather be written Creswel, signifying the broad edge or verge of
the shooe-sole round about.

Trinity house, is a certain house at Debtford, which belongs to a Company or
Corporation of Seafaring men, that have power by the Kings Charter, to take
knowledge of those that destroy Sea-marks, and to redress their doings, as
also to correct the faults of Saylors, etc. and to take care of diverse other
things belonging to Navigation, and the Seas, v. anno 8 Elizabeth. cap. 13. and
anno 35 ejusdem, cap. 6.

Trink, is a kind of Net to fish withal, anno 2 H. 6. cap. 15.

Triours, be such as be chosen by the Court to examine whether a challenge made
to the panel, or any of the panel, be just, yea or not. Brook, titulo
Challenge, fol. 122. and Old not. br. fol. 158.

Tritis, alias Tristis, is an immunity from that attendance in the Forest,
whereby every man dwelling in the Forest, is tied to be ready, holding of a
Greyhound, when the Lord of the Forest is disposed to chase within his Forest,
at such place as he shall be appointed, or else to be amerced for his default.
Manwood part pri. of his Forest laws, page 86. and Cromptons Jurisd. fol. 192.
and 197.

Tronage (Tronagium) is a kind of toll, Westminster. 2. cap. 25. anno 13 Ed. 1. taken
(as it seems) for weighing. For I find in Fleta lib. 2. cap. 12. sect. Item
ulnas, that trona is a beam to weigh with. See Weight.

Trover, comes of the French ( Trouver, i. Invenire) It signifies in our
Common law, an action which a man has against one that having found any of his
goods, resuseth to deliver them upon demand. See the new book of Entries, verb.
Trover.

Troy weight (Pondus Trojae) See Weight.

TU
Tumbrell (Tumbrellum) is an engine of punishment, which ought to be in every
liberty that has view of Frank pledge, for the correction of Scolds and
unquiet women, Kitchen, fol. 13. a. New book of Entries. Franchis. 2. and Quo
warranto. 1. See Cucking stool.

Tun, is a measure of Oil or Wine, containing twelve score and twelve Gallons;
anno 1 Rich. 3. cap. 12. that is four Hogsheads.

Tunnage. See Tonnage.

Turbary (Turbaria) is an Interest to dig Turves upon a Common, Kitchen, fol.
94. Old natura brevium, fol. 70. It comes of the rude Latin word (Turba)
which is used for a Turf. Lynd. in provin. de decimis cap. finali.

Turmerick (Turmerica) is a certain root of an herb growing in Arabia, as I
have been informed, very wholesome for diverse diseases in horses, and sometime
used for a man also in case of Jaundies. It is reckoned among the garbeable
drugs, anno 1 Jac. ca. 19.

Turn (Turnum) is the Sheriffs Court, kept every year twice: once after Easter,
and again, after Michaelmas, Magna Charta, caput 35. and within one Month after
each Feast, anno 3 Ed. 3. cap. 15. from this Court are exempted only,
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons, all religious men, and
women, and all such as have Hundreds of their own to be kept. And these are not
bound to appear there, except their appearance be especially required upon some
extraordinary cause, anno 25 Hen. 3. ca. 10. and Briton, ca. 29. It seems to
be called the Sheriffs turn of the French word ( Tour, i. ambitus circuitus,
vicissitudo) and is of Briton called Tour, cap. 61. sub fine capitis, as if we
would say, (The Sheriff his course) for (as Briton notes in the said twenty
ninth Chapter) that which before the Sheriff, is called the Sheriff^ Turn, is
called in the Court of Franchises and Hundreds, the view of Frank-pledge:
wherein inquiry is especially made of such as be not in any Dozin: with whom
Fleta agrees: And by Fleta it appears that this Turn was the Sheriffs course
to keep his Court in every Hundred, l. 2. ca. 52. in princip. So that as the
inferior Courts had their times to take knowledge of those, and other causes
belonging to their cognizance: So the Sheriff had his course or Turn to do the
like at these two several seaseasons. That if there were any defects in them,
it might he redressed in these, and Gods peace and the Kings so much the more
carefully observed. This as Master Lamberd says, was of old called also the
Sheriffs moot, l. 4. ca: 4. In this Court (as Briton says ubi supra) the
Sheriff causes to be found out twelve of the most sage, loyal and sufficient
men of all the Hundred (for he kept his turn twice every year in each Hundred.
Magna Charta, cap. 35. and Briton ubi supra.) whom he charged upon their Oaths
to present the truth touching the articles ministered unto them, and set down by
Briton in the same Chapter. This done, he put all other to their oaths,
according to their dozins and villages, truly to present unto the former twelve
all things concerning such articles, as by them they should be asked of. But
sithence the Hundred Courts, are all called to the County by the statute, anno
14 Ed. 3. cap. 3. Statut. pri. these Turns be likewise kept in one chief place
of every shire, and not severally in every Hundred, as before they were. Of
this you may read more in Briton, or in Cromptons Jurisd. fol. 230. and in the
Mirour of Justices, lib. pri. cap. de Turns.

Turney (Turneamentum) comes of the French ( Tourney, i. Decursorium) It
signifies a Mattial exercise of Knights or soldiers fighting one with another
in disport, and is thus defined, ca. felicis Extra de Torneamentis. Torneamenta
dicuntar Nandinae vel feriae, in quibui milites ex condicto convenire, and
adostentationem virium suarum, and audaciae, temere congredis olent. This word
is used in the statute, anno 24 Hen. octa. cap. 13. and as I have heard, it
signifies with us in England those combats that are made with arming swords on
Horseback. And I think the reason of the name to proceed from the French
Tourner, i. vertere) because it consists much in agility both of horse and
man.

Turno vicecomitum, is a writ that lies for those that are called to the
Sheriffs turn, out of their own Hundred. Register orig. fol. 174.

Tuain nithes gest (hospes duarum noctium) Roger Hoveden, part poster. suorum
annalium, fol. 345. b. who if he did harm to any, his host was not answerable
for it, but himself. See Thridinithes hawan man.

Twelve men (Duodecim homines legales) is a number of 12 persons, or upwards to
the number of 24. by whose discretion all trials pass both in civil and
criminal causes, through all Courts of the common Law in this Realm. First for
civil causes, when proof is made of the matter in question, as the parties and
their Counsel think good on both sides, the point of the fact, that they are to
give their verdict of, is delivered likewise unto them, which we call the
issue: and then are they put in mind of their oath formerly taken, to do right
between party and party, and so sent out of the Court severally by themselves
to consider upon the evidence of both sides, until they be agreed; which done,
they return to the Court again, and deliver their verdict by the mouth of the
foreman. And according to the verdict, Judgment afterward passes, either
condemnatory for the Plaintiff, or absolutory for the Defendant. These twelve
be called twelve milites. Glanvile, lib. 2. cap. 14, and 15. and so be they in
Bracton diverse times: but that word is altered.

In causes criminal there be two sorts of Enquests, one called the grand
Enquest, and the other the Enquest of life and death. The grand Enquest is so
called, either because it consists commonly of a greater number than twelve,
as of twenty four, eighteen, or sixteen at the least; or else because all
causes criminal or penal first pass through them: whereas the other Enquest is
especially appointed for one or few matters touching life and death, committed
to their consideration. Those of the grand Enquest are also called by Bracton
12 milites, lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. pri. number. 2. because they were wont to be
Knights, as it seems, and not inferiors, except so many Knights could not be
found, Idem, eodem, number. 1. in fine. And their function is to receive all
presentiments made unto them of any offense, and accordingly to give their
general opinion of the presentment by writing either these words (Billa vera)
upon the bill of presentment, which is an indictment of the party presented: or
else this word (Ignoramus) which is an absolving of him. Now as criminal causes
be of two sorts, either capital touching life and member, or finable: so is
there a double course of these Inditements. For in causes only finable, the
party indicted must either traverse the Indictment by denying it, and so it is
referred to a petit Jury, whereby he is either convicted or discharged of the
crime, or else he confessing it, the Court sets his fine upon his head
without more work. But in matters of life and death, the party indicted is
commanded to hold up his hand, and answer (guilty) or (not guilty) if (guilty)
he stands convicted by his own confession: if (not guilty) he is farther
referred to the Enquest of life and death, which consider upon the proof
brought against the Prisoner, and accordingly bring in their verdict (Guilty)
or (not Guilty) so is he judged to dye, or delivered by the Court. Of this read
more in Indictment, Assise, Jury. See the statute, anno 35 H. 8. cap. 6. and 37
ejusdem, cap. 22. et anno 2 Ed. 6. cap. 32. et anno 5 Eliz. cap. 25.

VA
VAcation (vacatio) has an especial signification in this Kingdom, being used
for all that time respectively which passes between term and term, at London.
And when such times, begun and ended in our Ancestors days, see Roger Hovedens
annals part posteriori, fol. 343. a. where you shall find that this
intermission was called (pax Dei et Ecclesiae.)

Vaccarie, alias vacharie (vaccaria, alias vacheria) seems to be a house to
keep kine in, Fleta lib. 2. cap. 41. sect. Item inquiratur 12. and Cromptons
Jurisd. fol. 194. in these words: without warrant no subject may have within
the Forest a vacary. But in the statute anno 37 H. 8. cap. 16. I find vachary
to be, as it were a special proper name, of a certain quantity and compass of
ground within the Forest of Ashedown.

Value (valentia, valor) The word is in it self plain enough: But I cannot omit
one place in M. West, part 2. symbol. titulo Inditements. sect. 70. V. W.
touching the difference between value and price. These be his words. And the
value of those things, in which offenses are committed, is usually comprised in
Inditements, which seems necessary in theft, to make a difference from petit
larceny: and in trespass, to aggravate the fault, and increase the fine. But no
price of things, ferae naturae, may be expressed, as of Deer, of Hares, etc. If
they be not in Parks, and Warrens, which is a Liberty, anno 8 Edward. 4. fol.
5. nor of Charters of land. And where the number of the things taken, are to be
expressed in the Indictment, as of young Doves in a Dovehouse, young Hawks in a
wood, there must be said (pretii) or (ad valentiam) but of diverse dead things
(ad valentiam) and not (protii) of coin not current it shall be (pretii) but of
coin current, it shall neither be said (pretii) nor (ad valentiam) for the
price and value thereof is certain. But of counterfeit coin, shall be said (ad
valentiam) and in counterfeiting of coin shall not be said (december libras in
denariis Dominae Reginae) nor (in pecunia Dominae Reginae) but (ad instar
pecuniae Dominae Reginae.)

Valor of marriage (Valor maritagii) is a writ that lies for the Lord, having
proffered covenable marriage to the Infant, without disparidgement, against the
Infant coming to his years, if he refuse to take the Lords offer. And it is to
recover the value of the marriage. Regist. orig. fol. 164. Old not. br. fol. 90.

Variarce, comes of the French ( varier, i. alterare) it signifies in the
Common law, an alteration, or change of condition after a thing done. For
example, the Commonalty of a Town make a Composition with an Abbot. Afterward
this Town by a grant from the King obtains Bailiffs. This is a variance, and
in this case, if the Abbot commence any suit for breach of the composition, he
must vary from the words of the Commonalty set down in the Composition, and
begin against the Bailiffs, and the Commonalties Brook tit. Variance, fol. 292.
It is also used for an alteration of something formerly laid in a plee, which
is easilier known what it is, than when it may be used, as it appears by
Brook through the whole title aforesaid. See variance in the new book of
Entries.

Vassal (vasallus) signifies him that holds land in fee of his Lord, Hot.
verbo Feudal, we call him more usually a Tenent in fee: whereof some owe
fidelity and service, and are called vassalli jurati, some that owe neither,
and are called vassalli injurati. But of this later sort, I think that in
England we have not any. Of these thus writes Hotom. in his disputations upon
the Feuds, cap. 3. Proprie is vassa dicitur, qui ab Imperatore regale feudum
accipit, vassallus autem (...) diminutivo nomine qui ab illo feudale beneficium
adeptus est: quasi qui in vassi fide et clientela est, etc. M. Skene de verbor.
signif. verb. Ligentia, says, that vassallus is divided into Homologum, et non
homologum; Homologus is he that swears service with exception of a higher
Lord: and non homologus, is he that swears without exception, all one with
Ligeus. And the same Author verb. Vassallus, says, that it is vassallus, quosi
bassallus, id est, inferior soc^us. From the French ( bas, i. humilis,
dimissus) and the Dutch word ( gesel, i. sccius:) his reason is, because the
vassal is inferior to his Master, and must serve and reverence him: and yet he
is in manner his companion, because each of them, is obliged one to the other.
He says farther out of Cujaceus, lib. prim. de Feud. that leads, leodes,
fideles, homines nostri, feudatarii, ministeriales, beneficiarii, beneficiati,
vassalli, signify almost all one thing. And a little after he says thus: In
the laws of the Feuds, vassallus is called fidelis, quia fidelit atem jurat.
Amongst vassals, the first place of dignity is given to them that are Duces,
Marchiones, Comites, and are called Capitanei Regni. The second is granted to
Barons, and others of like estate, and are called Valvasores Majores. The third
to them who are called Gentlemen, or Nobles, holding of Barons; which also may
have under them vassals that be Gentlemen. And such vassals holding in chief of
Barons, are called Valvasores Minores. And they which hold of Gentlemen, are
called Vassalli, valvassini, seu minimi valvasores. But in this Realm (he
speaks of Scotland) they that hold of Barons, are called Milites, and they
that hold of them, are called Subvassores. Thus sar Master Skene.

Vasto, is a writ that lies for the heir against the Tenent, for term of life,
or of years, for making waste, or for him in the Reversion or Remainder, Fitzh.
not. br. fol. 55. Regist. orig. fol. 72, and 76. and Regist. Judicial, fol.
17.21, 23, and 69. v. anno 6 Edw. pri. cap. 5.

Vavasour (vavasor, alias, valvasor) is one that in dignity is next unto Baron.
Cambden Britan. page 109. Bracton, lib. prim. cap. 8. says thus of this kind
of men: Sunt and alii potentes sub rege, qui dicuntur Barons, hoc est, robur
belli: sunt and alii qui dicuntur Vavasores, viri magne dignitatis. Vavasor
enim, nibil melius dici poterit, quam vas sortitum ad valetudinem, Jacobutius
de Franchis in praeludio Feudorum. tit. prim. number. 4. etc. calls them
Valvasores, and gives this reason of it: Quia assident valvae, i. portae
domini in festis, in quibus consueverunt homines curtizare and eis reverentiam
exhibere, propter Beneficium eis collatum, sicut libertus patrono: M. Camden in
his Br^tan. page 108. has these words of them. Primis etiam Normannorum
temporibus, and Thani proximi a Comitibus in dignitate censebantur. Et
valvasores majores (si illis qui de feudis, cribunt oredimus) iid^m fuerunt
Barons.

VE
Vendi^soni expo^as, is a writ ludicial, directed to the Undersheriff,
commanding him to sell goods that he has formerly by commandment taken into
his hands, for the satisfying of a judgment given into the Kings Court,
Register judscial, fol. 33. b.

Venire facias, is a writ judicial, and goes out of the record; lying where
two parties plead, and come to issue, sc. upon the saying of the Country. For
then the party Plaintiff, or Defendant shall have this writ directed to the
Sheriff, that he cause to come twelve lawful men of the same Country, to say
the truth upon the said issue taken. And if the Enquest come not at the day of
this writ returned, then shall go a Habcas corpora, and after a Distress until
they come. Old nar. br. fol. 157. See how diversely this writ is used in the
table of the Registor judicial. There is also a writ of this name, that is
original, as appears in the Register orig. fol. 200. b. which M. Lamberd in
his Processes annexed to his Eirenarcha says to be the common Process upon
any presentment not being felony, nor especially appointed for the fault
presented by Statute. Whereof he sets down an example in the same place. See
also the new book of Entries, verbo Enquest, fol. 253. columma 1, 2, and 3.

Venire sacias tot matronas. See Ventre inspiciendo, See Lamb. Eirenarcha, li.
4. ca. 14. pa. 532.

Venew (vicinetum) is taken for a neighbor, or near place. As for example,
twelve of the Assize ought to be of the same Venew where the demand is made,
Old not. br. fol. 115. and in the statute anno 4 H. 4. cap. 26. and anno 25 H.
8. cap. 6. I find these words: And also shall return in every such panell upon
the (venire facias) six sufficient Hundreders at the least, if there be so many
within the hundred where the Venew lies.

Ventre inspiciendo, is a writ for the search of a woman, that says she is
with child, and thereby withholds land from him that is the next heir at the
common law, Register original, fol. 227. a.

Verdour (viridarius) comes of the French ( verdeur, i. Saltuarius, vel
custos nemoris) he is (as M. Manwood, part pri. of his Forest laws, page 332.
defines him) a Judicial Officer of the Kings forest, chosen by the King, in
the full County of the same Shire, within the Forest, where he does dwell, and
is sworn to maintain, and keep the Assizes of the Forest, and also to view,
receive, and and inroll the Attachments and presentiments of all manner of
Trespasses of the Forest, of vert and venison. And the same Author upon the
first article of Canutus Charter, in the beginning of the same part, says,
that these in the Saxons times were called (Paegened) being four in number, and
they chief men of the Forest, as then they were. Their Fee was in Canutus time,
each of them every year of the Kings allowance, two horses, one of them with a
saddle, another of them without a saddle, one Sword, five Iavelings, one Spear,
one Shield, and ten pounds in money. These four (as appears by the said
Charter, number. 11.) had regalem potestatem, and might proceed to a threefold
judgment: And if any man offered them, or any of them violence, if he were a
free man, he should lose his freedom, and all that he had: if a villein, he
should lose his right hand. And all the Officers of the Forest were to be
corrected and punished by them; Ibidem, number. 10. The Verdour is made by the
Kings writ, Cromptons jurisd. fol. 165. the form of which writ you have in
Fitzh. not. brev. fol. 164. which is directed to the Sheriff for the choice of
him in a full County, by the assent of the said County. Yet if a Verdour be
suddenly sick or dead, at the time of the Justice seat, a new may be chosen
without a writ, Manwood part prim. page 72. the office is (as Crompton says
loco allegato) properly to look to the vert, and to see that it be well
maintained. Also when any forfeiture is taken in the Forest before the
Foresters or other Ministers, the price thereof shall be delivered to the
Verdour, who is to answer for it before the Justices in Eyr. And if he die, his
heir is chargeable therewith. Crompton ibidem. The form of his oath at his
admittance you may see in Manwoods first part of his Forest laws, page 51. who
there calls him verderour, alias verdictor. You shall truly serve our
Sovereign Lord the King, in the office of a verderor of the Forest W. you shall
to the uttermost of your power, and knowledge, do for the profit of the King,
so far as it does appertain unto you to do. You shall preserve and maintain the
ancient rights and franchises of his Crown: you shall not conceal from his
Majesty any rights or privileges, nor any offense either in vert or venison, or
any other thing. You shall not withdraw, nor abridge any defaults, but shall
endeavor your self to manifest and redress the same, and if you cannot do
that of your self, you shall give knowledge thereof unto the King, or unto his
Justice of the Forest. You shall deal indifferently with all the Kings liege
people: you shall execute the laws of the Forest, and do equal right and
justice, as well unto the poor, as unto the rich in that appertains unto your
office: you shall not oppress any person by color thereof, for any reward,
favor, or malice. All these things you shall to the uttermost of your power
observe and keep. Their Office is farther expressed, eodem, page 93. which is
to sit in the Court of Attachment, to see the Attachments of the Forest, to
receive the same of the Foresters and Woodwards, that do present them, and then
to enter these attachments into their Roles.

Verdict (veredictum) is the answer of a Jury or Enquest made upon any cause
civil or criminal, committed by the Court to their consideration or trial. And
this verdict is twofold: either general or especial, Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 3.
cap. 9. A general verdict is that which is given or brought into the Court, in
like general terms to the general issue: as in an action of disseisin the
Defendant pleads, No wrong, no disseisin. Then the issue is this in general,
whether the fact in question be a wrong or not. And this committed to the Jury,
they upon consideration of their evidence, come in and say, either for the
Plaintiff, that it is wrong, and disseisin; or for the Defendant, that it is no
wrong, no disseisin. And again, the prisoner at the bar pleading, Not guilty:
the Enquest in like general terms bring in their verdict, either for the King,
Guilty; or for the prisoner, Not guilty. A special verdict is that, whereby
they say at large, that such a thing, and such, they find to be done by the
Defendant, or Tenent, so declaring the course of the fact, as in their opinion
it is proved: and for the quality of the fact, they pray the discretion of the
Court. And this special verdict, if it contain any ample declaration of the
cause, from the beginning to the end, is also called a verdict at large.
Whereof read diverse examples in Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 3. cap. 9. and one or two
in Littleton, fol. 78. and 79. See the new book of Entries, verb. Verdict.

Verge, (virgata) may seem to come from the French ( verger, i. viridarium,
hortus.) It is used here in England for the compass about the Kings Court, that
boundeth the jurisdiction of the Lord Steward of the Kings household, and of the
Coroner of the Kings house, and that seems to have been twelve miles compass,
anno 13 Richard. 2. Stat. prim. cap. 3. and Fitzh. not. br. fol. 24. B. and
Briton, fol. 68. b. 69. a. and Fletae, lib. 2. cap. 2. and Sir Edward Cooks
Reports, lib. 4. fol. 47. a. For this see the Statute, anno 33 Hen. 8. cap. 12.
toward the end. But Fleta says, that this compass about the Court is called
virgata a virga, quam Marishalus portat ut signism suae potestatis, lib. 2.
cap. 4. sect. prim. Verge has also another signification, and is used for a
stick, or rod, whereby one is admitted Tenent, and holding it in his hand
swears fealty unto the Lord of a manor: who for that cause is called Tenent
by the Verge. Old not. br. fol. 17.

Vergers (virgatores) be such as carry white wands before the Justices of either
bank etc. Fleta, lib. 2. cap. 38. otherwise called Porters of the Verge.

Very Lord, and very Tenent (verus Dominus, et verus Tenens) are they that be
immediate Lord and Tenent one to the other; Brook, titulo, Hariot, fol. 23. In
the Old not. br. and in the writ ( Replegiari de averiis, fol. 42.) I find
these words: And know ye that in taking of Leases, six things are necessary:
that is to say, very Lord and very Tenent, Service behind, the day of the
taking seisin of the services, and within his Fee. And know ye, that a man is
not very tenent, until he have atturned to the Lord by some services. So that
by Brook, the very Lord, and the very Tenent, must be immediate, and by this
Book there must be an acknowledgement. See anno 19 Hen. 7. cap. 15. See Tenent.

Vert (viride) is made of the French ( verd, i. viridis) and significth with us
in the laws of the Forest, every thing that does grow, and bear green leaf,
within the Forest, that may cover and hide a D^er. Manwood in the second part
of his Forest laws, fol. 6. a. and fol. 33. b. with whom also Crompton agrees,
fol. 170. of his Iurisd. And vert (as the same Author says, eodem, fol. 34.)
is divided into Over vert, and Nether vert. Over vert is that which our
Lawyers call (Hault bois) and Nether vert, is that which they call (South
boil.) And of this you may read him in his second part of Forest laws, cap. 6.
per totum. Where you shall find, that he divides vert into general, and
special. General is, as it is above defined: Vert special, is every tree and
bush within the Forest to feed the Deer withal: as Pear trees, Crab-trees,
Hauthorns, Blackbush, and such like. And the reason of this name is, because
the offense of destroying of such vert, is more highly punished than of any
other, according to the quantity thereof, codem, cap. 6. number. 2. fol. 35. a.

Vervise, otherwise called Plonkets, anno 1. R. 3. cap. 8. a kind of cloth.

Vesses, anno 1 R. 3. cap. 8. and anno 14, and 15 H. 8. cap. 11. otherwise
called, Set clothes.

Vesture (Vestura) is a French word signifying a garment: but in the use of our
Common law, turned metaphorically to betoken a possession, or an admittance to
a possession. So it is taken, Westminster. 2. cap. 25. anno 13 Ed. prim. And in this
signification is it borrowed from the Feudists, with whom ( Investitura,
signifies a delivery of possession by a spear, or staff, and vestura
possession it self. Hotomon, in verbis feudal. verbo Investura.

Vesture of an acre of land, anno 14 Ed. prim, stat. prim. is the profit of it,
and anno 13 Edw. 1. cap. 25.

VI
Vice-treasurer of the Exchequer, 1 Jacob. 26. See Under-treasurer of England.
See Treasurer of the Exchequer.

View of frank pledge, (visus Franci plegii) is the office which the Sheriff in
his County Court, or the Bayliffin his Hundred, performs in looking to the
Kings peace, and seeing that every Freeman be in some pledge. This is called
of Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 5. nu. 7. in fine, Res quasi saora, quia solam
personam Regis respicit, and quod introductus sit pro pace et communi
utilitate, eodem, cap. 16. number. 8. in fine. See frankpledge, and Leet, and
Dece^nier. See the new book of Entries, verb. view of frankpledge.

Veiours, visores) comes of the French ( Veoyer, i. cernere, intueri,
despicere, prospicere, videre) and signifies in our Common law, those that are
sent by the Court to take view of any place in question, for the better
decision of the right. Old not. br. fol. 112. So does Bracton use it, lib. 5.
tract. 3. cap. 8. per totum. It signifies also those, that are sent to view
such as essoin themselves de malo lecti, whether they be in truth so sick, as
they cannot appear, or whether they counterfeit. Bracton, lib. 5. tract. 2.
cap. 10. et cap. 14. per ^totum. Lastly, it is used for those that are sent or
appointed to view an offense, as a man murdered, or a Virgin ravished. See View.

Vicario deliberando occasion cujusdam Recoguitionis, etc. is a writ that
lies for a spiritual person imprisoned upon forfeiture of a Recognisance,
without the Kings writ, Reg. orig. fol. 147. See statuto mercatorio contra
personam ecclesiasticam.

Viois et venellis mundandis, is a writ that lies for a Mayor and Bailiffs of
a Town, etc. For the clean keeping of their streets. Regist. orig. fol. 267. b.

View (visus) comes of the French ( veve, i. visus, aspectus, conspectus,
prospectus) and signifies with us the act of viewers. For (as the Author of
the Terms of Law says) when any action real is brought, and the Tenent knows
not well what land it is, that the Defendent asks, then he may pray the view:
that is to say, that he may see the land which is claimed: of this Briton
speaks, ca. 45. This point of proceeding we have received from the Normans,
as it appears by the Grand customary, cap. 66. where you shall read to this
effect. It is to be known, that there be diverse sorts of views: one of a fee
another of a man in sickness, another of an offense, as of a man slain, or a
Virgin deflowred: all which he describes in that place; and again, cap. 80, et
96. which are worth the reading: this view at this day is used in an Assise of
rent service, rent charge, or rent seck. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 178. D. and in a
writ de Curia claudenda. Idem, fol. 128. B. In a writ of Nuisance. Idem, fol.
183. L. N. O. In a writ Quo jure. Idem, fol. 128. L. In the writ de
rationalibus divisis. Idem, fol. 129. D. And in the writ de secta ad
molendinum. Idem, fol. 123. B. See the new book of Entries, verb. View, and see
Fleta how this view is made, lib. 4. cap. 6. See Veiours.

Vicechamberlain, called underchamberlain, anno 13 R. 2. stat. 2. cap. 1. is a
great Officer in Court next under the Lord Chamberlain, and in his absence has
the command and controlement of all Officers superior and inferior whatsoever,
appertaining to that part of his Majesty's household, which is called the
Chamber, wherein is included as well the Bedchamber, as the Privy-chamber, the
Presence, and the great Chamber, and all other Rooms, as Galleries, etc.
thereto belonging, with the Councell-chamber, Privy Closet, etc. And in the
Lord Chamberlains absence he keeps his Table in the great Chamber, commanding
and overseeing the attendance of all, to whom it appertainesh to be ready and
waiting on his Majesty going to the Chapel, or to speak with Ambassadors, or
else walking or riding forth.

Vicount, alias Viscount (vicecomes) comes of the French ( vicompte, i.
Procomes) and signifies with us as much as Sheriff. Between which two words I
find no other difference, but that the one comes from our Conquerors the
Normans, and the other from our Ancustors the Saxons, wherefore see more of
this in Shyreeve. Vicount also signifies a degree of Nobility next unto an
Earl, which (as M. Camden, Britan. page 70. says) is an old name of office,
but a new one of dignity, never heard of amongst us, until Henry the sixth his
days. But this degree of honor is more ancient far in other Countries. Casson
in gloria mundi, part 5. consid. 55. whom you may read.

Vicountiel, is an Adjective made of Vicountie, and signifies as much as
belonging to the Vicount; as Writs Vicountial are such Writs as are triable in
the County, or Sheriffs Court. Old not. br. fol. 109. Of this kind you may see
diverse Writs of Nuisance set down by Fitzherberi in his Not. br. fol. 184. b.
There be also certain ferms called Vicountiels, which the Sheriff for his time
pays a certain rent for to the King, and makes what profit he can of them.
See the Statute, anno 33, and 34 H. 8. cap. 16. and anno 2, et 3 Ed. 6. cap. 4.
and anno 4 H. quint. capite secund.

Vi laica removenda, is a writ that lies for the removing of forcible
possession of a benefice kept by lay men. And this writ is granted some time
upon the Certificate of the Bishop into the Chancery, that there is such a
force in his Dioces: some time upon a surmise made thereof by the Incumbent
himself, without the Certificate of the Bishop, and has a several form for
either case. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 54. Register origin. fol. 59. and 60.

Villanis Regis subtractis reducendis, is a writ that lies for the bringing
back of the Kings bondmen, that have been carried away by others out of his
Manors, whereto they belonged. Registor origin. folio 87. b.

Villein (villanus) comes of the French ( vilain, i. illiberalis, impurus,
vilis, turpis) and signifies in our Common law a bondsman, or as much as Servus
among the Civilians. Of these there be two sorts in England, as Sir Thomas
Smith says in his Repub. Anglo. lib. 3. cap. 8. one termed a villein in
gross, which is immediately bound to the persons of his Lord and his heirs,
the other a villein regardant to a Manor, whom the Civilians term (glebae
aseriptitium) being bound to their Lord, as members belonging and annexed to
such a manor, whereof the Lord is owner. This division is affirmed by diverse
places of our Common law Writers: as in the Old not. br. fol. 8. You have these
words, Know ye that a woman shall be in. dowed with a villein in gross, etc.
and again fol. 39. If a man do menace or threaten any villeins, which are
regardant to a manor, etc. Bracton has another division of villeins, which is
all one with the Civilians. For in his first book, cap. 6. number. 4. he says
thus: Scrvi autem nascuntur aut fiunt: and then thus goes forward: nascuntur
ex nativo et nativa alicujus copulatis vel solutis, sive sub potestate Domini
constituti sint, sive extra potestatem. Item nascitur servus qui ex nativa
soluta generatur, quamvis ex prate libero: quia sequitur conditionem matris
quasi vulgo conceptus, etc. And after diverse things delivered of this sort, he
says again thus: Fiunt etiam servi liberi homines captivitate de jure Gentium,
etc. Fit etiam servus liber homo per confessionem in Curia Regis factam: ut cum
liber homo sit in Curia Regis, et se cognoscat ad villanum. Item liber homo fit
servus, si cum semel manumissus fuerit ob ingratitudinem in ^ervitutem
revocetur. Item fit liber homo servus cum ab initio clericus vel monachus
factus fuerit, postea ad secularem vitam redierit. Quia talis restituti debet
Domino suo. v. Tiraquellum de Nobilitate. cap. 2. page 14. number. 54. In very
many Provinces of France there be certain men called homines manus mortuae, qui
tanta juris similitudine adscriptitiis colonis conjuncti, and prope iidem
videntur. Non autem servi sunt omnino, sed in territorio domini sunt, tanquam
alligati, non habentes demigrandi potestatem. Itaque servi corporis and
prosecuti nis vulgo dicuntur, quod si fugerint, votest eos prosequi dominus and
capere. Tributum autem isti and nonnullas commoditates d^mino praestant: in
quibus haec maxima, quod ipsie vita functis sine sobole, succedit dominus vel
ex toto vel ex parts. Connanus, lib. 2. cap. 10. number. 3. whose words I thought
not unfit for this place, because they express the nature of our villanage
something aptly.

Villein fleeces, anno 31 Ed. 3. cap. 8. are fleeces of Wooli that are shorn
from scabbed Sheep.

Vidimus, anno 15 H. 6. ca. 3.

Villenage (Villenagium) comes of (villein) and signifies a servile kind of
tenure belonging to lands or tenements; that is, a tenure of lands or
tenements, by such a service, as villeins are fitted to perform. For every one
that holds in villenage, is not a villein, or a bond man. Villenagium vel
servitium nihil detrahit libertatis, habita tamen distinctione, utrum ^ales
sint villans, and tenuerint in villano soccagi^ de dominico Domini Regis.
Bracton, lib. prim. cap. 6. number. prim. Briton in his 66 chapter speaks to
this effect: Villenage is a tenure of the demesns of a Lord delivered to a
Tenent at the Lords will, by villenous services, to improve it to the Lords
use, and delivered by the Rod, and not by any Title of Writing, or succession
of Inheritance, etc. And a little after he has words to this effect: In the
Manors of our Ancient Demesns, there be pure villeins both by blood and tenure:
the which may be cast out of their tenement, and deprived of their chatels, at
the pleasure of the Lord. By which two places I gather, though villein tennre
do not always make the Tenent a villein: yet that there is a two fold tenure
called villenage: one wherein both the person and the tenure is bound, and in
all respects at the disposicion of the Lord: and another which in respect of
the tenure, is after a sort servile, though the person be not bond. This is
well proved by Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 8. number. 3. in these words: Item tenementum
non muta^ statum liberi, non magis quam servi: poterit enim liber homo tenere
purum villenagium, faciendo quicquid ad villanum percinebit, and nihilo-minus
liber erit, cum hoc faciat ratione villenagii, et non personae suae: et ideo
poterit, quande voluerit, villenagium deserere, et liber discedere, nisi
illaqueatus sit per uxorem nativam ad hoc faciendum, ad quam ingressus fuit in
villenagium, et quae praestare poterit impedimentum, etc. So that a man may
hold in pure villenage, and yet be a free man in respect of his person. But
what is pure villenage? Bracton answers in the words there next following:
Purum villenagium est, a quo praestatur servitium incertum et indeterminatum,
ubi sciri non poterit vespere, quale servitium fieri debet mane; viz. ubi quis
facere tenetur quicquid ei praeceptum fue^it. The other sort of villenage which
is not pure, is there called of Bracton (villanum soccagium) which differs
from the other in this, because it is only tied to the performance of certain
services agreed upon between the Lord and the Tenent. Whereof see Bracton also
in the same place: by whom you may perceive, that a man may hold (per villanum
soccagium) and yet have (liberum tenementum) if he have it to himself and his
heirs. This villainous soccage is to carry the Lords dung into his Fields, to
plow his Ground at certain days, sow and reap his Corn, plash his Hedges, etc.
See Soccage.

Villainous judgment (Villanum judicium) is that which casts the reproach of
villeny and shame upon him against whom it is given, as a Conspirator, etc.
Stawnf. pl. cor. l. 3. c. 12. f. 175. This M. Lamb. in his Eirenarcha, li. 1.
ca. 13. page 63. calls villenous punishment, and says that it may be well
called infamous, because the judgment in such a case shall be like the ancient
judgment in Attaint (as it is said anno 4 H. 5. Fitzh. Judgment, 220.) and is
(in 27. lib. Assis. pl. 59) set down to be, that their Oaths shall not be of
any credit afterward, nor lawful for them in person to approach the Kings
Courts: and that their lands and goods be seized into the Kings hands, their
trees rooted up, and their bodies imprisoned, etc. And at this day the
punishment appointed for perjury, (having somewhat more in it than corporal or
pecuniary pain) stretching to the discrediting of the testimony of the Offender
from ever after, may be partaker of this name. Thus far M. Lamberd.

Virgata terrae. Reg. orig. fol. 167. a. See Yard land.

Viridario eligendo, is a writ that lies for the choice of a Verdour in the
Forest, Regist, origin. fol. 177.

Visitation of manners (Visitatio morum) was wont to be the name of the
Regarders Office in ancient time, Manwood, part pri. of his Forest laws, page
195. See Regarder.

Visne (Vicinetum) signifies a neighbor place, or a place near at hand, an.
16 R. 2. c.

Vis^ Franciplegii, is a writ to exempt him from coming to the view of
Frankpledge, that is not within the Hundred resident. For men are bound unto
this view by reason of their habitation, and not of Lands held where they dwell
not, Regist. orig. fol. 175.

Vitteler (victualarius) comes of the French ( victuailes, i. commeatus) and
signifies with us, him that sells victuals. For these there is a writ in
Fitzherbert, not. brev. fol. 172. if they exercise their trade, bearing a
magistracy in any Town Corporate.

VM
Vmple, anno 3 Edw. 4. cap. 5.

UN
Uncore prist, is a plee for the Defendant, being sued for a debt due at a day
past, to save the forfeiture of his bond; saying, that he tendered the debt at
the time and place; and that there was none to receive it, and that he is now
also ready to pay the same. 7 Ed. 6. 83. Dyer. See Unquest prist.

Vncuth, is a Saxon word, signifying as much as (incognitus) It is used in the
ancient Saxon laws, for him that comes to an Inn guest-wise, and lies there
for two nights at the most. In which case his Host was not bound to answer for
any offense, that he committed, whereof he was guiltless himself. But if he
laid there the third night, then he was called (guest, hospes) and then must
the Host answer for him, as for one of his own family. And if he tarried any
longer, then was he called Again hine, that is to say, familiaris. Whom, if he
offend against the Kings peace, his Host was to see forth-comming: or if he
could not bring him out within a month and a day, he must satisfy for his
offense. Lamb. Archaiono, fol. 133. number. 7. Of this Bracton, lib. 3. cap. 10.
number. 2. writes thus: Item secundum antiquam consuetudinem dici poterit de
familia alicujus, qui hospitus fu^rit cum alio per tres noctes: quia prima
nocte poterit dici Vncuth, secunda vero Gust, tertia nocte Hoghenhine, etc.
This law was made for the better preservation of the Kings peace, and to show
in what pledge every man was to be accounted, that traveled by the way. See
Tuainnithes gest.

Unite nihil habet is a writ. See Dote unde nihil habet.

Vnder-chamberlain of the Exchequer, is an Officer there, that cleaves the
Tallies, written by the Clerk of the Tallies, and reads the same, that the
Clerk of the Pel, and the Controllers thereof may see their Entries be true. He
also makes searches for all Records in the Treasury. There be two Officers
there of this name.

Vnderescheatour. Subescheatour, anno 5 Ed. 3. cap. 4. See Escheatour.

Vndershyreeve (Subvicecomes) See Shyreeve.

Vndersitter, is an Inmate. See Inmate.

Undertakers, be such as are employed by Purveyours of the King as their
Deputies, anno 2, and 3 Phil. and Ma. cap. 6. and such as undertake any great
work, as drying of Fens, etc. anno 43 Eliz. cap. 11,

Vnder^treasurer of England, (vicethesaurarius Angliae) anno 39 Eliz. cap. 7.
and anno 43 ejusdem. Subsidy of the Clergy. This Officer (as some Exchequer men
think) was first created in the time of King Henry the seventh, to chest up the
Kings Treasure at the end of every Term, and to note the content of money in
each chest, and to see it carried to the Kings Treasury in the Tower, for the
ease of the Lord Treasurer, as being a thing too mean for him to be troubled
with, and yet meet to be performed by a man of great secrecy and trust. He in
the vacancy of of the Lord Treasurers Office, does all things in the receipt,
that the Lord Treasurer does. He nominateth the two Praysers of all goods
seized as not customed, and orders, whether the party shall have them at the
price or not. He appoints the Steward, Cook, and Butler for the provision of
the Star Chamber. But this Officer in other men's judgment, is far more ancient
than Henry the sevenths days, yet named Treasurer of the Exchequer in the
Statutes, until Queen Elizabeth's time, where he is termed Under-treasurer of
England. Nevertheless, anno 35 Eliz. he is also written Treasurer of the
Exchequer. Read the Statutes, anno 8 Ed. 3. statut. 2. cap. 17. and 27 ejusdem,
Stat. 2. cap. 18. 1 Rich. 2. cap. 5. 4 H. 4. cap. 18. 8 H. 6. cap. 17. 27 H. 8.
cap. 11. with diverse other places, that seem to approve this to be true.

Union (unio) is a combining or consolidating of two Churches in one, which is
done by the consent of the Bishop, the Patron, and the Incumbent. And this is
properly called an union. Howbeit, that there be two other sorts: as when one
Church is made subject to the other, and when one man is made Prelate of both,
and when a Conventual is made Cathedral, as you may read in the Gloss of the
Chapter, Licet de licato and conducto, in Lyndwoods Provincials. Sect. E^quia,
versu Appropriationis. Touching Union in the first signification there was a
statute, anno 37 Hen. 8. cap. 21. that it should be lawful in two Churches,
whereof the value of the one is not above six pounds in the Kings books of the
First fruits, and not above one mile distant from the other. Union in this
signification is personal, and that is for the life of the Incumbent: or real,
that is, perpetual, whosoever be Incumbent.

Unity of possession, is called consolidatio usus fructus, and proprietatis, in
the Civil law, signifying a joint possession of two rights by several titles.
For example, I take a lease of land from one upon a certain rent: afterward I
buy the Fee-simple. This is an unity of possession, whereby the Lease is
extinguished: by reason that I, which had before the occupation only for my
rent, and become Lord of the same, and am to pay my rent to none, but my self.
Also an Abbot being seated within a certain Parish, afterward obtains an
appropriation of the Tithes belonging to that Church, for the use of his house.
Here is an unity of possession, by reason that the tithes, which before were to
be paid to the Incumbent, are now to be paid to none but himself, by virtue of
the appropriation.

University (Vniversitas) is by the Civil law any body politic, or
corporation: but in our language it is (at the least most ordinarily) taken for
those two bodies, that are the Nourses of learning, and the liberal Sciences,
Cambridge and Oxford: endowed with great favors, and privileges, for their
better maintenance, as appears not only by anno 2, and 3 Ph. et Mar. cap. 15.
a. 13 El. c. 21. et a. 18. ejusd. cap. 6. but much more by their several
Charters, granted unto them by diverse godly and magnanimous Kings of this land.

Unlawful assembly (Illicita congregatio, illicita assemblata) is the meeting
of three or more persons together, with force to commit some unlawful act, and
abiding still, not endeavoring the execution thereof, as to assault or beat
any person, to enter into his house or land, etc. West. part 2. symb. titulo,
Inditemenes; sect. 65. M. Lamberd in his Eirenarcha, cap. 19. says thus: An
unlawful assembly is the company of three persons or more, gathered together
to do such an unlawful act, although they do it not indeed. So says Kitchen
in effect, fol. 20.

Vnques prist, is (word for word) always ready. And it signifies a plee,
whereby a man professes himself always ready to do or perform that, which the
Demandant requires, thereby to avoid charges. For example, a woman sueth the
tenent for her dower: and he coming in at the first day, offers to aver,
that he was always ready, and still is, to perform it. In this case except the
Demandant will aver the contrary, he shall recover no damages. When this Plee
will serve to avoid charges, and when not, see Kitchen fol. 243. See Uncore
prist.

VO
Voidance (vacatio) is a want of an Incum. bent upon a benefice: and this
voidance is double: either in Law, as when a man has more benefices
incompetible: or indeed, as when the Incumbent is dead, or actually deprived,
Brook, titulo Quare impedit. n. 51.

Voucher (Advocatio) is a calling in of one into the Court at the petition of a
party that hops to be helped thereby. New book of Entries, verbo Voucher.
Voucher de garrantie, Brit. cap. 75. In Latin (Advocatio ad warrantizandum) is
a Petition in Court made by the Defendant to have him called, of whom he or his
Ancestor bought the Land or Tenement in question, and received warranty for the
secure enjoying thereof against all men. Briton of this writes a long chapter,
ubi supra, intituling it Garant voucher. But Bracton writes a large tractate
of it, lib. 5. tractat. 4. per totum. Litleton also handles it not mincingly,
in the last chapter of all his Tenures. Of this you may read Fitzh. also in his
not. br. fol. 134. De warrantia chartae. All this law seems to have been
brought into England out of Normandy. For in the Grand Customaty you have
likewise a Chapter entitled ( vouchment de garant, cap. 50. id est, vocamentum
Garanti) where it is set down, what time ought to be given, for the appearance
of the warrant called in this case, how many warrants may be vouched, one
calling in another, and diverse other points touching this doctrine. All which,
and many more, you may read in Bracton, ubisupra. A common voucher, a double
voucher. Cook lib. 2. Sir Hugh Cholmleis case, fol. 50. b. This is very
answerable to the Contract in the Civil law, whereby the Buyer binds the
Seller, sometime in the simple value of the thing bought, sometime in the
double, to warrant the secure enjoying of the thing bought. But this difference
I find between the Civil law and ours, that whereas the Civil law binds every
man to warrant the security of that which he sells, ours does not so, except
it be especially covenanted. The party that voucheth in this case, is called
the Tenent, the party vouched is termed the Voucher. The writ whereby he is
called, is termed Summoneas ad warrantizandum. And if the Sheriff return upon
that Writ, that the party has nothing, whereby he may be summoned: then goes
out another Writ, viz. Sequatur sub suo pericnlo. See Terms of the law, verbo
Voucher. And Lamb. in his explication of Saxon words, verbo Advocare. See
Warranty. I read in the new book of Entries, of a foreign voucher, which has
place properly in some Franchise, County Palatine, or other, where one voucheth
to warranty one not dwelling within the Franchise, fol. 615. columma 1.
whereupon because the Foreiner need not be tried in that Court, the record and
cause is removed to the common plees, etc. See of this Fitzh. not. br. fol. 6.
E.

US
Vser de action, is the pursuing or bringing of an action, which in what place
and County it ought to be, See Brook, titulo Lieu and County, fol. 64.

Use (usus) is in the original signification plain enough: but it has a proper
application in our Common law, and that is the profit or benefit of lands or
tenements. And out of M. Wests first part of his symbol. lib. pri. sect. 48,
49, 50, 51, and 52. I gather shortly thus much for this purpose. Every deed in
writing has to be considered the substance, and the adjuncts. Touching the
substance, a deed does consist of two principal parts, namely, the premises and
the consequents. The premises is the former part thereof, and is commonly said
to be all that, which precedeth the (Habendum) or limitation of the estate,
which be the persons contracting, and the things contracted. The consequent is
that which follows the premises, and that is the (Habendum.) In which are two
limitations: the one of the estate, or property, that the party passive shall
receive by the deed; the other of the use, which is to express in the said
(Habendum) to or for what use, and benefit he shall have the same estate. And
of the limitation of those uses, you may read many presidents set down by the
same Author in his second book of his said first part, sect. 308. and so forth
to 327. These uses were invenced upon the Statute called West. 3. or Quia
emptores terrarum, before the which Statute no uses were known. Perkins,
Devises, 528. And because men's wits, had in time devised many deceits, by the
settling of the possession in one man, and the use in another, there was a
Statute made, anno 27 H. 8. cap. 1. whereby it was inacted, that the use and
possession of lands and possessions should always stand united. New Expositor of
law terms, verbo Use. v. Cook, lib. 1. Chudleise case, fol. 121. and seq.

Usher (Ostiarius) comes of the French ( Huissier, i. Accensus, Apparitor,
Ianitor.) It signifies with us, first an Officer in the Eschequer: of which
sort there be four ordinary Ushers that attend the chief Officers and Barons of
the Court at Westminster, and Juries, Sheriffs, and all other Accountants at
the pleasure of the Court. There be also Ushers in the Kings house, as of the
Privy Chamber, etc.

VT
Vtas (Octavae) is the eighth day following any term or feast: as the utas of
Saint Michael, the utas of Saint Hilary, the utas of Saint Martin, of Saint
John Baeptist, of the Trinity, etc. as you may read, anno 51 H. 3. stat.
concerning general days in the Bench. And any day between the feast and the
eighth day, is said to be within the utas. The use o^ this is in the return of
Writs, as appears by the same Statute.

Vtfangthef, is an ancient Royalty granted to a Lord of a Manor, by the King,
which gives him the punishment of a thief dwelling out of his Liberty, and
having committed theft without the same, if he be taken within his fee.
Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 24. who in his third Book, tractat. 2. cap. 35. seems
rather to interpret the word, than to express the effect, and says thus:
Vifangthef dicitur extraneus latro, veniens aliunde de terra aliena, and qui
captus fuit in terra ipsius, qui tales habet libertates. It seems to be
compounded of these three words; Vi, fang, thef: which in our modern English
be, out, take or taken, Thief. Of this Fleta has these words: Vifangenthef
dicitur latro extraneus veniens aliunde de ^erra aliena, and qui captus fucrit
in terra ipsius qui tales habet libertates. Sed non sequitur quod possit ille
hominem suum proprium extra libertatem su^m captum reducere usque in
libertatem, et ibi cum judicare: reducere tamen poterit judicatum, et judicium
in proprio patibulo exequi ratione libertatis: commodum tamen non video. Debet
enim quilibet juri subjacere, ubi deliquit: proprios tamen latrones et alienos
judicare possunt, dum tamen infra libertatem fuerint capti, etc.

Vtlaghe, significat bannitum extra legem, Fleta lib. 1. cap. 47. See Vtlawrie.

Vtlagatio capiendo quando utlagatur in uno comitatu, et postea fugit in alium,
is a writ, the nature whereof is sufficiently expressed in the words set down
for the name thereof. See the Register original, fol. 133.

Vtlawrie (utlagaria, alias utlagatio) is a punishment for such as being called
into law, and lawfully sought, do contemptuously refuse to appear. And as
Bracton says, lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 11. He that is sued must be sought, and
called at 5 Counties, a month being between every County, to answer to the law.
And if he come not within that time, pro exlege tenebitur cum principi non
obediat, nec legi: et ex tunc utlagabitur, that is, (as the Author of the Terms
of Law says) he shall be pronounced by the Coroner, to be out of the Kings
protection, and deprived of the benefit of the Law. The effect of this is
diverse, (as the same Author says) for if he be outlawed in an action
personal, (he means) at the suit of another in a civil cause, he shall
forfeit all his goods and cattels to the King: if upon felony, then he shall
forfeit all his Lands and Tenements, that he has in fee-simple, or for term of
his life, and his goods and cattels, Bracton, ubi supra. xum. 5. says, that
such as be outlawed upon Felony, Ex tunc gerunt caput lupinum, ita quod sine
judiciali inquisitione rite pereant, et secum suum judicium portent, et merito
sine lege pereunt, qui secundum legem vivere recusarunt. Et haec ita, si cum
capiendi fuerint, fugiant, vel se defendant, si autem vivi capti fuerint, vel
se reddiderint, vita illorum et mors erit et manu Domini Regis. See Horns miror
of Justices, lib. 3. cap. des fautes punishables. Bracton says in the place
above specified (with whom also Fleta agrees, lib. 1. cap. 27.) that a Minor
or a woman cannot be outlawed. But take his own words: Minor vero, and qui
infra aetatem 12. annorum fuerit, utlagari non potest, nec extra legem poni,
quia ante talem aetatem non est sub lege aliqua, nec in Decenna, non magis quam
foemina, quae utlagari non potest, quia ipsa non est sub lege. i. Inlangh,
Anglice, sc. in franco plegio, sive decenna: sicut masculus, 12. annorum and
ulterius. Et ideo non potest utlagari. Waiviari tamen been potest, and pro
derelicta haberi, cum pro felonia aliqua fugam fecerit sine ceperit. Est enim
waivium, quod nullus advocat, nec princeps eum advocabit, nec tuebitur, cum
fuerit rite Waiviata: sicut fit de masculo, qui secundum legem terrae rite
fuerit utlagatus, etc. To the same effect writes Fitzherbert in his Natura
brev. fol. 161. viz. And because women be not sworn in Leets to the King, as
men be of the age of twelve years or upward: it is said, when a woman is
outlawed, that she is waived, but not outlawed, for she was never under the
law, nor sworn unto it. More of this you may read in Bracton lib. 3. tractat.
2. cap. 12, and 13. and then in the 14. how an outlaw is in-lawed again, and
restored to the Kings peace and protection. See also Fleta, lib. 1. cap. 28.
per totum.

Vtrum. See Assise.

Utter Baristers be such, as for their long study, and great industry bestowed
upon the knowledge of the Common law, be called out of their contemplation to
practice, and in the face of the world, to take upon them the protection and
defense of the Clyents. These are in other Countries called (Licentiati in
jure.) Howbeit, in modesty they still continue themselves hearers for diverse
years, like the Scholars of Pythagoras, that for the first five years never
adventured to reason or discourse openly upon any point of their Masters
Doctrine, which their silence (a cohihibendo sermon) was termed (...), as
Suidas and Zenodorus do report.

Vtlepe significat escapium latronum, Fleta, lib. 1. ca. 47.

W
WA
Wage (vadiare) proceeds of the French ( Gager, i. dare pignus, pignore,
certare) and signifies in our Common law, the giving of security for the
performing of any thing: as to wage law, and to wage deliverance; which see
before in Gage. None wageth law against the King, Brook, titulo Chose in
action, number. 9. The substantive of this verb is (Wager) in the Latin (vadium)
which some Feudists call (wadium) as testifies Hotoman in his Commentaries de
verbis feudalibus, verbo Wadium. See Law.

Wainage (wanagium, alias wannagium) signifies as much as peculium servorum,
of the Saxon word wonen, i. habitare, and woening, i. habitatio. See Gamage.

Waive (waiviare) ( Regist. orig. fol. 277. a.) is to forsake (habere pro
derelicto) as the Civilians term it. Waiviare feudum suum. Bracton, lib. 2.
cap. 7. that is, to forsake. Many of the Kings liege people to be outlawed,
and many waived by erroneous process, anno 7 H. 4. cap. 13. See Vtlawry. To
waive the company of Thieves, Stawnf. pl. cor. fol. 26. To waive his benefit,
Idem, fol. 46. To waive the advantage, Idem praerog. fol. 17. Persons attainted
or waived, West. part 2. symbol. tit. Fines, Sect. 13. D. This word waived
waiviata properly belongs to a woman, that being sued in the Law,
contemptuously refuses to appear, as outlawed does to a man, Regist. orig.
fol. 132. b. and 277. a. The reason whereof see in Fitz. not. br. fol. 161. A.
See Weif.

Wales (Wallia) is a part of England, on the West side, inhabited by the
offspring of the ancient Britons chased thither by the Saxons, being called
hither by them, to assist them against the might of the Picts. The reason of
the appellation, comes from the Saxon ( Wealh, i. exterus, vel peregrinus)
for so the Saxons both called them, and held them; though now, to the great
quiet of this Kingdom they be incorporated unto us. See M. Lamberds
explication of Saxon words, verbo Wallus.

Walkers, seem to be those that are otherwise called Foresters. Crompton in his
Jurisdictions, fol. 145. has these words in effect: There be Foresters
assigned by the King, which be walkers within a certain space assigned them to
look unto.

Waiviaria mulieris, is as much as utlagatio viri, Regist. orig. fol. 132. b.
See Waive.

Wapentake (Wapentakium) is all one with that, which we call a Hundred, as
appears by Bracton, lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. pri. nu. pri. in fine. Cenvocentur
(says he) postmodum servientes and Balivi Hundredorum, and per ordinem
irrotulentur Hundrederii sive Wapentakia et nomina servientium, quorum quilibet
affidabit quod de quolibet Hundredo elig ^t quatuer milites, qui statim veniant
coram Justiciariis ad faciendum praeceptum Domini Regis, et qui statim
jurabunt, quod eligent duodecim milites, vel liberos and legales homines, si
milites non inveniantur, etc. M. Lamberd in his explication of Saxon words,
verbo Centuria, is of the same mind: and farther says, that this word is
especially used at this day in the Countries be North the river Trent. And in
the laws of King Edward, set forth by him, number. 33. it is most plain in these
words: Et quod Angli vocant Hundredum, supradicti comitatus vocant wapentakium.
But there he names some Shires on this side Trent: as Warwickshire,
Leichestershire, and Northampton shire. In the words there following, there is
a reason given of this appellation in these words: Et non sine causa: Cum quis
enim accipiebat praefecturam wapentakii, die statuto in loco ubi consueverant
congregari, omnes majores contra cum conveniebant, and descendente de equosuo,
omnes assurgebant ei. Ipse vero, erecta lancea sua, ab omnibus secundum morem
soedus accipiebat. Omnes enim quoiqust venissent, cum lanceis suis ipsius
hastam tangebant, and ita confirmabunt per contractum ^rmorum, pace palam
concessa. Anglice enim arma vocantur (waepun) and taccare confirmare: quasi
armerum confirmatio. Vel ut magis express secnndum linguam anglicanam ^icamus,
wapentak armorum tactus est (waepun) enim arma sonant (tac) tactus est.
Quomokrem poterit cognosci, quod hac de causa, totus ille conventus dicitur
(wapentak) co quod per tactum armorum suorum ad invicem confoederati sunt. Thus
far the book goes word for word. With whom Fleta agreeeth, saving that Fleta
says, that this word is used in all Counties be North Watlinstreet, li. 2. ca.
61. ^. universimode. Take Sir Thomas Smiths opinion also: whose words, in his
second book de Rep. Anglo. ca. 16. be these: Wapentak, I suppose, came of the
Danes, or peradventure of the Saxons. For that so many Towns came by their
order then into one place, where was taken a muster of their armor and
weapons: in which place, from them that could not find sufficient pledges for
their good abearing, their weapons were taken away. The Statute, anno 3 Henrici
5. cap. 2. and anno 9 H. 6. cap. 10. and anno 15 Hen. 6. cap. 7. To makes
mention of Stainctife Wapentake, and Frendles Wapentake, in Craven in the
county of York. See Roger Hoveden, part poster. suorum annalium, fol. 346. b.

Wards and Liverus (wardi and liberaturae) is a Court first erected in King
Henry the eighth his time, and afterward augmented by him with the Office of
Liveries, and therefore called by him (as now it is) the Court of Wards and
Liveries. The chief of this Court is called the Master of the Court, etc. To
whom are joined the Surveiour, Attorney, and Receiver of the said Court, as his
Assistants: then as Ministers, the Register, two inferior Attorneys or Clerks,
and a Messenger.

Ward (Custodia) is the German word, as (Guard) is the French. Both these be
used among our common Lawyers: the one by those that write in French, the other
by those that write in English. Wherefore for your farther understanding, see
Guard, and Gardein. Yet is Guard sometime used in the English books also: as
yeomen of the Guard. And also the keeper of one in his minority, is not called a
warden but a Gardein or Guardian. Ward has diverse applications, as a Ward in
London, latined (warda) which is a portion of the City committed to the
especial charge of some one of the four and twenty Aldermen of the City, in
such sort as every one knows his certain ward assigned unto him, and has
dwelling within the same compass some one grave Citizen for the good government
thereof: who is in that respect a Deputy to the said Alderman, and commonly
called the Aldermans Deputy. Of these there be five and twenty within the City,
and one without, beside other Liberties and the Suburbs. Stows Survey of
London. Also a Forest is divided into wards: Manwood, part prim. of his Forest
laws, page 97. Lastly, a Prison is otherwise called a Ward. And the heir of the
Kings tenent, holding by Knights service, or in capite, or of any common person
by Knights service, is called Ward, during his nonage. See an. 32 Hen. 8. cap.
46.

Warden (Gardianus) signifies all one thing with the French (Gardein) And
therefore of this see more in Gardien. But it is the more usual word of all
that write in English, for him that has the keeping or charge of any person or
thing by Office: as Wardens of Fellowships in London, anno 14 Hen. 8. cap. 2.
Warden courts, anno 31 H. 6. cap. 3. Warden of the Marches, an. 4 Hen. 7. cap.
8. Wardens and Communality of the lands contributory unto Rochester bridge,
anno 18 Elizab. cap. 7. Wardens of peace, anno 2 Ed. 3. cap. 3. Statute
Northampton. Warden of the West Marches, Cambd. Brit. page 606. Warden of the
Forest, Manwood, part pri. page 111, et 112. Warden of the Aulnage, an. 18
Hen. 6. cap. 16. Chief Warden of the Forest, Manwood, part pri. page 42, et
43. Warden of the Kings Wardrope, anno 51 H. 3. statut. quinto. Wardens of the
tables of the Kings Exchange, anno 9 Edw. 3. statut. 2. cap. 7. et anno 9 Hen.
5. stat. 2. cap. 4. Wardens of the Rolls of the Chancery, anno 1 Edw. 4. cap.
1. and cap. 5. Warden or Clerk of the Hamper of the Chancery. Ibid. Warden of
the Kings writs, and Records of his Common bench, ibid: Warden of the Kings
armor in the Tower, anno 1 Ed. 4. cap. 1.

Wardmote, is a Court kept in every ward in London, an. 32 H. 8. ca. 17.
ordinarily called among them, the Wardmote-Court.

Wardpeny, is money to be contributed toward watch and ward.

Waranty (warantia) comes of the French (garantie) or ( garant, i. vindex
litis) which is a word of great antiquity with the French men, being brought
first thither by the Francogalli. And thence do they make a Latinish verb, viz.
(guarentare) vel, ut est in aliis libris, guarentisare, i. causam alterius
susc^pere, se defensorem profiteri. The Feudists also use this word (guarentus)
quo significatur is, qui Latinis author dieitur, and evictionem praestat. lib.
2. Feud. titulo 34.. 2. The Civilians have a stipulation (habere licere)
whereby is signified a power of perpetual and quiet possession to be given,
lib. 11.. final. p. de action empt. and vend. But this reaches not so far as
our warranty. For the Seller hereby is bound but to a kind of diligence and
care to maintain the Buyer in his possession. For if he be evicted, the Buyer
is not tied to recompense. Dectores in l. stipulatio ista Habere licere. p de
verb. obliga. VVarranty signifies in our Common law, a promise made in a deed
by one man unto another, for himself and his heirs, to secure him and his Heirs
against all men, for the enjoying of any thing agreed of between them. And he
that makes this warranty, is called Warrantus by Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 19, and
37. The Romans called him Auctorem, as Hotoman testifies in his Commentary
upon Tullies oration pro Aulo Caecinna, verbo Cesennius author fundi, whom you
may read more at large. And that which we term vocationem warranti, the
Civilians call authoris laudationem vel nominationem. Eimer pract. cap. 48.
This warranty passes from the seller to the buyer, from the feoffor to the
feoffee, from him that releaseth to him that is released from an action real,
and such like. And for the form it passes in a clause toward the end of a deed
in these words: Et ego vero praefatus 1, and haeredes mei praedictas december
acras terrae cum pertinentiis suis praefato H. haeredibus, and assignatis suis
contra omnes gentes warrantizabimus in perperuum per praesentes. West. part
pri. symbol. li. 2. titulo Feofments, sect. 28^, et 288. So a release may be
with clause of warranty. Idem, eodem, titulo Releases, sect. 410.

There is also a warrant of Attorney, whereby a man appoints another to do
something in his name, and warranteth his action, West. eod. sect. 181. And
these Warrants of Attorney seem to differ from letters of Attorney, because
that whereas Letters pass ordinarily under the hand and seal of him that makes
an Attorney by them, before any credible witnesses: warrants of Attorney be
acknowledged before such persons, by such means and in such manner, as Fines,
West. part 2. symbol. titulo Recoveries, sect. prim. F. See Attorney.

But these warranties in passing land from one to another, be of greatest
consequent, and of more intricate understanding. And therefore of these, diverse
have written at large, as Glanvile, lib. 3. per totum. Bracton, lib. 5.
tractat. 4. per totum. Briton, cap. 105. Littleton in the last Chapter of his
tenures: the form and effect whereof Bracton in his second book, cap. 16. number.
10. declares thus: Et ego and haeredes mei warrantizabimus tali and haeredibus
suis tantum, vel tali and haeredibus and assignatis, and haeredibus
assignatorum, vel assignatis assignatorum, et eorum haeredibus, et
acquietabimus, et defendemus eis totam terram illam cum pertinentiis (secundum
quod praedictum est) contra omnes gentes in perpetuum, per praedictum
servitium. Per hoc autem quod dicit (Ego et haeredes mei) obligat se et
haeredes suos ad warrantiam, propinquos et remotos, praesentes et futuros ei
succedentes in infinitum. Per hoc autem quod dicit (warrantizabimus) sucipit in
se obligationem ad defendendum suum Tenementum in possessione rei datae, et
assignatos suos et eorum haeredes, et omnes alios, secundum quod supradictum
est, si forte tenementum datum petatur ab antiquo in Dominico. Per hoc autem
quod dicit (acquietabimus) obligat se et haeredes suos ad acquietabimus)
obligat se et haeredes suos ad acquietandum, si quis plus petierit servitii,
vel aliud servitium, quam in charta donationis continetur. Per hoc autem quod
dicit (Defendemus) obligat se et haeredes ad Defendendum, si quis velit
servitutem ponere reidatae contra formam suae donationi^, etc. But the new
Expounder of law terms says, That this warranty begins two ways: one by
deed of Law: as if one and his Ancestors have held land of another and his
Ancestors, time out of mind by homage (which is called Homage auncestrel) for
in this case, the homage continually performed by the tenent is sufficient to
bind the Lord to warrant his estate. The other is by deed of the party, which
by deed or fine t^y eth himself to warrant the land or tenement to the tenent.
And Sir Edward Cook in the fourth book of his Reports, mentions the same
distinction, Nokes case, fol. 81. a. calling the one a warranty in law, the
other an express warranty. Civilians would call these species tacitam et
expressam.

Warranty (as the said Author of the terms of law says) is in 2 manners:
warranty lineal, and warranty collateral. But ( Litleton says ubi supra) it is
threefold: warranty lineal, warranty collateral, and warranty that begins by
disseisin. Warranty by disseisin what it is, is partly declared in Sir Edw.
Cooks Reports, li. 3. Fermors case, fol. 78. a. Whether of them divides more
aptly, let the learned Judge. For my part, I think that lineal and collateral
be no essential differences, of warranty, as it is originally considered in the
first warranter. For he binds himself and his heirs in general. And such be
bound, be they lineal or collateral unto him. Therefore this division rises
rather from the event of the original warranty: videlicet, because it so
falls out, that the tenent, to whom the warranty was made, or his heirs, when
he or they be called into question for the land warranted formerly by the first
feoffour, is driven by the means of the first warranters death, to call or
vouch him to warranty that is his heir, and now presently living, be he
descending or collateral, as it falls out. For example, A. enfeoff. th B. in
twenty acres of land, with clause of warranty against all men. So long as A.
himself lives he is liable to this Covenant, and none else: after his decease
his heir is subject unto it, be he his Son, Brother, Uncle, or what else. And
whether of these, or neither of these it will be, none knows until he be
dead. Wherefore I conclude, that this didistinction of lineal or collateral
has no use originally in this contract. For (as the Author of the terms of Law
says) the burden of this warranty, after the death of the first warranter,
falls upon him, upon whom the land should have descended, if the warranty had
not been made. And that is the next of blood to the warranter, be he in the
descending or collateral line. And therefore I resolve that this distinction
grows from an event, after the death of him that covenanteth to warrant. But
to make this plain, I find warranty to be used equivocally: signifying one
sort, the contract, or covenant of warranty first made, as appears by Bracton
in the place formerly noted: and in another sort, the very effect and
performance of this contract, either by the Warrenter or his heirs, when he or
they be by the tenent thereunto vouched, or called. As also I show out of
Bracton, lib. 5. tract: 4. cap. pri. nu. 2. in these words: Inprimis videndum
est quid sit warrantizatio. Et sciendum quod warrantizare, nihil aliud est,
quam defendere and acquietare tenentem, qui warrantum vocabit in seisina sua,
etc. With whom agrees Fleta, saying that Warrantizare nihil aliud est, quam
possidentem defendere, lib. 5. ca. 15.. 1. and lib. 6. cap. 23. quod lege per
totum. And the former division of lineal and collateral warranty, rather
belonging to warranty in the second signification than the former.

And that this way, it is imperfect, or at the least obscure, I think it not
hard to declare. First to show this, I note out of Bracton, who may be called
to warranty. And he lib. 5, tract. 4. cap. pri. number. 5. says thus: Videndum
est quis vocari possit ad warrantum, and sciendum, quod tam maseulus quam
foemina, tam minor, quam major (dism tamen si minor vocetur, remane at platitum
de warrantia in suspenso usque ad aetutem, uisicausa fuerit ita favorabilis,
quod aetas expectari non debeat, sicut ex causa Dotis) Item non solum vocandus
est ad warrantum ille qui dedit, vel vendidit, verum etiam vocandi sunt eorum
haeredes-descendentes in infinitum propter verba in Chartis contenta, Ego, and
haeredes mei warrantizabimus tali and haeredibus suis, etc. Et in quo casu
tenentur haeredes warrantizare, sive sini propinqui, sive remoti, remotiores,
vel remotissimi. Et quod de haeredibus dititur, idem dici poterit de
assignatis, et de illis, qui sunt locoallorum haeredum, sicut sunt capitales
Domini qui tenentibus suis quasi succedunt, vel propter aliquem defectum, vel
propter aliqund delictum, sicut de eschaetis Dominorum: By which words we
perceive, that the burden of this warranty is not tied to heirs only, be they
in the descending, or collateral line, but that under this word (Haeredes) are
comprised all such, as the first warranters Lands afterward come unto, either
by descent, or otherwise ex causa luera^iva. So that if a man have twenty
children, yet if he will, and may give his land to a Stranger, leaving his
children no land, that Stranger in this case is his assign, and is contained
under this word, Heir. So if he commit felony after such warranty covenanted,
and forfeited his lands to his Lord by escheat, the Lord is quesihares in this
case, and liable to the warranty sormerly passed. And in these two later cases,
warranty in the second signification seems to be neither lineal, nor
collateral: and at the least, as Littleton, and the other Author have defined,
or by example expressed them.

But let us define these two species as they be; wherefore lineal warranty is
that, which he is called unto by the Tenent, upon whom the land warranted had
descended, if the warrantee had not been covenanted. For example: A. sells to
B. twenty acres land with clause of warranty, and afterward dies leaving issue
C. soon after B. is impleaded for this Land by D. and voucheth C. This is
called a lineal warranty: because but for it the land had descended from A. to
C.

Warranty collateral is that, whereunto he is called by the Tenent, upon the
covenant of him, from whom the Land could not descend, to the party called. For
example: B. the Son purchases Tenements in fee, whereof A. his Father
disseiseth him, and sells them to C. with a clause of warranty. A. being
dead, C. is impleaded for the Tenements, and calls B. to warranty. This
warranty whereunto B. is called, ia collateral: because the Tenements, if the
warranty had not been covenanted by A. could not have descended from him to his
Father A. for they were his own by purchase. Many other examples there be of
this in Littleton. And this very case he makes his example of warranty by
disseisin, as also of warranty collateral, which plainly argues, that warranty
by disseisin, and warranty collateral, are not distinct members of warrantee,
but may be confounded: though one warranty may carry both names in diverse
respects. For there is some warranty collateral that begins not by
disseisin. For example: A. Tenent in tail, alienated to B. in fee, and dies
leaving issue, C. afterward. D. Brother to A. and Uncle to C. releaseth to B.
with warranty, and dying, leaves B. his heir being next of blood unto him.
This warraaty is collateral, because it descends upon C. from his Uncle D.
and yet it begins not by disseisin of his said Uncle.

Warranty has a double effect: one to debar him upon whom it descends from
the first warranter as his next of blood, from claiming the land warranted: and
another to make it good to the Tenent, if by him he be vouched thereunto, or
else to give him as much other land by exchange. But as the former of these
effects takes place with all heirs, except those to whom the Land warranted
was entailed, and that reap no equivalent benefit by the first warranter, anno
6 Ed. prim. cap. 3. so the later prejudiceth none that receives not sufficient
Land from the first warranter to make it good, Bracton, lib. 5. tractat. 4.
cap. 8. number. prim. and cap. 13. number. 2. In the Customary of Normandy, cap. 5.
you have vouchment de garant, which the Interpreter translateth, Vocamentum
Garanti, a voucher or calling of the warranter into the Court to make good his
sale or gift.

Warrantia diei, is a writ lying in case, where a man having a day assigned
personally to appear in Court to any action wherein he is sued: is in the mean
time by commandment employed in the Kings service, so that he cannot come at
the day assigned. This writ is directed to the Justices to this end, that they
neither take nor record him in default for that day, Register original, fol.
18. Of this you may read more in Fitzherb. not. brev. fol. 17. and fee
Glanvile, lib. prius. cap. 8.

Warrantia chartae, is a writ that lies properly for him who is infeoffed in
land or tenements with clause of warranty, and is impleaded in an Assise or
Writ of Entry, wherein he cannot vouch or call to warranty: for in this case
his remedy is, to take out this writ against the seoffor of his heir. Regist.
origin. fol. 157. Fitzh. not. brev. fol. 134. Of this yon may likewise read
Fleta, lib. 6. cap. 35. and West. part 2. symb. titulo, Fines, Sect. 156.

Warrantia icustodiae, is a Writ judicial, that lies for him that is
challenged to be ward unto another, in respect of land said to be holden in
Knights service, which when it was bought by the Ancestors of the Ward, was
warranted to be free from such thraldom. And it lies against the warranter
and his heirs, Regist. judic. fol. 36.

Warrant of Attorney. See Letter of Attorney, and Warranty.

Wardwite significat quietantiam misericordiae in casu qno non invenerit quis
hominem ad wardam facteudam in castra, vel alibi, Fleta, lib. 1. cap. 47.

Warren (Warrenna, alias varrenna) comes of the French ( Garrenne, i.
vivarium, vel locus in quo vel aves, vel pisces, vel ferae continentur, quae ad
victum duntaxat pertinent) Calapine out of Aulus Gellius, lib. 2. Noct. Attic.
ca. 20. A warren (as we use it) is a prescription or grant from the King to a
man, of having Feasants, Partridges, Connies, and Hares, within certain of his
Lands, Cromptons Jurisd. fol. 148. where he says, that none can have warren
but only the King, no more than Forest, or Chase. Because it is a special
privilege belonging to the King alone. And a little after he has these words
to this effect: the King may grant warren to me in mine own lands, for Feasants
and Patridges only. And by this grant no man may there chase them without my
license. And so of Hares, but not of Connies. For their property is to destroy
the fruits of the earth, as to eat Corn, and pill the bark of Apple trees.
Master Manwood in his first part of Forest laws, says thus of it: a warren is
a franchise, or privileged place of pleasure, only for those beasts and fowls
that are beasts and fowls of warren, tantum campestres, and non sylvestres,
viz. For such beasts and fowls as are altogether belonging to the fields, and
not unto the woods: and for none other beasts or fowls. There are but two
beasts of warren, that is to say, Hares and Connies: And there are also but two
fowls of warren, viz. Feasants and Partridges. And none other wildbeasts or
birds have any firm peace, privilege, or protection, within the warren. If any
person be found to be an offender in any such free warren, he is to be punished
for the same by the course of the Common law, and by the Statute, anno 21
Edward. 3. called the Statute de malefactoribus in parcis and chaceis, etc. For
the most part there are no Officers in a warren, but the Master of the Game, or
the Keeper. A free warren is sometime enclosed; and also the same sometime does
lie open, for there is no necessity of enclosing the same, as there is of a
Park, for if a Park is suffered to lie open, it ought to be seized into the
Kings Kings hands. Thus far M. Manwood.

Warscot, is the contribution, that was wont to be made toward Armor in the
Saxons time. In Canutus his Charter of the Forest set out by M. Manwood in the
first part of his Forest laws, uum. 9. you have these words: Sint omnes tam
primaris quam madiocres, and minuti, immunes, liberi and quieti ab omnibus
provincialibus summonitionibus, et popularibus placitis, quae Hundred laghe
Angli dicunt, et ab omnibus a^morum oneribus, quod Warscot Angli dicunt, et
forinsecis querelis.

Warwis, alias Wardwit, is to be quit of giving money for keeping of watches.
New exposition of law terms.

Wasie (vastum) comes of the French ( gaster, i. populari.) It signifies
diversely in our Common law, first a spoil made, either in houses, woods,
gardens, orchards, etc. by the tenent for term of life, or for term of another
life, or of years, to the prejudice of the Heir, or of him in the Reversion or
Remainder. Kitchen, fol. 168. etc. usque 178. upon this committed the Writ of
waste is brought or the recovery of the things, whereupon the waste is made. See
Vast^. Waste may be also made of tenants or bondmen belonging or regardant to
the manor. Regist. orig. fol. 72. a. et 73. a. See the new book of Entries,
verbo Waste. A waste of the Forest (as M. Manwood says, part prim. of his
Forest laws, page 172.) is most properly where a man does cut down his own
woods within the Forest, without license of the King or of the Lord Chief
Justice in Eyr of the Forest. But it is also, where a man does plow up his own
meadow or Pasture, and converteth it unto tillage. And of this you may read him
at large, in his second part, cap. 8. number. 4, et 5. Waste in the second
signification is taken for those parts of the Lords Demesns, that be not in any
one man's occupation, but lie common for bounds or passages of the Lord and
Tenent from one place to another, and sometimes for all the Kings Subject^.
Which seems to be called waste, because the Lord cannot make such profit of
it, as he does of other of his land, by reason of that use which others have of
it in passing to and fro. Upon this none may build or feed, or cut down Trees,
without the Lords license. Waste has a third signification, as year, day, and
waste. Annus, dies, et vastum: which is a punishment or forfeiture belonging to
petit treason, or felony: whereof you may read Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 3. cap. 30.
And see Year, Day, and Waste.

Wasters, anno 5 Ed. 3. cap. 14. See Roberds wen. See Draw latches.

Wastoll bread, anno 51 H. 3. statute of br. ad, and statute of pilory.

Waterbayliffs, seem to be officers in Porttowns for the searching of Ships,
an. 28 H. 6. ca. 5.

Watling street, is one of the four ways, which the Romans are said to ^have
made here in England, and called them Consulares, Praetorias, Militares,
Publicas, Master Cambden in his Britannia, persuades himself that there were
more of this sort than four. This street is otherwise called Werlam street, as
the same Author says;) and howsoever the Romans might make it and the rest,
the names be from the Saxons. And Roger Hoveden says, it is so called, because
the Sons of Wethle made it, leading from the East sea to the West, Annal.
part. prior. fol. 248. a. This street leads from Dover to London, and so to
Saint Albons, and there onward directly toward the North-west through the Land,
as from Dunstable to Westchester, anno 39. El. cap. 2. The second street is
called Ikenild street, beginning ab Icenis, who were the people inhabiting
Norfolk, Suffolk, and Cambridge shire, as M. Cambden declares, page 345. The
third is called Fosse: the reason of the name he gives, because he thinks it
was ditched on each side. The fourth is called Ermin street, Germanico
vocabulo, a Mercurio, quem sub nomine I^munsull, i. Mercurii columma, Germani
majores nostri colueru^t. Of these read more in the said Author, page 43, and
44. In the description of England going under Saxons name, cap. 7. I read that
Belinus a Briton King made these four ways: whereof the first and greatest he
calls Fosse, stretching out of the South into the North, and beginning from
the corner of Cornwell, and passing forth by Devonshire, Somersetshire, and so
along by Tetbury upon Toteswould besides Coventree unto Lecester, and thence,
by the wide plains to Newark, and to Lincoln, where it ends. The second he
names Watling street, coming out of the South east toward the Fosse,
beginning at Dover, and passing through the middle of Kent over Thames, beside
London near Westminster, and thence to Saint Albons, by Donstable, Stratford,
Towceter, Wedon, Lilborn, Atheriston, Gilberts hill, now called Wreaken, by
Severn, Workcester, Stratton, and so forth by the middle of Wales, unto
Cardican, and the Irish seas. The third he calls Erminage street, stretching
out of the West North-west, into the East South-east, from S. David's in the
West Wales unto Southampton. The fourth he called Rikenild street, stretching
forth by Worchester, by Wicomb, Brinhingham, Litchfield, Derby, Chesterfield,
and by York forth into Tynmouth. But he that lists to read at large of these
ways, let him have recourse to the first volume of Holinsheds Chronicle, and
the description of England there, the 19 chapter. Where this antiquity is far
otherwise declared, than by the former writers. Henry of Huntington likewise in
the first book of his History, not far after the beginning, mentions these
four Streets, terming them calls Regia sublimatos anthoritate, ne aliquis in
eis inimicum invadere auderet, etc.

Waterbayliffs, anno 28 H. 6. cap. 5. is an Officer belonging to the City of
London, which has the supervision and search of fish, that is brought to that
City, as also the gathering of the toll rising from that water. He is reckoned
an Esquire by his Office, as the Sword Bearer, the Huntsman, and the chief
Sergeant is. He also attends upon the Lord Mayor for the time being, and has
the principal care of marshalling the guests at his Table.

Way. See Chimin.

WE
Weif. (wavium) whence it has his original I cannot certainly say. But I find
the 19 chap. of the Grand Customary of Normandy to be entitled (De chooses
gains) and latined by the Interpreter (De rebus vaivis) which are there tus
defined: vaiva sunt res, vel alia, quae nullius proprietati attributa, sine
possessionis reclamations sunt inventa, quae usque ad diem and a^^um servanda
sunt. Et de^is modo, quo dictum est de veriscis, that is (weeks) ea sua esse
probantibus est restitutio facienda, etc. This weif or things weived have the
very same signification in our Common law, and be naught but things forsaken.
The Civilians call it (Derelictum) or (Quod est pro derelicto) Bracton in the
twelfth Chapter of his first book, ns^. 10. reckons them inter res quae sunt
nullius ea quae pro waivio habentur: sicut de averiis, ubi non apparet Dominus,
where he also says, quod olim fueruut inventoris de jure naturali, et jam
essiciuntur principis de jure Gentium. That this is a Regality, and belonging
to the King, except it be challenged by the owner within a year and a day, it
appears by Briton in his seventeenth chapter. Now the Kings in their times
have granted this and such like Prerogatives unto diverse Subjects, with their
fees, who there likewise says, that waifs, things lost, and estrayes, must by
the Lord of the franchise where they are found, be caused to be cried and
published in Markets and Churches near about, or else that the year and day
does not run to the prejudice of him that has lost them. See Waive, M. Skene
de verborum signif. verb. waif, says, that waif est pecus vel animal aberrans,
which wanders and waivers without a known Master, and being found by any man
within his own bounds, must be by him proclaimed upon diverse, and sundry Market
days, at the Parish Church, and within the Sheriff-dome. Otherwise the
Deteyner may be accused of theft. And it is lawful for the owner to challenge
the beast within a year and a day. Whereby it appears, that in Scotland that
is called a weif which we here call a stray or estray.

Would of Kent, is the woody part of the Country, Camden Britannia, page 247.
M. Verstegan in his restitution of decayed intelligence says, that Wald,
Weald, and Would differing in vowel, signify one thing, to wit, a Forest. See
the rest litera W.

Wedding (Nuptiae) comes of the German ( wed, i. pignus) and wed in Scotland
signifies so much at this day. Skene de verborum signif. verbo vadium.

Weigh (waga) is a certain weight of cheese or wool, containing 256 pounds of
avoyr de poyce. See Clove.

Weights (Pondera) what they be, it is well known. There be two sorts of them
in use with us. The one called Troy weight, which contains twelve ounces in
the pound, and no more: by the which Pearl, precious stones, electuaries, and
medicinal things, gold, silver, and bread be weighed: The other is called Aver
de pois, which contains 16 ounces in the pound. By this all other things are
weighed that pass between man and man by weight, saving only those above named.
Why the one should be called Troy weight, I have not learned, though I read it
termed libram and unciam Trojanam: as if it came from Troy. But Georg. Agricola
in his learned Tractate de ponderibus and mensuris, page 339. terms the pound
of twelve ounces, libram medicam, and the other of sixteen ounces, libram
civilem; saying thus of them both: Medica and civilis libra, numero non
gravitate unciarum differunt. The second seems so to be termed by reason of
the more full weight; for (Avoir de pois) in French, is as much as to say, as
to have full weight. But by these words (avoir depois) are some time signified
such Merchandise as are bought and sold by this kind of weights. The first
statute of York, an. 9 Ed. 3. in prooem. and an. 27 Ed. 13. stat. 2. cap. 10.
and anno 24. H. 8 cap. 13. Of weights in Scotland, See Skene ac verbo signif.
verbo Serplathe. All our weights and measures have their first composition from
the penny sterling, which ought to weigh two and thirty wheat corns of a middle
sort, twenty of which pence make an ounce, and twelve such ounces a pound, or
twenty shillings, but fifteen ounces make the Merchants pound, Fleta lib. 2.
cap. 12. It is not unlike that this Merchants pound, though an ounce less,
should be all one in signification with the pound of Avoir de pois: and the
other pound, called by Fleta troue weight, plainly appears to be all one with
that which we now call Troy weight. And I find not Troy weight mentioned by any
other that ever I read upon this subject, but only our own Country men. See
Tronage.

Weights of Awncell, anno 14 Ed. 3. stat. 1. cap. 12. See Auncell weight.

Were, alias werre, signifies as much as ( Ae stimatio capitis, aut pretium
hominis. M. Lamberds explication of Saxon words, verb. Ae stimatio) That is to
say, so much as one paid for killing of a man. Whereby he gathers, that
slaughters, and such other great offenses, were more rarely committed in
ancient times than now: when as for the multitude of offenders, death is most
justly inflicted for those crimes, that then were redressed by pecuniary
mulcts. Of this see Roger Hoveden, part poster. suorum annalium, in Henrico 2.
fo. 344.

Weregelt thef. significat latronem qui redim^ potest. Wera enim anglice idem
est in Saxonis lingua, vel pretium vita h^minis appretiatum. Fleta, lib. 1.
cap. 47.

West Saxon lage, alias West Sexenlage. See Law.

WH
Wharf (wharfa) is a broad plain place near to a Creek or Hithe of the water,
to lay wares upon, that be brought to or from the water, to be transported to
any other place. New book of Entries, fol. 3. col. 3.

Wharfinger, is the Keeper of a wharf, anno 7 Ed. 6. ca. 7.

White heart silver (Candidi Cervi argentum) is a tribute or mulct paid into the
Exchequer out of the Forest of White heart: which (as M. Cambden reports in
his Britan, page 150.) has continued from Henry the thirds time, and was
imposed by him upon Thomas De. la-linde, for killing of a most beautiful Heart,
which himself before had purposely spared in hunting.

WI
Widow (vidua) seems to come of the French ( vuide, i. inanitus, exinanitus)
or the verb ( vuider, i. inaniare) quasi privata atque orba marito. Macrobius,
l. b. 1. Saturn. ca. 15. draws it from the Hetruscan verb ( Iduare, i.
dividere. Vnde vidua quasi valde idua, i. valde divisa: aut vidua, i. a viro
divisa. The signification with us is apparent. But there is one kind of widow,
called the widow of the King, or the Kings widow (vidua Regis) that requires
exposition. And she is that widow, which after her Husbands death, being the
Kings tenent in capite, is driven to recover her dower by a Writ de dote
assignanda. Of whom you may read Stawnf. praerog. cap. 4. The words of the
statute of the praerog. made anno 17 Ed. 2. be these: Item assignabit viduis
post mortem virorum suorum, qui de eo tenu^runt in capite, dotem suam, quae cas
contingit, etc. licet haeredes fuerint plenae aetatis, si viduae voluerint. Et
viduae illae ante assignationem dotis suae praedictae, sive haeredes plen^
aetatis fuerint, sive infra aetatem, jurabunt, quodse non maritabunt sine
licentia Regis. Tunc Rex capiet in manum suam nomine districtionis omnes
terras, and tenementa, quae de eo tenentur in dotem, donec sat isfecerint ad
voluptatem su^m: it a quod ipsa mulier nihil capiet de exitibus, etc. quia par
hnjusmodi districtiones hujusmodi mulieres, seu viri eorum finem facient Regi
ad voluptatem suam. Et illa vol^^tas tempore Regis Henric. patris Regis Edwardi
aestimari consuevit ad valentiam praedictae dotis per unum annum ad plus, nisi
ulteriorem gratiam habuerint. Mulieres, quae de Rege tenent in capite aliquam
haereditatem, jurabunt similiter, cujuseunque fuerint aetatis, quod se non mar
it a^unt sine licentia Regis. Et si fecerint, terrae and tenementa ipsarum
eodem modo capiantur in manum Domini Regis, quousque satisfecerint ad
voluntatem Regis. Of this see likewise the great Charter, cap. 7. whereby it
appears that other common Lords have the same power over their widows,
touching their consent in their marriage, that the King has. Of this you may
read more in the Writ De dote assignanda. Fitzh. not. brev. fo. 263. C. See
also the Statute, anno 32 H. 8. cap. 46.

Windelesor, a Herald. See Herald.

Withernam (vetitum Namium) Master Lamberd thinks to be compounded of (
wither, i. altera, sive secunda) and ( Nam, i. pignoris captio) marvelling much
why it should so far be depraved in the Interpretation, as to be translated
(Vetitum Namium.) Read him in the Explication of Saxon words, verbo, Pignorari.
The concord of the thing signified with the meaning of the Latin words, makes
some to think, that it is compounded of ( wehre^, i. veto) and (uyman) or (
nemmen, i. capio.) For Withernam in our Common law is the taking, or driving a
distress to a hold, or out of the County, so that the Sheriff cannot upon the
Replevin make deliverance thereof to the party distreined: In which case, the
Writ of Withernam, or de vetito Namio is directed to the Sheriff, for the
taking of as many of his beasts that did thus unlawfully distrein, or as much
goods of his, into his keeping, till that he has made deliverance of the first
distress. Also if the beasts be in a fortlet or castle, the Sheriff may take
with him the power of the County, and beat down the Castle, as it appears by
the Statute, Westminster. pri. cap. 20. Briton cap. 27. But Mr. Lamberds
Interpretation, seems more consonant to the Writ, the form whereof is thus in
part ( Fitzh. not. br. fol. 73.) Tibi praecipimus quod averia praedicti B. in
Balliva tua capias in withernam, etc. and the Register original, fol. 82. and
83. and 79. a. and 80. a. and in the Regist. judic. fol. 29. a. and 30. a.
Whereby it appears that the Sheriff by these words is willed to take in
compensation of the former taking so many cattle, etc. But yet this may
qualify Master Lamberds marvelling, because they that translated this word
into such Latin, seem to have been deceived by the propinquity of the word
(wehren) both to the word (withernam) and also to the meaning. This error (if
it be an error) has a probable likelihood of descent from the Normans, as
appears by the Grand Customary, cap. 4. where you have words to this effect:
Deficientes (sc. Balivos) facere justiciari, et ea, de quibus judicium vel
vecordatio habet fieri in curia: debet (sc. Justic arius) retrahere vel
recitare. Treugam dari debet facere, quod est assecuratio pacis. observandae.
Nampta injuste capta per jus facere liberari, etc. Here you may see (Nampta)
referred to the first taking or distress, which is unlawful. Sir Tho. Smith in
his Repub. Anglor. agrees with M. Lamberd in these words: This (withernam) he,
meaning Littleton, with whom Bracton also agrees, lib. 2. cap. et lib. 3.
tract. 2. cap. 36. interprets vetitum Namium, in what language I know not.
Whereas in truth it is in plain Dutch, and in our old Saxon language ( wither
nempt, i. alterum accip^re, alterum rapere) a word that signifies all one with
that barbarous Latin word (Repraesalia) when one taking of me a distress,
which in Latin is called (pignus) or any other thing, and carrying it away out
of the Jurisdiction where I dwell, I take by order of him that has
Jurisdiction, another of him again, or of some other of that Jurisdiction: and
do bring it into the jurisdiction wherein I dwell, that by equal wrong I may
come to have equal right, etc. Namatio animalium in Scotland is used for the
pounding of cattle, Skene de verbor. signif. verbo Averis: whom also read,
verbo Namar^. Withernam in Bracton, lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 37: and also in
Westminster. 2. cap. 2. seems to signify an unlawful distress, made by him that
has no right to distrein, anno 13 Ed. prim. cap. 2. See the new book of
Entries. Verbo Withernam.

WOE
Woad (glastum) is an herb brought from the parts of Tolouse in France, and
from Spain, much used and very necessary in the dying of woollen cloth, anno 7
H. 8. cap. 2. we call it woad of the Italian word (guado) or the German word
(weidt.)

Woodgeld, seems to be the gathering or cutting of wood within the Forest, or
money paid for the same, to the use of the Foresters. And the immunity from
this by the Kings grant, is by Crompton called Woodgeld, fol. 157.

Woodmen, seem to be those in the Forest, that have their charge especially to
look to the Kings woods. Manwood, part pri. of his Forest laws, page 193. and
Cromptons Jus risd. fol. 146.

Woodmote court, is the Attachment of the Forest. Manwood, part pri. of his
Forest laws, page 95. See Attachment.

Woodward (woodwardus) is an officer of the Forest, whose function you may
partly gather by his oath set down in Cromptons jurisd. fol. 201 which M.
Manwood has also in his first part of his Forest laws, page 50. to the same
effect, but something more at large. viz. You shall truly execute the office of
a woodward of B. woods within the Forest of W. so long as you shall be woodward
there: you shall not conceal any offense either in Vert or in Venison, that
shall be committed or done within your charge: but you shall truly present the
same, without any favor, affection, or reward. And if you do see or know any
Malefactors, or do find any Deer killed or hurt, you shall forthwith do the
verderour understand thereof. And you shall present the same at the next Court
of the Forest: be it Swainmote, or Court of Attachments; so help you God.
Woodwards may not walk with Bow and Shafts, but with Forest bills, Manwood,
part pri. of his Forest laws, page 189. and more of him, page 97.

Woold^iver, anno 2, et 3 Ph. et Ma. cap. 13. be those that buy Wool abroad in
the Country of the Sheep masters, and carry it by horseback to the Clothiers,
or to Market towns to sell it again.

Woolferh: fod (Caput Lupinum) is the condition of those, which were outlawed
in the Saxons time, for not yielding themselves to Justice. For if they could
be taken alive, they must have been brought to the King: and if they in fear or
apprehension did defend themselves, they might be slain, and their heads
brought to the King. For they carried a Wolves head: that is to say, their
head was no more to be accounted of, than a Wolves head, being a beast so
hurtful unto man. See the Laws of King Edward, set out by M. Lamberd, fol.
127. b. nu. 7. The very like whereof Bract^n also says, lib. 3. tract. 2. cap.
11. See Vtlary. Roger Hoveden writes it ( Wulvesheved, part poster. suorum
annalium, fol. 343. b.) whom read of this matter, because you shall there see
what it was in those days to violate the peace of the Church.

Wool-staple, anno 51 H. 3. stat. 5. See Staple.

Wool winders, be such as wind up every fleece of Wool, that is to be packed
and sold by weight, into a kind of bundle, after it is cleansed in such manner
as it ought to be by statute. And to avoid such deceit as the owners were wont
to use by thrusting locks of refuse Wool, and such other dross, to gain
weight; they are sworn to perform that office truly between the owner and the
Merchant. See the Statute, anno 8 H. 6. cap. 22. et anno 23 H. 8. cap. 17. et
an. 18 Eliz. cap. 25.

Would. See Weald.

Wranglands, seem to be mis-grown Trees that will never prove Timber, Kitchen,
fol. 169. b.

Wormseed (Semen sanctonicum) is a medicinal seed brought forth of that Plant
which in Latin is called (Sementina) in English, Holy worm wood, whereof you
may read in Gerards Herbal, li. 2. cap. 435. This is a Drug to be garbled, anno
1 Jac. cap. 19.

WR
Wreck (wreecum vel wrectum maris) is the loss of a ship and the goods therein
contained, by tempest, or other mischance at the Sea. The Civilians call it
(Naufragium) This wreck being made, the goods that were in the ship, being
brought to Land by the waves, belong to the King by his Prerogative. And
thereupon in many books of our Common law, the very goods so brought to land
are called wreck. And wreck is defined to be those goods which are so brought
to Land. Sir Edward Coke, vol. 6. relatio, fol. 106. a. and the Statute anno 17
Edward 2. cap. 11. in these words, Item Rex habebit wreccum maris, per tatum
Regnum, ballenas, et sturgeones captas in mart vel alibi infra Regnum, except
is quibusdam locis privilegiatis per Regem. Whereby it appears that the King
has them, or such as have by Grant this liberty or Privilege of him: And that
this Statute does but affirm the ancient law of the Land, it appears by
Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 5. number. 7. hiis verbis: Sunt etiam aliae res quae
pertinent ad Coronam propter privilegium Regis, et ita communem non recipient
libertatem, quin dari possint, and ad alium transferri. Quia si transferantur,
translatio nussi erit damnosa, nisi ipsi Regi sive Principi, Et si hujusmodi
res alicui concessae fuerint, sicut wreccum maris, etc. The reason of this he
touches shortly in his first book, cap. 12. number. 10. where he reckneth these
goods (jure naturali) to be (in bonis nullius) quia non apparet Dominus eorum,
sed jure Gentium fieri principis: And see him also lib. 2. cap. 24. nu m. 1, et
2. It is worth the asking to know what is a wreck, and what not, in this
stricter signification. And the Author of the terms of Law says, that if any
person of the Ship come to land, it is not a wreck, or the wreck is not such,
that the King ought to have the goods, with whom agrees Sir Edward Coke, vol.
6. fol. 107. a. No, if either a Dog or Cat escape alive to the Land, the goods
are the Owners still, so he come within a year and a day to claim them. And for
this the Statute is plain, Westminster. prim. cap. 4. anno 3 Edward prim. which
doctrine Fitzherbert in his Natura brevium, fol. 112. E. extends thus far,
that if any of the goods be cast upon the dry Land by any in the ship, it is no
wreck subject to the Prerogative, for by this some of the Ship are presumed to
come to land, and still to have a custody of the goods. Cook ubi supra. This in
the Grand Customary of Normanny, cap. 17. is called (varech) and latined
(veriscum) where it appears that the like law to ours was in Normandy almost
in all points. But some sorts of their precious Merchandise do by their law
appertain to the Duke by his Prerogative, though a just challenge of the goods
be made within the year and day. The Emperors of Rome made no advantage of this
pitiful event, as appears, titulo De Naufragiis 11. Cod. And it appears
that Richard the first had some remorse of poor sea-mens miseries in this case.
For he quietum clam evit wreck suis subditis. Rog. Hoveden part poster. suerum
ann^l. fol. 386. Of this M. Skene de verb. siguif. speaks to this effect:
wreck signifies a power, liberty, and prerogative appertaining to the King, or
to any person, to whom the same is granted by him by feoffment, or any other
disposition, to take up and gain such goods as are ship-broken, or fall to him
by escheat of the sea.

Writ (breve) is that with our Common Lawyers (in Sir Thomas Smiths judgment,
lib. 2. de Repub. Anglorum, ca. 9.) which the Civilians call (Actionem, sive
formulam.) But I am rather of his judgment, that has added the marginal note
unto him, saying that (Actio) is the parties whole suit: and that (Breve) is
the Kings precept, whereby any thing is commanded to be done touching the suit
or action; as the Defendant or Tenent to be summoned, a distress to be taken,
a disseisin to be redressed, etc. And these writs are diversely divided, in
diverse respects. Some in respect of their order, or manner of granting, are
termed original, and some judicial. Original writs be those, that are sent out
for the summoning of the Defendant in a personal, or Tenent in a real action,
or other like purpose, before the suit begins, or to begin the suit thereby:
Those be judicial, that be sent out by order of the Court, where the cause
depends upon occasion growing after suit begun, Old not. brev. fol. 51. And
Judicial is thus by one sign known from the Original, because the Test bears
the name of the Chief Justice of that Court whence it comes, where the
Original bears in the Test the name of the Prince, Then according to the
nature of the action, they be personal, or real: and real be either touching
the possession, called writs of Entry, or the property, called writs of right.
Fitz. not. br. sparsim per totum. Some writs be at the suit of a party, some of
office, Old not. br. fol. 147. Some ordinary, some of privilege. A writ of
privilege is that which a privileged person brings to the Court, for his
exemption, by reason of some privilege. See Procedendo. See the new book of
Entries, verbo Privilegt. See Brief.

Writ of Rebellton. See Commission of Rebellion.

Writer of the Tallies (Scriptor talliarum) is an Officer in the Exchequer,
being Clerk to the Auditor of the Receipt, who writes upon the Tallies the
whole letfers of the Tellers bills.

Y.
YA
YArd lands (Virgata terrae) is a quantity of land called by this name of the
Saxon (Gyrdlander) but not so certain a quantity, as that it is all one in all
places: For in some Countries it contains 20 acres, in some 24. in some 30.
as M. Lamberd says, in his explication of Saxon words, verbo virgata terrae.
This Yard land Bracton calls ( virgatam terrae, lib. 2. cap. 10. et 37.) but
he expresses no certainty what it contains.

YE
Year and day (annus et dies) is a time thought in construction of our Common
law, fit in many cases to determine a right in one, and to work an usucapion or
prescrition in another. As in a case of an estray, if the owner (Proclamations
being made) challenge it not within that time, it is forfeit. So is the year and
day given in case of appeal, in case of descent after entry or claim; of no
claim upon a fine or writ of right at the Common law: so of a villein remaining
in ancient demean, of the death of a man sore bruised or wounded: of
Protections; Essoins in respect of the Kings service: of a wreck, and diverse
other cases, Coke, vol. 6. fol. 107. b. And that touching the death of a man
seems an imitation of the Civil Law. Nam si mortifere fuerit vulneratus, et
postea post longum intervallum mortuus fit, inde annum numerabimus secundum
Iulianum. l. ait lex n. ad legem Aqui^.

Year, day, and wasto (annus, dies, et vastum) is a part of the Kings
Prerogative, whereby he challenges the profits of their lands and tenements
for a year and a day, that are attainted of petit treason, or felony, whosoever
be Lord of the Manor, whereunto the lands or tenements do belong, and not only
so, but in the end wastes the tenement, destroys the houses, rooteth up the
woods, gardens, pasture, and ploweth up meadows, except the Lord of the fee
agree with him for the redemption of such waste, afterward restoring it to the
Lord of the fee, whereof you may read at large, Siawnf. prarog. cap. 16. fol.
44. et seq.

YO
Yoman, seems to be one word made by contraction of two Danish words (young
men) which I gather out of Canutus Charter of the Forest set out out by M.
Manwood, part prim. fol. prim. number. 2. in these words. Sunt sub quolibet horum
quatuor ex mediocribus hominibus quos Angli Legespend) ^uncupant, Dani vero
(young men) vecaut, locati, qui curam et onus tum vi^id^s tum veneris
suscipiant. These M. Cambden in his Britan. page 105. places next in order to
Gentlemen, calling them (Iugenuos) whose opinion the Statute affirms, anno 6
R. 2. cap. 4 Whereunto add the Statute, anno 20. ejusdem Regis, cap. 2. Sir
Thomas Smith, in his Repub. Anglor, lib. prim. cap. 23. calls him a Yoman,
whom our Laws call legalem hominem: which (as he says) is in English a ^ee man
born, that may dispend of his own free land, in yearly revenue, to the sum of
40 shillings sterling. Of these he writes a good large discourse, touching
their estate and use in this Common wealth. The former etymology of the name
he likes not, making question whether it come of the Dutch (Younger) yea or
not, which in the Low Countries signifies a mean Gentleman, or a gay fellow;
but he that has added the marginal notes to that book, seems to draw it from
the Saxons (Geman) which signifies a married man. M. Verstegan in his
restitution of decayed intelligence, cap. 10. writes that (Gemen) among the
ancient Teutonicks, and (Germein) among the modern, signifies as much, as
common, and that the first Letter G. is in this word, as in many others turned
into Y. and so writes Yemen; and that therefore Yemen, or Yeomen signifies so
much as Commoner. Yoman signifies an Officer in the Kings house, which is in
the middle place between the Sergeant and the Groom: as Yoman of the Chaundry;
and Yoman of the Scullery, an. 33 Hen. 8. cap. 12. Yoman of the Crown, anno 3
Ed. 4. cap. 5. and anno 22 ejusdem, cap. 1. and anno 4 H. 7. cap. 7. This word
(Yongmen) is used for Yomen in the Statute, anno 33 H. 8. cap. 10.

(...).

FINIS.

