The Nail and the Wheel.

THE NAIL FASTENED by a Hand from Heaven.

THE WHEEL TVRNED by a Voice from the Throne of Glory.

Both Described in two several SERMONS In the Green-yard at NORWICH.

By JOHN CARTER Pastor of Great St. PETER'S.

LONDON, Printed by J. Macock for M. Spark, and are to be sold by WILLIAM
FRANKLIN at his shop in the Marketplace in Norwich. 1647.

TO the glory of her Sex; The Right Honorable, both by the first and second
Birth, the worthy and most religious Lady; the Lady FRANCES HOBARTE.
MADAM!
YOur Honor knows I have ever been afraid of the Press hitherto I have stood
out against all importunity, and I was peremptorily resolved never to have
published any thing in Print: but now I am enforced, whether I will or no, to
send abroad these two small pieces. And since they must out, I humbly present
them to your Ladyship: Not for any worth that is in them: Not for your Honors
protection of them; let them go forth at their own peril: nor yet for the
subjects sake; the matter of them in the general not so directly, and properly
complying with your Ladyships condition: they are rather for the instruction of
Magistrates: But I dedicate them to your Honor: because they are your due.
Whatever I can perform in the service of God, and more by far then ever I am
able to do, low to the gracious Lady Frances. To say truth, your Honor called
for them, and here they are: take them with favorable acceptance. Something
your Ladyship will meet withal in both Sermons appliable and useful in regard of
your self. The NAIL (I mean the good Nail) will give your Honor a fresh sight of
that Noble Gentleman, worthy Sir JOHN HOBARTE, your Honors lately deceased
husband. He was a gallant Nail: by the grace of God well filed from all rust and
ruggedness: He was a bright Nail, as burnished gold, shining more and more
every day he lived (that I can testify to the comfort of my soul) by a godly
conversation. He was a great and a strong Nail: His abilities were beyond the
common pitch: He had a good head for wisdom and understanding: He had a good
heart; Faithful and zealous he was for God, for Religion, for his Country, for
our Solemn Covenant: He was a fixed Nail not only in the Capitol, but also in
the Sanctuary: his care and painful endeavors were laid out not only for the
Commonwealth, but for the Church also: yea he himself was a little suncturary
to the faithful Manisters of Jesus Christ. He was a stout Nail, steeled with
Christian resolution and courage; not counting his life dear if he might have
sacrificed it (as partly he did) for the Kingdoms peace, his Countries safety
and the Churches settlement. He was a Nail on which the Welfare and prosperity
of our Sion did much depend. And for our sins God has plucked out this useful
Nail. We see this great Nail turned into a little Wheel: and he is now rolled
into the House appointed for all the living. I will not tell the world of your
Ladyships immoderate sorrow, and how you sit disconsolate, sighing, sobbing,
and mourning like a faithful Turtle bereaved of her mate: I will rather guide my
speech to your Honor, and direct your eye to the Wheel. Worthy Sir John
Hobarte, he was a stately Wheel, he moved bravely in his time, and did much of
Gods work with all alacrity; yea he counted that life worse then death, when
his motion was any whit stopped by infirmity of body, so as he could not be
active in the Public service as he desired. This Voluble, and swift Wheel, is
now broken at the Cistern: and your heart Madam, was almost broken too. Oh! I
beseech your Honor, look up to the throne of glory; it is the voice of the Lord
has turned the Wheel: He has spok^n, and has done it. Submit, Submit with
humility, patience, cheerfulness. Rejoice rather: what a world of comforts may
your Ladyship have in your loss? He did worthily in his life, he dyed
religiously: I saw him draw his last breath: but so much Majesty, and peace in
a dying countenance I never saw. A stranger would have thought he had been only
in some sweet-contenting sleep, or tasting the heavenly joys. What an Honorable
name has he left behind him! Is it not as an ointment powered forth, even as
the fragrant spikenard? The Nail is pulled out of this lower wall, but it is
not lost: it is only advanced, and set up higher. He is fastened in the wall of
the New Jerusalem, he shines, and ever shall shine bright in glory. And we all
ere long shall roll after him; and then shall your Ladyship enjoy a better
Communion with your husband then ever. Be content to wait, is it not a little
while?

I intended a very short Epistle, but my pen begins to be free, and eager of
its way. I can hardly hold it in: it would fain be dropping out something of
your honors goodness. I well know how little your Honor affects the praise of
men (your praise is in the Gospel) and your Ladyship well knows how much I
abhor base flattery. And God he knows, my design is not to make you proud by
speaking your virtues to your face, but only this; I would most gladly take
occasion to publish something to the world of those eminent Graces, which the
Lord has wrought in your Honor by his holy spirit: that your Ladyships example
may be propounded as a pattern to all Chr^stian women, which they may ever look
upon, and follow. Elect Lady! I could tell them, how I have ever found you
walking in the truth, even in the most perilous and seducing times: with what
obedience you have always heard the word, resigning up your will to Gods
Command: How your deportment was to your Noble yoke fellow: the heart of your
husband did safely trust in you: All that were but lookers on, did see the
entireness of your heart, the intention of your love, your loyalty, and
faithfulness, joined with all diligence, and care. You made in your study and
work, to do him good in regard of his body, in regard of his estate; but
especially, and above all in regard of his soul. I could take occasion by this
my dedication to tell the world: That even whilst you are on earth, your
conversation is in heaven. I can truly testify that your Ladyship is a widow
indeed, continuing in fasting, and prayer, and reading, and meditation; and
that this is your work night and day in the temple, in your closet, in your
family: That Is remarkable; in your family you observe David's hours. Every
morning, every noon, and every night you have prayer, Scripture read and
expounded (and that by an able, and a called Minister of the Gospel) besides
repetitions of Sermons, singing of Psalms, and constant Catechizing (a most
necessary work) the Noble Olive-plant, your precious daughter answering with
the first, with all readyness, and cheerfulness, to her immortal honor. I
confess hearing the answers of young Mrs. Philip Hobarte, and the rest, I could
not but think thus with my self: This day is that Prophesy fulfilled in mine
ears. I will power out of my spirit upon all flesh, and your sons, and your
daughters shall Prophesy, and your young men shall see Visions; and on my
servants, and on my handmaids will I pour out of my spirit, and they shall
Prophesy.

Madam! Will not your honor be offended if I show my folly, and boast a little
to the world? You are my glory, my Crown, and my rejoicing: the comfortable
Harvest, and precious Seal of my Ministry. And this is discerned by others, as
well as by my self. Your parallel is not to be found: or at the least, scarcely
was ever any Christian seen, who did thrive, and grow so fast in Grace as your
Honor has done, especially of late years. Now, if either your Honor or any
others that shall cast their eye on these my free expressions, and think me
indiscreet in writing thus to your Honor: I Apologize for my self in the words
of Christ when he prayed vocally, and loud at Lazarus his grave; Not for your
sake Madam! but because of the people which stand by, I said it. I propound a
pattern to other Christians, and other families: and my sole aim is, the glory
of God, and the provoking of many to a holy emulation.

The God of heaven and earth; the God of my father bless your Honor, and your
noble and hopeful daughter. I beg for you the upper and the nether springs. The
God of all Grace perfect all Grace in you: be filled with the Spirit, with
inward peace and joy of the Holy Ghost. Be the Lords darling. Believe me
Gracious Lady! The tongue shall cleave to the roof of my mouth, and my right
hand shall forgets its skill: before I shall cease to bear your Honors name at my
heart: and to present it unto the Lord as often as I appear at the throne of
Grace. July 23. 1647.


Be sure Madam! I am Your Honors most humbly Devoted servant for ever. Thankful
for your Superlative favor, bounty, and care. And

As under God your Honor raised me from the grave. So (if I can believe mine
own heart) I am your Honors faithful Pastor: who if God should call him to it,
would willingly lay down his life to establish your Ladyship in the truth and
grace of Jesus Christ, and to further your eternal Salvation.

JOHN CARTER.

To The whole World.
O WORLD!
THou see what Contradiction these poor weak Sermons have met withal; how
they have been, and are accused of falsehood, envy, malice, peevishness: that
the Magistrates are slandered in them; and very lies uttered in the face of
City, and Country. I am necessitated to appeal to God, and the World. O World!
I hold forth unto thy view faithfully all that was spoken, nothing omitted. I
call unto thee, to be my true and impartial witness: and let the God of Truth
be Judge!



THE Nail hit on the head: AND Driven into the City and Cathedral Wall of
NORWICH.

By JOHN CARTER Pastor of Great St. PETER'S in that City.

At the Greenyard June 17. 1644. Being a preparative to the Guyle-Solemnity the
day following.

EZRA 9. 8. Grace has been showed from the Lord our God, to leave us a remnant
to escape, and to give us a nail in his holy place. depiction of nail

THE NAIL:
ESA. 22. 23. And I will fasten him a nail in a sure place; and he shall be for a
glorious throne to his fathers house.
THe business of this Text is nothing else but the driving and fastening of a
nail. Wherein --

1. The Master-worker: who it is that fastens the nail. I.

2. The nail that is fastened: what, or who is that? Him.

3. Vbi? Where is this nail fastened? in loco fideli: in a sure place.

4. The end, use, and benefit of this nail so fastened: He shall be for a
glorious throne to his fathers house.

These are the parts and particulars of the Text. But I will not tie my self
strictly and punctually to these; or, at least, I will not fall upon them
presently: but according to my plain and usual way, I shall, concerning this
Text, dispatch these things.

1. I will speak something of the sense and meaning of the words.

2. I will give you the sum and substance of the whole verse in one general
proposition of doctrine: to which also I shall make some general applycation.

3. And then in the third place I will look over the particulars: I will search,
and examine them for such observations and instructions as may be for our
profit and use, besides the main, and general doctrine. Of these in their
order: And the Lord be with us Amen.

1. The Exposition
And I] and who is that? Eccles. 12. 11
it is (as Solomon calls him) the Master of the Assemblies that fastens the
nail: in the 15. verse of this Chapter he is called the Lord of Hosts.

Will fasten, HIM] Him; this is the nail to be fastened: a living nayl: You have
his name, and also his Character shortly, v. 20. Eliakim, so was his name: the
servant of the Lord; that is his Character.

He was a Courtier, a great man, a holy man, a good Patriot, faithful to his
King, to his Country, to Religion, and Reformation: all which appears plainly
by the current of this place, and also by other passages of sacred Scripture.

And I will fasten him as a Nail] a nail is a pin, Et f^gam illum paxillum.
or peg. For the matter, some are made of brass, some of iron, some of wood.

A nail is fastened; when it is knocked, beaten, and driven into a wall, beam,
post, or pillar.

The use of such a nail, orpeg, or spirkit is to hang thingsout of hand; and
such things especially as we would have ready for our use; as garments,
vessels, pots, instruments of music, and the like.

Such things as otherwise would ly scattered about the house, and be subject to
miscarry.

Metaphorically: to fasten a man as a nail; is to confirm, and establish him in
some place, or office in the Church, or Commonwealth, and to make him useful,
and profitable for the Public good.

Here the Kingdom of Juda is compared to a wall, or post: Eliakim to a nail:
and the Lord fastens him in the Kingdom: that is, puts him in place, and
office, and confirms him in it

Q. But what place? what office was he settled in? that must be known.

A. I answer. There was another nail pulled out, and he was put in, in the room.

The other nail, viz. his predecessor was Shebna: he was deprived, and Eliakim
substituted in his room: therefore let us enquire what place Shebna was in, and
then all will be clear.

Some of the Hebrew Doctors, and learned Hierom with them, conceive that Shebna
was the high priest. Lyra, Sanchez, Lapide, Pintus, Tirinus, and most of the
Popish-writers are of the same opinion: Their arguments are principally.

First, the authority of the old-Vulgar-latine translation of the 15. verse
(which with them is authentic) Vade ad Sobnam praepositum templi. Go to Shebna
the overseer of the temple: that is (say they) the high priest.

Again, from the 21. verse, where it is said; and I will cloth him with thy
robe, and strengthen him with thy girdle: they conclude those garments, to be
the Vestments of the high priest: according to that in the 20. of Number. v, 28.
And Moses stripped Aron of his garments, and put them on Eleazar his son.

But certainly, if we go to the fountain, this can never be made out, that
Shebna was High Priest, or any Priest of the second order. For,

In the 15. verse it is only (...) super domum, not (...) super domum dei. Over
the house; there is not so much as a hint that it should be over the house of
God.

Again, v. 21. The robe, and girdle were ensigns of authority, and Magistracy:
Job mentions the girdle of Kings. Baltheum regum dissolvit: Job 12. 18. He
loses the bond, or girdle of Kings, and thus did Pharaoh to Joseph, he
arrayed him in royal robes, and put a golden chain, or girdle about him. Genesis
41. 42.

So here: I will cloth him with thy robe; that is, that robe which thou did
wear when thou were the great manat Court.

Yet further, he was not capable of the office of Priesthood. They which
received the office of Priesthood were all of the Children of Levi: but Shebna
was of another stock, not so much as a Jew, but an Alian, a stranger. That is
obliquely signified, and intimated, verse the 16. What have thou here? and whom
have thou here? that thou have hewed thee out a Sepulcher here etc. which is,
as if he should have said: what business have thou in this Land? what kindred?
Why should thou take up thy rest to live, and dye in the Lords land, and to
be buried in Jerusalem, whereas thou art an Assyrian, or of some other strange
Country?

To put all out of question. There was another high priest at the very same
time; Azariah by name: you shall read of him, 2. Chron. 31. 13. He was ruler of
the house of God; that is by the consent of all interpreters, the high priest:
and therefore Shebna, what ever he were, could not be the high priest.

What was he then? Let Us gather up his titles of honor together, and by that
time we have done, we shall understand his place certainl^y

In the 15. verse he is called, first, the treasurer, and then Shebna Who is
over the house: that is, over the Kings house. In the 37. Chapter of this
Prophesy: 2. Kings 19 2.
verse the 2. and often other-where in scripture, he is styled, the Scribe: not
an ordinary, or Common Scribe, or notary; but such an one as we call a
Chancellor or Secretary.

This is then the sum of all: Shebna was at that time the great favorite of the
King: he had all the chief offices, the highest honors, and dignitys of the
Kingdom conferred upon him. He was Lord treasurer: he was ruler, Governor,
Controller of the Kings house; he was the Lord Chancellor, and Secretary of
state. In a word, he was the chief in Court, and Kingdom, and under the King,
Lord President of the whole Country; just as Joseph was under Pharaoh: Gen 41.
40. 45, 8.
Thou shall (says the King) be over my house, and according to thy word shall
all my people be ruled, only in the throne will I be greater then thou.

Thus was Shebna: Him God deposed, and put Eliakim into his place; into the
very same favor, dignity, honor, Authority, and Magistracy. (...)
The LXX renders it thus: (...) Constituam cum principem. I will make him a
great Prince in Juda. Eliakim is fastened as a nail: namely in the highest place
of the Kingdom.

And that,

In a sure place (...) in loco fideli. The word is derived from truth: q. d. in
a true and faithful place: that is in a firm, stable, permanent condition; for
where truth is, there is certainty, and stability. And here is an Antithesis,
or opposition 'twixt Shebna, and Eliakim.

Shebna was as a nail, but in a hollow, unsound, or rotten wall, and therefore
shall fall out, he shall come down from his eminency. But as for this Eliakim,
says the Lord, I will six him in a solid wall, a sound post, or strong pillar,
out of which he cannot fall, nor be plucked out: that is plainly, I will so
confirm, and establish him in his place, that he shall never be deposed as
Shebna was, but he shall stand sure, and immovable. And he shall be for a
glorious throne to his fathers house] A throne is a Kings seat full of Majesty,
et erit in solium gloriae.
and glory.

He shall be for a throne; that is, for a glorious ornament to the King, to the
Kingdom, and to his own stock, and family. He shall do worthily in Juda, and so
carry himself in his place, authority, and Magistracy, he shall so administer,
as shall be for the honor of the King, the glory, and prosperity of the whole
Kingdom, and for the preferment of his fathers house: he shall advance his
kindred, and make his whole family famous and renowned. For the meaning this
may suffice.

Now in the 2. place I am to give you the sum and substance of all in one
general proposition.

Good, Doctr.
and faithful Magistrates are nails fastened in the walls of Gods house, in the
Church and Commonwealth.

So are they called, Ezra 9. 8. And now for a little space, grace has been
showed from the Lord our God, to leave us a remnant to escape, and to give us a
nail in his holy place. What nail? the Princes and the Priests that were left,
a remnant of Godly Magistrates and Ministers.

The very same expression you have in the Prophet, Zach. 10. 4.
Zechariah Chap. the 10. the 3. and 4. verses. Where God promises to visit his
flock, the house of Judah, and to give them all things that may make them safe,
and happy. The words run thus.

Out of him came forth the corner, out of him the nail, out of him the
battel-bow, and out of him every appointer of tribute also.

The corner] i. the supreme, the King, the chief Governor: who is like a
foundation and cornerstone to bear and couple the building.

The nail] i. Princes, Magistrates, Governors, faithful Counselors, such as are
in authority under the King.

The battel-bow] i. e. Commanders, Captains, Soldiers, Ammunition, and all
things fit, and necessary for a warlike, and potent people.

The appointer of tribute] i. e. Officers to impose, exact, and collect tribute
of all those foreign nations which they shall conquer.

Shortly, they shall have all things to make them a blessed, and flourishing
people: and as a principal thing they shall have the nail, viz. a good
Magistrate.

Reason! But why are Magistrates called nails? Not properly, but by way of
similitude they are tanquam, as nails, very like nails: and that in regard of
their end, and use. A nail, peg, or pin, is fastened in the wall, to hang loose
pieces of household stuff upon: as garments, vessels, instruments of music, and
other utensils; which otherwise would lie scattered on the ground, or be to
seek, or else be utterly lost. Princeps est sustentaculum subditorum et
infirmorum. Esa. 9. 6.
So Magistrates they are appointed of God, and established for the
sustentation, and bearing up of things. All the affairs of Church, and
Commonwealth, all public businesses, the safety, and happiness of the people
depend, and hang upon them: and without them all would fall, and miscarry. They
are made to bear. Unto us a child is born (says our Prophet) and the burden of
government shall lie upon his shoulder.

Also of Eliakim it is said in the verse immediately before my text, Fnlera, seu
fundamenta populi.
and the key of the house of David: that is, the highest authority in Court and
Kingdom will I lay upon his shoulder. Hence it is that Kings are called (...)
quasi (...) The props, and foundations of the people.

The burden of the Church hangs upon this nail, the care of defending and
cherishing the Church, and people of God; of advancing true Religion, and the
pure worship of God lies upon the Magistrate.

They ( says the Lord) shall bring thy sons in their arms, and thy daughters
shall be carried upon their shoulders: Esa 49. 22.
23. And Kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and Queens thy nursing mothers.

Thus shall Princes bear the Church in their arms.

The Magistrate is Custos utriusque tabulae: both tables of the Law: or if you
please: the Law, and Gospel, both hang upon this nail.

Upon him hangs the care of the Scriptures: He must see it published in a known
tongue that the Vulgar may be able to read, and reach it. He must appoint
learning, and fit Ministers to open, interpret, and apply it. He is to compel
those Ministers to do their duty, to protect, and encourage them doing well, to
correct, and depose them being unfaithful, and scandalous. He is to look after
Ecclesiastical Government, to settle Church discipline, by good decrees to
provide for the peace, order, and decency of the Church, and worship of God. He
is to call Counsails when necessity requires; to compel people to attend the
public Ordinances: and to remove whatsoever may be an obstacle to sound
doctrine, pure Religion, and the power of godliness.

Also the burden of the Commonwealth depends on the Magistrate; the peace,
welfare, and prosperity of all the people hangs upon this nail.

Saul seeing the people lament bitterly, 1 Samuel ii. 5.
said unto them: What ayleth this people that they weep? That Is the office of a
good Magistrate; Videre ne quid sit populo quod sleat; to wipe away tears from
the subjects eyes. And therefore it is his duty to make good laws, and then to
see them put in execution. To preserve the Kingdom, and people in peace, by
defending them against the violent assaults, and invasions of foreign enemies;
and suppressing domestic rebellions, and insurrections. He is to preserve the
persons, rights, goods, libertys, propertys of the subject to see that none
dowrong to another: He is to discountenance vice, and promote virtue: he is for
the punishment of evil doers, 1 Pet. 2. 14.
and for the praise of them that do well.

Thus was Eliakim a nail upon which did hang, as the next verse will tell you,
all the glory of his fathers house, the offspring, and the issue, all vessels of
small quantity; great flagons, and little cups, with all instruments of music.
That is, all persons of what rank, and quality soever, Summi, medij, infimi:
high, and low, great and small, the whole Church and Commonwealth: The fouls,
bodies, estates, religion, liberty, peace, welfare of all depends on the good
Magistrate. He is fixed as a nail, to note out this his end, use, and office.

Thus you have the general proposition made out: but before I leave it, you
must give me liberty to make some general application of the point. And it may
serve for 1. Instruction. 2. Reprehension. 3. Exhortation.

And here for Instruction. Use 1. Corollaric.
Observe: the weight of Magistracy. Government is a great burden. It Is a honor
indeed, so says the Text: He shall be for a throne of glory: but note, the word
there (...) that signifies glory, Grave esse. Exo. 18. 13. 18
or honor: it is derived of (...) that signifies weight. Moses sat to judge
the people, and the people stood about Moses from morning unto even: a heavy
task: so says Jethro unto him, Thou weariest out thy self greatly, and the
people that is with thee too: for the thing is too heavy for thee.

Jotham intimates this in his Parable, Judge. 9. 9, 10, 11, etc.
says the Olive: If I be advanced above the trees, I shall lose my fatness: I
shall wast my estate, consume my treasure: Magistracy is expensive.

Says the Fig Tree: If I be preferred above the trees, I shall forsake my
sweetness, and my good fruit: I must bid adieu to ease, and pleasures:
Magistracy is laborious.

Says the Vine: If I be exalted above the trees, I shall leave my wine, I must
be debarred the free use of the creatures: I must be cut short in my meat,
drink, and other creature comforts.

Magistrates, as well as Ministers, are like the lamps of the Sanctuary that
burn continually, and wast themselves for the common good. Their heads are full
of cares, their hearts of grief, their eyes sleeplesse, and their bodies
restless.

Hear and consider this, all you that ambitiously aspire to high places of
dignity, and authority: you that underhand give bribes, make friends, engage
the whole Stock, and Kindred to compass an Office, or some great place of
Magistracy! Know you what you pursue? Alas, alas, you look at nothing but the
honor! You see the Nayl is fastened aloft, but you consider not the burden that
hangs on it; if you did, you would not purchase so much care, and loss at so
dear a rate. Some have thought the imperial Robes scarce worth the taking up,
because of the ears that are wrapped up in them. Trajan repented him of taking
the Empire: and in that mind writing to the Senate, he used these words: The
Sea, and the Empire are two pleasant things to look upon, but perilous to
taste. Think then, I beseech you, beforehand not only of the height of the
place, but poise also the weight of the burden.

Of reprehension. Use 2.
And here our work must be to look round about our walls; the walls of the
Church, City, and Commonwealth, and to take notice of the Nails.

There are Nayls of three ranks; Highest, Nayl's. Middlh, Nayl's. Lowest,
Nayl's.


Let Us look them all over, and take notice how they are fixed, and what hangs
on them.

1. The highest Nayls: they are the Magistrates, and Rulers. There Is a goodly
row of them: but let us see what service they do in their places: What hangs on
then? what burden do they bear?

There Is some of the greater sort of Nayls, look what hangs on them? Truly
scarce any thing, unless it be a scarlet gown, or the ensigns of authority,
or a rich furnished table, bottles, and flagons, delicious dishes, and a deal
of Kitchin-stuff. But what service do they as Magistrates? Truly nothing at
all, that I can discern, either for Church or Commonwealth.

These are only a kind of embossed nayls, such as are driven into garments,
Vestimenta clavata.
collars, coaches, trappings of horses, chaires, and other things, only for
state, and ornament: they have great and glorious bossed, and gilded heads, but
a little ridiculous stalk, hardly enough to hold their own, or to keep them
from falling out of their places: they are so close driven, that nothing can
hang on them.

There are other of the high Nayls hang very full of things: But of what? Are
they vessels of the Sanctuary? Oh no such matter; they bear up a deal of the
Devils household stuff.

Upon one there hangs a company of drunken alehouses, swearers, profane
persons, Sabbath Breakers, cheaters, and sharks, these are upheld, and born up
bythem, when honest men are thrown down to the ground.

Upon another hangs a knot of Anabaptists, Antinomians, Brownists,
Independents, and others of the same bran, disturbers of Sions peace; these are
countenanced, and born up on high, whilst the Orthodox party are slighted,
cast off, and suffered to fall flat on the ground.

Upon another depends a cluster of persons Popishly affected, Malignants.
lignants, Incendiaries: such as these are born up, and born out too upon all
occasions.

Oh there is too -- too many such rotten, rusty, misimployed nails.

2. The middle nails: they are the Ministers of the word, the Clergy, as they
call them; well what hangs upon the most of them? What but a plurality of
livings? A black gown, or Canonical coat? A service book, The instruments of a
foolish shepard. Zach. 11. 15. Ezekiel. 34. 4.
or book of homilys? There did hang a while agone abundance of Copes,
Surplisses, Alters, Crucifixes, Images, and such trash, til they were taken
down by a strong hand. But for powerful, and frequent preaching, prayer, and
the weighty works of the Ministry, as strengthening the weak, healing the sick,
binding up the broken, bringing again that which was driven away, and seeking
that which was lost: there is nothing of all these to be seen amongst them. Are
these indeed for the glory of their fathers house?

3. The lowest sort of nails; they are the ordinary people, Gentry, and Commons.

Oh! What abundance of empty nails do we see round about? Nothing at all hangs
upon them: only they take up a place in the wall. There is a generation of
Gentlemen, and others, and well parted men too, able to undergo good service:
and yet live without any calling, Fruges consumere na^i.
any office, any employment at all: as if they were born to no other end but
only to spend, and scatter what their progenitors had scraped together, and
left them: but they will not put under their shoulder to bear any burden of
profitable employment in Church or Commonwealth. See, see what commonly hangs
upon them: bundles of hair, Sampsons locks, bushy periwigs, dogs, dice, drabs,
cards, and tables, bottels of generous wine, and flagons of strong drink, red
eyes, swollen bellys, and black souls: nothing else at all: Gentlemen! are
these things for the glory of your fathers house?

There are a company of idle Vagrants, and sturdy Rogues that wander up and
down the streets, and lanes, and highways: ragged nails, that stick out almost
every where, whethersoever we go, and are ready to catch our garments, and tear
us almost in pieces: and there is nothing hangs on them but the sweat of other
men's brows, purses, and garments, and such things as they have torn from honest
passengers.

Others there are of all sorts, that indeed are cruelly laden: there hangs
upon them huge bundles of oaths, rapine, Blasphemies, Adulteries, Treasons,
railings, filthy speeches, and all kind of sins: but they will bear no burden of
service in the Church, or Commonwealth.

Whereto shall I liken this accursed generation? They are like unto Ezekiels
vine-tree; of which he speaks thus. Son of man! What comes of the Vinetree
above all other trees? Ezekiel. 15. 2. 3. etc.
And of the Vine-branch which is amongst the trees of the Forest? Shall wood be
taken thereof to do any work? Or will men make a pin thereof to hang a vessel
thereon? No, No, the Vine-stalk, if once cut up, will not make a peg to hang a
bottel on, it will not be profitable for any thing.

But what is the end? Behold it is cast into the fire for fuel, the fire
devoureth both the ends of it, and the midst of it is burnt; is it meet for any
work? So shall it be with this unprofitable generation; Therefore thus says the
Lord God: Ezekiel. 15. 6. 7.
As the Vine-tree among the trees of the forest, which I have given to the
fire for fuel, so will I give them; and I will set my face against them, they
shall go out from one fire, and another fire shall devour them.

Surely such nails as these shall not be suffered to stand long in the wall: if
a man see a nail stick up in his house of no use, will he not presently knock it
out? There were abundance of such nails as these in Juda, and God knocked them
out, and threw them into Babylon. Christ himself passes sentence upon all
such. Cast that unprofitable servant into utter darkness, there shall be weeping
and gnashing of teeth. Mat. 25. 30.

Hear, and tremble all you useless nails! You unprofitable burdens of the
earth! Be you men, or women, that take up places in the world: and do no
service in the world, in the name of the Lord, I pass upon you Shebnas doom:
ver. 25. In that day, says the Lord of hosts; shall the nail that is fastened in
the sure place, be removed, and be cut down, and fall; and the burden that was
upon it shall be cut off: for the Lord has spoken it.

Of Exhortation, Use 3
and that is manifold, and various, to diverse sorts of persons, and to several
dutys.

I am to direct my word of exhortation, to 1. Magistrates. 2. People.


The 1. Exhortation, to the Magistrates. You are all nails, some higher, some
lower. Remember that you are not for ornament only, but chiefly, and
principally for use. In the name of God let every one in his place do the
office of a nail. Truly all things in the Church and Commonwealth lie
disorderly at this time, or hang very dangerously, and ready to fall and
miscarry. I beseech you let it be your care to uphold things; let every nail
bear something, yea though you weaken your selves for the common good.

Take your charge in some particulars, and that very shortly: I speak to wise
men: a word will suffice.

1. Keep the peace. Magistrates! know your office, you are all Commissioners
for the peace: and this is that which we are enjoined to pray for you in
authority: 1 Pet. 2. 2.
That under you we may lead a quiet and a peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty.

The nail holds things together when they are hanged upon it, which lay
scattered and sundred one from another before. Yes, upon one good pin they keep
close. How are the people of this Kingdom at this time divided amongst
themselves! How are they scattered! and scattered? One here, another there; one
of this mind, another of another.

Oh ye Rulers of the people! Use your pains and skill to bring them together
again into one mind, and one judgment, that they may hang upon you, as grapes
upon the stalk, in one cluster. Endeavor with all your might the peace of the
Church and Commonwealth.

2. Be ready at hand to do justice at all times. We knock up nails and pegs in
our houses, that we may hang things upon them of common use; things that we
would have always at hand: as for things of lesser use, we lock them up in
chests and cabbinets, and it matters not though they see the Sun but seldom.
Magistrates must be ready at hand, at all times, to hear the grievances of the
oppressed, to punish vice, to encourage virtue, to relieve the wronged, and
oppressed, to help the fatherless, and the widow to their right, shortly to do
justice readily and freely upon all occasions. The nayl easily receives at all
times what ever is put upon it.

Some Magistrates, I doubt, we have, that in this are like unto nayls, they
will not in, without greasing, and knocking: you shall not get them to do their
duty, except they be greased with a bribe, or beaten to it by fear. Otherwise,
with Foelix, they are not at leisure to do justice. I pray remember a woman's
answer. She petitioned the King for justice: Act. 24. 26.
(it was, I take it, Philip King of Macedon) he told her, he was not now at
leisure. Not at leisure, says she, to do justice? Why then art thou at
leisure to be a King? If a nayl be not at leisure to bear vessels, knock it
out; why does it trouble the wall?

Judgment (says the Prophet) must run down like waters, Amos 5. 24.
and righteousness as a mighty stream. The Magistrate therefore must not be as
a fountain sealed up; but like a river which runs continually, and the people
may resort to it at all times.

Absalom, 2 Samuel 15.
I confess, had base ends, but yet his practice singular, and his example to
be followed by all good and faithful Magistrates; they should be ready to hear
Israel at all times.

3. As you must be ready always to minister justice; so to all persons, at all
times, and to all comers. The nayl bears, not only the rich vessels, and
ornaments* the golden candlesticks, the pictures, and mus^cal instruments in
the galleries, and banqueting houses: but it also sustains bottels, and knives,
and g^idirons, plain instruments, and vessels of wood and iron in the Kitchen,
yea, the homeliest utensils in the scullery. So the good Magistrate he must
equally do justice to all; to the poor, and to the rich ^oth alike.

They shall hang upon Eliakim, the 24. verse tells you, not only the glory of
his fathers house, the offspring, and the issue, that is, those of the
blood royal: but they shall hang upon him also all the small vessels, the little
cups, and siddles: that is, the poorest, and most contemptible persons shall
depend upon the Magistrate for justice, and protection.

You shall do no unrighteousness in judgment, Deuteronomy 16 19. Levit. 19. 15.
says the Lord; Thou shall not respect the person of the po^r, nor honor the
person of the mighty: But in righteousness shall thou judge thy neighbor,
that is, every one, for every one is thy neighbor.

Do right to the poor and fatherless: do justice to the poor and needy: Psalm.
82. 3.
deliver the oppressed from him that is too strong for him; favor not one
above another. The use of a nail, peg, or pin, is to hang such things upon,
quae infirmiora: which are most weak, and cannot stand by their own strength:
Tables, and Trunks, and Chairs, and Stools, such great, and strong
household stuff can stand on their own feet, they need not any nail to hang
upon, the rich, and mighty can stand alone: They are the little small vessels,
and instruments of music that must be supported with a nail. The poor are
ready at every turn to be trampled upon, and to be made a prey, and therefore
you must have a special care of them. Uphold them that they may not fall.

4. Let every Magistrate be a nail, not only in the Capitol, or Senate, but also
in the Sanctuary The care of the Church, and Religion lies on the Magistrate.
Use therefore all your power to purge the Church of Idolatry, Popery,
Superstition, and all false worship, and gross errors, to advance the pure and
sincere worship of God, and the power of godliness. Bear up able, faithful, and
Orthodox Ministers by giving them your countenance, and affording them
comfortable maintenance. You have going before you in this care of Religion
many godly Kings and Emperors: David, Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah,
Constantine, Theodosius etc. Follow their good example: be faithful nails to
bear up pure Religion: always remembering what the Lord has said. 1 Samuel 2. 30.
Those that honor me I will honor, and they that despise me, shall be lightly
esteemed.

The 2. Exhortation is to the people. And we have to deal with diverse sorts:
and accordingly I am to press sundry kinds of duties: in the prosecution

Whereof I shall direct Electors. Subjects. All.


And 1. You that are Electors: To whom at any time shall belong the choice of
Magistrates, or any kind of officers in Church or Commonwealth. Be careful,
and circumspect in your choice. You are to look about for nails, on which to
hang the weighty affairs of the Church, Commonwealth and City: see that you
choose such as may be serviceable in their places, wel-qualified nails.

Take your charge; and directions from Jethro, he will advice you what kind of
men to choose into public offices: Exodus 18 21.
Thou shall provide, says he to Moses. 1. Able men. 2. Such as fear God. 3.
Men of truth. 4. Hating Covetousness. Suffer me a little to illustrate Jethro's
Counsel.

1. You must choose able and strong nails: They must have abilities of mind:
Clavus capitatus.
You must pick out such nails as have good heads, and sharp points; such as
have good understanding, wisdom, and solidity, and also some acuteness of wit
and pleasantness, amiableness of conversation. Psalm 2* 10.
Be wise ye Kings, be learned you Judges, says David: if they ought to be so,
then it is your duty to choose none but such as appear so.

There are a sort of nails (spikins I think they call them) they want heads:
and so whatsoever is hanged upon them slips of: Take heed of choosing Spikin
Magistrates; for if you hang the great affairs of the Commonwealth upon them,
they will certainly let them fall and miscarry because they want heads to hold
them.

They must also have abilities of body, and of estate: without competent bodily
strength they will never be able to endure watching* and travailing, and long
sitting on the bench: and believe me wealth is needful. Magistrates had need be
able, rich men: They must carry out things with some pomp, and state, else they
will be contemned; and their authority dis-regarded. Ad populum phaleras.
Magistracy is expensive, and if you offer to hang these heavy costs and charges
on weak nails, they will quickly break, and then you must take them down, and
keep them in the City purse.

Yet further, to their strength and ability, it is requisite that they be fixed,
well driven and fastened. Magistrates must be resolved, immovable, and
courageous, not sickle, and inconstant, turned about with every wind: they must
be well settled in Religion, inflexible, resolute in a good cause. I have seen
some nails and pegs screwed into the wall and so long as they are not stirred
you may hang what you will on them: but if any man come with a strong hand he
may easily wind and unscrue them, and then they soon grow loose, and off slips
all the burden they were entrusted withal: and so I have seen many in
authority, carry things very fair in Church and Commonwealth: very right they
are as long as they are suffered to stand quietly: but alas if the hand of
greatness do but touch them with the violence of a threatening, or the strength
of fair promises; of reward, honor, and preferment, it will easily turn, and
serve them any way; and make them to betray Church and Commonwealth, Religion
and Liberty, and whatever is precious. Be sure therefore to choose nails steeled
with Christian resolution: such as will stand against all assaults, fixed,
steady, and immovable; like to that Romans in Fabritius, of whom it was said,
that one might as well stay the motion of the sun in the firmament, as to put
him out of his way. Have your thoughts ever upon such: make choice of strong
nails: stout, and able for understanding, wisdom, wit, strength, estate,
courage, and resolution, Able men.

2. You must provide bright and shining nails: not of base iron, or wood, 2 Chronicles. 5. 9.
but of pure gold, well burnished: Such, and only such would Solomon make use of
in the Sanctuary. Ever choose such as shine and glister with piety and holiness:
men fearing God.

Be wise ye Kings (says David) be learned ye Judges of the earth: Psalm. 2. 10.
11.
there is strength and abilities required: but that is not all: you must also
serve the Lord with fear.

There is nothing more destructive and dangerous to Church and Commonwealth,
then eminent abilitys unsanctified. You shall often observe great, stout, rusty,
rugged-iron nails, to rent, and tear, and fret, and change the color of
whatsoever is hanged upon them: just so wicked men of eminent parts, and great
power do bear up a deal of mischief: and by their countenance and example do
taint and stain, and corrupt all the inferior people. As therefore David chose
smooth stones to encounter the Philistin withal: So do you choose smooth nails
to strike through the temples of Sisera: nails of pure gold, filed from their
rust and ruggedness; shining bright with piety and holiness: provide such for
the punishment of evil doers, and faithfully to bear the affairs of the Church,
City and Commonwealth.

3. You must provide right, straight; and sound nails. Men of truth: (...)
that is, just men; (so the Septuagint) Truth and justice are so near allied,
that ordinarily one is put for the other: seek out for such as follow after
justice; such as hate all violence and wrong, and flee from all kind of
injustice: Such as cover themselves with justice, and put on judgment as a
robe, and diadem. Job 29. 14.

Provide men of truth, Clear from all hypocrisy. There are a company of gilded
nails; fairly gilded over, but within rusty, and rotten: they are too-too many
who are glorious in outward profession, in outward appearance, lovers of
justice, truth and godliness, but within they are full of guile and deceit,
very hypocrites. Look well about you, or else you may be cozened by the outward
appearance. Pick out right, straight, and sound nails: true Nathaniels,
Israelites indeed, such as in whom is no guile.

4. You must look at nails elevated. The nails which ly scattered on the ground
are not in a fit posture to bear burdens. No, No, but only such as are fastened
aloft in the top of the wall or pillar. Neither are such men fit for Magistracy
whose thoughts lie grovelling on the base earth: who mind the world, and
therefore must you choose men hating Covetousness.

The covetous man for a gift will wrest judgment, respect persons, sell justice,
bear up all vice, and punish innocence it self. The nail that is sit to bear
burdens must be elevated, the head and body slanting upwards: a man fit to bear
office, must have a mind above earth, a heart not greedy of filthy lucre: if
the head of the nail bend downward, the scales of justice will never hang sure
upon it, but slip off immediately.

Now therefore my beloved brethren! You that vote in elections; be nice,
curious, circumspect in the choice of nails; let them be strong, and able, let
them have heads, and points, let them be bright, and shining, let them be
right, and straight; and let them be such as have their heads, and hearts to
heavenward. Amongst the Romans there was superstitious observation of the Nail.
When the Commonwealth was in danger, or oppressed with great evils and
calamities, then did the Dictator fasten a great nail of iron, or brass in the
wall of the Capitol with marvailous solemnity: And the fastening of such a nail,
was esteemed a present remedy against all mischiefs, and a charm against the
plague. And so conceited they were of this way, that oftentime a Dictator was
created: Solius figendi clavi causa: only to knock in a nail, thereby to save
the City.

What reasons the ancient Romans had for this their custom, or what experience
of the success thereof; I cannot give an account; but I cannot miss of
application. You see how many evils are upon us, how great our dangers: would
you remove all these? Would you have the Church and Kingdom, and City flourish
again? Then fasten good nails within your walls: choose, and establish able, and
godly Magistrates: that is a good, and ready way to free us of all our plagues.

I have done with Electors.
2 I am next to speak a word of exhortation to Subjects: such as live under
Authority. And here I am to admonish them of some duties which they owe to good
Magistrates.

These:

1. They must honor them. 1 Peter 2. 17.
Fear God, says St. Peter; and Honor the King. They are nails: and God has
placed them aloft in the highest place of the wall; he has embossed them with
honor and Authority, he has put his own name upon them, I have said you are
Gods, and all of you are Children of the most high. Psalm. 82. 6.

They bear a great burden for your sakes: on Eliakim hangs the weight and
welfare of Israel.

Give therefore to all their due: Romans 13 7.
Honor to whom honor belongs: Look upwards to those nails with admiration and
reverence.

2. They must preserve, and cherish them. Has God fastened in the Church, and
Commonwealth good, profitable, and serviceable nayls? Then take heed you do
not put them out. I tell you there is a company of base ways to pluck out good
nayls.

Upon some you hang too great a burden: you lay such loads upon Magistrates,
and upon Ministers too, that you quite break them. In this case, Exodus 18. 17.
18.
I say unto you, as Jethro to Moses, The thing that you do is not good: you
will surely wear them away: for these things are too heavy for them, and they
are not able to perform them their selves alone.

Some nayls you loosen with knocks, first on one side, and then on the other
side: and at last they fall out of themselves: many good Magistrates, and
Ministers are so hanged amongst you with injuries and reproaches, and scandals,
and slanders, with contempt, and disrespect, that their very hearts are broken;
and they seek for all advantages to be gone from their stations.

Some nayls are placed, in loco non fideli, in a rotten, hollow and deceitful
wall, and so they fall out per-force, there is nothing to hold them: many
Magistrates, and Ministers see, to their thinking, a fair wall before them; the
affections of the people, many fair promises, and comfortable convenants:
hereupon they offer to fasten here; but all proves rotten: love proves
dissimulation, promises come to nothing; covenants are broken; and out-goes the
Nayl.

There Is a trick, clavum clavo pellere, to drive out one nayl with another.
There Is a knock, a side made, they have a friend to bring into place for their
own ends: I, but the place is full, there is another nayl in; Is there so? That
nayl that stands in the way shall soon be driven out with another new one; and
so oftentimes a golden nayl is put out, and an iron one, or a wooden one is
driven in the room.

I beseech you have a care what you do. Are they able, useful nails? let them
alone in their places, till God kindly pulls them out with the pincers of death:
use all means to preserve and cherish them: love them, give them all
assistance, and encouragement, and pray, pray, pray for them. 1 Timothy (...)
I exhort you brethren that first of all prayers, and supplications, and
intercessions be made for Kings, and all in authority, that under them we may
lead a godly and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty. It is your
prayers must knock them in sure, and fasten them in their places.

I would you would understand the danger of loosing a good nayl out of the wall:
If such a peg be pulled out, down falls the great affairs of Church and State;
therefore preserve and cherish your good nayls.

3. They must obey them. Upon the nayl all the garments, and vessels do depend:
and so must subjects depend upon the commands of their superiors, 1 Pet. 2. 13.
and submit to their power. Submit your selves to every ordinance of man (says
Saint Peter) for the Lord's sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme, or
unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him.

And Saint Paul, You must needs be subject for conscience sake, Romans 13. 5.
Only with a limitation: Obey Governors, but in things lawful, not otherwise.
Obey the higher Powers, but yet still so as you do not disobey the highest of
all. So long as Magistrates command with God, and for God, and not against God;
go along with them, obey them for conscience sake: But if once there be a
clashing: The Magistrate commands one thing, and God commands the quite
contrary; then Saint Peter, and the rest of the Apostles, will teach you, That
you ought to obey God rather then men: In this case, Act 4 19 Act 5. 29.
disobedience is the best obedience. So long as the nayl bears thee to
heavenwards, depend upon it, but no longer. It was a resolute, and a pious
answer, which a Prelat of ours, sent to Henry the first.

Anselm Arch Bishop of Cant. being in Banishment because he would not obey the
King in some things, Anselm. Epist. li. 3. Epist. 95.
nor observe some Laws and customs which Lanfranck his predecessor did observe.
The King sent Letters to him, wherein he did express abundance of affection,
and did invite him earnestly to come over into England again; promised him that
if he would observe the Laws and customs which Lanfranck did observe, and would
obey the King as his predecessor did, no man should be more welcome and dear to
him: and that he also should enjoy all the honors, dignities, and revenues
which Lanfranck his predecessor did. To whom Anselm (being convinced that he
could not observe those Laws without sin) returned answer.

For your love and good will, Oh King! I give you thanks. To that which you say
of your father, and Arch Bishop Lanfranck, I answer. That I did never promise,
neither in my Baptism, nor in any ordination that I would keep the Laws, and
customs of your father, or of Arch Bishop Lanfranck; but in my Baptism, and
often else, I have vowed to keep the law of my God. Wherefore if you please so
to receive me, and to re-invest me, that I may live with you according to the
law of God: I am ready to come again into England, and serve God, and you.
Otherwise I choose banishment.

Such should be the resolution of all: Go with the Magistrate, while the
Magistrate goes with God. But if he command thee against God, fly, suffer,
dye, any thing rather then obey him.

4. They must be thankful for them. They are no small blessings. When God brings
in a good Magistrate, or Minister, he fastens a nail, upon which hangs the
welfare of Church and Commonwealth. (They bear our burdens when we sleep, and
should they not do so, all would fall and ruin, and come to nothing. All the
sweet blessings that we enjoy hang upon this nail; our peace, and all the
benefits that peace brings with it. Psalm. 128. Zach. 8. 4.
As namely, the conservation of humane society: That our wives are as fruitful
vines by the sides of the house, our children like olive plants round about our
tables. That our old men and old women dwell in the streets; and every man his
staff in his hand for very age; that the streets of our City are full of boys
and girls playing in our streets: That we sit every one under our vine and
figtree, enjoy our possessions, eat the labors of our hands, that we eat,
and drink, and plant, and build, marry, and give in marriage: That we have here
still the thrones for judgment; that Schools and Universities flourish, trading
in our Cities continue, and the business of the field is yet performed: that
our gramarys are full, affording all manner of store: that our sheep do bring
forth thousands, Psalm. 144 13.
and ten thousands in our streets; that our oxen are strong ^o labor: that
there is no breaking in, nor going out, nor no complaining in our streets: But
above all that Religion is maintained, the faith defended, the Gospel preached,
and the voice of the turtle heard in our land. That we enjoy these, and a
thousand blessings more, all is from peace, and our peace hangs upon this nail;
if that break, all falls to the ground.

A good Magistracy is a sign of Gods love and presence. When a man has made
choice of his habitation, in the house where he delights to dwell; there he
knocks up nails and pegs upon every wall, and post, which may be for his use
and convenience, upon which he may hang things off hand, and also know where to
have them again: So does the Lord also, in the place which he chooses for his
habitation; Psa. 123. 13. 14.
of which he says, this is my rest for ever, here will I dwell, for I have a
delight therein: In that place will he fasten nails, he will set up Magistrates
and Ministers for the good and benefit of his people, This was the sign of his
grace and favor to the poor remnant that escaped out of Babylon, Ezra. 9. 8.
and returned again to dwell in their own City: That the Lord gave them a nail
in his holy place; that is, Zerubbabel the Prince, and Joshua the Priest, and
others of that order.

Blessed be the Lord thy God (says the Queen of Sheba to Solomon that glorious
King, under whom Israel flourished) which loved thee, to set thee on the throne
of Israel; because the Lord loved Israel for ever, therefore he made thee King
to do judgment and justice. These nails they are admirable benefits and
blessings; therefore bless, and praise God for them.

The Subjects have had their charge.
3. Finally, in the last place I am to direct my exhortation to all: let every
one in his place be a profitable nail. We have in a house variety of nails, and
pins, and pegs, some of brass, some of iron, some of wood, some bigger, some
lesser, some fastend in a higher, some in a lower place: upon one nail we hang
one thing, upon another nail another thing, upon every one something according
to their strength and fitness: So let it be in Church and Commonwealth: let
every man; every woman, every person be a serviceable nail in their place; let
them bear some burden or other for the benefit of the public. Let Magistrates
make laws, and see them kept and put in execution; let them bear the burden of
Government. Let Ministers study, and preach, and pray, and walk as a pattern to
the flock, let them bear the burden of their office. Let every man in his trade
and vocation be industrious and faithful, Ephesians. 4. 28,
labor with his hands the thing that is good, that he may be able to uphold
his family, to relieve the poor, and to be beneficial to the public. Bear you
one another burden, Says St. Paul, and so fulfill the Law of Christ: Gal. 6. 2.

Bear, every one of you, some of the Parliaments burden; some of the Synods
burden, some of your neighbors burdens, bear somewhat or other for the use of
Church and Commonwealth. Either bear arms, if thou have a person to fight, or
bear a purse if thou have an estate, or bear a burden of labor if thou have a
strong body: ride, run, spare no pains, plot, and project, give counsel if thou
have a head for it. However bear a good heart in thy breast to the cause of
God, and thy Country: bear a good tongue in thy head for the praise of God, and
the honor of our wrothys. And be sure by thy incessan prayers, help bear up al
that's ready to fall.

And thus much for the meaning of the text: also for the general Doctrine, and
general Application. And now it is time (according to my ordinary method) to
return to the particulars. You have had the harvest, now for the gleanings: you
have been at the feast, now let us gather up the crumbs: you have had the
substance of the nail, let us search for the very filings.

The particulars you may remember, were four.

1. The Master-worker, that fastens the nail. I.

2. The nail that is fastened. Eliakim.

3. The Vbi. where the nail is fastened, in loco fideli.

4. The end, use, and benefit of this nail so fastened.

Every one of these will afford us some wholesome instruction.

Now therefore We Will cast our eye more diligently upon them all, and the Lord
make all profitable,

1. And first for the principal Architect: who is it that fastens the nail?

Here the Doctrine is concerning the efficient cause of Magistracy. Doctr.
It is the Lord of hosts.

God is the author of loveraignty, it is he that pulls out, and puts in what
nails he pleases.

By me Kings reign, says the Lord, and Princes decree justice.

By me princes rule, Prove. 8. 15. 16.
and nobles, even all the judges of the earth.

He changes the times, and the seasons: he removes Kings, and sets up
Kings. Dan. 2. 21.

Nebuchadnczzar must know that the most high rules in the Kingdoms of men, and
gives them to whomsoever he will. Dan. 4. 25.

St. Paul gives us the proposition fully: There is no power but of God, the
powers that be are ordained of God. Romans 13. 1.

Consider this all you whom the Lord has fastened in high places Applic.
of authority. Is it the Lord of hosts has made you rulers? Then take heed
what you do: for you judge not for man, but for the Lord who is with you in the
judgment. 2 Chronicles. 19. 6.

Your power is not arbitrary but delegate. Look therefore to your Commission,
to the word and will of God. Judge as those that must give an account unto the
righteous God: who at the last day will judge all things over again. And in
Ministering justice, ever have this in your minds: We are nails to bear the
burden of Authority: who fastened us here?

Again, let godly Magistrates (be they never so few in number, meet they with
never so much opposition) yet let them take comfort and courage, and go on
boldly to do Gods work: to discountenance sin, to punish evil doers, to
suppress Malignants, to encourage the good, to advance the cause of God, and to
further the work of Reformation. Let them not fear the opposition, nor the
malice, nor the rage, nor the power of man. It is God that has exalted them,
and fastened them in their high places with his own hand: and he will preserve
them, so long as they faithfully bear the burden which he hangs upon them. They
shall stand sure in their places, and never be removed: for the Lord has
fastened them, and shall for ever establish them.

Finally, let me give a word of direction to all. Would you have? Would you
keep good and serviceable nails? Would you have able and faithful Magistrates
and Ministers in your City, in the Kingdom? See then what course you must take:
Go to the Master of the assemblies, Ecclf. 12. 11.
it is he that fastens these nails. Pray, pray, Represent unto God the sad
condition of the Church and Commonwealth, for want of good and able nails: how
few there be of such, how thin they stand in the City-wall, how thin in the
Church-wall. How few godly Magistrates in a Country, how many miles a man may
travail, through how many Parishes, and not see one good nail fastened, not one
sound and painful preacher: and be earnest with God to pull, to pluck out, and
to throw down all rotten and useless nails: and to put, and fasten good, and
able, right, and straight, substantial, and serviceable ones in their room.

We have seen who fastens the Nail; 2.
proceed we to the 2 Particular, and let us look upon the nail that is fastened.
What nail is it? Or rather who is it? For it is a living nail. It is a man, and
a good man: Eliakim, that is his name: He was the servant of the Lord, that is
his goodness: And he it is that the Lord fastens in a sure place.

And here the Doctrine will teach us what kind of nails they be which God
fastens: Doctrine.
namely good nails, and none else. God establishes only good men in high
places of Authority. A base rotten nail may be driven into a wall, and stand a
while, but not long: The Lord plucks wicked men out of their places, and
preferrs his faithful servants into their room. He puts down the mighty, that
is, the proud, and wicked great ones of the world: he puts them down from their
seats, and exalts them of low degree, the humble, and Godly ones. Luke 1. 52.

Haman was promoted by the King, Hester 3. 1.
advanced as a nail into a high place, his seat was above all the Princes; but
he was a rotten and scragged nail, Hester 7. 6.
tearing the people of God; 'twas wicked Haman. But the Lord soon plucked him
out of his seat, threw him down, and fastened good Mordecai in his room.

Hophni, 1 Samuel 2 12. 34. 35.
and Phinehas, the young Priests, they were sons of Belial, they were exceeding
wicked, and knew not the Lord: and what says the Lord concerning them? They
shall be deposed from their office of Priesthood, in one day they shall dye both
of them. Yea both of them, and Eli their father, and plucked out in one day.

And says the Lord, 1 Samuel 2 35.
I will raise me up a faithful Priest, that shall do according to that which is
in mine heart, and in my mind: and I will build him a sure house, and he shall
walk before mine anointed for ever.

Old Eli was plucked out as a rusty nail, 1 Chronicles. 29. 22.
and Zadok anointed high priest in his room.

God will establish only good good men in their places.

This point must not pass without some application, and it may be various.

1. For our instruction we may observe what shall be the end of good and evil
Magistrates, and of all in eminent places: Princes and Rulers, the great men of
the earth: Prophets and ministers of the Gospel. Prove 2. 22. 23.
What shall their end be? Solomon will tell you: Such as walk in the way of good
men, and keep the paths of the righteous, shall dwell in the land: they shall
stand as a nail in a sure place: But the wicked, be they never so great, shall
be cut of from the earth, and the transgressors shall be rooted out off it. Yes,
this is an undoubted truth; the wicked though they be placed never so high, and
seem to stand so fast that they can never be moved: yet the Lord will pluck them
out at the last, and put better in their room.

In the eye of the world, who could be faster rivetted in his high place, then
Shebna? He was the great favorite at Court, he had in his hand all the chief
Offices, the highest Honors and dignities of the Kingdom (as you have seen
before:) he did flow in wealth, and greatness, there was none above him in the
Kingdom, save only he that sat upon the Throne.

A grand Politician he was; which some of the learned in the holy tongue have
gathered from one of his titles, verse 15. Go get thee (...) ad the saura^ium,
unto this Treasurer; so it is commonly turned: but the word seems to signify
another thing. It comes of (...) which signifies fovere, vel calefacere: to
warm, cherish, and to favor. And then thus we must read it, Go get thee to
this favourer Shebna: that is, to him that cunningly does favor, and cherish
all parties!

I hinted you a while ago, that some thought Shebna to be the High Priest: I
have disputed the point once* and I will meddle with it no more: but I am sure
he had the very tricks of our Highpriests now adays. For (as I have it from
good Authors) he kept in with all sides. Being favorite to Hezekiah King of
Juda, he did seem to favor the King, he did flatter, and fawn, and use all
his skill, to warm the Kings affection, and cherish his good opinion, and every
way to endear him. Also, as an Arch-traytor, most perfidious to his good
Master, he held fair correspondency with Sennacherib King of Assyria, Hezekiahs
enemy: He was a Pentioner to the King of Assyria, he was his Intelligencer, he
held a secret league, and confederacy with him; and was by compact engaged unto
Sennacherib, to betray the King his Master, and the City Jerusalem, and the
Kingdom of Juda into his hands whenever he came with his mighty host. And
thus by his craft and policy, he thought to secure himself against all events,
come what would come; prevail who would prevail, he would stand sure: if
Hezekiah prevailed against Sennacherib, then Shebna was well enough, he was the
Kings favorite: if Sennacherib prevailed against Hezekiah, yet Shebna would do
well enough; for he was also the King of Assrria's servant, and did secretly
make way for him to invade, and conquer.

And now the proud ambitious Traitor grows to a height of confidence: he
thinks he stands as a nayl that cannot be stirred nor plucked out of his place.
And in this presumptuous confidence he erects a stately monument for himself in
Jerusalem: as you may read verse. 16. He hews himself out a Sepulcher on high,
and grave's a habitation for himself in a rock: He concludes his own safety:
that if Hezekiah prosper, he is his Favorite to his dying day: if Sennacherib
conquer, he shall be his Deputy, or Viceroy as long as he lives. And at last,
that he shall dye with honor at Jerusalem; and all his pomp follow him, and his
name be famous to all generations; being written in marble, and brass upon his
Sepulcher. Thus, thus, silly man, he flatters himself. But now observe the end.
As it was with proud Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4. 31.
glorying in his great Babel, while the word was in his mouth, the Voice fell
from heaven, saying! The Kingdom is departed from thee: So comes the word of
the Lord to Shebna; Verse 16.
What have thou here? and whom have thou here? Why do thou think thy self
fastened here as a nayl that cannot be removed? But that thou shall live here,
and dye here, and lay thy bones here? Behold the Lord will pluck thee out; and
carry thee away with a mighty captivity. He will surely violently turn, and
toss thee like a ball into a large country, there shall thou dye, and there
the chariots of thy glory, shall be the shame of thy Lords house. And there is
an end of Shebna!

A parallel example we have of our own; which because it does so aptly agree
with the former, I will insert. It is of Sir Thomas More, who bare the same
office under the King of England, that Shebna did under the King of Judah; he
was Lord Chancellor of England under Henry the eight; he was a bitter enemy of
the Gospel, and persecuted the godly professors of it with fire and sword, and
thought thereby to get him a name; and needs must he have a monument of his
cruelty and impiety. He therefore takes care, to have a sumptuous, and
magnificent Sepulcher erected; and upon it written Encomiastiques, the high
praises of his virtue. He made his own Epitaph, and sent it to Basil, unto
Erasmus, that he might get it curiously engraven. He sent also with it a
stately ambling, or pasing horse, unto Erasmus for his reward; that he might be
so much the more careful about the work. So greedy was he of glory and fame.
Amongst the rest of his praises, this was the most famous; and to be written in
great letters; Lutheranorum profliga^^r Maximus; that is, The great persecuter
of the godly. Well, but what was the end? After all this presumptuous
confidence: The great Lord Chancellor was accused of treason, condemned,
beheaded: Ita patibulum ei pro sepulchro fuit. At lost, the gibbet, or the
fatal block was his monument.

Such shall the end be of all Tyrants, and ungodly Rulers; a while they may
stand on high, but shortly the Lord will pluck them out of their places, and
put better men in their stead.

Here learn the way to preferment, Use. 2.
and how to sit sure in your places when you are advanced. Would you be exalted
to honor? Would you stand fast in your places of dignity? This is your way. Be
good, and you shall soon be great. Be the Lords servants, and he will soon
prefer you. Continue right, and straight, and sound, and sincere: and the Lord
will fasten you so, as you shall never be removed. You have the way of preferment
chalked out. Psalm. 112. The man that fears the Lord, and dilighteth greatly
in his Commandments, v. 1. The upright man, v. 4. The good man, v. 5. The
merciful, and liberal, and righteous man, he shall abound with wealth and
riches: and his horn shall be exalted with honor. v. 3. 9.

God fastens none but Eliak^ms in high, and honorable places: Shebnas may clime
up a great height, but the Lord will soon throw them down again.

Does God fasten only such as be godly in a sure place? Use. 3.


Then I beseech you! See upon whom you may most safely depend.

We that are subjects, are as a company of infirm vessels: we must all hang
upon some nail or other, or else we are lost upon the ground. Now our wisdom
will be to rely on sure, and sound nails.

But you will say perhaps, how may we know the best nails?

I will tell you, there are now in the Kingdom two sorts of nails: Court-nails,
and Parliament-nails. Both are exalted very high: now tell me which will you
choose to depend upon?

Me thinks I hear some reply: what nail should we depend upon but that which
the Lord has fastened? And is not the King that nail? Has not God set him
upon the throne? And must I not go along with him in every thing?

Give me leave to answer. We do acknowledge with all duty, and obedience: that
the King is the highest Nail, that he is a precious Nail, that he is a nail
chosen of God, and anointed: And the desire of our hearts is that the Lord
would establish his throne, and fasten him so sure that he may never be removed.

But that which makes our hearts sad; it is this, that he is not, in loco
fideli, in a faithful place: That wall that is made up of Papists, Irish Rebels,
Delinquents, Malignants, and wicked Counselors, must needs be a rotten wall;
and can a nial stand sure in such a place?

The Parliament is a sound wall, made up of worthy Eliakims, loyal Subjects,
servants of the Lord, and faithful Patriots.

Now the Lord bring the King into the midst of his Parliament again, then
should he be indeed in loco fideli, and we might safely hang upon him.

But in the mean time, his power and Authority is with his great Counsel. It is
an undoubted Parliament by the Kings own act. But it cannot be a true
Parliament without a King. Why then, he is with them vertually, thou he be not
personally. The Parliament is all but one great nail. The King is the head, the
houses are the body; if you take the head off the nail, what can hang safely on
it? Therefore now I can easily show you what nail to hang on: I thus describe
it to you. King, and Parliament.

There are two mighty Armies abroad, one against the other. Every one of us must
depend upon one of those. We must take part with one against the other. In the
name of God, see that you choose the right nail. That Is the nail that God
fastens, upon that you may safely depend.

It is the extreme folly of men, that they will all choose to hang upon the great
nail, and the lesser nail they dare not trust to. They Will join with the most
numerous Army, with the greatest power.

Who would not have hanged upon Shebna (that had looked with a carnal eye) and
declined Eliakim? Upon whom was the eye of all the Court but upon Shebna?

Shebna was a Vapouring Cavalier; Eliakim sure, a despised Roundhead.

Shebna had great Authority, and favor in the Court: Eliakim, and the rest
were made Underlings, slighted, and disregarded.

Shebna a great Politician, held fair correspondence with foreign Princes;
Eliakim a plain faithful servant to his Master that had never put on robe nor
girdle.

Yet you see he was the wisest man, and in the safest condition that took in
with Eliakins.

I will give it you in a word. Look impartially: and mark, not which is the
biggest, but which is the rightest and straightest nail, look upon that side
where you see most of God: most zeal, most devotion, most piety; and join with
them.

That nail that God has fastened shall stand sure: let the Pope, and the Divil,
and all the Malignant crew knock it, and hang the weight of persecution upon
it; they can never pluck it out, it stands in loco sideli, in a sure place, and
all that depend upon it shall be safe.

But on the other side, if you join with Idolaters Blasphemers, debauched
drunkards, Atheists, profane Devils. You hang upon a rotten nail, a nail that
God has never fastened; and though it appear never so great, yet it will deceive
you: God will certainly pluck it out, and then there is nothing but certain ruin
to be expected: if the nail break, all that ever hangs on it falls down, and it
is broken, and lost. For a close of this, I shall pass a doom upon all such
rotten nails, and upon all that hang upon them. Even the sentence upon Shebna,
ver. 25. In that day says the Lord of hosts, shall the nail that is fastened in
the sure place be removed, and be cut down, and fall: and the burden that was
upon it shall be cut off, for the Lord has spoken it.

Therefore my beloved!. I say again, if you love your own safety, hang upon the
right nail.

Here Is a pattern for all such as he in Authority. Use. 4.
The Lord displaceth rotten and unprofitable nails, and sets up good and useful
ones in their room: let them do so.

I have already discovered unto you abundance of base nails, both in the City
and Church-wall. Corrupt Magistrates, Masters of misrule; blind, dumb,
useless, scandalous, covetous, drunken, debauched Ministers; such as do no
good, but a world of mischief in their places.

Now give me leave to speak freely to you that are Magistrates. I cannot but
say to you, ^evel. 2. 20.
as the son of God once to the Angel of Thyatira: I have a few things against
thee* that thou suffer the Woman Jezabel, which calls her self a
Prophetess, to teach, and to deceive my servants to make them commit
fornication.

The same to our Rulers: you have suffered Malignants, and loose Magistrates,
scandalous and superstitious, and factious, and error-teaching Ministers:
verily this is a great fault amongst you.

At last awake, and be followers of God. Use your power to pluck out, depose,
and remove these rotten and useless nails, and set more comely, and serviceable
ones in their room. Be unto those pests and plagues of our City, Judic ^. 21.
and Country like Jael's nail: Smite through their temples, and fasten them to
the ground: mistake me not, I call not upon you to take away their lives, but
to bring them lower, and restrain their power, and dispose of their places
better.

Let your word be of every place in Church and Commonwealth, and concerning
every preferment: Detur digniori. Follow the Counsel, and decree of the wise
men of King Ahasuerus, Ester 1. 19. Let their royal estate be taken away from
them, and give it unto others that are better then they. There are none but
good Nails of Gods fastening.

The 3. Particular follows, viz, the Vbi, where this nail is fastened: in loco
sideli, in a sure place: that is, I will establish him, he shall stand sure, he
shall not be plucked out nor removed. He shall keep his station and never be
removed, and this is promised as a blessing to Eliakim.

And affords us this observation, that to dwell safely and sure in a fixed
habitation, Doctr.
and settled condition, is a very great and a very sweet blessing.

It was Shebnas curse and punishment, that he should be violently turned and
tossed like a ball into a large Country: as it is, v. 18. His condition shall be
like a tennis ball, struck with the hands of them that play from side to side,
and from end to end, and at every bandy a hazard: or like about which is thrown
in the alley, or in a plain or steep place, down-hill; and then it runs, and
runs, and rests not, til another hand takes it and throws it back again: Or
like the stone of Silyphus, rolling up-hill, and down-hill continually; such
was the condition of Shebna. This the Lord threatened as a curse against Israel,
1 King. 14 15.
that he would smite them as a reed shaken in the water, that he would root
them out of the good land which he gave to their fathers, and scatter them
beyond the river, because they made their groves, and provoked the Lord to
anger. 1 Kings cap. 14. v. 15.

It was the curse of Cain for his fratricide, his bloody murder: A fugitive,
and a vagabond shall thou be in the earth. Genesis 4. 12.

But on the other side, a fixed habitation, and a settled condition is ever
promised as a blessing. ^ Sam. ^. 10.
Moreover, says the Lord, (when he will do good to his people) I will appoint a
place for my people Israel, and will plant them, that they may dwell in a place
of their own, and move no more.

To enjoy a fixed station, in a land of peace, procures blessing to the body,
soul, estate.

The body has rest: Psalm. 104. 23
The painful labourer, though he goes forth unto his work, and to his labor;
yet it is but til the evening; then the poor swain rests his weary limbs,
refreshes himself with his plain company, and sings in his thatched cottage,
and lays him down, and his sleep is sweet; and in the morning he awakes, and
arises as a man new created, and goes lively about his business again.

Further, such a fixed estate is very advantageous to the soul: In exile, when
people are wandering up and down in foreign Countries, they cannot enjoy the
precious ordinances, they cannot perform the duties of public worship, The
Babylonians did but abuse, and jeer the Israelites when they required of them a
song, Psalm. 137. 3 4
and mirth: saying: Sing us one of the songs of Sion: and the poor Captives
could return no other answer but this: How shall we sing the Lords song in a
strange land? They were now banished from the Sanctuary of the Lord, and so
were deprived of their soul-comforts.

But when the Lord gives a people rest round about, there they may build
Synagogues, enjoy Church Assemblies, and holy meetings, and public soul
fatning ordinances, the pure worship of God, and true religion, and all the
means of Grace.

Therefore says David, Psalm. 122. 6. 7. 9.
Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: Say, Peace be within thy walls, and
prosperity within thy palaces: And why? Because of the house of the Lord our
God, I will seek thy good. The peace of Jerusalem, and the settled condition
thereof, is the means to advance religion, and the Public worship.

Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, Psalm. 84. 4. They that have a settled
habitation in a land where Gods worship is established: And why? Because they
will be still praising thee: they will ever be doing good to their own souls.

Finally, A settled condition is a marvailous advantage to wealth; and to the
estates of men.

The rolling stone never gathers moss: An unsettled person will never be rich.

Exile and banishment strips off all.

The ancient believers wandered about in sheepskins, and goat skins, in
deserts, and in mountains, in dens, and caves of the earth: And what estate had
they? They were altogether destitute; afflicted, and tormented, Hebr. 11. 37,
38.

But in a settled course, wealth and riches are to be gotten: Upon a fixed nayl
there hangs a load of wealth.

England has been a quiet, and settled Land for many years; and has it not
grown a Magazine of wealth? Does it not abound with flourishing Cities, and
fruitful fields? Silver and gold have been as the stones of the streets: It
has been a Land of coor, and all manner of fruits; of sh^ep, and oxen, and all
manner of cattle, a Land like Canaan, flowing with milk and honey: In a word,
the glory of all Lands. And what has made England so rich? What but this. The
Lord has given England rest, and the inhabitants have been as fixed nayls in a
sure place.

To apply this shortly. Is a fixed and settled condition such a sweet blessing?
Applic.
And is it so grievous to be driven from our habitations? Then.

Let us sympathize with our brethren, the poor servants of God, that in
Germany, Ireland, and in the North and West of England, are plucked out of
their pleasant places, and now are tossed as a ball from place to place; Genesis
8. 9.
and with Noah's Dove cannot find rest for the sole of their foot: Alas! Alas!
for our poor brethren! the dear servants of God! What miseries do they
endure? They wander up and down in the desert out of the way, Psalm. 109. 5, ^.
and they find no dwelling place; hungry and thirsty, and their soul faints
within them.

Or as Job, Job 3^ 3, 4.
They flee into the wilderness desolate, and waste: they cut up mallows by the
bushes, and juniper roots for their meat; the springs and fountains ( if at
least they can meet with any) are to quench their thirst.

Oh let our bowels be troubled for them: Let Us relieve them to our power, and
let us pray for them earnestly, and incessantly; that the Lord would bring home
his banished again, and restore them to their country, and to their habitation,
and settle them as a nail in a sure place.

And for our selves, learn we to esteem, and prize our own happiness, in these
associated Counties.

We sit every man under his Vine, Mica 4.
and under his Fig Tree, and none makes us afraid. We enjoy peace, and plenty,
and liberty, and propriety, and friends, and all in our own Land where we
were born: Rom 9. 4.
And above all we have the adoption, and the glory, and the Covenants, and the
Gospel, and the Service of God, and the promises, and the Communion of the
faithful.

Oh let us praise the Lord for his goodness: Let us walk answerable to so
great mercies: let us make use of our standing, and improve all our advantages
to the glory of our bountiful God; and let us pray unto the Lord incessantly,
to fasten us still as a nayl in a sure place.

The fourth and last particular now presents it self to your view, viz. The
end, and use of this nayl: Erit in solium gloriae. He shall be for a glorious
throne to his Fathers house.]

And concerning this, many things might be spoken: but because I have held you
too long already, I shall only commend unto you, in a word this Observation: To
what end we are fastened in our places,

Let Magistrates, Ministers, and every one here present, duly consider
wherefore they serve, namely, to bear burdens, for the honor of God, and for
the glory of their Country and City, and fathers house.

Joseph made his fathers house glorious, he enriched it with the wealth, with
the treasures of Egypt, and made it famous, and renowned through all the
world, as it is to this day.

Our blessed Savior Jesus Christ: (who is the Nayl spoken of Zach. 10. 4.) He
is the glory of his fathers house, even of the people Israel.

I speak first to the chief Magistrate, and then to every one in his place.
Know that you ought not to be for your base private ends, for your own honor,
and wealth; but you must be men of public spirits: you must be for the good,
and for the glory of your City, and your Country: of the Church and
Commonwealth.

You must endeavor the public good before your own. You must be content to
bear any load of pains, or charge, to procure the wealth and prosperity of the
Kingdom, that the reformation may be perfected, true Religion established,
Popery, superstition, and the proud tyrannical Hierarchy may be utterly
extirpated; the rights and privileges of Parliement, and the liberties of the
Kingdom preserved: That the Kings person, and authority in the preservation of
true Religion may be defended: that the peace of the Kingdoms may be continued;
that delinquents may be brought to condign punishment, that England may be
made a sure place, a happy Nation, a famous Kingdom* Know that you are set for
a throne of glory: Be all of you for the honor of your City, for the glory of
Norwich. Make it famous, and happy this year. Mind not your own things, but
the public benefit. The devise of Alphonsus King of Arragon, was this: A
Pelican pecking her breast, and drawing out blood wherewith to feed her young:
the word Pro lege, and pro grege. So should every good Magistrate, not count
his blood dear, for the welfare of the people.

The Motto of Aelius Adrianus the Emperor was, Non mihi sed populo. A man set
in authority, should not be for himself, for his own profit, or ease, but all
for advancing the common good.

Abate of your excess; make less and fewer feasts, and do more good for the
public: Lay less upon your backs, and do more for the public. I know what
people are ready to say for themselves; That if Mayors, and Sheriffs shall not
make as great feasts at Sessions, and other times, as others before them, they
should be disgraceed, and talked on all the Town over; they should be counted
covetous, and miserable, and people would say they knew not what does belong to
their office, and it would be a dishonor to the City.

Alas, alas, my beloved! Is it for the honor of your City to have Sodoms
Character? That pride, fullness of bread, and abundance of idleness is in her?

Gentlemen! if any shall jeer you for not feasting as your predecessors, as if
you knew not what belongs to your places: Answer them as once Themistocles did:
who being at a sumptuons feast, and not singing with the rest of the jovial
company, and meeting with some checks for his silence, he said unto them. I
confess I have not learned to sing to the pipe at feasts, but I have learned
rempublicam ex parva magnam facere: to raise a Commonwealth from a poor
estate, to a flourishing condition: So do you answer all the world: You have
not learned to squander away vast sums of money in rich clothing, sumptuous,
and excessive feasts: but you have learned to lay out your money better, and to
part with your estate freely, even to the utmost farthing for the public
safety and good.

I beseech you be for a throne of glory; be all for the honor of your City and
Country.

Usually you shall hear men boast much of their Country, City, Progenitors: and
they brag that they were born in such a famous place, or that they are
descended of such illustrious ancestors: as if that were such egregious, and
singular nobility, which consists in the virtues, and noble acts of their
forefathers. Such cracks as these the Poet rightly reprehendeth, I^venal.
Satyr. ^.
and jerks: Stemmata quid faciunt etc. What is it to thee, if thy progenitors
were Noble, Heroical, Virtuous? If thou in the mean time be un-deserving,
unworthy, and base? Let me therefore tell you: He has the best nobility, and
deserves the greatest praise, that first makes his fathers house glorious: that
first begins a noble family: Be it your care to make your City, your Country,
your familys; and your fathers houses noble and glorious.

I have observed it to be an ancient custom in this City upon the day of your
solemnity, to present the new elect with some speeches: and withal with
escouchions or shields, and in them some divises, which hang all the year in
his parlour, to hint, and remember him of his duty. I have prepared you one out
of my Text against to morrow: and with my speech, I present it to you out of
the pulpit. It Is a very plain one, as you see, and not much charged.



You see here the pillar in the middle has many nails fastened in it: and every
nail bears somewhat; upon some hanggarments, upon others the ensigns of your
Authority: upon others vessels of gold, and silver, and iron, and brass, and
earth, and wood, and all instruments of music.

This is your monitor: You must bear up all honest persons, and all just
causes: You must bear even til you break again, and lay out all your power and
strength for the glory of God, the honor, and safety of the City and Kingdom,
the good of the Church, the advancement of Religion, and the pure worship of
God. And thus going on the Lord will establish you, as a nail in a sure place.

And hereafter you shall be set higher. Ere long every nail shall be plucked out,
and laid before the great Master of the assemblies, at the great and dreadful
day of judgment: Then will the Judge of all the world take a strict view of all
the nails that ever he fastened in any place. And the great question at that
severe day of examination shall be: what service have you done? What burdens
have you born in the Church and Commonwealth?

Then shall the empty, rusty, and unprofitable nails be put into the bag, and
thrown down into the pit of hell.

But such as have been useful, and have born the burden, and heat of the day,
and done good and acceptable service in their places: they shall be advanced and
set up higher: they shall be fastened in the wall of the new-Jerusalem, the holy
City, be overlaid with pure gold, and set with precious pearls, and shine in
glory for evermore.

Now the Lord God, the great Master of the assemblies make every one of us more
profitable, and serviceable in our places and stations. Amen.

(...)
PSALM. 84. 4. Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, they will be still
praising thee. Selah. REVEL. 2. 10. Be thou faithful unto the death, and I will
give thee a Crown of life.


The Wheel turned by a voice from the throne of GLORY. Described in a SERMON
At the Green-yard in NORWICH, upon the Guild-day. June 22. 1647.

By JOHN CARTER, Pastor of St. Peter's of MANCROFT.

LONDON, Printed by J. Macock for M. Spark, and are to be sold at the sign of
the blue Bible in Green-Arbour. 1647

TO THE Right Worshipful Mr. John Vtting, Mayor of the City of Norwich. JOHN
CARTER
Humbly Dedicates this poor and unworthy piece; and as he preached the Sermon
at his request; so now he presents it to him for his use, with apprecation of
all Grace, honor, happiness, and good success in his Government.

1 SAMUEL 2. 30. Them that honor me I will honor: and they that despise me
shall be lightly esteemed.
To those Magistrates in the City of Norwich, who were so highly offended, and
exasperated at this Sermon.

Galath. 4. 16. Am J therefore become your enemy, because J tell you the truth.
THE WHEEL:
EZEKIEL. 10. 13. As for the wheels it was cried unto them in my hearing, O Wheel!
THis is a voice, your ears can tell you so much; yea and that a mighty voice, a
great cry.

Concerning it here are three things remarkable, the parts of the text.

1. They word which was cried -- O Wheel!

2. To whom the word was cried; to the wheels: as for the wheels it was cried
to them.

3. The witness, in whose presence the word was cried, in my hearing.

These are the parts and particulars of the text. I will not fall upon them
presently; I shall lay them aside a while, and according to my plain and usual
way, I will dispatch 3. things.

1. I will speak something of the sense, and meaning of the text.

2. I will give you the sum and substance of all in one general proposition of
Doctrine: to which I shall make some general application.

3. And then in the third place, I will return to the parts of the text, and
handle them: I will search the particulars more narrowly for such observations,
and instructions as may be of further use: and then I will conclude all with
special application, to the time, place, persons, and present occasion.

I am to speak, you see, of Wheels, and of a wheel: my discourse is like to run
all the way upon wheels: Now the good spirit of God be upon us all, that we may
drive prosperously, and all our motions may turn to the glory of God, the
edification, and comfort of all our poor souls. Amen.

1. And first I am to expound and open the text.

As for the Wheels] When Ezekiel was among the Captives, in the Land of the
Caldeans, by the River Chebar, walking up and down by the waters of Babylon; he
saw broad-waking, a glorious vision, wherein the Lord showed to him the things
which were shortly after to come to pass.

And as Pharaohs dreams when he was asleep, Genesis 41. 32.
so Ezekiels Visions when he was awake, were doubled, because the thing was
established, and God hasted to perform it.

He first sees the Vision by the River Chebar. Chap. 1.

He sees it again, with some considerable alterations, additions, and
amplifications in this 10. Chapter.

To represent and set before your eyes the whole Vision, and exactly to
describe every part, every apparition, every wonderful and dreadful sight which
our Prophet beheld, would take up more time, and require more skill then falls
to my share. I shall therefore only point to a few of the most general, and most
remarkable things, which may serve to give some light to the text, and to let
in the Doctrine.

To our purpose.

He saw] in the firmament which was clear as the terrible crystal: v. 1.
viz. above the starry heavens, he saw a glorious throne as it were a
Saphire-stone, and upon the throne was the likeness as the appearance of a man:
the son of God sat above it. Chap. 1. v. 26.

Under his feet there were four living creatures, so they were called in his
first vision. Chap. 1. 5. here in this 10. is an interpretation, they are
called Cherubins: they had faces, wings, hands, and feet.

Below, by the feet of these Cherubins were wheels: four wheels in all,
according to the number of the living creatures. These wheels were dreadful to
behold by reason of their wonderful greatness, the height of their rings, the
swiftness of their motion, the brightness of their color, and the multitude of
their eyes. This was the vision, but what was the signification? That Is the
material question.

In general, this was to set forth the appearance of the likeness of the glory
of the Lord. c. r. 28.


But more particularly: The man sitting above upon the throne, is the Lord
Jesus Christ.

The living creatures, (...)
or Cherubins they are Angels, good Angels, which are immediately under the
Command of Christ.

But the wheels at the feet of the Cherubins, what are they?

A wheel is instrumentum volubile; a round turning instrument: there are diverse
sorts of wheels, chariot-wheels, clock-wheels, bel-wheels, mil-wheels, and many
others which perhaps we shall meet withal by and by. The wheels that appeared to
Ezekiel are thought to be chariot-wheels. The general: conceit is, that he saw
a complete chariot: and that the living creatures were the drawers, and movers,
and the man on the throne the guider of it: and the word Synechdochical, rota
pro^^^^u, the wheel for the whole Chariot.

The wheel is an instrument of very great and frequent use. Many works are done
by the turning of the wheel. The Chariot, Coach, and Cart are carried on their
way by wheels. Jer. 18. 3.
The husbandman plows, and thresheth, and grindeth beats out his corn with
wheels. The huswife spins her third upon the wheel: Esa. 28. 27. 28.
and the work of justice (as we shall hear more afterward) is done by the wheel:
A wise King scatters the wicked, and brings the wheel over them. Prove. 20.
26.

And by this time it is not hard to find out what is meant by the wheels;
namely, all instruments, and second causes by which God uses to work in the
dispensation of his providence.

The glorious Angels first, even they themselves are Gods great wheels. Then
the round celestial orbs, and lights which are continually wheeling about, next
the lower world, the elements, and all creatures in the air, earth, and wide
sea.

But especially, Lavat. in loci
we are to understand by the wheels reasonable creatures; as Kingdoms,
Commonwealths, Citys, Churches; which are societies of men; Kings, Princes,
Magistrates, chief Captains, Armies, Ministers, preachers of the Gospel, and
all people in their several places: who ever has any employment under God is a
wheel in the chariot of his providence: These are the wheels. Now it was cried
unto them] From the throne above. The Lord Jehovah, that sat aloft upon the
glorious throne: he

Cryed] that is, aloud, earnestly, with a mighty voice he called to them.

O Wheel] not simply (...) Wheel, but (...) Oh Wheel! This is demonstrative,
and points to some special wheel. Though the voice be generally cried to all
the wheels, to every creature in heaven and earth: as if the son of God should
say: O World!

Yet here we must conceive that it is directed in an especial manner to
Jerusalem, and her wheels; to the princes, priests, and Commons which were left
there, and were not carried into Babylon, with the rest of the Captives. For
this vision was showed to the Prophet for Jerusalems sake: to signify to him
what was shortly to come to pass in the City: and it is as if the man upon the
throne had said: O Jerusalem.

O] This O! is an adverb, or interjection of calling: God calls to all the
wheels, and cries, O Wheel!

This is a word of Authority and Command, by which the Lord either drives the
wheels on, excites them to do something: imp^ratum fuit ipsis ut volverentur,
Theod.
and converterentur, he spoke to them to roll and turn about: he gave them some
commands, which here are not expressed. Or else it is a word of countermand, and
he checks them for some irregular motions: and it is as if the son of God
should say, O Wheell stop, turn your course the right way: obey. In a word,
this is the word of Gods power, whereby the world, and all the creatures in it,
all second causes, and all persons are overawed, and their motions determined.

You have the sense of the text: next i will give you the general doctrine.

It is concerning the general, and particular providence of God: The voice of
him that sits on the throne, commands, and over-aws all the wheels. So
universal, and so particular is the providence of God, that it governs and
rules all things in heaven and earth. The powerful providence of God does
dispose all second causes as he pleases, and orders all creatures in the
world, and all motions in the world according to the counsel of his own will:
if the Lord do but cry, O wheel! all the wheels are at his beck, and turn as he
bids them. There Is not the least motion of a Chariot wheel, but the Lord
appoints it. Exodus 14 25.
This appears by Pharaohs Chariot wheels, The Lord took off their Chariot
wheels, that they drove them heavily: He had said before, O wheel! carry
Pharaoh into the midst of the Sea: now he gives them a check, and cry's to
them; O wheel! fly off from your axletrees; and as the word comes from God, so
do the wheels move and turn.

Behold the power of God's word, and how his voice commands all things Psalm.
29. verse. 3. The voice of the Lord commands it to thunder, or not to thunder:
the voice of the Lord commands the waters to ebb, or flow, to be rugged, or
calm; Verse. 5. The voice of the Lord commands the Cedars, he bids them grow,
and they come up; again, he speaks but to them, and they are broken down; also
when he pleases he makes them skip like a Calfe, or like a young Unicorn.
Verse. 7. The voice of the Lord commands the fire; he says to the watery cloud,
divide; and it breaks in sunder, and the lightning darts forth, and scatters
it self through-out our Haemisphere in the twinkling of an eye. Verse. 6. and 8.
The voice of the Lord commands Lebanon and Cadesh; at his word the mountains
dance, and the wilderness tremble. Verse. 9. The voice of the Lord commands
the wild beasts of the forests; he speaks to the Hinds, and they Calve: again
he says the word, and they are barren. In the Forest a leaf falls not from a
tree, the woods are not made bare without his word. Verse. 10. The Lord sits
upon the flood, yea, the Lord sits King for ever: his voice commands the
sea; he says to it, Job 38. 11.
hitherto shall thou come, and no further, and here shall thou stop thy proud
waves: Yea, the voice of the Lord commands the sons of men; and they move
according to his word. For, in him we live, Psalm. 37 23.
and move, Act. 17. 28. He orders all our steps, and goings, Prove. 20. 24.

But what may be the reason, Reason.
or ground of this? That the voice of the Lord should thus command, and over-aw
all the wheel's? Yes good reason: What hand should turn the wheel, but the same
that made it? By the voice of the Lord all creatures were made: By the word of
the Lord were the heavens made, and all the host of them, Genesis 1.
Psalm. 33. 6. He did but say, Let there be light, and there was light: He did
but say, Let there be a firmament, let there be sea, and dry land, let there be
grass, and trees in the earth, and lights in the heaven, and fishes in the
sea; and immediately it was done, it was so.

Yet further, his voice did not only command these wheels to be made; the same
word also preserves them, maintains them in being. He upholds all things by the
word of his power, Hebr. 1. 3.

God made all creatures, therefore of right he may dispose of them, and order
all their motions as he pleases.

He is the great Atlas, Caelifer Atlas.
bears up heaven and earth, and all things upon the strong shoulders of his
providence: and therefore he has power to move all things as he lists. He
that bears a burden upon his back may carry it whither he will. The cunning
Artificer who makes a clock, or curious pocket-watch; he also disposes, and
orders every wheel, in what place it shall be, what motion it shall have, how
long it shall go: So the Almighty, and infinitely wise God, he made the
wheel's, and turns the wheels: he made the greatest, and the least creatures,
and he causes, and over-ruleth the greatest, and the least motions.

To give you the whole doctrine in one Emblem.

Ezekiel was an Aenigmaticall Prophet; and me thinks he gives us (that which
was first showed to him in a vision) the most elegant, and significant
Hieroglyphick of Divine providence that can be found out in the whole world:
Cap. 1. and 10.
it is a Chariot.

A Chariot commonly is drawn by four horses: by them at their feet are four
wheels; above, a seat wherein the man sits who guides the engine; he with his
reins and whip, and voice commands the beasts, the wheels, the whole Chariot,
and all things in it, and they are moved, and turned as he pleases. Such is
the Chariot of Providence, God sits in the seat, even above in heaven upon his
glorious Throne, and by his word and power commands, guides, and moves all
inferior things.

Next under God are the living creatures, the Angels they are ministering
spirits immediately moved by him that sits upon the Throne.

The Angels they move the wheels: God governs inferior things by the ministry
of Angels: There are four living creatures, and four faces, and four wheels,
to represent the four corners of the earth.

The sum of all, is this in one word: The providence of God does rule, and
commaud, in all the four quarters of the world: God has wheels every where,
and he turns them all by his word of command; O wheel! You have the general
doctrine.

To make some use of it. And here I might be large, and apply it variously.

I might, first, for our instruction, gather this Corollary; That there is no
Contingency in the world; nothing falls out by chance: Not a wheel stirs but
it is moved by Gods hand: Mat. 10. 29, 30
Not a Sparrow falls to the ground, nor a hair from our heads without your
Father: Not an ax-head flies off from the helve, but it is thrown, and directed
by God's hand.

Indeed, in regard of us, and in relation to second causes, things may seem
chanceable, and contingent; because something falls out that was not like to
happen at all, or else the thing was like to fall out quite otherwise then it
does, we being ignorant of the causes of such casualties.

But in regard of God nothing is contingent: he is the first, and supreme
cause, the universal provisor, and moderator; sitting on his Throne as a
Judge, and a King; taking notice, and taking care of the least things, Plenus
negotii Deus.
of the smallest wheels in the Chariot: in respect of him, Ephesians. 1. 11.
all things are necessary: He works all things according to the counsel of
his will.

Yet again, I might apply it by way of reprehension, and give a check to the
heathenish language of many Christians, that speak Luck and Chance as
familiarly as Heathens use to do, and attribute all things to Fortune. This was
my fortune, this was my luck. What are these but Atheists, and such as deny
Providence? The iniquity of the house of Israel is exceeding great, and the
City full of perverseness, says the Lord, because they say the Lord has
forsaken the earth, and the Lord sees not: The eye of his providence is not
abroad, the wheels move by chance. Oh that such would be humbled for their sin.
Augustine writ Retractations, and the very first thing he corrects in himself,
and bewail's, is, that ever he did use the word Chance, or the name of Fortune.

But I let pass these: And I will apply the doctrine only as St. Paul teaches
me, Romans 15. 4. Whatsoever things were written were written for our learning
that we through patience, and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope: So
whatsoever has been spoken, it has therefore been spoken,

That you might have Patience. Comfort. And so hope.


The first use is of Exhortation; Use. 1
and here I am to persuade you to patience. Is every wheel turned by the voice
of the son of God? No motion but by his appointment? Learn then willing
submission, and cheerful contentation in all conditions. What? do not the
wheels move to thy liking? Art thou displeased at the motion of the King? Or at
the motion of the Parliament? or at the motion of the Army? (those are the
three great wheels of the Kingdom) Bestil: they move as God bids them! it was
said unto them in my hearing, O Wheel! The Kings heart, the Parliaments heart,
the Armies heart are all in the hand of the Lord, as the rivers of water, and
he turns them whethersoever he will. Prove. 21. 1. Whatever has been, or
whatever shall be hereafter, peace or war, order or confusion, safety or ruin:
what shall we say? It is the Lord has spoken, and he himself has done it. Esa.
38. 15.

To descend to lesser wheels: do not things go with thee according to thy
desire? I will make thee the living creature, and thou have thy wheels about
thee: how do they move? Thy yoke fellow, thy children, thy dearest friends,
thou would have these sweetly to move with thee in a perpetual communion,
but God turns them another way, they roll out of thy house and society into the
grave; and for this thou do mourn, and art discontented. As for the world,
thou would have it run in upon thee upon wheels: but God turns it another
way, and it runs away from thee upon wheels: yea faster, it flies away: Riches
certainly make themselves wings, they flee away as an Eagle toward heaven.
Pro. 23. 5. thou growest into decay, and poor, and hereupon thou art troubled
and discontented.

The tongues of people, thou would have them move rightly, and speak the
truth, yea speak well of thee: but the Malignant tongues of the world run upon
wheels of fire, and clamor against thee, prate to thy disgrace, invent
slanders, report vile things of thee, and hereupon thou art vexed and
discontented. And what is the reason of all this impatience? Thou look only
at second causes, and do not consider that the voice of the Lord overrules,
and sets all the wheels on work. It was said in my hearing, O Wheel! There is
not the least motion of the least wheel without his special providence. 2 Samuel,
16, 10,
Shemei curses because God bids him curse. Be therefore patient in all
changes, in all conditions, under all afflictions: murmr not, repine not,
object not against the dispensations of Gods wise providence: but ever resolve
with David, to be dumb, not to open thy mouth, because the Lord it is that
does it. Psalm. 39. 9.

Again secondly, Use. 2.
this may be applied for the comfort of Jerusalem, for the consolation of the
Church and people of God, and that many ways.

1. In the times of confusion, as it is with us this day: The Chariot-wheels of
our Kingdom move strangely and dreadfully; how are they hurried up and down,
backward and forward, hither and thither! and we are all in a maze, we know not
what to think of things, nor what to do, nor whether to turn us, all is like to
be overthrown and broken, and turned topsy-turvy. Truly we can see nothing by
the wheeling of things, but ruin of all: of Religion, and Laws, and utter
desolation of the whole Land. But here is our comfort: it is not a young rash
Phaeton that sits in the coach-box, who wants both skill, and power to guide his
fathers fiery steeds: No, No, it is the Ancient of days that sits in the seat of
glory, he commands the living creatures to draw the wheels which way he
pleases, and that by his only word: and after all the wheelings, and crooked
turnings of his providence, he knows the way to bring about a happy peace, and
settlement in this Church and Kingdom: which the Lord of his mercy grant. O
thou son of God that sit between the Cherubins, drive on, drive on by thy
wisdom and power, to thine own glory and the comfort of thy poor dejected
people.

2. Again, does the voice of the Lord command all wheels? This then may comfort
the Church and people of God against all potent enemies. Indeed the enemies of
Jerusalem are commonly many and mighty, such as were the Babylonians and
Assyrians; these were the great, high, and terrible wheels which God was now
bringing over Jerusalem to break it in pieces: they were now coming upon the
City, the rattling of the wheels was heard, and they could not but come; for it
was cried unto them from the Lord, O Wheel! come and execute the fury of my
wrath upon Jerusalem. Now the same powerful voice can give the wheels a check,
and call them back again: this is the Churches comfort.

Saul pursued after David in the wilderness of Maon: he and his numerous Army
turned upon him as a dreadful wheel, and wheeled about the mountain to have
crushed him in pieces: but when he was in his swiftest motion, it was cried
unto him from the Lord: O Wheel! O Saul! come back. There came a messenger unto
Saul, saying; haste thee, and come, for the Philistines have invaded the Land:
So Saul returned from pursuing after David; here the wheel was drawn off. Let
the wheels run on never so furiously; if God do but cry to them, they must come
back: if he cry to the wind peace! it cease; and if he say to the raging sea,
be still! there is presently a great calm: Marc. 4. 39. It is not hard for him to
curb, and call in his creatures. Saul was a bloody persecutor, a restless
wheel, running over the faithful servants of God: Act. 9. but v. 4. he had a
check, it was cried unto him from the son of God: Saul, Saul! why persecutest
thou me? You have seen Princes, Prelates, Potentates moving fiercely against
the Church, but the Lord in our hearing and sight has given them a check, and
cried unto them, O Wheel! go no further, and they have stood still, or gone
back. The wheels come not toward us by blind chance, but upon Gods call, they
move not a hairs breadth further then God bids them, and when hepleaseth he
calls them back by the word of his mouth: this is the Churches comfort.

3. And yet here is a further comfort to Jerusalem: Does the voice of the Lord
command all wheels? Then let not the Church, and people of God be troubled when
they are at a low ebb; when their dangers are great, their enemies many and
mighty, and all succor fails and there is none to help them: when they are
without all strength, let them not despair: God sits upon the throne, and
commands the wheels, he can call in help from unexpected places. In the 2. book
of the Kings, 2 Kings 6.
chap. the 6. God calls for a great wheel, even Benhadad King of Syria, with
his mighty host to break Samaria; and Samaria was brought into great straits, a
potent enemy without, and a grievous famine within, and no help appeared, 2
Kings 7. 6.
all seemed desperate: but Chap. 7. upon the prophets intercession (as I
conceive) the Lord called in wheels to their help; on earth all help failed,
therefore the Lord relieves them from above: for he made the host of the
Syrians to hear a noise in the air of Chariot wheels, and a noise of horses,
even the noise of a great host; and these imaginary wheels in the heaven, which
the voice of God called in to the rescue of Samaria, discomfited the Syrians,
put them all to flight, they ran away as fast as they could: and now there is
plenty, peace, and joy in the City.

Thus the mighty Jehovah that sits above upon the throne, can bring order into
the Church out of confusion; he can make the most formidable enemies of the
Church to go back, yea to fall backwards; he can call in help to his Church
when they are at their wits end, and all by the word of his mouth. Here is
Jerusalems comfort. I have done with the general Doctrine.

Now in the 3. place I return to the parts of my text, to handle them: I
purpose to search, and examine every particular, and I doubt not but we shall
find something as we go, that may be useful. You may remember the parts were
three.

1. The word cried.

2. To whom the word was cried.

3. The witness, in whose presence the word was cried.

Of these strictly, and in their order. The Lord be with us.

1. The word cried.
O Wheel! in the singular number, mark that. The prophet speaks in the plural,
as of many: As for the wheels, says he; but the man upon the throne cries out in
the singular, as if there were but one wheel in all. Reas^^.
What Is the reason of this? It is because the wheels, though they be many and
their motions different, yea contrary, yet all move to one and the same end,
they all join as one in bringing about Gods work. In man's eye there are many,
an innumerable company of wheels, but God accounts of them all, but as of one
great engine to bring to pass his Counsel and decrees. Look up to the glorious
heavens rouling over your heads. The primum mobile, the first moveable, or
first mover, turns continually from East to West in 24. hours upon the poles of
the world: the other inferior orbs, as so many cross wheels turn quite contrary
from West to East upon the poles of the Zodiak, and finish their circle in
different spaces of time: yet all these in respect of God, put the air, and
the bottles of rain, and the earth, and all to them, are but as one great wheel
to do his work. See it plain in the 2. of Hosea v. 21. I will hear, says the
Lord. I will hear the heavens, and they shall hear the earth; and the earth shall
hear the corn, and the wine, and the oil, and they shall hear Jezreel. Here you
see are many wheels, many second causes, or means subordinate one to another,
as it were a wheel in a wheel: but all join as one wheel to do Gods work; viz.
to feed, and sustein his Israel. The Lord of hosts has abundunce of Soldiers
under him, yet all but one great Army whereby he gets the victory. In a clock
you see many wheels, some greater, some lesser; some move one way, some the
quite contrary way, some flower, some quicker, yet they are all one engine,
serving for one and the same end, viz. to count the time, and point at the
hours. There Is nothing more plain.

Let us make some Use of this; Use.
and learn how to judge rightly of Gods admirable providence. You must not take
the work in pieces, nor six your eye too much upon some one special wheel, but
you must take all together; if you sever the wheels, and look upon some
particular dispensations, you will think the wheels move strangely.

Consider Joseph, he was made as a wheel; and if you mind only some particular
turnings, you will think he was turned strangely; he was turned into the ditch,
into a harlots house, into the prison; and yet the best of all the brethren:
other wheels also moved disorderly about him: The Ismaelites were moved by
covetousness; his brethren moved by envy, his Mris. turned by lust: strange
spectacles, to look upon them severally: but now mark the whole work of Gods
providence, and you shall see it good and comely, by the turning of these
wheels, he brings about Joseph's advancement, and Isreal's preservation.

How many wheels, and contrary motions were there about the passion of Jesus
Christ! The Jews were moved with envy, if you look no further, that is a strange
sight: Judas was moved with covetousness, if you look no further that is a
strange sight: Pilate was moved with popular air, and that is a strange sight:
Christ was pierced, and by wicked hands crucified and slain; and if you look
upon that alone, oh! it is a prodigious, and dismal sight: but take all the
work of God's providence together, and you will behold it beautiful and
glorious: by all these wheel's, the Lord works the redemption of man, the
salvation of his Church, the destruction of death and hell, the conquest of the
Devil, and the exaltation of his Son, and the glorification of his Saints.
When you see Tyrants prevail, and domineer, and exercise savage cruelty: When
you see bloody Massacres of God's dear people, holy Martyrs go to prisons,
slakes, and flames; when you see the Prophets, and Ambassadors of the Lord
slighted, contemned, silenced: If you look no further, these things will seem
very sad, and amazing: but take all the whole work of God's providence
together; and you shall see it is wise and good: The Church is sown with the
Martyrs blood, and made fruitful: The destruction of the Churches enemies is
ripened, the glory of the Saints hastened, and in all God is glorified. Consider
therefore the motions of the wheels not by piece-meale, but wholly and
entirely, part not one wheel from another. I say as S. Augustine, Atten ^e
totum, lauda totum; Mark all, and praise all. In all the confusions that our
eyes behold, let this stay our minds; though this wheel, and that wheel, and
another wheel seem to us, to move dangerously, preposterously, and disorderly,
threatening to crack, and overthrow all; yet in Gods hand they are all but one
wheel, and he will turn them so about, that in the long run they shall work
out his own glory, and his Churches good.

You have heard the word cried: Now let us hearken to

The second part of the text.
TO whom was this word cried? to the Wheels. And you have heard already what is
signified by the wheels; viz. The round world, and all the creatures that are
therein, more especially the lower world, and all sublunary things, and here
you may observe.

The mutability of all things in the world. Observe.
They are compared to wheels, subject to continual turning and change. The
condition of this world is, quasi versatio continua; as if it did run
continually upon wheels: here is nothing firm, stable, or permanent. The
celestial Spheres they run their rounds every day, and the glorious lights of
heaven are in continual wheeling. The Sun comes forth out of his tabernacle in
the morning like a bridegroom, and as a Giant runs his race till he be mounted
up to his meridian, and then declines toward evening, and sets commonly in a
cloud. The Moon, sometimes it is in the new, sometimes increasing, sometimes in
the full, sometimes waning; and ever in the change. The Elements, the fire, the
air, the water are in continual motion and transmutation: the earth which
only is immovable; what is it but a stage of nothing, but changings and
turnings? Upon this Theater kingdoms, and commonwealths are turned up and
down. How were the four great Monurchies (those high, and dreadful wheels)
rolled up and down from one to another, from the Babylonians to the Persians
from the Persians to the Grecians, from the Grecians to the Romans. And so are
all the Nations before the Lord, as the chafe of the mountains before the
wind, and like a rolling thing before the whirlewind, Esa. 17. 13.

Upon this Theater of the earth, how is the Church of Christ wheeled, and
hurried up and down? Now she is in Egypt, by and by in Canaan, not long after
in Babylon; and often driven into the Wilderness; sometimes in prosperity,
sometimes in persecution, and never long in one condition: You have her lively
picture in the twelfth of the Revelation, the first verse: She is clothed with
the Sun indeed; but under her feet is the Moon, to show that her way is in
continual change and turning, never long permanent in one condition.

Upon this Theater of the earth, how do cities and Families wheel about;
Volvuntur, revolvuntur. Ziklag to day flourishing, to morrow in the ashes. 1 Samuel 30 3.
Jerusalem a while the beauty of the whole earth, her towers, buildings and
bulwarks, the worlds wonder; and within a while not one stone left upon
another. There Is one days difference, says Sencca upon occasion of the
burning of a stately City, betwixt the greatest City, and none. What should I
speak of Families? A few descents makes them ancient; and a century or two of
years wears them quite out; they are like Jona's Gourd, flourish for an
evening, and in the morning smitten, withered, forgotten, their names and stems
worn out. One generation passes, Eccles 1. 4
another comes, none stays.

Upon this Theater of the earth, how does man act his part? how near is his
exit to his entrance? Job 14 1, 2.
Man that is born of a woman, is of few days, and full of trouble. He comes
forth like a flower, and is cut down, he ^leeth also as a shadow, and never
continues in one stay: now he is rich, presently poor: now in health,
presently sick: now he is alive, and in a moment he is gone down to the grave.
This mutability of all Mundane things the ancient Heathens were sensible of;
and did signify by the name and posture of their Goddess Fortune. She was
called Vortuna, a Vorto, from turning; and she was pictured sitting upon a
wheel, to show what her chief work was, viz. Ima summis, and summa imis
commiscere: to bring in vicissitudes of all things, to raise a man to the top
of honor, riches, happiness, and then to turn him down again to the bottom of
infamy, poverty, misery. The whole world what is it but a Sphere? It consists,
ex stante and moto, centro scilicet, and circumferentia; of fixed, and moved,
viz. of center, and circumference. The earth is fixed, and stands fast; and
all other things move and turn round about it as a circle, or the ring of a
wheel, which whirles about continually: that which is first is last, and that
which is last is first, and nothing abides at a stay; all things are unstable,
and voluble.

To make some application of this to our selves. Use 1.
And first: Are all things in the world, but as so many wheels, so many
rolling things? Let the consideration of this serve to take down the pride of
the great men of the world: Let not the rich man glory in his riches, nor the
mighty man in his strength, nor the honorable man in his dignity, and
preferment: Why? because of the instability of all things. Rota erigendo cadit.
The wheel whilst it lifts up it self, it falls. And he that is highest of all
now, may in a little space be low euough.

Proud Nebuchadnezzar walks upon the battlements of the Dan. 4. 29.
stately Palace of his Kingdom, and said: Is not this great Babel that I have
built for the honor of my Majesty? But while the word was in the Kings mouth,
there fell a voice from heaven, which cried O Wheel! Oh King Nebuchadnezzar! to
thee it is spoken, Thy Kingdom is departed from thee: And he was presently
brought low enough, to dwell with the beasts of the field, to eat grass with
the oxen, and to be wet with the dew of heaven. Fortunate Belisarius, the great
Lord General under Justinian: He was honored, and feared of all nations;
Victorious in all his expeditions; such a favorite of the Emperor, that in his
Coin was stamped on the one side Justinian, on the other side Belisarius, and
over Belisarius the Emperor put this inscriptione: Romanorum decus; The Romans
glory. So great a man, so triumphing upon the top of the wheel, through envy
(which ever follows virtue and eminency) was quickly brought to the lowest; his
eyes put out, and he compelled to beg his bread in the temple of Sophia day by
day; and this was his form of prayer: Panem Belisario date, quem virtus
extulit, in vidia oppressit. Give a piece of bread to Belisarius, whom virtue
advanced, envy oppressed.

Thou therefore, that with Capernaum art even lift up to heaven, be not
insolent; thou know not how soon thou may be brought down to hell: Exalt
not thy self over proudly above thy brethren. I meet with an ancient story, it
commonly goes along with Ezekiels wheels: I will give it you shortly, and leave
it to your selves to apply. Sesostris King of Egypt, a potent, and victorious
Prince: when he rid in triumph, he compelled four conquered Kings to draw his
golden Chariot; which they did patiently, because they could not avoid it. One
of the four kings that drew, cast his eye continually upon the Chariot wheel;
and being demanded the reason by Sesostris, he made answer; I see in this wheel
the mutability of all worldly things. That part of the wheel which is nearest
heaven is presently upon the earth. This made such an impression in Sesostris,
that he would never afterward suffer his Chariot to be drawn by Kings, nor yet
by men, but carried himself more humbly and gently. The application is easy, as
I said at first, and therefore I leave it to you: I think within these few
years we have seen amazing changes in the Crown, in the Mitre, in the Army, in
the Church, in the State, and in the City.

Let me speak on a little further, Use. 2.
and make a second Use. Are all things in this world but turning wheels?
Instable, and rouling? Then set not your heart on any thing here below. This I
say brethren; It remains that they that have wives be as though they had
none, 1 Cor, 7, 29, 30. 31.
and they that weep as though they wept not, and they that rejoice as though
they rejoiced not, and they that buy as though they possessed not, and they
that use this world as not abusing it; (...).
because the fashion of this world passes away. Where the world is compared to
a ghost or apparation, that appears, and soon vanishes; or to a show upon a
stage: there is a great pomp, every one acts their part, and on the sudden the
play is done, there is and end of all.

Set not your heart on that which is transitory; not on the turning wheel, but
upon him that moves the wheel, namely upon God.

God made all things changeable, says Augustine, that we might rest on him
only, and in him, who is unchangeable, immutable. He is the father of lights
with whom is no variableness, nor shadow of turning. Therefore is it rightly
said, that God is man's proper place wherein he ought to rest, as in his center,
and end. All things which are made, have their certain place and term. God
created the heaven, and filled it with Angels: he created the earth, and filled
it with beasts, and plants, and creeping things: he created the sea and filled
it with fishes; he created the air, and filled it with flying fouls. What
proper place is now left for man? Or what will God now give unto man wherein he
may rest? All other places are taken up, and full already. Therefore when there
was nothing else left to give to man, God gave himself to man: God himself
would be man's inheritance and resting place. All other places are restless, and
full of change; only God is immutable, and changes not. Psalm, 102, ^5, 26, 27.
I said, says the Psalmist, O my God! of old thou have laid the foundation of
the earth, and the heavens are the work of thy hands: They shall perish, but
thou shall endure; yea all of them shall wax old like a garment: as a vesture
shall thou change them, and they shall be changed: But thou art the same, and
thy years shall have no end. The earth is round like a tennis-ball, and the
creatures in, and upon the earth are voluble as wheels, and all things under
the Zodiaque, Variable and transitory: the refore aspire higher; Pant after
God, make him the portion of your inheritance, Augustine.
and dwell in him: Say unto the Lord Fecisti nos Domine ad te, and inquietum est
cor nostrum donec quiescat in te. Thou Oh Lord have created us to thy self, and
our heart is restless, til it rests in thy self. Fix not here, but mount your
thoughts upwards toward the new-Jerusalem, the City that has foundations,
where there is no volubility, nor vanity. Though you be on earth, yet dwell in
heaven above the spheres, above the way of the year, and the sun, and all these
lower turning wheels: Rest your souls upon the unchangeable God! I have done
with the 2. part, and particular.

The third, 3.
and last part of the text follows, viz. the witness, in whose presence the
word was cried.

In my hearing.
The question is, Quest.
why should the son of God cry this word, O Wheel, in the Prophets hearing?

For the more full answer to this demand, Answ.
I will first give you the Original Hebrew; that will make the business something
more clear: It was cried unto them (...) in auribus meis, in mine ear. To
speak in ones ear, is more then to speak in ones hearing. A word may be spoken
in a man's hearing that concerns him not at all: but no man directs his speech
into the ear of another, but we conclude presently, it was a speech of some
special concernment to him that was rounded in the ear.

You know it is our common expression: I will speak a thing in your ear by and
by: that is, some word that more nearly concerns you then others. So then, this
word was not only spoken in Ezekiels hearing, but the Prophet was nearly
concerned in it. And now in a word, I will show you the reason why God spoke
this word in the prophets ear.

You have the reason: chapt. 3. v. 17. Son of man! I have made thee a watchman
unto the house of Israel: therefore hear the word at my mouth, and give them
warning from me. The Observation is clear.

What God speaks in the ear of his prophets, Doctr.
the prophets must speak in the ears of the people. Most likely God did not
speak immediately to the wheels, but God spoke to the Prophet, that he might
speak to the wheels in Gods name; and every word which Gods messengers receive
from the Lord, they must show it unto the people clearly and faithfully.
Whether it be a word of command; the Prophet must show the whole will of God
unto the people: So Exodus 19. 9. when God gave the Commandments on mount Sinai:
the Lord said unto Moses; Lo I come to thee in a thick cloud that the people
may hear when I speak with thee, and believe thee for ever.

Or if it be a word of promise, of grace and mercy; the Prophet of the Lord
must prononnce the favor and good will of God. Ezekiel. 9. 4. The Lord said to the
man clothed with linen; go through the midst of the City, even of Jerusalem,
and set a mark upon the foreheads of the men that sigh, and cry for all the
abominations that be done in the midst thereof: and in the first verse, this
was cried in mine ears with a loud voice, says the Prophet: why? That he
might comfort the mourners with these words.

Or if it be a word of reproof and threatening, of cursing from mount Ebal: the
Prophet of the Lord must denounce it unto the people; in the 9. of Ezekiel. v. 5.
The Lord said to the executioners of his justice and wrath, who had the
slaughter-weapons in their hands: go through the City and smite, let not your
eye spare, neither pity: and says the Prophet, this was said in my hearing,
why? that so he might warn the people.

And this chiefly is intended in this text and Chapter: a word of reproof and
threatening to Jerusalem. The vision concerns Jerusalem: Jerusalem had sinned
grievously, and the Lord was now about to depart from Jerusalem: but before he
goes quite away, he cries aloud in the Prophets hearing, O Wheel! thou movest
disorderly, destruction is coming upon thee, and now the Prophet hearing this,
must reprove the City, and admonish them of their danger. Cry aloud says the
Lord; spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my people their
transgressions, and the house of Jacob their sins. Esa. 58. 1. The Lord cried
in the ear of Elijah the Tishbite. 1. King. 21. 17. it was a word of
threatening: and the Prophet went immediately, and thundered it in the ears of
King Ahab. Thus says the Lord, have thou killed, and also gotten possession?
Thus says the Lord, in the place where the dogs licked the blood of Naboth,
shall dogs lick even thy blood also. The Lord speaks in the ear of Nathan, and
he thunders in the ears of David. 2 Samuel 12. The Prophets of the Lord must cry
boldly to the greatest, and most dreadful wheels: they must reprove and
threaten, and not spare: if the Lord speak in our hearing, we must cry it in
their ears

To make some application of this.
And first of all to you that are Gods Prophets and Ministers: Use. 1.
be faithful and bold. Does God cry any word in your hearing? Keep it not back
from the wheels, show it unto the people. That which the Lord has set down in
the holy Scriptures, he has spoken in our hearing. He takes us as witnesses to
what he speaks; and we must depose, and testify for God before all men: before
all the world. When God gives a word of command in our hearing, we must exhort:
when God holds forth a promise in our hearing, we must comfort: and when God
has a controversy with a people in our hearing, we must rebuke sharply; and
show the people their danger.

Opposition we must look for. Ezekiel. 8.
Behold I send thee, says the Lord to Ezekiel, and to us also as well as to
him: I send thee to a rebellious nation, they will not hear; I send thee among
briers and thorns, and scorpions: But whether they will hear, or whether they
will forbear; Son of man, be not afraid of them, neither he afraid of their
words, neither be dismayed at their looks. Thou shall speak my words to them,
whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear. Behold I have made thy face
strong against their faces, and thy forehead strong against their foreheads.
Chap. 3. 8. 9. As an Adamant harder then flint, have I made thy forehead: Fear
them not, neither be dismayed at their looks, though they be a rebellious house.

The 2. Use, Use. 2.
and that which is more proper to the time and occasion, is to all sorts of
people, especially the great men of the earth, Princes and Governors, the rich
and honorable. Must Gods Prophets and Ministers speak what they hear from God?
Then let all men whoever they be, hear patiently what the messengers of the
Lord speak. For it may truly be said, it is the voice of God, and not of man.
Mica. 6. 9. The voice of the Lord cries unto the City.

But methinks I hear what some are ready to object. We are willing to hear the
word from the Minister, if he would preach Christ more: if he would set down
the dignitys of Christians, and leave urging their duties; if he would cease
reproving, and not be so bitter in his invectives: his salt is too quick, and
we are not able to bear his reproachful words: he so reviles us, that he makes
our cheeks to blush, and our very ears to tingle.

I, there it, pincheth, the word of reproof cannot be born, especially by the
Magistrates, and great ones: if these mountains be touched they will smoke and
fume. They hate him that rebukes in the gate, and they abhor him that speaks
uprightly. Amos 5. 10. It Is admirable to see how many ways, people, especially
the great ones, have to take off the faithful Ministers from rebuking plainly.

One project is by fawning, collogueing, and hypocritical slattery. They call
the Ministers in a respective way, thy tell them they are learned men, Reverend
men, holy men of God, what good their Ministry does, and how they are respected
in their places, so as never any had the like love before. And what of all
this? O here is a bait! They proceed. But you are too bitter against the
Magistrates, always reproving the Magistrates, to bring them into contempt: if
you destroy Magistracy it will be the worse for you; Magistrates and Ministers
must stand or fall together. Therefore let us go hand in hand together. Forbear
to reprove us; or if you see any faults in us, come and tell us of them
privately, and let not the world hear of them, and then we shall love you, and
do any thing in the world for you. Here Is the voice of the inchanter.

But what? Must the Prophets tongue be charmed with fair words? No, No
flattering speeches must not put us by our duty. when God cries in our hearing;
when we are called to it, we must reprove and rattle the greatest wheels. Dan.
5. 16.
Belshazzar the King came after this manner flamming to Daniel. The spirit of
the holy Gods is in thee: wisdom, and knowledge, and understanding is in thee,
thou can make interpretations, and dissolve doubts. Now do but interpret the
writing for me, and make it speak good to me, and thou shall be clothed with
scarlet, and have a chain of gold about thy neck, and thou shall be the third
ruler in the Kingdom. But what answers Daniel? He said before the King. Let thy
gifts he to thy self, and give thy rewards to another; yet I will read the
writing unto the King; I will make known the interpretation, be it what it will
be: if it be MEAN MEAN, TEKEL VPHARSIN: then I will tell the King plainly; God
has numbered thy Kingdom, and finished it; thou art weighed in the balances,
and art found wanting; thy Kingdom is divided, and given to the Medes and
Persians.

And truly thus the Devil would have baffled Christ. Lu^^ (...)
Luke 8. 27, 28, 29. There were Devils in a man, and when they saw Christ
approaching, they feared he would rebuk them, and what did they to prevent it?
Oh they fell down, and carried themselves very mannerly to him, they cry out in
his praise: We know, oh Jesus, who thou art; thou art the Son of God most high,
thou art the holy one of God! I beseech thee torment us not. And would Christ
be put off so? No, no; Out Devil, out Devil, says he; he spared him never
the more for his flattery. And so must all faithful Ministers deal with all
those that go about to button up their mouths with sordid slattery, Out Devil,
out Devil.

Another engine that great men have to stop the mouths of Ministers, that they
may not reprove them for their sins, is persecution, and violence. Does
Michaiah prophecy evil to wicked Ahab? yea, though it be nothing but what God
spoke in his hearing; what is next? 1 King. 22 27
Thus says the King, put this man in the prisonhouse, and feed him with the
bread of affliction, and with the water of affliction. Let Ministers with us
cry out against the sins of the City, the profanation of God day, the
contempt of the Word, the luxury and excess, the unmercifulness to the poor;
and the negligence of Magistrates in not endeavoring reformation. And what is
the next? They must look to be called to their Courts, to be censured and
threatened, their means and livelihood to be taken away. Just a year ago, upon
this very day, and occasion; the faithful Minister of Christ, who by the
providence of God then preached, he was but a little in reprehension, and
presently summoned to the Court, and questioned, though none evil could be
found in him, and he had spoken nothing but what was just and right.

The very last week, on Thursday, a godly-brother-Minister (at a Fast held in
my Church) did but reprove, (and that with all humility and modesty) the
neglect of Magistrates, in suffering sish to be sold in the streets on the
Sabbath day; and presently he was sent for to the Court, and called in question
as a delinquent. And wherefor^ is all this? Surely, to button up our mouths, to
make us afraid to quest, or open against sin. And what? Must we Ministers
cowardly for fear, forbear to tell the people of their transgressions, and the
house of Juda of their sins? I am sure Michaiah did not so, when he was doomed
to the prison till Ahab returned in peace; Thou in peace! says Michaiah; if
thou return in peace, the Lord has not spoken by me: And he said more-over,
Hearken all you people: It was a public reproof, and threatening, in the ears
of the whole multitude.

But the common objection is: by thus doing you cry down Magistracy, Object.
and bring it into contempt, and so make a way to all confusion.

I Answer: Answ.
Cursed; I, that is the word comes first to hand, I cannot think of a more
proper on the sudden, let it go for me: Cursed be the filthy dreamers that
despise dominion, Jude 8.
and speak evil of dignities. Those brethren in iniquity that under the
pretext of Christian liberty, kick against the higher powers which are ordaind
of God, strike at the root of all civil government, cry down Kings,
Parliaments, all Magistrates and Magistracy; who cast off Laws, disturb Order,
would lay all level, and bring in an Anabaptisticall parity: O my soul come
not thou into their secret. But tell me I pray! does the reproving the faults,
and negligences of Magistrates, strike at the root of Magistracy? Is that the
way to bring it into contempt? No, no; this is the way to establish Magistracy,
and make it glorious. As for the wheels of our curious clocks and watches: is
it a prejudice to them to be filed when they are rusty, to be scoured when they
are foul, to be oyled when they turn too sluggishly? You are convinced, I dare
say, that all this is for the good of the wheels, to make them shine more
bright, move more nimbly, and do their office more faithfully. The application
is easy: I leave it to your selves. I shall draw to a conclusion of this
point. As for the wheels, be they little wheels, or be they great wheels, be
they high, or be they low; be they rich, or be they poor; whatsoever is spoken
from God, in our hearing, concerning them; we must cry it again in their ears:
if we that are set as watchmen, see their sin and danger, and for fear, or
flattery shall forbear to warn them, how dreadful is our doom?

Thus says the Lord, Ezekiel. 3. 17. Son of man! I have made thee a watchman
unto the house of Israel; therefore hear the Word at my mouth, and give them
warning from me. verse. 18. When I say to the wicked, thou shall surely dye; and
thou give him not warning, nor speak to warn the wicked from his wicked
way to save his life; the same wicked man shall dye in his iniquity: but his
blood will I require at thine hand. verse. 19. Yet if thou warn the wicked, and
he turn not from his wickedness, nor from his wicked way, he shall dye in his
iniquity; but thou have delivered thine own soul.

This for us Ministers that shrink from our duty. Now hear O you wheels, great
and small! you that kick at reproof, and hate him that shall search and dress
your sores, and count those the only brave preachers that speak roses, and
their lips (like the whorish woman's) drop as an honeycomb. A word for you. Read
Esa. 30. 8. Now go, write it before them in a table, and note it in a book,
that it may be fore the time to come and for ever.

9. That this is a rebellious people, lying Children, Children that will not
hear the Law of the Lord. Why, what is their special wickedness? Mark;

v. 10. They say to the Seer's, see not, and to the Prophets, prophesy not unto
us right things: speak unto us smooth things, prophesy deceipts.

11. Get you out of the way, oh you reproving preachers: cause the holy one of
Israel to cease molesting us; with such bold reprehenders.

But now take in what follows, the punishment.
12. Wherefore thus says the holy one of Israel, because you despise this
word, and trust in oppression, and perverseness, and stay thereon.

13. Therefore this iniquity shall be to you as a breach ready to fall, swelling
out in a high wall, whose breaking comes suddenly, and in an instant.

14. And he shall break it as the breaking of a potters vessel, that is broken
in pieces, he shall not spare; so that there shall not be found in the bursting
of it, a sherd to take fire from the hearth, or to take water withal out of
the pit.

Behold, ye despisers, and wonder, and vanish away: the contempt of the word
spoken of by the Prophet is the contempt of him that sits on the throne. He
that despises you, says our Lord Jesus Christ, despises me. Luke 10. 16.

It is the See'rs duty to cry, and to cry earnestly, to cry with an O O O! unto
all the wheels: and woe be to us if we cry not. That which we cry, is nothing
else but what was spoken in our hearing from the throne of glory. Mica 6, 9.
It is the Lords voice that cries unto the City; and the man of wisdom will
hear the rod, and who has appointed it: that is, he will humbly and patiently
hear the Prophets of the Lord, when they cry, as well as when they sing: when
they reprove, as well as when they comfort: when they preach the Law, as well as
when they publish the Gospel: he will hearken to the doctrine that shows him his
sins, Prove. 15. 5.
and threatens the rod: but he that despises instruction and reproof is a fool.

THE APPLICATION.
Hitherto, Wel-beloved Christians! you have had the Exposition of the text: the
general doctrine and particular observations which grow out of the text: and
all the way I have showed you the Uses, what to do with those doctrines and
observations, that they may be rendered profitable. Now one thing yet remains,
and that is to make Application, to bring it home to the present time and
occasion to the place and persons.

It Is true, this word; O Wheel! is cried to the whole world, and all things in
it: as if he that sits upon the Throne should have said; O world! O heavens! O
earth! oh Kingdoms of the world! But yet it is most clear and certain to any
one that minds the scope of the Chapter; that this word O Wheel! was in a more
especial and peculiar manner cried unto Jerusalem: The whole Vision concerned
Jerusalem, it was to admonish Jerusalem: and to foreshew things that should
shortly be accomplished in Jerusalem. Then thus: Jerusalem was the chariot: the
Princes, Priests, and people were the Wheels. And these things are recorded for
our instruction: what was then cried to Jerusalem, is now cried to Norwich:
This City is the Chariot; the Magistrates, the Ministers, and the Commons are
the Wheels: to these it is cried in my hearing, Oh Wheel!

O!] This adverb or interjection O! makes the application plain; and brings it
close, and home. This O! is a servant to the passions; and is useful to express
various affections. It is ever Signum allocutionis; a sign of the Vocative
case, it speaks by calling loud unto another: and it principally signifies and
expresses these following passions; with their effects.

1. Indignation: Indignandi.
So Act. 13. 9. Paul set his eyes on Elymas the Sorcerer with indignation; and
said, O! full of all subtilty and all mischief, thou child of the devil!

2. Reprehension: the effect of indignation. So Math. 3. 7. John the Baptist:
when he saw the Pharisees and Sadduces come to his Baptism: he said: O
generation of Vipers!

3. It expresses anger, which is declared by threatening: So, Math. 23. 37, 38.
Jesus brake forth, Oh! Jerusalem, Jerusalem! thou that killest the Prophets,
and stonest them which are sent unto thee! behold your house is left unto you
desolate.

4. It discovers grief. So 2. Sam. 18. 33. David upon the news of his sons
death; Dolcndi.
burst out in passion: O my Son Absalom, my Son, my Son Absalom, would God I
had dyed for thee, O Absalom my son, my Son!

5. It Is ever a sign of calling: As Ruth 4. 1. Boaz called to the Kinsman,
Vocandi.
and said, Ho! such an one! turn aside: sit down here!

6. It shows vehement desire: Optandi.
As in David, 2. Sam. 23. 15. he longed and said, O that one would give me
drink of the water of the well of Bethlehem!

Thus is this adverb used in the Scriptures: and thus doubtless it must be
applied unto the Wheels.

For brevity I will put two together and pair them.

O! with Indignation Reprehension.


O! with Anger, Threatening Grief.


O! Calling Desiring.


O! hearken unto me whilst I apply all these to the Wheels.

And first, this O! reprehends with indignation: Surely there was somewhat
amiss about the Wheels: they were faulty. Why, what might the matter be?

Surely either they 1. Moved not at all. 2. Or they moved to no purpose. 3. Or
they moved irregularly: 4. Or they stopped.


Let Us look about a little, and see if there be not the same faults in our City
Wheels. And first.

Sure they did not move, 1. Non volubiles. Prove. 20. 26.
or they did not move as they ought to do: The Wheel should turn over the
wicked. But does it so? The Sabbaths of the Lord are profaned: old men, and
old women walk in the streets: and our streets are full of boys and girls
playing in the streets on the Lords day: Fish has been openly cried, and sold
in our streets on the Lords day: Ale-hous S* the shops of the devil, and the
nurseries of sin do abound: Beggars run up and down the streets clamoring after
every passenger: and many distressed creatures overwhelmed with miseries, sit
in their forlorn towers and dismal holes, and want bread! The oppressed cry out
for want of Justice.

O Wheel! O Wheels! where are the Wheels all this while? the great Wheels the
Magistrates? why do they not stir? why do they not turn, and run more
frequently and diligently into their several Wards? what not one Wheel appear
to scatter the open prophaners of the Lords day? What I not one one Wheel to
draw away the Fish on the Lords day? What not one Wheel to break the brood of
drunkards, and Ale-house-haunters? What not one Wheel to draw off the beggars
from our heels? or to draw in necessary provision to he almost starved members
of Jesus Christ: O Wheels! Where are you? why move you not? why do you not turn
in your Sphere? It may be worth inquiring, what is the matter the Wheels move
no better?

I doubt they are not round: its the round sphaericall figure that is fittest
for motion: if there be Angles and corners in a Wheel, twill never turn well:
corners are mischivous things, corners are dark, all the dirt of the house is
swept into the corner: I fear, here is some cause our Wheels move no better:
there is too many corners amongst them: dark corners of ignorance: O let me
speak plainly; there is too many sluttish corners, I meon, of Vice, as pride,
covetousnes, luxury, and other sins, these hinder the motion! O Wheel! what!
art thou not round!

Or perhaps the Wheels may be too little. The Romans were wont to use very
great wheels for little chariots: they found that the horses had less labor in
drawing, and yet they drew greater burdens: Majores rotae, magisaptae ad
rotationem; the bigger the Wheels the more apt to roll and turn: what are our
Wheels too little trow we? have they too little substance, two little height?
Have they too little understanding to govern? Too little ability? Oh ye little
wheels! look better to the choice of your great wheels!

Do they not want eyes? (...).
These wheels in my text were full of eyes, as you may see verse 12. of this
Chapter: round about the rings they were set with eyes, as the heaven with
stars: What are about the rings of our wheels? Nothing but great iron
hobnayles? No marvel they move no better: They are not Oculati, Sapientes.
they cannot see to move as they should do: they want that wisdom, and other
gifts and graces should make them sit for government.

Or it may be the wheels are not well shod; they want a good Struck; they
have no courage, they are afraid of a check, if they should be too active;
they should lose the favor of their friends, if they should be too strict in
the execution of justice: They have an estate to lose, and they fear that:
Truly, it is with the balances of justice oftentimes, as with the balance of
the watch, or clock, it never stirs, but when the Crown-wheele, or
spurre-wheele makes it go: So you shall never see some men active any way, but
as power and necessity compel them.

O Wheel! thy circumference should be iron round about: thou should be a
man of courage, else thou will never move freely.

Or, may not this be the cause of their not moving? the want of GODS Spirit
dwelling in them? the want of zeal for God?

The reason why these wheels moved so nimbly, and majestically: Chapter 1. 20.
was because the spirit of the living creature was in the Wheels. They were not
moved by any external cause, no hand turned them: But they were moved by an
inward principle: And it is the want of inward principles, that make our wheels
stand still. Well,

As for these standing wheels, it is cried unto them in my hearing: O Wheel!
the Lord rebukes thee.

2. Let us look about, to spy out the second fault of the wheels: They moved
perhaps: but to very little, or no purpuse: So I doubt too many of our wheels,
both greater, and lesser Wheels, Magistrates, Ministers, and other; they are
enough in motion: but what do they? either aliud, or male: either that that is
ill, or that that is as ill as nothing, or worse. Their motion is just like that
of the jack-wheels; they turn and turn, but what do they turn? nothing but a
fly at the top, and a spit at the bottom: So too too many, and even of our
great Wheels; the fly plays and the spit goes; they eat, they drink, they
feast, they play; they are merry and laugh; But for God, for the service of the
public; for the furthering Religion and Reformation for the good of the City
and particular Parishes and Congregations, they move not an inch. Perhaps
sometimes they will roll to the Court of Justice: and what do they there? truly
that which the count-wheel does in the Clock; tell the hours: they sit turning
their heads and looking about; but move not their tongues, much less put forth
their power for God and the public good. As for these unserviceable wheels: it
is cried unto them in my hearing, O Wheel! the Lord looks on thee with
indignation, cast out the unprofitable servant.

3. A third faul that seems to be in the wheels, for which they lie under Gods
indignation, is their irregular motion. As for Ezikiels wheels, chap. 1. 12.
17. their motion was even, constant, uniform; as the living creatures which
drew the chariot, went strait forward and they turned not when they went so the
wheels they followed them; when they went, they went upon their four sides, and
they returned not when they went: their motion was very regular. But here in
this tenth chapter, sure God sees some disorder in the motion of Jerusalems
wheels: for which he gave them a check in the Prophets hearing, O Wheel!

And what disorderly motions are there in all our wheels, great and small, high
and low? Magistrates, Ministers, and Commons they have not moved in an uniform
and constant way. Truly the greatest part of our people have turned like
weathercocks, to and again, this way and that way, and every way: they go forth
one way, and presently return another way. As the times turn they turn: when
Popish Innovations and Prelatical Tyranny brake in upon us as a ^^ood; then all
turned Eastward; wheeled about in the house of God: now they were at the desk,
by and by in the middle alley, anon bowing and cringing at the altar: How did
the Priest and Clark take their turns and answer one another in Psalms and
prayers, running out of one thing into another! and all the people sometimes
sitting, sometimes standing, sometimes kneeling, sometimes making courtsie; and
ever changing their postures; and this way was cried up by Baals Priest for
the beauty of holiness: it was countenanced by the scarlet robes, and magnified
by the luke warm Protestants; thus moved the wheels a great while: But now the
times are turned and they are turned; yea turned the quite contrary way:
Separation is now grown into great request, and they that but the other day
were driving on toward Rome as fast as they could; have now altered their
course and are hurrying toward Amsterdam; they are gotten out of the Church of
England already, and the superstitious Malignant has given the right hand of
fellowship to the Separatist. O wheel! thou movest irregularly. According to
the change of place and companies, they turn, and Proteus-like are any thing:
amongst Papists they are Catholics; amongst Brownists they are Independents:
In the Congregation they are seeming Saints: in the tavern with lewd company
they change their behavior as if they were mad, their speech faulters, and
their spittle runs down by their beards: to all these turning-temporizing
Wheels, it is cried in my hearing; O Wheel! the Lord abhorrs thee.

But do we not see other irregulat motions? oh how confusedly do wheels move
before mine eyes! How many gathered Churches or Congregations are there? So
many wheels they are; and every wheel must move his own way: and no hand must
touch them to turn them all the same way. Luther was of another mind: he
determins that these wheels did signify particular Churches: And the
similitude of the wheels, they were all alike in color, bigness, height,
motion; they turned all the same way, did represent the Uniformity of Churches;
that all the churches of Christ in the whole world have and must have fimilem
incessum, the same goings in the sanctuary; namely Uniformity in Religion,
confession of faith, form of Church government, Worship, and Catechizing. But
on the confusion of our newgathered Churches not two scarce of those wheels
move in the same way. To these I cannot say, O wheel! for they will not be all
one Catholic Church made up of many particular congregations: but I must cry
to them, Oh Wheels! your motions are various, different, contrary, confused,
irregular; the Lord approves them not.

Do you not see abundance of false prophets run up and down like wheels?
Seducers, that compass sea and land, to make one of their own profession;
Matthew. 23. 15.
and when he is made, they make him twofold more the child of hell, then they
themselves; these wheel about irregularly; the spirit of Satan is in these
wheels, and here is a check for them: O seducers come back; why do you turn the
people of Christ out of the right way?

There are a generation of Seekers (so they call themselves) Saint Paul gives
them their true charcter, Ever learning, and never able to come to the
knowledge of the truth. 2 Timothy 3. 7.
These are wheels that turn strangely and preposlerously, out of one thing into
another; they are ever finding, and ever losing, they fasten upon no certain
way, but ever seeking for something, and they know not what. The Poets fain
that Ixion for his slander of Juno, was in hell fastened to a wheel, and
perpetually turned about upon it: described thus by Ovid; Volvitur Ixion, and
se sequitur que fugitque:
In English you may take it thus:
Ixion's turned upon a wheel, an^ ^^ee
Follows himself, and from himself does flee.


And are not these Seekers just so? upon Ixion's wheel ever following the
truth, and ever slying from the truth, and never catch it, or if they do, they
let it go again: these move irregularity, and here they have a check: Oh wheel!
thy motion is tormenting, and the end of it will be the loss of truth, of
Christ, of heaven.

There are abundance of other wheels that move disorderly; the drunkard reels,
and turns round in the streets: the proud Fantastic gallant is ever turning
out of one fashion into another; but the most prodigious! sight your eyes have
yet seen, is a deformed monster, called Liberty of Conscience; it is a spirit
of confusion, which moves every wheel to turn according to the dictate of its
private spirit as it lists.

These Libertines must be left wholly to the freedom of their own consciences:
Oh conscience, say they, is a tender thing, and therefore to impose a rule to
regulate their motion, is no less then tyranny: Church Government, and a
coercive power to restrain and check their motion, is no less then
persecution. Every man must hold what opinion he will join to what Church he
will, worship God as he will, and do what seems good in his own eyes.

Oh prodigious O woeful spectacle! so many wheels and scarce two of them have
the same motion: but they move like scattered feathers in a wind; or as
Pharaohs Chariot-wheels in the red sea; smitten one from another, one this way,
another that way. These wheels move irregularly: a good rule would guide them
all the same way: they will at last clash one against another, and break in
pieces: in the mean time: it is cried unto them in my hearing, from the God of
Unity, peace and order, O Wheel! thy motion and turning is as of the children
of Belial that shake off the yoke.

4. A fourth and last thing which seems to be amiss in the wheels is this: They
stop sometimes: A while they move prettily well, and on the sudden they stand
stock-stil: Oh what stoppings are there amongst our great Wheels? Just this day
twelve month my reverend brother performed the work which I do at this time;
in his Sermon he did exhort the people to do something to the utmost of their
power which might conduce to the public good and setlement of truth and peace:
this was interpreted that the City would strike in with some petition tending
to the Kingdoms peace, and welfare: To this purpose a Petition was drawn (or a
Remonstrance, if you please to call it so) to back Londons Remonstrance then
newly come forth; which Petition or Remonstance, if it had taken effect, might,
in all probability, have done much good, and the Kingdom not have been in those
straits it is at this time: At the first proposal many were very forward for
the Petition: the Wheels ratled and turned very nimbly; all on the sudden
there came a stop and all the business was crossed with much vehemence: A
while, what zeal was there against the Devils free-schools and nurseries? I
mean, licentious, unlicenced alehouses: Oh how loud did some wheels crake? how
bitterly did they speak against them? how did they threaten them? if ever they
came in place they would do, I that they would, great matters: at last power
comes into their hands, and what is done then? no new alehouses licenced at
all; but all the old ones suffered and connived at: and they increase as fish
in multitude; and no noise against them: what is the matter trow? would not one
think there had been some greasing of the Wheel, it is so quiet and still, on
the sudden? Rota arida stridet.

About three or four years since (as I am informed) when the Kingdom was in
great straites, and the City in daily fears: the Magistrates then gave out many
Warrants against Prophaners of GODS Day: which by the faithfulness of the
Magistrates, punishing such as were presented, there was, as it were, a new
face upon the City, and nothing so much Profaneness as formerly: here was a
sweet rattling of the Wheels: But since that time it is observed that there has
been a remisness in the MAGISTRATES, Warrants have not been granted so
frequently; nor Officers encouraged in the Execution of such Warrants as have
been granted, whereby the Profanation of GODS Day increases more and more:
They stop; the wheels stop.

The Ministers of the City (those few that desire to be faithful) have with all
humility, petitioned the Court of Aldermen that they would purge the City of
scandalous Ministers, and cast out that unsavory salt, which has been thrown
out of the Country upon us: that they would perfect the Union of our Parishes:
that they would raise competent maintenance, and bring some more godly and able
Ministers into the City. At the first motion we find many with us, we have
promises of assistance: oh the wheels come rattling bravely: on the sudden all
are stopped: there is not one moves, except it be the wrong way, no good motion
goes on.

About six months since, or not much otherwise, there came a Letter from the
worthy Speaker of the Honorable House of Commons directed to the Mayor, and
some other faithful ones of the Corporation: requiring them to divide the City
into Classes: to return the names of such as were fit to be Elders: By the way,
take notice all ye people: That Letter was no forged Letter. I speak it in the
presence of God, and I will make it out to all the world; it was the Speakers
own letter, and the superscription and direction was according to his
COMMISSION. I say this Letter did not lie a year and three quarters in a box,
and nothing done: but presently the Major called all, that were concerned in
it, together: in one day we laid out the Classis; we nominated the fittest men
in the City (I am confident of that) for the Eldership; that very night we
returned what we had done to the Honorable Speaker: and we verily and justly
expected, the next return, to have received thanks, and a ratification of our
work, and the settling of Church Government in our City: O here the Wheels
rattled gallantly and moved freely; but on the sudden all stopped; the whole
work was at a stand, and so has been ever since.

In the name of God; what makes this stopping? Sure there is some rusty wheel
amongst the rest that will not stir, nor suffer the other wheels to stir; or
there is some ill-condition'd wheel. It Is a strange thing to see how one
naughty wheel will carry another: The phusy-wheel of the watch, with its
greatness carries all the lesser wheels as it pleases. The mil-wheel with its
coggs turns about the upper millstone, the clack, and makes the hoppet serve
them as they please: other wheels they have their teeth by which they stop or
turn the rest. And that I doubt is the reason of our stoppings and contrary
turnings: you shall see many good wheels, and in a fair motion, freely running
on in a good way: and on the sudden they are stopped and turned. Why, how
comes that about? Oh there are some Malignant Wheels amongst the rest, that are
contrived in the engine unseen: These by their greatness and power, or by their
coggs and flattery, or by their teeth and threatenings they make them afraid to
go on in any thing that tends to the public good, and the advancement of Gods
glory, and the Churches settlement. Oh that these rusty and ill-shaped wheels
were filed, or oyled, or removed, and better put in their room. In the 10.
Verse of this Chapter; you shall see the appearance of the wheels was, as if one
wheel had been in another wheel; which most think was not comprehensively: as
if a little wheel had been contained in a great wheel: no the wheels were all
of a bigness. This therefore they conceive was transversly: one wheel turned
right forth upon the ground, and then there was another wheel did cut that
wheel in the very midst with right angles, in the similitude of a Sphaere, and
moved with a cross and contrary motion: Ah! so it is with our Wheels; there is
ever a wheel in a wheel: one cross wheel in the midst that spoils the motion of
all the rest. As for these Wheels; it is cried unto them from the Throne of
Glory, in my hearing, O Wheel! the Lord gives thee a check: mend thy motion,
turn better, or else thou will break and destroy the Chariot of the Church,
Commonwealth and City. I have done with the O! of Indignation and Reprehension.

Now follows the second pair: namely the O! of Anger and Commination.
Lamentation.


Jerusalem was reproved sharply in the former O! but she reformed not:
therefore now follows another O! more grievous and dreadful: viz. a threatening
and a lamenting O! O Wheel thou shall be broken! Oh Jerusalem thou shall
suddenly be destroyed for thy wickedness and obstinacy. O! and alas for
Jerusalem! The very like sad expression you have from the mouth of Christ, in
the 19. of Luke, ver. 41. When he was come near, he beheld the City and wept
over it; saying, O! if thou had known, even thou at least in this thy day,
the things which belong unto thy peace; but now they are hid from thine eyes:
For the days shall come upon thee thas thine enemies shall cast a trench about
thee, and compass thee round and keep thee in on every side, and shall lay thee
even with the ground, and thy children within thee, and they shall not leave in
thee one stone upon another; because thou knew not the time of thy
Visitation.

And here it will be seasonable to give you the sum and parts of the Chapter,
and to show you more clearly the coherence of the text.

The Vision does most nearly concern Jerusalem: in the 3. Verse. you shall see
the Cherubins standing on the right side of the house: that is of the Temple of
Jerusalem.

The proper end of the Vision was to show the certainty and the near approach
of the destruction of the Jews; the living creatures, Gods Angels were armed
with power from God to take vengeance on them; they were winged, swift for
execution, and Jerusalems woe came running upon wheels.

There Is a tow-fold judgment threatened to Jerusalem; which cuts the Chapter
into two parts.

1. The Lord first shows to the Prophet that he wlll burn the City with fire,
in the 7 first Verses. The Lord spoke to the man clothed with linen, and said,
go in between the wheels, and fill thine hand with coals of fire from between
the Cherubims, and scatter them over the City: and he went in, in my sight,
Ezekiel; and took the fire accordingly, ver. 7. and went out, to do execution.

2. Then secondly: the Lord shows to the Prophet, and testifies by his
appearing in the Temple, that he is about to depart from the Temple, City and
Nation: from the 8. Ver. to the end: most plainly in the 18. Ver. Then the
glory of the Lord departed from off the threshold of the house.

Now before the Lord goes quite away, his voice eries to the City: O Wheel! O
Jerusalem repent: or else O Jerusalem! I will have no more to do with thee: I
will depart, and sudden and fearful destruction shall come upon thee: The sum
of all is,

An O! Observe.
of Commination ever follows an O! of Reprehension: if the Lord call to a
people, and they be not humbled and reformed; then the Lord will cry against
them in his wrath; even with the cry of a travailing woman, Isa, 42. 14.
and quite forsake them, and utterly destroy them. Hear what the Lord says
concerning the Jews.

Jer. 44. 4. I sent unto you all my servants the Prophets, rising early, and
sending: saying, Oh do not this abominable thing that I hate. There Is an O! of
Admonition and Reprehension.

5. But they hearkened not, nor inclined their ear to turn from their
wickedness, to burn no incense unto other gods.

6. Wherefore my fury and mine anger was poured forth and was kindled in the
Cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem: and they are wasted and
desolate, as at this day.

The Application will come close to Norwich, to England, to our selves: hear
and tremble.

As for the sins of Jerusalem and Judah, I am sure we are as deep as they: Had
I time to gather a catalogue of sins out of Ezekiel: you would verily think
that he had received his visions in our City: the very same sins are as rife
with us as with the Jews. You shall find them accused (if you read the
Prophecy) of abominable Idolatry: gross Superstition: Corruption in the
worship and service of God: horrible contempt of the Word: despising, mocking,
persecuting Gods Messengers: scorning at all goodness: perfidiousness, breaking
their Covenants with God and man: Fearful profanation of Gods holy Sabbaths:
barbarous oppression: pride; luxury: fullness of bread: abundance of idleness:
hardness of heart, and unmercyfulness to the poor: there was then a strong
Malignant party that with all their wit and strength opposed the Reformation
endeavored by Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and others: and now what think you? mutato
nomine: change but the name: for Jerusalem read Norwich: for Judah and Israel
read England, and does it not hold right? are not those sins, and many more,
ours?

When the Lord saw that their iniquity was great, and their sin very grievous,
he cried unto them with a mighty voice, for it was in the Prophets hearing: the
voice came from the Throne over the Temple in Jerusalem, and Ezekiel was by the
river Chebar in Babylon: a voice indeed that could reach so far: So loud the
Lord cried O Wheel! an O of Reprehension and admonition: O do not these
abominations which my soul hates: but they refnsed to hearken.

I know you cannot miss applying of it: has not the Lord cried in our ears by
his sons of thunder? have not the faithful messengers of the Lord showed the
people their transgressions, and rebuked them sharply? Have they not discovered
their dangers, and called them to repentance, saying O do not these abominable
things which the Lord hates?

Mark how God proceeds with them, when he sees they continue thorns, and
briers, and scorpions, and rebellious, and an obstinate people: then with a
stretched out hand from heaven he reaches forth to Ezekiel a roll of a book,
Ezekiel, 2. 9, 10
and when it was spread before the Prophet, he saw that it was written within
and without: and there was written therein, lamentations, and mourning, and woe:
he threatens dreadful destruction: he cries out Chapter the 7. An end! the end
is come upon the four corners of the Land: an evil, an only evil shall suddenly
come: and in this 10. Chap. The Execution is begun: the Angel scatters coals of
fire about the City.

I would to God the Application were not so manifest as that none can miss it.
We have continued a stiff-necked people: we have walked stubbornly, kicked at
reprehension, and we have hated to be reformed: and now the Lord has scattered
coals of fire about our Cities and Country: even the hot fire of war and
contention, the coals of juniper blown up by the spirit of division: O the fire
burns, the fire burns: poor England is consuming apace, and is like to be
turned into ashes shortly.
And here I cannot but set a hand to point at two remarkable Circumstances by
the way.

One is the Circumstance of the place whence the coals were taken: namely, Ver.
2, 3, 7.
from between the Cherubims in the Temple: to admonish that they were
Temple-sins that kindled the fire of Gods wrath; contempt of the Word and
Ministers; false Doctrine, Corruption in Gods Worship, Profanation of the
Sabbath, Sacriledg and Idolatry: nothing does so much incense the Lord and
provoke him to fury, as Temple-sins; Corruption in Religion and Doctrine.

The other Circumstance remarkable, is the person that takes and scatters the
coals about Jerusalem: it is the man clothed with linen: who is described in
the 9. Cap. ver. 2. and 4. to have a writers inkhorn by his side, whose office
there was to set a mark upon the foreheads of them that mourn: which sure is
none other but the Lord Jesus Christ: in the former Chapter you see him a
protector, a Savior: here in this Chapter he is a consumer, a destroyer:
Christ first comes to seek and to save, to call sinners to repentance: but if
they hearken not, then he changes his work and he comes armed with flaming
fire to execute vengeance upon all impenitent persons. Isa. 66. 15, 16. 2 These,
1, 8.
O sad condition when Christ's comes in anger against a people! then is ruin
dreadful and unavoydable; when the Lord cries to us by his Ministers and calls
us to repentance; as long as we hearken to his voice, we have Christ to plead
for us: but when our advocate becomes our enemy how deplorable is our
condition? I fear, I fear it is the man in white linen, that is now scattering
coals of fire about our City and Country; and the Lord is departing from us.
But yet before he departs from Jerusalem, he calls to it, O Wheel!

The Lords departure from Jerusalem is by degrees: he does not fly away in an
instant: no, no, the Lord leaves them, as if he were loath to depart: Ezekiel, 9, 3.
Observe a little his motions. In the former Chapter Verse 3. The glory of the
God of Israel went up from the Cherub to the threshold of the house: that is
from the Mercy-seat in the holy place to the door of the Sanctuary, ready to go
out; and there the Lord tatries a while before he depart. In this tenth
Chapter, verse 18. he removes a little further. The glory of the Lord departed
from off the threshold of the house, and stood over the Cherubims: That is, he
went forward to the East gate of the great Court: on the top of that gate aloft
were placed Cherubims, and there the Lord rested a while, before he went quite
away. In the next Chapter, Ezekiel. 11. 23.
verse 23. he removes yet further; The glory of the Lord went up from the
midst of the City, and stood upon the mountain which is on the East Side of
the City; that is, Mount Olivet, and there he rests a while: But why does he
abide upon mount Olivet? Truly, some are of opinion that the Lord stayed upon
the mount, to see the burning of the City, and to triumph over it: As did Nero,
when Rome was fired, he gate him up to the top of a hill, and there did sing,
and rejoice at the spectacle. The Lord had often called to Jerusalem, Prove. 1.
24. 26.
and they had refused, he had stretched out his hand, and none would regard;
therefore now he sits upon the Mount, and laughs at their destruction, and
mocks at the coming of their fear.

But I rather think, and hope, he staid a while upon the Mountain, to be called
back again. Before he went out of the City he cried to them, O Wheel! Oh
Jenusalem! yet, yet seek me, and I will be found of you; call to me, and I will
return, and dwell with you.

Neither here can you avoid the Application: Does not the Lord seem to be
departing from England? But he has not taken his slight all at once; he has
withdrawn himself by degrees: In the time of the late prelaticall tyranny and
persecution, when the worship of God was corrupted, the faithful Ministers of
the Gospel silenced, all manner of popish, superstitious innovations obtruded;
then God seemed to be gone to the threshold, ready to go out of England; but
departed not.

When the Commotions, and concussions began between the two Kingdoms of England
and Scotland, threatening the breaking of both. Then God seemed to be going
still further from us; from the threshold out of the door; onward on his way
from England, but yet he departed not.

When the bloody intestine war began between the King and his Parliament,
then the Lord seemed to be departing quite away; then was the noise of a whip,
Nah. 3 2.
and the noise of the rattling of the wheels, and of the praunsing horses, and
of the jumping chariots: The horseman lifted up both the bright sword, and the
glittering spear, and there was a multitude of slain, and great number of
carcasses, and the Lord seemed to sit aloft upon his holy Mountain, laughing at
our destruction.

But blessed be his holy Name, we find he is not quite gone; there is a little
stay of his judgments: I hope, beloved Christians, the Lord stays yet upon
Mount Olivet, the Mountain of peace, and he expects when we should call him
back again: Yet there is hope in Israel concerning this thing. Ezra 10. 2.


The Voice of God from the Throne has called to us a long time; Oh Wheel? Now
let us call to Mount Olivet: O Lord our God, Depart not from us; let us call
him back with our true and hearty repentance, with our thorough reformation;
with our team and prayers: who can tell but God may yet repent and return, and
turn away from his fierce anger, that we perish not? Return, Oh Lord, to thy
thousands in our Israel, and dwell amongst us again: Amen.

3. At the last, I come to the third and last Pair of O-s; to wit, the O of
Calling: Desiring.


And here I am to speak in the Vocative case, and to call every one to their
duty; to set every wheel on turning, and that for prevention of the dreadful
ruin threatened; and as I go along, I cannot but make it the desire of my
heart, that the word of God may take good effect: O si! o ut inam!

And first in general, 1.
I call to all the wheels; what was spoken from the Throne of glory in my
hearing, that I cry in the ears of every wheel, O Wheel! Turn, turn: for this
is a word of command: yea, Jocl 2 12, 13.
turn to the Lord your God with all your heart, and with fasting and weeping,
and with mourning: and rent your hearts, be humbled for all your irregular, and
preposterous motions; and turn to the Lord by unfamed repentance, a thorough
reformation, a holy conversation, and newness of live: Let thy Spirit, Oh God,
come upon all these Wheels: And O wheels roll, run Sion-ward: let your eyes,
your spokes, your rings all turn heavenward: Oh that there were such a heart
in them, that they would fear the Lord, and keep all his Commandments always
that it might be well with them, and with their children for ever, Deuteronomy. 5. 29.

In the next place, 2.
more especially I call to the great wheels, to the heads of the people, to the
Magistrates. As for those wheels, it is cried unto them from the Throne of
Glory: O Wheels! Turn regularly in your proper Sphaeres: Judge you the people
with just judgment: Prove, 20, 26.
Scatter the wicked, O let the great wheels turn over them: Let not swearers,
and drunkards, and houses of drunkeness, and prophaners of Gods Sabbaths:
Malignant Priests that begin to rake up their old Superstitions again: O Wheels
have you not eyes? Do you not see what abundance there are of these? Why do you
let them lie so quietly? O Wheels! turn over them: either mend them, or remove
them, or break them. In the 77. Psa. ver. 18. says Asaph: the voice of thy
thunder was (...) in rota: in the wheel: so it is in the Hebrew: O wheels,
let us hear the voice of thunder from you: thunder against this wicked crew. And
oh Wheels* accept not persons: do justice to the small as well as to the great,
Psalm 82.
Defend the poor and fatherless; do justice to the afflicted and needy: deliver
the poor and needy, rid them out of the hand of the wicked. Take heed what ye
do, for ye judge not for man but for the Lord. I pray cast your eyes upon the
Lords Throne: Dan. 7. 9. The ancient of days did sit; his throne was like a
fiery flame, and his wheels as burning fire. Gods Throne moves upon Wheels:
What Is the meaning of that? It signifies to us that God is the great King and
Judge of all the world: he sits above, and by his powerful providence governs
and judges all things: But how? not immediately: he carries on his judgment
by wheels: those wheels below the Throne, are Kings and Judges of the earth: by
them God acts and executes his judgments. O Magistrates! remember you are the
wheels of Gods Throne: Oh that these wheels were as burning fire! that they
would consume the wicked like dross, that their light might shine before men,
that they would be hot and zealous for God: that they would move swiftly, turn
with facility, count it a joy to do judgment: O si! O utinam: would to God our
Magistrates were all such.

Finally, 3.
I come yet more close to the work of the day: and in the last place, I shall
crave leave to speak the word to a particular wheel: the greatest of the
wheels, the chief Magistrate new elected.

I have observed of late years: the Preacher commonly has directed his speech
personally to the New-Elect; and given him a charge, or rather a word of
Exhortation: I shall follow former Presidents: and so much the rather because
the chief Magistrate, to whom I am to speak, lives under my charge: and also
because my Text calls me to call particularly

O Wheel!

I will endeavor to dispatch all in a few particulars. O Wheel! drive
prosperously. Be not offended that I set the Wheel a going to day; I hope it
will turn the better all the year after.

And first: 1.
O Wheel! it is with you this day as it was with the Wheel under my hand: Chap.
1. 19. it was listed up from the earth, and so are you lifted up above your
brethren! Remember who it is that has advanced you: even the Son of God that
sits upon the Throne of Glory. For promotion comes neither from the East, nor
from the West, nor from the South: but GOD is the Judge, he puts down one and
sets up another: Psa. 75. 6, 7. Be not impatient then under the great burden
of Government that is fallen upon your shoulders, at your election: it was the
Lord that turned all the wheels, and he served you up into this place of honor:
do you submit to this dispensation: be thankful, and move swiftly, and
zealously for that God who has lift you up: be a wheel of burning fire.

O Wheel! 2.
be round, be round: Totus teres atque rotundus: a round is the emblem of
perfection: as being every where equal and like it self: it is the fittest
figure for motion, and the most capacious. The Sphaeres are round, the lights
of heaven are round; the heads of beasts indeed are long, and square, and
cornered: but the heads of men are round, and the wheels of Gods Chariot and
Throne ought to be round: away, away with all unevenness: with all corners:
every sin is as a corner, or a knob that will hinder the pleasant turning of
the Wheel, be round O Wheel! be round: be perfect as your heavenly Faaher is
perfect. Mat. 5. ult.


O Wheel! 3.
move and turn as my wheel does here: that is, in the Temple. The care of
Religion lies upon the Magistrate, therefore honor God with your authority: O
Wheel! with all your weight, turn over Idolaters, Heretics, Blasphemers,
Schismatics, Sabbath Breakers; suppress them, and make much of them that fear
the Lord. Promote, to your utmost power, the service and worship of God: see
that Gods poor be provided for; and that Gods faithful Ministers may have
countenance and maintenance. O Wheel! O Wheel! never leave turning, and turn
all wheels to bring more faithful and able Ministers into the City. Oh it is a
sad thing, that there should be 36. Parishes within the Walls, and I think
above half of them have no Ministers at all: and many of the rest have such
Ministers as they had as good have none, perhaps better: Oh Wheel put on; to
settle Church Government, to settle the Union of Parishes, to procure Pastors
for every stock; to see the Sabbaths of the Lord sanctified: 1 Samuel 2. 30.
Honor God: for those that honor him he will honor. O Wheel lift up God, lift
up Christ into his Throne, and the Lord will lift you up higher.

O Wheel! 4.
Be well shod: be courageous: how can the Wheel move long without shattring,
except it have a good struck? Fortitude, it is the struck of Gods Wheel. You
are now Gods special instrument, by which he does his work of Justice and
Government: go on boldly: fear not the frown of any, regard not the favor of
any: In the name of God move with your own proper motion: I do not mean
according to the dictate of carnal reason, neither that you should consult with
flesh and blood: but that motion which the Law of God commands, and the Spirit
of God suggests that is your proper motion: O Wheel! let not any hand turn you
the wrong way. V. 10. it is said there was: (...) rota in medio rotae: a wheel
in a wheel: a lesser wheel within, that turns the greater wheel as it pleases:
and has it not been so amongst our wheels? Has not this been a common word:
whosoever be New-elect, we know who will be Mayor? O Wheel! move with your
proper motion: and fear not: the Lord will be with you as he was with Joshua;
Josh. 1. 5, 7^
He will not fail you nor forsake you: only be thou strong, and very
courageous, that thou may observe to do according to all the Law which God
has commanded thee: turn not from it to the right hand or to the left: that
thou may prosper whithersoever thou go.

O Wheel move constantly: 5.
this is the description of the wheels, Chap. 1. 17. When they went, they went
upon their four sides, and they returned not when they went: O Wheel run on in
a good way and return not: commonly the motion of a Wheel is slow at first, and
by degrees swifter and swifter: be you so: more and more active and zealous for
the advancement of Gods glory and the public good: grow better and better in
your office: Rev, 2. 19.
let your works be like the works of that Angel in the Revelation: more at the
last then at the first. Oh what hopes have we had of many Magistrates at their
first coming on! in the beginning of their office how have the wheels ratled,
how nimbly have they turned! how forward and active have they been in reforming
abuses, and doing for the good of the City? but before their year has come
out, yea in a little time all our hopes have come to nothing: the wheels have
flagged in their motion or turned the wrong way.

-- Amphora coepit
Institui, currente rota, cur u^ceu^ exit?
The potter, says the Poet, went about his work, as if he had intended to make
a great and stately vessel: his wheel runs on and on; at last out comes a
paltry pitcher: why, what is the reason of this? Many promise great matters
before they come into the highest seat of Magistracy, and after they come into
the place, they perform nothing at all* what is the reason of this? Surely
ambition; they aspire to the Honor and dignity, they consider not the work and
burden. I observe in the wheel, the spokes that are behind rise up heaven-wards
apace; and as soon as ever they are at the top, then down again as fast toward
the earth: and truly just so has it been in the wheels of our City: our
younger Aldermen that are behind, and but coming on; oh they carry themselves
plausibly, and seem to grow up heaven-wards, they make a great profession, and
promise much: at last they get up to the top, to the seat of the chief
Magistrate: and then down again as fast; they are as ill as who is worst? Oh
Wheel! go straight forth and return not: be constant: in a round there is neither
beginning nor ending; it is every where and ever the same: be you so. Let it
not, I beseech you, be said of you, as Paul sometimes said of his Galatians,
Gal, ^. 7.
Ye did run well, who did hinder you? What made you stand still, or go back?
Begin well, go on better, and be careful to end best of all: Oh Wheel! be
constant in your motion.

Above all, 6.
O Wheel! labor for the Spirit of God, else there will never be any right, or
good motion: Chapter 1. verse. 20. The wheels were lifted up stately, and moved
gloriously: whence was that? the spirit of the living creature, that is, the
Spirit of the living God, was in the wheels. The Spirit of the Lord comes upon
Saul, and presently he is turned into another man; 1 Samuel 10. 6.
he whose business was to look after Asses before, is now fit to be a King.
The Spirit of the Lord, Esaias 11. 2.
is the Spirit of wisdom and understanding, it is the Spirit of counsel and
might, it is the Spirit of knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord. Let this
Spirit rest upon you, and do not you suffer the temples of your head to take
any rest till you have obtained the Spirit; be diligent in hearing the Word,
that is the way to get the Spirit: when God speaks, he breaths out his Spirit to
his people* Pray, oh pray for the Spirit, for your heavenly Father will give
the ^oly Spir^^ to them that ask him: Oh Wheel! this is my desire, and (...)
you, that God would fill you with his Spirit. O si! o utinam*

To conclude: give me leave to speak to you all, O ye Magistrates! in the
singular, 7.
O wheel! you are many wheels, yet be you all but as one great wheel. Ephesians. 4
3.
Endeavor to keep the Unity of the Spirit, in the bond of peace: Amongst
Christians, especially amongst Christian Magistrates there ought to be so great
concord, such a conjunction of minds, that they should be all as one soul, as
one will, as one'man. The multitude of them that believed, were of one heart,
and of one soul, Act. 4. 32. At leastwise let the whole Court of Alt ermen be
but as one engine: and let one wheel continually set another a going; quicken,
encourage one another in love. Let all the lesser wheels join to the great
wheel: All you inferior Magistrates, join together as one, to assist and help
the chief Magistrate in the great work of government. I have heard former
Mayors complain of the want of assistance! this spoils all. A wheel, you know,
if it be extremely overpressed, it will squeak, and break; if you lay too much
weight upon the chief Magistrate, it will wear him out. When Jethro saw that
Moses did sit alone to judge the people, he says to him; Thou will surely wear
away, both thou, and this people that is with thee; for this thing is too heavy
for thee, thou art not able to perform it thy self alone, Exodus 18. 18. I
beseech you therefore join all as one. O that I could truly say to you all, be
you never so many O Wheel! Preserve Unity: which that you may do: remember it
is the Unity of the Spirit: I tell you without the Spirit of grace you will
never agree together. Behold Ezekiels Wheels: they have no axletree nor pin,
and yet they join and keep orderly together, to bear and carry Gods Chariot:
How comes that about? the Spirit of God was in the Wheels, that held them
together. If you will preserve Unity and love, labor to abound with the Spirit;
and with goodness: Alas if you have nothing but axletrees: I mean outward
respects and relations to hold you together, you will quickly split: the respect
of kindred is an axletree, it may hold some of you together a while: feasting
one another is an axletree, it may maintain good fellowship among you for a
while: perhaps you gain one by another, you are helpful one to another, you are
of a disposition, and merry together many times, these are axletrees, See Number,
11. 16, 17.
and may keep you together (...) there is no enduring unity, no lasting love but
that which (...) the Spirit of Grace. In the second of the Acts: the holy Ghost
fell upon them: Ver. 3, and 4. and after that, they continued together with one
accord, and they were all of one heart, and of one soul: Oh Wheels! the Chariot
of this City; all the great affairs of this Commonwealth are to be carried on
by you: there, fore join together in love: keep the unity of the Spirit in the
bond of Peace: be all as one Wheel for God and for Government: It is cried unto
you from the Throne of Glory, in my hearing, O Wheel! That you may be thus is
my hearty desire: for this I shall pray: O si! O utinam.

I was about to break off; but let me not forget; it is a custom at this
Solemnity, for those that make speeches, to present the newelect with an
escouchion, or shield, and in it some device or other, some Emblem; which may
hang in the Magistrates house all the year, as a memento, to hint him of some
good thing, as often as he looks upon it. Now what shall I present? Truly I had
some thoughts to have taken my hieroglyphick out of the first book of the
Kings, Chap. 7. Ver. 29, 30, 38.

It is a Laver, or a great vessel of brass holding much water, set upon a
substantial base of brass apiece: and upon the borders of the base
graven, Lions, Oxen, and Cherubims; and four wheels under the base to remove
the vessel from place to place upon every occasion. Such a thing is a good
Magistrate: a Laver to cleanse and purge both Church and Commonwealth: he must
have a firm base of brass; that signifies the stability, courage, and
fortitude requisite in a Magistrate, and he must have his four wheels, he must
be apt to move from place to place; to go, yea, readily to run circuit, for
the administration of justice.



But I will hang this aside, you may look upon it when you please in Gods book:
I shall go no further then my text: out of that I present you with this Shield,
or escouchion, the whole devise, a piece of Ezekiels Vision.

The field is a Marble color, because the appearance was by the Temple-wall,
the matter whereof was marble: the charge a great wheel with twenty four spokes
joining together in one Nave, and bound about with one ring, and in the struck
eyes in stead of nails: the color of the wheel a seagreen, Verse 9. the
appearance of the wheel was as the color of a beril (...) which was the color
of the sea.

The crest; the head of a Cherub with the Wings: and four faces: the face of a
Man, the face of a Lion, the face of an Ox, and the face of an Eagle: and over
the crest above: (I dare not be so bold as to represent the Son of God sitting
upon a throne but) the name (...) surrounded with glorious rays: and from that
glory a beam of light darting down to the wheel, and in it the word:

O Wheel. By that which you have heard, he that runs may read the meaning.

The Wheel represents the Magistrates; the twenty four spokes the number of our
Magistrates: the nave, and ring that bind them together, the unity that should
be amongst them: the eyes the wisdom that should be in them, as also their care
and vigilance: The Seagreen color minds them of the floating condition, and
uncertainty of all worldly things: The field of the color of the Temple-wall
admonishes them ever to move in the Temple, to purge and reform the Church, to
promote Gods worship and service; to be ever hearing and praying in the Church.

For the Crest, that also speaks to Magistrates: the Cherub, or Angel with
wings, minds them of a heavenly conversation, that they should be winged, and
cheerful in ministering justice, and doing the whole will of God: The four
faces commends unto them four virtues requisite in Governors: The face of a
man wisdom, the face of a Lion fortitude, the face of an Ox patience, and
unwearied labor; the face of an Eagle, swiftness of motion, and
heavenly-mindednesse: by these creatures God does his great and wonderful
works.

And for the word, O Wheel! I hope you can read that: But I beseech you; you,
I say, whom God has lifted up this day into the highest seat in this City: I
beseech you mark whence the voice does come: look upwards; it comes from
Jehova, it is the God above that gives the word of command to the Magistrate.
Ever, ever in all your proceedings look upward, eye God, hearken to his word of
command: what ever you do, have a word from God; stir not, move not O Wheel!
except you have a word from the Throne of glory: and when God cries to you,
stand not still, but turn, and be doing: Gal 6 16.
and if you walk according to this rule, peace shall be upon you and mercy, and
upon the Israel of God: The Lord has honored you, lay out your self to honor
God; be faithful, and then I promise you another O! an O of gratulation and
exultation: At the great day of retribution, when the Son of God shall sit upon
his Throne to judge the world, and to give to every one according to his work:
Then shall the Lord say unto you; O wheel! thou have turned very well, thou
have done worthily in thy place? Well done O thou good and faithful servant,
thou have been faithful in a little, I will make thee ruler over much, enter
thou into the joy of thy Lord. Oh Wheel! thou did turn painfully in my
service. Now rest, and shine like the Berill stone for ever.

I was even about to stop here: but let me remember my self: one word more, I
beseech you, and then I cease. By wheels are chiefly meant reasonable
creatures, that is apparent. Then welbeloved Christians, we are all wheels, and
then we must also al conceive, that the Word is cried to every one of us in
particular, from the Throne of glory, O Wheel! To thee, and to me the Son of
God cries O Wheel! turn, turn! God has appointed to every one of us that are
here in his presence a several motion, to one he has appointed one work, to
another, another work; one wheel he places in the Church, another in the
Commonwealth: O let us all move in our several Spheres according to the word
of God. Not only Magistrates, those great wheels, in their places; but let us
Ministers in the orb of the Church move diligently and faithfully: 2 Timothy 4. 2.
Let us preach the Word, be instant in season, and out of season, let us
reprove, rebuke and exhort, with all long-suffering and doctrine: let us watch
in all things, endure asslictions, do the work of true Evangelists, and fulfill
our Ministry: The Lord cries to us, O Wheels!

Let all the people move in their several orbs, with all diligence! it is cried
to the least wheel: O Wheel! turn, turn, turn, do the work of God in thy place;
Whatever thy hand fin^s to do, do it with all thy might: Eccles. 9, 10.
Let the Master do his duty in his sphere, let the servant do his duty in his
orb, let the tradesman do his duty in his calling: Let every one be ever
turning, rolling, and acting in the duties of his general and particular
calling.

And let us not only do Gods work in our several stations, but let us do it
with readiness, alacrity, and cheerfulness: Let Us be all round; the
sphericall bodies are most apt to turn; lay a perfect round ball upon a plain,
and the least touch will make it roll. O that with the Prophet I could hear the
rattling of the wheels, and the noise of the clapping of the wings of the living
creatures, which express their activity and zeal in the service of God.

And let us be constant in our motion; Cap. 3. 12. 13.
like the wheels let us run on, and not turn back till we have quite finished
our course. The living creatures move, the Angels move, the wheels move
swiftly, and shall we stand still?

To move us to this diligence and alacrity in the service of God, it is enough
that we remember we are wheels: The Wheel as it must have a motion, so it must
of necessity have an end of motion: God has decreed just how long every wheel
shall move: that is, from the day of our birth, to the day of our death; but
how long that shall be, or how short, none knows, but he that sits on the
Throne of Glory, and with the hand of his providence turns every wheel. This is
certain; our motion still is nearer and nearer to the end: what a deal of our
motion is spent since we came together into this place? James the Apostle calls
the progress of our life, (...): I am, 3,
the wheel of nature: our life runs upon wheels: and none can stop them till
our bodies roll into the grave: It is but a very little while we have to move:
therefore let us hearken to the voice of the Apostle, Gal. 6. 10. While we have
time and opportunity let us do good. Hieroms translation reads my Text, and
rotas istas vocavit volubiles: the Lord called them swift-turning wheels: let
us turn swiftly, for we have but a very little time to move. This is it which
Solomon presses, Eccles. 12. in the first Verse: he exhorts to early
turning: Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth: his argument from
the brevity and uncertainty of man's life: the evil days will come shortly: the
Sun, Moon and Stars will be darkened: the keepers of the house shall tremble,
and the strong men bow, and the grinders cease: man posteth to his long home:
shortly the golden bowl shall be broken, and the pitcher shall be broken at the
fountain: and Verse 6. The Wheel shall be broken at the Cistera: and what is
the meaning of that? I shall shortly tell you what I conceive, not condemning
other men's judgments. The Stomach is the Cistern: All the parts and members of
the body are the wheel: the blood, that (as judicious Physicians tell me) keeps
a constant circular motion in the body, wheeling about continually, whilst a
man lives: as the wheel draws water out of the well, so the several parts
and members of the body draw nourishment from the stomach, which is conveyed by
veins and arteries as by the rope and bucket: the wheel is broken at the
cistern, when nature cea^eth to do her offices, and man dies. Oh then dearly
beloved Christians! oh wheels! let us turn speedily to the Lord our God! let us
abound in the work of the Lord with all zeal and alacrity: let us give all
diligence to make our calling and election sure: for we cannot tell how soon
the pitcher shall be broken at the fountain, and the wheel shall be broken at the
cistern: Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was, and the Spirit unto
GOD who gave it.

FINIS. (...)

