AN EXPEDIENT For Taking away all IMPOSITIONS, AND For Raising a REVENVE
without TAXES.

HUMBLY PRESENTED His most Excellent MAJESTY King Charles the II.

By Francis Cradocke Merchant.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Seile, Stationer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. 1660.

May it please Your most Excellent Majesty:
HOw unfit and unworthy a choice I have made of my self, to appear in a work of
this nature, mine own Reason, though exceeding weak, has sufficiently resolved
me: And notwithstanding Opinion better than Truth can travel the world without
a Pasport, where there are as many internal forms of Minds, as external figures
of Men; yet my hopes are, that by publishing the honor done by Your Royal
Perusal to the Manuscript, before it saw the Press, and recommending the same
to Your Majesty's most honorable Privy Council, this may obtain the favor of
their Debate, and receive the better common acceptance.

I have had it under my consideration about four years, (and thought it a jewel
unfit to cast before such Governors:) What esteem it will receive by others I
cannot promise to my self, my ambition in it is to serve my Sovereign Lord and
Country, whereunto I am more obliged than many others, in that Your Majesty
has dealt so bountifully by,

Dread Sovereign, Your Majesty's Most thankful Subject and Servant, FRAN.
CRADOCKE.

AN EXPEDIENT For taking away all Impositions, and raising a Revenue without
TAXES, By Erecting Banks for the Encouragement of TRADE.
I Expect so little credit will be given the Title, that, should I be large on
the Subject, I question whether it would be esteemed worth perusal: And having
propounded so great advantage by erecting Banks, I conceive it proper first to
give You some hints of the nature of them.

A Bank is a certain number of sufficient men of Credit and Estates joined
together in a stock, as it were for keeping several men's Cash in one Treasury,
and letting out imaginary money at Interest, for 3. or more in the hundred per
annum, to Tradesmen or others, that agree with them for the same, and making
payment thereof by Assignation, passing each man's Account from one to another,
yet paying little money: Insomuch; that if a Merchant or other person want
money, if he has or can procure credit in Bank, he may make as good payment
by Assignment in Bank without it: As for Example, the said Merchant buys
Cloth of a Clothier for 100 l. value more or less, and goes with him to the
Bank, where he is Debtor for so much as he takes up, and the Clothier is made
Creditor for so much as he sold his Goods for to the said Merchant: Then such
Clothier having occasion to pay money to a Stapler or Wool-monger for wool
bought, the said Clothier is made Debtor, and the Wool-monger Creditor upon
account, the said Wool-monger buys wool from a Country Farmer, for so much
money more or less, so the Wool-monger is made Debtor and the Farmer Creditor;
the Farmer must pay Rent to his Landlord, and is likewise made Debtor and his
Landlord Creditor; the said Landlord for his occasions buys goods of a Mercer,
Grocer, Vintner, or the like, or from all, then he is made Debtor, and such
Mercer or other Tradesman Creditor; then peradventure such Mercer or other
Tradesman buys goods from the same Merchant that took up the first credit in
Bank, and stands yet Debtor there, but upon sale of his goods to the Mercer or
other Tradesman, both clears their accounts in Bank. And so in all Trades, as
occasion presents.

These Banks in the several parts of Europe where erected, being so held by
Merchants and others, joined together in a stock, and credited by the moneys
brought in thereunto (which money for the most part there remaining, and
payments being made upon the credit thereof by assignment in Bank as
aforesaid) might as well be done here only upon the credits of Landed men,
whereof they have few in Holland, and in other parts, lying convenient for
Trade; where Land is, the Owners thereof are seldom found to be Merchants: So
that England (if but sensible of it) has an advantage of all parts in the
world, as lying in the center of the Trade of Europe, enjoying safe and
commodious Harbors, wanting few necessaries, no Lands nor persons naturally
inclined to Trade, if not discouraged by great Customs, Excise, and the abuses
in Collecting it, and by the want of stock, or a supply thereof at reasonable
Interest.

To free England of these inconveniences, and supply it with a stock for
Trade, as great as shall be requisite, without bringing in more Bullion, it may
be done three manner of ways, never yet practiced in Europe, and the whole
profits thereof (which will be considerable) be also converted to His Majesty's
Revenue for defraying the public charge of his Kingdom, in case His Majesty
and Parliament shall think fit to erect either of these following kind of
Banks, for the accommodation of Trade, in the most proper places of England;
assigning to each a proportionable division of the Country adjoining, where
all men's Estates in lands, houses or rents, either for Lease of years, Lives or
in Fee, This may be done, so as all fraudulent Conveyances may be pretended,
and yet no man's Estate be discovered more than at present: For if the propriety
be found to be in A by the Register, its no matter though B be the true
proprietor, for then A can wrong none but B, who has entrusted him; or if B be
doubtful to trust A, and yet desire to conceal his Estate, which he cannot well
do without him, B himself may own the Estate, and allow A to enter a Morgage to
(or near) the value, and take his defeizance for the same: so that in this case
A cannot cheat B if he would, nor either of them any other, though both should
combine therein.
may be registered; as also all morgages, claims or other interests pretended
thereunto, with morgages or purchases at any time to be made thereupon.

That the said places for Banks being established, Estates registered, and a
Survey taken of such Estates, whereby the value may not be entered above its
real worth. Any persons may be admitted to have credit in Bank, for any sum
safely to be lent under the value of his Estate, without other security or
ceremony of Conveyances, This Survey may be taken by a Jury in every Parish,
and delivered to the Sheriff of the County, or at the Bank upon Oath, and will
be done with a small charge to His Majesty, and in little time.
than the hand and consent of such person as is the proprietor, he paying
Interest for the same at 4. per cent. per ann. quarterly into the said Office.

First then, to effect the end aforesaid, it may be done without money, by a
Law enjoining all payments to be made in Bank of any sum above 20 l.
sterling, for all lands, goods and merchandises sold whatsoever, which is done
voluntary in other parts, where Banks are erected by almost all persons, who
find both ease and accommodation thereby, and the Banks here (like those in
foreign parts) will be and serve as a general or National Cashkeeper of all
men's moneys and accounts, transferring them from one person and Country to
another with much facility, not only preventing the danger of Robbery, but the
trouble of counting, and loss in receiving clipped and bad money, which is the
cause that payments made in Bank are generally esteemed better than in specie
by ten shillings in an hundred pound; At first erecting Banks in Holland, all
local payments were enjoined to be made in this manner, but the ease and
accommodation being found thereby, it became a most voluntary act, as it does
at this day continue, to the great enriching that Country.
which would have the like esteem in England, were Banks once erected.

The second Expedient is, without any Imposition, leaving all persons free to
take or make payment, either in Bank, or by money in specie; which will, I
presume, bring in the same advantage to His Majesty's Revenue; but not properly
be erected without two millions of money; but if once settled would out of the
same produce a million per annum profit, and stand always as a constant
increasing Revenue: For, by computation there is yearly paid in England for
Interest Bortomree, and other kinds of Usury, two millions; for which should
all Usurers call in their principal, it would amount unto thirty five millions;
when there has been but twenty two millions coined in England in and since the
Reign of King Edward the Sixth* both in Gold and Silver, which, I presume, is at
least one half exported, whorded up, or melted down; and allowing the Usurous
propriety to be the moyetie in all Coin passing from one hand to another, it
must necessarily follow, that all the said great Revenue is brought into them
by five millions and an, half real sterling money; which is no Paradox,
considering that all moneys, though passing but through the hands of Usurers,
does yield to each of them the full yearly Interest; which may by done for one
and the same sum of moneys ten times in twelve months; moreover by the money
brought into Bank, The two Millions herein mentioned, is intended for the
payment of all such as desire their money out of Bank, for its presumed such
there will be, and such a Bank as this must have money always ready; for the
being punctual in payment will so creditifie Bank, that most will keep their
Cash therein for their own advantage.
(which under the settled Government of so hopeful a Prince will be undoubtedly
most that shall be employed in Trade) why may not His Majesty make a profit
thereof as well as the States of Holand, which does let out the same at
Interest, as they have done great sums in England, and yet support a much
greater Bank without Land upon their credits only, it being generally
conceived that they have not at any time in ready Cash the tenth part of what
the Bank stands Debtor for to private persons, although they abound in money
for want of Land to purchase.

The third is such a Bank as may conveniently be erected both of money and
credit with a less sum, setting Interest at such differing rates, as in time
may invite all men to esteem credit as good as money, which is accounted better
in foreign parts, as in truth it is, though seemingly otherwise; which
disparity will be at all times reconciled by an Exchange or kind of Brokerage,
like that of Plate and Black-money, where current; which several kinds of
Banks having no President, I shall not presume to prefer either as most
proper, In this way the Bank will not be prejudiced for want of money, but be
supplied with Bills, which may be a Sovereign stamp be allowed to pass in a
City or County instead of money, and be returned within a year, so that by
setting a lower Interest thereon, will cause it to be equal in esteem with real
money.
but submit them all with confidence, that the worst of them will prove of
great use and advantage to England, if once erected.

That all Merchants that have no Estates real in Lands or Leases as aforesaid,
may also have credit in Bank, upon depositing any Goods (not perishable) of an
equivalent value in his Majesty's Warehouse, in every Port or other place
where such Bank shall be erected; and that any person having moneys in Cash or
in Bank in one place, desiring to have it transferred for his accommodation,
and to have it again either in Cash or in Bank in another, may be
accommodated, allowing only 10 s. for every hundred pounds so exchanged or
remitted.

That every the aforesaid Banks may furnish another petty Bank (or Mount) of
Charity with a competent stock, to lend any sum under ten pounds upon Pawns
at a reasonable Interest, for the accommodation of poor people and others
desiring the same. And that the persons put in to govern in these Banks may
have the management of all other public receipts within their several
districts, which will lessen the public charge: And if such Banks are found to
be advantageous, others may be also erected in Scotland and Ireland in like
manner, The foundatiof these Banks being Land, will be esteemed (as in truth
they are) the most secure in Europe, for that every Creditor will be sure of
land in case the Bank should fail of money, and neither His Majesty nor Officer
will be Entrusted, but the Estate of one man Debtor to another.
for the accommodation of those there resident, as well as others living in
England and trading thither.

The advantages which either of these Banks by an ingenious management will
bring into his Majesty's Revenue.
By the help of these Banks his Majesty or Kingdom shall have credit at any
time (wanting moneys) either in England or in foreign parts, for a million,
without engaging private persons for the same.

It will add to the reputation and honor of this Kingdom, and render it more
it esteem with foreign States and Princes, by so much as the Trade and wealth
of England will thereby increase, and consequently the strength at Sea by the
many ships which will be more employed.

It will bring into his Majesty's Revenue all the Interest money paid in
England, and money paid on Bottomree to Scriveners and others, which at 6 per
cent. amounts unto by computation yearly two millions; and when to be had at 4
per cent. will be one million three hundred and thirty thousand pounds per ann.

It will also bring in a profit by the persons that now deal for time, who will
then get credit in Bank, and pay ready money for their Commodities, which by
computation are now bought upon credit to the value of five millions yearly,
the Interest whereof at 4 per cent. will amount unto two hundred thousand
pounds per ann.

Moreover, all Merchants that usually keep unvendible goods by them, as a dead
stock upon their hands, will take up credit in Bank thereupon for continuing
their Trade, of which goods there is by a like computation at all times
remaining as a Drug on the hands of Merchants the value of four millions, which
at 4 per cent. is one hundred and sixty thousand pounds per ann.

Also when there is a certain conveyance by Exchange of money (or by imaginary
money) from one place to another at so easy a rate as 10 s. for an hundred
pounds, no person will then adventure to carry any sum considerable, though
but a days journey, considering the having it in Bank will be esteemed worth
so much in the hundred, the profit of which remittances cannot amount unto
less yearly than thirty thousand pounds.

By the petty Banks to be erected, when money will be had at easy rates, and
without charge or trouble of Bonds and personal security, the numerous (though
small sums) to be taken up, will, I presume, yield profit to Bank ten
thousand pound per ann.

The Revenue estimated that this will bring in to His Majesty's Revenue is one
million seven hundred and thirty thousand pounds per ann. which will not cost
in managing twenty thousand pounds per ann. which is four times as much as is
made of Customs and Excise of goods brought into and exported from England:
Besides this Kingdom will so flourish under a free Trade, that it will soon
become the Mart or Emporium of Europe for all foreign commerce. And this
Revenue being supported by Trade, and a supporter of Trades will by an
ingenious management accordingly be improved.

The benefit to the Subjects.
By registering all Estates, every man's title will appear in reallity what it
is, and many controversies and suits in Law be prevented.

It will very much advance the price of Land, and preserve many Families from
being ruined by the extortion of Usurers, and yet make the Usurers gainers also.

The Nation may be degrees (as the Revenue does increase) be eased of all
Taxes, at least Excise may forthwith be taken away from all Foreign goods, and
Custom also where i^s found a burden on Trade, if this Revenue (or profit of
these Banks) does amount unto but the one sixth part of the sum e^imated; so
that England will flourish under a free Trade, ^to he encouragement of
Merchandising, the building of Shipping, and support of Navigation.

By the benefits of Banks most ingenious men will be furnished with stock to
trade at small Interest, and honest and able men be supported in their credits.

It will make English Merchants capable to engross the commodities of another
Country, and withhold it from others, as the Dutch do at present from us by
the help of their Banks.

It will procure English Merchants credit in foreign parts, or in foreign
Banks to buy any commodity there without money, as well or better than with
money, and upon as good terms at the Hollander or any others.

By taking away the duties from foreign Goods brought into England, we may (by
a prudent management) get the Duties taken off from English Manufactures in
foreign parts, and by that means under-sell all others, which the Hollander
will not be able to prevent nor obtain themselves.

It will in fine increase Trade, Trade will increase wealth, wealth and Trade
will encourage our native manufacture, and all will employ the poor, and I
doubt not but in few years it will make England the Staple of Commerce, as
Holland is at present.

I have not given so plain a demonstration, nor reasons on the particulars of
either of these Banks, as the subject indeed more proper for debate, and
sufficient for a large Volume, requires; neither have I spoken any thing in
defense of the many Objections which may seem to arise and Eclipse the utility
thereof, presuming that no rational person will prejudge therein, till I have
had command to answer his Objections, which I doubt not but to be satisfactory
in, humbly conceiving that what I have in short hinted at, will be understood
and amplified by the more ingenuous: I shall therefore conclude it with saying,
that were this manner of Banking practicable in Holland, or that if the
Hollander were possessed of England, they would by this means soon become
Masters of all the Trade in the World.

Other necessary heads to be considered for the increase of Trade, and
encouragement of Navigation.
I presume, none will deny but that Trade ought to be considered, as well with
respect had to public as private interest; and therefore, I hope I shall be
held excused for my Opinion, in holding that Forraigners ought to have the like
privileges with Natives, both Trading in English shipping, which I conceive to
be the best Expedient to make Exports of England, exceed the Imports, without
which this Kingdom cannot be richer then it is, and since every particular will
in some measure be concerned within the general good of Trade, I shall presume
to hint how far, (and with what restraint) it ought to be encouraged.

First, for Exportation of our native Commodities, such as Lead, Tin, Wax, etc.
of little or no workmanship; England cannot be too liberal in, nor grant too
many immunities and privileges, (though to her very Enemies) that may
encourage the sending out of all Manufactures perfectly wrought up and
Fabricated: regard being had to Wools, Timber and Leather, which in no respects
ought to be Exported.

Secondly, for Importing of foreign Goods, such as Linen, Sugars, Raw-silk,
etc. which we stand in need of. It ought not neither to be discouraged by
Impositions, though otherwise it be proper, to lay convenient duties on such
Commodities Imported, as obstruct the sale of our own Manufactures; whereby to
hold a Balance in Trade without prohibiting foreign Goods, which if we once
do, other Nations will do the like by us; and so obstruct our Trade in General.

Thirdly, for Transportation of such foreign Commodities, as are first
Imported, (if done in English shipping) it will prove a great help to the
Overbalance of Trade, and therefore ought to have the like due encouragement
with a reasonable respect shown to foreign Vessels, though not equal to our
own.

In all which three respects, England might have advantage of all the World,
and by industry (under good Laws) soon become the Mart of Europe, by reason of
its situation surrounded by the Sea; the safeness of her harbors and
superfluities of sundry Commodities which other Nations stand in need of, which
would be the sooner effected, were these ten particulars observed, there being
many others also worthy, which I omit at present.

1. By Imposing all duties to be paid alike, upon all Goods, by all persons,
the difference to be only upon Commodities Imported or Exported in foreign
Bottoms, (viz.) ships not built in England, and failed by English Mariners.

2. By permitting all people of foreign Nations to Live, Purchase and Trade
freely amongst us, whereby most of them will soon become profitable Natives,
and bestow their wealth brought hither or here gotten, in Lands for their
posterity; which the present Laws of England compels them to Export, to the
great enriching of foreign parts, and impoverishing of this Nation.

3. By using all ways of encouragement to advance the Fishing employment, and
His Majesty's assuming His Prerogative of being Lord of the British Ocean,
which by the most ancient prescription ever belonged as Rightly due to the
Kings of England; so that by prohibiting others to Fish on our Coast, and
improving the same to this Nation, it will soon become of more worth to
England, then the West Indies are to the Kingdom of Spain.

4. By encouraging new Manufactures and profitable inventions with due rewards
and privileges, which will bring artificers from foreign parts, and in time
(by industry) make all Arts common amongst us; wherein we come much short of
other Countries, to the disadvantage of our own.

5. By erecting a standing Committee of Trade, whose correspondencie should
reach over all Trading parts of the World; the effect whereof will not only
enable them the better to contain the improvement of Trade here: but also to
prevent many inconveniences that have late fallen on England by the undermining
actings of foreign Nations, who have robbed us both of our Money and Trade,
for want of a timely remedy.

6. By Con^^ituting a Court of Merchants, where all Merchants and Merchant-like
causes and differences may be Summarily decided.

7. By using means to increase the general stock of England, either in raising
the value of money for encouraging it to be Imported, (which I will not much
commend) but rather do encourage the supplying it imaginary upon the Credit of
Lands, to pass in payment by assignment in Bank as aforesaid, one of which is
absolutely necessary in order to the increase of Trade in this Kingdom.

8. By taking way Excise from all Imported Goods, or at least forthwith to
produce the same under the management of the customs whereby to take off the
superfluous number of offenses,) it being but a small advance to the revenue,
and an intolerable bur^hen on Trade, in the way its now managed.

9. By lightning the duty of customs, especially on Goods Exported and
Manufactured here in England, and so regulating the Book of Rates made for
payment thereof; that in few or no particulars the Rates exceed what is paid
for the like Commodities in Holland.

10. By granting a free Transportation of foreign Commodities with little or
no customs detained for the same, whereby Goods here Imported may go out
without being loaded with impositions, and find a market in foreign parts to
the same advantage, which will make England the Magazen or storehouse of
Europe.

Each of these ten particulars deserves to be more amply set forth, but I have
been short in this as in the former, submititing it also to the ingenious
Reader to Paraphrase thereon, taking only to set forth how much the putting
them in use will decrease the Revenue.

There being nothing in this whole discourse that reflects on the Revenue, but
the taking away Excise from foreign Goods usually amounting to 175000l. per
annum, and the granting a free Transportation thereof, 19000l. per annum, which
is in all 194000l. per annum, which does cost in managing 35000l. per annum, so
the real decrease is but 159000l. yearly, which I am bold to affirm puts the
whole Nation to as much Charge, by the trouble and other inconveniences of
keeping a greater number of servants to attend the several Offices; the
fetching of Tickets, and the interruption of the (too many) Excise Officers in
the improper manner its now collected, which sum so expended would be
otherwise employed in Trade; and His Majesty, I presume, might have as much
advantage by a reasonable Custom out of the returns made thereof, which would
be then really paid, for that none will hazard their Goods, but all make due
entries; so that the continuing those Duties fills the Chests in the Exchequer,
as water does a vessel, being poured in at the Specket whilst it runs out at
the Bung.

POSTSCRIPT.
I Have late published some few lines, touching regulating the Custom and
Excise, wherein I did set forth that two hundred thousand pounds per annum,
has for many years been visibly lost for want of a better method in the
collecting thereof: I presume to say, I can give a plain demonstration wherein
its lost, and how it may be remedied. It is also proper for the consideration
of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel, unto whom I most humbly submit,
etc.

FINIS.

