GLAD TIDINGS from HEAVEN; TO The Worst of SINNERS on Earth.

BY WALTER CRADOCK Late Preacher at Hallows Great in LONDON;

LUKE 2 10. Fear not, for behold I bring you good tidings of great joy which
shall be to all people.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons 1648.

To the Christian Reader;
READER,

THe nature of man is prone to be inquisitive after news, especially in these
unsettled, distracted times amongst us, it is a great part of the imploiment of
people and takes up much of their time, as if London, were Athens, and the
people thereof Athenians, (who spent their time in nothing else: Act. 17. 21.
but either to tell, or to hear some news.) And yet the news we bear is
sometimes bad, sometimes uncertain, and many times false. Divert thy thoughts
awhile from earthly things, and in this ensuing Treatise thou shall hear, what
news from heaven in the Gospel. The Law indeed brings us tidings: but it is
like the message of Ehud, to Eglon, it brings a dagger with it that stabs
mortally: but the tidings of the Gospel is like that message Judge. 3. 21.
of the young Prophet to Jehu, to make him a King. 2. King. 9. 6


There is nothing truly terrible, but the Gospel brings tidings of our freedom
from it, (if we be believers) nor nothing truly amiable, but it tells us of our
interest in it. How welcome to a poor captive is news of deliverance from
slaverie? The Gospel brings us tidings of our deliverance from sin, Satan,
death, hell, from wrath, and damnation, it tells us of riches, and glory, and
Kingdoms, and Crowns, and what soever may satisfy the capacious soul of man.

God has appointed different conditions for men, and Angels, the Angels that
stood they are so confirmed that they cannot fall; the Angels that fell they
are determined under eternail wrath that they cannot rise, but God from
everlasting in his love, and mercy had appointed that fallen man should have a
way of recovery, as a board after ship wrack, whereby he might come safe to
the shore. And God in time was pleased to come out of his hidden eternity, and
to discover this love of his to the world, and has sent his Son to puhchase
it, and his Spirit to apply it, and his servants to tell (not this, or that
particular man) but all Nations, that whosoever believes in Jesus Christ Mat
28. 19 Luke 2. 10 Joh. 3. 16.
shall have everlasting life: this blessed tidings is brought by the Gospel.

And let none say this news is to good to be true, for God who is truth it
self (as it were on purpose) to anticipate the infidelity of man, has said
it, and sworn it, and sealed it with the blood of his dear Son, that we might
have strong consolation; and has made this fabric Heb. 6. 8.
of the world to be as a stage to act the redemption of his people on, which
being finished, it shall be no more.

It should stir us up to love, and bless the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ,
and the holy Spirit; and to embrace the Messengers that bring those glad
tidings, to account their very feet beautiful, the meanest part of the body,
and upon the moutaines, the barren places of the earth. And I Isa. 52. 7.
doubt not but many poor souls can from experience bless God for the worthy
Author in those barren mountains, where he converseth, and else where, and
say of him as David of Ahimaaz, he is a good man, and brings good tidings.
Though others being hardened spit at such lights, 2 Samuel 18. 27.
and labor to extinguish who God in just judgment will cause to stumble, and
fall, and lie down in eternal darkness. But I shall detain thee no longer
from the the work; but commend it and thee to Gods blessing, and rest.

Thine in the Gospel of Christ.

GOOD NEWS To the Worst of SINNERS.
MARK 16. 15. And he said unto them, go ye into all the world, and preach
the Gospel to every creature.

YOu may easily understand who spoke these words, and to whom they were spoken.
In these words, our Lord Jesus Christ after his resurrection, when he had all
power in Heaven, and Earth given to him, he sends forth his Apostles to Preach,
and he bids them Go into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every
creature. This was their Commission they were to have now, to go preach the
Gospel; Indeed they had a Commission before, but it was only to the Jews; and
it was a little, but by spirts: but now Christ was risen from the dead, and had
received all power in Heaven and Earth, he sends them for good and all (as it
were) he gives them a full and complete Commission, Go ye into all the
world, and preach the Gospel to every creature.

Before I come to the Lesson that I mean to insist The words opened.
upon, there are two things here in the words that must be opened, that you may
see the foundation, or ground of this Lesson; And that is,

First, what is meant by Gospel? Go, and preach the Gospel. Gospel what meant
by it.


Then, what is meant by creature? Go preach the Gospel to every creature.

For the first, what is meant by Gospel? I will not stand upon the several
acceptations of it, only you may understand that both in the Scripture
language, and also among the Heathen, Gospel has been taken for Glad tidings,
good news in general; any Good news, or Glad tidings have been called
Gospel; So the Greek word signifies, so some conceive the English word Godspel,
being old English, signifies Gospel, that is, good speech, good news, good
hearing, good tidings: but in a peculiar sense in Scripture it is taken for
that Good tidings of grace, and salvation by Jesus Christ. And so in this sense
we read of it in the old Testament, and in the new. In the old Testament, you
shall read in Heb. 4. 3. that our Fathers they had the Gospel as well as we:
but (Beloved) you are to take notice, that though our Fathers had the Gospel,
that is, the glad tidings of life and salvation by Jesus Christ, from Adam,
from the beginning of the world, yet they had it but dimly, and darkly; and
they had it mixed with a great deal of Law, a great deal of bad tidings (as I
may speak) they had a little good news with a great deal of bad. So Adam had
a little good tidings The seed of the woman shall bruise the Servents head; and
there was bad tidings also, there was the curse upon the Serpent, and upon the
woman, and the man; the woman should bring forth in pain, the man must eat his
bread in the sweat of his brows; And so in all the old Testament, there was a
little Gospel in the Prophecies, and Gospel in the sacrifices, and Gospel in
the visions, but abundance of law mingled with this Gospel; the one spoke sad
tidings, as well as the other did good; for you know the Law spoke curses and
damnation to those that in every point did not observe it: But in the new
Testament, especially after the resurrection of Jesus Christ, when he went up
to Heaven, we read that there was perfect Gospel, or only good news, and glad
tidings, for the bad news was now all gone. And so it is to be understood
here, Go preach the Gospel. As if he should say, I do not (my disciples) bid
you go and give them now good news, and then bad, to give them a little of
the Law, and a line of Gospel: but go preach the Gospel emphatically, that is,
merely, purely Gospel; for now Christ is risen from the dead, and now the
Gospel in the purity, and simplicity is erected, Go preach the Gospel.

[To every creature] What should be the meaning of Creature what meant by it
that? We know that in the Scripture language, creature most usually signifies
not men but beasts, and things without life, as in Romans 8. you have it twice,
or thrice The creature groaneth; the beasts, and the woods, and every thing
that God has made, as being a name somewhat too low for men in the ordinary
Scripture expression. Yet so as it comprehends men: for men also are sometimes
called creatures. Now, what should the meaning of this be, that now the Gospel
being to be purely, and fully, and completely set up, whether the Lord Jesus
would have them preach, and make known glad tidings to all creatures, that is,
that even the bruit beasts, and these creatures without life, that they should
have glad tidings, and good news from the death and resurrection of the Lord
Jesus Christ. I will not averr that it is so, that that is the meaning of it:
but surely (beloved) there is no creature under heaven, but has a great deal
of glad tidings, and good news from the death and resurrection of Jesus
Christ: for we read Romans 8. that the creature groans, and the creature
exspects deliverance, and redemption. All these creatures by sin are brought
into slavery, and certainly they shall partake of the liberty of the Sons of
God: there is a redemption for them out of slavery, as well as for men by the
redemption of the Lord Jesus Christ: But what that shall be, or in what sort I
cannot determine. Now whether you will understand it so, that our Lord Christ
meant not men and women only, but that by creature, the poor creatures that
are without life, and bruit beasts, and all might understand the precious worth
of this Gospel.

Or take it more restrained as generally the godly Gentiles called creatures.
do, that by creature here is meant the Gentiles, in opposition to the Jews,
for they knew that they were to preach the Gospel to the Jews, which they also
did before the resurrection: but now says Christ, Go preach the Gospel to
every creature. That is, now I will have no distinction of persons, I do not
now say, take heed of the way of the Samaritans: but go which way you will,
go to the Gentiles, to Sinners, to any men, or women that you can call
creatures, Scithians, Barbaririan, bond or free, go and preach the Gospel to
them, bring them glad tidings, and news, that Jesus Christ has brought life,
and grace, and salvation freely for them.

That this is the meaning, compare it with Mat. 28. 19. Go therefore, teach
all nations baptizing them in the name of the father, and of the Son, and of
the holy Ghost. Here it is, go preach to every creature, there it is go teach
all nations, I will have no partition, or distinction between them says
Christ. I gave you leave, and often bid you teach the Jews before: but now go
teach the Gentiles; for the world was then divided into those two parts, Jews,
and Gentiles, go teach the Gentiles, go teach every creature.

But some may say; Why does not our Lord then Quest.
say, go teach the Gentiles as well as the Jew? Why does he call them
creatures?

I answer, it is not an ordinary expression to call Answ.
men creatures in the Scripture: But the reason (as I Gentiles the worst of
sinners.
conceive) is this, because the Gentiles were great sinners and the greatest of
sinners. And that you shall see clearly in diverse places, as in Mat. 5. where
Christ forbids us to take care for tomorrow, what we shall eat, and what we
shall drink; why? for (says he) after these things the Gentiles seek; that is,
the worst of sinners, and we must not be like them. So in Ephs. 4. the Apostl
would not have them darkened in their understandings, and walk as other Gentiles
walk, in the vanity of their minds. So in 1 Pet. 3. It is an ordinary
expression in Scripture, where great sinners are spoken of, either they are
called Gentiles, or else compared to Gentiles, Col. 2. Are we not Jews, and
not sinners of the Gentiles? that is, the Gentiles were the greatest sinners
that were; now they being the greatest sinners, the Lord calls them creatures,
and not men: because it is an ordinary expression in Scripture to call wicked
people beasts rather than men, Isaiah 11. they are called Bears, and Wolves,
and Tigers, and Foxes, and Dogs, and Bulls, etc. So in Hos. 1. compared with 1
Pet. 3. You that were not a people says Peter, has God made his people. They
were not a people; God will not ordinarily vouchsafe wicked men and women the
name of people: but they were not a people. What were they then? They were Dogs
for filth inesse, Foxes for cunning, Tigers for cruelty, and Bears, and such
kind of creatures. Therefore the Jews were called the people of the Lord, not
only to distinguish them from others: but they were called the people of God,
as we see in Exodus, it was a privilege to be accounted a people first, and
then the people of the Lord. Therefore the Lord Jesus because he would not
have his Disciples make any exception, he calls them creatures; as if he
should say my Disciples, though they be so sinful that according to the
ordinary Scripture language you cannot call them men, and women, or people, yet
they are creatures, and go preach the Gospel to every creature, go to the
Gentiles, the greatest sinners in the world, whom I will not vonchsafe to call
a people, yet they are creatures, go preach the Gospel to them. So that now I
am come to the lesson which we are to observe, and that is this;

That the Ministry of the Gospel (especially after the resurrection of Jesus
Christ) Contains nothing Doct. The Ministry of the Gospel contains nothing
but good news to the worst of sinners.
but glad tidings, and good news even to the worst of sinners.

Creatures that were so bad that they could not be called men and women, yet
says Christ, go preach the Gospel, pure Gospel, gladtidings to them. I say
the Ministry of the Gospel if it be rightly dispensed does not contain a
tittle in it but perfect good news, and glad tidings to the heart of the worst
of sinners. For this is the proper difference between the Law and the Gospel.
The Law speaks good news but only to the righteous, Difference between the Law
and the Gospel
if thou do well thou shall be rewarded; if thou fulfill the Law thou shall
have life; the Law speaks well to a man quatinus as a righteous man: but the
Gospel quite contrary, the proper object of all the good that the Gospel
brings, it is to a man quatinus as a sinner, not as a regenerate man, and a
righteous man, and a humble man, but as a sinner. And here is the excellency of
the Gospel, the more sinful any man is, the more suitable this Gospel is to
him, the more sin abounds, grace abounds much more; therefore you shall read
Romans 4. they that had the benefit of the Gospel they are called ungodly, he
that justifies the ungodly. They are called aliens Ephesians. 2. they are called
strangers and enemies, and men without strength, Romans 5. they are called the
chief of sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 9. So to enemies, aliens, strangers, lost people,
unrighteous, ungodly, and the like; the Gospel brings perfect good news, and
glad tidings of life, and grace, and salvation by Jesus Christ.

Now this in some measure you know, but this that I tell you I fear you do
not know, that the Ministry of the Gospel it is only good news, there is not
one word of bad news, not one line, not one syllable, or Nothing but good
news now in the Gospel.
tittle, but only glad tidings, sweet, and good news to the heart of the worst
of sinners. Therefore to show you this truth a little more fully; Before our
Lord Christ went to Heaven there was some Gospel, but there was much Law; and
as our Lord Christ was a Minister of the Gospel, so he was of the circumcision,
as the Apostle calls him, I mean before his resurrection; yet it is said in
Luke 4. he took the book of Isaiah (and some think this was the first Sermon
that ever he made) and he read this place and opened it to the people. The
Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach the
Gospel to the poor; he has sent me to heal the broken hearted, to preach
deliverance to the Captives, to recover sight to the blind, to set at liberty
them that are bruised; to preach the acceptable year of the Lord, etc.
Beloved, there is nothing in all this but only good news, glad tidings; as
that the poor should have salvation by Christ, that the broken hearted should
be healed, that the Captives should be delivered, that the blind should
receive their sight, and that them that are bruised should be set at liberty,
and them that are slaves should have the year of Jubilee, the acceptable year
of the Lord; there is not a tittle in all this but only good news, and glad
tidings.

Take another place, and that is Heb. 12. 18. there Heb. 12. 18. 19. etc.
opened.
you shall have the difference between the old Testament and the new, or
between the Law and the Gospel (if I may so speak) the Law; that is, the
administration of the Gospel in the time of the Law, where there was a little
good news, but mingled with a world of bad, and terrible news. Ye are not
come unto the mount that might be touched, and that burned with fire, nor unto
blackness, and darkness, and tempest, and the sound of a Trumpet, and the
voice of words, which they that heard entreated that the word should not be
spoken to them any more. For they could not endure that which was commanded:
And if so much as a beast touch the mountain it shall be stoned or thrust
through with a dart. Here is nothing but what is terrible, and sad news: as a
mountain that was so terrible that it might not be touched; when God did give
his Law upon mount Horeb, or mount Sinai; and that mountain all burning with
fire; If we see a house burning with fire it is terrible: but to see a
mountain all over burning with fire, and with blackness, and darkness, and
tempest too! A fire though it be terrible yet there is somewhat comfortable,
because there is light: but that fire was full of blackness and darkness, and
darkness is a sad thing. And there was tempest, and lightning, and thunder,
and a voice of words, a voice of terrible words, that bid them do such and
such things that they had no power to do, and yet they must do them, or be
damned. It was terrible, in so much that Moses himself, that used to see God,
face to face, said, I quake exceedingly: and if a beast touch the hill he must
be stoned to death, or thrust through with a dart. Here was nothing but
terrible objects in the administration of the old Testament, in the giving of
the Law upon mount Sinai: But come to the new Testament, of the Gospel as it is
set up since Christ went to the holy of holies, after his resurrection. You are
come now to mount Sion, and that was a pleasant place, if you take it according
to the letter it was the pleasantest place about Jerusalem. And you are come to
the City of the living God, to the heavenly Jerusalem. And, what a beautiful
thing that is, you may read in Revel. 20. and 21. a City with 12 gates, and
every gate a whole pearl. And to innumerable companies of Angels. Whether that
be meant, that now, in the times of the Gospel, God sends out Angels to
minister to the Saints more frequently, or diligently than formerly; or as most
men understand it, Ye are now come to a myrd of Angels, or to an innumerable
company of Angels, that is, ye are come to an estate by Christ in the Gospel,
wherein you are at least equal with Angels. And you are come to the general
assembly, and Church of the first borne; as if he should say, you are come to a
Church where all are Patriarchs, for the Patriarchs were the first borne
heretofore; Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and they were honorable men. Every
Saint in the time of the Gospel is in as honorable, and glorious a condition
as any Patriarch; you are not come to a Church of ordinary Saints, but to the
Church of the first borne, whose names are written in heaven. And you are come
to the judge of all. You will say that is a terrible thing; No, it is a blessed
thing to see God in the light of the Gospel to be a judge: Therefore in 2 These.
1. and diverse other places, he comforts the Saints in their persecutions, and
sufferings with this, that God will come to judgment, God is the Judge of all,
it is a comfortable thing. And then you are come to the spirits of just men
made perfect, to such an assembly of Saints, and Church of the first borne
where the spirits of men are made perfect, that is beyond my expression, and
conception; there is a perfection of the Saints in their love, and in their
graces incomparably to that it was before. And ye are come to Jesus the
Mediator of the new Covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling; You are come to
such an estate, and to such a Testament where Christ is the Intercessor, and
his blood speaks not as the blood of Abel, it does not cry for vengance, but
always for grace, and mercy from his father to you. You see in the
administration of the New Testament, or of the Gospel, there is not one
syllable, or tittle, but what is amiable, and sweet, and comfortable even to
the worst of sinners. And therefore the Spouse in the Canticles, speaking of
Christ (as I suppose) she commends Jesus Christ from the crown of the head to
the sole of the foot as all beautiful, and amiable, and then she sums up
all, Thou art all fair my love, there is no spot in thee. Jesus Christ in the
new Testament, or Ministry of the Gospel is all fair, altogether amiable even
to the worst of sinners, there is no spot in him. So you have the Lesson
briefly.

Now that which with the help of God I will further Every particular in the
Gospel glad tidings.
do, is to give you a weiw of the sum of the whole Gospel in particular,
that so you may look upon every piece of it, and you shall see that there is
not a jot from the beginning to the end, but it brings glad tidings to the
worst of sinners.

First of all you may take notice that the Gospel The Gospel shows man's
wretched condition
does hold forth to sinners their lost wretched condition they are in; In the
Gospel poor sinners come to learn what a damnable wretched condition they are
in whereas men without it think they are well, they do no body hurt, they give
to the poor, and lend, and the like, and yet they are going the broad way to
destruction. Now we see not only by Scripture but by experience the Gospel
tells them they are dead in sin, that they are children of wrath, that they are
under the curse of God going the broad way to hell.

But you will say, is that good news for a man to hear the Preacher say he is
in a damned condition, and a child of wrath, etc.

Beloved, it is sweet and good news; if the Preacher should make thee a damned
creature, or dead in sin it were bad news: but when the Gospel brings thee a
light to see that thou art so, whereas otherwise thou in thy blindness
would go down to hell in it, it is blessed, and good news; it is better
to see it here than for ever in hell where there is no remidie. And there is no
man, or woman in this place that belongs to God, but they can bless God, and
his Son Jesus Christ that by the Gospel the Lord has discovered to them their
wretched condition that they were naturally in. That is one thing.

A second instance is this, that the Gospel holds 2. The wrong ways and means
that men use for salvation.
forth to sinners, all the wrong ways that they go, and all the wrong means
that they use to save their souls; this is by the light of the Gospel. Man
naturally is either dead in sin, or asleep; or if he be a little awaked, he
takes a thousand ways to go to heaven, and none of them Gods way, none of
them the right way. Every carnal man sometime or other, has some design in
his head to save his soul: one man thinks to do it by his equity, and justice
in his dealing, and trading; another by his hospitality, and charity to the
poor; another by hearing of Sermons, and performing of duties, as in the time
of Popery how many years did they spend, and spent their strength and time,
and their money, and when all came to all, all was lost; all their ways were
the wrong way to Heaven. Now, the light of the Gospel discovers all these false
ways, and shows that you will come short of the glory of God, and the
salvation of your souls; and will convince you that There is no Name under
heaven by which you can be saved, but only the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ.
Consider, is not this good news that God should come first by the Ministry of
the Gospel, and show thee thy wretched condition; and then when thou have spent
thy time, and strength in false ways to be reconciled to God, and to save thy
soul, the Gospel comes and discovers all these that thou may go seek the
true way?

Thridly, the Gospel holds forth to poor sinners 3. It holds forth Gods love
to sinners.
that there is a love, an eternal love, an infinite love in Gods breast to
poor sinners before ever the world was made. You know in reason a man would
think that God should hate such a one as I am, God foresaw what a creature I
would be when I was borne, and how I have lived; and reason would think that
love should proceed from something amiable in the object that should produce
love, some beauty, or bounty, as we say: but God sees me to be wicked, and
sinful; and therefore reason would think God must damn me world without end.
Now the Gospel comes to such a sinner, and tells him the case is otherwise, it
is not so, poor sinful man or woman, and though God hate sin above all things
in heaven, or hell, yet God loved thee knowing what thou would be; God knows
the reason of it, we do not; it is as it is said in Deutrenomie, I loved thee,
because I loved thee. God has an infinite, special love to thy poor soul,
yet hates thy fin; from before the world was made, and the Mountains were
brought forth; So God loved the world, that he gave his Son etc. There was a
love in God, out of which he gave his Son Jesus Christ to die for us. This the
Gospel, and the Spirit of God init, reveals to the poor soul, that when I
was an enemy to God, he was my friend; when I hated him, he loved me; nay
before I was, God had thoughts of an infinite, eternal love to me

Then fourthly, the Gospel holds forth to a sinner, 4. Gods love fruitful.
that as God had an infinite love toward him, so it was not a cold love that
ended in nothing: but out of this love God would send his Son Jesus Christ into
the world to save sinners; This is one maine principle of the Gospel, that the
Father out of his love sent his own Son, that was the Image of his person, the
Son of his love, and delight into this world, to lay down his life, and to die
for sinners. Were it not for the Ministry of the Gospel we could never know
this: how could we know but by the Gospel that the Lord Jesus Christ did come
to die to save sinners? So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten
Son, that he that believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.

Fifthly, briefly (for I do but give you a few touches 5. Christ came to work
redemption.
of instances.) it holds out to us that as the Father out of his, love sent his
Son; so that Jesus Christ actually, and really is come into the world, and took
our nature upon him soul and body, and the infirmities of both, and sanctified
our nature that he took, and in that nature became our Surety, a Public person
for us; our Advocate, a second Adam. That he was conceived, and born of the
Virgen; and that he lived here, and so did the will of God, and fulfilled his
Law; and conversed many years among men, and that therein while he did so, he
gave us many blessed experiments of his love, and mercy to poor sinners, in
healing the sick, in giving sight to the blind, in raising the dead. And while
he conversed among men, he taught, and discovered in a great measure the
mysteryes of his Fathers counsels to us, that else we could never have known,
and gave us a holy pattern, and example of life, in humility, and patience,
and delligence, and prayer, and thankfulness. All these things are good news,
and glad tidings to poor sinners, every part of them.

Then the Gospel tells us, that this Lord Jesus Christ after he had walked
among men for many years together, 6. Christ died for us
that then as a Public person, and second Adam, and our Surety, he did lay
down his life, and die for our sins.

But you will say, Where is the good news from that? Hence it is that poor
sinners are reconciled to God, they are made friends with God. Hence it is that
poor sinners are redeemed from all their enemies, sin, and death, and wrath,
and curse, and hell; all these by the death of the Lord Jesus are removed.

Then the Gospel tells you that Jesus Christ, as he died for our sins, so he
rose again for our justification, he rose again from the dead the third day,
whereby poor sinners are assured that they are justified and freed 7. He roase
from death
from all their sins, and whereby they shall rise to grace here, and their
souls and bodies shall rise to glory hereafter with Christ, and whereby they
shall rise out of all afflictions also in due time; For the resurrection of
Christ is the ground of our resurrection out of afflictions in this world; and
every tittle of this is glad tidings, and good news to poor sinners.

Then the Gospel tells you that after his resurrection he conversed with his
Disciples, and not with the 8. Conversed with his discipls
world, and that he met with his Disciples from one mountain to another, from
one Town to another, for a few days after, and there he made many precious
Prayers to his Father for them, and for all that should believe in him; and
there he gave them instructions, and directions how they should order the
Churches of God, and Preach the Gospel to the end of the world.

And then you know the Gospel tells us that he went 9. Ascended into heaven.
up into heaven, and from heaven, as soon as he came there, he sent his holy
Spirit to us to unite us to Christ, to be our Intelligencer, to make known the
heart of Christ to us, to lead us into all truth, to comfort us in all
distresses, and to make intercession in us till we come to heaven, where he is.

And the Gospel tells us this good news that when he went to heaven he made
way for poor sinners to 10. Intercedes for us.
come there, and that there he intercedes for us, and there succors us, and
pities us when we are in the flesh as he was once.

Then the Gospel tells us that in due time he will 11. shall come to judgment.
come again from heaven as he went, and bring a Crown with him, and actually
subdue all his peoples enemies, and give them the same glory that he has, and
they shall be one with God for ever as he is; he will come and take poor
sinners to himself, that they shall be where he is, and as he is, world
without end.

The Gospel tells you moreover that all this love, 12. Gods Covenant.
and grace, and mercy, and salvation by Jesus Christ, here, and in Heaven, it
is all made sure to us by an everlasting Covenant, sure and perfect in every
point, as David says. And this Covenant is sealed with the blood of the
Testator, the Lord Jesus, that it might be sure: and he has also sent Pastors,
and Teachers to make known this Gospel; and he has given the seal of the
Lords Supper, and Baptism to confirm this Gospel. Put all together, and from
the first to the last, you shall not find in the Ministry of the Gospel (if
it be truly, and soundly opened) any syllable but what is wholesome, and
comfortable, and sweet and glad tidings to the worst sinners.

Only, to clear it more fully to you, there are some objections that you may
make: (for Beloved it were a happy thing if we did fully understand this
Lesson, and fully believe it) therefore that it may sink into your hearts, I
will tell you all that I know can be said against it.

One objection is, you will say, the Ministry of the Object. Concerning
outward things.
Gospel is not so very good, because we poor sinners do not hear any thing
in it for the body; we do not hear any thing in it of honor, and wealth; we
see people as poor after they receive Christ as ever they were, and it may be
poorer; and if God did mingle in the Gospel earthly things with heavenly, than
it were good news, worth the hearing.

Beloved, concerning that I answer but in two words. Answ.


All the happiness of this world consists either in honor, or wealth. As for
honor, if you believe in God, if you receive Jesus Christ, the Gospel brings
you tidings, that whereas now you are poor people that no body cares for, you
shall be Kings, and Queens, as Christ is a King, so you shall be Kings, and his
daughters shall be Queens. Nay you shall be Princes in all Lands. You know
earthly Kings are but Princes in Psalm 45.
their several Kingdoms, as the King of Spain, and the King of England, etc.
But the Saints, for honor are Princes in all Lands. They shall bind Kings in
Chains, and Nobles in fetters of Iron; such honor have Psalm 149.
all his Saints. You must look on it (beloved with a spiritual eye. And if
there be any reallitie in that that they call honor, this is not a notion, but
there is more reallitie in spiritual honor than in Carnal. Take Spiritual
honor real.
carnal men that call you honorable, and worshipful, and the like, you know
all these are but words, and a puff of wind, when they are present: but they
are hateful, and hate one another when they are gone, as the Apostle says.
But if a man receive Christ in the Ministry of the Gospel, there is true
honor; that is, such a man will be respected in the hearts of others; not only
in the eyes of God, and godly men, but in the hearts of the wicked: for in
their hearts they will say, such a man is an honorable man, such a woman is an
honorable woman, they will not do any thing against their consciences, and
disobey Christ, they had rather die. Beloved there is more realitie in this
honor; you shall be Princes, and Kings, and Queens.

And then you shall have innumerable companies of Angels wait on the Saints
Angels, you shall be in as glorious a condition as they, and somewhat better,
you shall have them to wait on you. You consider not this, because you settle
not your selves to search spiritual privileges: you shall have an innumerable
company of Angels to wait on you; that is better than to be Lords, and Earls,
that have an innumerable company of Swearers, and drunkards, and whoremongers
for their serving men, that it were agreat deal more ease if they could spare
them, to be without them: but you shall have a company of Saints, and Angels to
wait on you.

And though the Gospel tell you not of outward Saints right to outward things.
riches, for Christ himself, says, The soxes have holes, and the fowls of
the air have nests: but the Son of Man has not whereon to lay his head. Yet
the Gospel tells you that you have so much title to worldly things, that
Godliness has the promise of this life, and of that which is to come. And
that God will be a Sun, and a shield to those that fear him, and he will
withhold from them nothing that is good. Is not that tidings enough of riches
and wealth, when God will withhold nothing that is good? God will give food,
and raiment, they have it by promise; wicked men have it by providence, as the
dogs, and fowls, have it. Therefore, for all that objection this truth runs
clear.

But secondly, another will say, the Gospel indeed Object. The Gospel brings
persecutions.
brings tidings of Christ, and salvation, but it brings tidings also of
afflictions, and persecutions: the Gospel says, Whosoever will live godly in
Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution. And Christ says, I come not to bring
peace, but a sword; I come to set the father against the son, and the son
against the father and the mother against the daughter, and the daughter
against her mother. And says the carnal heart I like not this news, I love
to be at peace with God, and all the world (as their phrase is.)

Concerning that, though it be true that the Gospel Ans. 1. they are
privileges.
brings afflictions, yet it is true the Gospel tells you that these sufferings
of yours. In the first place they are privileges, the Gospel tells you it is a
piece of your happiness to have them, 1 Cor. 3. Whether it be Paul, or Apollo,
or Cephas, or life, or death. Death, what is death? Afflictions are called
death, In death often, that is, afflictions; they are but little deaths, and one
great death ends all; the greatest death is a privilege, your afflictions, and
poverty, and reproaches, will be a privilege. How is that? You have it in To.
8. They all work for good to them that love God. For your good here, and your
glory hereafter; for says the Apostle 2 Cor. 4. These light afflictions that
are but for a moment, they work for us, an exceeding, exceeding weight of
glory. The English word cannot express it; compare it with Romans 8. The
afflictions that we suffer, are not worthy to be compared with the glory which
shall be revealed. The Spirit of glory rises on you. The Lord does you good by
it for the present, and it works for a Crown of glory hereafter; For this is a
true saying, if we suffer with Christ, we shall reign with him. Therefore
though the Gospel bring sufferings with it, yet take them as the Gospel
expresses them, they are sweet, and good tidings; they are privileges to you,
and will turn for your good here, and your glory hereafter.

The Gospel moreover tells you for your suller satisfaction 2. They are
moderated.
that the Lord will lay no more upon you than you are able to bear. And he
will be in the afflection with you, in the fire, and in the water; the Lord
Jesus will be with you there, and in due time he will make you a way to get
out. Beloved, put all together that the Gospel speaks of afflictions, and
sufferings, construe them together, and you shall see that there is nothing in
all that, but glad tidings, and good news.

I but says another, the Gospel, (if it be Gospel that we use to hear from
our Ministers) it is not good Object. The Gospel requires men to forsake sin.
news, for our Ministers preach against Drunkards, and Swearers, and
Whoremongers; and when I swear the Minister says I shall never go to Heaven;
And he says the Gospel will have a man forsake his sins, and repent, and the
like, this is not good news: it is good news that God will save me, but it is
not good news that I must leave my sins, and all my ways of pleasure that I
am in. It is good news that the Gospel will have me saved but it is not good
news that the Gospel will have me a Puritan, and be purisied, and purged from
my sins.

Concerning that, it is very true that though the Gospel speak not properly
against drunkards, and whoremongers, Answ.
and Swearers; yet the Gospel says that drunkards must leave their
drunkenness, and Swearers, must leave their swearing; and the Gospel calls
every man to repentance, from every sin, yet not withstanding that it is no bad
news.

First, take Christ's Argument Mat. 5. Does thy right eye offend thee? pull it
out and cast it from thee; does thy right 1. Leaving of sin profitable.
hand offend thee? cut it off, and cast it from thee. That is as some interpret
it, there are some sins that are as pleasant as the right eye, and as
profitable as the right hand, and thou were better to cut them off: why so? It
is better to go to heaven with one eye, than with two eyes to go to hell; and
it is better to go to heaven with one hand, than with two to go to hell. Is
it not good tidings when a man is taught to make a good bargain? is it not good
tidings when the Gospel tells a man he must throw away his sins, and it is
better to cross himself a little in his lusts and go to heaven, than to go
lusts, and soul, and body, and all to hell? Is it not good news, when a man's
house is on fire, if one come and show him how to save a piece? It is better
than to have all burned. Now the Gospel teaches you to leave sin, and it is
good news, Why? I will tell you, because when the Gospel bids thee leave sin,
it puts in thee a new nature that is contrary to sin to hate it more than
hell, and the Devil himself, and then if God bid thee leave thy sins, it is
the best news in the world; as for instance, there The Gospel teaches to hate
sin.
are many men, and weomen I believe here, that if the Lord should say to them,
as he did to Solomon, I will give thee whatsoever thou would have in heaven,
or earth, there are some in this place that would say, O Lord I would leave my
pride, I would have a humble heart, and a heart that should not love worldly
things, and a heart that should not be froward, and waspish. If the Gospel
should leave the heart as the Law did, and bid you throw away your sins, and
give no strength to do it, it were bad news: but if the Gospel give you a new
nature, to hate sin, and when it bids you leave, it gives you power to take it
away; it is sweet, and pleasant news.

Another objection that others may make is, that Object. The Gospel requires
duty.
the Gospel brings tidings, that when we receive Christ, as we must leave sin,
so we must set on the doing of good, I must not be my own Master, as the
Minister says, one while I must fast, and another while I must pray, and teach
my Children, and my Family, and this is a hard task, an endless work, I
cannot bear it, to pray every morning, and evening etc.

I answer, this is good news. Why? because in the first place, when the Gospel
tells you any such thing Answ. 1. Not on pain of damnation
the Gospel does not bid you do them, or else you shall be damned, as the Law
did: but the Gospel sairh thus, thou poor drunkard, or thou proud woman, here
is a gracious God that has loved thee, and out of love has sent Jesus Christ
to die for thee, and has appointed his Ministers to make it known to thee: and
here is everlasting redemption, and salvation by him, only because thou art a
sinner, there is no other reason in the world; now thou art safe, free from
damnation, and hell, fear not that, that is gone, Christ has died to
reconcile thee to God, and Christ has loved thee, therefore obey him, if not
thou shall not be damned, that is done away already; Indeed the Law says,
thou shall be damned for not doing it: but says Christ, in the Gospel, I have
died, and have forgiven thee thy sins, and if thou will be a Villane, and not
respect my Father that has loved thee, and I that have died for thee, so it
is: but if thou will obey me, thou shall be a good child, Thus the Gospel
speaks; now there is no bad news, for me to hear of my duty, to hear that
the Lord Jesus, Christ commands me, when I see my salvation sure, I work not
for life, as those under the Law, for the Law is a voice of words, it bids me
do this, or that, or I shall be damned; and if I went a little awrie, I should
lose all my labor; no, I see my salvation is safe, hell, and damnation are
shut out of doors, God is my Father, and I am his child, I am in an
everlasting Covenant, there is nothing in Heaven, or Hell, shall be able to
separate me from the love of God. Now I am redeemed from my enemies, and
without fear, as the Scripture says, why should I not serve him, and study
to do what he commands me?

Besides, admit the Gospel bids thee do many things, the Gospel also gives
thee power to do them. It is not a voice of words as that on Mount Siuai, Heb.
12. that is, 2. The Gospel gives power to do what it requires.
words, that had a voice, but no power; thou shall do this, and not that, but
it gave no strength, and the people were not able to hear the word. for they
were bid, not to commit adultery, not to swear, not to steal, and there was
no strength, but a voice: But the voice of the Gospel is a voice of power, it
is called The day of Gods power, the power of God to salvation; The Arm of
God, the strength of God. Therefore whatsoever the Gospel commands, it gives a
sweet power to the heart to do the same, and then it is no bad news. If a man
bid me pay a thousand pounds for my neighbor, and give me a thousand pounds in
my hand, it is easy to do it. The Gospel bids me deny my self, and subdue my
lusts, if it did give no power it were a terrible thing: but if withal the
Gospel carry the Spirit of Christ into the heart and kill sin, and make me able
to deny my self, then it is good news.

Besides, the duties that the Gospel bids me do, they are few for number, and
easy for nature; and for the 3. Gospel duties few and easy.
end of them, it is not for life, and salvation, that is safe, there is no
danger of that; and there is a Spirit to them And also there is a sweetness in
Gospel obedience, that there is nothing on this side glory, so Pleasing to the
soul that has believed, as obeying of Jesus Christ, To. 6. You have your
reward in holiness. Godly men say that this is the meaning of it, that holiness
is a reward to it self; the doing of good things is a reward to it self. To
say nothing of the reward hereafter, that there is a Crown of glory, your
labor is not in vain in the Lord. 1. Cor. 15.
You that work for him: but the very doing of Gospel duty, with a Gospel
spirit, it is no other than meat, and drink. Our Lord Christ Joh. 4. when he
was hungry, and thirsty, when he was weary; one would have thought he might
have done many things more pleasing, than to be teaching a silly woman; when
they came with meat, he would not leave that that he was doing, I have meat
(says he) that you know not off; who gave it thee said they? Says he, It is
my meat, and drink, to do the will of him that sent me. So, when we have the
heart, and the nature, and the spirit, of Christ, it will be sweeter than
meat, and drink, out of love, to do any thing that Jesus Christ commands us.

Again, it may be, some man will say, the Gospel for Object. The Gospel
requires Faith.
the most part brings good news: but there is one thing in the Gospel that me
thinks is no good news to poor sinners; says a poor soul, the Ministers
use to preach, and to tell me, that the Law says, do this, and live; and the
Minister tells me, that the Gospel says, believe, and live; he says that
there shall be all happiness, and good to me, if I believe; and says the poor
soul, for my part it is as possible for me to keep the ten Commandments, as to
believe, and the Ministers say, that there is no good thing in the Gospel that
I can partake of except I believe; I would like it well but for that one thing,
I would, but I cannot believe.

To answer this, if the Gospel held forth Christ, and Answ. The Gospel breeds
faith.
salvation, upon believing (as many often preach) it were little better tidings
than the Law: for it is as easy for a man of himself to keep the ten
Comandments, by obeying; as to believe of himself, to have faith to receive
Christ: Therefore, that is a misunderstanding of the Gospel, the Gospel says
not bring faith with thee, and then here is all grace, and salvation; No, for
whence should I have faith? whatsoever is of the flesh, is flesh; and what is
of me is flesh, and abominable to God; therefore the Gospel expects not that
any sinner should bring faith, for he has it not; nay, it is a sin to
endeavor to have it of himself: But the Gospel as it brings salvation, so it
breeds faith in the heart of a sinner. The same word that makes known
salvation, the same word breeds, and begets faith in the heart to receive it.
That God that gives his alms to us, gives a purse to carry it: that God that
gives Physic to a poor soul, will give a hand to receive it. It were strange
if God should expect faith from a poor sinner, whereas, for ought I know, and
learned men hold, that Adam in innocence had not the faith that we are
justified by; and for ought I know the Angels in heaven have it not; and whence
should a poor sinner have it? It is God that gives repentance to Israel; and
God is the author, and finisher of our faith. Heb. 12. And in Philip. 1. It is
given to you to believe. Therefore, when I hear of grace, and glory, and
salvation by Jesus Christ, I must not consider where I shall have a vessel to
carry it home, where I shall have faith to receive it: but it carries the
vessel with it, and I go, and take the promise, and by the holy Spirit that
same Gospel that brought the grace will work faith, or else, it were as harsh
as the Law. Therefore never stand off about faith: for he that gives grace, and
solvation, will work faith.

Again, it may be objected by some; we confess Object. Discipline and
government. in the Gospel.
that the Gospel is good news, and blessed be God it is performed also. But it
seems that there is in the Gospel, or annexed to it a discipline, or a
government whereby we shall be ruled; thus says one, thus says another; and
if we receive the Gospel of Christ, we must receive the Government of Christ
say the Ministers, and we fear that will be no good news to our poor souls.

As for that, in few words as I am able, I confess Ans. Two wrong governments
since Christ.
(Beloved) that in, or with the Gospel of Christ, there is a Government, or
there is a discipline, that may (in a sense) be called an external discipline
over the Saints or people of God. And it is true that all the governments that
have hitherto been in the world, since our Lord Christ went to heaven, men have
called them the Governments of the Gospel, and fatherod them upon Christ, and
the Gospel: and truly if they had been so indeed as men pretended, that is, if
those kind of governments that we have had, had been part of the Gospel,
surely than there had been a great deal of bad news, and heavy tidings in
the Gospel of Jesus Christ. As for instance; There have been but two great
governments, or disciplines (if I may use that word) in the world since our
Lord went to heaven,

The one was Papacy.
The other Episcopacy.
We have been governed either by the Pope that Papacy. Episcopacy.
styled himself, the Successor of Peter, and the Romish Governor, or by
Episcopacy in latter years, in many parts; though Papistrie made the greater
stir in the world. Now these two differ in degrees, otherwise they are of the
same kind. And if these were the government of Christ, and the discipline of
the Gospel, we may well say, there has been sad tidings, and heavy news from
the Gospel for many years. Give Evils in both governments.
me leave to instance in a few substantial things in these two Governments.

This was one thing that was in both these Governments; The Ministers, (such as
they were, by what 1. Concerning their power.
titles soever they were styled; for they had many sorts) they took all the
power of governing, and government wholly, and solely into their own hands;
they called themselves the Church of God; we must look to the Church, that is,
the Bishops, to their laws, etc. They called themselves the Clergy, that is,
Gods inheritance, as the word in the Original signifies. True it is, there is
a power, a sweet Gospel power in the Ministers, that is somewhat peculiar from
the people: But to take all power into their own hands; and to leave the
people, and call them the laity, the dross, the valgar, to leave them as
vassalls, and slaves, and to call themselves, the Clergy, and the Church, and
the like: If this had been Christ's discipline, there had been some hard, and
heavy tidings in the Gospel of Christ.

Secondly, as they took this power into their hands, so they used this power as
Lords over Gods inheritance, contrary to the command of Jesus Christ 1 Pet. 5.
2. Their Lorldlines in two things.
4. You shall not Lord it over Gods inheritance. Now you know they were Lords,
that will appear in two things.

First, they made Laws upon the consciences of men, 1. In imposing laws on
men's consciences
besides the Laws that Jesus Christ made; you know they had their Synods, and
their Convocations, and their great Councels, and the like, and there they
would have Canons, or Laws every time they met for the consciences of poor
Saints; This was no good news.

And then forcing men to aver those laws that 2. In sorcing men to obey those
laws.
they had made; as they had made a law that people should not go out of their
Parishes; they must every one hear his own Minister, though it may be he was
an Ignorant, drunken, dumb, profane wretch, and if they did not, they were
forced, and compelled to do it, Beloved, this was not according to the Gospel
of Jesus Christ: for if it had, surely it had been no good news

Thirdly, in the second Government that we have 3. Forcing Ministers and
Officers on the people.
had hitherto, they imposed Ministers, and Officers upon the people, the people
never had yet liberty under these two Governments, to choose men according to
Gods own heart, that would feed them with knowledge, and understanding: but
such as the Bishops sent they must receive, whether they were good or bad, they
must tako them as they found them; and those usually were either Ignorant
unlearned meu; or profane unsanctified men, and these were sent by them as
Lords, and the people were forced to receive them.

Then fourthly, in this government, all the power which they had (which they
took all to themselves) 4. Their power excercised against the Saints.
they exercised it only, (almost) against the Saints and people of God, either
as Schismatics, or Lollards, or Heretics, or Puritans, or the like; either
for doing that that was good, or for things that were trifles, according to
their own judgment. For doing that which was good, for fasting and praying,
for meeting to teach one another, and to seek the Lord, these were called
Conventicles. Or for trifles that they in their consciences held indifferent,
as the wearing of the Surplice, and the Cross in baptism; they themselves
said they were indifferent things, and trifles, and yet men must be silenced,
and people bannished beyond Sea for these things. This government we have had,
and there was little good news and glad tidings to the souls of the poor
Saints from all this.

Fifthly, they did restrain the Spirit of God in the 5. Restraining the Spirit
in preaching, and praying
Saints both in preaching, and praying. In preaching, the Ministers were tied,
they must preach such, and not such things, and they must be in danger to be
fined, if they did not keep to the hour. And for Prayer, when it may be the
poor Ministers soul was full of groans, and sighs, and he would have
rejoiced to have poured out his soul to the Lord, he was tied to an old
Service-Booke, and must read that till he grieved the Spirit of God, and dried
up his own spirit as a chip, that he could not pray if he would; and he must
read it for an hour together, and then it may be come into the Pulpit: but his
spirit was gone.

Again, they backed all their laws with the secular 6. Their laws backed by
secular power.
power, and punnishments; they never rested till they had twisted their own
laws, with the secular laws the Civil laws of the Land. Every law of theirs
was steeled, and backed with some Civil severe law, to confiscation of goods,
or imprisonment, or such a fine, to the cuting off of ears, the slitting of
noses, the burning of cheeks, to banishment, yea to death it self; as you
know how many precious Saints of God (even by those that pretended the
government of Christ, and his discipline) were burned in Smithfeild; and how
many suffered strange torments, and punishments, yet their persecutors
pretended the discipline, and government of Christ. I give you but a few
instances; These were the governments we have had hitherto, for thirteen, or
fourteen hundred years, either from the Pope, or the Bishops, Papacy, or
Episcopacie. And truly Beloved, there is not a title of good news, or glad
tidings to the hearts of holy Saints, and tender consciences in all this, as
your selves may judge.

Now what we shall have the Lord knows I know not, but only thus much I say,
that what ever it will be, if it be according to these strains that have been
heretofore, than I confess there will be a great deal of heavy tidings, and
hard news, even in the Gospel of Jesus Christ; if men call it Gospel, or any
thing belonging to it. For my part, as I am wholly ignorant what Government men
will set up and call it Christ's, right, or wrong; So I am not ignorant of the
fears, and jealousies that are in the hearts of godly people of this, and that
thing: but be sure, if it be the government of Jesus Christ, and his
discipline, there will be nothing but good news, and glad tidings to the
honestest heart, and tenderest conscience; and if it be not such a government,
it is not of God; for I have proved plainly, that there is nothing in the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, but good news, and glad tidings to the worst of
sinners. But if it be a government that I shall be compelled against
conscience, and my goods confiscated for this, or that trisle, this is not
according to the Gospel; for there are none of these terrible things in the
Gospel of Christ, it is all sweet.

I will give you but one instance, and pass it over; The two worst things in
the Gospel good news.
In the government of Christ according to the Scriptures, the two worst, and
harshest things that you shall find there, you shall see clearly that they
are good things, and good news for a poor Christian to have them set up over
his soul.

As first of all, you know that in the Gospel, the 1. Reproof
government or discipline, call it which way you will. We find in some cases
that the Lord Jesus, will have us not only comfort, and exhort, and teach one
another: but in some cases he will have us reprove one another, and have our
Ministers reprove us also, but in love, and Benefit of Gospel reproof.
tenderness. This is one of the harshest things; and this if you look right on
it with a spiritual eye, truly it is glad tidings for a poor Saint, when he
has forgot himself, by the violence of some lust; Then for a sincere hearted
Brother, or Sister in the spirit of meeknes, and love to reprove him, and set
his bones in joint. You have some of you found in experience that a sweet, and
wise reproof has been as pleasing to you as any Sermon of consolation that
ever you heard. And therefore you see in Scripture how the Lord sets down
reproof, that you may not be afraid of it Levit. 19. 17. he tells you that
reproof is an argument of love, Thou shall not hatethy brother in thine heart,
but rather reprove him. It is an argument of love. A man that reproves another
wisely, and meekly he loves him: for otherwise his poor soul is going in the
way toward hell, from God, and fellow ship with God, going on in sin. Now a
man that reproves him he brings him back again from sin, and that strangnes
from God that he was in a course to run into; therefore I say, there is no such
evil in reproof.

Besides, the Scripture says it is a precious thing Ps. 141. 5. David says
Let the righteous smite me, and it shall be as balm, it shall be a kindness;
let him reprove me, and it shall be an excellent oil, it shall not break my
head. It shall be as excellent oil, or balm to heal his soul. Reproof is
called a profitable thing also, 2 Timothy 3. The Scripture is profitable for
instruction, and reproof, etc. If reproof were an evil thing, one could not
say that the Scripture were profitable for such an end.

It is a great judgment of God, when God casts a man into such a condition that
no body will reprove him. It is a thing that I am many times afraid of, truly
almost to trembling, least a man should so carry himself to the Saints, and
so estrange himself that they will not reprove him; O, it is fearful when a
man stands on his own bottom, and on his own legs, that men shall say,
there is a Professor, he is so proud, and so foolish that none will reprove
him. Says God to Ezkiel, Thou shall not be a reprover to this people; and in
Hosea 3. Let no man strive, or reprove another. Why so? says the Lotd in the
end of the Chapter, Let him be as a backsliding beifer, Ephraim is joined to
Idols, let him alone. It is a pitiful thing when God shall leave a man as a
heifer, that is turned into the meddow to grass, let him alone. They used to
plow with heifers in those days as we do with horses and Oxen, and the
horses, and Oxen are called from the house to the Plow, and are driven and
beaten: but when the Ox is turned to grass to be fatted, let him alone, he
lies down, and rises when he will; so these people were so wicked, that no
man should reprove his brother, but he should be as a lamb in a fat Pasture.
So that reproof, that is one of the harshest things in the government of
Christ in the Gospel, it is a good, a precious, and profitable thing. It is a
great judgment to be without it: therefore though that be used, the doctrine
holds true, that there is nothing but good news, glad tidings in the Gospel of
Jesus Christ.

There is another thing, that is, Excommunication, 2 Excomunication.
cutting a man off from the people of God, or delivering him up to Satan. A man
may say that is a terrible thing; It is terrible as I said before, when there
is secular punishment with it, confiscation of goods, and loss of estate, and
freedom: but according to the Gospel of Christ you shall see, that even the
delivering men up to Satan, Christ Jesus intends it in love, for the good, and
salvation of their souls; It is harsh, but it is good news, 2 Cor. 5. says
the Apostle, In the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ when ye are gathered
together, and my spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver
such a one unto Satan, for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be
saved in the day of the Lord Jesus; speaking of the incestuous person. If men
will be so wretched as to sin grossly, the Lord Jesus has ordered that such a
man shall be delivered to Satan; for what? that he may be damned, and to bring
him to hell? No, for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved
in the day of the Lord Jesus. And truly Beloved, I have seen, more than one
that have blessed God for that Ordinance, that have been brought to humble
their souls, and sweetly, and closely to walk with God again, by the blessing
of God on that Ordinance. Now I have told you the worst in the Gospel, either
reproof, and that but upon great occasion; or else delivering to Satan, and
that must be upon extraordinary occasion; yet both are sweet, and profitable,
and precious for the good of the soul; Therefore the truth of the Doctrine
holds clear to you, that there is nothing in the Gospel, look which way you
will, but good news, and glad tidings to the worst of sinners.

There is one objection more, and so I proceeed to Object. No peace to the
wicked;
the Uses. Some body may say out of the Prophet Isaiah, There is no peace to
the wicked says my God. Isa. 57. ult. And Isa. 48. 12. The wicked are like the
troubled Sea, when it cannot rest, whose watters cast out mire, and dirt. The
Prophet seems to comfort the godly, but wicked men have no peace: then a man
may say; how does this stand with your Doctrine? you say that the Gospel holds
forth peace, and glad tidings, and good news to wicked men, even to the worst
of sinners.

The are three ways to answer it, in few words. Ans. three Ways. 1. It is
rather Law than Gospel.


The first is, that however Isaiah was in a sort an Evangelicall Prophet, and
spoke many things of Gospel by way of Prophecy; he saw things for us, and not
for himself, as Peter says; yet these kind of expressions are more properly
Law, than Gospel; for it is certain there is no other language in the Law but
that, there is no peace to the wicked; Transgress once and be damned for ever:
but the language of the Gospel is contrary, it comes and gives peace to the
wicked, and justifies the ungodly, he preaches peace to them that are near,
and to them that are affar off; And who were they? The Gentiles that were
emphatically sinners: are we not Jews (says the Apostle) and not sinners of
the Gentiles? Therefore this was rather Law, than Gospel.

Secondly, there is no peace to the wicked, or to sinners, says my God. You
may understand it also in this 2. God will not make peace with sin, though he
does with sinners.
sense, that the Lord will not make any peace with sin, though he send messages
of peace, and reconciliation to sinners; though God be reconciled to a sinner,
he will never be reconciled to sin.

But the third, and last, and most proper as I take it 3. No peace to men that
continue in sin under the Gospel.
is this, There is no peace to the wicked, says my God; that is, there is no
peace to men that continue in sin after Jesus Christ has been offered them,
and they have refused him, then there is no peace to them. Observe for it is a
thing of great concernment: it becomes not a Minister of the Gospel by any
means to pronounce, wrath, and curse, or damnation to a sinner, qua a sinner,
as a sinner, he is not a Minister of the Gospel, if he do, he is a Minister of
the old Testament, that says, here comes a drunkard, eo nomnie, because he is
a drunkard God will plague him, and damn him; this is the language of the old
Testament.

But you will say; will you speak peace to drunkards, and sinners? Object.


We speak judgment, and curses, and damnation to Answer How judgments are
pronounced against sinners.
them, when once we have first offered Christ, and they refuse him. And for
this reason, and no other according to the Ministry of the Gospel, I am to
pronounce, damnation, and curse, to wicked men, because they refuse Jesus
Christ: because they do not believe in Jesus Christ.

You will say, is it absolutely evil for a Minister to Quest.
speak against drunkards, and Swearers, and whoremongers, and to say the curse
of God will fall on them, etc.

No; Why? because I speak against a drunkard, not properly because he is a
drunkard, but his drunkeness Ans. Continuance in sin a sign of unbelief.
is a sign that he continues in unbelief, and so has not received Jesus
Christ: So we are to understand the Scriptures. There is a drunkard, a Sot, a
jearer of godliness, I say the curse of God will come upon him, and the
damnation of hell is ready to overtake him; why? not because he is properly
such a one, but because those are signs that he is an unbeliever. When God
shall come to judge the world; There are people that he will judge eo nomine
because they are drunkards he will throw them to hell, as those in the
Mountains of Wales, etc. Because they have but a little light, and they did
not follow that, they shall be condemned, and the heathens shall be condemned
for their ignorance, etc. But under the Gospel all are wrapped up in unbelief:
So that this is the pin of Heaven, or Hell, the very wards that opens, or
shuts, that you be believers, or unbelievers. But I will not stand longer on
that.

Now I proceed to show what profit we may have by this Doctrine, by way of
Application.

There be diverse special Lessons that I would have use 1. To learn that in
the Gospel salvation s offered o sinner, s sinners.
you learn hence.

The first is this, that this truth that I have now taught you, it is the door
of the Gospel, the very entrance into Christian Religion; the first stone as it
were in the Christian building in the Profession of Religion, in Gospel
Profession. There is a kind of devotion and Profession, but it is not built
according to the Gospel: but if you would walk according to the Gospel learn
this lesson first, that is, that God gives life, and salvation through Christ
to sinners, as sinners though they be hard hearted, backsliding, and the chief
of sinners, yet as long as they be sinners, and but sinners they may always
look upon Jesus Christ, and salvation in his hand to be bestowed on them. This
is a truth that thou must learn, and be taught it of God, or else thou can
not go one step into the Profession of the Gospel; for (beloved) till you know
and learn this, you will be like men in the dark, you will be groping for
Christ Jesus, but you will never be graffed into him, you will never be knit to
Christ. I say this is the first step to Religion to understand this truth
aright, that the Gospel brings glad tidings of salvation to be given to the
worst of sinners: therefore though I see no good in me at all whereby I might
receive good news from the Law, and though I do not see that I am a humbled
sinner as such a Preacher teaches, or a believing sinner, or a broken hearted
sinner, as another Preacher says, yet I say I am a sinner, and a sinner quasi,
a sinner is the proper object of the Unsetlednesse in religion whence.
Gospel. You will be off, and on, and never be knit to Christ, but will be as a
bone in and out till you come to that; for if you go and lay hold on Christ
any other way, in any other consideration, that you are humbled sinners, or
broken hearted sinners, or mortified sinners, as soon as ever temptation tells
you that you are not humbled enough, you will be gone again, the bone will be
out of joint again, and so you will be as a reed tossed of the wind, you will
never be fastened to Christ; whosoever holds Christ upon any qualifications on
his side, must let him go one time, or other. As for instance, if he think
the Gospel be directed to broken heartednes, and he can weep at a sermon, to
morrow his heart may be hard, and then be thinks, he is a devil that was but
now a Saint. Therefore many Christians after many years Profession of Religion
never felt their souls knit, till God rightly, and truly taught them this
lesson: but then they were knit to Christ, and their souls were never in and
out, they were never loose more; because they were able in all temptacions to
retreat to this truth as a refuge. For let the devil tell a man he is no Saint,
the soul can say, I am a sinner; if the devil say, thou art an hypocrite, I,
but an hypocrite is but a sinner, I am a sinner still, though I be not a broken
hearted sinner; so let the devil, and hell say what they will, they shall
never beat him from that refuge; And says the soul being a sinner I am the
proper object of grace and life, and salvation in the Gospel, and though I have
no comfort as a Saint that I am in the Kingdom of Heaven, yet at least I have
comfort that I am a sinner, and I may be there: though I have no comfort that I
am in, yet I have comfort that I am near, and the door is open; though I be
not a Siant I am a sinner, and if I have no real interest in Christ as a
Saint, yet I have interest in the promises of Christ as a sinner; and though I
can not serve God cheerfully as a Saint, yet I will serve God as comfortably as
I can, as one that may be a Saint. In Matthew. 13. It is said of the Merchant
man, he found the field wherein was the treasure, he rejoiced. I remember a
worthy man of this country, he faith, he rejoiced not that he had found the
pearl the treasure: but he rejoiced that he was come near a good bargain, he
was come to the field where it was; so though I be not assured that I am a
Saint, yet a sinner may rightly receive this truth with joy as a sinner,
because he is near a good bargain.

This is the reason that you have many Professors Many do little for God, why.
that mislearne the first principles of religion of which this is the greatest,
they will never do any thing for God but when they are assured of their
salvation, if there be the least doubt that the work of grace is not right,
they mope, and will do nothing for God, but vex, and fret, and tug, and when
their qualifications are gone that they builded on, then they think they are
hypocrites, and damned creatures, and God shall have no service from them; when
other people that it may be have not fully assurance they are Saints, not one
day of three in the whole year, yet there is a current, and stream of
obedience, and love, and delight in God in some measure, and they go on
constantly, though not so strongly, doing and suffering his holy will; Why?
because they have learned the Gospel aright, they obey God in the notion of
sinners; says the soul, I see a great deal of love in God to poor sinners,
and the Gospel contains nothing but glad tidings to sinners, and though I have
nothing in me that may make me the child of Christ, yet the way is open,
therefore I will go on with the work, let him do what he will. Thus the soul
is knit to Christ that come what will, it will never be beaten off from Christ
I never knew my own soul knit to Christ till God had taught me this, but it
was off, and on, as a bone in and out, a Saint to day, and an Hypocrite to
morrow to call God Father to day, and Enemy tomorrow. The Gospel is directed to
a sinner, quasi a sinner, not as this, or that sinner, but as a sinnner; there
is the object of salvation. This makes a Saint I say go with constancy, if I
cannot go to Christ as a Saint, yet I can as a sinner; so he has something
that k epes him that he is not as many Professors, that are ready to kill, and
hang, and drown themselves, because they see the Gospel is made to Saints, and
they see they are not Saints, then they are in a worse condition than sinners.
Learn this you that are Professors of Religion, that are in and out, that have
spent ten, or twenty, or thirty years, and your souls are not knit to
Christ, beg of the Lord to teach you this lesson.

The next Lesson that I would teach you from the Lord is, that this being so,
that in the administration Use 2. To labor for aperfect spirit of adoption.
of the New Testament, or the Ministry of the Gospel, there is nothing but
glad tidings no object but what is amiable and good; then all you that have
received Jesus Christ, let me exhort you to this, labor to get up in you a
perfect spirit of adoption, my meaning is this, you know there is a spirit of
adoption, and a spirit of bondage, the spirit of adoption is a frame of heart,
a temper of spirit like that of a child to his father. And you know it is
ordinary with the Saints, that they have a little adoption, they can cry Abba
father, a little, and low, and at sometimes: but there is a great deal of the
spirit of bondage mingled with it, there are sometimes fears, secret
whisperings in the heart, no, thou art not right, Christ is not in thee; if he
were, it is impossible thou should be so weak, and so easily overcome, and
there will be some flaw in the heart, and soakings in of guilt, that will eat
out a man's peace, that sometimes he shall call God father, and another while he
will look strangely upon God, and be afraid to come to God, and be loath to go
upon his knees before him, and be glad when he is got out of his presence;
there is a spirit of bondage mingled with the spirit of adoption. Now in the
New Testament we should labor for a full spirit of adoption. What is Full
spirit of adoption what.
that? that is, that there may be nothing in my heart toward God, but pure
love, because in his dealing to me there is not a syllable but love, and grace,
and glad tidings to me, and my heart and life should be answerable. For the
reason of all the horror that you find Fears, and horrors, whence.
in your hearts, and all your fears and troubles that arise there, they are
from this error in your minds, this opinion that is not quite rooted out, that
there is in the Gospel administration some ill, and bad tidings, there is some
love, and some hatred; some mercy, and some wrath; you think that it may be God
is your father, and it may be he is your enemy, and that because you have
sinned he will damn you to hell. This is natural, and ordinary. Now if you
were convinced that there were nothing in the Gospel since our Lord Jesus is
gone to heaven, and is at the right hand of his Father, there is nothing in his
dispensation but love, and mercy, and no wrath; hell, and damnation, and sin,
etc. are all thrown away, and if I be perfectly righteous, and perfectly
justified from all my sins; if I have the spirit of Christ given me, and am one
with God for ever, by an everlasting Covenant, and shall have life, and a
Crown of glory for ever, and my sins shall not be laid to my charge; O, what a
clear, and sweet spirit should I have in Gods service! and not a muddie, and
dogged, and froward spirit that arises from guilt soaking into the soul. When
I view this truth over, and pull it by peice-meale, and see that there is no
gall, nothing in the Gospel, first, or last, but what is amiable, and
beautiful, and blessed news to sinners; then there should follow this
consideration, why should there be any thing in my heart, and spirit toward
God, but amiable thoughts, and love, etc? why should there be any of those
coares of unbelief, and distruct, and fear, and horror? Those mixtures of
adoption, and bondage? Why should there be hellish fears, or guilt in me,
since there is no wrath, not anger at all in God? Why should not the carriage
of my heart be clear toward him, as his is in his Son, by the administration
of the Gospel toward me?

Labor for a perfect spirit of adoption, that you may not have any of those
bublings of bondage in your spirits that now over take you, and are twisted,
and woven with that little adoption that you have. For, who is there among us
to this hour, but when he comes before the Lord, and has a little smiling in
his soul to see his favor, and a little joy, and delight to come at him; and
yet there is some fear, and trembling, as Peter when he was on the waves, and
what if God will not receive me? etc. Therefore study to keep up the spirit of
adoption. It is a hard thing to keep up the temper of a child in the soul,
especially, when God lets a man fall into temptations, and folly, and
weakness, etc. But though it be hard labor to keep up that temper, at least
thus much, that thou never come to so low a condition (which was the prayer of
one that was a good man) wherein thou can not with a full mouth, and with a
clear heart call God father, and thee his child, though the unhappiest, and
unworthiest child. If thou come below this, if thou call on God with fear;
and can not cry abba, abba, that is as much as daddie, daddie, as our babes
use to say, if thou do not come so high, thou art spoiled, and undone, desire
God to teach you this Lesson also.

Thirdly, if this be so that the Ministry of the Gospel is all glad tidings to
the worst of sinners; then I appeal The damnation of them that refuse the
Gospel just.
to you all, and let every man put his hand upon his own breast, and if this
be a truth (as I hope it has been cleared) you shall all be your own judges;
how just will the damnation of that sinner be that will not receive the Gospel.
If there were in the Gospel ridged tidings, sad news, (as people are apt to
fancy to themselves) then it were no wonder if one persecuted it, and another
despised it, and another neglected it, and another turned it into wantoness:
But when it comes in such a stream that there is nothing but love, and light,
and salvation, and grace, and all freely laid down at the feet of a sinner for
his receiving; nay, he shall have power, and grace to receive it, he shall have
salvation, and a vessel to carry it in; judge how justly thy damnation will be
in the last day, man, or woman, whosoever thou art that set thy self
against the Gospel, and wilt not receive salvation.

This is the reason why damnation comes out so rife in the new Testament, it is
scars ever mentioned in Damnation mentioned frequently in the New Testament why.
the old Testament, that I know of damnation is not mentioned in the old
Testament, nor hell, but as it is taken for the grave, etc. But when grace, and
the Gospel, and life comes, damnation comes at the heels of it; How can ye
escape the damnation of hell? Then comes the worm that never dies, and the
fire that never goes out. The reason is, because then damnation is proper;
Then when a man will not receive salvation, not because he cannot, no man is
damned because he cannot receive Christ: but because he will not receive this
salvation, and grace. Therefore says Christ, Mat. 28. Go preach the Gospel,
he that believes shall be saved, he that believes not shall be damned. That
is, says that godly Dr Preston, go tell every wicked man this good news, that
Christ has brought salvation: But it may be they will not believe what we say
to them, there is no more in the long and short, but in a word tell them they
shall be damned. That is the reason in Mat. 22. where the Ministry of the
Gospel is compared to a feast of dainties, and one slights it, and another
despises it, and another rejects it; and when the Master of the feast came
it is said, he found one without a wedding garment, and that the man was
speechless; he was as a man says Beza with a halter about his neck, faith he
go, Bind him hand, and foot, and cast him into utter darkness, there shall
be weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth. He was speechless, he had
nothing to say. and truly, I have had more experience lately, than ever I had
in my life, I saw a man that was accounted all his life a professed Athiest,
and I was with him in the room when one in the company opened the Gospel from
one end to the other (as I have endeavored in my poor ability to do now)
and all the riches, and the salvation of it, how free it is, how there is no
core, nor nothing but what is amiable; Says the man when he had done, judge
ye, will ye not think it just if ye be damned, if ye will not receive, and
obey this? Says he it is so, I deserve to be damned without mercy. Consider
this, you will say so too, you will be made to confess how just your damnation
will be for refusing it. If there were any thing in all this that were harsh,
and cruel, and rough, and ridged it were somewhat: but when God has cast the
Gospel into such a mold, and way that every thing smiles, and all is roses; and
yet a wretch shall go and persecute it, and slight it, and neglect, and despise
it, I leave such a man, let him judge himself at the last day worthy of
damnation: for he shall have judgment without mercy, that rejects this mercy;
When men have this mercy without mixture of judgment, it is fit that those men
should have pure judgment withour mixture of mercy.

This is the reason that the Lord laughs at men's Whose destruction God laughs
at.
destruction, Pro. 1. when it comes as a whirlwinde. Now we must understand
that God does not laugh at any man's destruction, as a transgressor of the Law,
for he has cast himself into a necessity of sininng, and has damned himself,
and he cannot help it. And God will not laugh at the destruction of the
Gentiles, and heathens that have not heard of the Gospel: but when God comes by
his Ministers, and opens, and unbowels all the mysteries of the Gospel to
people, and has laid all before them clearly, yet then for people to love
darkness rather than light, and to continue drunkards and whoremongers, and
swearers, and villanes, and jearers of Gods people, and laugh at his
Ordinances, this makes the Lord laugh at their destruction. I beseech you
therefore, all you that yet never received the Gospel of Jesus Christ, consider
what I have said. Use. 2. Gospel Ministers to be embraced.


In the fourth place, if the Gospel, and the Ministry of it be good tidings,
and glad news to the worst of sinners; Then Beloved you should me thinks
embrace with all affection the true, and sincere Ministers of this Gospel,
these Messengers that bring you these glad tidings we. are (as the Apostle
says) the offscouring of the world, a spectacle to men, and Angels. Truly,
there are no Ministers in the world that are more persecuted, and hated, and
despised, than the humble, sincere Ministers of the new Testament, of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, nor never were; This is a sore, and a strange thing, if
we did bring one word that were sad, and grievous, and harsh to you, it were no
wonder, but if all that we speak be the voice of the dove, doves language,
all sweet; come to the Gospel Ministry, if there come a poor man full of
sadness, the Ministry of the Gospel speaks a word of comfort to him, if he be
in darkness, and he knows not which way to go, waiting on a Gospel Ministry
there is light to find his way. If he be in fear, and know not his estate
what he is, a Gospel Ministry will give him assurance of Gods love; so it
brings glad tidings to some souls every hour. Is not this than madness in men
that of all creatures in the world they hate that man, and those Messengers
that bring these blessed glad tidings. There is a Prophecy in Isaiah 52. 7.
How beautiful upon on the mountains are the feet of him that brings good
tidings, that publishes peace, that brings good tidings of good things, that
publishes salvation; that says to the righteous, thy God reigns. How
beautiful are their feet? much more their lips; you do not in this as you do
in natural things, if a man come, and bring glad tidings of taking of such a
Town, or of such a victory, though it may be there is loss, and little good
in it, we all welcome it, and he is rewarded presently, and has all ways of
encouragment, and yet when people shall come, and by the Spirit of God make
known all the love of God in Jesus Christ, and all the riches of the Gospel in
Jesus Christ, that your hearts should so rise against it, that you should
receive and entertain so many prejudices against it, it is a strange, and
wondrous thing. Therefore you should do well me thinks, as you read in the
book of God, 2 Samuel 18. 27. of two men that did bring tidings to David of the
wars, and the watchman said Me thinks the running of the foremost is like the
running of Ahimaaz the son of Zadok; and the King said, he is a good man, and
comes with good tidings. He would have the watchman open the gate quickly; why,
because he was a good man, and did bring good tidings. So we should,
especially if men be good, and holy, and humble, and feel the power of that
they speak, and express it in their lives, say as David, that is a good man,
and brings good tidings; he will teach me if I be ignorant, he will comfort
me if I be sad, he will direct me if I have lost my way; he will build me up
if I thrive not in grace. The consideration of this truth me thinks should
bannish all those strange thoughts, and prejudices that we have against the
Ministers of the Gospel.

In the first place another lesson is this, if the Gospel be such good news,
such glad tidings, then you use. 5. To hearken to, and inquire after the Gospel.
should hearken much after it, and inquire much into it. We all (you know) are
naturally greedy to hear news, and we know how much time is spent (here in
the City especially) in reading Diurnalls, inquiring after tidings, and how
much money is cast away that way. We should do so much more about these
glorious tidings of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. It is not enough to hear a
Sermon, or to read a Chapter once, or twice a day, as it is the manner of some,
that will not bring us to know the mysteryes of the Gospel, but we must search
the Scripture, and compare spiritual things, with spiritual things. As in
earthly tidings, if a man tell of such a victory one way, and another after
him another way, and a third a third way, you compare what they say, and their
letters, and news, to find out the truth. So you should be earnest in seeking
God, and bego his Spirit, compare Scriptures together, see what the Scripture
says in such a place, and how in another place, and this is the way to find
out the mystery of the Gospel.

These tidings are great, therefore inquire into Gospel tidings great and true.
them, and they are true tidings, they are not fables, and tidings of common
concernment to every Saint; therefore let this be the use that thou and I
should make of it, to desire the Lord to lead us into the depth of those
mysteryes, and to set our selves to study it more, and more; for the further
we go the more we shall find, as in a mine; It is not as in your news, many
times you have a great deal of good news, and in a day, or two it vanishes
to nothing: But here you shall find, first the field, and then the pearl.
Professors are grown careless, they were wont to read Chapters morning, and
evening, that was ordinary, but thou must do more if thou will understand the
mysteryes of the Gospel, compare one Chapter, and one Scripture with another,
search the Scriptures, and go to God to open the meaning of it.

Sixthly, spread these glad tidings as much as you can use 6. To spread these
glad tidings to others.
to others. You know when people receive good news they run and tell it to
others. The poor shepherds Luke 2. when they heard the news of the Messiah,
they left their sheep, and ran to the Towns to tell it. So, when Christ was
risen Mary runs to tell the news to the Disciples. Beloved, when we understand
this good news we should endeavor to spread it. People buy Diurnalls for
their friends, and fold them in their Letters, and send them about the
Kingdom; let us do so with these spiritual tidings, that we may send them
forth. O, I would to God that we did see how the poor Countries in the North,
and West of England, in many places, in Towns, they have not so much as a
Service-booke, not so much as reading; if God settle, and compose these times
the Lord give you hearts to join together to find out a course, to send the
Ministers of the Gospel to bring the glad tidings to poor people, that lie in
the Mountains of darkness, and in the shadow of death.

And let us not be so curious, or scrupulous, as to hinder Gospelpreaching not
to be hindered.
people that they should not preach the Gospel. Suppose people have no degrees
in the University, or it may be have not the knowledge of the tongues, (though
that were to be wished) let us not pick quarrels with them to stop their
mouths, and to hinder the preaching of the Gospel. And let us not think so
hardly in these days, of those men that God has raised to preach the Gospel.
It is strange you shall have your Pulpits ring, calling them Tub-preachers, and
Tinkers, and Cobblers. We should think better of them; Why? they are filled with
good news, and they goo and tell it to others. We do so usually in other
things, when we have good news, we run to our friends, and neighbors, and
comrade's, and make it known.

This is an age wherein God comes and fills his New light discovered in these
days.
people, with the glorious light of the Gospel, and poor wretched, they cannot
choose but speak what they have seen, and heard; therefore be not so captious,
and furious. The Lord has spoken, who can but prophecy.} Amos 3. 8. When God
fills peoples souls with the knowledge of Christ; who can keep it in? It is as
the new wine spoken of in Joh, it cannot be kept in. And surely the time is
coming that young men shall see visions, and old men shall dream dreams, and
God will pour out his Spirit upon all flesh, and they shall prophecy; It is
prophesied in Joel, and this is to be made good in the new Testament. And
therefore if we see that the Lord fills young men, or tradesmen, etc. and
gives them hearts to go, and tell the good news to others; why should you be
so extremely troubled, and spend your spirits in rage at it?

I use not to tell stories, but let me tell you this one thing; since I have
been from you of late, I have observed, and seen, in the Mountains of Wales,
the most glorious work that ever I saw in England, unless it were in London;
the Gospel is run over the Mountains between Brecknockshire, and
Monmouthshire, as the fire in the thatch; and who should do this? They have no
Ministers: but some of the wisest say, there are about 800 godly people, and
they go from one to another. They have no Ministers, it is true, if they had,
rhey would honor them, and bless God for them; and shall we rail at such,
and say they are Tuh-Preachers, and they were never at the university? Let us
fall down, and honor God; what if God will honor himself that way? They are
filled with good news, and they tell it to others; and therefore vex not at
them, and say, O, what times are these! and what will become of us? Why, what
is the business? O, such a man he was never Master of Arts, he was never at
the university, and he rakes upon him to preach; when it may be he has more of
God in him than I, and a hundred that have all this.

Only take two Cautions. Cautions


First, I speak not to disparage learning, or learned Learning not to be
disparaged
men, it were to be wished that there were more godly, and learned men also in
England, and Wales.

Secondly, take this Caution, that because God Men not run before they be sent.
fills many with the Gospel, and they do a great deal of good, take heed
least any of you run before you be sent, that is, that a man go not rashly;
and believe his own judgment rather than the judgment of the Saints; as
diverse in this City they think they are fit to preach, and other people of God
that are better able to judge of their gifts think not so, and yet they will
run presently. Take heed of pride, and rashness, but if God fill a man with
the tidings of the Gospel, and others of the people of God see it spark le out
as a vessel full of new wine, who am I that I should resist, if with humility
he make known this tidings to others?

If the Gospel be such a thing (as I desire you to spend some thoughts in
considering of this truth) Use 7. Comfort against present troubles.
then this should comfort us, and help our patience a little in these trouble
some times; that though all be out of order, and we suffer such losses, yet
blessed be God we have the voice of the turtle still in the Land; thou may
say, though I have hard news at home; trading is low, and my stock is small,
yet blessed be God I have the Gospel, that is, I have abundance of glad tidings
made known to my ears, and to my soul every day. This is some comfort, you
have less of outward things, but more of inward (I suppose) then ever.

Another thing is this, if this be so, then it is a caution Use 8. 1.
that is necessary to be observed by us that are Ministers, they must take heed
of two things. Not to corrupt the Gospel.


First, take heed of corrupting, and adulterating this blessed Gospel, and glad
tidings with their own wisdom, it is glorious enough of it self, every
addition of humane wisdom makes it worse; take heed of sophisticating the word
of God, of playing the hucksters, as the Apostle says 2. Cor. 3. we are not
those that play the hucksters, hucksters mingle apples and pears: they mingle
their commodities, take heed of that.

And then take heed of mingling the Law, and the Gospel together. It is true
the Law is necessary, and is 2. Not to mingle Law and Gospel.
added to the Gospel; but God intends not in the new testament that it should
be mixed and mingled with the Gospel. As to instance in a few; many ministers
undo the souls of people, I know this by experience that a Gospel-heart, that
is but weak in Gospel light, and grace, had rather lie a year in close prison
than to be a year under a ministry, jumbling old and new together the Law
and the Gospel, for it routs, and on sounds a poor soul. As to preach terror
and damnation to a sinner qua a sinner, properly as a sinner; though we be
called ministers of the Gospel, yet this is a part of the ministry of the
Law: for the Law brings curses for a sinner, and blessings for him that does
well; now when we quatinus as a sinner damme him, and curse him, we harden him,
and make him run 2. It is legal to do good or abstain from evil for fear of
judgment.
further from God then before.

Secondly, when men have drawn men to good, or driven men from evil with
judgments, either spiritual, or temporal: this was the way of the ministry
of the old testament. When people shall take all the judgments of the old
testament, and persuade a man to do this or to take heed of that, or else thou
shall have judgment fall upon thee, and thou will bring judgment, upon the
Land. Beloved, this was the way of God certainly and the way of the ministry
of the old testament; but I never knew a saint avoid evil, or do good for
fear of such judgments. Therefore look to thy own experience; men may play at
dice with the word of God that way; if a man's ways like them not, they may say
they will bring judgment upon the Land, as Independants, or as such, and such
men; but these are but bugbeares, why? because in the Gospel, the saints are
dilivered from the hands of their enemies that they may serve God with out
fear: they know that in God there is no cloud, God may chasten, and correct
them out of love but there is no danger otherwise. And then again they are
delivered from men, they are not the servants of men.

I do think for my part constantly, that the main Cause of divisions.
cause of all the divisions, and stirrs, and contentions among us is because
there is so much of the old testament in our ministry especially, and our
profession must be accordingly; for our strength will be according to our meat.
And truly a man may be a Godly man, and yet may be a minister of the old
testament; and if you take a man, let him be a Godly man, if his grace be bred
in him by the ministry of the old testament, and nourished in him by that: and
take another saint that has grace planted, and bred by the ministry of the
Gospel, and nourished by that, the former man though he be godly, must of
necesity persecute the latter. I pity them when ministers rale against this
man, and against that, and they know not why, yet they may be Godly men.
Ishmael might be a Godly man for ought I know; he was a type, not of wicked
men, but of men under the old Covenant, If ever you will have peace and
comfort, in the Land, beg of God to remove an old testament spirit from our
preachers, from our prayers, and our principals, and to set up the new
testament, Jesus Christ in the Gospel, and then certainly the promise shall be
fulfilled, we shall be all of one heart and one way, and one mind, but it will
never be otherwise as long as some reach to the ministry of the new testament
and others go in the old, as Ishmael, and Isaak could not be reconciled, no
more will these.

I will conclude all only with this last word, seeing Use 9.
it is clear out of the word (and so truly I hope To receive the Gospel.
you apprehend it through Gods grace that the whole Gospel is Good, it is
nothing but sweet and glad tidings to the worst of sinners, much more to
saints; then I exhort you in the name of Jesus Christ that you receive this
Gospel. O there is no reason why thou should be so shie of Christ when we
speak fair, and offer fair to your souls, and beseech you earnestly, and
give you reasons why you should receive Christ, you harken but a little, and
you go away so shy, there are some sinners still: beloved there is no reason
for it, God deals plainly; there is no tittle in the Gospel but it is really
good and glad tidings to the worst of sinners; therefore receive it. What is
that? Endeavor to believe it, for the Lord Jesus that is the faithful
witness 1. To beleve it.
has said it: and children heretofore used to say, it is as true as Gospel;
and though it be Gospel, and truth yet you will not believe it.

Then endeavor to embrace it with joy, and affection 2. Embrace it with joy
as in 1 Thessalonians. 1. see how they received the Gospel in joy with much
affliction. What if it bring a little affliction with it, that thou be jeared;
receive it with joy, it is joyful, and glad tidings.

And then resign thy self give thy self wholly up to 3. To give up our selves
to it
walk according to this blessed Gospel, and not to turn it into wantonness, or
abuse it, but that thou may give thy self body and soul as a living
sacrifice to Jesus Christ, that since he died for thee, and has given thee
abundant righteousness, and everlasting salvation, and all blessed, and glad
tidings in it, that thou may give thy self, and all that thou have, and art
freely to live to that Jesus Christ, and to obey his blessed commands. These
are the uses that you and I should endeavor to make, that this truth may
remain, and abide with us, that there is nothing in the whole ministry of the
new testament but good tidings, and glad news to the worst of sinners.

FINIS.
An alphabeticall Table of the principal Heads contained in the foregoing
SERMONS.
A
ABuse, see Liberty Accident
Part. Page How men come to do good by accident 1. 148
Adoption
Spirit of adoption to be labored for 2. 40 Full spirit of adoption wha 2. 41
Affliction see moderated Age
Decency in regard of age 1. 82
All
All what meant by it 1. 4
Angels
Angels wait on the Saints 2. 18
Ascended
Christ ascended into heaven 2. 16

B
Backsliders
Backsliders their course 1. 156
Baptism
Baptism, how appointed 1. 16 Baptism, the substance of it only set down 1.
23 Baptism, the way to peace about it 1. 100 Manner of baptism determined by
the Magistrate 1. 108 Baptism doubted of by some 1. 141.
Believed, Believing
Believing in Christ what 1. 36 Gospel to be believed 2. 54
Bind
Not to bind others where Christ has not bound them 1. 59
Bishops
Bishops their practice 1. 48
Bondage
Spirit of bondage whence 1. 52
Brethren
Expedient actions bring good to our brethren 1. 70
Burden
Religion presented by some as a burden 1. 145

C
Scripture not all delivered in Canons 1. 167 Carnal, see outward Freedom
from Ceremonies 1. 14 Why men run from Christ 1. 26 See sinners, Spouse, mind
Christian, see spiritual, Question, excellent The Church may determine
concerning Gods worship how 1. 100 Cautions for Churches in determining Ibid
The ten Commandments of force in the new Testament 1. 13 Upon what ground
Saints obey the Commandments 1. Ibid See weakened Coming to Christ what 1. 36
Common see heart Paul's Compliance with men 1. 12 Concurrence of things to
expediency 1. 67 Condition of men by nature, showed by the Gospel 2. 11
Conscience of Saints to be warily dealt with in imposing laws on them 1. 111
Contention one cause of it 1. 41 Ignorance of Christian liberty causes
Contention 1. 54 Contention to be avoided 1. 71 Contentions among Saints how to
end them 1. 99 No reason of the present Contentions 1. 125 Contentions whence
they are 1. 128 Gospel not to be Corrupted 2. 52 Gods Covenant in the Gospel 2.
16 Of being Covered, or uncovered in heating the word 1. 114 Creature what
meant by it 2. 3 Gentiles called creatures, why 2. 4 Credit to be given to
what Christ teaches 1. 36 Custom hardly broken 1. 21 Custom of Churches, and
Saints to be looked to 1. 113 Custom the weakest rule in spiritual things 1.
114
D
Damned, Damnation
A man may be damned for doing lawful things 1. 92 Damnation of Gospel
refusers just 2. 43 Decency what 1. 78 see person, relation profession, sex,
age, season Those that eyenot expediency lead others to destruction 1. 150
Things that God has determined not to be weakened, 1. 65 Things concerning
worship to be determined how 1. 170 Service of the Devil hard 1. 33 see
sweetness Christ died for us 2. 15 Sweetness in sin from distemper 1. 34
Division, the cause of it 2. 53 Christ a door, how 1. 29 Duties means of
salvation how 1. 31 Duties not to justle out one another 1. 78 Duties how
required in the Gospel 2. 22

E
THe ways of Christ easy 1. 29 Things left for us to do easy 1. 32 Christ's
ways easy how Ibid What use to be made of Gospel easiness 1. 97 Gospel
duties few, and easy 2. 24 Expedient actions tend to edification 1. 73
Disorderly actions miss their end 1. 87 Religion presented by some as endless
1. 143 Enfringe, see liberty, Engagement to parties inexpedient 1. 171
Encouragement see Sinners, Things simply evil inexpedient 1. 62 Good to be
ommitted when their comes a greater evil 1. 63 Every example makes not a law 1.
55 Example of old Saints to be looked to 1. 112 See rule Benefit of Gospel
excommunication 2. 33 What makes an excellent Christian 1. 152 Expediency what
1. 7. 66 Expediency to be looked to as well as lawfulness 1. 11 Few things
expedient 1. 61 Meaning of the word expedient 1. 88 Helps to expedient walking
1. 177 See strict Externalls how far to be looked to 1. 22 See Worship
F
Some men pleased with doctrine out of faction 1. 163 Faith required, and bred
by the Gospel 2. 25 Sinners invited to a feast 1. 28 Vain fears in Gods ways
to be avoided 1. 104 Fears, and horrors whence 2. 41 Things left for us to
do, few 1. 32 Few turn from Christ to serve Satan 1. 35 Who they be that
intend good but to a few 1. 140 Gods love fruitful 2. 13 Danger in making
laws for the future 1. 110
G
Gentiles the worst of sinners 2. 5 see creature Expedient actions advance Gods
glory. 1. 69 Who they be that do little for God. 1. 143 Why men do little for
God. 2. 29 Godly men how a cause of the present distractions. 1. 133 see
judgment. Things simply good may be unexpedient. 1. 63 A less good must give
way to a greater. Ibid Good when to be refrained. Ibid see evil, easiness. To
preach the Gospel, what. 1. 27 Liberty in the Gospel, what. 1. 95 Gospel, what
meant by it. 2. 2 Difference between the Law and Gospel. 2. 7 Gospel, to be
enquired after. 2. 47 To give up our selves to the gospel. 2. 55 see strict,
new, Ministers, corruption. Two wrong governments. 2. 27 Grace more in the new
Testament than in the Old. 1. 10 Guilt in the Saints, whence. 1. 52. 138
H
Hair.
OF wearing long hair. 1. 116 see Papists, natural, Devil. Doing lawful
things with common hearts brings guilt. 1. 138 Excellent Christians busied
about high things. 1. 154 Hindrances to expediency. 11. 171 Gospel tidings not
to be hindered. 2. 49 A sign of an hypocrite to regard only lawful things. 1.
90 Hypocrisy hinaers expedient walking. 1. 177
Hold, see Liberty.
Things honest, what. 1. 84 Spiritual honor real. 2. 17

I
Jealousy.
DEvout jealousy touching truth and error. 1. 173 The service of the Jews in
the old Testament 1. 32 Lawful things done inexpedi ently bring guilt 1. 139
Ignorance, see contentions others Independency 1. 49 Hurtful principles of
Independents 1. 123 see Presbytery, contention Indifferent things what 1. 64
Interpret see word Christ's intercession for us 2. 16 Gospel to be embraced with
joy 2 54 Godly men differ in judgment 1. 125 Christ shall come to judgment 2.
16 Judgments how denounced 2. 35

K
Magistrates may determine in things that relate to their Kingdom 1. 110
Knowledge see outward liberty
L
CHristians must walk laudably 1. 83 Why God laughs at men's destruction. 2. 45
Of those that abolish the morrall Law 1. 42 Those that make laws to tie
themselves 1. 46 Those that make lanes to bind others 1. 47 Danger to take
away any of Gods laws 1. 59 Not to make laws where God has not 1. 158 Men's
laws forced on people 2. 28 Law and Gospel not to be mingled 2. 52 see
example, Gospel Things lawful now that were not of old 1. 5 Lawful, what
meant by it 1. 6. 62 Sin in doing lawful things Ibid Saints now their liberty
in point of lawfulness 1. 8 Christians troubled in the use of lawful things
1. 74 Men reproved that regard only lawful things 1. 89 see expedient, rule,
submit heart Learning not to be disparaged 2. 51 Errors on the left hand 1. 40
Liberty of Saints in the New Testament 1. 14 Why Christ has left that liberty
1. 17 To understand our Christian liberty 1. 51 Knowledge of Christian liberty
safe Ibid Christian liberty not to be infringed 1. 55 Christian liberty not to
be abused 1. 59 Christian liberty to be held fast 1. 160 see others,
contention, Gospel Life see salvation
New light discovered 2. 49 Expedient actions increase love 1. 70 Love to be
practiced by Saints 1. 106 Love to a man's self natures law 1. 119 Love a help
to expedient walking 1. 179 Gods love in the Gospel to sinners 2. 13 Things
lovely what 1. 85

M
MAgistrates how far they may determine concerning Worship 1. 107 Cautions for
Magistrates in determining 1. 109 see, time, place, Malignants cause of the
present contentions 1. 132 Many see all,
Masters of families how they may determine concerning worship 1. 109
Means, see duty
Members of Christ who 1. 35 Saints in the new Testament grown men 1. 18
Excellent Christians have Christ's mind 1. 153 Ministers forced on people 2. 28
Gospel Ministers to be embraced 2. 45
see stumbling blocks
Afflictions moderated to the Saints 2. 20 Modesty a law of nature 1. 119
Common multitude cause of the present contentions 1. 134

N
Nature.
THe law of nature to be looked too. 1. 118 Gods ordinary commands agree with
the law of nature. 1. 119 Contrary names put upon men and things. 1. 101 Names
of persons and things changed by the Devil. 1. 131 Service of natural men
hard. 1. 33 Magistrates may determine in necessary indifferent things. 1. 109
The Ministry of the Gospel nothing but good news. 2. 6 Latitude of Saints in
the new Testament. 1. 12 see grace, liberty.

O
Offended, see law.
OFfices and officers in the new Testament. 1. 17. Saints tied more strictly of
Old. 1. 8 see lawful, grace. Punctual laws in the Old Testament. 1. 15. Old
Testament spirit, what. 1. 95 Sign of an old testament-spirit. 1. 91 How men
deprive themselves of opportunities. 1. 147 Christians must walk orderly. 1. 86
Things done disorderly, how. 1. 87 What hinders men from winning others. 1. 53
see law.

P
Papists.
Hardness of Papists service. 1. 33 Men offended that their party is spoken
against. 1. 163. see engagement. Posseover strictly observed. 1. 16 What
actiins tend to Peace. 1. 71 The way to peace. 1. 100. 122 No peace to the
wicked, how. 2. 34. see self, prosperity. Some men think truth always goes
with persecution 1. 175 Persecution of Saints a privilege 2. 19 Decency in
respect of a Christians person 1. 78 Place of meeting to worship how to be
determined 1. 108 Pope, his practice 1. 48 Power given in the Gospel to do
what is required 2. 23 Practice, see Pope, Bishops Things worthy praise what 1.
85 Praise only to God 1. 86 Of preaching 1. 116 Precepts of several sorts 1.
56 see rule Prejudice inconvenient 1. 172 Of Presbytery 1. 49 Fall Presbytery
1. 101 True Presbytery 1. 102 Presbytery, and Independents wherein they differ
Ibid Presbyterians judgment 1. 124 Contention from carnal Presbyterians 1. 129
Principles and ends of carnal Presbyterians 1. 136 see contention Principles
see Presbytery Privilege, see persecution Outward profaneness by whom
allowed 1. 43 Decency in respect of profession 1. 80 Profit meant by expediency
1. 66 Profit how brought by actions expedient 1. 68 profitable see sin Truth
goes not always with prosperity 1. 173 Prosperity sometimes goes with truth 1.
75 Of singing Psalms 1. 115 Things pure what 1. 85

Q
Christians full of Questions why 1. 140
R
THe Saints must be dealt with rationally 1. 110 Reason of three sorts 1. 117
Right reason, what Ibid Rediculous to tie the Saints where Christ has not 1.
50 Religion presented by some as rediculous 1. 146 Christ came to work
redemption 2. 14 Decency in regard of a Christians relation 1. 79 Religion, see
endless, burden Things of good report what 1. 85 Benefit by Gospel reproof
2. 31 Right hand errors 1. 44 Rigor not to be used in determining things 1.
111 The Law the outward, and the Spirit the inward rule 1. 13 What precepts or
examples make a rule 1. 58 To walk all by the same rule 1. 103 Every thing in
Scripture not a rule 1. 166 see Scripture
S
SAlvation to be accepted of from Christ 1. 37 Wrong ways to salvation 2. 12
Rules mis-drawen from Scripture 1. 168 Heed in drawing rules from Scripture 1.
169 see Canon, Rule, Decency in regard of season 1. 82 The way to peace in a
man's self 1. 138 Self a hindrance to expedient walking 1. 177 Ministers not to
run before they be sent 2. 51 The Saints under the old Testament servants 1. 17
Decency in regard of sex 1. 80 Engagement to sinners to come to Christ 1. 26
Leaving of sin profitable 2. 21 God makes no peace with sin 2. 35 Salvation
offered to sinners as sinners 2. 36 see lawful singing, see Psalms Difference
small between Indedependents, and Presbyterians 1. 125 Sobriety a help to
expedient walking 1. 177 Saints in the new Testament sons 1. 17 Expedient
actions for the good of the soul 1. 74 The service of the devil will one day be
sour 1. 34 Saints in the new Testament have more of the Spirit 1. 19 Christ's
Kingdom spiritual 1. 20 The Spirit enables to do what is required 1. 35
Spiritual things to be studied 1. 105 Spiritual Christians their carriage 1.
141 Spiritual things by whom relished 1. 155 Spirit by whom restrained 2. 29
see rule Ministers to woe men as spouses for Christ 1. 28 Strength not given to
keep laws of our own making 1. 139 Men strive about unlikely things 1. 126
Men strive about that they cannot prove 1. 127 Doctrine not to be abused to
strife 1. 165 Gospel way a strict way 1. 94 To be strict in point of expediency
1. 98 Stumbling Blocks keep men from Christ 1. 27 Stumbling Blocks removed 1.
162 Saints now tied chiefly to the substance of things 1. 23 see supper To
submit to Christ's laws 1. 38 To look to our principles against times of
suffering 1. 176 Supper of the Lord how ordained 1. 16 Substance of the Lords
Supper set down 1. 24 Sweetness in the Devils service whence it is 1. 34
Sweetness in Christ's service not tasted Ibid
T
EVery thing in the Gospel glad tidings 2. 11 Gospel tidings great, and true 2.
48 Gospel tidings to be spread abroad Ibid Tie, see ridiculous Time of public
worship by whom to be aetermined 1. 107 Comforts against troubles 2. 51 Things
true what 1. 84 Saints of old as children under tutours 1. 18
V
Sign of unbelief 2. 36 understand, see liberty Unsetlednesse in Religion
whence 2. 37
W
VVatchfulnesse a help to expedient walking 1. 179 Weak Christians cause
contentions 1. 129 Nothing commanded by God to be weakened 1. 165 Some make the
way wider than Christ has made it 1. 40 Expedient actions tend to the winning
of others 1. 73 see others Carnal wisdom a hindrance 1. 176 Spiritual
wisdom a help to expedient walking 1. 177 God will interpret his own word 1.
174 Fancy to be subjected to the word 1. 178 Notions to be followed as they
agree with the word The maine work of salvation done already 1. 29 Liberty in
the externalls of Gods worship 1. 15 No liberty in the substance of Gods
worship Ibid The maine work done concerning worship 1. 104
Y
Yoke of Christ, what 1. 9.
READER,
THe number of the Pages in the latter three Sermons, beginning with 1, 2, 3,
etc. For thy ease in the use of the Table I have set down what is contained in
the nine former Sermons, as Part 1. In the three latter as Part 2. Whereby with
ease may be found any head in either.

T. S.



