A CABINET OF Spiritual Jewels.

WHEREIN Man's Misery, God's Mercy, Christ's Treasury, Truth's Prevalency,
Errour's Ignominy, Grace's Excellency, a Christian's Duty, the Saint's Glory,
is set forth, In eight Sermons.

With a brief Appendix, of the Nature, Equity, and Obligation, of TITHES under
the Gospel.

And Expediency of MARRIAGE, to be lemnized only by a lawful Minister, so in
the Church, or public Assembly.

By JOHN CRAGGE, M. A. and Minister of the Gospel, at Lantilio Pertholy in
Monmouth-shire

2 Timothy 4. 2, 3. Preach the word, be instant in season and out of season,
reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all long-suffering and doctrine.

For the time will come, that they will not endure sound doctrine, but after
their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears.

LONDON, Printed by W. W. for H. Twyford, N. Brooks, T. Dring, J. Place, and
are to be sold at their Shops, 1657.

To the right Worshipful, Thomas Morgan, of Machen Esquire; and his truly
vertutuous Consort, Mrs Elizabeth Morgan.
Much honored Worthies,
GIve me leave to prefix your names to this Manuell, and conjoyne you in this
Dedication, whom Providence has linked in that sacred Tie, which so
mysteriously emblems Christ and his Church; and that, with that luster in your
Family, as Rubies and Diamonds, Carbuncles and Saphires, are matched in
Imperial Crowns; with that happy success in your Issue (those Olive branches
about your Table) as Rachel and Leah, which builded up the house of Israel;
with that harmonious Diapason in Religion, as Jachim and Boaz in the Temple;
with that beautiful and sweet asspect to your Neighborhood, as the Rose and
Flowre-deluce in Garlands; with that Halcyon calmnesse in the troublesome Sea
of this World, as Castor and Pollux to the Mariners. When Duty told me, in
something I was bound, in much I was not able, to express my grateful
affections toward you; I resolved (with that poor Persian, who had nothing to
entertain Artaxerxes with, but water fetched out of the next spring) to present
you with these Waters, drawn out of the Wells of Salvation, with this
unpolished Cabinet, not like that of Alexander's, embroidered with gold and
pearls, wherein he kept Homer's Iliads; but rather resembling that precious
stone in Dioscorides, black on the outside, checkered with golden spangles
within; or the Tree in Pliny, withered in the outward rind, fruitful in the
inner core: For indeed, the frame and structure of it (as mine) is homely, but
the truth enshrined in it (as Gods) is precious: for it comprises an Elixir of
that glorious Gospel, for which the British Nation has been so renowned, and
outshined all others in these Western parts, velut inter ignes Luna minores.
Transcendently renowned in a threefold respect: First, in regard of their
nursing Fathers of the Church. Secondly, of their primitive receiving of the
Gospel, as soon as any others. Thirdly, of retaining the purity of it after
others. For,

The first Christian Emperor was Constantine, inaugurated to the Diadem at
York, by acclamation of the Soldiers, Son of Helena, King Coile's Daughter, a
British Lady. The first Christian King the Sun beheld, was Lucius, Monarch of
Britain. The first King that appeared for reformation of Religion, (which for
many Centuries, with the River Alpheus, had coursed through the saltish brine
of corruption) was in part Henry the Eighth, more completely his Son Edward the
Sixth. The first Prince, that by his learned Pen laid Siege to the Hierarchy
of Rome, was King James; all of them of the British Race. What can be added
more, unless a proto-Matyr, to seal it with his blood?

Secondly, Britain, for primitive receiving of the Gospel, may challenge
equiqage, if not precedence, with other Nations, which Gildas, the wise,
emblazons; for, relating the tempestuous storms, and billows of calamity, his
Countrymen were tossed withal, under Claudius his bloody War, with the same
breath he mentions a sudden miraculous calm. In the mean time (says he)
Interea glaciali fr^igore rigente Insula, etc. Gild. de excidio Britan. cap. 6.
Niceph. l^b. 3. hist. cap. 1. Theod. lib. 9. de curand Graec affect.
while Bellona was raging, there appeared and imparted it self to this cold
Island, (removed off from the visible Sun further than other Countries) that
true and invisible Sun, which in the time of Tiberius Caesar had shevved
himself to the whole World. B^itannorum l^ca Ro^anis inac^^lla Christo sub ta
sunt. Tertul. advers. Judaeos, cap. 7. 8.
Tertullian, who lived less then two hundred years after Christ, tells us,
that the British Territories, (not only the Southern, but) those unaccessable
to the Romans, were subject unto Christ. Brita^niam in Christianam consentire
religionem. Orig. Homil. 4. in Ezekiel.
Origin, who lived in the year of Christ, 260. says, that the Britains had
consented to the Christian Religion. And St. Gallia, Britannia, Africa, Persis,
oriens India, and omnes barbarae Nationes unum Christum adorant, unam observant
regulam veritatis. Jerome. ad Evagrium
Jerome proclaims, that Gaul, Britain, Africa, Persia, East India, and all
barbarous Nations, adore one Christ, and observe one rule of truth. And this
Evangelicall light was brought hither both by Apostles, and Apostolic men:
Apostles, first St. Peter, if credit may be given to Simeon Metaph. apud
Surium, die 23 Jun. page 862.
Simeon Metaphrastes and Surius, which seems to be confirmed by Innocent 1. in
Epist. ad Decent.
Innocentius, almost one thousand three hundred years ago, saying, The first
Churches of Italy, France, Spain, and the Islands that lie betwixt them,
(whereof, Eusengrenius says, Britain was one) were founded by St. Peter; which
may rationally be conjectured to be the cause, why Gild. page 2. Epist. de
excid. Brit.
Gildas amongst other things, objecteth to the British Priests, Quod sedem
Petri Apostoli inverecundis pedibus usurpassent, That they had usurped the
Apostle Peter's seat with unreverent feet. Secondly, St. Paul, whom Theodoret,
Sophronius, and Arnoldus Mirmannus in Theatro, quarto Neronis An. Dom. 59.
Arnoldus Mirmannus, affirm, to have passed to Britain the fourth year of
Nero, and there having sown the seed of life, to return to Italy. This
Venantius Fortunatus, eleven hundred years ago, witnesses of Paul's
Peregrination.

Transiit Oceanum, vel qua facit Insula portum,
Quasque Britannus habet terras, atque ultima Thule.
He passed the Oceans curled wave,
As far as Islands harbors have:
As far as Brittan yields a Bay.
Or Iselands frozen shore a stay.
Thirdly, Simon the Canaanite, surnamed Zelotes, of his zeal, in the second
year of Claudius, eleven years after our Savior's passion, arrived at Britain,
and preached the Gospel, as witnesses Dorotheus: Simon Zelotes peragrata
Mauritania and Afrorum regione, Christu^ praedicavit ta^dem in Britannia, ubi
crucifixus, occisus, and sepultus est. Doroth. in Synopsi.
Simon Zelotes having passed through Mauritania, and the Regions of Africa, at
last preached Christ in Britain, where he was crucified, slain, and buried.
Nicephorus Evangelii doctrinam ad occidentalem Oceanum, insulasque Britannicas
persert. Niceph. lib: 2. cap. 40. Baron. ad diem 28 October. Magdeb. cent. 1. l.
2. cap. 2.
avouches, that he having preached to many Countries, conveyed at the last the
Doctrine of the Gospel to the Western Ocean, and British Islands. With these,
Baronius, and the Magdeburgenses agree.

To these three Apostles, Antiquaries join some Apostolic men, or
Evangelists, as Aristobulus, whom St. Paul names in his Epistle to the Romans,
recorded by Mirmannus i^ theatro de conversione gentium. page 43.
Mirmannus, Dorotheus in Synop.
Dorotheus, and Baron. out of the Greek Martyrol. ad diem. 25. Martii. Johannes
Capgravius in Britanniae catalago. Polydor Virgil. hist. Anglic. lib. 1. Camde^
in descript. Prove. Belg. Brit. Harpsfield in histor. Ecclesiast. fol. 3.
Baleus, Fl^mingus, Scropus.
Baronius, to have propagated the Gospel in Britain; as also, Joseph of
Arimathea, a Nobleman of Jury, who buried our Savior, is said to have
traveled through Gaul, and from thence to be sent by St. Philip, (as some say)
or by St. Peter himself, as he passed that way too and from Britain, (as
others) into this our Nation, wherein he obtained a place to exercise an
Eremeticall life for him and his ten Companions, in the Island called Avallonia,
where Glastenbury after was builded. For this, there is a cloud of modern *
Witnesses.

Thirdly, Britain was renowned for retaining the Gospel in the primitive
purity, longer then other Churches, yea, then that of Rome, commended so much
by the Apostle, and afterward by Cyprian, as will appear by two circumstances,
whereof the former is this: When there was a Schism in the Eastern and Western
Churches, about the celebration of Easter, Polycrates, with the Oriental
Bishops, alleged the authority of John, Philip, Polycarp; yea, the prescript
of the Gospel for their warrant. Victor Bishop of Rome alleged for their
warrants St. Peter and St. Paul. Such as were more moderate, (which principally
were the Britains) Ostendit nec Victorem, nec Polycratem justam habuisse causam
de festo Paschatis tam odiose digladiandi, nam nec Salvator inquit, nec
Apostoli, (...). Socrat.
misliked to see a schism in the Church for so small a matter, judging with
Irenaeus, Observationes illas esse liberas, That those rites were things
adiaphorous or indifferent; concluding (as Socrates has it) that neither
Victor nor Polycrate had any just cause so bitterly to contest about such
trivialls, seeing neither Christ nor his Apostles, (...), by any Law had
commanded the observation of it.

Secondly, when Augustine the Monk Galfrid. Monumothensis histor. Britannica.
l. 8. c. 4.
imposed upon the British Church the Romish superstitions, they renounced them;
the occasion was this. Gregory, afterward Pope, surnamed the Great,
seeing-beautifull children sold in Rome, enquired Cujates, of what Country they
were? It was answered, Angli, English. Potius Angeli, (says he) Rather
Angels. He further enquired, Of what Province? They replied, of Dira. Nay,
(says he, knowing they were Pagans) Dei ira, the wrath of God. He thirdly
demanded, Under what King? It was answered, Alla. Efficiam (says he) ut canant
Halelujah, I will make, that they shall sing Hallelujah. Whereupon he shortly
after sent his Legate Augustine, Cent. 2. cap. 2.
to convert the Saxons; which being effected, he endeavored to persuade the
British Church to accept the Popes Supremacy, and the Romish Ceremonies, which
to that day they had not known, as Altars, Images, Vestments, Crosses; but
were strongly opposed by Dinotus, Daganus, and Columbanus, Qui nullam in
ritibus mutationem admittere volebant, which would admit of no change in
Religion.

But by degrees this Serpent insinuated, Centur. 6. lib. 5. cap. 17.
and got focting, in that King Osuvius inclined thereto; and the matter was
debated with so hot contention, that from words it came to weapons, and twelve
hundred Churchmen were slain, that refused subjection to the Sea of Rome: Yet,
the red Dragon wholly prevailed not, till almost two hundred years after this,
the whole Island was seduced by the blandishments of one Ecbertus, to submit
their necks to the Roman slavery.

Sed quorsum haec? Whither tends all this? To encourage us to stand fast to our
tacklings, and vindicate that Truth, thus famously in the days of yore,
glorified in this Nation, but now like Hippolytus his body torn piece-meales,
that scarce a wise Aesculapius knows how to join it; wherein I will
adventure, first a word of the disease, then of the cure.

The disease arises from the hedge of Discipline pulled down, when proud slime
will acknowledge no Superintendency over it. This Enclosure lay common; Satan
first persuades to deny Infant Baptism, then all Baptism, then all Ordinances;
whence, one turns Leveller, another a Ranter, a third a Quaker, a fourth a
spiritual Monarchist. One impugnes Christ's Divinity, and becomes an Arrian;
another his Satisfaction, and proves a Socinian; a third his Incarnation, and
turns Jew; a fourth a Sceptick, of all Religions, till truly of none, The cure
consists of two ingredients, first, soundness of judgment in profession;
secondly, sincerity of heart in practice. Soundness of judgment in profession,
respects either Doctrine or Discipline: Doctrine, which must be regulated by
those Oracles, delivered by our Savior and his Apostles, as interpreted by the
current of primitive Fathers, while (as Egisippus said) the Church was a pure
Virgin, (...), keeping Clemens Alexandria.
the good old way, as is expressed in the joint harmony of Confessions of all
reformed Churches. Discipline, that those grand Ecclesiastical Canons, [Let
all things be done decently and in order, in peace, without schism, without
scandall] may be precisely observed, and put in execution, by some
Scripture-grounded authority.

Besides these, the last, and not the least, is sincerity of heart in practice;
for, howsoever the World, doting upon gilded miseries, stinking vanities,
golden fetters, judges purity of the Spirit but Ecquid divitiae pereuntes, and
transitoriae facultates, nis^ stercora aeterna diligentibus sunt. Greg. in 2
Reg. c. 2. Non debet pro magno haberi honor humanus, quia nullius est ponderis
fumus. August de Civit. dei. lib. 5. c. 17.
folly, I can assure you, in the word of life and truth, the richest and rarest
confluence of all human happinesses, the most exquisite excellency and variety
of the greatest worldly pomp and splendor that ever the Sun saw, since the
first moment of its creation, is but dust in the balance; it is but dung, to a
humble mind, savingly enlightened with the foretaste but of the least glimpse of
that incomprehensible endless glory, which shall shortly be revealed to the
upright in heart.

To this end, the thirsty longing of my soul, and heartiest prayer shall ever
be, that ye may shine every day more and more gloriously, in all personal
sanctity, plantation of godliness in your own family, a holy zeal in advancing
the affairs of God, where you have any power or calling; that when the last
period of your mortal abode in this vale of tears, which draws on apace,
shall present it self, you may look Death in the face without dread, the Grave
without fear, the Lord Jesus with comfort. Thus let all the saving blessings of
Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity, be gloriously shining upon your selves,
your children, and posterity, which is the daily vote of him, who is,

Your Worships most humble and devoted Servant in the Lord Jesus, JOHN CRAGGE.
October. 10. 1656.
A SERMON, Preached formerly in the University of CAMBRIDGE.
The Text, Psalm 144. 4. Lord, what is Man!
A Time there was before all Times, when there was no Day, but the Ancient of
Days, no Good but God, no Light but the Father of Lights: Arts were but
Idea's; the World, a Map of Providence; Heavens, the Book in Folio; Earth,
Water, Air, and Fire, in Quarto; Hell, the Doomes-day pageant; Men and Angels
but Capital Letters, in the Margent of Gods Thoughts. Elohim Bara. But lo,
the World and Time begun, the Heavens were spread as a Curtain, the Spears
incircled round, Comets and blazing Stars, Lightnings and Tempests; Birds and
feathered Fowls, seated in the Air; Leviathans and Fishes, in the Sea: The
Earth infoulded within the arms of the Ocean embraces the Center, beset with
Plants and Herbs, and Garlands of all Flowers, gives nourishment to Beasts and
Creeping things. Sanctius his Animal, Lastly Man was made, Lord Paramount of
all; he calls Earth, Heaven, and Elements, Birds, Plants, and Beasts, according
to their Nature, each by their names: clear light of Reason, makes him a
Logician; Stars, an Astronomer; Nature of all Creatures, a Philosopher; Earth
and Paradise, a Geographer: Thus nothing is hid from him, while he is unknown
to all. The Stars shine, Heavens smile upon him, the Air cherishes him, Fruits
nourish him, Lions and all Beasts couch before him; all at once, as with a
sudden rapture, admire, and know not what to call him. It Is thou, O Lord, alone
that made him, that pouredst him out as Milk, that curdedst him as Cheese,
that writst all his members in the volume of thy Book, that knows him: Lord,
what is Man!

Man, that was here David's mirror of admiration, must be our glass of
speculation. Ignorance, in not knowing the true cause of things, is the true
cause of Admiration in things. David, a man after Gods own heart, knows Man,
and yet he knows not Man; he knows him, in respect of the efficient (...),
the offspring of God, as Aratus said; he knows him in respect of the matter,
Adam quasi Adamah, composed of red earth; he knows him in respect of the form,
his soul is spiraculum vitarum, breath of life's; life vegetative, common with
the Plants; life sensitive, common with the Beasts; life reasonable, peculiar
to himself, temporal and eternal. He knows him in respect of the end, all
his thoughts, words, works, are so many motions, God is the Center; his
speculations, imaginations, meditations, are so many Lines, God is the
Circumference; in God, from God, and for God, is all his good, in whom we live,
move, and have our being. But in this he knows not man, Reason is at a stand,
why God, that stood in need of no Creature, should create Man, to delight in
him so vile a creature; that Angels, more glorious Creatures than he, should
minister unto man; that Heaven, with all her Hosts and Armies, should serve
man; that Christ, that was (...), both God and Man, should be accursed and
dishonored for Man, that Man might be blessed and honored with God, should
leave Heaven and his Father's Throne, that Man might live for ever in Heaven,
and before the Throne. All Creatures! confess your ignorance in this;
confessing it, admire; admiring, give God the glory. Fountains, clap your
hands; Mountains, bend your heads, skip you little Hills like Lambs; old men
and Babes, young Men and Maids, Angels and Choristers of Heaven, join in this
hymn, Glory be to God on high, peace on earth, and toward men good will. But
why peace on earth, and toward men good will? cease to scan, and leave it to
him that is the Lord of Man: Lord, what is Man!

Which words are an Epiphonema, or, conclusion, following an Eucharistia, or
spiritual gratulation, enforced from a soul, deeply solaced with the
meditation of mercy, in the depth of misery. The parts are two: First, an
Apostrophe or Appellation, Lord! Secondly, an Erotema or Interrogation, What is
Man? There is a what of objurgation, a what of interrogation, a what of
admiration, a what of meditation* David meditates of Man; the more he
meditates, the more he admires; the more he admires, the more he asks; the more
he asks, the more is his task, till mirror is changed into terror, and every
glance into a trance. Earth that sustaines him, tell me; Fruits that nourish
him, tell me; Air that cherishes him, tell me; Creatures that serve him, tell
me; Stars that shined at his Nativity, tell me; Astronomers, calculate;
Gymnosophists, unfold this Riddle; Angels, unvail your faces, and tell me:
Man, unmask thy self, and tell me, What is man? Mount up my Meditations
higher, pierce through the clouds toward Heavens; Glorified Saints,
Principalities and Powers, tell me. If all these be silent, let wretched Man be
bold to ask of Him, that sits upon the Throne, concerning man, Lord, what is
man?

Man before the Fall created, Man after the Fall degenerated, Man by grace
regenerated, Man after death glorified. What, in his creation? What, in his
degeneration? What, in his regeneration? What, in his glorification? Man by
creation, wholly pure, an Angel; by degeneration, wholly impure, a Devil; by
regeneration, partly sanctified, a Saint; by glorification, entirely crowned, a
King. An Angel in Eden, a Devil in the World, a Saint in the Church, a King
in Heaven; and all this but silly Man: Lord, what is Man?

First, Man created before the Fall: what Man was in God's decree and
intention, before the Creation; what in his union and composition in the
Creation; what in his rule and dominion, after the Creation. Man, in Gods
decree and intention, a creature next to the Creator; that Hell envied, Earth
admired, Heaven desired; a Gemme of beauty, a Pearl of virtue, a Star of glory;
Heir to a Crown, if he had not crossed himself. What in his union and
composition in the Creation? The Son of God, molded by God, and yet not (as
the Manichees dream) of the Substance of God; the Image of God, and yet not
that Image which was God; a Spirit from Heaven, breathed into a Body of Earth,
and yet not all earth. Fire gave him natural heat, Air gave him vital
breath; Water, humors: the Fire was purified, the Air cleansed, the Water
purged, the Earth refined to make up this fine complexion of Man; and yet
materiam superabat opus, the workmanship surpassed the matter, as far as Heaven
surpasses its matter; At the contemplation whereof, Dav^d bursts out into
admiration, Psalm. 139. 14. I was fearfully and wonderfully made. And Ga^en,
before an Atheist, composes an Hymn, in the praise of him that made him,
styling the fabric of man's body (...), the handiwork of God; (...), preserved
by God. For, the Body is the Soul's Castle, the mouth, the entrance; the Lips,
a double leaved door; the Teeth, a portcullis, and Ivory gate; the Tongue, the
porter, trenchman, and Soul's Orator; the Head, an eminent Tower, where four
senses external, Seeing, Hearing, Smelling, Tasting; three senses internal,
Common sense, Fantasy, Memory, keep so many scout-watches. The Brain, the
Armorie and Treasury, fenced about with hair, skin, bone, the pia Matter, or
golden Eure: the Neck, a Wheel to turn this Turret, to every point in the
Compass: The Tongue, Teeth, and Palate, musical Instruments, for modulation
of the voice; the Chordae, or silver cords, stretched through the body; the
Liver is the Well, the Pores, the Conduits; the Veins, the Pitchers of blood;
the Heart is the Cistern, and Fountain of Life; the Systole and Diastole moves
gales of wind, to free from putrefaction. For this cause, Man is called a
Microcosme, or little World, in that he resembles the greater World: The Liver
resembles the Ocean, the Veins, the lesser Rivers; the Breath, the Air; the
natural Heat, the warmth of the Air; the radical Moisture, the fatness of
the Earth; the Hairs of our head, the Grass of the earth; Knowledge, Light;
our Eyes, the Sun and Moon; our Beauty of Youth, the Flowers of the Spring; the
Thoughts of our Minds, Motions of Angels; our four Complexions, resemble the
four Elements; seven Ages, seven Planets. Thus was Man created a (...),
containing All, till that by usurping All, he lost All.

Neither was this Beauty solely the Bodies, but the Soul in beauty far
surpassed the Body, as far as the Soul is more active than the Body. The
Understanding clear, without ignorance; the Will holy, without disobedience;
the Affections calm, without distemperance; Thoughts undistracted, Heart
untempted, Conscience unwounded: The wonderful union of them both, more
wonderful than both. Earth and Heaven were espoused, a Body from Earth, a Soul
from Heaven, were united, that nothing but Death could part; nor Death neither,
if bodily concupiscence, with Martha, had not made choice of the worser part.
Knowledge of sickness and sorrows was unknown: No Paracelsus distracted about
Extractions. It would have been the Physicians Disease, that there was no
Disease; the Grave's Death, that there was no Death; Envie's Grief, that there
was no Envy.

What Man was, in Rule and Dominion after the Creation? Emperor of the whole
Earth, Admiral of the whole Sea, Heir of Eden, peerlesse Peer of Paradise;
that with the Grand Sultan, he might have insulted, styling himself, Ruler of
the World, and Shadow of God: With the Pope, have worn a triple Crown,
trampling upon Hell, triumphing upon Earth, trusting For Heaven. All Creatures
seeing the splendor of Majesty, and God's Image resplendent in this new
created Magistrate, with reverence pointed at him, with an Ecce Adam, lo Adam!
The Stars that, lately created, were gazed upon as the world's wonder, wonder
at this new created Star, with an Ecce Adam! The Angels, those ministering
Spirits, Heb. 1. 14. behold him, to whom they must minister, with an Ecce Adam!
God, who after the Fall, came with an Ecce exprobrandi, or upbraiding, comes
now with an Ecce demonstrandi, or declaring to all Creatures, Ecce Adam, lo
this is Adam, whom ye must all serve; this Adam, Lord of all, was Man, Lord,
what is Man?

Thus we have done with the first what, what Man was in his Creation: We come
to the second what, what man is in his Degeneration, where we must distinguish
of a threefold what; what degenerate Man is in his life, what in his death,
what after death. The Degenerate in life, what in his Body, what in his Soul:
In his Body, the length of his time, the strength of his time: What Man is in
the length of his time; His life is a Mask, his Prologue is acted in secret,
within the Curtains of the Womb; the Protasis in his Birth and Cradle; the
Epitasis, in his checkered mirth and sorrow; Death is the Catastrophe; the
Grave his Wardrobe. His time is a gliding Shuttle, a riding Post, a flying
Cloud, a spying Eagle, a floating Ship, a fading Flower. The Shuttle is
through, the Post is gone, the Cloud dissolves, the Eagle vanishes, the Ship is
out of ken, the Flower fades. His length is but a Span, his strength Grass,
his beauty but a Venice-Glasse, a China's Dish; his thoughts Dreams, his body a
Shadow, his flesh but a Vapor, his glory but a Taper, which begins as a
Bubble, continues as a Blaze, ends with a Blast. Lord, what is man?

Thus what Man his Body is, in length of time: the second what, in strength of
time, what in his Infancy, what in his Youth, what in his Manage, what in his
Old age; in all these Natures, ridle unfolding Sphinx his ridle. In his Infancy
an Image, has hands, and cannot handle right; tongue, and cannot speak; feet,
and cannot go; a soul, and cannot understand; an unreasonable Brute, in the
shape of reasonable Man, conceived in lust, imbrued in blood, brought forth in
sorrow with throbs and throws.

His Youth an untamed Tiger, unsettled Quicksilver, a Camelion of every color,
a Polypus of every shape, an Ape in all imitations, beginning to swell with
Pride, boil with Revenge, burn with Lust, gasp for Honor, gape for Riches.
Manhood is a Monster, composed of many miseries, a Sea of sorrows, a World of
wars, where all fears affright him: The Sea is full of Pirates, the Land of
Robbers; Wealth is envied, Poverty is contemned, Wit distrusted, Simplicity
derided, Religion suspected, Vice advanced, and Virtue disgraced. Old age is a
Creple, blind as Appius, blear-eyed as Leah, lame as Mephibosheth, bald in the
head, wrinkled in the face, rotten in the teeth, stinking in the breath, teasty
with choler, withered with dryness, overwhelmed with sickness, bowed
together with weakness, (...), looking upon the earth, which must be his
grave, till he lie down in the grave, gasping for breath; begins with crying,
continues with sighing, and ends with a groan, Lord, what is man?

Thus is every Age of life, a Stage of strife, that well may we sing with
Ausonius a Turtle-like Song, (...), every Time is a troublesome Tide, no place
or condition is secure in the world: Fear of Enemies affright, Suits in Law
vex, wrongs of Neighbors oppress, care for Wife and Children consume: The
house is full of cares, the Field is full of toil, the Country of rudeness,
the City of factions, the Court of envy, the Church of Sects, (...); What
course of life then shall a man take, when every life is a curse? What Art
shall he study, when he is the doleful subject of every Art, and studying it,
studies his own misery? What does Grammar teach him, but to speak the language
of his own confusion? The first part whereof contains the true Orthographie,
and charactering of his cares, the Comma's, Colons, and Periods, (if any there
be) of his passions. The second unfolds his Casuum discrimina, a thousand
diversities of dangers, accidents, varied with diverse Cases, with Genders of
sorrow, ingendring numberless, declining that which is good, and inclining to
that which is evil. The third displaies his misconstruction of Charity, in not
Concording and agreeing with equals, in not Governing his Inferiors, in not
submitting to the government of Superiors. And what is the last, but an
Accenting of his griefs, by several pricks in the flesh, and Scanning of
things upon the fingers of human reason, to tickle the ear of fancy and
affection?

What is his Rhetoric, but a Poison cooked in a painted dish? each Trope a
translation from Purity to Corruption; each Climax climbes up by degrees of
renewed grief; each Auxesis augments, and each Hyperbole makes up the height of
his hardship. What is his Logic, but an art of Reasoning, to inform Reason of
the loss of Reason? each Predicament a Ladder of human frailty, declaring the
Substance of his body of death, the Quantity and Quality of his sin, in what
Relation he stands to the Devil, Hell, and the Grave; the guilt of every
Action, the sting of every Passion, ubi, quando, Where, When, in what manner
and Habit every sin was committed; Demonstrating by causes, and proving by
Induction, his destruction. His Music is a Modulation, made up of diversity of
maladies, in place of melodies; his birth by Original sin sounds Base, by
Actual, Treble worse; unconstant, never keeps Tenor; his life is a Cliffe,
his might a Minim, his wit but a Crochet, his wisdom a Quillet, his glory but
a Quaver. Lord, what is Man?

His Arithmetic deciphers the numberless number of his necessities, adding,
subtracting, dividing, multiplying, measuring all things by the rule of Golden
number, roules in a Circle, and ends in a Cipher. His Physic serves to seek
out the symptoms of his sickness; the brain conceives frenzies, madness,
vertigoes in the brain; the Eye sees three hundred diseases in the sight of the
eye; the Ear can hear of a Parotis, or impostumated inflammation in the ear;
the tongue can tell of an Angina, or Argurangina, a Quincie, or silver-Quincie
in the throat, which ties the tongue-strings: The Hand can feel a Chiragra, or
Gout of bribery in the hand, the Sinews are sensible of convulsions of worldly
cares; the Bowels of Tympanies, or swellings of pride; the Heart of a
Cardialgia, or carnal fear; the whole Man of a noli me tangere, impatience of
admonition. Thus Man is become the Anatomy of Misery, and the Misery of
Anatomy; and yet his greatest misery is, that he cannot help his misery; making
the whole World a Pesthouse, the Earth an Aceldama, or field of blood, and the
Sea a Golgotha, or place of Sculs.

Thus what Man is in his body. The next, what in his Soul: First, What in
regard of misery of losses. Secondly, What in regard of misery of crosses. In
regard of misery of losses, the soul of Man has lost blessings internal,
external, eternal. Internal, the perfect Image of the Creator, the perfect
knowledge of the Creature; God, Christ, holiness in heart, uprightness in
life, union betwixt God and the soul, which is (...), the very soul of the
soul. Lost blessings external; not Rivers of Milk, Wine, Oil, Mountains of
Gold, Silver, Diamonds, not a world of Crowns, Scepters, Diadems, these were
but Blanks; but, the Prize in this Lottery lost, was his lot of inheritance in
Heaven, communion with Saints and Angels, in that inheritance that never
fails. Lost blessings eternal, the glory of a Crown, and a Crown of glory; the
blessed Vision, and the vision of Bliss, of the Trinity in Unity, and Unity in
Trinity,

Secondly, what the Soul of Man is, in regard of the misery of Crosses, crossed
with the stain of sin, crossed with the pain of sin; the stain of sin, the Mind
is stuffed with vanity, the Understanding is darkened with ignorance, the Will
stiffned with stubbornness; hence the Soul is defiled with lust, polluted with
filthiness, outraged with passions, over carried with affections, pined with
envy, overcharged with gluttony, surfetted with drunkenness, boiled with
revenge, transported with rage.

The pain of sin consists in consciousnesse, of horror of Conscience, and
sense of a reprobate sense. This horror meets a man in the dark, and makes him
leap in the night, and makes him quake in his sleeps, and makes him start in
every corner, and makes him think every Bush a Man, every Man a Devil, every
Devil a messenger to fetch him quick to Hell. By this, Theodorick saw the face
of a Man in the mouth of a Fish; Nessus heard the noise of Murder, in the voice
of Birds; Saunders run distracted over the Irish Mountains: This made Cain
wander, Saul stab himself, Judas hang himself, Arius empty his bowels at the
Stool, Latomus cry desperately, he was damned, Julian confess, that he was
conquered; makes Man, the Lord of all, slave to all: Lord, what is Man?

Thus this General, what degenerate Man is in this life; the next, what
degenerate Man unregenerate, is in his death: Come to his Bedside, and see how
darts of calamity dart him.

Stiches, aches, cramps, feavours, obstructions, rheum, phlegm, chollick,
stone, wind, as so many tempests and whirlwindes, attempt him: View his body
sweating, his members trembling, the head shooting, the face waxing pale, the
nose black, the nether jaw bone hanging down, the eye-strings breaking, the
tongue faultring, the breath shortning, the throat rattling, at every gasp, the
heart strings cracking. Thus struggling, in comes Death, Hells Purveyor, to
summon the Soul to Hell; Reason accuses, the Devil endites, Memory gives
evidence, Conscience condemns, damned Spirits flutter like flies, to catch
this Spirit flying. O then, with what stentorious cries would it pierce the
Clouds, if it had a voice to cry: Help Eyes, that were as quicksighted in
vanities, as Lynceus, and see for some comfort; help Ears, late organs of
melody, and hearken for some comfort; help tongue, that was my Suada-Orator, or
Demostenes, persuade Satan, affright Death, flatter Hell, and tell my soul some
comfort: Help Feet, that were my wings of swiftness, and quickly fetch some
comfort; help hands, that were my Sword and Buckler, quiet my conscience, stop
hells mouth, banish Satan, and minister me some comfort. Alas, the Eyes are
closed up, the Ears deaf, the Tongue speechless, the Feet lame, the Hands
dead, not able to remove the slime that stops the breath: and Man, that was
even now a Body and Soul, is a stinking Carcass without Soul: Lord, what is Man?

Thus Death is displayed. Next, what degenerate Man is after death: A man of
Death, fuel of Hell fire, lashed with Satyrs, wounded with Scorpions,
scourged with Furies, sting'd with Dragons, gnawen with Vipers, still rolling
the Stone of sorrow with Sisyphus, turning the restless Wheel with Ixion;
hungring and thirsting, freezing and burning with Tantalus, burning with heat,
freezing with cold. Romish crucifying, Turkish ganging, Jewish stoning,
Christian racking, burning, firing, fagotting, are nothing to this. And besides
this infiniteness, it is everlasting infinite; the Grass of the Field, Sands
in the Haven, Stars in the Heaven, may be numbered; but the Days, and Months,
and Years, and Ages, of the torments of Tophet, are numberless, which makes
the frying Soul cry out, Fountains cool me, Mountains cover me, Rocks hide me,
Sea swallow me up, that I may be freed from this bottomless Sea of misery.
What Adamant can endure this knocking? what Steel this beating? what Brass
this burning? Lord, what is Man?

We pass from man Degenerate, and come to man Regenerate, the third what; what
Man is by Regeneration, what in his Redemption, what in his Justification, what
in his Sanctification? In his Redemption, a Slave bought with a precious Price,
a Prisoner rescued, an Enemy reconciled, a Malefactor pardoned. Wretched Man
was the Prisoner, the Enemy, the Malefactor. Christ is the Price, the Rescuer,
the Reconciler, the Pardoner. Woods of Franckincense, Floods of Nectar, Ophir,
India, and Havilah, though replenished with Gold and Pearls, could not pay this
Price: Angels would have sunk under the burden, Man could not satisfy, God
could not suffer; therefore Christ became both God and Man; God, to satisfy,
Man to suffer: He left his Fathers Throne, for the Virgins Womb, a heavenly
Mansion, for a Manger; a Crown, for a Cross, where he was crowned with Thorns,
crucified between two Theeyes, as a Rose amongst Thorns; scourged with Whips,
fastened with Nails, pierced with a Spear: where, with Saint Augustine, view his
body sacrificed for man, his wounds bleeding for man, his price paid for man,
his head bending to kiss man, his hands stretched out to embrace man; and then
say, Lord, what is Man?

Secondly, what Regenerate man is by Justification, disrobed of
unrighteousness, arrayed with Christ's robes of Righteousness, clothed with
the Wedding garment, anointed with new Oil, furnished with the oil of Grace,
burning in his Lamp. The firstborn of Saints are his associates, God his
Father, Christ his elder Brother. Crete strove for Jupiter, Thebes for Pindar,
the seven Cities for the birth of Homer; shall not we for the Birth and
Brotherhood of Christ, which begets in us a new birth. This new birth frees Man
from the second Death; the strongest, the richest, the learned, must taste
of Death's cup; Pompey have no grave, Bajaset be brained in an iron Cage, proud
Saladine leave nothing but a shirt, Crassus be cashiered at Carrae, Aeschilus
was slain with a Torteis shell, Euripides torn by Dogs, Mahomet the false
Prophet by Hoggs, Terrence was drowned: But Man, that is born anew, Elected,
Justified in Christ, shall not die eternally, but live for ever with Christ.

Thirdly, what Regenerate Man is by Sanctification, changed from a vassal of
wrath, to a vessel of honor, a spiritual creature, purified with the Spirit,
not with Pelagian purity of conception, Romish holy water sprinkling, Popes
pardoning, extreme unction, purgatory scorching; not with the Libertines law of
Liberty, that has no Law; but by Grace in the soul, that graciously clenses
both body and soul. The Understanding is lightened, because Christ is his light;
the Will obedient to God, because he is born of the will of God; the Heart, by
spiritual comfort, is heartned, and gives over burning; the Conscience
barking; the Pulse of horror beating; all his Host of Body and Soul, is set
to serve the Lord of Hosts: Knees bend to pray, Tongue sounds to praise, Feet
run, Hands fight the Lords Battle. Nor is this all, but Man enjoyes him that is
all in all, and all in him: For in Christ, 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23. all are ours, we
Christ's, and Christ Gods. Satan cease to tempt him, Flesh to allure him World
to beguile him, all is in vain; the Word feeds him, the Spirit guides him, the
Creatures serve him, the Angels guard him; what joy of the Spirit within, what
without, none knows, no not the Spirit of Man, but the Spirit of him that made
Man: Lord, what is Man?

Thus what Man regenerate is in Redemption, Justification, Sanctification; we
come to the last what, what Man is in his Glorification; what glorified in soul
till the Resurrection, what in both body and soul to eternity, after the
Resurrection. What Man is glorified in soul till the Resurrection, a glorified
soul by Christ's Resurrection, winged swiftly upon the wings of Cherubims to
Heaven, where for every Cross she receives a Crown; in either Palm, a Palm
of Victory; Angels come at her entrance, and salute her with an Euge;
thousands of Seraphims, Thrones, Principalities and Powers, salute her with an
Euge; Patriarchs, Priests, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, salute her with an
Euge; Souls of Friends, Parents, Husband, Wife, Children, and all Saints
deceased before her, salute her with an Euge; nay, Christ himself salutes her
with an Euge, Well done, good and faithful servant! To whom that Soul, with
all the Souls, returns Hallelujah; honor and praise to the Ancient of days,
that sits upon the Throne. Now glorified Soul! that would have wondered with
the Queen of Sheba, at Solomon in his royalty, at the Grand Sultan going to his
Seraglio, at the Pope in his Procession; tell me how thou will wonder, and
glory to see that Wonderful, that neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard,
nor has entered into the heart of man. Lord, what is Man?

Thus what glorified Man is in Soul, till the Resurrection; the last, and not
the least, what glorified both in Body and Soul for ever, after the
Resurrection. Glorified, in regard of the place of Glory, the object of Glory,
the prerogatives of Glory. In regard of the place, which is Paradise, the third
Heaven, the Heaven of Heavens, the heavenly Jerusalem, built of pure Gold,
walled with Jasper, founded on precious stones; the Gates, twelve Pearls,
watered with the Water of life, planted with the Tree of life, bringing forth
twelve kinds of Fruits, to feed the twelve Tribes of Israel: Pallas Temple at
Troy, Diana's Temple at Ephesus, Jerusalem's Temple in Sion, must give place to
this Temple of the new Jerusalem, which is the place of glory.

And as glorified in place, so glorious by the Object of glory in that place:
The Object is, the vision of the Unity in the Trinity, where Man shall see all
Felicity in the Glass of the Trinity. Moses his face shined, with the shining
brightness of Gods hinder parts; Paul was senseless of all joys but Heaven,
when he was rapt into the third Heaven; Peter was transported in Soul, when
Christ was transfigured in Body: How glorious then will thy face shine, when
thou shall see God, face to face? enjoy the immediate communion with the
Trinity? which will be joy to man's soul, health to his body, beauty to his
eyes, music to his ears, honey to his mouth, perfumes to his nostrills, meat to
his belly, light to his understanding, content to his will, delight to his
heart, whole happiness to every part.

Glorious in the Prerogatives of glory; the body of a Mortal, made an
Immortal body; of a Corruptible, an Incorruptible; of a Natural, a Spiritual
of a Weak, a Powerful; of a Deformed, a Beautiful: A Body shining as the
Stars, the Soul in glory exceeding the Body, as far as the Moon exceeds the
Stars; Christ in brightness exceeding all, as far as the Sun the Moon. Thus it
shall be done to the Man, whom the King of Glory will honor. At the last doom,
will Mountains burn, Devils mourn, Man shall be mounted up with Angels, and
Christ the Archangell, toward Heaven: Open ye Gates, be ye opened, ye
everlasting Gates, and let the King of Glory come in, with all his troops of
Glory. Say all Creatures, what is any Creature? What is Man, Lord, what is Man,
that thou conferrest this glory upon him? Sing all Creatures, Men, Angels,
with Hymns, Anthems, Hallilujah's; keep an everlasting Sabbath of Thanksgiving,
with, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbaths, heaven and earth are full of the
majesty of thy glory: To thee we give all Honor and Glory both now and for
evermore.

A SERMON, Preached before the General of all the Forces of South Wales, and
the West of England.
The Text, Matthew. Cap. 13. v. 45, 46. Again, the Kingdom of Heaven is like
unto a Merchant man, seeking goodly Pearls:

Who when he had found one Pearl of great price, he went and sold all that he
had, and bought it.


HEAVEN is not feisable for money; then shall an earthly price run in equipage
with it? Well might this seem a Paradox, if it were not a Parable. That (...),
2 Cor. 4. 17. excessive weight above, transcends our Scales below. Earth is but
an Atome, and what we see, is scarce worth to make an Emblem of what we hope to
see. Well said Emped^cles, Terra terram inspicimus, aeihere aetherem; In an
earthen Globe, we see the earth's Diameter; and in a paper-Sphear, the Circle
of the Spears. A Mapp, displaies the World; Counters, the revenues of a Crown;
and, if we look up higher, a Pearl, a Palm of Victory: For, The Kingdom of
Heaven is like a Merchant-man, seeking goodly Pearls.

Seek, says our Savior, and you shall find; and, if ought, this Pearl is
worth the scrutiny* Earth has her precious Stones, the Sea her Pearls; then
what has Heaven? The World is a Sea, the Church a Ship sailing for Pearls,
and bound for Heaven the Haven. The Pixis of our Saviors speech, through this
whole Chapter, points at this Pole. In the first verse, we find Christ (...),
by the Sea. In the second, (...), entering into a Ship, and that (...), on the
Sea. And here resembling Heaven, (...), to a Merchant-man, trafficking by Sea.
Scripture has her rich Mines o^ Rhetoric, and in every Mine a Mystery. This
sweet conflux of the History with the Allegory, was not for nothing. Well then,
make on for this Kingdom. Christ is the Gate; the Word, the Way, the Key: This
Key has many Wards. In the third Verse, (...), a Parable of the Sower: (...),
in the 24. another Parable of the Tares: (...), in the 33. another Parable of
the Leaven: (...), 44. Again, the Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a h^dden
Treasure. And in the Text, (...), Again, the Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a
Merchant-man. A Parable, a Parable, and then another Parable; Again, and again:
and all these Parables and Againes, but Parallelisms to Heaven; Line upon Line,
and Precept upon precept. Lord, how blind are our eyes, that need so many
Lamps to enlighten them. The three first pointed at the power of the Gospel;
the fourth, at the price; this fifth, at the superlative transcendency of the
price. Gold is the best of Mettalls, Pearls better than Gold; Heaven is like
Pearls, nay, the best of Pearls, The Kingdom of Heaven, etc.

Parables had their birth in Paradise, He shall bruise thy heel, and thou shall
break his head, Gen, 3. 15. Plato commends them in his Dialogues, and does not
Christ? They are fit similitudes, or, if you will, comparisons. That which no
mortal eye has seen, (and such is Heaven) must be made known by that which
has been seen. Princes send Pictures, to inform their Paramours. Some things
sublimed above a mortal reach, must be read below in Characters proportioned;
as the Sun's splendor in a Pail, or as Medusa's head, is fained in Perseus
glittering Shield: Moses his face must have a Vail, before he can be spoke
with. These are threefold; Typical, as foretelling; Apologicall, as
illustrating; Methologicall, as instructing. This Parable is all; by Faith,
giving forefight; by Knowledge, sight; by Sanctification, insight into Heaven.
Then take up this Optick-glasse, The Kingdom of Heaven is like, etc.

The parts in general, of this Apologue, are two: First, (...), the thing that
is compared or like. Secondly, (...), to what it is compared or like. The thing
that is likened, is the Kingdom of Heaven; the thing to which it is likened,
is a Merchantman, seeking goodly Pearls. The Antapodosis, or reddition to the
former part, is not expressed, but by collection to be gathered from the
latter. As Synchronisms, so Parallelisms, that begin together, must needs end
together. Thus then take the Diagramma. First, a man under sin, is compared to
a Merchantman. Secondly, his seeking of some good things, (as omnia appetunt
bonum) to seeking of goodly Pearls. Thirdly, the price of glory in Heaven being
found, is compared to that one Pearl of great Price, the Merchant found.
Fourthly, as the Merchant sold all that he had to buy that Pearl, so must we
forsake all Earthly things, for this Heavenly Pearl. A Christian then is as a
Merchant; probable good things, as Pearls; Heaven is (...), that most precious
of Pearls; thus (...), by inversion, (...) by alternation. These are the two
passions the Philosopher makes of a Parable, (...), one thing alike irradiates
another: For, as face answers to face in a Glass, so the Kingdom of Heaven to
this Pearl: For the Kingdom of Heaven is like, etc.

Of these Parts, by Divine assistance, and your Christian patience, in order;
so using the Similitude, as Painters their Shadows, to illustrate the
Portraicture of the Text; (...), says St. Chrysostom: In Apologues, we must
have an eye at the Authors purpose, lest by too curious inquisition, we wring
out blood. Thus then take the Paraphrase, as a Chart, to direct our Compass in
the future discourse. St. Jerome, by goodly Pearls, understands the godly
Precepts of the Law and the Prophets; by that one Pearl of great price, the
precious blood of our Savior, by which we were bought with a price. The
Merchant sold all to purchase this Pearl; so, with St. Paul, we must forsake
the rites of the Law, ut Christum lucrifaciamus, that we may gain Christ. This
one Pearl being found, condemns not the rest, nor the Sunshine of the Gospel,
those lesser Stars of the Law; that was Marcion's Heresy, and the Manichees:
Sed quia omnis alia gemma sit vilior, says Aquinas, The luster of the Gospel
is more translucent than the Law; otherwise, (...), the Law is a Doctor to
drive us unto Christ.

Again, Goodly Pearls, (says the Gloss) is the glory of this World, deforme
conspicitur, all is but dung: That one precious Pearl is that unum
necessarium, the vision of the Unity in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, of Grace
here by Faith, of Heaven hereafter by Fruition. Omnia vendit negotiator, the
Merchant sells all for this (...), love surpassing all knowledge.

These goodly Pearls, (says St. Augustine) are unspotted and godly Men, which
the Merchant sought, (as Diogenes with his Lanthorn in the Market) and found
none; this one precious Pearl is Christ Jesus, both God and Man. Or, these
goodly Pearls are the observation of Gods Precepts: the precious Pearl is,
Charitas proximi, Charity, in which all virtues are contained. Or, these goodly
Pearls are the Mines of Knowledge; this one Pearl, is that one Truth, (...),
the Word made Flesh, Joh. 1. 14. This is the third Gloss, and (...), these
three ^re all that I find, all of them in several, answerable to the analogy
of Faith, diversity without contrariety, and all of them jointly perhaps to our
Saviors meaning, whether the Gospel, or Grace, or Christ, or Charity, or
Evangelicall Knowledge; the Kingdom of Heaven, in the language of Scripture,
comprises all, why then should not this Pearl, all? For, The Kingdom of Heaven
is like unto a Merchant-man, seeking goodly Pearls.

Thus the Paraphrase, now to the Parts: (...), Every Man is a Merchant, that is
the first Parallel; a Merchant, that Marts by Sea, not Land: For (...) is the
same that (...), which Vitruvius expresses by Mercatorem, and Lampridius by
Negotiatorem Maritimum, a Merchant by Sea: At this points Porphyry, upon the
second of Homer's Odysses, (...), one that trafficks by transporting: of which,
Plato says, in his Republica, (...), these are the Merchants. This appears by
the root, for (...) is a journey, and such a journey (as Budaeus says) as mari
conficitur, is made by Sea. Of (...), to pierce, as water does pores. Hence
(...) is sometimes (...), the Sea it self, and so Apollonius uses it. Well
then, we are all Merchants; this floating World, is the fickle Sea; these frail
Bodies, our Barks; our Wishes, our Oars; our Zeal, our Sails; inbred desire of
Good, our point in the Compass; Knowledge, our Pilot; Discretion, our Rudder;
Contemplation, our Mainmast; Providence, our Cables; and Hope, our Anchor;
(...), Take heed therefore to your tacklings. O navis, referent in mare te novi
fluctus, fortiter occupa portum. Horat. Make for the Haven, one wave treads
upon the neck of another, and where the old broak off, new scenes of surges
have taken up their cues. Poor Soul, thou art the Palinurus, which ventures
more, than all the West- Indian's Company is worth, while with the Argonautes,
thou floats for the golden Fleece, embarked in a Barge of Clay, (for what is
thy Body else?) all the world in sight is an Asphaltite, or dead Sea; each
sound, almost a Siren; each sin, a sink; each temptation, a tempest. Una
Eurusque, notusq, ruunt, creberque procellis Africus, (V^rgil Aeneid. 1.)
Whirlwinds wheel about on every side, and drives our shipwracked weather beaten
souls in brevia and syrtes, into desperate quicksands and shallowes, and tosses
our Sea-sick Consciences, with blustering Billows, angrier than Adria. On this
side, Scylla's sin-sinking Gulf devoures us in despair; on that side,
Charybd^s splits us on Rocks of presumption; here Satan, as a Pirate, assaults
us without; there, through infirmity, our Vessels leak within; and what can we
remember, that is not a Remora? Yet, we sing in security, as if the Halcyons
had builded their nests about us, and promise our selves as fair, as if Castor
and Pollux sat upon our Prora's or Poups. A wake, O thou keeper of Israel, that
rebukedst the winds, and they obeyed, rebuke these winds and they shall obey.
Thou that strechedst forth thy hand to Peter, when he was sinking, strecth
forth thy hand of mercy, and save our souls from sinking, that optata potiamur
arena, we may come to the wished for sand, where these goodly Pearls are
shrined. Thus, I perceive, you imagine, how unexpectedly my speech is glided,
from Merchant, our State or Vocation, to seeking goodly Pearls, our
Merchandise or Negotiation: The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a Merchant-man,
seeking goodly Pearls.

Seek, the Action; goodly Pearls, the Object. We must seek, which implies
Pains, the best of Actions; Pearls, the best of Merchandise; goodly Pearls,
the best of Pearls: Yet, Gold is but glittering clay, Pearls, but purer slime
congealed; why should we seek them? Erasmus commends his Moria; Phavorinus, his
quartane Feavour; Politianus, his Thersites; our Savior, the unjust Steward;
not their evil, but their good; not the Poison in the Toad, but the Pearl. He
that can bring light out of darkness, by his omnipotent Chemistry, can extract
a Pearl out of a Dunghill, the Kingdom of Heaven out of a Pearl: Seeking
goodly Pearls.

After Man had lost Paradise, by losing himself in Paradise, the first Potion
that was prescribed him for recovery, was [Seek.] A Mineral is found by
digging, a Race won by running, a Pearl got by seeking. So let us seek, that we
may find; so run, that we may obtain. Atalanta, by Hippomenes his golden
Apples, in the Poet, lost the Goal; by charms of pleasure, so shall we. Let us
have therefore always written before our eyes, (as the Pharisees the
Commandments on their Phylacteries) that saying of Piny, Vita vigilia est, This
life is a watch. And learn that lesson, that Socrates, in Aristophanes, gives
Streps^des, (...). Let enchanting sleep be banished from our eyes. (...), says
Aristotle, No felicity is in slumbring security; but, (...), in the virtuous
search of an active Soul. This those Emblemes teach us, of Providence on a
watchtower, painted like Janus looking both ways; and Hercules his two ways
in the Wilderness, una voluptatis, the one of Pleasure, (as Tullie says) but
the other of Pains. Let us with Alexander, (...), nothing delaying, by seeking
insist in this painful way, lest, while with the Ravens, by sloth, we gape
against the Sun, Satan watch us, as the Crab does the Oyster, in St. Ambrose,
sorupulps injiciens, throwing in Peebles in stead of Pearls, Seeking goodly
Pearls.

So we are come to the Object of this search, [(...), Pearls.] The word for
Pearl in this place, has its name from Mare, the Sea, or at least is Gemma
Marina, a Pearl proper to the Sea; and this (which Quintilian commends)
continues the Allegory. Gemmarum multa sunt genera, (says Pliny) Pearls are
of many kinds; (...), this Seakind is the best, and of them, those in profundo
maris are best, that are in the depth of the Sea. No wonder then, if this
Merchant does (...), seek these Pearls.

They have many names to be sought by: That which Christ here, and Theophrastus
elsewhere, calls (...), a Pearl, Arrianus calls Cynaedum; Lucian (...);
Statius, Propertius, and Claudian, (...); Cicero, Gemmam; Pliny, Unionem;
Virgil, Baccham Concheam; and St. Jerome, rubri maris granum, a grain of the Red
Sea. Thus the Names; a word of the Nature: They are Conchae, precious Shells,
conceived in Conchyliis, in Sea-fishes, which at the time of their conception,
drinking the dew from Heaven, gravidae in partu enituntur Margaritas, are
delivered of Pearls, together with their Spawns. These goodly Pearls, the
Merchant seeks, and emblemed in these, every man (...), seeks some Good, and to
his knowledge, (as the Philosopher says) (...), the Chiefest good. Our souls
at first, like Needles of a Dial, were touched with the Magneticall tincture
of Gods Image, poynting at Him, the Pole; till sin, like the Onyons of Egypt,
and the presence of the Adamant in our hearts, bends our thoughts another way;
like Children newborn, we still seek some Breast to suck, and with the
confounded Linguists at Babell, lisp out some language: with Ixion, taking the
Cloud for Juno, a Glass for a Pearl, Jacob for Esau. Man's Soul is a
seeking-Creature, and for lack of the chiefest, must have some, though but
apparent Good. Hence it comes to pass, that this brittle glassie sea of the
World, that should be the Channel to convey us, and our perspective Glass, to
look up to Heaven, proves our Harbor, and our Looking-glass. This gavefewell
to that faction, betwixt the Academicks, and the Peripateticks, both of them
confessing, that (...), the object of the Will, was that which is good: The one
said, (...), but apparent good; the other, (...), true good. Aristotle joined
both, or quicquid sub specie boni, whatsoever seems good: And that is meant by
goodly Pearls, so called, not because they are all so, but because they all
seem to be so. True Good, is a conformity with the will of God, archetypa, not
with the will of man. Some are simply evil, as sensuality, sinful pleasure:
Some (...), neither Good nor Evil, but (...), as they are used; these are the
Goods of Fortune, (as they call them) Honor, Riches. Some truly Good, yet not
the chief Good, because referred to a chiefer, or Architectonicall end, as
Prudence, and Moral virtues, though Austin in Heathens, calls them, splendida
peccata, glittering sins.

Well then, no wonder, if (as Varro says, and the Father of Hippo secondeth
him, in his Civitate Dei) there were three hundred opinions in the language of
my Text, concerning these Pearls. As truth is is one, so Error is infinite;
and yet they were ignorant of the Law, the Jewish Targum Cabala, and Sanhedrim,
which Interpreters comprise within these Pearls. O the endless search of these
inferior things! we may seek them, but not rest in them. Seeking is a motion,
motion argues imperfection, so does Pearls in the plural number: Martha
carked for many things, there was but one thing needful. It is wittily at
least observed by Origin, that God put no lo, it was good upon that day, when
the light was divided from the darkness; nor must we put any rest in these
Pearls. For to instance in a few: What is Pleasure, but a pill in Sugar?
Beauty, but a painted Snake? Honor, but a blast of idle Wind? Riches, but a
smile of Fortune? and all the Wealth the World has piled together, but
Obelisks of vanity? Let some Gallants condemn this, as the voice of a
melancholic Scholar; yet, I know a day will come, when, Eccles. 12. 3. the
keepers of their house of clay shall tremble, those that look out of the
windows shall be darkened, and Death shall gnaw upon them like sheep: then
they shall confess, that none, nor all these, can give their souls content.
There is one precious Pearl, that neither Prince nor People, Men, nor Angels,
have in their keeping; Height nor Depth, Principalities nor Powers, Life nor
Death, can take away; and that is, (...), this one precious Pearl.

So we are passed to the third part or parallel, where observe this method:
first, seek; then find. God answers every man to, nay, above his expectation:
Saul sought Asses, and found a Crown; the Milesian fishers, Fishes, and found a
golden Trivet; the Merchant sought Pearls of less price, and found one of
greater price. This Pearl is but one, and yet instar omnia, it comprises all.
Pliny calls it an Union, and what is it else, but an union of God and Man into
one person? of God and Mankind into one Covenant? One, because Truth (as the
Schoolman says upon this place) is in divisa, undivided, as the Trinity in
Athanasius his Creed. This Pearl was sought, because promised in the Law, but
found in the Gospel. Abraham made his Servant put his hand under his thigh,
and swear, (as Isiodore Pelusiota says) by Christ, that was to come out of
those loins. The Massorites sought this Pearl out of the profound Sea of
Curiosities; Rabbis and Jews, amongst Thrones, Palaces, and Principalities;
and it is more than probable, that the (...), or Popular sort, sought but an
earthly Prince. But, as Mercury in the Fable, sent the Husbandman a Golden
Hatchet, who petitioned but for an Iron one; so the carnal Jews seeking but
an earthly Messiah, found an Emanuel: (...), I have found, says the
Mathematician, and what? but the Rule of Algebra. Italiam! cried, Aeneas, and
novum orbem! Columbus, but at the ken of an earthen shore: (...), We have seen
his Star, (says the Wisemen); but when they had seen the Babe, (...), they
rejoiced exceedingly. And so this Merchant, when he had found (...), this one
Pearl of great price.

Many things have been esteemed precious: Gyges his Ring, by which he went
invisible; Vulcan's Panoplie, that was falsely reported to secure from all
Weapons; Aesculapius his Herb Panace, to cure all Diseases; (...), to contain
all curiosities: the Palm in Pliny, to minister all things necessary for
Meat, Drink, Clothing, and Building: the precious Stone Opalum, to have the
virtue of all Stones* the brightness of the Carbuncle, purple color of the
Amethist, the amiable greenness of the Emerald; all these were nothing to this
one precious Pearl. There is a Pearl Gemites, wherein appears a hand in hand;
that is this Pearl, Christ Jesus, and his Kingdom, wherein God and Man are
joined hand in hand, and (...), God with us.

Well then, get this Philosophers Stone, and thou needs want no Gold of the
Sanctuary; this most precious Pearl, so precious, that it is beyond all
conceptions transcendant: Reason cannot fathom it, but is at a stand; Scripture
expresses, that it is unexpressible, Phil. 4. 7. Eye has not seen, ear has
not heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man. The Saints at the
sense of it, are rapt into an Ecstasy; Cherubims vail their faces: Sanctifying
grace in man comes somewhat near it, which causes joy in the heart
unspeakable: and yet there is as great a disproportion, as for a Star that is
enlightened by the Sun, to express the whole glory of the Sun. The World is but
a painted Map, the real Vision is in Heaven: all Creatures are but Rays and
Spangles, from this Pearl that sits upon the Throne; and keeps the Keys of
Life. Tell me then, poor soul, what if this World were as the Gardens of
Alcinous, Elysian fields, or Paradise; the Rivers run with Nectar, the Fields
brought forth Ambrosie, Hyacinth, and Moly; thy Ways were strowen with Carpets,
thy Head crowned with Rose-buds, each Tree were as the Tree of Life, or Apples
of the Hesperides; the Heavens were a Globe of Gold, the Earth a Center of
Diamond, the Clouds shoured down precious Pearls, like Gold in Diana's lap;
each Man were an Orpheus or Amphion, with Musicks harmonious charm, to set
Devotion on the Wing: Tell me, whether this one precious Pearl being found,
thou will not sell all that thou have, and buy it?

So we are come to the last Parallel, or fourth River of our Paradise, (...),
He went, and sold. Grace is nimble heel'd, will not stand still, when it is
transported with an Object, but moves unto it, as grave things to the Center.
The Merchant sought this Pearl before he found it, and when he had found it, he
still went on. A Christian moves in a Circle, that point that ends one motion,
like a Terminus communis, begins another. Standing water corrupts. Go we must
for this Pearl, and yet we need not far; Pilgrimages to the Holy Land, and to
the Tombs of Saints, are now out of date; Heaven, in this Sunshine of the
Gospel, is to be found every where. Go, but not from thine own Pastor, in
every Church. Revel. 22. 17. The Spirit, and the Bride says, Come: Let him
that is athirst come, and whosoever will, let him take the water of life
freely. And yet he went, and sold. That which cost our Savior his Blood, must
cost us something. Though we have nothing but what we have received, yet, God
must receive of that which we have: Or if we have any thing, it is but sin. Let
us cut off our Hand of revenge, pluck out our Eye of lust, belch out our Heart
of pride, and sell our selves, that we may buy our Savior. This is to sell all
that we have, not for a new Inheritance in a New England, under a new
Discipline; this is with Demosthenes, to buy repentance to be repented of,
which some of them confesses: Others, like the mured Anchorit at Bruxells,
bites-in the lip, and dissembles, and sees their exchange to be like his, that
gave golden Armor for Brazen, but too late.

We must sell all to buy Heaven: Shall Creates of Thebes throw his Gold into
the Sea, for purchase of Philosophy, and shall not we for Christ? Many in
Hadrians time, lost their goods, their lives, in following that false Messiah,
that styled himself Benchochab, the son of a Star; but proved Bencozba, the son
of a Lie. But he that follows Christ, shall gain his life, and fight under
that Banner that Constantine saw, with this inscription, and the apparition of
the Cross, or rather crucified Savior, (...), In this, overcome. What then,
if we had the whole World to cast in counterpoise with this Pearl, it were
(...), not worthy of it, but as the dust of the Balance in comparison. We are
like Sun-Dialls, unless It shine; blaze Torches, Tapers, Candles, all Stars at
once are of no use; flow Riches, Honor, Strength, Wives, Friends, Children, to
our contentment, without this Sun of Righteousness, it is still night. Lesser
Pearls may be Copies of Gods Grace; but without Seal, Ciphers of no value,
unless the Unity in the Trinity be joined with them. We cannot conceive so
great a number of earthly things, but still more may be added, more desired:
but, he that has this Pearl, is ravished in spirit, cannot conceive more,
has contentment in mind, cannot desire more, his Cup does overflow: To the
fruition, and beatificall vision whereof, God of his mercy bring us.

(...).
A SERMON, Preached at the Ordination of MINISTERS.
The Text, Revel. 3. 19. Be Zealous.
THIS word is one of the last, uttered by Him, who is Alpha and Omega, the
First and the Last, to the Church of Laodicea, the last of the seven Churches
of Afia: A golden Lesson delivered by Him, that stands in the midst of the
seven golden Candlesticks, girded about his Papps with a golden Girdle,
counselling us to buy Gold tried with the fire. A light shining from Him, that
holds the light of the seven Stars in his right hand, whose countenance shines
as the lightning. A burning Coal of Affection sent from his Altar, the feet of
whose affections burns as fine Brass in a Furnace, to in flame the key-cold
affections of the lukewarm Laodiceans. (...), Be zealous.

The Angels of these seven Planet-moving Churches, are compared here to seven
Stars; yet, all of them borrowing their light from that Son of Man, Christ
Jesus, that shines in the midst of them. The Angel of the Church of Laodicea,
is ranked here like the Moon, the last in the Sphere of this heavenly Vision:
As the Moon waining from grace, she has left her first love; as the Moon
eclipsed, she is poor, and blind, and naked; as the Moon seeming the greatest
in her own eyes, I am rich, increased in goods, and stand in need of nothing,
when she is the least of the Stars, wretched and miserable; as the Moon,
bemoystening all things with watery humors, not with dew-dropping tears of
repentance, but with carnal humors to be repented of; Repent, and do thy
first works. As the Moon, neither hot nor cold in it self, they are
lukewarm; so hot, as still Professors; so cold, as but hypocritical
disguisers: As the Moon, the Fountain of coldness to others, befreezing the
well-springs of Grace, and sluices of Charity; thus this poor Church is sick,
quid faciet? what shall she do? To what Gilead shall she resort for Balm? Come
all you that are sick, and here is one salve for every soar, made up by the
Physician of the Soul, in this one Electuary, Zeal. If thy Grace be waining,
Zeal will increase it; if thou be poor, Zeal will present thee Gold tried in
the fire; if thou be blind, Zeal is a Collyrium or Eye Salve, to anoint thine
Eyes withal: if thou be naked, Zeal is a Garment to cover thy nakedness
withal; if thy Soul be drowned with a deluge of carnal humors, Zeal is a
flame to dry it; if thou be lukewarm, Zeal is a fire to kindle thee; if thy
Heart be frozen, Zeal is a heat to thaw it: (...), Be zealous.

It contains an Exhortation, brought in by way of illation, with this
Illative, (...), As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten: (...), Be zealous
therefore: God loves us, therefore we must be zealous, for zeal is more then an
ordinary heat of love. God, who is infinite, loved his Church infinitely; the
Church, which is his Darling, must love him fervently, this fervency of love is
zeal. Because he rebukes us, we must be zealous, inkindled with zeal of anger
at those sins, that he rebukes us for, moved with a zeal of love toward God,
for rebuking us with Words, when he might afflict us with Swords. Zealous,
because he chastens us with Rods, and not with Scorpions, sparkling with the
fire of zeal at sin that chastises us, but zealous of those sparks of Gods love
and mercy, that chastises, and subdues sin in us: (...), Be zealous.

The word has its name from (...), to sees, and (...) from the Greek Letter
Z, the sound that liquor makes in seething: Seething presupposes boiling,
boiling heating, heating fire: This fire is affection, the seething pot the
soul, Knowledge the fuel, prayer and meditation the bellows; these inflame
the heart, and soul, and conscience, and every faculty of the inward Man;
neither stays it there, but sparkles out into the outward Man, the tongue is
tipped with zeal, the eye sparkles with zeal, the hand brandishes the sword of
zeal, the feet are shod with zeal, all are zealous at once for the Lord of
Hosts. This heat of zeal, if it be right tempered, in a fit quantity, as heat
in the third Degree, is an Antidote against vice, a Cordial in afflictions, a
purger of corruptions: But if it be too hot, as in the fourth of fifth Degree,
it becomes a poison, a wildfire, that no waters, scarce many waters, scarce the
milk of the Gospel, will queneh: It is a fire that burns without knowledge,
as Ch^ysogonus his pot at Rome, seethes without any fire of knowledge at all;
it is an ignis fatuus, a blind fire, leading us in a blind way; this blind
way is the broad way, that leads to destruction.

In brief, the word (...), [Zeal] generally taken, is an earnest affection to
any thing; (...), a thing indifferent, neither good nor bad; and yet, either
good or bad, as the thing to which it is referred differences it: When it soars
aloft at Heaven, and the Sun of righteousness, then it is a Phoenix of
virtues; for this, Phineas his Sword, imitating the flaming Sword of the
Cherubim; and blind Samuel his zeal, though not blind zeal, is commended. By
this, one of the Apostles conquered more, then he that was the greatest
Conqueror. Scipio, by conquering Africa, was called Africanus; but Simon, by
conquest of Zeal, was called Zelotes; this Conquest was Heaven, a greater than
can be imagined in somnio Sc^pionis. This Simon was not Simon Peter, for his
Motto was not Zeal, but Love; Simon, love thou me? But it was Simon the
Canaanite, not of the land of Canaan, with Caph, that comes from a Root that
signifies, he was made vile; but written with Kuph, coming from a Root in
Pihel Kin, and signifies, He was moved with zeal. But Zeal, when it looks
asquint, and is not fixed upon the right object, when, Icarus-like, it towers
aloft, without the wings of Knowledge; when, like an unruly flame, bursting out
of the Furnace, it sets our neighbors house on fire, it is vicious, bitter as
Colliquintida; for which, St. James calls it, (...), bitter zeal. The zeal here
meant is in Nature, true zeal, in regard of the object, zeal according to
knowledge, in degree, moderate zeal. (...), Be zealous.

The party exhorting was Zelotypus, a zealous God, out of whose mouth went a
sharp two-edged Sword. The parties exhorted, the lukewarm Laodiceans, whom
neither sincerity had made hot, nor hypocrisy would suffer to be cold. The
thing exhorted to, is Zeal; Zeal, which when it is true, drives out the
distempered feavourish heat of opinion, that brainsick frenzy heat of
obstinacy, and cures the senseless security of that Lethargy of sin. (...), Be
Zealous.

It cannot be divided into many Propositions, for it is but one, and that
implicit; nor into many words, for it is but one, though explicit; yet,
consisting of many Letters, and that without superstition, a sacred septenary,
which like the seven heads of Nilus, meets all in one Channel: but here is the
difference, the heads of Nilus are scarce known; the Head of zeal, well
grounded knowledge, must be known: Those that dwell near the heads of Nilus,
with the found thereof are made deaf, and cannot hear; but those, in whose
heads, or rather hearts, Zeal dwells, are made more judicious, and more quick
to hear. The word is one, the Proposition one, the Exhortation one, the point
of Doctrine it yields is also one, Christians must be zealous. Be zealous; is
as much as if he had said, You Pastors, you People must be zealous. Though the
Laodiceans (Angel and Church) be Christians in profession, yet not spoke to
them alone, but to all Christians, as the Ointment poured on Aarons head, runs
down to the skirts; All Christians must be zealous. All Scriptures, Prophets,
Apostles, Saints, Evangelists, as so many Virgins with Oil in their Lamps,
yield fuel to this Torch of Zeal, by precept, by practice. Noah's zeal dried
the waters of the Flood, which overtopped the Mountains, and drowned the
World. Lot's zeal, by a more holy fire, quenched the fire of Sodom, and
preserved his life in Zoar. The brightness of Moses his zeal was admirable,
outshining the brightness of his face, Exodus, 32. 32. If thou will not forgive
their sins, blot me out of the book which thou have written. Blot me. Does
Moses his zeal, as Eagles at the Sun, fly at things impossible? or does he
wing his speech with Seraphick raptures, to elevate his Rhetoric to Him, that
thunders in the Clouds? Or, is he rapt with St. Paul into the third Heaven,
where he conceives things unutterable, and utters things unconceivable? Or,
does he dart this by way of supposition, that he would be contented with
damnation, upon condition of their salvation? it is uncertain: Yet, this is
most certain, though he shot at rovers, Zeal bended the Bow, and drew the Arrow
to the head. Phinehas his heat of zeal, contrary to the nature of heat, stayed
the Plague, and cleansed the air, and by the fall of two, prevented the fall
of thousands on his right hand, and ten thousands on his left. David his zeal
went through his bones, like the fury of a hectic Feavour, and brought him
into a consumption, Psalm. 119. 139. My zeal has even consumed me, because mine
enemies have forgotten thy word. [Mine enemies have forgotten thy word.] What
would he have done, if his friends, if himself had forgot it? Psalm. 69. 9. The
zeal of thine house has eaten me up: that is, wasted me, consumed me, made me
a Scheleton or Anatomy. Come on, and see Jehu's zeal against Jezabel for the
Lord of Hosts; whose zeal, though not true, if it be commended, consider what
true zeal would be. Esay's terrible Trumpet was tipped with zeal, sounding a
retreat to Idolatrous Judah and Jerusalem, Jeremiah's zeal did boil more
fervently, then the seething pot he spyed in the North, against the sins of the
people. Our Savior, the perfect pattern of zeal, though as meek as a Lamb in
his own quarrel, yet zeal made him as fierce as a Lion in Gods, and that
sparkling in words, Woe to thee Bethsaida; in deeds, to Peter in private, Get
thee hehinde me Satan; to the prophaners of the Temple in public, You have
made my Temple a den of thieves. Zeal metamorphosed Paul, from a Persecutor to
a Professor, a Preacher, a labourer in Christ's Vineyard, one that labored more
then them all, a Martyr indeed, sacrificing his body for the truth; and, if
wishes would have prevailed, Anathema pro populo, his soul also: Neither could
this heat of zeal be kept within him, but like the fire of Aetna, it burst out
to others. Tit. 2. 14. Be zealous of good works. Romans 12. 11. Be fervent in
spirit; fervency of spirit is but zeal, dressed in other attire. All those
emblems in St. John's vision, of a zeal-commanding Savior, are but so many
motives to zeal; seven golden Candlesticks, burning with Lamps of zeal, a
golden Girdle about his Papps, this Girdle (as that Ephesians. 6.) is Zeal, Truth
and Zeal must go together: These Papps are the two Testaments, from whence all
truth flows, upon which altar all zeal must be kindled. His eyes are a flame
of fire: these eyes are Knowledge, this flame of fire is Zeal; knowledge and
zeal must go together. His feet like fine brass, burning in a furnace: This
brass is stability and constancy, this burning brass is zeal; zeal and
constancy must kiss each other. In his right hand seven stars: These Stars are
so many Lamps, giving light to others; for, they that have given up their names
to Christ in Baptism, must be like John Baptist, lucernae ardentes, burning
lights; lights burning inwardly within themselves, shining outwardly to others.
Christians must be zealous.

And that this our Christian zeal may be distinguished from an ignis erra^icus,
or wandering fire of opinion; an ignis fulminaris, or frensive fire of
rebellion, let us examine the ground of this truth; for all zeal is grounded
upon truth, and all truth upon Christ, (...), the Truth. Hence it is, that
Christians should be zealous, because for this cause, Tit. 2. 14. Christ gave
himself for us, that he might redeem unto himself a peculiar reople, zealous
of good works. That Angel that appeared unto Moses in the burning bush, to the
Prophets in a pillar of fire, as speaking from God to Man, became (...), both
God and Man, that Man for the glory of God might be zealous. He bought our
salvation with pangs, and blood, and sweat, that we, zealous of piety and
purity, might work out our salvation with fear and trembling. He sweat blood in
the Garden, he was beat with cords and whips, fainted under the Cross in the
way, was fastened to it with nails, pierced with a spear, assaulted by Satan,
Hell, and all our sins at once, that we might be covered with righteousness as
with a roab, and clothed with zeal as a garment. The Turks are zealous of
their Mahomet, the Sidonians of Bell and Dragon, the Priests of Baal of their
Idol, the Papists for their Relics, Crucifixes, Images; the Jesuits of their
Ignatius Loyola, each Sect of their own superstitions: Then, shall not
Christians be zealous for Christ, who, zealous of our salvation, gave himself
for us, that we might be zealous of good works?

Secondly, Christians must be zealous, because zeal is the life and soul of
Christianity; that which the Bellows are to the forge, zeal is to the Soul, an
inkindler of grace; that which natural heat is to the body, zeal is to the
spirit, a preserver of Grace; that which Heroical virtue is to Moral virtues,
the same is zeal to all divine and heavenly virtues, the perfection of grace.
Zeal is the quintessence of Graces distilled, the marrow and life of Religion,
the height and hyperbole of Holiness. Faith without zeal, is but historical,
Charity without zeal is but hypocritical, Profession without zeal is but
carnal, Patience without zeal is but Stoicall Apathie; Mercy without zeal is
foolish sympathy, Hope without zeal is but impudency, Love without zeal but
lechery, VVisdome without zeal but folly, Martyrdom without zeal but murder.
These two reasons of the Point we have but poynted at, because zeal is a Grace
that is grounded upon reason, yet in the heart, practical; therefore we omit
any further reason, and come to Application. First, inquiring what true zeal
is: Secondly, the several kinds of zeal.

Zeal is defined by the Philosopher, to be a mixture of anger and love, when we
are angry at the party or thing, that injures that which we love. These two
affections, as fire and oil, met together in Moses; he loved God, hated
Idolatry, therefore he was angry at that Idol, that was enmity against God.
Ancient Divines have described it, to be a mixed affection of grief and anger
flowing from love. Grief is an affection of the heart, that wounds the soul
for some present evil; thus Jeremie mournes, for the misery of the daughter of
Sion. Anger is mixed of sadness and a desire of revenge: Esau was sad for the
loss of his Birthright, his heart boiled with revenge against his supplanting
Brother. These were the territories the Ancients tied zeal to, who all shot
near, yet missed the mark; for true zea^ neither consists in hatred, nor love,
nor sorrow, nor a desire of revenge alone, a channel too narrow for zeal to
run in, which (like) Nilus overflowes the whole soul; the higher, the
fruitfuller. But true zeal, either consists in a mixture of all the affections,
or is a high and heroical pitch of any affection, that makes Heaven suffer
violence. A high rapture of spiritual joy is zeal, that, like St. Paul, rapes
us up into the third Heaven. The Scheme in Paul's Rhetoric was zeal, when he
said, Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say, Rejoice. By this zeal, John
Baptist leapt in his Mothers womb, at the presence of Mary conceiving. By this
zeal, Simeon's trembling arms received heat, to embrace our Savior. By this
zeal, the Angels rejoice in heaven at a sinners conversion. Surely, it was a
high pitch of affection, and no affection but zeal, that lift the soul of
Diagoras, of Chylon the Lacedemonian, of the Roman VVidow, off the hinges; this
affection was joy. And, as a high pitch of joy, so, strain the pegg of sorrow,
and it will prove zeal. Joy, a rapture for the present good; sorrow a pressure
for the present evil. Rachell's sorrow for her Children, Mourning and weeping,
and great lamentation. Jeremiah's mourning for the captivity of the people,
Come and see, if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, may make up the tale
of zeal. David's mourning all the day long, watering of his couch. Ezekiah's
chattering as a swallow, or crane in the desert, is the fruit of zeal. Hope,
when it is wafted with full sails toward the Haven, and like the
Heliotrophium spreads it self toward the Sun of righteousness, is zeal. It
was this zeal of strerched forth Hope, that put this (...), or full assurance,
in Paul's mouth, I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, etc. shall be
able to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord,
Romans 8. 38. And as hope, so fear, when it is a Graduate in the University of
the Soul, puts on the habit of zeal; this fear must be filial: Such zeal as
this was the fear of Martyrs, which feared God more then thousand deaths and
burnings. This zealous fear of God wrought in Ignatius this heavenly
resolution, Fire, gallows, wild beasts, breaking of my bones, quartering of
my members, crushing of my body, and all the tortures of hell come upon me, so
that I may enjoy my Lord Jesus and his kingdom. Anger, when in the forge of
the affections, it receives a heat more than ordinary, becomes zeal. In this
zeal, Moses broak the Tables, when he saw the golden Calfe set up. Phinehas in
this zeal, thrust through the Adulterers. Samuel slew Agag. Hatred, when it
grows inveterate and headie, Aeternum servans sub pectore vulnus, is zeal.
This is the zeal that all Saints have toward sin, Satan, corruption.

Love, when it is elevated to the height, is zeal; such love, such zeal, was
that of Jonathan's love, stronger than death, stronger then the love of a
woman. (...), Rejoicing at another hurt, when it is fixed upon the right
object, in a high measure, is zeal; that object must be malum poenae, the evil
of punishment, not malum culpae, the evil of sin. In this zeal, Moses and the
Israel^tes sung a song of deliverance, for the overthrow of Pharaoh. Barak and
Deborah for the death of Sisera. This zeal wings David's Apostrophe to God,
VVash thy footsteps, O Lord, in the blood of thine enemies, and laugh at their
destruction. Thus you see zeal consists not in anger, love, or sorrow alone,
but in a high pitch of all the affections, or any of them.

In the second place, we come to distinguish the several kinds of zeal, or by
the touchstone of trial, to difference true from false. All zeal is a fire,
and then true, when like Eliah's fire, it is from Heaven; then false, when like
Nadab's and Abihu's, it is strange fire, such as God commands not. False zeal
may be fixed, either upon the true or false object, true zeal only upon the
right object. When zeal is set upon the false object, it may be great, setting
Churches and Commonweales in combustion, but can never be good. This wildfire
is either Doctrinall in opinion, or Practical in conversation; Doctrinall, so
the Turks are zealous for their Mohammedan superstition, and Alcaron, the
Ephesians for their Temple of Diana, and silver Shrines; the Church of Rome for
their Popes Supremacy, Images, Indulgences; the Brownists against the buildings
of our Churches, which they call Antichristian Synagogues. Practical in
conversation, when our zeal toward riches, makes Mammom our God, and things
below, that should be our Perspective-glasse, to look toward Heaven, proves
our Looking-glass; when such is our zeal in Prayer, that though we seem to
petition first for spiritual things, after for temporal, our affections reads
them backwards, like figures, valuing the latter ten times more than the
former. Again, zeal may be false, when it is fixed even upon the right object,
and that either in regard of the measure, or means. In regard of the measure,
either too cold, which is remission, or too hot, which is superstition; too
cold, and this is the temperature of carnal worldlings, time-serving
politicians, formal professors, that will seem to be Christians, and yet will
give no sheafe of their corn, no penny of their talent, no oil of their cruse,
to the poor members of Christ; Christians in name, yet Devils incarnate
indeed, zealous for the smoke of their chimney's, the watercourse of their
channells, the dust of their ways, the bubble of their fame; yet, without any
touch of conscience, hear the name of God blasphemed, see his Church profaned,
ruinated; see the Fatherless wronged, the Widow oppressed; see the bleeding
wounds of both Church and Commonwealth gaping.

Zeal upon the right object too hot, which is superstition; this zeal is
either of them, which are too hot for Ceremonies, that they advance them into
the chair of Substance, punish the neglect of them as severely, as blasphemy,
as murder, as theft: Too hot against Ceremonies, that while they brand others
with superstition, surmount the highest Tower of superstition, forsaking holy
solemnities for a Ceremony, the Sacrament for a gesture, the Ministry for
things of the least moment; pay Tithe of Annise, Mint, and Cummine, let pass
the wonderful things of God; strain at a Gnat, and swallow a Camel. False
zeal, yet fixed upon the right object, in regard of the means and ground upon
which it is builded; builded either upon ignorance, our own ends, or other men:
Ignorance of them, that are hot in themselves, a spur to others, a censurer of
all men, that are slacker then they in duties that ought to be done; yet, they
know no ground in Scripture, no reason in Nature why. This is false zeal, the
zeal of ignorant Romists, to believe as the Church believes. Zeal upon the
right object, for our own ends; thus Judas was zealous for the bag, the People
in the Wilderness for the Bread, the Priests of Bell for the Wheat and Oil,
those in Tertullian's time, that went with the Christians to the Assembly of
Prayer, because they were commonly attended with Love Feasts. This is false
zeal, because it is not a heat of the heart, but of the stomach, and may be so
sincere, as to arise out of the bowels, yet it ends in the belly. False zeal
upon the right object, when it is builded upon men; zealous of the Word, when
it is preached by such a man; key-cold, when more learnedly, more powerfully,
more sincerely by another: They pray after such a manner, because such an one,
who is their Paul, their Apollos, their Cephas,, their Demigod, does so: Run so
many miles to hear a Sermon, leaving a better at home behind them, because
such an one makes conscience of such things, conscience to disobey the
Ordinance of God, conscience to be singular, conscience at the best, to be
zealous not according unto knowledge, which is as good a conscience, as a
painted man is a man. Now we come to true zeal, true in regard of the Object,
Gods glory, Righteousness, Heaven, and spiritual things; true in regard of
the measure and degree, neither too cold by remission, nor too hot by
superstition. True in regard of the means and grounds, not builded upon
ignorance, which is blind zeal; nor upon profit or pleasure, which is
counterfeit zeal; nor upon men, our Idoll-gods, which is idolatrous zeal. Of
this here more briefly, because we stood more largely upon false zeal. For, as
rectum curvi, so curvum and sui, and recti index; in the glass of false zeal,
we may judge of true zeal.

But, that we may distinguish this true fire of zeal, from many wildfires; true
heat, from feavourish heat; Amphitryo from Jupiter, Juno from the Cloud, Salam
^nder-like, let us abide a while in these flames. For, what is true of
conscience, may be said of zeal; each man, each Heretic, pretends a zeal; the
Turks die for their Mahomet, it is their zeal; the Jesuits stab Kings, dethrone
Princes, it is their zeal; the Arrians go to the Stake, for denying the Divinity
of Christ, it is their zeal; the Israelites offer their Children to Molah, it is
their zeal; thou leaves divine Ordinances, the Sacraments, perhaps thy weighty
Calling, it is thy zeal. Well, but all that say they are Israelites, are not of
Israel: Therefore if thou would have the touchstone of trial, observe these
marks well, and thou may discern true zeal by them.

First, the matter and subject of thy zeal must be good, Gal. 4. 18. It is good
to be zealously affected in a good matter. This is a fire that burns in no
Lamp, but the Lamp of the Sanctuary; a fire that feeds upon no oil, but the
oil of the Sanctuary; that is kindled upon no Altar, but Gods, devoures no
Sacrifice but Gods. If the matter and subject of thy zeal be evil, thy zeal is
evil. No fire but ignis erraticus, will feed upon stinking ditches; no fire
but ignis lambens, will feed upon thine own carnal humors. If thou be zealous
with Saul against Christianity, it is blasphemy; if thou be zealous with the
Pharisees, to compass Sea and Land to make a Proselyte of thy groundless
opinions, it is diabolical Heresy. Thy zeal is a fruit, that must not grow
upon the forbidden tree. Though thine eyes be now blinded, yet hereafter they
may be opened, that thou may see the blindness of thy zeal.

Secondly, true zeal, is zeal according to knowledge, Romans 10. 2. this
knowledge must be the Scriptures truly understood, guiding us as a pillar of
fire by night, a pillar of cloud by day. No fire might kindle the Vestalls
Lamps, but from the Sun; no fire will kindle this Lamp of zeal, but the Sun of
Righteousness, Christ; who (as Ignatius says) as he was (...), the essential
Word, by which all knowledge was created, so he is (...), the Word of life,
which is a light unto our feet, and a lanthorn unto our steps. For this cause,
Bernard compared knowledge and zeal to two wings; knowledge without zeal,
cannot fly so high as to pierce the clouds; zeal without knowledge, is beatt
back again like a whirlewinde: Take with thee both wings, Zeal and Knowledge,
if thou would fly to Heaven. As is fire to a Child that walks among
barrells of Gunpowder, so is zeal without knowledge, a cause of incendiaries
and combustions in Commonweals. This zeal without knowledge, slashed and
gashed the Priests of Baal; this zeal without knowledge, arms the ignorant
Papists, to maintain that with sword and blood, and persecution, which they
cannot defend with the Word: This zeal without knowledge, makes many ignorant
people in our nation, (as preposterously, as if one should ring the Bells
backward at the sparkling of a Smith's Forge, or fire the Beacons at the
discovery of a poor Dunkirkers Vessel) to be up in arms against every thing,
that crosses their humors.

This blind zeal works three dangerous effects in the soul; 1. Pride. 2.
Uncharitableness. 3. Impatience of admonition. First, Pride, that like Lucifer
the morning Star, they are bright in their own conceit, like the Element of
fire over all Elements; nay, as good as in Heaven in their own conceit, cast in
the same mould with Nebuchadnezar's Image, their head is of Gold, but their
feet of Clay. Secondly, this zeal without knowledge is Uncharitable, censuring,
nay, condemning all, like the fire of Eliah, not sparing the Elders. This made
the Jews crucify Christ, for reproving their traditions; the Arrians
persecute the Orthodox Christians, more then did the Heathen Emperors; the
Papists more zealous for their Canons of the Council of Trent, than for the
Articles of their Creed. Thirdly, zeal without knowledge is impatient of
admonition; it is as deaf as an Adder, though you charm it never so wisely; be
earnest, and it flies with the sting in your face. This zeal made the Pharisees
impatient, when our Savior rebuked them for their blindness; made Zedekiah
impatient of Michaiah's admonition. And for these causes, a worthy Divine
says, Zeal without knowledge is more dangerous in Church or Commonwealth, then
knowledge without zeal.

The third mark of true zeal is, that it burns fervently within the Furnace of
the Heart, before the flame burst out at the crevises of the body; thy Soul and
Conscience must be truly zealous within, before thine eyes sparkle with zeal to
affright others, thy tongue be tipped with zeal, to censure and rebuke others,
thy feet be shod with zeal to pursue others, thy hands be armed with zeal to
wound others. Many Zealists now adays, are like the Heathen God Momus, carp at
all, do nothing themselves; like the Flies engendered from the wild Figtree,
provoke others to ripen, but are barren themselves; find fault with every
corner in the streets, never sweep before their own doors; are informers,
controulers in every Calling, practices none themselves; and, as if they were
Metropolitans of the whole World, they keep continual visitations and
corrections of all men's manners, especially the Churches, who (if judged by
true zeal) scarce belong to the Church. Zeal has many more marks, which if I
should prosecute, my zeal of the Subject would seem to outrun my discretion of
the Time. I Will only name them.

The fourth Mark is, that we must be zealous in weighty matters. The fifth,
that we must look as well to our purity within, as our holiness without. The
sixth, that we must be as strict to our selves, as to others. The seventh, that
we condemn sin as well in friends, as foes. The eighth, that it oppose it self
against the sins of the Mighty. The ninth, that it be joined with compassion.
The tenth, that it be desirous of admonition. The eleventh, that it be fervent
in Gods Cause. The twelfth, that it be constant in all estates. These are the
twelve Signs of zeal, through which Christ Jesus, the Sun of righteousness,
moves in the Zodiac of our souls.

I Will say no more, but seal up my discourse with that which our Savior does,
to the Church of Laod^cea, [Be zealous.] And if thou will but observe the
Lesson given this Church, thou shall have the reward of all Churches: Be
zealous, and thou shall eat of the tree of life in the midst of the paradise of
God, with the Church of Ephesus: Be zealous, and thou shall not be hurt of the
second death, with the Church of Smyrna: Be zealous, and thou shall eat of the
hidden Manna, with the Church of Pergamus: Be zealous, and thou shall have
power over many Nations, and be as a morning Star, with the Church of Thyatira,
Be zealous, and thou shall be clothed in white raiment, and have thy name writ
in the book of life, with the Church of Sardis: Be zealous, and thou shall be
made a pillar in the temple of God, and have the name of God written on thee,
with the Church of Philadelphia. Be zealous, and thou shall sup with Christ,
and sit with him upon his throne, with the Church of Laodicca: And thither by
prayer I recommend you.

(...).
A SERMON, Preached at a General Assizes, in the Passion-Week.
The Text, 1 Cor. 6. 20. For ye are bought with a Price, therefore glorify God
in your Body, and in your Spirit, which are Gods.
THE words are an Enthymema, containing two parts, an Antecedent and a
Consequent: The Antecedent, Ye are bought with a price, ye are Gods. The
Consequent, Glorify God in your body and in your spirit. The Arguments
unfolded, discover themselves to be threefold: The first is drawn from the
worth of our Redemption, Empti pretio, ye are bought with a price. The second
from the Relation, Jus patronatus, Ye are Gods. The third from Induction of,
particulars, In body, in spirit. In the Consequent is first a Duty, Glorify
God. Secondly, the manner, In body, in spirit. Because ye are bought with a
price, therefore glorify God. Because ye are bought both in body and spirit,
therefore glorify him both in body and spirit: For ye are bought with a price,
therefore glorify God, etc.

The main and cardinal Propositions, to which every word may be reduced, are
three: The first gathered from the Connection, and but employed, That we were
lost, and stood in need of a Redeemer or being bought. The second, that we are
Redeemed or bought with a price, Christ's blood. The third, Because we are
bought with a price, therefore we must glorify God in Body, in Spirit. These
three shall limit our discourse at this time, only let them leave and find
you attentive.

(...), For ye are bought. This [For] i^ like Janus, double faced, and looks
back at the former, Ye are not your own: Here is the reason, For ye are bought
with a price. Not our own, therefore non ingenui, sed servi; not freemen, but
slaves, servants, bought of God, and therefore not Gods before. And is not this
a wonder, that Man, who by Creation was Emperor of the whole Earth, Admiral
of the whole Sea, Heir of Eden, peerlesse Peer of Paradise, should be owner of
all, and yet not his own? He sold himself for sin, (as the Prophet says) and
lost his freedom. Amongst the Roman freeborn, (as Justinian decreed) si quis
solvendo non esset, if any man was indebted beyond the pitch of his estate, he
might sell himself as a slave to pay the debt. Man, when he was free, and
ought nothing, but service to his Sovereign, sold himself for nothing (and
was not this a misery?) but for an Apple. Even small things, when they are
commanded, require no small obedience, which aggravates the sin. But if he was
not his own, was he not Gods own, own by Creation? own by preservation? A
Subject that by treason enslaves himself, is still a Subject; and what if not?
Princes are like Categories, each chief in their own Predicament. An exile may
live in another Orb, and lose his first Alliegance. But God is supreme
Moderator of all, Angels and Men his Servants, Devils his vassalls, can lose
nothing, whose are all things: Yet, he is bought of God, bought as a Son,
redeemed as a Saint, of him, to whom he belonged before as a Creature, by whom
he was condemned as a Judge. For in this sense, if he had not sold himself
from God, what need he have been bought? We are (...), delivered with a strong
hand, (says the Evangelist) and if delivered, the strong and armed man Satan,
is conquered by Christ, a stronger than he. And if, (...), he has redeemed us,
bought us with a price, therefore we were in bondage before. Nature does
nothing in vain, much less the God of Nature. It was no small ransom that was
but paid with the death of him, that was the Lord of life. I appeal to Man
himself, who was the Delinquent: Who can be so partial in his own cause, as
not to confess, that in breaking the Covenant with an infinite Majesty, we
justly provoked against our selves an infinite Enemy, in that we sinned against
infinite Justice, we were to be punished with infinite Judgment; in that we
abused infinite mercy, we were not to be redeemed but with infinite
Satisfaction. Thus we lost our selves in sin, Romans 7. 14. were carnal, and
sold under sin. O fond man* for Esau's pottage, Jonathan's hony-combe, for
Judas his sop, to sell a Paradise here, a Palm of Victory hereafter! We count
that Prince unwise, that exchanged his golden Armor for brazen; an Indian,
that will give a Pearl for a Glass, a precious Jewel for a Chiua's dish: Yet,
we sold Earth, Heaven, our selves, God, Grace, and Glory, for the price of
Vanity, and stood in need to be bought with a price our selves, for we were not
our own. Not our own, for God had forsaken us, the Flesh had inveigled us,
Satan supplanted us, the World imprisoned us, Hell threatened us, Death
tyrannized over us. Thus were we lost, and stood in need of a price. Lost in
Adam, his first sin was ours by imputation; lost by inborn corruption, traduced
by propagation; lost again daily by actual contamination. Eve had but one
Tempter in Paradise, we three here, (as the three goddesses did Paris) each
promises fair; the Flesh Beauty, but paies with inficiam vos, I will infect
you: The World Riches, but paies with deficiam vos, I will fail you: Satan
Honor, but paies with interficiam vos, I will slay you. Lord free us from
these three Assasinates, that lie in wait for our Souls, and say, reficiam vos,
I will refresh you: For we were lost, and stood in need of a price.

And because lost, let us therefore find our hearts, and be humbled for our
loss, if we desire to find again. The Prodigal at first lost his Estate, and
at once found his Father and himself: If he had not lost himself on Earth, he
had scarce found Heaven; when he went astray he was humbled, and no sooner
humbled but he was advanced. This humility must be true, and our sorrow as deep
as our sins; not hypocritical like the Pharisees, who, with the Roman Brutus,
will kiss the Earth, when their thoughts of vainglory are builded as high as
Babel; by lessening themselves, hide their hypocrisy, (as the Snake does her
length, by folding her self into many gyres and doubles). It has still been,
and will be, the garb of those formal Penitentiaries, who make Heaven a
footstool for Earth, and Religion a Pandour to worldly Policy, like a Faulcon,
by voluntary humiliation, to stoop the lowest, when they mean to soar highest;
and like a Bullet, spit out of the mouth of a Canon, first graze and then
mount. But we must remember, that we were lost, and not our own.

This is somewhat harsh. As we are generally forgetful, so in nothing more,
than in things belonging to our woes. Either we dare not, or cannot lay to
heart, our former adversity, and our present cause of sorrow. The Mariners love
not to hear of Storms, nor States rocked in security of Wars; neither can
wanton Youth endure the tidings of sickness and old age; nor our souls, that
they were slaves to sin, Satan, not our own. If any one be dismayed hereat,
thinking with the Disciples, that it is durus sermo, a hard speech; or judge of
this humiliation, as Paphnutius did at the Council of Nice, of the Inhibition
of Priests Marriage, that it is (...), a heavy yoke. Lo here, after this harsh
sentence, a pardon presents it self, in the first words, (...), Ye are bought
with a price.

This is the second Proposition, which as the Dayspring from on high, visits us
with comfort; and (as the Angel, that sat upon the Wheel with the Martyr,
under Julian's persecution, wiping away the blood with his handkerchiefe)
sweetens the malignity of the former, (...), Ye were bought. The word signifies
to Buy, as one does in a Market, coming from (...), a fair or Market. This
Fair was proclaimed in Paradise, rung to by Aaron's golden Bells, sounded by
Esay's Trumpet, Isa. 55. 1. Ho every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters,
buy milk and wine without money and without price. But, Fountains of Milk,
Wine, Oil; Mountains of Gold, Silver, Diamonds; Worlds of Crowns,
Scepters, Diadems, were not of worth to redeem Man lost: What then must he be
bought withal? (...), with a price. The word sometimes signifies Honor,
sometimes the reward of Honor, sometimes Magistracy, Dignity, and Authority;
sometimes Victory, sometimes a Trophy or reward of Victory, sometimes a Price
that is paid for ransoming or recovering a thing lost; and so here. And surely,
if ever any was, this may be styled (...), by way of eminence, (...), the
honorable price. The young Pellicans being dead, are not restored to life, but
by the blood of the old one: Nor we, dead in trespasses and sins, without the
precious blood of our Savior. Heaven is a Lottery, each Man draws for, and
aims at a summum bonum, or chiefest good; some lights in friends, some in
Honor, some in Riches, some in Moral Virtues, above three hundred opinions,
(as Varre has observed): All these were but Blanks, here is (...), the price.

This price was Christ, the seller Judas, the buyer the Jews, God the
permitter, who appointed his Son a price, (...), By his determinate counsel
and foreknowledge, Act. 2. 23.

The Son gave himself a price, Ephesians. 5. 2. Judas was stigmatized with this
everlasting brand, (...), the deliverer; all of them, (...), joint Agents in
this sale, yet not alike. God gave this price out of mercy, (...), he so loved
the world; such a sic, as can never be paralleled with a sicut. The Son gave
himself a price in submission to the Father; Father, not my will, but thine be
done. Judas sinned against the Father, in selling the Son: God neither
commanded nor compelled Judas, Judas neither obeyed, nor aimed at Gods command;
therefore was neither God guilty of Judas his fault, nor Judas free from guilt,
by cooperating with God. Thus God brought light out of darkness, Judas
darkness out of light. Lord, turn our darkness into light, that we may see
the value of this price, a price unvaluable.

The Vestalls fire put out, might not be kindled, but by the beams of the Sun;
neither the fire of Gods Grace re-kindled, but by the obedience of his own Son;
Men, Angels, blood of Martyrs, Incense of Saints, a thousand Worlds, ten
thousand Rivers of Oil, could not, nor any thing, but the death of him, that
was the Lord of Life. We were captives, bondslaves, and he (to use the
Civilians words) ad pretium participandum sese venundari passus est, suffered
himself to be sold, to purchase the price of our Redemption. A price delivered
from Satan to Judas, from Judas to the Soldiers, from the Soldiers to the
High Priests, from the High Priests to Pilate, from Pilate to the Jews to be
crucified. Thus mare repellit ad barbaros, barbari ad mare; tossed between the
Sea of our sins, and the Pikes of Satan, could find no resting place, till he
was naild to the Cross in Calvary. Look up all ye beholders, look upon this
precious Body, and see what part ye can find free: That Head that was adored,
and trembled at by the Angelical Spirits, is all raked and harrowed with
thorns; that Face, of whom it was said, Thou art fairer then the children of
men, is all besmeared with the filthy spittle of the Jews, and furrowed with
his tears; those Eyes, clearer then the Sun, are darkened with the shadow of
death; those Ears, that hear the heavenly consorts of Angels, are now filled
with the cursed speakings and scoffs of wretched men; those lips, that spoke as
never man spoke, that commanded the Spirits both of light and darkness, are
scornfully wet with Vinegar and Gall; those Feet, that trample on all the
powers of Hell, (His enemies are made his footstool) are now nailed to the
footstool of the Cross; those hands that freely sway the Scepter of Heaven,
now carry the Reed of reproach, and are nailed to the Tree of reproach; that
whole Body, that was conceived by the Holy Ghost, was all scourged, wounded,
mangled.

This is the outside of his sufferings, and was he free within? these were but
love-tricks to what his Soul endured. O all ye that pass by the way, behold
and see, if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow. Alas! what can we see of
thy sorrows? we can no more see thy pain, than endure it; only this we see,
that what the infinite sins almost of infinite men, committed against an
infinite Majesty, deserved in infinite continuance of time; all this Thou, in
the short time of thy Passion, have paid for to the full, and we are bought
with a price.

O dear Christians, how ought these Earthy, Rocky, Adamantine hearts of ours,
rent in pieces at this Meditation? What, all these tears, and pangs, and groans
are for us, yea, from us. Shall the Son of God thus smart for our sins? yea,
with our sins, and shall not we grieve for our own? How far were our souls
gone, that could not be ransomed with an easier price? If thy Soul had been in
His Souls stead, what had become of it? it shall be, if His were not in stead
of thine. Go too now, thou lewd Man, that makes thy self merry with
uncleanness, thou little knows the price of one sin, which made thy blessed
Savior cry out, to the amazement of Angels, and horror of men, My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me? But now, we are bought with a price.

And if we be bought with a price, then away with those Jubilee Proclamations of
Rome, I mean the Supererogatory sufferings of Saints, to pay forth this price;
a blasphemous and beggarly Principle, (as learned Fulk calls it). Some modest
Doctors of Lovain would have minced it, affirming, that the suffering of
Saints are not truly satisfactory, but only motives to move God, to apply unto
us Christ's sufferingss: but they were soon charmed by four several Popes, (as
their own Cardinal confesses) and commanded to speak home with Bellarmine,
Passionibus Sanctorum expiari delicta, that by the sufferings of Saints, our
sins are expiated, and that by them applied, we are redeemed from those
punishments, we yet owe to God. Blasphemy worthy of tearing of garments!

How has Christ paid the price, if we must supply the defect? But, we are
bought with a price.

Take up then a Song of deliverance, far more glorious than that of Moses,
Deborah, or Gideon. Art thou afraid of Satan? Christ has spoiled
Principalities and Powers. Art thou afraid of sin? Christ was made sin, that
is, a price for sin for thee. Death, Hell, and the Grave are conquered, that
thou may triumph: Hell, where is thy sting? Death, where is thy victory. Nay
this price has paid for the abolishment of the Ceremonies of the Law. Away
then with New Moons, Sacrifices, and the rites of Judaism, the vail of the
Temple is rent. That conceit of Theophylact is witty at least, That as the
Jews were wont to rend their garments, when they heard blasphemy; so the
Temple not enduring those execrable blasphemies against the Son of God, tore
her Vail apieces. But that is not all. The vail rent, is, the observation of
the Rituall Law cancelled. I say not, that all ceremonies are cancelled by this
price, but the Law of Ceremonies and Jewish. It is a sound distinction of the
Ancients, that some are Typical, foresignifying Christ; some of order and
decency; those are abrogated, not these. The Spouse of Christ cannot be without
her laces, and chains, and borders. But thou, O Lord, how long shall thy poor
Church, through contentious spirits, find her ornaments her sorrows? How much
better were it, to revive the sweet spirit of divine Saint Austine, turning
this contention into grar^dation, glorifying God for these mercies; which is
the next Proposition, and the last of the three; Ye are bought with a price,
therefore glorify God.

All things ought to begin for, to terminate in, Gods glory, which is the end
of all our actions, the center of all our motions. The Angels sounded this
Trumpet at his Birth, when the price was but offered; shall not we, for his
precious Death and Passion, when it was paid? (...), Glory be to God on high.
This glory is Gods: First, a debito, for we are his, and that triplici jure, by
a threefold right: of Creation, as Men; of Redemption, as Sons; of
Sanctification, as Saints. Secondly, ab integro, from the whole; we are
composed of two parts, Body, and Spirit; are Gods, both in body and spirit,
therefore must glorify him both in body and spirit. Thirdly, a lytro, from the
Ransom. Empti sumus, We are bought, by a Synecdoche, quasi redempti, redeemed,
and re-bought, and that by an Emphaticall Pleonasme, pretio, with a price. And
thus, what one ought to have done, a threefold cord must move us to do, to
glorify God. We are Gods, both in body and spirit; Gods, because we are
redeemed both in body and spirit by the Son of God. This is the main and
cardinal reason, let us prosecute it.

What mercy was ever like this? for a God to sell his own Son, that he might
redeem his Enemies? What more dear than a Son, what more hateful than an
Enemy? Yet, oftentimes we see, that the hate of an Enemy, is drunk up of the
love of a Son. O my son Absalom, would God I had dyed for thee. Fulvius, a
Roman Senator, slew his Son, for conspiring with Cateline; but, in Christ was
no guile found. Manlius adjudged his Son to die, for violating the Law of
Arms; Christ kept the whole Law. Aegeus sent his son Theseus, to conflict with
a Minotaur, to free himself and his Country from deserved bondage; God sent
his Son to conflict with Satan, Death, and Hell, who was (...), free from all
bondage. The Israelites sacrificed their Children to Moloch. Agamemnon his
daughter Iphigenia to Neptune; but they had more: But God, when he had no more,
gave his only Son for a price. Besides the infinite disproportion betwixt God
and Man. An act of mercy, in Scripture, in History, not to be found the like
unparalled, unless a Type in Abraham, and but a Type: I know (says God to
Abraham) thou love me, because thou have not spared thine only son Isaac.
And then shall not we, O holy Father, know thou love us, that have not
spared, but given thine only Son Jesus? Gods love to Christ was infinite,
Abraham's to Isaac but finite. God gave his Son willingly, Abraham as it were
constrainedly. God gave his Son to an ignominious death, Abraham to a holy
Sacrifice. Isaac was in the hands of a tender Father, Christ of barbarous
enemies. Isaac was but offered in show, Christ paid the price indeed. O the
infinite disproportion! St. Chrysostom is rapt hereat, and calls it, (...), an
excess of love; that is a pin to low. Pareus calls it, por^entum amoris, a
miracle of love; that is yet too short. St. Paul, waft upon Seraphick wings,
styles it, (...), love surpassing knowledge; that, that is it.

What can we do in lue? but to the point in hand, glorify God; like Pigeons,
having drunk of this River of life, (...), jointly together hold up our Bills
toward Heaven in token of thankfulness; thank him, who is the God of glory,
for devesting himself of glory, that he might restore us to hope of glory. We
reverence men on Earth, Rome gives (...) worship to Saints in Heaven, (...),
more worship to the Mother of our Savior, Queen of Heaven, (as they style
her). But, (...), glory only to the God of glory. My glory (says God) I will
not give to another, but my peace I will give: Which was sung by the Angels at
the Nativity, Glory be to God on high, peace on earth. It is Aristotle's saying
in his Ethics, We give praise to men, but (...), a better thing than praise to
God: And what is that, but (...), Glory? Therefore (...), Glorify God in your
body and your spirits, which are Gods. It is Plato's phrase in his Respublica,
(...), Glorify God. Aratus his, (...), Ye are God's offspring. Join them both
together, and we have the point, Glorify God, because ye are Gods.

But as Honor, so Glory, is, in dante, in the Giver; we have no glory to give,
all glory is Gods, to whom we ought to give; and when it is given, it is but
his own, but a part of his own: And if all tongues should glorify him at once,
it adds no more to his glory, then a drop of a bucket returned to the Ocean,
whence it issued. As Rivers return to refresh the Sea, whence they came,
Sunbeams by reflection are inflamed; so our hearts by glorifying God, must be
enflamed, that he may glorify us, In storms, in calms, blow what wind will,
the Mariners Needle still points at the Pole; in prosperity, in adversity, we
ought to aim at Gods glory: Here, I say, we ought; in Heaven I am sure we
shall: for there (...), the Angels Leiturgie is singing of Hymns of glory. But
what need we look so high? was not our first Reformers so? Observe the blessed
method the Spirit dictated them, in the very dawning out of Popish
superstition: First, Contrition; then, Confession; then, Absolution; then
Petition; then, Gloria Patri, Glory be to God: then, Venite exultemus, Come and
rejoice: then, several Psalms, as so many Hallelujah's for the Day, each
concluding with Gloria Patri, Glory be to God.

After the first Lesson, Te Deum laudamus, We praise thee, O God, or the Song
of the three Children, Benedicite omnia opera, Let all his works glorify God.
After the second Lesson, Jubilate Deo, Be joyful in God: Ending still like
Frankincense put out with this sweet odor, Gloria, Patri, Glory be to God.
Well then, if this was the heavenly language in the infancy of our Church, let
every grown Member of the Church glorify God in Body, This was delivered, An.
1640.
in Spirit, for all his mercies, but especially, for this mercy of Redeeming
us, with the price of his own precious blood.

Therefore with Angels, and Archangells, and all the company of Heaven, we
laud and magnify thy glorious Name, evermore praising thee, and saying, Holy,
holy, holy, Lord God of Hosts, Heaven and Earth are full of thy glory; Glory
be to thee O Lord most high: To thee we ascribe all honor and glory, both now
and for evermore.

(...).
A SERMON, Expressing the benefits accruing from our Saviors Death and
Passion, insisting only upon the latter part, by reason of the affinity with
the former Subject.
The Text, Romans 8. 32. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for
us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things?
THIS Text is an Exchequer, the Treasurer God, the Gift all things; the parties
to whom, all men; the key, Christ. God the Father, that spared not to give
Christ for us all, will not spare with him to give us all. The Parts in
general are two: First, an Hypothesis, or Supposition. Secondly, a Thesis or
Position. The Hypothesis or Supposition has a double reference; looking back
at the former, unties a a knot; looking forward at the latter, is an argument
to confirm a truth; in matter, drawn a majori, from the greater to the less;
in form, an Enthymema, thus unfolded: God spared not, but delivered up his own
Son, therefore he will not spare, but deliver up all things for his Saints. It
is amplified, first, from the party or person giving, (...), He, in Grammar the
Third, but here the First Person in the Trinity. Secondly, from the double act,
(...), has not spared, negatively, (...), but has delivered up,
affirmatively. Thirdly, from the object or gift, that is, (...), a Son, (...),
his own Son, (...), his only begotten Son. Fourthly, the subjects, or parties
for whom, not Angels, but Men; for, when he ascended above Principalities and
Powers, he gave gifts to men: (...), us; not restrained to some of us, but with
a note of universality, all, (...), for us all: He that spared not his own Son,
but delivered him up for us all.

The second Branch, is in it self a Position; in reference to the former, a
Conclusion: The parts of it (as the Rivers of Paradise) are principally four:
First, the Donor, God. Secondly, the Donation, (...), a free gift, or Charter,
Thirdly, the parties to whom it is given, (...), to us. Fourthly, the Donative,
or gift, and that is, (...), all things, amplified with the correlative, (...),
with him: By him, all things were made: in him, all things are given. All of
this illustrated by a threefold Emphasis, here expressed; (...), a note of
Interrogation; (...), of Negation; (...), of Augmentation; (...), How shall he
not also? He that spared not his own Son, etc.

We have already ^ntred into this Exchequer, where we have seen the rich
treasury of Gods mercy, in delivering up his Son for us all. Now is the second
return, this Exchequer is yet open; let us all enter in further by him the
Door, and the Way, to see, how that with him, he will freely give us all
things: How shall he not with him also, etc.

The first part is the Doner, He: The word is twice repeated by an Epanados, in
relation to a double act of mercy: He that gave Christ for the health of our
souls, that He will give us all things for the health of our bodies, (...),
which is, which was, which is to be. Jam. 1. 17. Every good and perfect gift is
from above, and comes down from the Father of lights. He is Omnipotent to
make all things, Omniscient to know all things; infinite in Wisdom, to
contrive; in Mercy, to dispose; in Bounty, to bestow: He only that is (...),
the maker of all things, He only (...), is the giver of all things. It was the
dream of Avicen, that Angels, by the power of God, did make the Heavens, the
Heavens the inferior Bodies: But he was a Turk, and his Doctrine in this
relishes more the Alcaron, than the Evangelists. As unsound is that Sentence of
the Master of the Sentences, That God could communicate to the Creature, the
power of Creation: For, Creation is a production of a thing out of nothing, to
make a thing of nothing, an act of Omnipotency, Omnipotency an incommunicable
Attribute of God, as incommunicable as that Attribute of giving every good and
perfect gift, to be attributed to none but Him, that made all things for Man.
Genesis 1. 29. Behold, I have given you every herb, every tree, the fruit of every
tree, every beast of the field, foul of the air, fish in the sea, creeping
thing upon the earth. O curva in terris animae! O fond souls, like the poor
lunatic man at Athens, to presume upon that which is Gods prerogative. Vermis
crastino moriturus, a worm, that must die to morrow. Before God had given Man a
Being by Creation, he gave every thing for the Well-beeing of Man, by his
everlasting purpose, Predestination, Election: Purpose, to make Man in his own
Image, to make so many in number of men, (though not all their souls at once,
as Origin said) as there are Angels fallen; so many, as the Angels that
remain in purity, say some; so many as the Angels pure and impure, say others;
how many, uncertain, and that is the truth most certain. By Predestination, in
which gift or chain of Gods mercies are three links: First, the decreeing of
man to a supernatural end. Secondly, the gift of eternal life, which is the
supernatural end. Thirdly, the disposing of all saving means, to this
supernatural end, all effected in time, yet ordained before all time. By
Election, which is a culling and picking of some out of the mass of sin,
leaving others in the mass of corruption: As a Jeweller purifies what Gold, a
man sifts what Wheat he pleases; so God purifies the Elect his Gold, sifts the
Saints his Wheat for his Granarie, passes by the rest for their sin, I will not
determine whether Original or actual sin, nor deny them Christ in some sense,
whom the Father spared not, but delivered up for all. The reason why Christ was
not effectual for all, was their infidelity and sin. It is true, (as the
Schoolmen say) Predestinatio nihil ponit in praedestinato: Predestination is
an act of mere mercy in God, not of merit in man; neither in regard of the
Decree, which was, when he was nothing; of the first infusion of Grace, when he
was worse than nothing, in which God was the sole Agent, man the Patient; yet,
man is an Agent, and operative in using of grace, which he was a Patient in
receiving of. Whether God gives this grace to all indifferently, I will not
here question: But to the purpose, to whom he gives this grace in Christ, he
will give all. And as God was a giver in intention, before he made any thing,
so he was a bountiful giver in execution, after he had made all things: By
Creation, by Preservation, to sustain the body; by Vocation, Justification,
Sanctification, to adorn the soul here; by Glorification to crown both body and
soul hereafter. By Creation, making that of nothing, which was nearest nothing,
the first matter of all, (as the Philosophers calls it) Moses, Tohu vebohu; the
Septuagints, (...) or (...); the Poets, a Chaos, or rude mass of unpiled
Matter, out of which was made the starry Heavens to give light, the azured
Sky, a Throne for the Clouds; the Air, for birds to fly, men and beasts to
breath in; the Earth paying her yearly revenue of herbs, Plants, flowers; the
Sea, an unsteady Element, for fishes, made rather for use and wonder, than
pleasure. All made by God, all gifts given by him: And as given by Creation, so
continued by Preservation, garding of us by his immediate providence, by
Angels, by Secondary causes. By immediate Providence; For as omnia fecit, sic
omnia fulcit, that hand that made all things, supported all things; (...), his
eye behold all things, Spiritus intus abit, his Spirit that moved upon the
waters, moves every where; in him, all things live, and move, and have their
being. And as he gards us with his Providence, so with his Angels; whether with
a good Angel to support us, as a bad to tempt us; whether every man have one
ordinarily deputed, whether from his Birth, or from his Baptism, (curious
speculations, more befitting the Schools than the Pulpit) I Will not dispute. My
present Theme is to prove, that it is God that gives; that He, in my Text, that
gave his Angels charge over his Son, has given his Angels charge over all,
for whom he has given his Son, and he has given his Son for us all, that they
should take us up in their arms, lest we dash our feet against stones. And
shall not He, that gave his Angels as ministers, his Cherubims as flames of
fire, give us an inheritance with the Angels, and free us from eternal fire.
To his immediate Providence, as he has substituted the Angels, so all
Secondary causes; the Heavens with motion, light, influence; the Fire to
refresh, the Air to cherish, the Earth and Sea to nourish, Food to feed,
Physic to cure, Clothes to cover these our bodies: All these he gives us, (as
Aquinas says) non propter defectum suae virtutis, sed propter abundantiam suae
bonitatis; not that his power fails, but that his mercy overflowes. For, he
could feed us without food, cure us without physic, save us from cold without
covering. Neither is he only the giver of temporal things for the body, but
spiritual for the soul; by Vocation, either external, the Word preached,
Aaron's golden Bells ringing, the Sacraments, as nails of the Sanctuary; or
internal, the Law by the Spirit hammering, the Gospel softning, Grace
seasoning our Souls. By Justification, in forgiving our sins, and imputing to
us the merits of his Son. By Sanctification, as the Gold by filing, so our
Souls by purifying, are made clean. The Sun enlightens the dark Moon, the Sun
of Righteousness enlightens by his Spirit our dead members. By Glorification,
non nostra merita, sed sua dona coronans, crowning not our merits, but his own
mercies. These we touch briefly, because in giving his Son, he gave these,
(...), who is the giver of all. And if God be the giver of all, (as Rivers
receiving their Springs from the Sea, return them to the Sea) let all things
give praise to the God of gods, to the Lord of lords, for his mercy endures
for ever. Mountains and Hills, Fountains and Springs, all Tongues, and Tribes
and Kindreds, praise the God of mercies, as long as his mercy endures, and his
mercy endures for ever. The Stork paies tribute of her young, the Trees of
their fruits, the Earth of her flowers, for tillage: Shall we be (...), without
natural affection? (...), without God in the world? not (...), return blessing
and praising to him for his infinite blessings? And those that turn this
blessing into a curse, will be cursed as an Anathema Maranatha, a bitter curse.
Democritas and Epicurus denied God the gift of Creation of the World, while
they lived; yet questionless ere this confess, that fabricavit infernum, he
made Hell for them when they were dead. Some give God special providence of
celestial things in heaven, but not of terrestrial upon Earth; this Atheism
Eliphaz imputes to Job, Job. 22. 13. Thou say, how does God know? can he
judge through the dark cloud? thick clouds are a covering to him, that he sees
not. Rabbi Moses expunged all corruptible things, except man, out of the
Calender of Gods care. The Stoics tie the god of Fate, to their (...), or
inevitable necessity of Fate. Aristotle at the first maintained the World to be
eternal, without Creation; yet, at the last, ascribes the glory of the World
to God, and that in his Book, de Mundo, which Justine Martyr calls, the Module
of all his true Philosophy, where he confesses, that it is (...), the
handi-work of God; (...), preserved by God. Galen, the great Physician,
ascribed the fabric of man's body to Nature, not the God of Nature; but,
astonished at the workmanship of it, burst forth into an Hymn, concerning him
that made it, and that in his third Book, de usu partium, ^ompono canticum in
creatoris nostri landem: I will make a Song (says he) in the praise of him
that made me. Less divine is that opinion, Gregory Nyssen reproves in divine
Plato, making God the Guardian of spiritual, the Angels of Temporal, the
Devils of human things. These were Vipers, not Men, that wounded those bowels
of compassion, that made all things for the use of men. But in God is a
threefold Providence, (...), universal preservation; (...), motion to all
good; (...), permission of all evil, that his infinite goodness may appear
(...), who is the giver.

This is the second Branch, (...), a free gift or charter: There is a
commutative giving by way of exchange, when we exchange one thing for another;
as gold for Garments: Thus God gives all, receives nothing. A distributive
giving to every man according to his desert; but to us is no gift of merit, but
of Gods free mercy. A ministerial giving, not of his own, but of his Masters;
thus Men and Angels are Gods Almners, he the rich Owner and Donor of all.
There is a pernicious giving, to the receivers destruction, like the Grecian
Horse to the Trojans, Deianira's shirt to Hercules, Eutrapelus his treasury to
his Favorites. But every gift of God is good, if it be received with
thanksgiving. If the Son ask bread, will the Father give him a stone? if a
fish, will he give him a serpent? That we as Toads turn the pure potions of
Gods mercies into poison, the grace of God into wantonness, is from us the
ungrateful receivers, not from him (...), the free giver.

The word is derived of (...), grace, which is a free gift of God; (...), joy,
and (...) comes of (...), to rejoice, because (as Plutarch says) there is
nothing so (...) fruitful of joy as (...) grace; so that by the name we find,
that grace is a free gift of God, flowing from his love; God is a free giver,
because he is a lover, for all his (...), free gifts, are beams from the
sunshine (...) of his love: (...), He so loved the world; such a sic, as can
not be paralleled with a sicut. It was love, to make us of nothing; his (...),
or bowels of pity, to redeem us when we were worse then nothing. Love linked
with pity, with Christ the means, internal, to link all means external, to
sugar and sweeten this life. Therefore as the Greek word has the name of love,
so the Hebrew of pity, (...) chen, is grace, (...) chinam a free gift, both of
them coming from (...) chanam to have pity. This love, this pity of God will
more appear, if we seek out the several Charters of his grace, of his free
gifts. There is a grace temporal, common to all; a grace spiritual, special
to the Saints; this special grace is either gratis dans, in God accepting, or
gratis data, in man receiving: In man receiving, there is a grace preventing, a
grace following, a grace working, a grace co-working, a grace exciting, a grace
perfecting; these graces are internal, and proper to them that have Christ,
and given in the former branch of the Text, with Christ; the grace meant here
is common, (...), that shall be given overplus with Christ, and those are (...)
things for this life, that our heavenly Father knows we stand in need of. He
himself the giver will be to us a gift, which is all in all; a Castle to the
besieged, liberty to the prisoner, a father to the fatherless, a husband to
the widow, clothes to the naked, bread to the hungry, health to the sick,
ointment to the head, oil to the face, wine to the heart, marrow to the bones,
strength to the body, comfort to the soul; and all these he gives with Christ,
through whom is eternal salvation, both of body and soul. Now if God freely
give all, let us in token of gratefulness return (...) thanks to him, (...),
who is the giver.

The Stars shine, the Heavens rain, the Earth fructifies, Cattle multiplies,
all by his free gift, who if he should close his hand of bounty, the Stars
shine not, the Heavens rain not, the Earth fructifies not, Cattle multiply not.
Consider this, and wonder, O Epicure, that rises up to eat, lies down to sleep,
with Solomon's sluggard; that has eyes enclosed with fat, with David's Bulls
of Basan; that ascribes all to thy fortune, carriage, cunning, providence. Many
while they are in prosperity, feed upon Gods blessings, like Swine upon
Acornes, and look not up at the Tree whence they fall; when they are in
adversity, like Dogs snarl at the Stone that smitt them, but minds not the hand
that threw it, never considering with Job, The Lord gives, and the Lord
takes, blessed be the name of the Lord. God is a free giver, thou art his
Steward; if thou can give nothing (...) freely, because what thou possessest
is not thine own; yet, give (...) willingly. Some will give but (...)
^^willingly, (like narrow mouthed bottles) pour out nothing without grumbling.
Thou must be unlike to these, if thou will be like to God, who gives freely,
so freely, that he does not grudge it thee, after it be given, nor turn it to
thy misery, unless thy sins abuse his mercy. Kings oftentimes (as Diogenes
Laertius says) uses their Favorites like Bottles, whom they first fill, then
hang up; or like Spunges, when they are swelled to the full, then squeese them.
But God (as Curtius says of Alexander) endowes his darling Saints with lesser
benefits, to make them more capable of greater blessings. And as it was in
Trajan's time, the most winning way to petition for a future dignity at Gods
hand, is to show, we have lately been endowed with one. It is a good method in
our prayers, to begin with (...), giving of thanks for bounties bypast, then
proceed to supplication and intercession for graces following. Stick not, but
go boldly to the throne of grace; He that created the world for us, will freely
give all things we need, (...), to us.

This is the third particular in this pile, the parties to whom this Donative
or Charter is given, (...), to us. Where many have an equal possibility,
though but one enjoy a Crown, there is an universal hope; but where all may
enjoy, there is a general Jubilee and rejoicing. All in a Race hope, yet only
one can win the Goal: In a Lottery, each man expects a Prize, where a hundred
for one draws but Blanks. Darius alone was declared King by neighing of his
Horse, while each of the Princes persuaded himself, the Persian Scepter was
his own. Each of the three goddesses did fancy, the golden Ball was hers, yet
Venus only got it. The lot of the Apostleship falls in Matthias's lap, while
Joseph also expects it. Every Tribe throws down their Rod, yet Aaron's only
budds. Many submits themselves to the judgment of Urim and Thummim, while the
shining Letters on the High Priests breast can but pleasure one. If these
(...), free gifts of God, were such rare Phoenixes, like high Offices in a
Commonwealth, conferred on one, while thousands were competitors, there were
some hope to every drooping soul; but here is our comfort, they are freely
given, (...), to us; (...), to us, not only collectively, as, to judge the
twelve Tribes of Israel was given to the twelve Apostles, then some of us might
despair, at least doubt of these free gifts, and say with Judas, Is it I that
shall go without; but distributatively, (...), to each of us; He that gave
Christ (...), for us all, he will much more give lesser benefits, that come by
Christ: (...), ^o us; and not only so, but with a note of universality, (...),
to us all. It is a rule impregnable, that nature a non deficit necessariis,
Nature is not defici^nt in things necessary; and surely grace is less. God
feeds the young Ravens, clothes the Lillies of the field, and shall not he much
more his Saints? Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will
ease you. And here is our greatest comfort, that the poorest beggar that has
Christ, has as good an interest in God, in the (...) free gifts of God, as the
richest Monarch. An Emperor, though he have diverse Diadems, can not say,
(...), he will only give to me. The Pope, (for all his usurped triple Crown)
can not say, (...), he will only give to me. A King that swaies the Scepter of
many Kingdoms (...), he will only give to me. A Duke for his Dukedom, an
Earl for his Earldome, a Lord for his Baronry, none of them can say, (...)* he
will only give to me. But Joseph in the stocks, Lazarus at the gates, Job on
the dunghill; nay, all of them severally can say, (...), he will also give to
me; all of them jointly, (...), he will give unto us all; and what? not only
an Empire, a Popedom, a Kingdom, a Dukedom, an Earldome, a Baronry, for
these are but particular things, but (...), he will give us all things.

This is the fourth thing, the Donative or Gift, (...), all things; that one
man should enjoy all things to earthly Heraldry, may seem a Paradox: But that
(...), all should enjoy all things, amounts unto a prodigy, a wonder: Ninus
had his stately Palaces, Ptolemie his ample Provinces, Xerxes his numerous
Armies, Craesus his unvaluable riches, all of them but something, and none of
them all things: Nay, all these items put into one sum, makes up but a parcel
or moity, not All; and yet this moity was never bequeathed to any one for a
Legacy: The Assyrians, Persians, Greeks, Romans, each of them had their
succeeding Monarchy; yet, he who possessed most, had but a point, in comparison
of the Earth's whole Diameter. Cicero brings in Scipio weeping, when he be
held, as from Heaven, the narrow straitness of the Roman conquered
Territories. Puissant Alexander could not pass Hercules his Pillars: Casar
(unless it were in a Mapp) could never attain the Orcades. Admit that both of
them had compassed the whole known World, America, and the greatest part was
then undiscovered; grant them all the Earth, Ambition would have wept for more.
A Christian that has conquered the whole World, tramples the Moon under his
feet, willscom dull Earth the Center. To Absolom's beauty, join Samson's
strength, to both of them Croesus his wealth, to all these, Solomon's wisdom,
all is but vanity, vanity is but emptiness; where there is emptiness, there
is not (...), all things: Where is it then? It is in God, hid in Christ, given
also with Christ; How shall he not with him also give all things? This is the
Correlative, by which this universal [all] is amplified, (...), with him.

If we look upon Christ lying in the Manger, bleeding in the Garden, naked in
his Passion, complaining in the World, that though the Foxes had holes, Birds
of the Air nests, yet he had not (...), where to put his head, our faith might
waver, how with him all things were given, that enjoyed nothing. But, if we
consider, that it was he that by an omnipotent Chemistry extracted all things
out of nothing, it is most plain, Joh. 1. 3. All things were made by him, and
without him was nothing made. Coloss. 1. 16. All things were created by him,
and for him. For him in his Mystical, not in his Personal capacity: As God,
^e had no use of terrestrial things; as Man, now he is impassible, immortal
in Heaven; and therefore not in his own Person, but in the person of his
Saints, what is done to them, he acknowledges don to himself; all the world,
all things in the world, are given for the use of his Saints: All things (to
use the Philosophers distinction) that are bona animi, goods of the mind, bond
corporis goods of the body, bona fortunae goods offortune. All things (as
Divines say) internal in the soul, external of both body and soul, eternal
for the saving welfare of both. All things (as Aquinas says upon this place)
quae cedant in nostrum bonum, that may turn to our good; divinae personae ad
fruendum, to behold the vision of the Trinity, have communion with Saints and
Angels, commerce with Men, comfort with and from all the Creatures. All things
(as cur Savior says) (...), whereof we have need, Matthew. 6. and Him we will
follow as the best Interpreter. So then, we may conclude with the Apostle, 1
Cor. 3. 21. All things are ours; and God with Christ has given all things to
us all. If every man might be his own Interpreter, how sweet and heavenly would
this Doctrine be? the Drunkard would swim in Rivers of Wine, the Whoremonger
would have more Dalilah's, than the Turkish Grand Sultan or Solomon had; the
Glutton would receive his daily tribute of delicates from Earth, Sea, and Air;
the Tyrant would make the Earth an Aceldama, or field of blood, the Sea a
Golgotha, or place of sculs; the Covetous man would make the world his
Counting House, each Island a Closet of his Treasury; the Pope, and each
ambitious Roman Prelate, would number their Crowns and Scepters by their Beads.
But look again, before thou feed thy soul with this fools Paradise, it is
(...), with Christ. If thou have Christ, thou shall have all things; if thou
have not Christ, thou have nothing; but, that which thou possessest, is not
thine own, not thine own by a Spiritual right, though thine own by a Civil
right. All things were lost by the first Adam, restored by Christ the second
Adam, who, Heb. 1. 2. is heir of all; and only they that have Christ, are heirs
and joint heirs with Christ of all, Romans 8. 17. So then, he may be a spiritual
usurper, that is a civil lawful possessour, possessour, either jure gentium,
by the Law of Nations, and that by Conquest, as the Israelites subdued Canaan;
or jure civili, by the Civil Law, so we possess things given by the bounty of
others, got with the sweat of our own brows, appropriated unto us by buying,
exchanging, falling upon us by descent, death of friends, honors given, as the
reward of virtue. Some would have this Civil right to be derived to all by
Creation, not to be lost by Degeneration; God that feeds the Storks, clothes
the Lillies, will much more feed and cloth his nobler Creatures, for whose
sake, the Storks and Lillies were created. Some say, they were given in, and by
Christ to all; He that delivered up his Son for all, delivered up all things
with his Son for all. The Turks, Infidells, Impious, that have not Christ, are
not debarred of these lesser benefits that come by Christ. Some give this
Civil right only to the visible members of the Church; he that is baptized
into Christ, has only the benefit of this (...), all things that come by
Christ. Which of these opinions is the truth, I will not determine; that only
the Faithful have spiritual claim to this [All] in the Text, it is confessed
by all; they only can say and pray, (...), Give us our daily bread. For what
is it to have spiritual right, but to have the Spirit turning all things to
their comfort, and increase of glory, Romans 8. 28. All things work for the good
of them that love God, all things to the confusion of them that love not God.
But how have spiritual men all things? A right to all things, not a possession
of all things: Thus Abraham had a right to Canaan, because God had promised it,
though he possessed it not; God, if it were for their good, would give them the
fruition of all things. An Orphant trusts his Guardian for his means, a Patient
his Physician for his diet; and dare not thou trust God? While thou art
Militant here, thou art under tuition, and shall not possess all till thou be
Triumphant. We restrain a man in a Lethargy of his appetite of sleep, and deny
cold drink to one sick of a Feavour, though he be owner of all in the house. So
does God, the wise Physician of our Souls, give us all things that we need, but
not all things that we lust.

To look back again at the words, (...), He will give us all things with
Christ: O happy union! Christ and his benefits are never severed. He that gives
Gold, will much more give the Dross; He that gives Pearls, will give Pebles;
He that gave Christ, the Lord of life, will give all things convenient for life.
Heat may be separated from fire, as in Nebuchandnezzar's Furnace, light from
the Sun, as at our Savior's Passion; but no good thing can be separated from
the Son of God: he that has the Son, has life. And here methinks I see the
noble Army of Martyrs, that seemed to the World to have nothing, to throw down
the Gantlet of defiance, and triumph, that in Christ they have all things,
Armor of proof, a strong Tower, an invincible Fort, a Rock of salvation, that
if Men, Devils, Leviathans, Behemoths, losses, diseases, torments, swarm about
them like the Flies of Egypt, this (...), all things in Christ, will make them
sing, under the whip, at the stake, in the flames, make the patient laugh, when
the Spectatour weeps, carry frail flesh singing and rejoicing through a world
of bonds, rods, swords, racks, wheels, flames, strapadoes; break through
torments, armies, tempests, floods, to Heaven; shake off bonds, fetters,
manacles, and lead captivity captive. And if all these things come by Christ, O
then, let us get Christ himself, which is the (...), the giver of all, Men
venture themselves on the angry Seas, digg into the bowels of the Earth for
Gold and Silver, expose their bodies in Wars to wounds, scarrs, skirmages,
massacres, death; for honor, riches, wealth, empire, dignity, which, without
Christ, are for substance but shadows, vapors, Sodom's apples; for
continuance but bubbles, blasts, dreams; and for true solace of the soul, but
like the Vipers conception, whose momentary pleasure ends in murdering both
body and soul. What pain, damage, and travail do the Alchymists sustain, to
gain the Philosophers Stone, a thing doubtful whether it be possible, more
doubtful whether in their time; and if they had it, all is but to make Gold, a
little glittering Clay: What then should we do to gain Christ, in gaining whom,
we gain Heaven, and all? How often have we heard, and pitied some, whom the
world accounts her dearest Minions, beyond an ordinary pitch of Epicurisme or
Atheism, Midas-like, to cram their soul with wishes to themselves, to their
Children, of the fleshpots of Egypt, trash of this world, ballast to fill the
guts; not one poor wish, I fear, scarce a thought, for Heaven, for Christ.
Methinks I could resolve my self into Jeremie's lamentation, and Nehemiah's
tears, to see the preposterous course worldlings take, to provide earthly
garbage for their Children, advancing them by Marriage, when ignorant of the
principles of Religion, they go together like Brutes: They themselves tumbled
into the grave like the rich Glutton, leaving their posterity in as pitiful a
plight, as he his five brethren. Tell me, I beseech you, what comfort is it to
a damned soul in hell, to leave Children upon earth wallowing in abundance,
without Christ? they shall be as Fellons, apprehended with the Mannure in which
they glory, and cast into the same Prison. The Rich without Christ are so far
from having all things, that they have nothing, like the mad lunatic man at
Athens, they may persuade themselves, that every ship that is landed is their
own; like the Lam^ae or Witches, think they feed upon delicacies; like
Sanguine-dreams, fancy they have Earldomes, Dukedomes, Mountains of Gold; yet
all is but a fancy. And admit the meat thou eats, the clothes thou puts on, the
pleasure thou enjoyes, the lands thou possesses, be truly thine own; without
Christ, they are but as Trees without fruit, Clouds without rain, Combs
without honey, have no more proportion to that a Christian enjoyes, than a
house of Cards has to a Palace, a Molehill to a Mountain, a King on a Stage
to a King on a Throne. And admit thou receive some real comfort here, the more
will be thy sorrow hereafter; for every minute of sugered delight, thou shall
have an eternity of horror; the more thy strength, thy beauty, thy riches, thy
honor here, the more will be thy feebleness, thy deformity, thy want, the
deeper thy disgrace hereafter. Boast now, O Worldling of that thou enjoyest
without Christ, glory as a Cripple of his soars, a Prisoner of his Fetters, a
Pirate of his robberies at the Gallows, of the things thou usurpest, till,
Judas-like, thou throw them away as the cursed price, for which thou have sold
thy soul to Satan, and confess, as thou will be once compelled, that only he
that has Christ, has (...), all things. All things in this world, are like
Sun-dials, blaze-Torches, Tapers, Candles, all Stars at once, they are of no
use; flow Riches, Honor, Strength, Wives, Friends, Children, to our
contentment, without this Sun of Righteousness, it is still night: They may be
Copies of Gods grace, but without Seal; Ciphers of no value, till the Unity in
the Trinity, by Christ the Meadiatour, be joined with them: When this union is
once made, then, as if the whole World were a Globe of Gold, the Earth a Center
of Diamond, the Heavens poured down Balm, the Clouds showred down precious
Ointments, all for the solace of that man; God shall replenish his Soul with
comforts, and no wonder, seeing he has given him his Son, (...), How shall he
not with him give all things?

This is the threefold Emphasis, by which this Argument is amplified; (...), a
note of Interrogation; (...), of Negation; (...), of Augmentation: (...), How
shall he not also? As if he had said, It is a thing beyond all possible
certainty, and more then certain, that he will give us all things, and more
then all things, if it be possible; and all of this, because he has given us
his own Son, who is (...), all of all, and all in all, and more than all.

And the reason of this inference may be either taken from the Cause, Christ
that made all things, contains all things; or from the Sign, He that could
give Christ, can give all things; He that would give Christ, will give all
things. God has given to Satan power in the world, and therefore he is styled
in Scripture, god of this world, the prince that rules in the the air: To the
blessed Angels he has given power in Heaven, therefore they are called,
Thrones, dominions, principalities and powers; but to neither of them has he
given his Son. Some Divines make this the occasion of Lucifer's fall, and the
Angels; they ambitiously aspired, desired the union with the Unity in Trinity,
envyed that the seed of Woman should be united with the eternal Word, the
second Person in the Trinity. God has given eternal Crowns to the Angels in
Heaven, power to the Devils upon Earth, but Christ to neither of them. But he
has given us Christ, therefore he will with him give us (...), all things in
Heaven and Earth. Wherefore art thou then perplexed within me, O my Soul, still
trust in God, Ille providebit, He will be thy great reward. Quid dubitas de
possessionibus (says St. Chrysostom) herum and dominum cum habeas? Why
doubtest thou of possessions, when thou possessest the Lord of all, even Christ
the Son of God? Now, O Lord, thou that sparedst not, but crucifiedst thy Son
for our sins-sake, crucify our sins, and spare us for thy Son's sake: Spare us
for thy Son's merits, who would not spare thy Son for our sins demerits:
Receive us by the red Sea of his Blood, through the dead Sea of Death, to the
Land of Promise; To whom with thee, O holy Father, etc.

(...).
A SERMON, Preached before these times, as prognosticating the storms that were
then impendent, whereof part are fallen since.
The Text, Psalm. 76. 7. And who may stand in thy sight, when once thou art
angry?
THE time when, the occasion why, and the Author by whom this Psalm was penned,
is not generally agreed upon; but that it was (as all Scripture is) from the
holy Ghost, in time of spiritual joy and exaltation, after some glorious
victory, none makes question. And if Moses and the Israelites sung a Song of
deliverance, for the overthrow of Pharaoh, Barak and Deborah for the death of
Sisera, why may ^ot we think with the Septuagints, that this is a Song of
deliverance, for that miraculous discomfiture of Senacherib's army, in the
days of Hezekiah? But we leave that as more then probable, and come to the
parts of the Psalm, which are four: The first is a Preface, in the two first
verses, laying down the Argument, that God is to be praised, enforced by two
reasons; the one drawn from his wonderful works, whereby he has showed
himself to the Jews; the other, from his special presence at Jerusalem, and
hiding his face from the Gentiles. The second contains a description, of that
great victory Gods mighty arm had given them over their enemies. The third,
propounds the Doctrines drawn from thence, for the Churches edification, from
the seventh to the tenth verse. The fourth and last, is an Epiphonema or
conclusion, in the two last verses, exhorting all Tribes, and Tongues, and
Kindreds, for the foregoing motives, to praise and glorify God. Thus the
Analysis.

The Text belongs to the third branch, containing points of Doctrine, for the
Churches instruction: For having expressed, that God had broke the enemies bow
and arrows, shield and sword, in battle; that he had spoiled the
stout-hearted; that at his rebuke, the horses and chariots were cast into a
dead sleep: The Spirit of God enforces this conclusion, in the beginning of the
seventh verse, Thou, even thou art to be feared. The Emphasis in the word
[Thou] redoubled, implies as much, as if he had said, Not principalities, not
powers, not hell, not death, nor any thing for themselves, but thou O Lord
alone art to be feared. Arguments and reasons to confirm it are two, here laid
down in the Text: The first is drawn from Gods anger, who has decreed, and
accordingly executes, vengeance upon all proud rebels. The second is drawn
from his power, not Princes, not Armies, not Men, not Angels, are able to
endure the breath of his fury: For, Who may stand in thy sight, when once thou
art angry?

The words at the first view, seem to divide themselves into these two parts:
First, an (...) or question, Who may stand in thy sight? Secondly, an (...) or
supposition, When once thou art angry. But if by more strict examination, we
lay them up on the file, the (...) or Supposition (as in all necessary truths)
may be resolved into an infallible Position; as if he had said, There is a
time, when God will be angry. The (...) or Question, is equivalent to a
negative Proposition, but with more Emphasis and significacie, as if he had
said, None can stand in thy sight. Hence these two points of Doctrine,
naturally arising, offer themselves to our consideration: First, If men
continue in sin, there will be a time when God will be angry. Secondly, When
God is angry, none can stand in his sight and abide it. And of these in order.
But first, the words are to be unfolded, for the clearer understanding of the
matter; in which, if there be any difficulty, it is in these two; first, what
it is to stand in Gods sight; secondly, in what sense he is said to be angry.
Standing is properly a positure of the body, that argues strength, valor,
exercise; for while Soldiers stand in their squadrons and ranks, there is hope
they make at their Enemies, and reward them; if not, they either turn their
backs, and are discouraged, or fall to the ground, and so are utterly
discomfited. So here in the Text, Who may stand? As if he should say, O Lord,
if thou should bend thy bow, and whet thy glittering sword to come to Battle,
what man, what Angel would not fall before thee, and melt as wax before the
fire? Thus much for the former. The second is, to inform our judgments, how God
can be angry? The truth is, Anger is a speech borrowed from men, in whom anger
sometimes signifies displeasure or discontent, Genesis 45. 5. Be not angry at your
selves, that you have sold me hither; that is, be not displeased. Sometimes it
signifies a desire of revenge, upon the person of our neighbor, Matthew. 5. 22.
He that is angry with his brother without a cause, shall be in danger of
judgment. Sometimes it signifies displeasure, not against the person, but
against the sin of our neighbor, or our own sin; this kind of anger, if it be
moderate, and joined with compassion, is a holy affection, 2 Cor. 7. 1. In that
ye were godlily sorry, what [anger] has it wrought? that is, holy indignation
against sin. Anger, in the first sense, is not a discontent in God, for he is
all fullness of joy, and nothing can hinder his Bliss; it cannot be a
displeasure at any man's person without a cause, for God is angry at none, but
those that first have displeased him. Thirdly, it is not a passion or
perturbation in God. But the truth is, he is said to be angry, when he does
such things as angry men do, who punish, and take away signs of favor from
such, as they be angry withal. This the word [anger] in the original imports,
coming from (...) aph, that signifies a nostrill, because anger shows it
self in snuffing and breathing of the nose; therefore David describing God
when he is angry, says, Psalm. 18. 8. There went a smoke out of his nostrills,
and fire out of his mouth devoured, coals were kindled by it. Not that God has
passions, or mouth, or breath, or nostrills; but because that men, when they
are an^ry, show it in some, or most of these. (...) (...); It is spoke in the
dialect of men, but must be understood in an Idiom proper to God. Of this more
fully, when we come to the Uses: thus much for opening the words. Now to the
first point of Doctrine, which is this, Though the enemies of the Church should
link themselves together in bands of Iron, yet a day will come, when God will
be angry.

For the proof of this, see what St. Paul says; he does not say, Because God
is merciful, therefore they may take their scope in sinning; because he
punishes not presently, therefore he sees not; because he is long-suffering,
therefore his justice shall not be executed: But he evinces the contrary, Romans
2. 5. But after thy hardness and impenitent heart, thou treasurest up to thy
self wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment
of God. As though he should say, Do not think to escape, because thou enjoyes
hearts ease, Halcyon days, and days of peace; for every sin God hoords up,
and seals as in a bag; the devil trusses up, as in a bill of indictment;
thine own conscience heaps up wound to wound, and plague to plague, which one
day, as dammed Rivers, shall burst in upon thee with more violence; as long
festered wounds be more incurable, as an Army long a providing, come with
greater terror to Battle. Therefore it was not the least point of wisdom in
Solomon, to press this point. Eccles. 11. 9. Rejoice O young man in thy youth,
let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the delight of
thy heart, and in the sight of thine eyes: But know, that for all these things,
God will bring thee to judgment. God uses to deal with sinners, as Fishes do
with their prey, after they have swallowed the hook, suffers them to play and
sport with it to the end of the line, then strikes it through their gills, and
brings them back again. Thus much this forequoted speech of Solomon imports, as
if he had said, You that solace your selves with all delights, in the heat of
your blood; well, go on in your courses, banish dull and sad thoughts with the
purest Wine, shake off your fits of melancholy, with peals of laughter, sleep
on in the laps of your Dalilah's, cheer up your selves with Pipe, and Tabret,
and the sweetest Music; yet a little more sleep, a little more slumber, live
on, as though there were no Heaven, no Hell, no Wrath, no Judgment: Yet, know
this, and know it you must, that God has his hook in your nostrills, and ere
long his wrath and fury shall wax hot against you like fire. Job goes about to
inform gluttons, and worldly minded men, (men hardest of belief) in the truth
of this Doctrine, Job. 20. 23. When he is about to fill his belly, God shall
cast the fury of his wrath upon him, and shall rain it upon him while he is
eating. 27. The heaven shall reveal his iniquity, and the earth shall rise up
against him; the increase of his house shall depart, and his good shall flow
away in the day of his wrath. Even the Church of God it self, that like a
wanton Minion, had put far from her the evil day, was glad to confess this,
and that with ruefull moan to complain, Lam. 1. 12. Is it nothing to you, all
ye that pass by, behold and see if there be any sorrow like to my sorrow,
which is done unto me, wherewith the Lord has afflicted me, in the day of his
fierce anger, A day of anger indeed. Lam. 2. 21. The young and the old lie on
the ground in the streets, my virgins and my young men are fallen by the sword,
thou have slain them in the time of thine anger, thou have killed, and not
pittyed. Gods anger is such a flame, as cannot be quenched, his day of anger;
such a day, as neither wisdom, nor honor, nor riches, nor gold, can ransom
us from: Ezekiel. 7. 19. They shall cast their silver in the streets, and their
gold shall be removed; their silver and their gold shall not be able to deliver
them, in the day of the wrath of the Lord. It is not Crowns imperial, nor
Thrones, nor Diadems, that can escape this day: Ps. 110. 5. The Lord at thy
right hand shall strike through Kings, in the day of his wrath. Therefore the
holy Ghost, to note the certainty of Gods anger, calls it a day of wrath, of
fierce wrath; a day of displeasure, hot displeasure, heavy displeasure; a day
of Gods vengeance, Jer. 46. 10. A day of the Lord, and a cloudy day, Ezekiel. 30.
3. A day of darkness and of gloominesse, a day of clouds and thick darkness,
Joel 2. 2. Arguments and reasons further to confirm it, may be these.

The first is drawn from the nature of God, who is of purer eyes, than to
behold iniquity unpunished; a consuming fire, that the stubble is burned up
before him; a God of glory, that Dagon cannot stand in his presence; a light,
that cannot dwell with darkness; a jealous God, that burns the chafe with
unquenchable fire, wounds Kings, and spews all workers of iniquity out of his
mouth. For, in Creatures, wherein (by reason of the antipathy of their nature
and humors) there is but a finite distance, there can scarce be any agreement;
the Vine will not thrive in the same place with the Colwort, the Elephant is
enraged at the sight of a Ram, one Bird and Beast pursues another with eager
pursuit: Then how much more shall God, who is infinitely holy, everlastingly
good, eternally happy, threaten, punish, be angry at, take revenge upon sin,
that abuses his mercy, despises his justice, defaces his image? What man will
not take care to break a Cockatrice eggs, and kill a Serpent? And shall not God
in the day of his fierce wrath, take revenge upon sin, which that old Serpent
Satan brought into the world? The reason why men are not angry at those crimes,
that deserve Phinehas his zeal, and Samuel's indignation, is, because our
understanding cannot see the heinousness of them, our wills cannot
sufficiently desire revenge, our affections with eagerness pursue them. But
God understands, and wills, and hates, as things are in themselves, and as they
deserve.

The second Reason may be drawn from Gods Will, who justly decreed, to pour
down the fierce Vialls of his wrath, in the day of his wrath, upon all
disobedient persons: See Deuter. 28. the curses and comminations God in his
anger threatened to bring upon the people: See if he do not set apart the wicked
for fuel of his wrath, against this day, Prove. 16. 5. The Lord made all things
for himself, yea even the wicked for the day of evil. Now if God be willing
to pour out his heavy displeasure upon those, that displease him, what can
hinder his mighty arm for performing? Creatures indeed may be angry, but
oftentimes like Drones without stings, cannot hurt; as Canons charged with
powder without shot, only makes a roaring; like the Popes Bulls, threatens
many, hurts none but them whose consciences are enslaved. Saul may be angry at
David, but cannot find him out; but, from Gods all-piercing eye, none can hide
himself. Satan may desire to kill Job, Jonah may be angry till death for
N^niveh's preservation; yet, God puts a bitt in both their mouths, which if he
be angry, nothing can be holden out of his reach. Princes (if they take
captives) may have the rescued from them again, as Lot was from the King of
Sodom; bought with a price, as Joseph of the Ishmaelites: But no power can
rescue us from Gods anger, no ransom but Christ's blood redeem us. Gods Will
being set afoot, all his Attributes follow; if his Will say, Be angry, his Eye
seeks out the object of his anger, and finds it; his wisdom tempers the cup,
his hand whets the sword, his arm strikes the blow. Thus you see, there is a
time of Gods anger for sin, because he will have it so.

The third Reason, that there is a time when God is angry, is drawn from the
cause, which in general is sin, and in special, the contempt, and
contumacious despite we offer unto God, in every sin we commit: The Apostle
uses the same reason, Romans 2. 4. (...), Despisest thou the riches of his
goodness, and forbearance, and long suffering? The conclusion he infers, is
this, (...), Thou treasurest up to thy self wrath against the day of wrath,
and revelation of the righteous judgment of God. Nebuchadnezzar was angry at
the three Children, for contempt of worshipping of his Image, and threw them
into the hot fiery Furnace; Daniel for the like was thrown into the Lions den.
Shall Kings wrath burn thus like fire, for despising of their unlawful
decrees? and then shall not God, who is a consuming fire, be angry at us vile
worms, for despising of his pure, holy, and wholesome Laws, which the Angels
dare not mention without trembling? Esau lost his Birthright, for preferring a
mess of Pottage before it; the Jews smarted, for preferring Barabbas before
Christ; Judas felt Gods wrath, for valuing our blessed Savior at thirty pieces
of silver. In every sin, we prefer the service of Satan before Gods service,
the pleasure of iniquity before the fruits of righteousness, death before
life, our own will before Gods will.

The fourth Reason may be taken from the effects, and execution of his anger;
we see symptoms of Gods wrath in some, in their bodies, as Oehazie's leprosy;
some, in lack of liberty, as Manasses; some in their children, as Eli; some in
the gripes of a yelling conscience, as Cain, Judas, Achi^ophel, and Saul; some
in taking away their reason, as Nabuchadnezzar; in some of sudden death, as
Belshazzar, while he was quaffing; Herod, while he was boasting; the people of
Sodom, while they were wallowing in their uncleanness; Dathan and Ab^ram
swallowed quick to Hell, while they murmured against Moses and Aaron, and
usurped the Priests office. Lastly, in all reprobates at the last judgment,
which will be a day of anger indeed, where his wrath shall seize upon them for
ever. Hitherto the Reasons, the Uses follow: First, of Information. And how God
can be angry, in opening of the Text we touched, to make way to that which
followed; Let us further enquire wherein it consists. When anger is said to be
a desire of revenge, as (...) of (...) imports, to desire as ravinously as a
hungry stomach does meat, an inflaming of the blood about the heart, a sorrow
of the heart, for the contempt that is done to us, with an inkindling of
indignation against the despiser. Anger, as it is thus described, neither for
the material nor formal, can belong to God, because he is a pure Essence,
free from passion, all-sufficient in himself, cannot be crossed in his
absolute will: Yet, in a sense it is true, that Anger is in God, and that in
these three respects.

First, it argues his will, and most just decree of taking revenge, and
punishing the injuries and contempt offered to him, and his Church, as, Romans 1.
18. The wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness; that is,
God manifests by punishments, what he has decreed from eternity. Secondly, it
signifies the comminations and threatenings of punishments against sinners; for,
when God threatens to bring plagues and judgments, he is said to be angry:
Psalm. 6. 1. O Lord rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy hot
displeasure; that is, do not punish me as thou threatens me, according to my
sins. Thirdly, it signifies the effects of his displeasure, and the execution
it self of those plagues and judgments, which he had before decreed and
threatened. Thus you see, God may be said to be angry, because in his will he
decrees, in his word he threatens, in his wisdom punishes. This may serve to
confute that Stoicall opinion, that God cannot be angry, because anger (say
they) is a disease of the soul, that cannot surprise a wise man: Here they may
see, that it derogates not, but suites with the wisdom of him, who is wisdom
it self. Here the Epicures may see, how blasphemously they dishonor God, when
they say, he sits idle in Heaven, takes care for nothing, punishes none. How
near unto these are all our carnal Worldlings, that take their ease, eat,
drink, and say in their hearts, Tush, God cares not: Let them know, that for
all this, though they escape a while unpunished, he will bruise them in pieces
with a rod of iron, like a potters vessel,

The second inquiry is, Seeing God in a sense may be said to be angry, whether
anger be one of those Attributes, that are imitable and warrantable in us, or
no? We are commanded to be holy, as he is holy, merciful as he is merciful:
But of anger, it may be doubted, because it blindes the understanding, perverts
the will, disorders the affections. The truth is, anger is not only
warrantable, but sometimes not to be angry is sin. This may be proved by the
example of Christ, Joel 2. 7. The zeal of thy house has eaten me up. Zeal is a
passion, mixed of anger and love; by his actions, in driving the buyers and
sellers out of the Temple; by precept, Ephesians. 4. 25. Be ye anry, and sin not;
that is, though anger in it self may be good, yet, the inordinatenesse of it
makes it a sin, and that is three ways: First, if we be angry rashly, above
measure, for slight or no causes. Secondly, if we be angry for private
injuries, and not for dishonouring of God. Thirdly, if we be angry more for the
hatred we bear to our brethren, than for their sins. Otherwise to be angry at
sin, (if the action be streaming in Christ's blood) may be a means to assuage
Gods anger for sin.

Let the second Use serve to examine our selves, whether we have provoked the
Lord to anger, or no; And if; by what signs we may know the day of his anger
is at hand: First, whether we have provoked him to anger, may be known from the
cause, which is the contempt, and contumacious despite we offer to God in
every sin; I Will only name two or three which the Scripture often mentions, as
the greatest incentives of his anger. First, Idolatry, a sin that puts God out
of his Throne, sets up Idols in his place; which is not only when we worship
other Gods, but when we suffer riches, honor, beauty, pleasure, to take up or
soul, which should be the holy Ghosts temple. This is high treason against God;
therefore how often showed he his anger to the Israelites, in fiery serpents,
plagues, pestilences, dearth, famine, sword, and captivity. To this may be
added, tempting of God, rebellion against God, that sin of witchcraft,
blasphemy, hypocrisy, and profaning of the Lords Day.

The second way whereby we may know, whether we have angered God, is, to
examine our souls, whether we have been dutiful to Parents, obedient to
Rulers, reverent to our Betters: The Scripture styles them Gods; they that
despise them, despise God, in as much as they are ranked among the cursed,
Deuteronomy. 27. 16. Cursed is he that sets light by his father, or by his mother,
and let all the people say, Amen. Nay, so great is Gods anger, that he
threatens the Ravens shall pull out their eyes.

Thirdly, Murderers, and those that imbrue their hands in innocent blood, offer
injury and despite unto God with a high hand, and therefore highly displease
him: He that stabbs but at the Grand Sultan's Picture, is guilty of treason;
then how shall the blood of his brother cry for vengeance against him, that
defaces Gods Image in Man? witness Cain's ghastly conscience, David's broken
bones, Judas bursten bowels, and the wrath of God against the Jews, who
cried, His blood be upon us, and upon our children.

Fourthly, the wronging of Widows and Orphans, oppressing the poor and
strangers, are sins that anger God: He has promised to be a Husband to the
widow, a Father to the fatherless, a succor to the poor, a guide to the
stranger: They that offer wrong to these, strive to separate those, whom God
has wedded to himself by holy affections, by promises, by his Son Jesus:
Therefore see what God says; Exodus 22. 22. Ye shall not afflict any widow or
fatherless child; if thou afflict them in any wise, and they cri^ at all unto
me, I will surely hear their cry, and my wrath shall wax hot; and I will kill
you with the sword, and your wives shall be widows, and your children father
less.

Lastly, all filthy, unnatural, and abominable lusts of the flesh, these
rebel against the spirit, anger God the Father of spirits; witness the
adultery of David, for which, the sword never departed from his house; those
thousands of Benjamites that were slain, for abusing the Levit's wife; those
Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, that were buried in the fiery flakes of
brimstone. Thus we have discovered a few of the chiefest of those sins, that
provoke Gods anger. By these, and all others, let us examine our souls, and sit
an audit in our consciences, whether we have any share in kindling of Gods
anger or no. O that many men's consciences did not tell them without
examination, and that we did not see by daily experience, that, Hos. 4. 2. by
swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing of adultery, men
break out that blood touches blood. Thus much for the Use of Examination.

The next Use is of Enquiry; if it be so, that we have angered God, how we may
foresee, and know the day of his anger. Mariners desire to so see a storm,
diggers in Mines a damp, soldiers would be forewarned, that they may be
fore-armed against the coming of their enemies. The truth is, God for the most
part keeps the express day of his anger, in his secret will to himself, yet
many times shows, that it is near; and those are either such, as must
infallib^y come to pass, as the last Judgment; or are revealed to us with a
condition, as Niniveh shall be destroyed if they repent not; Jerusalem shall be
demolished, if she will not know the day of her visitation; Judas shall smart
for it, if he betray his Lord and Master. and these events which are
conditionally proposed to us, may be known three ways.

First, by the threatenings and menaces of Gods Prophets and Ministers, for they
are his mouth, and as long as they speak, his Word cannot lie. If the Prophet
tell Zedechiah, that if he go to the Battle he must be slain, tarry at home he
must, or die. If Daniel tell Nebuchadnezzar, that God was angry at the great
Tree, he must either give over his beastly lusts, or live with the beasts. So
when Gods Ministers threaten a day of anger against any Nation, City, Family,
for their proud transgressions, it must of necessity come to pass, either here
or hereafter; be repented of here, or for ever punished hereafter.

The second sign, whereby we may know, that the day of Gods anger is at hand,
are lesser plagues, that he sends as forerunners and harbingers of severer
wrath; like Tamberlain, he first hangs out his Ensign of peace, then his red
Cross of justice, and musters smaller plagues against us; if then we return
not, and strike a League, he hangs out his black Flag of implacable wrath,
skirmaging and massacring, till neither Prince nor People, root nor branch be
left. He is like a Man of war, discharges a warning-piece at his enemies, if
they despise that, quits the Hatches of them with a second, strikes off their
mani-Mast with a third, and so sinks them. He sends little flashes, before the
great thunder-crack come. Hence it is, that his anger is first compared to a
smoke, then to a kindling of fire, then to a flame of fire, then to a consuming
fire, then to an unquenchable fire. He sent to the Egyptians Frogs, Lice,
Locusts, Murrain, Blood, Darkness, Hail, Death of the Firstborn, and lastly
an utter Overthrow. Christ, Matthew, 24. having told Jerusalem of wars, rumors
of wars, troubles, famines, pestilences, earthquakes, ends his speech with a
nondum finis, yet is not the end; these are but the beginnings of trouble. To
apply. What shall we think God meant, by the late threatening of dearth and
famine, such streams of bloodshed in our neighbor Nations, feavours and
pestilences scattered abroad, as though the destroying Angel were shooting at
Rovers; I will not conclude, that his day of anger is at hand, and that he will
make us the Butt, at which he will discharge his whole Quiver of Arrows; but
this I say, that either repentance or destruction must follow.

Neither is it the least sign, that a day of vengeance is at hand, and that
the Lord has a controversy with his people, when he takes holy and religious
men, zealous Ministers, from amongst them. If a Seal be plucked from an
Evidence, it argues the whole Writing shall be torn assunder, cancelled,
thrown in the fire, burned. Godly men are as a Signet on Gods hand, Seals and
Pledges, that he will not destroy the righteous with the wicked; A royal
Priesthood, whom he oftentimes takes away, that they may not see the ensuing
misery; as Pearls plucked from Rings, Wheat gathered from the Tares,
foretells, the one must to the furnace, to be new molded, the other to the
fire to be burned: As children taken from the breasts of mothers adjudged to
die, that they may not see their execution. Thus God sent Lot and his Family
out of Sodom, and then rained down fire and brimstone upon them. After God had
taken away the godly King Josiah, what miseries and calamities, like waves one
in the neck of another, pursued the Jews, till their utter desolation?

The third sign, whereby to know that a day of God's anger is at hand, is, his
suffering of sin long to reign unpunished. Vespasian had for his Ensign, an
Anchor, with a Dolphin painted in it; an Anchor, to signify that he was slow
in coming; a Dolphin, that he was fierce in taking revenge. It is the Tree
that continues unpruned, that must be hewn down; the Oxen that go in fat
Pastures, that must to the shambles: So sinners, if God feed them, it is but to
fat them for the knife; if he preserve them, it is but for further judgment.

This is not the least token, that God has sealed us up (unless we repent)
for the day of his anger. What heart, though harder than Adamant, would not
bleed, to think of the scourges of other* Countries, The streets running with
blood, the Cities burning with fire, the children slain in the parents sight,
the old gray heads dyed in crimson blood, the young led into captivity; while,
while we are hedged about on every side with peace, wallow in abundance; and,
which is worse, in unthankfulness, in sin. What good could we not yet promise
this our Nation? But when the Streets rings with swearing and profaneness,
Markets are stained with lying, oppressing, and cousenage; the Taverns and
Innes abound with filthy vomitings, wickedness reigns in every state, every
condition, every place; shall we still put far from us the evil day?

Thus you see, we have angered God, and that unless he be appeased, the day of
his anger is at hand. The third Use is of Instruction, how to prevent it, and
that is by repentance: First, taking a strict examination of our selves, how
often, in what manner, in what measure, we have angered God. A Physician must
first know the disease, before he can apply the cure. Then we must be heartily
sorry, that we have offended God; this godly sorrow must work like a strong
potion, work in the understanding, in the will, in the affections, in the
conscience, bruise the bones, twinge the spirit, break the heart. Thirdly, we
must aggravate it, by remembering, that we have not only angered Men and
Angels, but Christ that dyed for us. No heat of fire, nor knock of hammers,
can break the Adamant; but anoint it with the hot blood of a Goat, it falls in
splinters. Not precepts, not threatenings, not judgments, can make a stony heart
contrite, till God in Christ move it. Fourthly, we must forsake our sins,
whereby we have angered God. The Scolapendra when she has swallowed an hook,
vomits out her bowels with it, and so is quit. When we have swallowed
iniquity, that the guilt thereof stings us, let us vomit and spew out our
darling pleasures, pluck out our eye of lust, cut off our hand of revenge,
belch out our heart of pride, and so in the rest. Fifthly, we must appease Gods
anger with prayer, come to the Altar, bring Incense, stan^ before the
Mercy-seat, cry unto him that sits between the Cherubims, have some Moses to
hold up his hand for us, and with us, some Samuel to make intercession for us:
And if all this will not pacify him, let some Magistrate, like Moses,
Phinehas, or Joshua, execute judgment, that so the plague may be stayed.

Hitherto the first point, that if we continue in sin, God will be angry. The
second follows, That when God is angry, none can stand in his sight, or abide
it; or, That the anger of God is a terrible, unspeakable, unsupportable,
intolerable burden. Every word in the Text has a special Emphasis to prove
this; Who may stand? Who? shall Angels? they are but like refracted beams or
rays, if God should hide his face, they would cease to shine. Shall Man? his
glory and pomp, like the colors in the Rainbow, vanishes away, when God puts
forth in anger the brightness of his face. Shall Devils? If he speak the
word, they are tumbled down from Heaven like lightning. Stand in thy sight.
[Stand.] What! a Reed against a Cedar, a Thistle in Lebanon against a Cedar in
Lebanon, a Feather against a Flame, a Grasshopper against an Almighty, a head of
Glass against a head of Brass. When once thou art angry. [Angry.] By sending
out his wrath, that it wounds like arrows; angry, in pouring it out, that it
drownes like water; angry, in kindling of it, that it burns like fire; nay, a
consuming fire, but that may be quenched; an unquenchable fire, but that may
cease to burn, when it lacks matter; an everlasting fire, that never goes out,
That, that is it; such anger as is never fully shown, but in punishment of
Reprobates; in no punishment, but that in Hell; in none in Hell, but that
eternal.

First, to prove, that Gods anger is terrible, we need go no further, but to
the godly, to seek it: How have the stout-hearted pulled in their horns, and
melted like Snailes? Snailes (as Naturalists observe) put in salt, dissolve
into water: How has it grinded them to dust? Hear David, Psalm. 32.
complaining, that his bones waxed old, and that his moisture was turned into
the drought of summer. Hear him houl and cry, Psalm. 102. that his days were
consumed like smoke; that his bones burned like hearth, withered like grass;
that he was become like a pelican in the wilderness, or a sparrow on the house
top. Hear Job complain, Chap. 6. that his grief was heavier then the sand of
the sea; that the arrows of the Almighty were within him, the poison had drunk
up his spirit; the terrors of God had set themselves in array against him.
Secondly, that Gods anger is unspeakable, we can all tell, how great, none can
tell; it is like God himself, infinite in greatness, and (unless he in mercy
put an end to it) it is like eternity, infinite in time, eternal: therefore the
Saints have thought no Rhetoric sufficient enough to express it in, but
sighs; no tongue, but scrikes and groans; no ink would cast, but tears; no
paper, but a wounded heart; no words of force, but exclamations of despair, and
such as issue from a bleeding soul. As Lines drawn from the Circumference meet
in the Center, and pierce it through, yet no part of them is comprehended in
it; so, many arrows of Gods anger may meet in us, pierce us through, but
express them we cannot; nay, when we are in the greatest agonies, As
burningglasses by reflection of the beams of the Sun, cause heat and burning,
which is not in the Sun, but presents not the least glory of the Sun; So we can
better express our passions, than unfold the weight of that mighty arm that
smites us. Thirdly, that the anger of God is unsupportable, we need no other
instance but of our blessed Savior: He that makes the Heavens roll without an
axel-tree, causes the Earth to hang in the Air, as a ball poysed without
pillars, puts bounds to the waves of the Sea, staggering over the banks; He
sweat and bled, and groaned under this burden: We have heard tell of finite
Creatures, that have endured mangling of bodies, ripping of bowels, racking of
joints, burning of flesh, boiling in oil; but under this stroke, he that was
God and Man, was in a sense compelled to cry out, O God my God, why have thou
forsaken me. Fourthly, that the anger of God is intolerable, Judas, Cain, and
Saul could tell before their deaths, and, it is to be feared, better since; and
many reprobates in this life are so racked, that it pierces the whole Man;
head, heart, side, back, all parts at once ache, and sweat, and tremble; the eye
sees no comfort, the tongue tastes no comfort, the ear hears no comfort; and as
there is no ease within, so no comfort without, no place, nor bed, nor board,
nor house, nor Church; no creature, nor meat, nor drink, nor friend, nor wife,
nor child, will afford any comfort: How many have found a weight beyond the
weight of mountains, lying upon their souls, and wish, that they had rather
been famished or starved, or burned, or strangled long before, and catch and
call for death, for hell, leap out of the fire into the flame. And if this be
the arraignment of God's anger in this life, what will be the terrible
execution hereafter.

You may have this proved by examples; God was angry at the Angels, and they
fell down into the lowest pit; he was angry at Adam, and he was thrown out of
Paradise; he was angry at the old World, and they were drowned in the Flood;
angry at Sodom and Gomorrah, and they were burned with fire and brimstone;
angry at Pharaoh, and he was buried in the waves; angry at Dathan and Abiram,
and they were swallowed quick to hell; he was angry at Senacherib, and the
Angel slew a hundred fourscore and five thousand of his Army in one night; he
was angry at the Jews, and rased their ^^ie to the ground, and scattered them
as vagabonds over the face of the whole earth; angry at all reprobates, and
will cast them out of his presence for ever. Thus you see we range over the
Scriptures, yet not out of the narrow bounds of the Text, as lines from the
circumference meet in one center, and spoaks of a wheel in one axeltree, points
all at Gods anger; for, what Man, what Angel can stand in his sight, when once
he is angry?

All the reason we will give of this Doctrine, shall be the infinite
disproportion betwixt God and Man; when there is not a creature to a creature,
weakness to weakness; but a finite must encounter with an infinite power,
weakness must fight with strength, man with God, how can there be any
standing? First, of Gods power. Secondly, of man's weakness. He that made all
things of nothing, can, if he please, return all things to nothing; the Heavens
will pass away at his anger as a smoke, the Hills melt, the Earth tremble, the
raging Sea is dried up, and all creatures couch before him like Lambs. Thus God
can do without means what he pleases, and when he pleases, command what means
to be rods of his wrath he will, he can send upon their bodies, consumptions,
feavours, extreme burnings, botch of Egypt, scab, itch, and pestilence; make
the Heaven over our heads like brass, the Earth like iron, rain down powder
and dust, smite the corn with mildew and blasting, send famine and sword,
strike our souls with blindness, madness, and astonishment of heart. Now
what is man that he should stand against all these? a flower that is cut down, a
shadow that continues not, a cloud that is consumed, a dream that vanishes, a
shepheard's tent that is removed, a smoke that is scattered with the Sunbeams,
and at the best, but the untimely fruit of a woman, that before we be in life,
we are in the midst of death. Thus the Reasons, the Uses follow. First, of
Information.

Ob. The Angel of the Lord met Moses in the way, and would have slain him, yet
he escaped. The Angel met Balaam in the way when he was angry, yet he lived.

Ans. I answer, the Lord dealt with them, as a Nurse that holds the finger of a
child to the fire, not that the fire may burn it, but that it may learn to
dread the fire: God seemed to be angry with them, not that he might overthrow
them, but that they might learn to fly (...), from the wrath to come.

Ob. Secondly, the wicked, upon whom God threatens to pour down all the
plagues written in the Law, stand highest in view, and strongest upon their
guard.

Ans. I answer, if they stand the highest, it is but as Prisoners at the Bar,
hold up their hand, that all may see their arraignment: If strongest upon their
guard, but like Malefactors nailed to the Pillory, that they cannot move.

Ob. But the damned spirits and reprobates in Hell, endure the anger of God,
not for a day, but for ever.

Ans. I answer, they endure it so, as they are still fainting; live so, as they
are still dying; stand so, as they are everlastingly falling; like wheels, are
carried about in a circle of Gods vengeance, as one wave of his wrath beats
them down, another raises them up again. God could with one blast of his fury
consume them to nothing, but he deals with them, as the Turks with their
Gally-slaves, adjudges them to perpetual slavery.

The second Use may let us see, that no strength, no riches, no wisdom, no
nation, no army, no city, can continue long, when once they have angered God;
If strength, then Goliath, Sehon, Og the King of Bashan, might have boasted; if
riches, the rich Glutton, and the Fool in the Gospel, might have sung on their
Requieme; if wisdom, Solomon had been secure; if Kingdoms, the Jews, and the
three Monarchies had still flourished; if Armies, Senacherib's had not been
defeated; if Cities, Jerusalem, Tire, Sidon, and Niniveh had still stood. This
is it that made Solomon say, Prove. 21. 30. There is no wisdom, no
understanding, no counsel against the Lord. This made Jeremie say. Jer. 9. 23.
Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in
his might; let not the rich man glory in his riches. This made David say, Psalm.
2. 12. If his wrath is kindled, tantillum, but a little; quantillum, how
little, O blessed Saint? that, he knows not: But after a long ecstasy or
trance, breaks off his Aposiopesis with this Epiphonema, Blessed are all they
that put their trust in him.

We may learn also from hence, that all earthly comforts are but crosses, all
worldly blessings are but cursings, when Gods anger once begins to flame. God
was angry at Eli, and his own children burst his heart; angry at David, and his
beloved Absalom conspires against him; angry at Senacherib, and his own sons
imbrue their hands in his blood; he was angry at Solomon, and his wisdom was
but vexation of spirit; all his riches and honor, but vanity of vanities; his
Wives, Children, Horses, Chariots, and all his worldly pleasures, like buckets
of Oil thrown into the flame, increases the burning; he was angry at Judas,
and all things work together for his sorrow; that he had been Christ's Disciple
wounds him, that he had preached the Gospel wounds him, that he had wrought
miracles wounds and galls his soul. Thirdly, observe, that all other wounds
they are but ripples, all other flames they are but sparkles, in comparison of
Gods anger; diseases of the body, Gout, Stone, Strangury, bloody Flux may be
cured; Plague, Pestilence, Dearth, Famine, may be abated: Punishments of the
body, Rods, Swords, Racks, Wheels, Flames, Strapadoes, may be endured: I ones
Estate, poverty, nakedness, imprisonment: In ones name, slanders, reproaches,
defamations, false witnesses: In the Commonwealth, captivity, overthrow, utter
desolation, in some sense, may be undergone: But, before Gods anger, who can
stand? This breaks the legs, looses the joints, consumes the marrow, burns up
the spirits, dries the moisture, wounds the heart, deads the soul, and murders
the conscience. In this Epilepsie, all parts fail at once, till God be
pacified; in that Apoplexy they lie for ever, whom God in his anger leaves.

The third Use may serve, to reprove three sorts of men: First, those
blasphemous Rabsheca's, whose words, works, lives, show, they defy Gods anger,
like the Cyclopes in Homer, that despised Jove's thunderbolts; like Darius,
that writ a Letter of defiance to the River Xanthus, for drowning his Horse;
like the Cicilians, that made war against the mountain Aetna, for spoiling
their corn fields, but were buried under the sands thereof, and flakes of fire;
this is the lot of all that anger God. But some Machiavel or State-politician
will say, we have Riches, Artillery, strong Towers to defend us. So had
Jerusalem, but when she had angered God, she could not stand. But our enemies
are weak. O consider, he can without means of man overthrow, as he did Pharaoh
in the red Sea, Jericho with the sound of Rams horns; with weak means, as a
thousand with Samson's jaw bone, Goliath with David's sling. But the rich
cormorant will say, What need we fear plague, famine hunger? we keep alone from
all company, our tables are full of dainties, our granaries are full of corn,
and money we have enough to supply. Consider, He that could slay so many of
David's, of Senacherib's Army in one night, can send the pestilence in thy
meat, in thy drink, in every blast of air thou draws: He that took away holy
Job's substance in one day, may justly confound thee in a moment; that if thou
like a fly flutter against this flame, thou will be forced one day to cry out,
as did Julian the Apostat, when he was wounded with an arrow from heaven,
(...), Thou have conquered, O Jesus of Galilee.

Secondly, this reproves those, that when God is angry, add flame to flame,
firebrand to firebrand. Does God threaten scarcity and want, then be sure at
this time drunkenness and gluttony will most abound. Does God smite with
diseases of the body, as pestilence, burning Feavours, etc? then
lasciviousness, wantonness, uncleanness of the flesh, whordome, adultery,
and the like. Does he shut up any in their houses, with the seals of his
judgments? then there will be the most stealing, even out of infected houses;
when his judgments will not come to them, they will find them out. Is not this
to stand in defiance against Gods anger?

Thirdly, this reproves those, that murmur against God, for sending his rod of
anger to correct us, when our sins have deserved the sword to kill us. If he
should send the enemy amongst us, and you should see your daughters ravished,
your sons butchered before your eyes, would not this be bitter? If we should
see our Towns and Cities on fire, our streets running with blood, all in a
skirmage and uproar at once, would not this be bitter? Should your children
fall in the streets for bread, die for thirst, they ready to eat you up, you
ready to chop them for the pot, would not this be bitter? All this we have
deserved, all this Gods anger threatens, all this we shall have, unless we
repent. O let us now prevent this, that we may never see nor feel it. The Word
of God is against us, the decree is come out, most of those sins that have
brought captivity, sword, famine, upon other Nations, are amongst us; we see
the Lord has begun already, and our Brethren have begun to us in this bitter
cup. O the bitter lamentations of Germany, Fathers, Mothers, weeping for their
Sons that be not. O England, England, look to it, that we drink not of the
dregs. O that you would fast and mourn in public; O that you would each in
private, pray earnestly, and say, O Lord, spare our Nation, our houses, our
sons and daughters; spare them from the sword, from famine, from pestilence,
from misery* and who knows, but the Lord may yet have mercy, turn away his
anger, that we may not fall, but stand in his sight for ever.

(...).
A SERMON, Preached, when the Church seemed in part to be Eclipsed, and some
eminent Members thereof to be Clouded.
The Text, Act. 14. 22. And that we must through much affliction enter into the
Kingdom of God.
THE subject is Christian sorrow, the burden of Paul and Barnabas their first
Sermon preached at Antioch, where men were first called Christians; a burden
but like Christ's, leight; affliction, fit for Paul to begin; the kingdom of
God, a theme of comfort more suitable for Barnabas to end. The substance of the
Law was, do, and live; but of the Gospel, suffer, and believe. Faith and
affliction are linked together, for so says the Text, that they confirmed the
souls of the Disciples, and exhorted them to continue in faith, and that we
must through much affliction enter into the kingdom of God.

The Proposition entire is not pure, but modall, consisting (as all of that
kind) of two parts: First, the mo^us, or manner of it, oportet, we must.
Secondly, the d^ctum, or matter of it, through much affliction enter into the
kingdom of God. This life is a Race, Heaven is the Goal, this Text the common
Stadium, wherein observe these severalls: First, the terminum a quo, whence our
afflictions begins, and that is here employed, from the womb, nascimur
afflicti. Secondly, the mobile, or parties who, (...), we Christians. Thirdly,
the motum, or passage, (...), enter through. Fourthly, the med^um, or way
through which, (...), through much affliction. Fifthly, the terminum ad quem,
the end of this race, (...), to the kingdom of God. Thus divided, it admits of
a twofold handling: First, general, in regard of the modus or manner of it.
Secondly, special, in regard of the dictum or matter of it, where (as in a
Sorites, so many Propositions, so many employed Syllogismes; so here) are so
many parts, so many propositions. We Will content our selves at the present with
the general, where the Propositions are two: The first is necessary, and armed
with an oportet, that we must suffer affliction, before we can enter upon
heaven. This is somewhat sharp and harsh. The next sweetens and sugars it, That
through these afflictions and waters of Marah, we shall at the length come to
Heaven. We Will begin and end like a Comedy; and so of them in order. Afflictions
must be suffered.

The Cross of Christ must be born, before a Crown of glory be wo^^; we must
through the Wilderness and Jordan, before we come at Canaan; go through the
Wine Press, before we drink of the Grape in the Kingdom of Heaven. Some have,
and some still must go through a purgatory of rods, swords, racks, wheels,
flames, strapadoes, (in this life) before they be carried in a chariot of
triumph into glory. We may prosecute this Argument, launching in blood of
Martyrs to the knees, whole clouds of tears of afflicted Prophets, Apostles,
Saints, who are now noble, and thrice renowned in Heaven, who had no other
Arms upon the earth, but the Cross; no Coat but Sable; no Badge, but the
marks of Christ; no Crest, but Confidence; no Supporters, but Patience; no
Field, but Aceldama, a field of blood. This is the Watchword our Savior gives
his Soldiers, and the Motto in his Banner, Matthew. 16. 24. If any man will
follow me, let him forsake himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.
Saint Paul says to Timothy, All that will live godly in Christ Jesus, must
suffer persecution. We are Christians, and our lives begins, baptismate
fluminis, consecrated in the waters of affliction; goes on baptismate flaminis,
confirmed in the fire of affliction; and oftentimes ends baptismate sanguinis,
waft on Rivers of blood, covers our Hearse with a scarlet die toward Heaven,
and that for these causes.

First, thereby God proves us, whether we be constant and true, and manifests
to others our sincerity; they are a touchstone of trial, to examine, whether
we be pure or reprobate gold. The Eagle tries her young ones, whether they be
bastards, by making them look at the Sun; so God tries us by the heat of
tribulation. As Gideon's Soldiers were proved at the water, so we at the
waters of affliction. Faith, that before was but fained, will then vanish into
smoke, like Sodom's apples, gilded hypocrisy into vapors: but true Faith set
upon the file, will be more resplendent, Hope more certain, Zeal more blazing,
Charity more perfect.

Secondly, afflictions are a means to wean us from the world, and win us unto
God, as Mirrhe and Aloes, to lay on the paps of worldly pleasures, to make us
fly to Christ, a Pharaoh to pursue us out of Egypt unto Canaan: they are a rod
of God, to turn our Rivers of delight (when we are bewitched with them) into
blood; they are a worm, to make our Manna stink, when we lust after it: This
brought the prodigal Son to his Father, the Israelites from Captivity, the
diseased unto Christ. Is the Arc taken, and the glory of Israel departed, then
the House of Ely will begin to think upon God. Is David banished unto Gath?
then happy are they that are but dore-keepers in the house of God, or the
sparrowes that may build their nests there. Is Israel led into captivity? then
will the daughters of Jerusalem hang up their Harps upon the willowes, when
they remember thee, O Sion. Is any afflicted? then surely they will pray.

Thirdly, afflictions are medicinal restoratives, by which sinners may be
awaked to recover their health by repentance; they are the launcing knife in
the Phlebotomie of the soul, to wound us, that neither the Plethora, or
rankness of blood, honor, riches, preferment, pleasure, choke and stifle the
spirit; nor the Cacochymia or pestilent humors of sin, as covetousness,
pride, intemperance, bring us into the Hectic feavour, or incurable disease of
hardness of heart, rebellion, or sin against the holy Ghost. They are a rod to
scourge us in a Lethargy: As Physicians in a Lethargy use to burn the hair of
the patient, and smoke it into his nostrills; so afflictions burn vanities and
darling pleasures, which are but as excrements, and casts them as dung into our
nostrills: They are preparative potions to repentance, pills of contrition,
purgations of natural corruptions, vomits of sin, tents to search our wounds,
scarrifications to draw out ill humors. And though no afflictions be pleasant
for the present, yet afterward they are cordialls of comfort, restauratives of
grace. Thus God taught Miriam by leprosy, to leave her murmuring; he awakened
Jonah out of sleep, by casting him into the Sea; he cured Zachary of his
infidelity, by striking him with dumbness; delivered Saul from his evil
course by blindness; David from pride, by the plague; cured him of adultery,
by killing the child. Blessed is the man whom the Lord thus corrects.

Fourthly, as afflictions are restauratives for maladies bypast, so they are
preservatives and antidores to prevent the evil to come. As a man, whose blood
is consumed in a lingering feavour, is not so apt to take the pestilence, so
neither a man afflicted, to be puffed up with pride, or burn with lust, he need
not fear the swelling of that Carbuncle. They are salt to hinder us from
putrefaction, a stormy wind to save our standing pools from corruption, a
fiery Cherubim, to keep us out of the forbidden paradise of sin: As the golden
hair was to Nisus, a safeguard from his enemies, so the cross of affliction
arms from the flesh, the world, and the devil. As is said in the Fable of
Achilles, so far as he was dipped in the water, so far he was unpiercible by
any weapon; so far as we are plunged in the waters of Marah, our spiritual
enemies have less power over us. God sent an Angel of Satan to buffet Paul,
not so much for any evil he had done, as to prevent sin for the time to come,
lest through the abundance of revelations, he should be exalted above measure.
If God inflict upon us malum poenae, the evil of punishment, it is to prevent
malum culpae, the evil of sin.

Fifthly, by afflictions we are prepared and polished for Heaven, that as the
one scale of tribulation presses us down, the other of grace may mount us up.
Our Oil of grace is a quintessence, that must be extracted by fire, our
cordial waters of comfort by distillation, our Grapes squeazed in the
Wine Press of sorrow, our Wheat flayled in the threshing-floor of tribulation,
our Flower grinded between the milstones of pressure: We are Gold that must be
purified seven times in the Furnace, before we be carried into the Sanctuary;
Trees that must be pruned, before they bring forth any fruit; living Stones,
that must be polished and hammered, before they be brought into the heavenly
Jerusalem: So that to a Christian, all his whole life is as it were a
threshing, death is the fan to winnow the pure wheat from the chafe, that we
may be gathered into the heavenly Granary, where no unclean thing shall enter.

Well then, if every Christian must feel the sting of these fiery Serpents,
before he come at Canaan, learn we to make account of them, not murmur, mutter,
wonder at them. In this vale of tears, we must look to be fed with the bread of
affliction, to drink the bitter water, gall, wormwood, and eat the sour grape
of sorrow. Shall the heavens mourn, the clouds shed their tears, the earth
tremble, the fruits be blasted, the sea rage, the creatures groan for our sins,
and we not sympathize with them? Shall the Prophets and Apostles go through the
fire, the Martyrs have their robes dyed in scarlet, our Savior sweat water and
blood, conflict with hell, Satan, death, and we go to heaven in a bed of roses,
tread on carpets, ride still in triumph upon the wings of pleasure? True it is,
in former times, we enjoyed Halcyon days of peace, sitting under our own Vines
and Fig Trees, singing the song of Sion, and tuning our own harps in a
melodious harmony, having no Towns but Salems, no men but friends; if we had
gone into the fields, we should have seen no spears but standing corn, have
heard no drums but tabrets, no outcries, but harvest-homes, had no years but
of Jubilee, no days but of rejoicing. But now of a long continuance, (by
reason of our unthankfulness) all places have become Aceldamaes, houses of
blood, fields of blood, ditches of blood, towns of blood, Churches of blood, in
this land, that was once Insula pacis, an Island of peace. Lord water our eyes
with tears of godly sorrow, like Gideon's fleece, while others are dry, that
we may be dry, and saved from those waters of afflictions, wherein others are
drowned; beget in us fruits of contrition worthy of repentance, and then
repent, that thou have sent this spirit of division, and destroying Angel
amongst us.

Secondly, this necessity of afflictions, may comfort Gods children in all
troubles, on this consideration, that afflictions are sent of God, consecrated
by his Son Jesus Christ, suffered of all Saints that are now triumphant in
Heaven; that he that sowes in tears, shall reap in joy; that he that wears a
Crown of thorns with Christ here, shall wear a Crown of glory with him in
heaven hereafter: Seriously meditating in our hearts, that God afflicts us not
in fury, but in mercy, and that for these ends: 1. That he may draw us from the
Love of the world. 2. That he may cure our spiritual sicknesses. 3. That he
may preserve us from fearful falling into damnable sins. 4. That he may
deliver us from the wrath to come, and the torments of hell. 5. To try and
examine the sincerity of our faith. 6. To make us run unto God, the fountain of
living waters. 7. That God might show his outstreched arm in delivering us. 8.
That they may be sanctified to the increase of our glory. Now our afflictions
are of two sorts, either internal in soul, or external; these, either in our
names, or in our goods, or in our persons; here we have comfort against all: Is
any in prison? look upon the Irons entering into Joseph's soul, and yet
delivered. Is any in banishment? look upon David, restored from thence to a
Kingdom. Is any hungered, starved, naked, full of soars? look upon Lazarus in
Abraham's bosom. Is any afflicted with loss of goods, health, children? look
upon Job's triumph after misery. Does any suffer for conscience sake? look upon
the crowned Martyrs in heaven. Is any a man of sorrows? look upon Christ,
before whose Throne, Angels, Saints, and Cherubims, throw down their Crowns
and Palms of glory.

Thirdly, the necessity of afflictions may teach us, not basely to fear them,
but rather fear sin, that lays us naked to Gods fierce indignation, and the
malice of our enemies; fear indiscretion, that creates unto us many needless
troubles; fear superstition and ignorance, for that makes a man mistake his
cause; fear singularity and presumption, so as to rest upon our own
sufficiency. These are worse then affliction, as much as the sin is worse then
the punishment.

Fourthly, the necessity of them, may make us lift up our eyes at Him, that
rules the wheel of providence. No affliction springs out of the dust, but comes
from God; he has tempered the cup, and said, Drink this; Christ could not
escape it, though he besought it thrice with tears, and then shall we? Our sins
deserved afflictions to the full, God turned them to our good. Moses at the
first called the Rod his, but when he had wrought miracles with it, it was
God's: The rod of affliction is Gods, let us therefore kiss it; Thy rod and
thy staff (says David) has comforted me. Swine feed upon Acorns, and look
not up at the Tree; Dogs snarl at the stone, and mind not the hand that threw
it: But David minded Shimei not so much that cursed him, as God that sent that
shame upon him. A Christian that makes this right use of afflictions, is the
worlds wonder, with the bush, in which Jehovah appeared to Moses, he burns, and
yet consumes not. Hananiah the false Prophet broke off the timber yoke from
Jeremie's neck, but had one of iron put upon his own. He that burns God's Rod,
shall be beatt with Scorpions.

Fifthly, if this life be a passage through the wilderness of afflictions,
then here we are not perfect as we would be. The word is, (...), pass through
afflictions; Every passage is a motion, every motion (as the Philosopher said)
is (...), an imperfect act, moving for an end, running for a goal; this end,
this goal, is the Kingdom of God; for, We must through much affliction enter
into the Kingdom of God.

So the second Proposition offers it self, That through these afflictions, or
waters of Marah, we shall at length come to heaven. This is somewhat sweeter,
and sugars the former, therefore I beseech you observe it. For a storm here, we
shall have a calm; for Christ's cross, an eternal Crown; our nights of
mourning shall be turned into Halcyon days; for months of affliction, we shall
have years of jubilee; for a rod of correction, we shall have a palm of
victory; our mournful Elegies of lamentation, shall be turned into
Hallelujah's of consolation. With this, Athanasius comforted the Saints under
Iulian's persecution, that affliction was but nubecula cito transitura, a storm
that would quickly end in a sunshine or calm: So did our Savior his disciples,
Matthew. 5. 10. Blessed are they that suffer persecution for righteousness sake,
for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven: Nay, as if they were already in the
suburbs of glory, v. 12. Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your
reward in heaven. Take up the perspective glass of Faith, and look toward
Heaven, and there you shall see the noble Army of Martyrs, Prophets, Apostles,
Evangelists, set down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of God;
yet, if you look at their journall toward heaven, you may trace them by their
blood. These afflictions are sometimes called (...), passions, but such
passions as are (...), lessons of no less than Christ and his kingdom. Here
they are called (...), of straitness, elsewhere (...), of narrowness; Matthew.
7. 14. (...), strait is the gate, (...), narrow is the way: But it is (...),
leading unto life, into a heavenly Canaan, that flows with milk and honey. Honey
in the Be is not without the sting, neither the Kingdom of God without
affliction; 2 Cor. 4. 17. we have an unparalled parallelism of these two,
This light affliction which is but for a moment, works for us a far more
exceeding great, and eternal weight of glory. Here they are both cast into the
scales, and their weights duly poysed, where first consider the difference
between the subjects, or things weighed, (...), worldly affliction is cast into
the one scale, and (...), heavenly glory, into the other. Secondly, their
quantities, and that either durationis, of continuance, affliction is (...),
momentary, for a day; glory is (...), everlasting, for ever, or molis, of
weight; affliction is (...), light, easy, supportable; but glory is (...),
heavy, weighty, beyond all possible Epithet, superlatively great; a phrase,
able to challenge all the profane Writers in the world, neither Sophocles his
high buskin, nor Demosthenes his lofty strain, is able to come near it. Lastly,
it is amplified by the act, (...), it works forth, which is as it were the
Trutina or pin to turn the beam of the scales, where affliction has no more
proportion to glory, than the drop of a bucket to the whole Ocean, or the dust
of the balance has to a mountain.

This then may serve for a ground of comfort to every soul, distressed with the
tedious bitterness of this life; for short sorrow here, we shall have eternal
joy; for a little hunger, an eternal banquet; for light sickness and
affliction, everlasting health and salvation; for a little imprisonment,
endless liberty; for disgrace, glory: In stead of the wicked to oppress and
afflict them, they shall have the Angels and Saints to comfort and solace
them; in stead of Satan to torment and tempt them, they shall have Christ Jesus
to ravish and affect them. Joseph's prison shall be turned into a palace,
Daniel's Lion's den, into the presence of the Lion of the Tribe of Judah; the
three Children's hot fiery furnace, into the new Jerusalem of pure gold;
David's Gath, into the Tabernacle of the living God.

Obj. But shall every affliction bring the patient to the Kingdom of God?
shall the frenzy of Cain, ter^our of Judas, horour of Achitophel, trembling of
Felix, be turned into triumph?

Ans. No, afflictions to the wicked are like often baiting to some beasts,
which grow mad at the stake, and makes them worse, specially if the cause be
bad. It was a golden saying of St. Austin, and I hope we are all of his mind,
Non ex passione certa justitia, It Is not suffering, that makes a cause
righteous; sed ex justitia gloriosa passio, but its righteousness that makes
sufferings glorious. It was well observed by Saint Cyprian, that the first
Martyrs that suffered for Christ, were Innocents; and as well said, Non
supplicium, sed causa facit Martyrem, Not the punishment, but the cause makes
the Martyr.

Who suffered more then the Cicumcelliones, those Donatists, in this Father's
time, and yet no Crown. How many are there, who when they are punished for
their misdemeanors, do lift up a hideous noise like Swine, and cry out, They
are persecuted? Hujus farinae, of this leaven are our Ranters, Quakers,
Levellers; their language you know is persecution altogether, and when they
suffer for their opinions, or rather disordered practices, they are persecuted
they say for their consciences; as if every conceit were conscience, every
groundless opinion religion. We must not measure the cause by the sufferings,
but the sufferings by the cause; for, unless a man's cause be good, his
conscience good, and his carriage in some measure good too, his sufferings will
amount to no more, then a condign punishment, unless the end crown all; which
makes St. Cyprian and St. Jero^^ say, That the Thiefe's suffering on the
Cross, was turned to Martyrdom.

What if then in a good cause, thus circumstanc'd, our afflictions (as in the
Text) be (...), many, no single appellation, but a compound of all cruelty,
nomen multitud^nis, like the possessed that lived amongst the Graves, her name
is Legion, (...), because they are many; her Pavilion hung about with trophies
of death, fetters and whips, racks and strapadoes, halters and swords, stakes
and fire. What if one affliction still treads on the heel of another, and where
the old went off, new scenes of miseries have taken up their cues? here is
(...), a Kingdom that will recompense all.

It pitties me when I read what those Romans, Cocles, Mutii, Curtii, Decii;
what those Graecians, the people of Marathonia, Salamina, Plataea, and
Thermopol^ endured, toget them a fading name upon earth, that we Christians
should not do as much, or more, for this (...), Kingdom of God; a Kingdom, in
regard of the dignity of it; of God, in regard of the author and giver of it;
one Kingdom, but the estates are two, one Militant, another Triumphant, of
Grace, of Glory; one in substance, varying in degrees, but not an earthly, not
a fading Kingdom, but (...), of God.

Herod was a King, so was Ahab; Jezabel was daughter, wife, mother, sister, to
Kings, and yet still afflicted: Alexander wept, when he had all the Crowns and
Scepters in the world, (piled as it were at his gates) that there were no more
to be subdued. Godfrey of Bollene refused to be crowned at Jerusalem with a
Crown of Gold, where our Savior was crowned with Thorns. It Is only this
Kingdom of God, that can wipe all tears from our eyes. Go then a pilgrimage to
this holy Land, Heaven is feisable, and more easy to be attained then an
earthly Kingdom; here we cannot all be Kings, there are not Kingdoms enough;
but lo, in Heaven, there is none under the degree of a King: And in this
Kingdom, Revel. 21. the Metropolis or chief City is of pure gold, the walls
of Jasper, having twelve foundations of twelve precious stones, twelve gates
made of twelve pearls, every gate of several pearl. The streets of the city
paved with gold, interlaid with pearls and diamonds. The light of this city is
the splendor of Christ himself in the midst thereof, from whose throne issues
a river of water as clear as crystal, to refresh the city; and on both sides
of the banks there grows a tree of life, bearing continually twelve kinds of
fruit. Into this city no darkness, nor any unclean thing shall enter. Now,
afflicted soul, tell me, thou that would upon earth have wondered with the
Queen of Sheba, at Solomon in his royalty; at the Grand Sultan going to his
Seraglio; at the Pope in his Procession; tell me how thou will wonder and
glory, to see that wonderful glory, that neither eye has seen, ear has
heard, nor has entered into the heart of man. Which glory, God of his mercy
bring us all unto.

(...).
A SERMON, Preached the fourth day of June, 1656. at the Funeral Obsequies of
James Parry, Gent.
The Text, 1 Samuel 3. 18. And Samuel told him every whit, and hid nothing from
him; and he said, It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good.
HEre we have a divine Oracle, sent, not from Daphne or Delphos, but from the
Tabernacle of God at Shilo, wherein two things specially remarkable are
couchant: First, Samuel's Revelation, And Samuel told him every whit, and hid
nothing from him. Secondly, Eli's Acceptance, And he said, It is the Lord, let
him do what seems him good. It is the Lord, there is his humble confession.
Let him do what seems him good, there is his patient submission. In the
former branch is considerable, first, the Persons, which are two, the one young
Samuel revealing, who by this occasion received primam tonsuram, his first
unction to prophecy; the other is old Eli, who like Sexagenarius de ponte, as
his bodily, so his spiritual eyes grew dim; for, 1 Samuel 3. 1. The word of the
Lord was precious in those days, there was no open vision. Secondly, we have
the thing revealed, which is either the sin, or the punishment of sin; sin,
either the father Eli's, for not correcting and chastising his sons; or the sin
of his sons, Hophni and Phinehas, who being Priests of the Lord, 1 Samuel 2. 12.
were sons of Beliall, knew not the Lord; by their rapine made men abhor the
daily sacrifice. 17. lay with the women that assembled at the door of the
Tabernacle of the Congregation, 22. The punishment of sin either threatened
first by a man of God, not otherwise named, 1 Samuel 2. 27. secondly, by Samuel
himself, that the Lord would cut off the whole family of Eli from the
priesthood, and that the iniquity of his house should not be purged with
sacrifice nor offering for ever, 1 Samuel 3. 14. Or executed in the fourth
Chapter, for thirty thousand of the Israelites were put to the sword, the whole
Camp scattered, Hophni and Phinehas the Priests slain, the Ark of God taken
captive by the Philistims: the Wife of Phinehas hearing of it, fell into the
pangs of childbirth, and was delivered of a Son, calling his name Ichobod, the
glory is departed from Israel, and so expired; and at the relation of the
messenger, Eli being ninty eight years old, fell back from his chair, and brake
his neck. Thus the whole Family was dysastered, raro antecedentem scelestum
deseruit pede poena claudo. Seneca. Punishment and shame like a blood-hound,
always pursues sin at the heels; the Ark was taken, the Army routed, the
Priests slain, Phinehas his Wife perished in the after-pangs, Eli brake his
neck. Hence observe, that sin is the deserving cause, procuring the ruin and
calamity of Church and State, Cities and Families.

Sin it is, that infects our purest air, that damps our richest mines, that
poisons our sweetest dainties, that lays thorns in our softest beds of down,
that undermines Palaces, pulls down Crowns, shakes Thrones, and ruinates
Kingdoms; that sets all mortal Wights at opposition, heat against cold, cold
against heat, winter and summer, light and darkness, moisture and drought, in
arms one against another. That the whole world is become a boiling furnace of
contradictions, where man is the metal, the body is the dross, which must
first be burned by the refining fire of death, before the soul can become pure
gold, fit for the heavenly Sanctuary. For the proof of this, hear Jeremie's
lamentation, Lam. 3. 39. Wherefore is the living man sorrowful? Heaven and
earth answers his Interrogatory, with a soul's sad Echo, Man suffers for his
sins. Come on further; and see all Creatures, Angels, Men, Beasts, Plants,
Elements, Heavens, in sorrows discord, sighing out the sad Epitaphium of man's
mortality, 42. We have sinned and rebelled, therefore thou have not spared,
thou have covered us with wrath, and persecuted us, thou have slain, and not
spared. Romans 6. 23. The wages of sin is death. As tooth for tooth, eye for eye,
hand for hand, one talent for another; so death is a deserved reward for sin,
death first seizing upon the body while we live, by the canker of corruption
and mortality, bringing at the length death of the body by dissolution; and all
this hatched and brooded under the Cocatrice sin. Come on, and travail with St.
Paul to Corinth, 1 Cor. 11. 3. For this cause (says he) many are weak amongst
you, and sick, and many sleep. For this cause, that is, for the poison of sin,
the canker of corruption in general; for spilling of our Savior's blood,
piercing his side, nailing his feet, unworthy receiving of the holy Sacrament
in particular. Are sick, that is, feavours boil you, consumptions waste you,
plague and pestilence devour you. And many sleep, sleep in an everlasting
Lethargy and apoplexy of death, never to be awaked before the last doom. Many,
that Biers are become restless Peripateticks, the Spade and Mattock tired, the
Sextons still digging, the Graves still gaping, passing-Bells without any stop
or period, confounding the language one of another, the Churchyards more
peopled then the Theaters; Mista senum, ac juvenum densantur funera, no sex,
nor age, nor, young, nor old, are spared, but are made a subject for death to
read mortalitie's lecture upon. This made David complain, that his bones waxed
old, and that his moisture was turned into the drought of summer, Psalm. 32.
made him houle and cry, that his days were consumed like smoke, his bones were
burned as hearth, withered like grass; he was become like a Pelican in the
wilderness, or a sparrow on the house top, Ps. 102. This made Job complain,
that his grief was heavier then the sand of the sea, that the arrows of the
Almighty were within him, that the poison had drunk up his spirit, the terrors
of God had set themselves in array against him, Job 6. This makes all Mankind
rot as a Pomgranate, shiver as a Potsheard, splinter as a Venice Glass,
corrupt as a standing Pool, and vanish into ashes like Sodom's Apples.

And the reason of all this, is, because the justice of God requires it; sin is
daily in the view of his allpiercing eye, sends up cries aloud into his holy
ear, piercing through the clouds for revenge, importuning his vindicative hand,
to whet his glittering sword, to feather his arrows, to make sharp the point
of his spear, to wash his footsteps in blood: And then shall not he, that has
called his footstool the Earth, and his throne the Heavens to witness, and
has sworn by himself the greatest, that sin shall not pass without revenge,
shall not he be just? Besides this, consider all Creatures, as daily Orators,
that miserably complaining, put up their petitions to him. The higher House the
suburbs of Heaven, sits drooping, the Sun is turned into blood, and eclipsed,
the Stars unsnuffed burn dim within the socket of their spears, their natural
force abated, their influence impaired, all waxes old as does a garment, and
says, that sin is the cause. The air is stifled with the poisoned breath of
meteors, and instead of comforting the inhabitants of the earth, is become a
stage of prodigies and terrors, flying Dragons amaze, blazing Stars as Beacons
of astonishment affright, Thunder with her loud Canon-shot makes roaring, the
impetuous fury of the Bolts brings death; the Clouds, in time of need are
barren, in time of harvest intoxicate the earth with deluges; no dew sometimes
but mildew, no light but lightning, no blast nor gale of wind but blasting,
and says, that sin is the cause. The sea roules, the winds blow unmercifully,
the waves rage impetuously, all things are troubled unnaturally, which makes
the Leviathans roar, and the fishes die, and says, that sin is the cause. The
earth quakes and trembles like a recoyling Cano^, and mourns as with a
sympathy, while the heavens weep, the flowers droop, and closes up their heads
within the lap of their mother earth; the grass withers, the corn is blasted,
the fruits are thunderstroke, and in stead of pagles, daizes, and roses of
paradise, briars, brambles, nettles, thistles, spring out of her womb, and
says, that sin is the cause. All Nations, all States, all Kingdoms, are
troubled, and says, that sin is the cause. The Pagans against Turks, Turks
against Christendom, one Province against another, as whirlewindes in a strait,
move tumults. Victorious Sweden has long sit in Sable, as a Matron mourning
under the Myrtle trees, deploring the dismal fate of her deceased Worthy,
which occasioned so many alterations in government since, and fluctuations in
State, and says, that sin is the cause. Poland lies sick, licking the scars of
her lately received wounds, and says, that sin is the cause. Denmark bewailes
her ill ^ccesse abroad, and feels the smart of her losses, and intestine jarrs
at home, and says, that sin is the cause. Whole Italy is distracted with
convulsions, and the State of Venice can scarce find a pillow to sleep
securely upon, and says, that sin is the cause. France, before she could
recover her bloodshed at the great Massacre, has begun to bleed afresh with
civil jarrs, and says, that sin is the cause. Whole Germany has been for
many years in a combustion, burning of Cities is no greater wonder, then the
sparkling of a Smith's forge; slaying of men of as small account, as of sheep
in a slaughterhouse; to die in Troops as familiar, as to live in Trenches;
such overflowing of blood, that Rivers were dyed with the crimson tincture; old
gray heads mourning, yo^ng infants crying, women like Leah blear-eyed, with
weeping, like Rachel, lamenting the death of their children, and cannot be
comforted, because they are not; and all conclude, that sin is the cause. We of
these Nations, once styled fortunate Islands, guarded like Goshen in the midst of
Egypt, with turelar Angels, have for these many years layne under the stroke
of the destroying Angel, and the stage of War has been set up in our
Territories, making all places Aceldama's, fields of blood, the Commonweal
distracted with factions, the Church rent with schisms; and, as if these
intestine broils at home were not sufficient, engagements with the Hollanders
abroad, to the loss of life and treasury; with whom, no sooner was a Peace (if
lasting) made, but Spain, that had fed us with her blandishments, proclaims
her self an enemy, preparing hostility against us, as if the Armado in eighty
eight, were but an earnest of what they intended to pay us. Thus this poor
Church and State lies bleeding, and is not sin the cause? Well then, to sum up
all, shall not the petitions of the Heavens darkened, of the Stars bedimn'd, of
the Air poisoned, of the Sea troubled, of the Earth cursed, of Kingdoms
ruinated, of the unreasonable Creatures groaning under the burden, and looking
up toward heaven, as if the Stars that fought in order for Sisera, would pity
and rescue them; shall not these (I say) awake the Lord out of sleep, as a
Giant refreshed with wine, to put on his Brigandine, and to gird on his Sword?
If souls for this deserve to die, then how much more the body? And shall not
these that were petitioners, become also executioners? Lo the heavens, (as if
it were their task to kill and slay) has for her arms hung up in the Zodiac,
man's anatomy; the Planet Mars, as though he were still the god of War, the
Dog Star and Saturn, murders their children; the Air poisons with infections,
feavours, plagues; the Sea is become a devouring gulf, and, contrary to
Nature's intent, is made a Goigotha or place of sculls; the Earth, that with
her fruits should have nourished, and with her conserves cherished, is become
an Aceldama, or Theater of blood; one Nation, one City, one Kingdom, one
Family, one Brother rises up against another, as if man were born with those,
that arose of the Dragon's teeth in the Poet, mutuis peri^e gladiis, bleed to
death on one another sword. And then shall not Gods just wrath, our just
desert, so many executioners in heaven, in earth, by sea, by land, bring ruin
and calamity of Church and State, Cities and Families?

Hence (as the case stands) we are blameworthy in a fourfold respect: 1. Of
Satan. 2. Of security. 3. Of pride. 4. Of intemperance. First, of Satan, who by
his subtle sleights, as he has killed the body, would murder also the soul;
and yet we slight it, as though we should die neither body nor soul. Satan is
that Panther, that with his sweet odours allures us, till he have gotten us
within the reach of his talants, that he may tear us; that Crocodile, that
commiserates us, till he have murdered us; that Hyena, that flatters us, till
he have killed us; that Siren, that sings till she has drowned us; that, with
Jael, allures in with milk, and murders with a nail; with Joab, embraces with
one hand, and stabs with another; that whore of Babylon, that gives poisoned
drink in golden cups; that cunning fisher, that baits his hooks with the
pleasures of sin; that lies as a Snake in thy greenest grass, as an Enemy to
assault thee in thy securest travails, as a Ruffian to cut thy throat in thy
sweerest sleep. Art thou banqueting like Job's children with thy friends? take
heed, Satan's there. Art thou with Job praying? take heed, Satan's there. Art
thou with Judas and the Apostles receiving the Communion? take heed, Satan's
there. In thy eating, in thy drinking, in thy hearing, in thy praying, in thy
meditating, beware, Satan is busy about thee; take heed, he that has wrought
thy bodily death, would also of thy soul. O man of God beware, mors in olla,
death is in the pot.

Secondly, this discovers the security of carnal secure men, that mind death
no more hanging over their heads, then Jerusalem did the blazing Star, and Army
in the air; then Damocles did the glittering sword, perpendicular over his
head; then Jonah did the swelling of the waves over the Ship, while he was
under the hatches sleeping: but they lie snorting in a lethargy of sin, till a
deluge of death overwhelme them, as the flood did the old World, as fire and
brimstone did Sodom and Gomorrah, as the house of Dagon did the Philistims;
that then death, and grave, and worms, and hell, and destruction, seazes upon
them.

Thirdly, this discovers the vanity of pride; many while their life is
consuming, as a candle burning within the socket, as a coal taken out of the
fire growing black, studies only to varnish and paint over that rotten stock
the body, robbing all creatures to adorn it, from one takes his wool, from
another his skin, from another his fur, from another their excrements, as silk
from worms; beggs pearls of the fishes, diggs into the ground for gold and
silver, turns up the sands of the sea for precious stones; and then,
Peacocklike, prides themselves in these, which are but liveries of beasts, scum
of the earth, badges of sin, earnests of death, and recognisants of hell; thus
jetting, till death comes, and sounds his trumpet in his ear, O fool, this
night they will require thy soul of thee, etc.

Fourthly, this discovers the vanity of intemperate and voluptuous men, that
with Philoxenus, study only to relish dainties, make their throats tunnells,
and their bellies barrells, and shows by their daily sacrifices, their O^gia,
D^onysia, and Bacchanalia, that they are of that Epicure Sardinapalus his
mind, that was wont to say, ventrem deorum esse max^m^m, that the belly was
the greatest of the gods; living thus, till death arrest them, and then they
shall be arrayed with nothing but a shroud, or winding sheet, have no dwelling
place but the grave, no house but a stinking coffin, no servants and tenants
but crawling worms, have no allowance to give them, but their own flesh, which
they shall feed upon, till all be consumed, and they made a fit Sceleton, for
death to read Anatomie's Lecture upon.

Consider again, this was more particularly for the sins of Eli and his Sons:
Let those that attend upon God's Ordinances in this present age, reflectupon
this. It must be acknowledged sure, that the hand of God has gone out against
us, more then against others of our rank at other times; at least, that God
has not restrained violence against us, so as he did against those of our
profession in the days of old. The portion of the Egyptian Priest (that served
the Ox, the Ape, and the Onyon) escaped sale in the time of the famine. Learned
Junius, in his Academia, Cap. 4. says, that the Philistims spared the Schools
of the Prophers in their wars with Israel; and that the Phoenicians,
Chaldeans, and Indians, were tender over such places; the Goths and Vandalls
(as barbarous as they were) when they entered Italy, scarce laid a sacriligious
hand upon the Churches revenues. Thus then did God restrain the spirit of
Princes; yet, that God, who in his own Law, Levit. 25. 22. gave the Levites a
special privilege of redeeming lands sold by themselves at any time, when
other tribes were limited to a set time, has not stayed the raging of these
waves, but that the Churches Patrimony is sold to others without redemption. We
must acknowledge, that God's wrath (whether for our personal sins, or the sins
of our Predecessors, or for the sins of the people jointly) has taken hold of
us, Zach. 1. 5. that the Lord has devised a device against us, has watched
upon the evil, and has brought it upon us. For under the whole heaven has
not been done, as has been done unto Jerusalem, Dan. 9. 14. Let us not flatter
our selves presumptuously; the punishment answers the sin, as the wax the seal,
and as the moulds own the figure, and let us own both.

Yet, let none think now, that this confession will give advantage to the
adversary, they may take where none is given: They may say, let the Lord be
glorified by their own confession, we offend not, though we devour and
dishonor them, because they have sinned against the Lord, the habitation of
justice, Ier. 50. 7. But they shall find at last, that to forsake the Levite
is a sin, that it is a bitter thing to help forward affliction, when God is but
a little displeased, that Jerusalem will be a cup of trembling, and a
burdensome stone to every one that cries, but down with it. Woe to thee O Ashur,
the rod of Gods wrath, the stasse in thine hand is Gods indignation for our
correction; to purify us the sons of Levi from our dross: For, It is the Lord
that does it. So we pass from the Revelation, to the Acceptance, And he said,
it is the Lord.

But how did Eli know that it was the Lord? Partly by the man of God, partly by
Samuel's dream or vision, for he knew that the Lord had called the Child. It is
a heathenish tradition, that no dreams that relate to public concernment are
to be credited, that proceed not from Princes, as Macrobius stories it upon
Somnium Scipionis. Hence Nestor in Homer proclaims in the Grecian Council,
that credit is to be given to Agamem^on, concerning the marshalling of his
Army, because he was (...), the General, or ruler of the people, which
otherwise should have been sieighted. But Ely was better instructed, who knew
in part, though not so fully as was afterward revealed, Joel. 2. 28. that God
would pour his spirit upon all flesh, and their sons and daughters should
prophecy, their old men should dream dreams, and their young men should see
visions. Therefore Ely willingly submitted, saying, It is the Lord. Lord by
Creation, all things were made by him, Ioh. 1. 3. Lord by Donation, All power
is g^ven me in heaven and in earth, Matthew. 28. 18. Lord by Redemption, for we
are bought with a price, 1 Cor. 6. 20. Lord by Conquest, By death he destroyed
him that had the power of death, the devil, Heb. 2. 14. Lord by Marriage, I am
my beloveds, and my beloved is mine, Cant. 6. 3. Lord, by way of excellency,
depending on no creature, Lord of Lords; Lord, not only of goods, body, life,
but of soul and spirit; Lord, not for a season, but for ever, an eternal Lord,
a Lord that cannot (...), abuse his authority, but is Jehovah zedeck, Jehovah
our righteousness, Ier. 23. 6. A Lord that does what he pleases, Let him do
what seems him good.

So we pass from his confession, to his submission, Let him do what seems
him good. Peter Martyr makes a scruple, whether these words proceeded from a
penitent soul or no, saying, they might come from an evil and hypocritical
mind, though God, who is only (...), a searcher of the heart, knows this, yet
he concludes, probabile est illum resipuisse, non tamen necessarium, it is
probable that he repented, but not necessary. Gregory is of opinion, that this
answer is no true sign of his humiliation, but rather of his hardness of
heart and reprobation, and endeavors to confirm it by three reasons: First,
(says he) we find not, that after this, he either repented, or corrected his
sons. Secondly, because he seems to be willing rather to incur the heavy
displeasure of God, then by severe and condign punishment, to offend his
children. Thirdly, because he seems rather presumptuously and disorderly, to
trust to the mercy of God, than by serious repentance, and selfe-denyall, to go
in the way of God. It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good: Si
Dominus, ubi timor? If it be the Lord (says he) where is his fear? where are
his prayers? where his tears? where his groans? we read of none. Haec oration
non culpam agnoscentis, non dei misericordiam implorantis; sed animum
despondentis, iram provocantis: This speech is not of one imploring Gods mercy,
confessing his faults, but of one despairing, provoking Gods wrath. But St.
Chrysostom and Theodoret, perhaps upon better grounds, conceive, that they
discover Ely's unfeigned and hearty repentance: First, because he earnestly
required Samuel to reveal unto him the vision. Secondly, because he adjures him
by an oath, not to conceal any part of it. Thirdly, from his humble submission
unto Gods pleasure, as he interprets the words, let him do what seems him
goo^. Fourthly, from his magnanimous entertaining the news of his sons
death, and other sad dysasters; but, when he heard the Ark of God was taken,
maerore confectus, his heart being burst with sorrow, he gave up the ghost:
Gods cause and his Churches ought to be more dear unto us, then all private
interests. And this to be the true meaning of this place, I am confident was
the apprehension of our deceased Brother, who frequently, with ingemination,
repeated these words, during the time of his visitation and spiritual
conflict, and before his departure, recommended them to be the theme and
subject of my discourse, and your meditations, at his funeral, Let him do what
seems him good.

Which is the same in effect with that we daily pray, Thy will be done in earth
as it is in heaven; with that which our Savior prayed in his agony, Father, if
it be possible, let this cup pass from me, yet let not my will, but thine be
done. There is a Categoricall or absolute will of God, as to save only the
Elect; there is an Hypotheticall, or conditional will of God, holden out to
all that are willing to lend an ear. There is voluntas signi, Gods revealed
will, that Isaac should be sacrificed; beneplaciti, his hidden will, that he
should be spared. There is Gods Antecedent will, that he would have all men to
be saved; his Consequent will, that he would have impenitent sinners to be
punished. But the will of God in this place, or, quod bonum est oculis suis,
that seems him good, is, patiently to submit to his correction, come life,
come death; it is vox patientiae, the voice of patience, and sounds like that,
ecce paratus sum, lo, I am willing to undergo thy will, O Lord: It Is he that
has perfectly learned St. Paul's lesson, Phil. 4. 11. I have learned in
whatsoever state I am therewith to be content. I know both how to be abased,
and I know how to abound, every where, and in all things, I am instructed, both
to be full, and to be hungry, both to abound, and to suffer need; I can do all
things through Christ which strengthens me: That is, so confirmed and
well-grounded a Christian, that with a cheerful countenance, he can look upon
all the changes of life. Sapiensque sibi imperiosus, quem neque pauperies,
neque mors, neque vincula terrent. Horat. That can, with an unmoved temper,
welcome all fortunes; not tempted by felicity to forget God, nor urged by
afflictions to murmur at him; that when he has lost his ventures by sea, or
his comforts by land, suffers no tempests, or rebellious perturbations within
his own breast, but parts with his wealth, as Bias did with his at the sack of
Priene, Ille haec ludibria fortunae, ne sua quidem putavit, (as Tully in his
Parad.) considering his riches are hirelings, destinated to change their
Masters: And parts with his friends, as the noble Roman did with his son, of
whose death, when he had received the notice, he entertained it with this manly
reply, Ego cum genui, tum moriturum scivi; I received him upon such a
condition, as I reckoned that death might make him not mine. He that thus meets
the affronts of sickness, death, and fortune, giving them Job's thankful,
though sad farewell, Dominus dedit, Dominus abstulit, The Lord gives, and the
Lord takes away, blessed be the name of the Lord, such a man has well learned
Christ, and made a just application of the Apostles Doctrine, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3. In
all things give thanks, for this is the will of God. That lays his hand upon
his mouth, and lets that, which was once his Masters, be his Motto, sicut ovis
coram tondente, like a sheep dumb before the shearer. For our task is to
suffer, not to reply or complain: It is the Lord, let him do what seems him
good.

But why does not Eli labor to reverse this sentence of death, by repentance?
Vox desperantis, non deprecantis, says Ephraem, It is the language of one
despairing, not deprecating. Ezekiah was told, that he should not rise from his
bed, and yet for his humiliation, fifteen years were added to his days. Forty
days (says Jonah) and Niniveh shall be destroyed; yet, at their repentance,
the Lord deferred the judgment above forty years. Novit Dominus (says St.
Austin) mutare sententiam, si noverimus mutare delictum; The Lord knows to
reverse his sentence, if we know to reform our lives. Doubtless Ely
petitioned, and the Lord heard him, as he did David, that (though his sin was
pardoned) yet the sword should never depart from his house; as he did Christ,
that the cup should not pass from him; as he did Paul, when he was buffered by
a messenger of Satan, My grace is sufficient for thee: If not granting that
which he requested, yet that which seemed best to the Master of Requests, quod
bonum oculis suis, what seemed him good. But was it good for Ely and his
family, thus signally to be punished? Yes, it is good for a man that is
troubled with a (...), or rankness of blood, to breath a vein, for an
obstructed foul body, to receive a sharp potion: It was good for me (says
David) that I was afflicted. Therefore Mauritius Emperor of the Romans, and
Sigismund King of the Burgundians, earnestly petitioned God, that by suffering
of temporal punishments, they might be freed from eternal, and were therefore
slain with their whole Families. This was Ely's choice, let him do what seems
him good. And motives to patient submission, to what God shall lay upon us, may
be these. First, meditate, that our sins deserves scorpions, and we are but
chastised with rods; an eternal curse, is turned to a momentary short
correction: and shall we murmur at restraint for a day, who have demerited
everlasting imprisonment? Secondly, we are in the hands of a loving Father, who
corrects us for our good; it is a file to eat off our rust, a fire to purge away
our dross, a corrosive to corrode our dead flesh: We patiently submit to
earthly Fathers, and shall not we much more to our heavenly Father, in hope of
an eternal Crown? Thirdly, Christ was vir dolorum, a man of sorrows,
undergoing his Father's heavy displeasure for us: Shall not we then take up the
Cross, and follow him, seeing it is his pleasure, that we must go through this
Wilderness, and tread on fiery Serpents, before we come at Canaan? Christ
suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps, 1 Pet.
2. 21. which St. Paul presses, Heb. 12. 1, 2. Let us run with patience the race
that is set before us, looking unto Jesus, the Author and finisher of our
faith, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross, and
despised the shame. Fourthly, these sharp humors have run in all the veins of
the mystical body of Christ hitherto: no afflictions befall us, but such as
are accomplished in our brethren that are in the world. Joseph was in prison,
Daniel in the Lion's den, the three Children in the fiery furnace, Job on the
dunghill, Lazarus prostrate at the rich Man's gates, the blessed Virgin's heart
was pierced with a sword, the Apostles in the jail. And we have a promise,
that the God of all grace, after we have suffered a while; will make us
perfect, stablish, strengthen, and settle us: And that God of his fidelity,
will not suffer us to be tempted above that we are able, but will with the
temptation also, make a way to escape, that we may be able to bear it. Fifthly,
God has put bounds to the storms of this troublesome Sea; huc usque thus far
the waves shall rage, and no further. Thirty years were appointed the sick man
at Bethesda's pool, twelve years to the woman with the bloody issue, three
months to Moses, ten days of tribulation to the Angel of the Church of
Smyrna, three days plague to D^vid: Yea, the number of the godly man's tears
are registered in Gods book, and the quantity kept in his bottle; they are but a
shower that will end in sunshine, a troublesome torrent, that will waft us to
the haven of rest. Be faithful unto death, and thou shall receive a Crown of
life. Sixthly, we are called, to give an account of our Stewardship, how we have
improved our Talent; to repetitions in Christ's school, to see how much faith,
patience, and godliness we have learned all this while; and whether we cannot,
like ^ob, receive at the hand of God some evil, as well as we have hitherto
received a confluence of good. As therefore we have always prayed, Thy will be
done, so let us not be now offended at this which is done by his holy will.
Seventhly, meditate, that all things shall work together for the best to them
that love God, insomuch that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, shall be able to separate us from the love of God,
which is in Christ Jesus our Lord: Every pang is a prevention of hellish pains,
every sanctified respite, an earnest of heavens rest. It is but the Cross of
Christ, sent before to c^ucifie the love of the world in us; let us therefore
with Simon of Cyrene, carry it after him; the pains will shortly pass, the joy
will never pass away. Lastly, consider, there is no equality, no proportion,
betwixt the hour of temptation here, and the everlasting jubilee hereafter. As
is the center to the circumference, an instant to eternity, a molehill to a
mountain, a drop of water to the sea; so are the Saints crosses to their
crowns; as is the earth, little or nothing in respect of heaven, so is our
earthly sufferings in respect of it; therefore glory is called the kingdom of
God, of the Father, of Heaven, Abraham's bosom, Matthew. 8. 11. it is called, a
Paradise of pleasure, wherein is the Tree of life, the house of our Father, all
fullness of joy, the new Jerusalem, an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled,
that fades not away, reserved in the highest heavens: It Is called the glory of
God, our glory, rest, refreshment, such felicity, as neither eye has seen, ear
has heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man. For it is the
habitation of God, of Christ, of the holy Ghost; as great a difference as there
is betwixt a Snailes house and a Palace, a Tortoise shell, and Solomon's
Temple, Jonah's Gourd, and the Towers of Ninivey, so much, and more difference,
is betwixt heaven, and any thing that can be upon earth. We see this is the
composure of the World, that finest things are situated in the highest places;
the earth, as grossest, is put in the lowest room, the Water above the Earth,
the Air above the Water; the Fire above the Air, the Spears of Heaven, purer
then any of them, above the rest, which you see beautified with Sun, Moon, and
Stars, shining more gloriously, then all the precious Stones in the world; and
all this, but the nether side of the pavement of that Palace; then what shall
be the glory of the Heaven of Heavens within, able to drink up all afflictions,
as the Sea does the River Jordan. There are three distinct places, in which
every Saint successively, is resident; first, in his mother's womb; secondly,
in the world; thirdly, in heaven. As much as the whole Universe is larger then
our mothers womb, so much is heaven larger and ampler than it; for, if one
star exceed the earth so much in bigness, then what shall the heavens, that
contain infinite stars? Secondly, as in largeness, so in time; our time to be
in our mothers wombs is but nine months, but on earth it may be an hundred
times nine months; but our being in heaven is without period of days, months,
or years. Thirdly, as no man can remember, what sorrow he had in his mothers
womb, so shall our joies in heaven drink up all our sufferings upon earth. And
this glory consists, either essentially, in the beatificall vision, or
operatively, in the effects it works in us. Essentially, in the beatifical
vision, (though the Familists and Millenaries understand it not, confounding
grace and glory) but no man upon earth has seen God, neither can he be seen,
that is, perfectly; it is true, we may see God here in a natural vision in his
Creatures, as in a Glass, wherein some splendor of his glory shines; he may
be seen in a specular or symbolicall vision, by signs and characters of his
glory; so Moses is said to have seen Gods hinder parts, Esa. 6. 1. I saw the
Lord sitting upon his throne, high, and lifted up, his house was full of
majesty, and the Seraphims stood about him. We see God here by the vision of
faith, when by Doctrine of Christ his Son, and the operation of the Spirit, we
know the will of the Father. But the beatificall vision in heaven, is to behold
God and Christ Jesus face to face, we shall see him as he is, no veiles being
put betwixt us. Stay here, and pause a while. What comfort will this be, to see
the Lamb sit upon his seat of state? If the wise men of the East came so far,
and rejoiced to see him in the manger, what will it be to see him sitting in
his glory? If St. John Baptist did leap at his presence in his mothers womb,
what shall this his presence do, in his royal and eternal Kingdom? If the
Queen of Sheba was astonished at the sight of Solomon, what shall we be at the
sight of millions of Saints in his Court, every one greater than Solomon,
throwing down their Crowns before him the King of Kings? To this, join the
communion of Saints; imagine what a comfort will it be, to meet with the noble
Army of Martyrs, the goodly fellowship of the Prophets, the holy society of all
the Apostles, Evangelists, Confessors, where we shall see their Crowns of glory
set upon their heads, which Christ confers upon them, not for their merits, but
for his mercies sake.

The effects the beatificall vision works on us, are radiant either in soul or
body; in soul, where first the understanding shall be truly enlightened with
divine and heavenly knowledge, which God shall immediately reveal unto us,
without the ministry of men and Angels. Secondly, in our Will, which shall be
filled with righteousness and holiness, perfect love toward God, charity
toward our fellow Saints for ever. Thirdly, in our Affections, which shall be
composed without at axie or disorder, into eternal harmony, as Be^nard says
sweetly, Deus implebit animam rationalem luce sapientiae, concupiscibilem
justitia, irascibilem perfecta tranquillitate: God will fill the soul with
light of wisdom, the concupiscible faculty with righteousness, the irrascible
with perfect tranquillity.

The effects it works on the body consists in these particulars: First, of
mortal bodies, they shall be made immortal; of corruptible, incorruptible;
our flesh, that is subject to so many mutations, vexed with so many diseases,
defiled with so many corruptions, pestered with so many infinite calamities,
shall be made most glorious, and most perfect, to endure for ever without
change, and to reign with the soul world without end. Secondly, of a natural,
it shall become a spiritual body, not in essence and being, but in quality and
condition, because it shall be freed from all pains and troubles that belongs
to the same, as sin, eating, drinking, sleeping, and the like. Thirdly, of a
weak, it shall become a powerful body, by reason of agility and nimblenesse,
able to mount toward Heaven, and meet our Savior in the Air. Fourthly, of a
deformed and imperfect, it shall be a perfect and beautiful body; Jacob shall
not halt, Leab shall not be blear-eyed, nor Mephibosheth lame, but all shall be
as nimble as Hearts. Fifthly, in our bodies shall appear resplendent glory,
beautifulness, and shining brightness; we shall be (...), like Angels,
glistering like stars, conformable unto Christ's glorious body. Dan. 12. 3. They
that be wise, shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and they that
turn many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever. Well then, seeing
it is thus, let us say with Eli, It is the Lord, let him do what seems him
good, so we may enjoy him; with Austin, Hic seca, hic ure, Lance here, sear
here, so we may have glorified bodies; with Ignatius, Fire, gallows, wild
beasts, breaking of our bones, quartering of our members, crushing of our
bodies, so our bodies, so that we may enjoy our Lord Jesus and his Kingdom.
Take our earthly possessions, so that we may reign with him.

(...).
A brief APPENDIX, Concerning the nature of TITHES.
IN these free times, wherein every one takes liberty to expose his thoughts to
the world, give me leave also to offer up my Mite into the public Treasury,
which shall consist but of a twofold consideration; first, whether dishonouring
of the Ministry; secondly, whether robbing of God in Tithes and offerings, and
defeating of Christ's Ambassadors of a comperent livelihood, may not portend
misery, and calamity, if not ruin, to a Church or State?

For the former, when God gives up a people to dishonor their Ministers, it
argues, Religion is declining: They are his Soldiers, Stewards, Angels; He is
their Portion, He has promised to be with them to the end of the world, that
the gates of hell shall not prevail against them; that he will recompense a cup
of cold water that is given them; he that hears them hears Him, he that
despises them despises Him. When the Prophet would discover the Jews to be
ready to be swallowed up in the whirle-pool of destruction, he gives them this
character, that they are like a people that contest with their priest. Corah
and Dathan murmured against Moses and Aaron, and the earth swallowed them up,
with all their partakers.

For the latter, (which here I principally intend) the danger of robbing of God
in Tithes and Offerings, and defeating Christ's Spouse of her jointure, let
three things be seriously weighed: First, whether the tenth part of the fruits
of the earth are not as due to God, as the seventh part of our time, and so the
morality thereof founded upon the same bottom, that our Christian Sabbath is.
Secondly, if not so, whether there is not an (...), moral equity, if the
Priesthood under the Law received the tenth part and more, the Ministry under
the Gospel, which is more honorable and laborious, should not receive at
least as much, and whether that be not the principal scope of the Apostle, 1
Cor. 9. which he makes good by several arguments. Thirdly, if neither of these
Rocks should prove impregnable, whether this be not a wall of brass, able to
endure what siege Antichristian forces can lay against it, that being once
consecrated, and by special donation appropriated unto God, a Power less then
Divine, can not reduce them to any other use, without sacrilege, and taking
the Scepter out of Gods hand: And whether that signal judgment inflicted on
Ananias and Saphyra, Act. 5. for retaining that which they had devoted unto
God, only by their private vows, be not a miraculous confirmation of this
truth, and a pillar of salt to be looked upon to the worlds end? Israel is a
thing hallowed to the Lord, and his first fruits; all they that eat it
shalloffend, evil shall come upon them, says the Lord, Jer. 2. 3. Tithes are
Gods portion, whereby we acknowledge His royalty and superintendency over us,
and therefore being once solemnly bequeathed unto him, may seem to be
inviolable by any just Law of man, for these reasons: First, Abraham, and in
him Levi, paid Tithes to Melchizedeck, (...), even of the spoils taken in
war, Genesis 14. 20. Heb. 7. 4. and that above four hundred years before the Law
was given. Secondly, Jacob vowed as he went to Padan Aram, that if God would
bless him, the Lord should be his God, and that surely he would give the tenth
unto him, Genesis 28. 22. Now that the Lord should be acknowledged for his God,
was a moral duty, and no less the other for substance, especially after his
vow, and reducible to the duties of the first Table. Thirdly, God strictly
commanded to pay the tithes of all things to the Priests and Levites; nay, the
first fruits, first and second tithes, heaveofferings, wave-offerings, which
amounted to nineteen in the hundred, or above the sixth part^; which Precept, if
it be not purely moral, but judicial in some circumstances, respecting equity
betwixt Priest and People; yet it holds proportion to the Ministry of the
Gospel, according to their dignity and necessity, and being devoted unto God
by our forefathers, famous in their Generations for piety, are as obligatory,
as what God himself immediately consecrated. Fourthly, God calls it a robbing
of him in tithes and offerings, Mal. 3. 8. and for that, pronounces the whole
Nation cursed with a curse, that is, a signal curse, which the Spirit of God
does not use to do for violating Laws, that are purely judicial or
ceremonial. Fifthly, Christ confirms them under the Gospel, Matthew. 23. 23.
telling the Pharisees, they pay tithes of Annise, Mint, and Cummin, these
things ought to be done. And if they could not enter into heaven, unless their
righteousness exceeded the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, what
shall become of those, that come short of them? The Pharisees paid cheerfully
things hallowed unto God, Christians do not. Sixthly, the Apostle of the
Gentiles makes sacrilege (which consists in detaining of tithes and holy
things) worse than Idolatry, Romans 2. 32. Thou that abhorrest Idols, (...),
do thou commit sacri'edge? To rob God of his due is a greater sin, then,
through mistake, to ascribe that to a false God, which is not his due.
Seventhly, it seems by the Law of Nature, or a Positive Law of God, to be
derived from Noah to all Nations; Plutarch says in Camillus, that they did
(...), pay tithes to Jupiter. Herodotus says, (...), that they offered unto
Hercules the tenth part of their wealth; so did the Hetrurians, calling it the
Herculian part, as Plautus has it in his Truculentus. Xenophon says, the
Grecians did offer their tithes at the Temple of Apollo at Delphos. Aristotle,
lib. 2. Oeconomicks, says, that the Babylonians paid tithes. Hence it was,
that Princes, (when they came like Caligula, to challenge Deity to themselves)
usurped the tithes. Appian records, that the Sicilians and other conquered
Nations, paid the tenth part to the Roman Emperors; therefore the Publicans
(as Cicero has it) are called (...), tithe-gatherers. Eighthly, that tithes
should be paid, was the judgment of the Ancients, that lived in Primitive
times; St. Chrysostom says, that Abraham in paying of tithes was our
Instructor, teaching us what we should do; St. Jerome says, Quod qui non
fecerit, deum defrandare, and supplantare convincitur, that he that paies not
tithes, defraudes and undermines God. St. Austin says, Nolumus partiri cum Deo
decimas, mod^ autem totum tollitur, We have been unwilling to pay God his
tithes, therefore it is just he should take all from us. Ninthly, many
Councills have confirmed the paying of tithes; the first, Aurelian, chap. 17.
the second of Matiscone, chap. 5. the Forojulium, in the last Chapter; at
Ments, in the time of Charles the Great, chap. 38. at Mentz under Rabanus, chap.
10. at Mentz, in the time of the Emperor Arnulph, chap. 17. where it was
decreed, that those that neglected to pay tithes, should be excommunicated. At
Rhemes, chap. 38. in the time of Charles the Great; at Valence in the time of
Lotharius, chap. 10. the fourth at Arles, chap. 9. with many more, besides
Panormitan, Hostiensis, and the Canonists of all Ages. Tenthly, the Heathens,
by the glimmering light of reason, punished those that were sacrilegious: Plato
ordained in his Laws, that if a servant or stranger should detain holy things,
they should be branded in the hands and forehead; but if a freeman, he should
be put to death. This was one of the twelve Tables of the ancient Romans,
Sacrum, sacrove commodatum qui rapsit, parricida esto, Let him that steals any
holy thing, or dedicated to a holy use, be punished as a parricide; that is, as
one that murders his father or mother, and that was, to be sown in a sack of
Leather, with a Serpent in it, and thrown into the Sea. Amongst the
Aethiopians, if any was convinced of that crime, a potion was given him to
drink of diverse kinds of poison, which was no sooner taken, but it so wrought
upon the fancy, that they conceived themselves to be stung with all kinds of
Serpents, and to be rid of that pain, they made away themselves. Eleventhly,
Histories tells us, that imbezilling or alienating of tithes, has been the
Prodrome and Harbinger of ruin to several Nations, Churches, and Families: In
Hezekiah's reign, tithes began to be neglected, that he appointed Overseers to
look to the payment thereof, 2 Chronicles. 31. 11. for which cause, God suspended
the judgment for his time; but his successors growing careless, they were
given up to a Babylonish captivity, and their temple destroyed. About one
hundred and thirty years before our Savior's Incarnation, corruption so
prevailed, that it began to be questionable, whether tithes were to be paid or
no, whence their high Court of Sanhedrim decreed, that instead of the tenth (as
Moses Cotsensis has it) they should pay one part of an hundred; and shortly
after, God took from them their Rulers, their Temple, their Land, and all. O
what a sad thing is it, when men will be wiser than God. It was one of Julian
the Apostata's projects, to supplant Christianity, by taking away the
livelihood of the Ministry. The Eastern and African Churches acted their parts
in this Scene, before they were delivered up to the doleful Catastrophe of
Mohammedan blindness and slavery. What success Henry the Eighth had in
pillaging of the Church, the dysasters in his Family, and the sad tragedies of
Cardinal Wolsey, the Vicar-generall, with the rest of his Agents, and many of
those Tribes that were enriched by them, can signally witness. Lastly,
Sacrilege has been inevitably attended with remarkable judgments in all ages:
Xerxes and Brennus sent their Soldiers to violate the Temple at Delphos, the
one was destroyed with all his Army, by lightning; the other lost forty
thousand of his Foot by fire from heaven: The Soldiers that Cambyses sent to
spoil the Temple of Ammon, were buried quick under heaps of sands, and he slain
with his own sword. Pyrrhus having pillaged the Lucresian Proserpina, was
wracked with his whole Navy, and left to the mercy of the waves: Alsimus, high
Priest of the Jews, attempting the overthrow of the Temple, was struck with a
dead Palsy, and dyed miserably. Heliodorus sent by Seleucus, to ransack the
Temple at Jerusalem, felt the revenging hand of God, till Onias the high Priest
interceded for him; out of which Temple, when Crassus the Roman General had
taken two thousand talents of gold, he was no sooner passed over the River
Euphrates, then his whole Army was rooted by the Parthians, and part of the
gold he had taken, melted, and poured into his mouth, with these words, Now
surfeit on gold after thy death, which thou could not be satisfied with, all
thy life long. Herod sending his men to dig into the Sepulchers of David and
Solomon, where Church-Treasures were laid up for security, there brake out
thence a fire, that burned the sacrilegious delvers to ashes. When Leo,
surnamed Copronimus, espied a Crown beset with Carbuncles in a Christian
Church, he caused it to be fetched, and setting it upon his head, there
suddenly arose a Carbuncle in his forehead, which never suffered his temples
after to take any rest. Felix, carrying away the rich presents, that
Constantine and others had dedicated to God, in the new Temple at Jerusalem,
builded by Queen Helena, died of a flux of blood. Julian, uncle to the
Apostata, having raked together most precious vessels and sumptuous monuments
at Antioch in Syria, uncasing his postern parts, sat down upon them in
derision; incontinently his flesh began to rot, and he died desperately of the
disease called Miserere. Gaepio, the Roman Consul, robbing the famous Church of
Tolossa in France, he, and every man in his Army, that had fingered any of the
gold, came to miserable ends within a year. It was observed, that Gustavus the
late King of Sweden, prospered not, after he began to rifle Churches. Achan was
stoned, for detaining the wedge of gold, and the Babylonish garment. Ananias
and Saphyra smit with sudden death, for concealing that which they had devoted
unto God. When Belshasar quaffed in the consecrated Bowls, taken from the
Temple at Jerusalem, a handwriting appeared upon the wall, his Kingdom was
taken from him, and he gave up the ghost. God is the same God still, his arm
is not shortened; though he may seem to have leaden heels, he will be found in
revenge to have iron hands.

Ob. But tithes are heathenish, paid by the Gentiles.

Ans. So are (...), relief exhibited by children to parents; those that deny
the one, are (...), without natural affection; those that deny the other, have
been conceived (...), without divine reverence.

Ob. But they were Jewish, paid to the Leviticall Priesthood.

Ans. Not only so, but paid four hundred years before to Melchisedec, who
was a type of Christ, and his Gospell-Ministry.

Ob. But they are Antichristian.

Ans. Not, unless that which Christ confirms and approves, be against Christ;
these things ought to be done, to the tithing of mint and cummin.

Ob. But it is against Christian liberty to pay tithes.

Ans. No more to render unto God the things that are Gods, than to men the
things that are men's, honor to whom honor, tribute to whom tribute; the
Church has as good a title to the tenth, as the owner of the rest to the nine
parts. Parents can but leave to their posterity nine parts. Men when they
purchase, purchase but nine parts, and pay proportionably.

Ob. But by paying of tithes, men are deprived of that they get with the sweat
of their brows.

Ans. No more then Tenants by paying their Landlords rent, who will not be
content with the tenth, but scarce sometimes will be willing, to allow one
part, for their labor of the ten. God is Lord Paramount of all, and gave the
land of Canaan to the Israelites, upon condition of paying of tithes; Mal. 3.
10. Bring ye all the tithes into the Starehouse, and I will open the windows
of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to
receive it. v. 12. All nations shall call you blessed. There is the same reason
under the Gospel, which St. Paul urges, afortiori, 1 Cor. 9. 11. If we have
sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we shall reap your
carnal things? And, Gal. 6. 6. Let him that is taught in the word communicate
unto him that teaches, in all good things. Be not deceived, God is not mocked.

But we hope there is no further need of this dispute. That God that puts
bounds to the raging waves of the Sea, tha^ kept Sarah untouched from
Abim^^^^^, has, against all Satan's designs, preserved the Jointure of the
Church, Christ's Spouse, a thousand six hundred years, will still maintain her
dowry untouched from sacrilegious hands.

(...).
Of the expediency of MARRIAGE, To be solemnized by a lawful, MINISTER In the
Church, or public Assembly.
MARRIAGE, that only positive traduciary Ayrlome we retein of Paradise, as
taken in its full extent and latitude, is defined by the Civilians, A
conjunction Matrimonium est viri, and mulieris conjunctio individuam vitae
consuetudinem continens. Justinian Institut. lib. 1. tit. 9.
of Man and Woman, containing an individual fellowship of life; and falls
under a threefold consideration: First, Oeconomicall, as it is the prime
Seminary of Families. Secondly, Political, as it is the Embrio of civilized
States and Commonwealths. Thirdly, Ecclesiastical, as it is the root and
stem, whence that Vine, the Church, spreads it self by numerous branches.
These three (as vegetative, sensitive, and rational life, in living creatures)
may be actually separated, one from another, yet, so still, as the latter
(...). Arist. de Anima.
virtually comprehends the former, as the reasonable soul does the inferior
faculties; for, there may be a mutual consent betwixt Salvages and Indies, who
live without subordination to superior Laws; and observation of legal rites,
relating to Marriage, amongst Turks and Persians, who acknowledge not Christ:
But in Christians, who are as well members of the Church as Commonweal, it is
requisite, that to private contracting, and submission to municipall or civil
Ordinances, there be super-added an acknowledgment of divine Rules, and a
solemn benediction upon that Tie, which ought to be sacred and inviolable.

This will appear more perspicuous, if we traverse these three in order: First,
taking our prospect of Marriage, as it looks no further then private Families,
and herein the consent of both parties, and parents, is necessary; of the
parties, for the very form, essence, and being of Matrimony; of the parents,
for the been esse, or legitimation of it: The verity of both these, we may see
presented to the life in one glass, where, Genesis 24. 58. the parents of Rebecca
having given their consent to Abraham's servant, requesting her for a wife to
Isaac* enquired further of the Damsel, whether she was willing, otherwise,
further progress therein had been obstructed; for, where there is not a free
consent, (...), without violence or coaction, (...), without ignorance or
mistaking, the Canonists declare it a nullitie. And that the consent of parents
is requisite, St. Pau^ evidences, Ephesians. 6. 1. Children obey your parents in
all things: And, lest generals should not conclude, he descends to
particulars, 1 Cor. 7. 36. (...), declaring, that it is the privilege of
parents, to deny or give their children in marriage. Which light was
communicated to the heathens, as appears by Euripides, Euripid.
who in the Scene, introduces a Virgin, thus answering her suitors: Of my
marriage my Father will take care, (...), it is not in my power to Ambros. lib.
de patriarchis. Justinian Institut. de nuptiis. digest. de statu hom. code de
nuptiis. Council. de Toledo cause. 4 quest. 21.
dispose. And this with approbation is quoted by St. Ambrose, and is further
confirmed by the civil Laws, Canons of several Oecumeniall Counsels; the
pith and marrow whereof, Gratian epitomizes, saying, In contracting of
Marriage, the consent of parents is always to be required.

And as the consent of parties and parents is requisite for marriage, as it is
the seed-plat of Families, so the compliance of civil, or municipall
constitutions and Magistrates (which are patres patriae, fathers of the
Country) is to be taken in, for the further consummation of it, as Families are
integrall parts of Provinces, Nations, or Kingdoms. And this is clear from
prescription since Adam. Genesis 6. 2. which was first violated when the sons of
God saw the daughters of men that they were fair, and they took them wives of
all which they chose, and that questionless, maugre the advice of Enoch, Noah,
and other godly Patriarchs, whom God had set Princes over them. In conformity
to this, Genesis 24. 3. Abraham made his servant swear, that he should not take a
wife to his son Isaac of the daughters of the Canaanites. Rebecca, Genesis 27. 46.
was weary of her life, for the daughters of Heth, lest Jacob should take a wife
of them. Genesis 28. 8. Esau saw the daughters of Canaan pleased not his father
Isaac. And when the Jews, after their departure out of Egypt, were
incorporated into a body politic, God, who is Lord Paramount, as well of
judicial, as cerimoniall, and moral Laws, gave a Directory for marriage,
Levit. 18. which being slighted by Solomon, he was deserted of God, and lapsed
into Idolatry. The Jews were hurried into captivity for taking strange wives,
which crime, after their reducement, Shechaniah and Ezra endeavored to
expiate, by a general Ezr. cap. 9. and. 10. (...) Aristotl. polit. 1. Gellius
noct. Attic. lib. 12. cap. 18. Florus, Plutarch, in* vita Solonis, and Lycurg^*
Ad Odyss. ^.
divorce, and deposition of their illegitimate budds, Ezr. 9. and 10. The
Pagans had a glimmering sight of this, which Minos expressed in his Laws at
Crete, Rhadamanthus at Lycia, Aeacus in Aenopia, Draco in blood at Areopagus,
Numa Pompilius at Rome, Lycurgus at Sparta, Solon at Athens, rearing his
superstructure upon Cecrops his basis, who there first instituted the contract
of matrimony, and for that cause was saluted by the name of (...), says
Eustathius, as if he were an Hermophrodite, or (...), participating of both
sexes; or (according to the Scholiast upon Aristophanes) quasi, (...), In
(...), Act. 3. Scen. 3.
Because with much ado, the coalition of the two natures of father and mother
into one, was his inventory. This the Egyptians received from the Hebrews, the
Phoenicians from the Egyptians, the Ionians from the Phoenicians, the Romans
their Justin. Hist. Carrion Chron.
duodec^m tabulas, from the Ionians or Grecians, which twelve Tables were the
root, whence the Arbor of the civil Laws (consisting of the Code, Digestes,
Constitutions, Pandectes, Extravagants,) has spread its branches over the
western world; and all treates of Marriage.

This Nation (as far as the Torch of History Vxores habent deni, duodenique
inter se communes, sed si qui sunt ex his nati, eorum habentur liberi a quibus
primum virgins quaeque ductae sunt. Caesar de Bello. Gallic. l. 5 Libro
constitutionum Londinensium, pertaining to the Guild hall.
yields us light) had always their Nuptials regulated by Laws, even the
ancient Britains, while uncivilized, (as Caesar their enemy confesses) had
their conjugall knot. But when the Sun of Righteousness arose with healing in
his wings, Lucius the first Christian Monarch, by Elutherius his direction,
gave Scripturegrounded rules for Marriage, as well as other perquisites; how
this was inviolably observed, through the Saxon's Heptarchy, till Ina's
Monarchy, from thence till Alfrid and Edward the Confessor, from them till
Magna Charta, and so successively till our times, I leave it to the recognition
of the learned Sages of our Laws; only observing this, That what provisoes,
as preparatory to Marriage, were formerly executed by the Officers of civil
Constitutions, are now defalked, and the power wholly transmitted to the
Magistrate, or Ministers of the common Law, the legality whereof, far be it
from me to dispute or question, which obliquely all this while I have been
proving. But the scope I aim at is this, to which, I doubt not, every
unbiassed judgment will subscribe, that as the first step of matrimonial
solemnity, takes in the consent of parties and parents; the second, of
Magistrates and municipall Laws, and both of these but in a domestic and
political capacity, common to us with Turks and Pagans; so there is a further
graduall perfection, which requires the consent and benediction of the Church,
(as the parties contracting are members thereof) and so pleads for the
expediency of the solemnization thereof by a Lawful Minister, in the public
Assembly.

This I Will endeavor to evidence, founding the structure of my whole fabric
upon a threefold bottom; first, the Law of Nations; secondly, praescription of
the Church; thirdly, deductions from Scripture. These single may seem weak, but
in conjunction, will make a threefold cord, not easily broken.

First, the Law of Nations, though barbarous (some of them) concenters in this,
that Marriage is but rough cast, till polished by the sacred hand of a Priest;
and this Tradition doubtless they had hereditary from Noah, Noah from
Methusalem, Methusalem from Adam, Adam from God, who consecrated the yoke of
our first Parents, not abstractly, as man and woman, but as his servants, and
in covenant with him, gave a benediction, not only as they were to replenish
the earth, but as their Seed was to bruise the Serpents head. And that act was
managed by the Creator, rather as he was the prototype of Priestly, than Kingly
office, leaving a president to posterity, which all future ages observed, till
Moses, acknowledging the firstborn in this sense, as consecrated to God, which
selling Esau heard profane, because the Priesthood, a thing holy, was an
appendix of his birthright. And that the nuptials of all their children were
to be celebrated by the Patriarcks, or heads of their respective Families, is
as transparent from Scripture Light, as if writ with the Sunbeams. This, other
Nations, whether civilized, or barbarians, religiously observed. Let the
Grecians be mustered in the van, who for the consummation of their marriages,
usually repaired to the Temple, where, in the presence of the Priest, they
engaged themselves Achil. Tat. libr. 5.
mutually by Oath, as appears by the practice of Clitiphon and Leucippe, where
the man in the Temple of Isis swore, (...), to love sincerely, and the woman,
(...), that she would accept him for her Husband, and Lord of all. And as
preparative Cael. Rhod. lib. 7. cap. 4. (...), Eurip. in ^phig. v. 1 112.
Eurip. v. 711.
to this, which is said to be the invention of Erato, the Priest did sacrifice
to Minerva a Heifer, never married in the yoke. Wherefore Clytemnestra,
speaking of her daughter (whom they pretended to marry to Achilles) demanded of
her husband, (...), whether he had seen the sacrifices performed. They did also
(...), offer their baskets to Diana, their (...), and (...), the nuptial
gifts, and nuptial votes to Juno. And these were not to be interrupted for any
civil solemnity, as appears by Agamemnon, who importunately called upon by his
wife, to attend the wedding feast, religiously makes answer, (...) Eurip. Iph.
v. 721. Flat delegibus.
(...), When I have done my wedding sacrifice. Hence their Priests were called
(...), celebraters of marriage; and the solemnities themselves, (...), marriage
ceremonies, which was performed by the (...), or master of Ceremonies, Theognis
(...) v. 16.
at the nuptials of Cadmus, under the Dramma of Muses and Graces, as Theogenis
personates it.

(...).

To join in one body with the Grecians, the ancient Romans may next ^ally up
their Forces, who usually first contracted the parties to be matched in their
espousalls, Salmuth. in Pancirol. lib. rerum deperd. cap. de nuptiis. This
resembles the preparatory acts of our Magistrates and Registers. Juvenal.
Satyr. 6.
which were termed sponsialia a spondendo, because each engaged to other to
live as man and wife. This preludiatory act might be commenced by the Parents,
or civil Officers, who, for their greater security, writ down the form of the
Contract upon Tables of Record, as appears by Juvenal, Si, tibi legitimis
pactam junctamque tabellis, Non es amaturus.

These tables were sealed with the Signet of competent witnesses there present,
who thence were denominated Signatores, not without the Omen of Soothsayers,
procured by either sex, as the Satyrist emblazons it. Veniet cum signatoribus
Auspex. Juvenal. Satyr. 10.


This done, certain solemnities were used by a Pontifex, or chief Priest, and
the woman made sure to the man, by pronouncing a set form of words, in the
presence of ten witnesses at least; then a solemn sacrifice was offered, part
whereof the married couple were jointly to eat; especially the consecrated
Cake, a far the bread-corn, or matter of it, the sacrifice was termed
confarreatio, and the marriage it self farracia, the dissolution of it
diffarreatio. If any of these Hieron. ferarius Philippic. orat.
Ceremonies (especially the last) were relinquished, they were judged nuptiae
innuptae, marriage unmarried, as we call our enemies gifts, no gifts, (...).

The Hebrews shall bring up the rear, whose Patriarchs (as is formerly
glanced) by virtue of primogeniture, being Priested, did sanctify and bless
their childrens marriages, as Rebecca's Parents and Brother did hers, Genesis 24.
60. saying, Be thou the mother of thousands of millions, and let thy seed
possess the gate of those that hate them. The latter Jews acted their
nuptial solemnities under a Tent or Canopy, called in their language (...)
Elias Thisbite.
Chuppa, to which the Psalmist alludes, Psalm. 19. 4. In them thou have set a
tabernacle for the Sun, which as a bridegrrom coming out of his chamber,
rejoices as a strong man to run a race. And this was done in the assembly of
ten men at least, where the Master of the Ceremonies was styled by them, Baal
Mischte, which by St. John, Joh. 2. 9. is languaged (...), chief of the
marriage Chamber. The tabernacle or chamber it self, was called Beth hillula,
the house of praise; the marriage Song, Hillulim, praises; they that sung this
Epithalamium, or marriage Song, (...), children of the Scukius de convivio,
lib, 2. c. 3.
bridechamber, Matthew. 9. 15. Now whether that mazel tob, good luck wished for
by all the guests, was not specially implored by one, who was consecrated for
that end, I leave it to the scrutenie of others. Their marriage Liturgy,
copied out at large by Genebrard, speaks no less, the system whereof
epitomized, was this: The (...), or chief of the marriage chamber, took a cup,
and blessed it, saying, Blessed be thou, O Lord our God, the King of the world,
which createst the fruit of the Vine: Blessed be the Lord our God, the King of
the world, who has created man after his own Image, according to the Image of
his own likeness, and has thereby prepared unto himself an everlasting
building. Blessed be thou, O Lord, who have created him. Then descending to
particular invocation for the Bridegroom and the Bride, closes with a
benediction; and in that (...), or poculo charitatis, drinks to them both. Now
seeing Uzzah by a sudden syderation was unmanned, for touching the Arc; Saul
and Uzziah un-kinged, for approaching the Altar; Corah and his accomplices
sodomized in a new Asphaltic gulf, for counter-censuring Moses and Aaron;
shall we think, that any did attempt this sacram palestram, solemn wrestling
with God, by public prayers and praises, without holy oil, and sacerdoticall
unction? especially, seeing the Jews held Targum Hierosolumit: Genesis 30. 21.
a quaternion of blessings, more immediately dependent on God; to wit, the key
of Rain, the key of Food, the key of the Grave, and the key of the Womb: These
(say they) were neither deposited to Angels, nor Seraphims, and therefore
fittest to be worn at the girdle of them, to whom our Savior entrusted the
keys of the kingdom of heaven. The whole, informed, thus.

It is expedient that the Law of Nations

So I have spent my forelorn hope, consisting of ragged Regiments, emprested
out of scattered Laws of Nations, which if they seem not to charge home; my
auxiliaries shall make amends, which now draw up; consisting of whole Brigads
of Ecclesiastical prescriptions, marching with Canons mounted successivly,
since the Apostles times, taken out of the Magazin of general Counsels. For
the original of Christian Marriage by Ministers, is like the heads of Nilus,
unknown. I Will build upward, ascending the scale of Ecclesiastical practice,
beginning with that demi-canon, of our late Assembly of Divines, charged by
Ordinance of Parliament, the Report whereof is this: Because Solemnization of
marriage, Directory. page 28. die Jovis. 13. Mart. 1644. Anordinance of
Parliament, for establishing and observing this present Directory, throughout
the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales. The form of solenmization of
Matrimony, confirmed by several Acts of Parliament.
such as marry are to marry in the Lord, and have special need of instruction,
direction, and exhortation, from the word of God, at their entrance into such a
condition, and of the blessing of God upon them therein; we judge it expedient,
that marriage be solemnized by a lawful Minister of the Word, that he may
accordingly counsel them, and pray for a blessing upon them. Thence up till
the Reformation, our Municipall, Civil, and Ecelesiasticall Constitutions
required, that Banes being asked, or special License indulged, at the day
appointed for solemnization of matrimony, the persons to be married shall come
into the body of the Church, with their friends and neighbors, and there the
Priest shall say, as in the Rubric of the Liturgy was directed. On this only
Basis, our Laws founded the legality of Marriage, legitimation of children,
claim to Inheritances; by virtue of which, all our present Nobility, Gentry,
and Yeomanry of England, claim their estates and honors, as did their
Progenitors; which being violated, the bed was rendered adulterous, children
spurious, patrimonies not hereditary. And this was no novell constitution, but
involved in the veteres Angliae consuetudines, Charta originalis sub sigillo.
Daniel life of Henry 3.
ratified in Magna Charta, received from the traditionall current under Norman,
Danish, and Saxon Monarchs, till the Heptarchie, and so looses it self into
the original spring of Christianity, as the Britains Beda Histor. Angliae.
Gildas de excid. Brit* Augustine Epist. 133. Oportet conjuges sub velo
sacerdotali benedictionem accipere, quod si diversae religion is fuerint, quo
modo in Ecclesia Christi sub eodem velo contegerentur? Ambros. Epist. 7. ad
Vigilium. Ex illis verb is intelligimus fuisse tunc morem ut matrimonia in
templis consecrarentur, and velo conjuges eodem per ministrum fuisse coopertos,
ut astantes viderent fuisse conjunctos. Pet. Martyr. Comment. in 1. lib. Reg.
p. 25. Illum Ambrosii consilium vehementer probasse qui censuit, ut si conjuges
in matrimonium consenfissent, Minister Ecclesiae accerseretur. Possidon. in
vita Augustini.
had copied out before them, for several Centuries, as venerable Bede and
Gildas stories it.

Neither was it confined to this Nation, but as diffusive as Christianity, as
appears by ancient monuments. St. Augustine being importuned to celebrate a
marriage, answers, He would, if the mother of the child were present, whose
consent is necessary; which proves, that marriage was a part of the
Ministerial office in his days. St. Ambrose contends, that persons of
several religions ought not to be matched together, because this could not
receive a joint benediction sub velo sacerdotali, under the veil of the Priest.
By these words we understand, (says Peter Martyr) that it was then the manner,
to have matrimonies solemnized in Temples, and that the husband and the wife
covered both with one veil, by the Minister, to the intent, that the
spectators might see, that they were joined together; which custom (says he)
is much against clandestine marriage. What is meant by covering under the veil,
and whether our wives hence are said to be under Covert Baron, as heterogeniall
to my purpose, I will not here engage. And that marriages might neither be
clandestine, nor contracted betwixt Infidells and Believers, Possidonius
avoucheth, that he did very well like the counsel of St. Ambrose, who judged,
That if a man and woman did consent together in matrimony, the Minister of the
Church should be sent for, by whom the covenants of marriage should be
established, and the Matrimony should be confirmed. And that marriage is not
completed, without ministerial instruction and benediction, that Canon of the
Council of Neocaesaria confirms, wherein Ministers of the Church are
prohibited to be present to bless the second marriage of Polygamists, the
former wife living. Many such proviso's are scattered in other Councills,
relating to circumstantialls of marriage, by Presbyters, or them in holy
Orders, none to the substance, as being a thing antidated, and rivetted into
the body of Christianity, in the first Embrio of it, when Counsels had yet no
being: Which premises will enforce St. Augustines Augustinus de Baptismo contra
Donatistas. lib. 4. cap. 23.
conclusion: That which the whole Church holds, was never begun by any
Council, but always observed, cannot otherwise be believed, but that it came
from the Apostles, and such is marriage by Ministers. The whole, abbreviated,
thus.

It is expedient, that that pious custom

The Auxiliaries having thus discharged, the main Battalio draws up, whose
Artillery consists of Scripture-deductions: Nunc ad Triarios perventum est,
This is the Rereward, which this cause most confides in, and being well
ordered, may colophonem addere, put an end to the controversy. The first
alarm shall be given from marriage-consecration; which is defined, A sacred
Est actio sacra qua sponsus and sponsa in Ecclesiam deducti, coram coetu
fidelium, a Pastore docentur de institutione, and finibus conjugii, express
suum consensum testantur, vel per signum in his qui muti sunt, aut surdi, vel
per verba in his qui loqui possunt. Bucan. Institut. Theolog. p. 122.
action, whereby the Bridegroom and Bride, brought into the Church, before the
assembling of the faithful, are instructed by a Pastor, concerning the
institution and ends of Wedlock, expressly witnessing their consent by signs,
in those that are deaf or dumb, by words, in those that can speak. And this
will amount to Scripture Proof, if we consider three things; first, the Author;
secondly, the Ends and use; thirdly, the Rules prescribed for marriage. The
Author was God, whose first act, after Creation, was Churchplantation, laying
the ground-stone of that fabric in conjugall union; It is not good for man to
be alone, I will make him an help meet for him, Genesis 2. 18. Man shall leave his
father and mother, and cleave to his wife, and they shall be one flesh, Genesis 2.
2*4. Mat. 19. 5. God blessed them, and said, Be fruitful and multiply, and
replenish the earth, and subdue it, and have dominion over the creatures, Genesis
1. 28. That which is asscribed to God, without distinction of Persons, is
appropriated to Christ, the second Person, by St. John. Joh. 1. 23. The word
was in the beginning with God, all things were made by him, and marriage (for
it is an undivided act of the Trinity) consecrated Opera Trinitatis ad extra
sunt indivisa. Aquinas.
by him, and that not only in his Kingly and Priestly, but prophetical
capacity, giving commission to his Ministers in the extent he received it, As
the Father sent me, so send I you; which ratiotionally may be conceived, to
comprehend matrimonial instruction and benediction, as part of the
Ministerial function, which the parties contracting stands more need of now,
than they did in Paradise. These Items laid together, makes up this total Sum.

It is most expedient, that marriage of Church Members be solemnized by those,
concerning the institution, use, and ends thereof, and to confer a benediction
upon them: Therefore it is most expedient, that marriage of Church Members be
solemnized by a Minister.

Secondly, the tripartite use and end of marriage (as filed by the Schoolmen)
pleads for the same, which is, issue, fidelity, Targum Hierosol.
and the sacred mystery thereof: The key of Issue is Gods special peculiar,
God remembered Rachel, and opened her womb, Genesis 30. 22. Numerous issue is his
peculiar, with a more signal benediction, Thy wife shall be as a fruitful
vine by the sides of thine house, thy children like olive-plants round about
thy table. Behold, thus shall the man be blessed that fears the Lord, Psalm,
128. 3, 4. But numerous issue, sanctified from the womb, and in covenant with
God, is a more transcendent superlative peculiar: The Lord shall bless thee
out of Sion, and thou shall see the good of Jerusalem all the days of thy
life; yea, thou shall see thy childrens children, and peace upon Israel, Psalm.
128. 5, 6. The result is this.

That, whose end and use is Gods sole peculiar and his signal and transcendent

Another end and use of marriage, is fidelity, which includes unanimity,
chastity, constancy. Yoke-fellowes in wedlock ought to be Turtle-like,
unanimous in all estates; Cael. Rhod. lib. 28. cap. 21.
Husbands, (...), be not bitter to your wives, Col. 3. 19. This the Grecians
Hieroglyphicked, in flinging the gall of their marriage-victim, with most eager
loathing, behind the Altar, during the time of their sacrifice. Wives should,
like Hero, (who (...), Masaeus, Hero and Leander.
expired with her perishing husband) sympathize in affection with them. As
unanimity, so chastity is a flower in this marriage-garland: To avoid
fornication, let every man have his own wife, and let every woman have her own
husband: Let the husband render unto the wife due benevolence, and likewise
also the wife unto the husband. The wife has not power over her own body, but
the husband; the husband has not power of his own body, but the wife. Defraud
not one another, 1 Cor. 7. 2, 3, 4. Therefore amongst the ancient Romans, the
man, in token of this, gave a Ring unto the woman, which she was to wear upon
the next finger Aulus Gellius, Noct. Attic Ea enim cornicum societas est, ut ex
duobus sociis altera ex tincta, vidua altera perpetuo maneat. Plinius
unto the little, of the left hand; because unto that finger alone, proceeds
a certain artery from the heart. Their Soothsayers, in their nuptial.
Divinations, accounted the apparition of Crows the most auspicious Omen,
because they live chaste, and, one extinct, the other continues single; the
Turtle mournes to death, if her fellow miscarry; the same is observed of the
Stork. To these, join constancy, which crowns the rest: Whosoever shall put
away his wife, (...), except it be for fornication, and Vt signarent illam ibi
perpetuo mansuram, neque inde ulla tempestate recesseram. Alex. ab Alex. Sig.
de jure Romans c. 9. Salmuth. in Pancirol. lib. rer. deperd. cap. de nuptiis.
shall marry another, commits adultery, Mat. 19. 9. The Grecians emblem'd
this, by carrying the Bride from her chamber to her husbands pavillion in a
Carroach, where arriving, they brned the axletree, to signify, that she must
make her perpetual abode there, and never to depart; the Romans by a Spear,
wherewith some Fencer had been slain, with the point whereof, the Bridegroom
divided the hair of his Bride, to intimate, that nothing but death, or such
violence, should separate them. The extract is this:

It is expedient, that that vow which is

The third end and use of marriage, is the sacred mystery thereof, recorded,
Ephesians. 5. 31, 32. A man shall leave his father and mother, and (...), shall be
joined unto his wife, and they two shall be one flesh. (...). This is a great
mystery, a great Sacrament, says the vulgar translation: A Sacrament, not in a
strict sense, as the Romanists canonize it, nor one of the confined number of
seven, (though less Dr Cosin^ devotions.
principal) as some of our own have languaged it; but in a large extent, which
takes in with it, the calling of the Gentiles, Ephesians. 1. 9. Ephesians. 3. 3. and the
incarnation of the Word, 1 Timothy 3. 16. in which acceptance, Common places,
part. 2. page 462. Pet. Martyr. Libr. de bono conjugii cap. 18. cap. 24. libr.
de fide, and operibus. cap. 7. Augustine.
the precise number of Sacraments or Mysteries, is a mystery inscrutable. In
this latitude, Peter Martyr, (who marched as Primipilus, or a prime frontier,
in the vanguard of Reformation) owns Matrimony for a Sacrament, and so before
him did St. Augustine, thus descanting; In the marriages of women, the sanctity
of the Sacrament is more to be valued, than the fruitfulness of the womb. The
good of matrimony, in respect of the people of God, consists in the sanctity
of the Sacrament; in the Church, not only the band of marriage, but also the
Sacrament is commendable. Thus taken, marriage is defined in the Schools,
Imago conjunctionis inter Deum, and Ecclesiam. Ursinus explicat. Catechet. page
696. Typus, and imago fuit vere divini, and spiritualis conjugii* quod futurum
erat inter Christum, and ipstus Ecclesiam. Bucanus de conjug. page 108.
A conjunction of man and woman, representing and signifying, the union of
Christ with his Church by Incarnation; of God with the soul, by grace and
sanctification. Therefore the Apostle having said, Ephesians. 5. 32. this is a
great mystery, adds, (...), I speak concerning Christ and the Church, says
ours, in Christ and the Church, says St. Jerome's Tanslation. Now we never
find in sacred or profane Histories, that Sacraments and Mysteries, were
immediately entrusted to any, but Ministers or Hierodulists; hence Mystery is
etymologized, (...), as Suidas, (...), as Eustathius, Because the Priests were
to keep the mysteries of Religion Augustinus de doctrina Christiana. l. 2. c. 1.
(especially visible signs of invisible grace) secret and inviolable, (...),
from dogs and profane; or of (...); to initiate to holy things, as Budeus. From
the same root, Nazianzene calls the Ministerial function, (...), the solemnity
of Mysteries; Ministers themselves (...), or (...), dispensers of mysteries.
The quintesscence extracted, is this.

It is expedient, that that mystery (or sacrament)

The Author, use, and ends of marriage displayed; arguments drawn from the
prescribed rules thereof, brings up the Rere. One Scripture-Canon is, that
marriage be sanctified by the Word and Prayer. The Apostle of the Gentiles, 1 Timothy 4. 1, 3, 4, 5. having told expressly, that in the latter Paulus conjugium,
cibos. and similia^ ait sanctificari per verbum and oratiorem. B^ can.
institut. Theol. page 111.
times, some should depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and
doctrine of devils, forbidding (...), to marry, (...), to abstain from meats,
which God has created to be received with thanksgiving, of them that believe
and know the truth, gives his reason, For every creature of God is good, and
nothing to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving, for it is
sanctified by the word of God and prayer. This forbidding to marry cannot
rationally be interpreted, to be a prohibition of mutual consent, and carnal
copulation, which nature dictates, and continuation of mankind necessitates;
but, a forbidding the sanctified solemnization of marriage, by the word of God
and prayer, which, as Castitatem esse concubitum cum propria uxore. Sozomen.
lib. 1. cap. 23. Argum. 7.
Paphnutius avouched in the Council of Nice, renders the marriage bed chaste.
The Elixir is this.

It is expedient, that, that which is to be sanctified by the Word and Prayer,
(the contrary whereof is a doctrine of devils) be solemnized by a lawful
Minister: But marriage is to be sanctified by the Word of God and Prayer, (the
contrary whereof is a doctrine of devils); Therefore it is expedient, that
marriage be solemnized by a lawful Minister.

A second Scripture-rule is, 1 Cor. 7. Religiose, and in timore Dei, Bucan.
institut. Theolog. p. 119. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3, 4. (...).
39. that marriage be (...), only in the Lord, that is, religiously, and in
the fear of God: This is the will of God, your sanctification, that ye should
abstain from fornication, that every one of you should know how to possess his
vessel in holiness and honor: Which is best glossed in the antiquated form,
of solemnization of matrimony, where it is said, to be commended of St. Paul,
to be honorable amongst all men, and therefore not to be enterprized, nor
taken in hand by any unadvisedly, leightly, or wantonly, to satisfy men's
carnal lusts and appetites, like bruit beasts that have no understanding; but
reverendly, discreetly, advisedly, soberly, and in the fear of God. The
rebound, is;

That which ought to be only in the

A third Scripture-rule is, That marriage Matthew. 18. 7. (...), Woe to the world
because of scandalls: But by marriage-solemnity by a Minister, Greek, Latin,
Popish, Reformed Churches abroad, many conscientious Brethren at home, cease to
be scandalized.

A fourth rule is, that it be, 1 Cor. 14. done to edification: But marriage
tends most to the edification of the parties contracted, and of the spectators,
when it is solemnized by a Minister, who is commissioned from Heaven to
endoctrinate them, concerning the institution, nature, use, and ends of
marriage; and, after exhortation to mutual duties, is impoured to confer a
blessing.

A fifth, that it be in subordination and Facit mos iste ad matrimonii
dignitatem, and novos conjuges omni prova suspicione liber at, ne scortorum
instar cohabitare putentur. Bucan.
obedience unto God, who, 1 Cor. 14. 33. is not the author (...), of confusion,
but peace, as in all Churches of the Saints: But the author of peace, to avoid
confusion, has established matrimonial solemnity by Ministers, in all
Churches of the Saints; and if any one seem to be contentious in opposing it, 1
Cor. 11. 16. our British Church may answer them in the Apostles Dialect, (after
fifteen hundred years prescription) We have no such custom, neither the
Churches of God.

A sixth, that it be, 1 Cor. 14. 40. (...), decently, and in order: ne plus
ultra, is no further progress; and if we make a halt before, Marriage is
abortive, and born before its time.

Now to sound a retreat, and (...), gather my Forces to within their Trenches:
The Law of Nations, Greek, Roman, Jewish; Prescription of the Church, Eastern,
Western; Deductions from Scripture, whether taken from the Author, God, or the
end and use of Marriage, Issue, Fidelity, and the sacred Mystery; or the Rules
praescribed for Marriage, that it be sanctified by the Word, and by Prayer,
that it be in the Lord, that it be without scandal, that it be for
edification, that it be in obedience unto God, who is not the Author of
confusion, but peace; that it be done decently and in order: All of them single
respectively, and all of them joined composedly, conclude, the expediency of
Marriage to be solemnized by a lawful Minister, in the Church, or public
Assembly.

(...).
FINIS.

