THE GUARDIAN; A COMEDY. Acted before Prince CHARLES His HIGHNESS At
Trinity-Colledg in Cambridge, upon the twelfth of March, 1641.

Written by ABRAHAM COWLEY.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN HOLDEN at the Anchor in the New-Exchange, 1650.

The Actors Names.
CAptain Blade the Guardian. Old Truman, a teasty old man. Young Truman his
Son, in love with Lucia. Col Cutter a sharking Soldier Lodger at the Widows
house. Dogrel a sharking Poetaster Lodger at the Widows house. Puny a young
Gallant, a pretender to wit. Lucia Niece and Ward to Captain Blade, in love
with young Truman. Aurelia daughter to Blade. Widow, and old Puritan, Landlady
to Colonel Cutter and Dogrel. Tabytha her Daughter. Jaylors, Servants, and
Fiddlers.
The Scene London.

The PROLOGUE.
WHo says the Times do Learning disallow?
It Is false; 'twas never honored so as now
When you appear, great Prince, our night is done:
You are our Morning Star, and shall b'our Sun.
But our Scene's London now, and by the rout
We perish if the Roundheads be about:
For now no ornament the head must wear,
No Bays, no Mitre, not so much as Hair.
How can a Play pass safely, when we know,
Cheapside-Cross falls for making but a show?
Our only hope is this, that it may be
A Play may pass too, made ex tempore.
Though other Arts poor and neglected grow,
They Will admit Poetry* which was always so.
Besides, the Muses of late times have bin.
Sanctified by the Verse of Master Prin.
But we contemn the fury of these days,
And scorn as much their Censure as their Praise.
Our Muse, blessed Prince, does only on you rely;
Would gladly live, yet not refuse to die.
Accept our hasty zeal; a thing that is played
Ere it is a Play, and acted ere it is made.
Our Ignorance, but our Duty too, we show:
I would all ignorant people would do so.
At other times, expect our Wit and Art;
This Comedy is acted by the Heart.
The Guardian.
Act. 1.
Scaen. 1.
Widow, Tabytha, Colonel Cutter, Dogrel. Cutter. PRithee widow be not incensed,
we'll show our selves like young Lords shortly; and you know, I Hope, they use
to pay their debts.


Wid. I, you talk of great matters, I wis, but I Am sure I could never see a
groat yet of your money.


Dog. Alas, we carry no silver about us,
That were mechanical and base;
Gold we about us bring:
Gold, thou art mighty in each place,
Of Metals Prince and King.
Why I tell you my pockets have not been guilty of any small money in my
remembrance.


Wid. I know not, but all things are grown dear of late; our Beef costs three
shillings a stone, and the price of corn is raised too.


Taby. Nay, mother, coals are raised too, they say. These things you think cost
nothing.


Dog. Nay, Tabytha, Mistress Tabytha! ifaithlaw now I Will make a Psalm for you,
and be but peaceable.

Contain thy tongue, and keep it in
Within thy mouths large prison.
Both jars, and also many a sin
From out the mouth has risen.
I Am only for Odes, by the Muses, and the quickest for them, I think, in the
Christian world, take in Turks, Infidels, Jews and all.


Cut. Have but a little patience, widow; well^ I Will say this for thee, thou
art the honestest Landlady upon the face of the earth, which makes me desire to
live in your house; and you shall not lose by it: do but mark the end.


Wid. I stand not so much upon that; but I use to have Lawyers in my house, such
civil complete gentlemen in their Satin doublets (I warrant you) and broad
ruffs, as passes; and Courtiers, all to be laced and slasht, and fine fellows
as you shall see in a summers day; they would not say Why do ye this? to a
woman: and then Knights.


Tab. I, and Gentlemen too, mother.


Wid. But you, forsooth, come in drunk every night, and fall a sweari^g as if
you would rend the house in two, and then mumble and tumble my daughters
clothes, she says.


Tab. I, and would have --


Cut. What would we have done?


Tab. Nay no good, I warrant you.


Wid. And then you drink up a kilderkin of small beer next morning.


Dog. All this shall be corrected and amended, Landlady: yes faith, Cutter,
thou must repent, thou have been to blame sometimes.


Wid. Besides, you are always so full of your fripperies, and are always a
grinning and sneering at every thing: I was wont to have sober boorders in my
house, and not such hee-hee-heeing fellows.


Tab. Nay, they mocked and fleer'd at us as we sung the Psalm the last
Sunday-night.


Cut. That was that mungrel Rhymer; by this light, he envies his brother Poet
honest John Sternhold, because he cannot reach his heights.


Wid. O the father! the Colonel's as full of waggery as an egge's full of meat:
I warrant, M. Dogrel, what you get by him you may even put in your eye, and
never see the worse for it.


Cut. Well, and how do in faith now, honest Landlady? when shall we walk again
into Moor-fields, and rejoice at the Queens Cake-house?


Dog. I Will bespeak Cakes and Ale of the purpose there; and thou shall eat stewed
Prunes, little Tabytha, till thy smock drop again. A word in you ear, Landlady:
Can you accommodate us with two shillings?

To morrow ere the rosy fingered morn
Starts from Tithonus bed, as Authors write;
Ere Phoebus cry Gee-hoe unto his team,
We will restore again, and thank you for your pain.


Cut. I Will tell you a secret, Landlady: Captain Blade and I shall be called
shortly to the Court; the King has taken notice of our deserts: I say no more:
though yet thou scorn'st me, Tabytha, I Will make thee a Lady one day. Will you
lend, widow? Great affairs bid me make haste.


Wid. I care not much if I trust you for once: Come in and take it.


Dog. Then Mistress let me lead you thus,
And as we go let us buss.

Tab. Buss me no bussings. O lord, how you tumble my gorget! Exeunt.


Act. 1. Scaen. 2.
Captain Blade, solus. I could now be as melancholy as an old scabbie Mastiff,
or the Lions in the Tower: 'twere a good humor to repent. Well, Captain,
something must be done, unless a man could get true gems by drinking, or, like
a mouse in a cheese, enlarge his house-room by eating. Four hundred pound a
year cashiered? Four hundred, by this light, Captain. All my comfort is, that
now the usurer's damned; and now that niggardly three score and ten withered
chap-faln Puritanical thing, his wife, refuses to marry me: I would see her
burnt for an old witch before I Would take her for a wife, if she had not Agues,
Squinancies, Gouts, Cramps, Palsies, Apoplexies, and two dozen of diseases more
then S. Thomas Hospital; and if she live long with all these, I Am sure she will
kill me quickly. But let her be damned with her husband: Bring some drink, boy;
I Am soxt, by this light, with drinking nothing yet.

Act. 1. Scaen. 3.
Blade, Cutter, Dogrel. Blade. What are ye come? Bring us a Tun then, and that
so big, that that of Heidelberg may seem but like a barrel of pickled Oysters
to it. Welcome Snapsack, welcome little vermin of Parnassus: how is it, my
Laur^ate Rhymer? Cost thou sing Fortune my foe still with thy brother Poet?


Dog. Ye Muses nine assist my verse,
That dwell by Helicon along;
Captain Blades praise I will rehearse,
With lyre and with song.

Bla. Why this right Ballad, and they hobble like the fellow with the wooden
leg that sings them. And how do, man of blood?


Cut. As well as a man of worth can do in these days, where deserts are so
little regarded: if Wars come once, who but Cutter? who else but Colonel
Cutter? God save you, Colonel Cutter, cry the Lords; the Ladies they smile upon
Colonel Cutter, and call Colonel Cutter a proper Gentleman: every man strives
who shall invite Colonel Cutter to dinner: not a Cuckoldly creditor dares pluck
me by the cloak, and say, Sir, you forgot your promise, I Am in a strait for
moneys, my occasions force me, or the like.


Bla. Cheer up, my Hercules upon a sign, I have a plot for ye, which if it
thrive, thou shall no more lie sunning in a bowling-alley, nor go on special
holidays to the three-peny Ordinary, and then cry It pleases my humor better
then to dine at my Lord Majors.


Cut. Would we had some drink here to stop your mouth.


Bla. No more be sick two or three days while thy boots are vamping: no more
outswear whores in a reckoning, and leave the house in an anger.


Cut. Have you done?


Bla. Nor sup at Taverns with Radishes: nor for a meals meat o'erthrow the King
of Spain of the Hollanders when you please: no^ when you go to bed produce ten
several Tavern snuffs to make one pipe of Tobacco.


Cut. 'Slid would I had one here.


Bla. Nor change your name and lodging as often as a whore; for as yet, if you
had lived like a Tartar in a cart, (as you must die, I fear, in one) your home
could not have been more uncertain. Your last Gests were these: From a
Water-mans house at the Banks side, (marry you stayed there but a small while,
because the fellow was jealous of his wife) passing over like great King Xerxes
in a Sculler, you arrived at a Chandlers house in Thames Street, and there took
up your lodging. The day before you should have paid, you walked abroad, and
were seen no more; for ever after the smell of the place offended you. Next,
you appeared at an Alehouse in the Covent Garden, like a Duck that dives at one
end of the pond, but rises unexpectedly at the other. But that place (though
there was Beer and Tobacco there) by no means pleased you; for there dwelt so
many cheaters thereabouts, that you could not live by one another; they spoiled
your trade quite. Then from a Shoo-makers, (as you entitled him; marry some
authors call him a Cobbler) to a Basket-makers; from thence to the Counter: from
thence, after much benevolence, to a Barbers; changing more lodgings then
Pythagoras his soul did. At length, upon confidence of those new breeches, and
the scouring of that everlasting Buff, you ventured upon the widows, that
famous house for boorders, and are by this time hoysing up your sails, I Am
sure; the next fair wind you are gone.


Cut. I wonder, Captain, among so many rascally houses, how I happened to miss
yours. It Is true, I have not lien leaguer always at one place: Soldiers must
remove their tents: Alexander the Great did it an hundred times.


Bla. Now to the words of comfort -- drink first -- then Lordings listen all.


Dog. We do, both great and small. O my conscience this cup of wine has done my
genius good.


Bla. When first my brother departed --


Dog. 'Twas poorly spoken, by this day.


Bla He committed his daughter and estate to my care; which if she either di'd,
or married without my consent, he bequeathed all to me. Being five years gone,
he died.


Dog. How frail is humane life! Well sung the divine Poet

Like to the damask rose you see,
Or like the blossom on the tree,
Or like, etc.

Cut. Sirrah, Trundle, either hear out peaceably, or I shall cut your ears
off. Proceed, Captain.


Bla. I falling into ill company, yours, or some other such idle fellows, began
to be misled, could drink and swear, nay, at last, whore sometimes too; which
courses having now at last made me like Job in every thing but patience; your
Landlady (for to her husband my estate was morgag'd.) I have sought all means
to marry.


Dog. That Niobe! that Hecuba!


Bla. Pish! I could have lien with either of the two, so 't had been before
Hecuba was turned into a bitch, or the other into a stone: for though I hate her
worse then small beer.


Cut. Or pal^d wine.


Dog. Or proverbs and Latin sentences in discourse.


Cut Or a Sermon of two hours long.


Bla. Or Dogrels verses, or what you will else; yet she has money, blades; she
would be a Guiana or Peru to me, and we should drink four or five years
securely, like Dutchmen at a Wedding. But hang her, let her die and go to hell,
it is only that can warm her: she scorns me now my money's gone.


Dog. Thus Pride does still with Beauty dwell,
And like the Baltic ocean swell.

Bla. Why the Baltic, Dogrel?


Dog. Why the Baltic? This it is not to have read the Poets.


Bla. Now if my niece should marry, praesto, the means are gone; and I must,
like some Gentleman without fear or regard of the gallows, betake my self to
the highway, or else cheat like one of you, and tremble at the sight of a
pillory. Therefore -- (prick up your ears, for your good angel speaks) upon
conditions of share, I marry her to one of you.


Both. I but how, Captain? how?


Bla Why either she shall have one of you, or no body; for if she marry without
my consent, the money's mine own: and she will be hang^d first in the Friars rope,
ere she turn Nun.


Cut. I Will be a Franciscan, if she do.


Bla. Not a Carthusian, I warrant thee, to abstain from flesh. Thou might
well have taken holy Orders, if it were not for chastity and obedience: their
other vow of never carrying money about thee, thou have observed from thy youth
up.


Dog. I Will have her, by Mercury; I have two or three Love-odes ready made; they
cannot choose but win her. Cutter, adore me, Cutter, thou shall have wine thy
fill, though thou could out-drink Xe^xes his army.


Cut. You get her? what with that Ember week-face of thine? that Rasor of thy
nose, those ea^s that prick up like a Puritanical button-makers of Amsterdam?
thou lookst as if thou never had been fed since thou suck'dst thy mothers
milk: thy cheeks begin to fall into thy mothers mouth, that thou might eat
'em. Why thou very lath with a thing cut like a face atop, and a slit at the
bottom! I am a man, and can do her service; here is metal, boy.


Dog. It Is in your face then.


Cut. I can fight her quarrels, boy, and beg^t on her new Achilleses.


Dog. Yes -- thou art a very Achilles -- in the swiftness of thy feet* but thou
art a worser coward then any of the Trained Bands: I Will have a schoolboy with
a cat-stick take away thy Mistress from thee. Besides, what parts have thou?
have thou scholarship enough to make a Brewers clerk? Can thou read the
Bible? I Am sure thou have not. Can thou write more then thine own name? and
that in such vile characters, that most men take them for Arabian pot-hooks;
and some think thou do but set thy mark when thou writest thy name. I Am
versed, Cutter in the whole Encyclopaedie, a word that ^s Greek to you. I am a
Wit, and can make Greek verses ex tempore.


Bla. Nay not so; for if you come to your verses* Dogrel, Im sure you have done
with wit. He that best pleases her, take her a Gods name, and allow the the other
a pension: What think you, gallants?


Cut. Agreed; thou shall have three pound and a cloak.


Dog. Away, you puff, you kickshaw, you quaking custard.


Cut. Prithee be patient, thou shall have lace to it too.


Bla. Pox take you both; drink and be friends.


Dog. Here Is to you, Cutter. I Am something choleric, and given to jeering: but
what, man? words are but wind.


Bla. I Will call her in. Why boy within three, call my niece quickly hither.


Dog. I Am undone; I have left my Ode at home: undone, by Mercury, unless my
memory help me.


Cut. Thus and thus will I accoast her: I Am the man; Dogrels clothes will cast
him.


Act. 1. Scaen. 4.
Blade, Cutter, Dogrel, Lucia. Bla. When she has seen you both, one void the
room, and so woo by tu^ns.


Dogrel. I^ll go out first, and meditate upon my Ode.


Bla. Welcome, dear niece; I sent for you to entertain these Gentlemen my
friends: and hark you niece, make much of them; they are men of worth and
credit at the Court, though they go so plain; ^hat's their humor only: And
hark you, niece, they both love you; you cannot choose amiss. I have some
business -- Your servant, Gentlemen.


Luc. Not choose amiss? indeed I must do, Uncle, if I should choose again. You Are
welcome, Gentlemen.


Cut. I thank you, fairest Lady: I am a Soldier, Lady, and cannot complement;
but I have traveled over all the world, Germany, Morocco, Swethland, Persia,
France, Hungary, Caleput, Peru.


Dog. 'Slid* ho^ he shuffles all the Countries together like lots in a hat!


Cut Yet I never saw before so fair a Lady. I cannot complement in faith.


Luc. You Have taken a long journey, Sir 'twere best
To rest your self a little: Will you sit?
Will you, Sir, take a seat too?

Dog. 'Slife I cannot say my Ode now. I Will wait upon you presently. Exit.


Cut. Fair Lady -- (This it is to converse with none but whores: I know not
what to say to her.)

You are the only mistress of my thoughts.

My service to you, Lady. Drinks to her.


Luc. To me, Sir, do you speak, or to the wine?


Cut. To you, by Mars. Can you love me, Beauty? I Am sure your uncle prefers no
man under the cope --


Luc. Soft, Sir, do you use to take in Towns so soon?
My uncle gave an equal commendation
To both of you.

Cut. What? to that mole-catcher in the old Serge? he brought him in for
humor, to make you sport. Ill tell you what he is.


Luc. Pray do, Sir.


Cut. The very emblem of poverty and poor poetry: the feet are worse patcht
of his Rhymes, then of his Stockings: if one line forget it self, and run out
beyond his elbow, while the next keeps at home (like him) and dares not show
his head; he calls that an Ode. Your uncle and I maintain him only for sport.
I Will tell you how I found him; marry walking in Moor-fields cross armed: he
could not pluck his hat over his eyes, there were so many holes in it: he had
not so much linen about him as would make a cuff for a Bartlemew-fayr-baby.
Marry the worst I like in him is, he will needs sometime^, in way of gratitude,
present me with a paper of Verses. Here comes the vermin.


Act. 1. Scaen. 5.
Cutter, Dogrel, Lucia. I Will leave him alone with you, that you may have the
better sport: he will not show half his tricks before me. I think I have spoiled
his markets. Now will I stand behind the hangings, and hear how she abuses
him. I know by her eye she loves me. Cutter, you are blessed Exit.


Dog. Fairer, O fairer then the Lilly,
Then Primerose fair, or Daffa^ illy;
Less red then thy cheeks the Rose is,
When the Spring it does disclose his
Leaves; thy eyes put down the starlight;
When they shine, we see afar -- light.
O these eyes do wound my heart
With pretty little Cupids dart;
Wounded I am with deadly smart;
The pain raigns in every part.
Thy beauty and thy great desert
Draw me as horses draw a Cart.
O that I had Rhetoricks art -- impart-sart-mart-start.
To move thee; for I would not start
Till I --

Luc. Take heed, Sir, you will be out of breath anon.
Y'ha' done enough for any honest Poet.

Dog. Fairest nymph, I swear to thee,
The later part was made ex tempore?
Not a bit of prose goes down with me.

Luc. (I must know it.)
May I be so bold as to enquire of you
Your friends name that was here; he seems to be
A man of worth and quality.

Cut. That Is I.


Dog. Quality? yes?


Cut. That Is I again. If whoring, drinking, cheating, poverty and cowardice be
qualities, he is one of the best qualified men in the Christian world.


Cut. O the devil!


Luc. He Is a great traveller.


Dog. In suburbs and by-lanes; he never heard a gun but in Moor-fields or
Finsbury at a mustering* and quaked then as if they had been the Spaniards:
I^ll undertake a Pot-gun shall dismay him


Cut. A plague upon him --


Dog. Those breeches he wears, and his hat, I gave him: till then, he went like
a Paper-mill all in rags, and like some old statue in a ruined Abbey. About a
month ago, you might have seen him peep out at a grate, and cry, Kind merciful
Gentlemen, for the Lords sake, poor prisoners undone by sur^^tish^p, and the
like.


Cut. Contain thy self* great spirit; keep in a while.


Dog. We call him Colonel in an humor only. The furniture of his chamber (for
now, at mine and some other Gentlemen's charges, he has got one) is half a
chair, and an earthen chamber pot, the bottom of an inkhorn for a candlestick,
and a dozen of little gally-pots with salve in 'um; for he has more diseases --


Cut. I can endure no longer. Enters. Dogrel, thou lie; there is my glove;
meet me an hour hence.


Dog. And there is mine. I Will put a good face on it; he dares not fight, I^m sure.


Cut. Two hours hence
Expect the Saracens head; I Will do it, by heavens.
Though hills were set on hills, and seas met seas, to guard thee,
I Would reach thy head, thy head, proud Dogrel.

Exit. Luc. Nay, you are both even: just such an ex'lent character
He did bestow on you. Why thou vile wretch
Go to the stews, the jail, seek there a wife;
Thou Wilt find none there but such as will scorn thee.
Was thy opinion of my birth or fortune,
My chastity or beauty (which I willingly
Confess to be but small) so poor and low,
That thou could think thy self a match for me?
I^ll sooner marry with my grave; for thou
Art worser dirt then that. See me no more.

Exit. Dog. Scorned by a mistress? with a friend to sight?
Hence, lighter Oder; I Will biting Satyrs write. Exit.

Act. 1. Scaen. 6.
Truman filius, Lucia. True. I must be gone, my Lucia; I must leave
My self, and thee more then my self, behind me
Thus parts the greedy usurer from his bags,
With an heart heavier then those: he fixes
His covetous eye upon the charming metal,
As if he meant to throng those many pleasures
Which several times would yield, into one minute.
With as much joy he kisses his loved Idol,
As I do thee, to whom all gold compared,
Seems but like Pebbles to the Diamond:
And then he sighs, my Lucia.

Luc. And weeps too, if, like us, he bid farewell.
Why should your father be so cruel?

True. He Is old and angry, Lucia, very angry,
And either has forgot his youthful days,
Or else I Will swear he did not love my mother
With half that noble heat that I do thee:
For when he heard your uncles resolutions,
Doubting your portion if we two should marry,
He forced me to an oath so strange, which though
I then durst swear, I scarce dare now repeat;
An oath never more to see nor hear thee, Lucia,
After the envious shortness of this hour,
Without his leave.

Luc. You will forget me quite then.

True. Forget thee, Lucia? it is not death it self
Has so much Lethe in it: I shall not choose
In the long sleep o'th grave, but dream of thee,
If it be true that souls which leave hid treasures
(Being buried far less peaceable then their gold)
Walk up and down, and in their urns want rest,
How will my ghost then wander, which has left
Such precious wealth behind it? Sure it will
Desire to see thee, and I fear will fright thee.
I would say more, but I shall weep anon.

Exit. Luc. So quickly gone! he might have staid, me thinks,
A little longer, and I owed that happiness
To the misfortune of his future absence.
Why did he swear to's father? I Am a fool,
And know not what to say.

Act 1. Scaen. 7.
Truman filius, Lucia. True. Stay, Lucia, prithee stay; I had forgot
The business which I came for.

Luc. I owe much
To your forgetfulness, my Truman: if
It be such always, though you forget me,
I Will pardon you. What was your business, pray?

True. To kiss your hand, my dearest.

Luc. Was that all?
I Am glad to see your grief so small and light,
That it can find leisure to complement:
It Is not like mine, believe me.

True. Was not that business, Lucia?
In my opinion now, th'affairs of Kings,
The honorable troubles of a Counselor,
Are frivolous and light, compared to this.
May I not kiss your lips too, dearest Lucia?
I have an inward dropsy; and my remedy
Enflames my thirst: it is that best Nectar only
Which has the power to quench it.

Luc. If there be Nectar there,
It was your lip that brought it thither first;
And you may well be bold to claim your own.
Shall we sit down and talk a little while?
They will allow us sure a parting-time.

True And that I would not change, not this poor minute
In which I see, and hear, and touch thee, Lucia,
For the age of Angels, unless thy loved presence
Make a heaven there for me too.
What shall I do to bring the days t'an end?
Sure they will be tedious when I want thy company.

Luc. I Will pray for the success of our chaste loves,
And drop down tears for beads.

True. I Will read over the large volume of the creatures;
And where I find one full of grace and beauty,
I Will gaze and think on that; for that is thy picture.

Luc. Whatever kind of Needle Work I make,
Thy name I Will intermingle, till at last,
Without my minds conjunction and consent,
The needle and my hand shall both agree
To draw thy name out.

True. I will gather flowers,
Turn wanton in the truness of my love,
And make a posie too, where Lu^ia
Shall be mysteriously writ in flowers:
They shall be fair and sweet, such as may paint
And speak thee to my senses.
Within. Mistress Lucia, Lucia.

Luc. I am called: farewell.

Act. 1. Scaen. 8.
Truman filius, Lucia, Aurelia. Aur. My father, cousin, would speak with you.

Luc. I Will wait upon him. Exit.

Aur. Will you be gone so soon, Sir?

True. I must offend your father else.

Aur. You would have stayed longer with her, I Am sure.

True. It may be so. Your servant, Lady.

Exit. Aur. Contemned by all? while my proud cousin walks
With more eyes on her then the moon: but I,
Like some small petty star without a name,
Cast unregarded beams.
It must not be; I snatch of all those glories
Which beauty or feign^d virtue crown her with,
Till her short light confess her but a Comet.
I love thee, Truman; but since it is my fate
To love so ill, I Will try how I can hate.

Finis Actus primi.
Act. 2.
Scaen. 1.
Cutter, Dogrel. Cut. Come on, Dogrel, now will I cut your throat.


Dog. You^ll be hanged first.


Cut. No, by this light.


Dog. You Will be hanged after then.


Cut. I Will slice thee into steaks.


Dog. I believe indeed thou art so hungry, thou could feed like a Cannibal.


Cut. No, thou wilt be a dish for the devil; he will dress thee at his own fire.
You called me Coward: had thou as many lives as are in Plutarch, I Would make an
end of 'um. (I must daunt him, for fear he should fight with me.) I will not
leave so much blood in thee as will wet my nail: and for thy flesh, I Will mangle
it in such manner, that the Crows shall not know whether it were a man's body
or no.


Dog. (He was once a Coward, and I never heard yet of his reformation)
Hear, thou altitonant Jove, and Muses three.
(Muses? a plague upon 'um I meant Furies.)
Hear, thou altitonant Jove, and Furies three.

Cut. Nay then
Leap from the leathern dungeon of my sheath,
Thou Durindana brave.
(Will nothing do?) Come on, miscreant. They draw.

Dog. Do, do, strike if thou dare.

Cut. Coward, I Will give thee the advantage of the first push.

Dog. I scorn to take any thing of thee I.

Cut. Thou had better eat up thy mothers soul, then touch me.

Dog. If thou will not strike first, take thy life.

Cut. I had rather die then give the first blow, since thou have said it.

Dog. I see this quarrel, Cutter, will come to a quart of wine: shall's go?

Cut. How rash is anger! had not reason checked me,
I should have killed my Poet for a woman,
A very woman. Let Us sheath, Dogrel --

Act. 2. Scaen. 2.
Cutter, Dogrel, Puny. Here Is company; 'slid I Will fight then.


Pun. How now, Paynims? fighting like two sea-fishes in a map? slaying and
killing like horse-leaches? Why my little gallimaufry, what Arms and Arts?


Dog. Tam Marti, quam Mercurio, I. 'Slife, outbrav'd by a fellow that has no
more valor in him then a woman's Tailor?


Cut. By my fathers Soul, I Will kill him an he were an Army.


Pun. Hold! stop! this Colonels spirit's all flame.


Dog. It Is the flame of a flap-dragon then, for 'twill hurt no body.


Cut. Mr. Puny, you do me wrong.


Pun. What do ye mean bufles?


Cut. 'Slife, an you hinder me Puny --


Pun. Pox take you, kill one another and be hanged then, do, stab, why don't
ye?


Cut. At your command Mr. Puny? I Will be forc^d by no man; put up Dogrel,
we will fight for no man's pleasure but our own.


Dog. Agreed, I Will not make another sport by murdering any man though he were
a Ti^ker.


Pun. Why now you speak like righteous Hom^ncles, ye have both great spirits, as
big as Indian-whales, for wit and valor a couple of Phoenixes.


Cut. It Is my fault Puny; I Am the resolutest man if I be but a little heated.
Pox take it, I Am a fool for it.


Dog. Give me thy hand.


Cut. I did not think thou had been so valiant, in faith: I should have
killed my self, if I had hurt thee in my fury.


Dog. So should I by this hand.


Pun. This is rare! up and down like a game at chess;


Dog. Why a game at chess more then any other?


Pun. A game at chess? why -- pox you are a kind of Poet I confess, but for
wit you shall pardon me -- there is as much in Tom Coriats shoes. But prithee,
why did you two Pythagorians fall out?


Dog. A trifle, only a Mistress.


Cut. A pox take her, I wooed her in an humor only, I had rather marry a
wench of ginger-bread, they are both of a Complexion.


Dog. And then her mouth's as wide as a Crocodiles, her kisses devour a man.


Cut. Her eyes are like the eyes of a needle, and her nose pointed like that;
I wonder her face is no cleaner, for those two perpetually water it: As for her
lower parts, blessed are they that live in ignorance.


Pun. What an Heliogabalus make you of this wench? would I could see this
Barbara Pyramidum.


Dog. Hang her, she looks like a gentlewoman upon the top of a ballad.


Cut. Shavers, who i the devils name would you guess to be my Mistress?


Pun. Some w^nch at a red lattice.


Dog. Some beast that stincks worse then Thames Street.


Pun. And looks like a shoulder of mutton stufft with parsley.


Cut. 'Faith guess who.


Pun. It Is impossible among so many whores.


Cut. 'Faith Tabitha, none but gentle Mistress Tabitha.


Dog. We shall have him turn Brownist now, and read Comments upon the
Revelations.


Cut. Thou have hit it Dogrel: I Will put my self into a rare garb; Buffe, thou
must off, tru^y Buffe thou must.


Pun. 'Slid, a good humor; I could find in my heart to change religion too.


Dog. Pox! no body will change with me, I Am sure. But can thou put off
swearing with Buffe? can thou abstain in the middle of long grace from crying
a plague upon him, the me^ts cold? can thou repeat scripture enough to make a
Puritan? I Am sure for understanding thou wilt be like enough to any of 'um.


Cut. Let me alone, I Will deal with no oath above gods fatlikins, or by my
truly: exclaim upon the sickness of drinking healths, and call the Players
rogues, sing psalms, hear lectures; and if I chance to preach my self, woe be
to the act, the object, the use, and applica^ion.


Pun. Thou art an everlasting stinker Colonel, it is a most potent humor,
there is mustard in it, it bits in the nose.


Cut. Dog^el, take heed of swearing before Tabitha.


Dog. If I look not as grave as a Judge upon the bench, let me be hanged for it.


Pun. Come away Physicians; 'slid I Will be of some Religion ere^t be long too.


Act. 2. Scaen. 3.
Truman pater, Truman fillus. True. p. You hear me --


True. f. Sir --


True. p. Sir me no sirs: I say you shall marry Mistress Tabitha.


True. f. I hope sir --


True. p. I, when I bid you do any thing, then you are a hoping; well, what do
you hope sir?


True. f. That you would be pleased --


True. p. No, I will not be pleased till I see your manners mended: marry gap,
you will be teaching your father.


True. f. I am --


True. p. Go to, you're a foolish boy, and know not what is good for your self:
you are? what are you, pray? we shall have you crow over your father.


True. f. I shall observe --


True. p. You will not sure? will you observe me? it is very well if my son come
to observe me i'my old days, you will observe me? will ye?


True. f. I mean sir --


True. p. You shall mean what I please, if you be mine: I must be bound to your
meaning?


True. f. It may be --


True. p. You Will teach me what may be, will you? do not I know what may be? it is
fine, it is very fine: now in your wisdom, now what may be?


True. f. That Captain Blade --


True. p. That what? what can he do? I Will see his nose cheese before you shall
marry his niece. Captain Blade's a swaggering companion; let 'um swagger, and
see what he gets by his swaggering; I would have swaggered with him for his
ears when I was a young man. And though I have done swaggering -- well -- I
shall meet with Captain Blade, I hold him a tester on it --


True. f. (Would he were gone.) I shall obey --


True. p. Obey me no obeyings, but do what I command you. I Will to the Widow, and
talk abo^t her portion: stay ^ I had almost forgot to tell you; oh -- Mistress
Tabitha's a virtuous maid, a very religious wench; I Will go speak concerning her
portion.


True. f. It may be sir --


True. p. You^ll never leave this trick, you will be at your may-bees; take heed
boy, this humor will undo thee -- she cannot have less then three thousand
pounds: well -- I Will go see -- and do you hear? she goes plain, and is a good
huswife; which of your spruce mincing squincing dames can make bonelace like
her? o it is a notable, apt, quick, witty girl -- I Will go to her mother about
the portion. Exit.


True. f. About this time her letter promised me a meeting here: destiny it self
will sooner break its word then she. Dear Mistress, there is none here besides
your vassal. She Is ready --


Act. 2. Scaen. 4.
Truman filius, Lucia veiled. Ha! why this covering?
This is mystery darker then the veil
That clouds thy glorious face; unless t'encrease
My desire first, and then my joy to see thee,
Thou cast this subtler night before thy beauty.
And now like one scorched with some raging fever,
Upon whose flames nor dew nor sleep has fallen,
I could begin to quarrel with the darkness,
And blame the slothful rising of the morn;
But with more gladness entertain't, then they,
Whose icy dwellings the cold Bare ore-looks,
When after half the years continued night,
And the most ^edious night of all but death;
A sudden light shot from their horizon,
Brings the long wisht-for day, which with such glory
Leaps from the East, as does thy mateless beauty.
When thus the mist departs -- Offers to pull away the veil.
Why shrinkst thou back?
I prit he let me see thee, Lucia.
I Would rather some good power would strike me blind,
Then lose the cause for which I love mine eyes:
At least speak to me: well may I call it night,
When silence too has joined it self to darkness.
And did I not swear I would not --
Thy witty goodness can save others too
From sinning: I had quite forgot my oath
Yet sure an oath forced from a lovers tongue
Is not recorded in heavens dreadful book,
But scattered loosely by that breath that made it.
However thy blessed Letter makes me patient:
Thou giv'st all virtues: I can love thee thus.
And though thy skin were such, that it might seem
A black veil cast by nature over thy body,
Yet I would love thee, Lucia: every night,
Which is the harvest-time of all our hopes,
Will make thee as thou art now; and do thou think
I shall not love thee most then?
We trifle here: I Will follow thee, O heaven;
Prosper the wise invention which it has taught thee. Exeunt*

Act. 2. Scaen. 5.
Captain Blade, Servant. Bla. Is he carried to prison? that damned
Urinal-monger, that stinking Clyster-pipe-rogue! that ignorant Satin cap! He
has not so much physic as would cure the toothach. A slave that poisons
Gentlemen, to keep his hand in ure Must a slave come up stairs mount the bank
for money, and not be dishonored down? He look^d as patiently then, as any
Fiddler need to do. Give me some small beer, and the godly book; I must not go
to hell; there are too many Physicians there. I was never in a worse
disposition to die, in my life: my guts begin to squeak already. Nothing vexes
me now, but that I shall stand pictured in a Ballad, with Beware the physician,
or some such sentence, coming out of my mouth. I shall be sung in Smithfield:
not a blind Alehouse but the life and miserable death of captain Blade shall
be pasted up in: there shall I be brought confessing my sins at the later end,
and giving good counsel. (You will be jumbling still.) Ten to one but Dogrel
makes an Epitaph; there is another mischief. Here, take the book again; I Will not
trouble my brain now I Am a dying.


Serve. Here Is the widow, Sir, and her daughter, come to see you; and they have
brought M. Knockdown to comfort you.


Bla. How? everlasting Knockdown? 'Slid, will they tro^ble a man when he is a
dying? Sirrah, blockhead, let in Knockdown, and I Will send thee to heaven before
me. I have but an hour to live, my Physician says, and that is too little for him
to preach in.


Serve. Shall I let the widow come in?


Blade. That Is a she -- Knockdown too. Well, let her come in; I must bear all
torments patiently now. But, rogue, take heed of Joseph Knockdown: thou shall
not live with ears, if Joseph Knockdown enter. A plague upon all Physicians.


Act. 2. Scaen. 6.
Capt. Blade, Widow, Tabytha. Wid. How do you? how is it, Sir?


Bla. Cut off in the flower of my age, widow.


Wid. Not so, Sir, you are old, neighbor, God he knows.


Bla. IN the very ^lower, in faith. That damned quacksalver.


Tab. He looked like a rogue; a man might know him for a rogue, by his very
eyes. Take comfort, Sir; ye know we must all die either sooner or later. Our
life is compared to a flower; and a flower is subject to uncertainty, as M.
Knockdown observes.


Bla. O the torture of such a tongue! Would I were dead already.


Wid. Alas, good man! his tongue, I warrant ye, is hot: look how he raves,
daughter! I have heard, indeed, that many rave when they are poisoned. Think of
your sins, Sir.


Bla. I prithee molest me not; there is none of 'um worth thinking of. I Am
hotter then a dozen of Fevers: give me a cup of Sack there: Shall I die thirsty?


Wid. By no means, M. Blade. Fellow, take heed what ye give him: he must have
none; it breeds inflammations.


Bla. I Will never repent without a cup of Sack. Do, do, choose whether you will
ha'me saved or no.


Wid. For his souls sake then, I Will drink to him in a cup of Sack Drinks.


Bla To my good journey widow. Sirrah, fill me a brimmer. Here, Tabytha.


Drinks. Act. 2. Scaen. 7.
Blade, Widow, Tabytha, Aurelia, Cutter, Dogrel. Aur. Stand to 't now.


Dog. I Will warrant you I Will stand like a knight of the post: I Will forswear with
the devil. As for Cutter, he has don't forty times before a Judge already.


Aur. My dearest father, though we cannot call
The sentence of fate back that is past upon you,
Yet heaven has mixed some mercy with its anger,
And shown us the cursed plotters of your ruin.

Bla. How now, varle^s? ye see I Am going to heaven, and ye must follow; but the
Captain must be saved before the Colonel. Who art thou? a godly Weaver?


Cut. I am not he that I was of old: what has passed, is gone and vanishes;
but what is now, remains.


Wid. No I Will besworn is he not; never was Christian creature so altered, as
they say.


Tab. He said a prayer last night so zealously, that all the house heard him,
did they not? Brother M. Cutter.


Cut. Sister, I did pour out my self last night. Captain, you are abused.


Bla. A small abuse; nothing but only poiso^^d.


Dog. Yes 'faith, we saw the Physician, Mi^^ress Lucia and Truman consulting
all together: the Physician plucked a box out, showed it them; they seemed to
approve: an oath of secrecy we heard them take, but suspected nothing, by this
hand. We honest men do seldom suspect others.


Bla. Is this true, Colonel?


Cut. Should I say it is not true, I should not tell the truth if I should say
so.


Bla. You swear it is true?


Cut. Before an Elder I shall swear.


Bla. Aurelia, send for 'um immediately, as if I meant to see 'um contracted;
and bid the servants be ready to carry um away. I Will see 'um clapped up close
before I die.


Aur. I go, Sir. Exit.


Act. 2. Scaen. 8.
Blade, Widow, Tabytha, Cutter, Dogrel, Lucia. Luc. Dearest Uncle,
I come to beg one boon of you, the last
Which you can grant me, or I need to wish.

Bla. Speak, gentle Niece.


Luc. That since the love 'twixt Truman and my self
Has been so fixed, and (as our fortunes) equal,
You will be pleased to seal with your last breath
The confirmation of our loves, our Contract:
And when your soul shall meet in heaven my fathers,
As soon as he has bid you welcome thither,
He Will thank you for our marriage.

Bla. Oh by all means: where is gentle M. Truman? He Is sorry for my death, good
man, I warrant ye. Weep not for me, dear Niece, I know it greives you. Where Is
loving Mr. Truman?


Luc. Without Sir, waiting on your will, as on the voice of his good fate.


Bla. Pray call him in. Exit Luc. Sirrah, fetch two or three more of my knaves
in.


Dog. Oh the dissembling of these women; they are like a folded picture, that
every diversity of light represents diversely.


Bla. Hang all women beside you and your daughter, widow: I could almost like
Mahomets religion, for turning all the sex out of Heaven.


Act. 2. Scaen. 9.
Blade, Cutter, Dogrel, Widow, Tabitha. Truman filius, Lucia veiled. True. It Is
as we wished, dear Lady; O this blessed hour!


Bla. Away with 'um immediately, let 'um be sent to prison straight.


True What means this rudeness? I understand not this incivility.


Cut. Ungratious children, ye have poisoned a most virtuous Soldier here.


True. I poisoned? what do you mean?


Bla. Away with 'um I say, they shall ^inde another place to answer for it.


Exeunt Servants, with Truman and Lucia. Wid. Hei ho! what pity it is.


Cut. Captain, prithee away with these two impertinences; since you must dye,
let us have a parting cup for shame.


Bla. But thou art turned Apostate.


Cut. I did but fain all this; I Am as very a Rogue as ever I was.


Bla. Thou speakst righteously, we will not make a dry farwell on it. Widow. I
have some business with these two; shall I desire privacy a little while?


Wid. Fare ye well. Mr. Cutter, you can speak comfortably to him: I Will see you
again anon. Oh the wickedness of these worldlings! Come Tabitha.


Exeunt Widow and Tabitha. Bla. The Doctor says, I shall dye without pain;
therefore my sparks of Asia, let us be merry for a while. Boy, fetch some wine
and an hourglass.


Cut. An hourglass! what emblem shall we have? bring a sith too; and this
same lean, greedy, hungry Poet, shall act Time here. Enter boy with wine, and
an hour glass.


Bla. Well said my little Pawn. So, thus I Will husband my time. According to my
Emperick's computation I am to live an hour; half which I do allot to drink
with you, a quarter to settle some business; and the rest to good medit^tions
and repentance. How like ye this my gallants?


Cut. Most Logically divided; never Scholar divided mess better.


The boy fills wine. Bla. How it sparkles! Never be drunk again? My Homer
junior, have at thee; this will string up thy Muse: rejoice young frog of
Hellic^n. Drinks.


Dog. No, rather let me weep, drop briny tears, Till I like Niobe --


Cut. There Is a piece of her sticks in his throat still, drink it down Dogrel.


Bla. Do, for when I am once gone, ye must even like Mahumetans, count wine a
thing forbidden.


Cut. Let Us drink, let us drink, whilst life we have:
You Will find but cold drinking, cold drinking in the grave.

Dog. A catch in faith.
Boy go down,
And fill's the the other quart;
That we may drink the Captains health,
Before that we do part.

Cut. Why do thou frown, thou arrant Clown etc.


Bla. Ha hei boy's! another catch in faith.
And all our men we^e very very merry.
And all our men were drinking,

Cut. One man of mine,


Dog. Two men of mine,


Bla. Three men of mine,


Cut. And a man of mine,


Om. As we went by the way, were
Drunk Drunk, Damnable Drunk;
And all our men were very very merry etc.

Bla. Hei brave boys! now, Cutter, thou art a precious Puritan.


Cut. And thou a puissant Captain. Some would have pined, and kept a quarter,
and howled at their death, and have been more froward and troublesome then a
Citizens wife when she takes Physic. This is true valor.


Dog. Sure he has died before, he is so expert at it.


Act 2. Scaen. 10.
To these, old Truman. Bla. What says old Priam to Achilles great?


True. It Is well, I Am glad to see you in you Priams; but for all your Priams,
and your Killisses, what have you done with my Son?


Bla. Thrice was thy Hector drawn about the walls.


Cut. Xanthus and Simois, with his purple gore.


Dog. Alas, and welladay! we are stained all over.


Om. Ha, ha, ha.


True. It Is very well, excellent well, all is well that ends well; I say -- I
shall find Law I hope. My Son Dick in prison, and old Dick laughed at here by
Raggamuffins: It Is very excellent well; I thank you gentlemen I thank you
heartily.


Bla. It Is not so much worth in faith Sir; what do you mean Sir? pray spare your
courtesy, nay, I pray be covered Sir.


True. It may be so, it is very likely Sir, an there be Law in Westminster --


Cut. -- And what do thou mean, old man?


Dog. -- And what do thou mean, old man?


Cut. -- If thou mean to live long, plump, lusty, and strong;


Dog. -- Then take of the cup and the Can.


Om. Ha, ha, ha.


True. Well, I Am made a laughing stock, it seems.


Bla. And good Sir --


True Yes, I am made the laughing stock; I shall take some other course, I hold
you a groat. Rest ye merry Gentlemen, I pray be merry, very very merry.


Dog. Nay, you shall stay and drink first.


True. Shall I, Iacksauce? Strikes off his hat.
Pray Sir, be you covered too.

Bla. Come old Iethro, here is a cup of wine will stir thy brains again, they are
moldy now.


True. I, you would poison me, would you? it is very well if a man may be suffered to
poison whom he pleases. Breaks the glass.


Bla. No, your good Son has got the art of poisoning.


True. My Son? Thou lie. My Son?


Bla. If ye be raging Lyon-mad, do you see that door? Be gone to your Son, and
take some juice of Opium: Thou wants sleep, Iethro. Trum^n offers to go out,
and turns back again.


True. There Is Law, Captain.


Bla There is so; would you would go fetch it.


True. Nay there is none it seems.


Bla. True, there shall be no Law, so you will be gone


True. There shall be no Law, say you? I desire no more, it is very exceeding
dainty. There shall be no Law; I desire no more, it is a kind of petty Treason:
You Will remember, Sir, that there shall be no Law: That Is enough, I pray
remember Sir: and so farewell. There shall be no Law.


Exit. Bla. This worm-eaten old fellow has spoiled our sport. And what says my
hourglass now? Time was in faith.


Cut. How do you feel your self?


Bla. As hot as Hell. Come we will take our last farewell within; and farwell here
all drinking. God send me a good journey, I say.


Dog. Then briny tears come trickling down apace,

For loss of him --


Cut. And what?


Dog. Nay, ye put me out. Exeunt.


Finis Actus Secundi.
Act. 3.
Scaen. 1.
Dogrel, Aurelia. Dog. Not poisoned you say?


Au. No, hes as well as we.


Dog. It may be he has more lives then one, or used himself to poison, as we
now, that are Scholars, and Poets read, of one Mithidrates.


Au. He was never sick.


Dog. Yes, very hot.


Au. I, as a painted fire, his fancy made him so; I smell a plot in it. Lucia,
you say, urged him then for Truman. 'Twas a mere plot, I doubt, to put him in
fear of death.


Dog. I shall be taken for a kind of Rogue then, for bearing false witness


Au. You shall not be mistaken, Sir, at all.


Dog. Pillory'd, and whipped, with my godly brother Cutter.


Au. Abused by the Prentices as you walk in the streets, and have rotten apples
slung at you.


Dog. Have a hundred blustering oaths of mine no more believed, then when I
swear to my Creditors, I Will pay all.


Au Be abandoned by all men above a Tapster; and not dare to look a gentleman
in the face; unless perhaps you sneak into a Playhouse, at the fifth Act.


Dog. If ever I have to do with women again, but in the way of all flesh, may I
dye an Eunuch. I Will never lie or swear hereafter, but for my self. Were not you
the virtuous gentlewoman, with the brown paper-face, that persuaded me to it?


Au. The very same, Sir; and I have just such another exploit here to employ
thee in: therefore be secret, close as a cokle, my good Rymer.


Dog. To employ me in!


Au. Nay, you must do it in faith; I have sworn first, Dogrel.


Dog. By this good light, I will do nothing at thy entreaty: not if thou
should entreat me to lie with thee. Must Poet Dogrel?


Au. I, must, if he intend e're to drink Sack again; or to make more use of his
little-pocket, then to carry Tavern-bills in it; must do it, unless he intend to
die without a shirt, and be buried without a winding sheet.


Dog I like thy wit yet wench, what is it?


Au I would marry Puny; he is rich you know, and a bravery, and a wit.


D^g. He says himself he is so; but few are of his faith.


Au. He dances too, and courteth the Ladies.


Dog. Yes in more postures then a dozen of Bowlers.


Au. But he is rich, Dogrel, and will be wise enough; when I have got'um
knighted, then I shall be a Lady, Dogrel; have a dozen of French-Taylors,
Doct^rs, Jewellers, Perfumers, Tyre-women, to sit in consultation every
morning, how I shall be dressed up to play at Gleek, or dance, or see a Comedy,
or go to the Exchange in the afternoon; send every day my Gentleman, to know how
such a Lady slept, and dreamed; or whether her dog be yet in perfect health:
Then have the young smelling braveries; all adore me, and cut their arms, if I
be pleased to be angry: Then keep my close and open Coaches, my yellow satin
Pages, Monkies, and women, or (as they call 'um) creatures.


Dog. Be then a politic, Lady; keep none but ugly ones, you will never be
handsome else. But suppose all this, what is this to Dogrel?


Au. Dogrel shall be maintained by me, he shall have fine new Serge; and every
day more wine then is drunk at a Coronation.


Dog. This qualifies. And when the good Knight's dicing, or at bowls, or
gathering notes in private out of Romances; might not Dogrel have a bit?


Au. Yes, like enough your Poetry might tempt some of my under-women to it. But
are you prepared to cheat, in your own behalf, and mine?


Dog. I, but how must this be done?


Au. Why thus briefly. First read this Letter.


Dog. ( reads) Dearest Truman,
We have long desired to be contracted together, that nothing might be wanting
to our Loves, but Ceremony: To night about nine a clock, I shall find
opportunity to meet you at the garden door, and let you in; silence and the
help of veiles, will save the violating of your oath. Farewell.

Yours, Luc. Blade.


In Faith, was this her writing?


Au. No* but the hand's ^s like hers as the left is to the right. This you
shall show to Puny; and tell him that you found or stole it from Truman: I need
not I suppose instruct you, to polish over a lie; he knows their love, and
cannot suspect any thing; persuade him to make use of the occasion, and come
himself.


Dog. And you^ll meet him veiled.


Au. Have thou found it out? thou have shrew^d reaches Dogrel.


Dog. I Will do it. Thou shall be blessed. I Will do it in faith.


Au. About it then; I Will leave you: and fail not, Dogrel; remember wine and
serge. But first, I have another way to undo thee, Lucia: And that I^ll try
too. Exit.


Dog. Go thy ways girl for one, and that is for Puny I hope; I see thou wilt never
turn Semstress, nor teach girls; thou would be a rare wife for me, I should beget
on thee Donnes, and Iohnsons: but thou art too witty. We men that are witty
know how to rule our selves, can cheat with a safe conscience; it is charity to
help thee, Aurelia, and I will do it, and merit.


Exit. Act. 3. Scaen. 2.
Truman filius, Solus. True. Our minds are like the Sea, and every Passion
Like some fierce Tempest stricken from the North,
Disturbs the Peaceful calmness of our thoughts:
Custom of anger drives us from our selves,
The Adrian Gulf a milder fury hurries;
Those Waves touch Heaven, but these arise to Hell.
Sometimes the winged whirlwind of blind Avarice
Shoots it self forth, and sweeps up all before it.
Now we with greedy hope, knock at the Spears,
Anon the deadly hand of cold despair
Throws us beneath the grave: and midst these dangers
The flame of Love appears in stead of lightning;
And with sad glory frights the night it self.
Oh! it is a subtle fire! and kills, but wounds not.
Good God! What more then man can safely pass
The Bil^ows, Rocks, and Monsters of this Ocean,
Unless some power Divine, become his Pilot?
For then the winds would scatter, the waves shrink,
And th'outworn storm suffer it self a shipwreck.

Act 3. Scaen. 3.
Aurelia, Tailor, Truman filius. Au. Thanks good Tailor; now I Will only beg
that I may buy your secrecy: Fare thee well, Friend. at the door.


True. Ha! I did but speak just now of Heavenly powers,
And my good Angel enters! welcome
Lucia; I can scarce say so here, yet welcome heartily:
You see how ill our honest Plot succeeds;
I see we must out-weary fortunes anger,
And I have armed my self for it -- ha!
She gives him a note, and embraces him. He reads. I have with much ado gotten
to you, and can stay with you to night. (Ha!) Why should we defer our joys
longer, since we are married in heart? The opportunity, and impatience of such
delays, forced me to desire that which else my modesty would not suffer me --
(Modesty?) -- Your desires -- to your bed -- long wisht-for -- (why this is
strange) hum-hum-hum -- Yours, Lucia. No, no, thou art not Lucia. If thou do
(As thou say) love me, do not use that name. She embraces, and goes to kiss
him Some devil has changed thee -- This i^ worse still -- with much ado -- to
night -- joys longer -- opportunity -- Read^: then walks about the room; goes
to the Candle, and burns the Letter

May all remembrance of thee perish with thee,
Unhappie paper, made of guilty linen.
The menstruous reliqu^s of some lustful woman:
Thy very ashes here will not be innocent,
But fly about, and hurt some chaste men's eyes,
As they do mine. Weeps.
Oh thou that once were Lucia! thy soul
Was softer then, and purer then swans feathers,
Then thine own skin: Two whitest things, that paper,
And thine own self, thou did at once defile.
But now thou art blacker then the skin that covers thee:
And that same gloomy shade not so much hides
Thy Bodies color, as it shows thy Minds.
She kneels. Kneel not to me, fond woman, but to heaven;
And prithee weep: tears will wash cleaner Ethiops --
Would thou have had me been mine own adult'rer?
Before my Marriage too? Would thou have given me
An earnest of the horns I was to wear?
Is Marriage only a Parenthesis
Betwixt a maid and wife? Will they remain
Entire without it? Go, pray go back,
And leave me too, since thou have left thy self:
When peace is made with heaven, it is made with me. Exit Aurelia.
What are these women made of? Sure we men
Are of some better mold. Their vows and oaths
Are like the poisonous Spiders subtle net,
As dangerous to entrap, and broke as soon.
Their love, their faith, their selves enslaved to passion.
Nothing's at their command, except their tears,
And we frail men, whom such heat-drops entice.
Hereafter I will set my self at liberty,
And live more free then is the air I breathe in:
And when I sigh, henceforth, it shall not be
For love of one, but pity of all the Sex.

Exit. Act. 3. Scaen. 4.
Dogrel, Puny. Pun. But how shall I represent this Anthropophagus?


Dog. Only speak softly, lest she chance to know your voice.


Pun. I warrant you I Will whisper like wet wood in a Justices chimney at
Christmas.


Dog. But of all things, take heed of too much wit; that is always dangerous,
but especially now. Truman, you know, is an honest harmless fellow, and is
contented to speak sense.


Pun. I, hang him; there is clotted cream in his head in stead of brains; and no
more of that then will completely serve to fill the eye of a needle. But I
shall never abstain from these fine things, hyperboles and similitudes: my
nature stands a tiptoe: Truman has got the cramp; his genius is like some gouty
Alderman's that sits in a chair. An' I were in Phalaris's Bull, I think I
should be witty.


Dog. Nay, I know it; a man may as well keep a prentice from Moor-fields on a
holiday, as you from your Muses, and Canundrums; they are meat and drink to you.


Pun. No, my good bag-pipe, they are meat and drink to you, that feed by 'um.


Dog. I see you're ashamed of the Muses, and I hope they are even with you. But
so much for this: you^ll find wine, I hope, when I have found you the wen^h.


Pun. Though thou would drink cups bigger then Pa^ls-steeple, or the great
bell at Westminster, thou should have 'um. How long do thou think has this
night worn her mourning-gown, and looked like a funeral?


Dog. Indeed, she has many torches. Why sure, it is just about the Critical time
which she appointed. You know your business: First break a piece of Gold;
profess before Heaven and Angels, you take her for your wife; then give her
half of it: and after that, somewhat as you understand me.


Pun. Will she be malleable, do you think? Shall I stamp Puny on her?


Dog. There Is a Metaphor indeed! It seems it is the fashion; you take your wife
for Gold. Hark! the door opens, use your fortune well. Exit.


Pun. Now, if my Alcocadin be right, I Am sure, I am made.


She opens the door, and lets him in. Act. 3. Scaen. 5.
Captain Blade, Servant. Bla. Pox upon 'um, they put me into a horrible fear;
but I am glad I am so happily cheated, for all that. Well, I must devise some
horrible lie, to justify my fears; some trick must be thought upon to gull
Truman. How now? What news from Tripoly.


Serve. Sad news, my Lord; here is an Army at the door, to speak with you.


Bla. Who are they? Creditors? a Merchant, a Mercer, a Scrivener, a Tailor, a
Butcher, Six Cooks, a dozen of Vintners, and the rest? Ha? Tell 'um I am sick,
taking Physic, or else abroad; hang 'um Rogues, come like quotidian Agues on a
man.


Serve. No, Sir, it is old Mr. Truman, the Widow, and her daughter, and Mr.
Dogrel, and I know not who; there is a stock of 'um.


Bla. They are those I wished for, let 'um in. Exit Serve. Now, Signior Blade, If
ever thou would see the golden age of yore, this is the time.


Act. 3. Scaen. 6.
Blade, Truman Pater, Widow, Dogrel. True. O Sir, my Son has poisoned you, I
see; there is no Law yet, is there?


Bla. Mr. Trum^n --


True. True me no more then I true you. Come, Captain Blade, I know what you
are, and so shall others too.


Bla. You Will hear me, Sir, I hope --


True. And so shall you hear me, Sir; I can be heard, I would you should know,
in as good a place as this is; and before as good as you are, Captain Blade.


Bla. First leave your raging, Sir: for though you should roar like Tamerlin at
the Bull, 'twould do no good with me.


True. I Tamerlin? I scorn him, as much as you do, for your ears. I Will have an
action of slander against you, Captain; you shall not miscal me at your
pleasure: remember you called me Iethro once before.


Wid. O the Father! little did I think, I wuss, to see you ever with these eyes
again.


Bla. Pray, Sir, hear me; The wrong I did you, when you were last here, came
from distraction only, and not my will; and therefore deserves pardon. The
business, if you please, I Will relate truly to you; and by what special
providence I escaped the danger. they whisper.


True. Well, Sir, I Am not angry; but I Will not be called Tamerlin by any man.


Bla. Upon my faith, Sir, it was an Antidote; I vomited up more then any whale
could have done; things of more colors then twenty Rhetoricians were ever able
to invent.


True. I shall teach my son --


Bla. No good Sir, I forgive him with all my heart: but for my Niece -- You
remember, Sir, the Will my brother left; you were witness to it. For this her
disobedience, the means are fallen to me. Now if you please to marry M. Richard
to my daughter, Lucia's portion shall all be hers.


True. Thank you good Captain Blade; I thank you for your love heartily: pray
send for 'um; he shall do it presently. I thank you heartily for your love, good
Captain: he shall do it, he shall do it. Calls his servant, and sends for 'um.
(What good luck was this, that I spoke not to the widow for her daughter!) How
do you, widow? you're melancholy methinks; you're melancholy in faith, that you
are.


Wid. Well, I praise God, Sir, in better health then I deserve, vile wretch.
I Am glad to see our neighbor so recovered.


True. I, good man, he has had a dangerous time of it, that he has, a very
dangerous time: his niece is a naughty wench, a scurvie girl, to repay him thus
for all his care and trouble: he has been a father to her, Widow, that he has;
to my knowledge he has: Her father was an honest man, I Am sure on it.


Wid. Was he? I, as ever trod upon Gods ground, peace be with him; I, and as
loving a neighbor too --


True. We have drunk our half pintes of Muscadel together many a morning, that
we have.


Wid. My husband too was all in all with him. Hei-ho! I shall never forget how
merry we were when we went with him to Mortlake in the Easter-holy-days: and we
carried a shoulder of Mutton with us, and a fat Pig, and he carried his bottle
of wine down with him: I warrant you he he loved a cup of wine as well as his
brother; in a fair sort, I mean.


True. Ah widow! those days are gone: we shall never see those days again. I was
a merry grig too then, and would ha'danc'd and cut capers: ha -- who but I? I
was as merry as the maids.


Wid. My daughter Tabytha was just four year old then, come Lamas-tide.


Dog. Captain, I thought thou had been at Ere^us by this time: but it is no
matter; it is but an Epitaph lost: hanged, 'twas made ex tempore and so let it
pass.


Bla. Had thou made one in faith?


Dog. Yes, by thy, light.


Bla. I Am glad I did not die then. O here they come. She Is a good handsome
wench; it is pity to cozen her. But who can help it? Every one for himself, and
God for us all.


Act. 3. Scaen. 7.
Blade, Widow, Truman pater, Dogrel, Truman filius, Lucia. Bla. Welcome, kind
Niece; you see I live still: there were Antidotes as well as Poisons.


Wid. He has been a loving Uncle to you, Mistress Lucia: he might have deserved
better at your hands: you might had Master Truman, I warrant you, had you but
held up your finger to him: he would not have seen you perish, Mistress Lu^ia; I
may say I know him so far. Speak, Mistress Lucia, speak for your self, good
chuck; your Uncle will forgive you: we'll all speak for you: He shall forgive
you, that he shall: he knows we have all our faults.


Dog. I understand the language of her silence; it is strong and good. You bound
your son, Sir, to an oath never to see nor hear her without your commission:
it is that troubles her conscience; she has a tender one.


True p. I bound 'um? Well, I absolve 'um then; what is that to you, Sir? I Will
bind 'um again, if 't be my pleasure so: if not, a fig for you; that is all I
care. I love to speak my mind; you must pardon me, I have spoke to as good as
you i^ my days.


Dog. Do You speak thus always? I Will have you in a Play if you do.


True. p. I Am glad you are so religious, Sir; did I bind you too to silence? Go
too, Sir; I told you what your may bees would bring you to, you will always be
wiser then your father: Nay, you may speak, and your Minion too, if she pleases.


Lucia, pulls off her vail. Luc. Does any man here accuse me of any thing?


Bla. We, and your conscience do.


Luc. My Conscience? it is as pure as Sythian Crystal,
From any spot; I can see through't at pleasure.
Whatever crime you mean, (for yet I know not)
Would it were written in my face.

Bla. Thou Would be blacker then a Moor if 'twere. Did not you consent with that
damned Physician to give me poison?


Luc. There was none given you, I call God to witness:
If such a thought had slipped into my dream,
The horror would have waked me, and I feared
Ever to sleep again. No; what we did, Sir,
Was but to fright you with a painted danger;
That the just terror of your own destruction
Might call to your remembrance my dead father:
For sure, Sir, you forgot him when you thought
To match his only child with one of these
Fellows that live extempore; whose fortunes
Are patched up like their wit by several pat^ons.
Should I have married thus, (but I would sooner
Endure the shameful end which they deserve)
Your conscious Ghost would start to meet my fathers,
And look more pale then death it self has made it.

Dog. Let her alone, she will call names and fling stones about anon.


Wid Alas poor soul! you may see she is not her own woman.


True. p. What a poor excuse she made! a very idle simple excuse; have you never
a better for us?


True f. No, she says true.


True p. You will not bite off my nose? will ye, Sir? pray do not bite off my nose,
I pray, Sir, do not?


Act. 3. Scaen. 8.
Blade, Widow, Truman pater, Dogrel. Truman filius, Lucia, Puny. Pun. What a
bevy of men's here! ha! My little Lodestone, art thou here, my little Diamond?
I Will speak to your Uncle now; we'll have a Parson cry I Nicholas presently.


Luc. You Are rude, Sir: what do you mean?


Pun. I, so you said in the garden, when I began to gather, you know what fruit:
Come put on your vail, you will blush else; and look like the picture of a
red-rose in the hangings. Captain, Salve, it is done.


Bla. Done! What?


Pun. I have her, in faith.


Bla. God give you joy, Sir.


Pun. Nay, she is my own.


Bla I am very glad of 't.


Pun. I scaled the walls, entered the Town, and left a garrison there, I hope.


Bla. I congratulate your Victory, Mr. Puny.


Pur. You shall go to my wedding, with me and thi^ fair Chorus. I Am as nimble
as a Lybian Rabbit: Come, you must go, though you be as lame as a criple, that
b^^s at Westminster, or a Crow in a gutter without her right leg. What do you
wonder at? I tell you, she is my Penelope now.


Bla. May I be so bold, Sir, as to ask, who it is you mean?


Pun. 'Slid, can thou not see my meaning? are your brains in a litter? I Am
contracted to your Niece, and have got upon her -- Nay, never blush, we are as
good as married, my dear Agat.


Bla. Have you then lien with her?


Truman fill. Ha! No figures nor similitudes, good Mr. Puny; be as open and
naked with me, as you were with her.


Pun. As plain as a Scholars mourning-cloak. I have don't in faith, but do you see?
We broke this gold between us first, and will be married to day. Who Is that?
Truman, ha, ha; he looks like the Globe of the World, now: look how he
scratcheth his poul.


Bla. God give you joy, Sir: but she has not a farthing portion.


Pun. How, Captain?


Bla. Not so much as will buy ribbands: all s mine own: a lawful prize, in faith.


True. fill. Oh monster of her sex!


Luc. Will thou, vile man -- I cannot speak to him -- Witness all these --
Weeps.


Bla. So it is all forfeited to me. Will you try how your sons affection stands
toward Aurelia?


True. p* Come, Dick, the Captain has forgiven you: never think of Lucia; she is
not worth your thinking on; a scurvie girl: never think of her; thou shall
marry fair Aurelia: there is a wench, a wench worth gold in faith.


True. f. I cannot marry.


True. p. What cannot you do, Sir?


True. f. I cannot marry.


True p. Do you know who it is you speak to, Sir? you do'n't sure: Who am I,
pray? you can^t, when I bid you. Surely you know not who it is you speak to: you
shall do it, or I Will know why you shall not.


True. f. I will not marry.


True. p. Get you out of my sight: come within my doors no more; not within my
doors, Sir.


Bla. Take heed, M Truman, what you do.


True. f. I wo'n't marry.


Luc. Pray hear me all --


Bla. Come, M. Truman, let us talk of these things within: come, Gentlemen.


Wid. Hei-ho! I Will never trust a wart of the right cheek and a twinkling eye
again whilst I breathe, for Mistress Lucia's sake. A man would, think, that
sees her* that butter would not have melted in her mouth. Take heed, Tabytha;
the still Sow eats up all the draff, I see.


True. p. I Will never acknowledge him for my son again: I tell you, Captain, he is
always thus; he is always with his may-be's and his wo'nots: I cannot abide these
wo'nots, not abide 'um.


Pun. I ll follow him about the portion; he sha' not think to make an Asdrubal
of me.


Dog. Now my plot works.


Exeunt omnes praeter True. fill. and Lucia. Act. 3. Scaen. 9.
Truman fill. Lucia weeping. True. How precious were those tears, if they were
true ones!
How much more worth then all the Oceans Jewels!
But they are only false and empty bubbles;
Fair to the sight, but hollow as her heart:
There Is nothing, nothing in 'um: he that weighs 'um,
Shall find 'um lighter then a mad man's dreams,
Or women's resolutions.

Luc. I never did that fellow any wrong.
Why should he pay so dearly for the loss
Of my poor honor, as to sell his soul for it?

True. O she confesses, now, sh'has lost her honor.

Luc. They triumph in the ruin of us women,
And woo our beauties only, or our dowries;
Which when they miss of, they resolve to take
Revenge of their unworthiness on us;
Stealing away all that makes rich our dowry,
And beauty fair, our Name. But it is no matter,
Since heaven and Truman know my chastity.
Ha! he is here still! How do you, Sir?

True. Well, well.

Luc. You look ill.

True. No, no, no.

Luc. Indeed you do: your are not well, Im sure.

True. I am. Will you be gone?

Luc. How, Sir! You do not know me, sure.

True. I would I never had.

Luc. What do you mean?

True. To see thy face no more.

Luc. You said you could not live without the sight on it.

True. It was a good one then.

Luc. Has one day spoiled it?

True. O yes, more then an hundred years of time,
Made as much more by a continual sorrow,
Could ever have done.

Luc. I do not think my glass will say so.

True. That Is
A false as you, perhaps; but it is not half
So brittle. Dares your husband trust me alone
With you so long?

Luc* My husband?

True I cry you mercy;
The man you sin withal. You scorn to use Pretenses.

Luc. Yes, I do, Sir:
For she that scorns the offense, needs no excuse
Have you so little confidence in that
Which you have seemed to praise so often, my Virtues?
Or did you flatter only? Sure you did not:
For I remember I have heard you swear
You spoke your thoughts. Are Oaths but complements?
It Is done unkindly, very unkindly, Truman;
And were 't not your self, I should be angry.
Had a bright Angel come to me, and said
That you were false, I should have sworn ^t had ly'd,
And thought that rather false then you. Nothing
Could ever move the opinion of thy constancy
But thine own self; and thee I must believe.

True And I Will believe my self in what I saw.
I know thou can speak prettily; but thy words
Are not what Nature meant 'um, thy minds picture.
The Be has left his honey in thy tongue,
But in thy heart his sting.

Luc. O do not say so:
My heart is honest still, unless thou spoildst it
When it received thee in. 'T had but three corners.
And thou had two, at least. Would thou could see
How little room I Have left my self there in it.

True. Yes; for it is crowded up with many guests;
So many guests, that they excluded me:
And now I freeze without; but never more,
Never will enter: 'twas a Palace once,
But now it is turned a Dungeon.

Luc Will you leave me?
I will not call you fickle nor unconstant;
But sure you are too blame: you will not find
A woman that will love you half so well.

True. I do not mean to try.

Luc. Yes, prithee do.
But when you have talked, and loved and vowed, and sworn
A little while, take heed of using her
As you do me. No, may your love to her
Be such as mine to you; it cannot be better,
What ever you think; I Am sure it cannot, Truman.
May she be worthier of your bed then I,
And bring forth many little selves to you:
And when the happy course of diverse years
Makes you seem old to all besides your wife,
May you in the fair glass of your blessed issue,
See your own youth again. But I would have 'um
True in their loves, and kill no innocent maids.
For me it is no matter: when I Am dead,
My busy soul shall slutter still about you;
'Twill not be else in heaven: it shall watch
Over your sleeps, and drive away all dreams
That fly not with a soft and downy wing.
If any dangers threaten, it shall becken,
And call your spirit away till they be past;
And be more diligent then your Guardian-Angel.
Only sometimes, when your best leisure serves,
(For I Would not trouble you more dead then living)
Bestow ^ne thought on Lucia, and then sigh,
And (if you will) drop down a tear or two.
But that is a task Ill not enjoin you to:
And if you do it, spend not too many on me;
One will suffice: then only say, That maid
Deserved more of me. And again t'your business.
For my wronged virtue and forsaken truth,
I ask no more. So, dear False-man, farewell.

Exit. True. Farewell? That word has charms and poisons in^t;
It makes my frighted soul start back and tremble.
It Is but an aerie word. Do You hear me, Lucia?

Luc. (within) Who calls?

True. Farewell, Lucia, farewell; that is all: farewell
Repent, and meet me in heaven --
Why did rash Nature quarrel with her self,
In making one so excellently bad?
She is more fair then May^s new painted blossoms,
But falser then the smiles of faithless April:
And this I know, and yet me thinks I love her.
O she has killed my Reason: I have lost
That and my self for ever. Exit.

Finis Actus tertii.
Act. 4.
Scaen. 1.
Lucia sola. Every thing now has left me; tears themselves,
The riches of my very grief, forsake me:
Sorrow, me thinks, shows nakedly without '^m.
My sighs are spent too; and my wearied lungs
Deny me fresh supplies: and I appear
Like some dull melancholy ^pril-even,
When after many a shower the heavens still lowre,
As if they threatened more; and the s^ed Sun
Leaves nothing but a doubtful blush behind him.
And I could wish my eternal night were coming,
Did I but know who it is that makes me wish it:
Else, when my soul is ready for her slight,
And knows not who it is she must forgive,
A thousand light suspicions will call
Her charity several ways; and I may chance
To doubt thee, T^uman. But thou art abused:
I know not why; but sure thou could not do it.
I fear thee, cousin When we were both girls,
Thou would accuse me falsely to my Mistress,
And laugh to see my tears. I fear thee, cousin;
But I Will not judge too rashly: for I would not
Have any innocent wronged as I have been.
But I^m resolved to try her. She Is now seeking
(Hoping that all my fortunes now are hers)
For a new maid to attend her. That maid I Will be.
Clothes I have got already; and my face
Grief has disguised: that and my voice some art
Will quickly alter. I have left a Note
Upon my chamber-window, which will keep 'um
From all suspicion of my staying here.

Act. 4. Scaen. 2.
Cutter, Dogrel, Puny, Lucia. Cut. Hei! the Sisters are ravished, and we have
holy kisses enough. I shall be as great among 'um as -- Who Is there? What, your
Spouse, Pury?


Dog. She looks like Niobe on the mountains top.


Cut. That Niobe, Dogrel, you have used worse then Phoebus did. Not a dog looks
melancholy, but he is compared to Niobe. He beat a villainous Tapster the other
day, to make him look like Niobe.


Pun. Why 'faith that 's pretty odd, like one of mine.


Luc. O, Sir, had you the virtuous impudence to slander a poor maid thus?


Pun. Poor enough now indeed. I will not marry thee: thy portion was a
condition of the Contract. I Will sooner marry a woman that sells Orenges with a
face like Belinsgate.


Luc. I scorn thee -- I contracted to thee?


Pun. Were not? Answer.


Luc. No, by heaven.


Pun. Bear witness, Gentlemen; these words are Ca^duus benedictus to me.


Cut. And what will you do now, fair Gammer Lucia, you that contemned the
Colonel? Will you knit for your living?


Dog. Or else weed gardens for six pence a day and bread.


Luc. This is unheard of rudeness.


Pun. Nay let me have mine too; I have got a pat one for her. Or else turn
Apple-woman, live in a stall, and sell pippins for eight a penny.


Dog. Or hither in triumph 'twixt two panniers ride,
And sell the bouls of wheat and butter in Cheapside.
The last is a little too long: but I imitate Spencer.

Cut. What think ye, Gentlemen? she will make a pretty Landress.


Pun. A Landress? hang her, she looks like a foul handkercher.


Luc. Pray let me go; I have business requires me.


Cut. What? you're to meet some Gentlemen? How is it? twelve pence a time, I
warrant, in these clothes.


Dog. Where do you set up? Nay, we are true strikers. What, is it in
Covent Garden?


Cut. Or do you renew the decayed credit of Turnbal-street?


Pun. Or honor the Mill-bank at Westminster.


Dog. Or flee to Wapping, and engross the Sailors.


Cut. Or Moor-fields, and sell cakes.


Luc. Are all barbarous here?


Dog. Nay tell's; we shall be customers.


Pun. Enough, enough; give her a clap of the breech, and let her go.


Cut. Well, fare thee well, girl; we shall find you at the Play house in the
six-peny-room sometimes.


Dog. And do you hear, Lucia, Keep your self wholesome: your tub's a terrible
thing.


Luc. Unworthy villains -- But I Am born to wrongs,
And must endure 'um. Exit.

Omn. Ha, ha, ha.


Cut. A pretty Scene in faith. Now for the Captain; he will entertain us like
foreign Princes: we'll drink this half-yeer with him before we eat or sleep.


Pun. I Will drink like Gog-Magog himself, or the Spanish Tinker on a holy day.


Dog. There will I whet my Lyrick Muse
With Falern wine as I do use.
Captain Blade cannot refuse
To entertain us; he cannot choose,
When we bring him such good news,
As that his niece is gone to the stews.

Cut. Leave your verses, Dogrel. I hate your verses, Dogrel, till I be drunk.
It Is a glorious Captain.


Dog. As free as Free-town in Germany* Here comes Ieronymo.


Act. 4. Scaen. 3.
Cutter, Puny, Dogrel, Blade. Bla. The story says my niece is run away. The
story is not bad. Now will I get the widow, turn off my old rascally
companions, and live like an Emperor.


Cut. He says he will live like an Emperor; ha, ha, ha, brave Captain.


Pun Invincible Captain Priam.


Omn. Hei brave Captain!


Bla What do you mean, Gentlemen? Are ye broke loose from Bedlam? Have you no
other place to play your tricks in, but at my door? If you come here as
Mummers, much may be done; happily you may have twelve-pence: or else depart;
depart, if you be wise.


Omn. Why how now, Captain!


Bla. If you be not gone immediately, I Will have my men switch you further off --
Here are saucy knaves indeed with all my heart --


Offers to go out. Cut. By this light the Captain's drunk without us.


Pun. Prithee, Captain, thou art as humorous as a bell-rope. Do thou know me,
man? I Am M. Puny.


Blade. Y' are a fool, an addle egg: there is nothing else but cobwebs in your
head: The height of all thy knowledge is to find out the quarter day against
thy rents come in, and thou could not find out that, if 'twere not marke'd
in the Almanac with red letters. Yet you forsooth, because you see some
Gentlemen and Poets of late, a little extravagant sometimes in their
similitudes; because they make a pretty kind of sound to those that mark 'um
not; make that your way of wit, and never speak without comparisons. But never
were comparisons so odious as thine are. And these two Rabbit-suckers, for a
quart of wine extol thee, and cry good when thou speak so.


Pun. The Captains raging mad like a Baker when his oven is over heated.


Bla. And that was one of um --


Cut. Come leave your humors, hang you, confound you, pox take you, Captain, we
come to drink here.


Bla. Mine Is no blind Alehouse, where you may roar and swagger with half a
pipe of Tobacco in your mouth.


Cut. Do you know me, Captain?


Bla. I would I never had. Thou art one that say thou have seen the wars,
but thou lie basely; for if thou ever wast in a battle, i am sure thou winkest
there. Thou art one that liv'st like a Raven by providence and rapine: one that
if thou should chance to go to bed sober, thou would put it down in thy
Almanac for an unlucky day; sleep is not death's image with thee, unless thou
be dead-drunk.


Dog. He dares not abuse me thus.


Cut. Is It even so, Captain? Has your money exalted you?


Bla No, it has humbled me, and made me know my self and you, whom I shall
study to forget hereafter.


Dog. Come, Captain, shall you and I drink hand to hand?


Bla. Oh, you're his Lansprizado, Sirrah, Trundle.


Dog. Let not thy wrath swell like the Adrian Sea.


Bla. Thou that troublest thy self to be a fool; I will so beat thee, Trundle,
that thou shall hobble like one of thy own Rhyms. Therefore, if ever thou
show that Poetical face of thine within my doors again, I Will use thee worse
then thou did me, when thou made an Ode in commendation of me.


Dog. Then break thine oaten reed --


Bla. Fare ye well Gentlemen. I shall see thee Cutter a brave Tapster shortly;
it must be so in faith, Cutter; thou must like Bardolph in the play, the spiggot
weild. Dogrel shall make and sell small Pamphlets in the playhouse, or else
Tobacco, or else snuff Candles. As for Puny, his means will serve him to be
cheated of these five or six years.


Cut. It Is very well the times are so altered.


Bla. Ye cannot want a living Gentlemen, as long as there are Whores,
Bowling-allies, or Ordinaries; especially such able men as you are. There will
be wars too shortly; never quake, Cutter; here is Dogrel, when his want has spun
him out a little thinner, will serve you for a pike.


Cut. It Is very well: pray God your mirth last, Captain.


Bla. When you're grown old, and your fingers then only nimble with the palsy,
I Will provide an Hospital for you -- Seeds ubi fata quietas -- Fare ye well,
Gallants; and pray be merry: Fare ye well heartily.


Exit. Cut. Poverty, the pox, an ill wife, and the Devil go with thee, Captain.


Pun. I vexed him, when I put that jest upon him, like a Baker when his oven's
overheated.


Dog. If I don't compose a Satyr shall make him hang himself, may I never
write verse more.


Cut. I would beat him like a Buck, but I shall be bound to the peace for it,
and be affronted afterward by every one.


Dog. No, no, no -- let me see -- Besides my Satyr I have another way -- let
me see -- His brother traffickt at Guiny.


Cut. Yes, but the Merchants there report him dead.


Dog. The more knaves they: he lives, and I am he.


Cut. How? How, Dogrel, thou the Merchant man?


Dog. By this light, I either am, or will be.


Cut. How, Dogrel! Though thou be as thin and penetrable as a spirit, yet thou
can not assume dead bodies.


Pun Prithee, Dog^el, hold thy peace; thou talkest like a hogs f^ce.


Dog. De^ide not Puny: if I be not more like then any of your similitudes, I Will
be hang^d for it.


Cut. Thy face, indeed, will do exceed^ng well to represent one risen from the
grave


Dog. By long conversation with the Captain, I know all the passages between
him and his brother; know what his humor, what his state and fortunes were,
better then himself did when he lived.


Cut. I, but thou 'lt never act him. Why, man, he was a thing more st^ange then
any monster in Africa where he traveled.


Pun. What was he, prithee?


Dog. I knew him well enough; he had lost his memory, and therefore either writ
down every thing, and took his business with him in a scroll, or else trusted
it to his man John, whom he carried with him.


Cut. O I, that John and he went perpetually together, like the blind man and
his dog.


Pun. Or a Tinker and his t^ull. But do you hear, gallants, let me do apple-
John: never was such a John as I Will be, not John a Gaunt himself, nor John a
Nook.


Cut. But Dogrel, how will thou be made like that Cinque-^ater?


Dog. Why we Poets can do any thing. First you may remember (unless you be like
him) it is seven years since he went from hence; and time, you know, will alter
men. I made an Ode upon that subject once: Time, that do eat, and makst no
Lent --


Cut. Pox take your Ode; go on in your business, Dogrel.


Dog. Then I and my man John (as simply as he stands here) will swarthy over
our faces as if the Country had made us so: for if you remember my verses, In
Africa they are black as coals --


Cut. The devil's in thy verses. Prithee on.


Dog. Besides, we'll be attired in some strange habit of those Countries: I
know not how; but you shall see it in Speed, Maps.


Cut. Why now I like thee, my little Ovid; go about thy Metamorphosis. I Am for
Tabyth^; she is taken, Dogrel, ^elted like virgins wax. I ll to her presently,
and tell her that the vision appeared to me last, and warned me to carry her to
S. (...); there will I have a Priest.


Dog. A Priest, Cutter?


Cut. A Minister, I mean; a holy, godly, zealous Minister: and she -- You
conceive me, Dogrel --


Dog. Well, let us be going then. Puny, take heed of your wit when you act John:
I shall beat my servant John, if he be witty.


Pun. That Is the devil; I shall hardly abstain.


Cut. And Dogrel, you must make no verses, Dogrel: let that be the first thing
your memory fails you in.


Pun. Well, I Will follow you in a pissing-while.


Dog. Do so, good John. Exit Dog. Cut.


Pun. Now will I turn John, as round as a Wedding-ring: and if that plot be cut
of^ by the nose -- Ha? Here comes sententious Bias that walks gravely. I Will
observe my young Laconian.


Act. 4. Scaen. 4.
Puny, Truman filius. True. She Is gone for ever. Peace be with thee, Lucia.
Where ever thou art.

Pun. Now he begins his Epithala ^ium.

True. If she be guilty,
Forgive her, heaven; she will repent, I Am sure:
For she is soft, and melting as the dew,
That kisses every morn the ^embling roses;
And howsoe'er beauty and youth misled her,
She cannot be, I know, a stubborn sinner.

Pun. Did ever Basket-maker talk thus?
to himself too, l^ke a Conjurer in a garden?

True. Ha! This is he, that wicked man,
That devil which betrayed her.

Pun. O, are you thereabouts? Offers to go out.

True. Nay stay,
For were thou armed with thunder and my anger,
Yet I would bring thee back. Tell me what charms,
(For I will rip thy heart up but I Will know it)
What witchcraft did thou use t'entice her thus?
Never deny't. For had thou been more handsome
Then other men's, or thine own flattery
Could ever make thee: have thou been as beautiful,
And could have spoke as well as she her self,
All this were nothing; she would look upon thee,
But lust no more then thine own Angel does.
No, thou did use some cursed art to tempt her,
Some Philter --

Pun Not I by all -- what do you mean pray, Sir?

True. Why then you ravished her, by Heaven you ravished her:
Alas, she is weak and tender, very tender,
And was not able to resist that strength
Which youth and furious lust did arm thee with.
'Twas basely done, above expression basely,
And I would presently revenge it fully,
But that my sword would take from the laws justice,
And from thy shame.

Pun. I ravish her? By this light I scorn't.

True. You did enjoy her body? Did you not?

Pun. I did so.

True. You did? I prithee do not say you did so;
This is to brag of the vile act thou have done:
But I shall spoil your pride and shameful glory
Which your base sin affords you.

Pun. You bid me tell you the truth, what would you ha'me do?

True. Do? I would have thee fix thy adulterous eye
Upon the ground, which thy cursed feet dishonor;
And blush more red then is the sin thou have acted.
What would I have thee do? I Would have thee weep,
Shed as true tears as she does for thy fault,
And sigh away thy body into air.
What would I have thee do? I^d have thee kill thy self.
And sacrifice thy life to her wronged Soul.
Can thou refuse to do all this for her,
For whom thou have damned thy self?

Pun. We were contracted first ever I enjoyed her.

True. Did thou enjoy her then? How durst thou do it?
Why she was mine, I tell thee she was mine;
All the Seas wealth should not have bought her from me,
While she remained as spotless as my love:
And so she did remain till thy sin stained her.
I tell thee to that hour she was more innocent
Then thou, false man, were in thy mothers womb.
Did thou enjoy her? Either fetch back that word,
Say, nay I Will have thee swear thou did not touch her,
Or by those joys which thou have robbed me of,
I Will kill thee strait.

Pun. 'Siid I did not touch her. What would you have me say? would I were John
the Merchants man now.


True. O Heavens! O most unheard of villainy!
Th have done a crime so great, that there is hardly
Mercy enough in Heaven to pardon thee.
Tell me, (for now I Will argue mildly with thee)
Why should you seek to undo a harmless maid?
To rob her of her friend^, her life perhaps,
I Am sure her fame, which is much dearer to her.
'Twas an inhuman act; an act so barbarous,
That Nations unciviliz'd would abhor it:
I dare say boldly she never injured you;
For she was gentle as the breath of Zephyrus:
And if she ever did but begin a thought
Of wronging any man, she would have wept
Before she thought it out.

Pun. I had rather be a pickled* Oister, then i'this case I am in now.


True. Is Lucia abused? and I stand here
T expostulate with words her injuries?
Draw, for I Will talk no more with thee.

Pun. Do You hear, Sir -- by Heaven I lay with her, but we were contracted first
-- will you be pleased to hear me?


True. No, be gone.


Pun. Most willingly. Fare ye well heartily, Sir; I wish you a good nightcap.


Exit. True. The want of sleep and diet has distempered me,
If I stay thus I shall be quite distracted;
Me thinks a kind of strangeness seizes me:
And yet if I go home I shall be forced
To marry with Aurelia. Is it possible
There should be women good, if Lucia be not?
They are not sure: She looked as well as any,
And spoke as well too.

Act. 4. Scaen. 5.
Truman pater, Truman filius, Blade. True. p. I tell you, Captain, he is a
stubborn boy, a self-willed hair-brained boy: he has his know-nots, and his
wo'nots, and his may be's, when I speak. I have told him of his manner a
hundred ti^es; nay I may say a thousand.


Bla. Pray take ^y counsel for this once: though I be a soldier, yet I love
not to do all things by force. Speak fairly to him.


True. p. Speak fairly to my son? I Will see him buried, I Will see his eyes out
first.


Bla. I mean, desire him.


True. p. O, that is another matter. Well, for your persuasion, I Will do it: but
if ever I speak fair to him --


Bla. I know his nature's such, that kindness will sooner win him -- Look you,
he is here in faith, as melancholy as an owl in the daytime.


True. p. O, are you there, Jacksauce --


Bla. Nay, remember what I told you.


True. p. It Is true indeed How now, son Dick? you're melancholy still, I see.


True. f. It best becomes my fortune, Sir, now you have cast me off.


True p. I cast thee off? marry God forbid, Dick. How do do, Dick? Thou lookst
ill, Dick, in troth thou do: I must have thee merry.


Bla. I see all kindness is against this dotards nature, he does so over-act it.


True. p. Will thou have a Physician, Dick? Thou art my only son, Dick, and I
must have a care of thee: thou should ride abroad sometimes, Dick, and be
merry. We'll have a wife too for thee, Dick, a good wife, ha --


True. fill. I thank you, Sir; but I know not --


True. p. I, now he is at his know-nots. I will make you leave those know-nots,
boy --


Bla. Remember, M. Truman, what I told you.


True. p. It Is true indeed. Your father's old now, Dick, you see, and would fain
see a grandchilde: it is out of love to you, Dick, that I persuade you to it; you
may be a comfort, Dick, to your father now.


True. f. You may comm^nd me.


True. p. Well said, Dick, I see thou love me now, Dick; do thou want any
money, Dick? or clothes? or horses? You should tell me what you want, you
shall have any thing -- here is the Captain, a hearty friend of yours -- where is
your Daughter, Captain? there is a wench, Dick! ha you seen her?


True. f. Yes, Sir.


True. p. And how do you like her, Dick? speak freely.


T^u. f. I know no cause why any should dislike her.


True p. Why well said, Dick; keep thee of that mind still, and God will bless
thee.


Bla. Your father means, Mr. Truman, I suppose, how you like her for a wife.


True. p. I can tell my own meaning my self I hope, I Am old enough I Am sure.


True. f. You wrong her much, I never shall deserve her.
Alas, I am a man so weak in all things,
So lost both to the world and to my self;
That if I loved a woman heartily,
And wooed her with all zealous passions,
And valued her love 'bove all things else but Heaven;
Yet, when I thought upon my own unworthiness,
I should my self persuade her not to marry me.

Bla. Well, Sir, if you esteem her worth your choice, she shall be yours.


True. p. Why what should air him, Captain? He esteem her? Must he, forsooth,
or I be Master pray? Captain Blade, you make him too saucy with such talk;
never tell me, Captain Blade, I say it makes him too saucy, I marry does it, it
does in faith; must he be his own Carver? Come no more words, I^ll have you
married presently: i'saith law, Captain, you make him too saucy, that you do,
you do in faith, Sir; I cannot abide when sons must come to esteem, he esteem her
with a vengeance?


True. f. I desire time only to consider --


True. p. I, why I told you this; it is such a another wilful, hair-braind
Coxcomb, he is always a considering. Captain Blade, I could never keep him from
his considering; but I shall so consider you -- go get you in, Sir, I Will have
it done when I please; get you in, Sir, I Will keep you from considering
hereafter. Exeunt.


Act. 4. Scaen. 6.
Aurelia, Lucia disguised. Aur. What did you say your name was?


Luc. Jane, forsooth.


Aur. Well said, Jane; and as I told you, Jane, you shall have six pound a
year, Jane, for your wages; and then my clothes will serve you with a little
alteration: There Is a gown of my Cosens within will almost fit you, you're much
about her height, you shall have that too. I had a Cousin here was a foolish
thing god wot, it is well I Am rid of her -- and do you hear -- you must be very
secret and faithful to your Mistress; a waiting woman's place, is a place
require, secrecy.


Luc. I shall ill deserve your favor else.


Aur. Nay, I dare trust thee, Jane, thou lookst ingenuously: did thou ever
live at Court?


Luc. No forsooth.


Aur. O, you must learn the fashions of the Court: I Am already contracted to
one Mr. Puny, though he little things of it; Take heed of speaking, Jane, you
see I trust you. And when I Am married to him I Will live at Court: He Is a simple
thing God knows, but I Will have him knighted, and I like him the better for it: A
wise woman you know will make the best use of a foolish husband. You know how
to dress me, Jane, in the Court fashion?


Luc. Yes forsooth.


Aur. And you can lay me on a Fucus hansomly?


Luc. I hope I shall quickly learn it.


Aur. And when you see a friend with me, or so, that I would be private with;
you can stay in the next room, and see that no body come in, to interrupt us?


Luc. I shall not be deficient in my duty.


Aur. Well said. And can you tell in private such a Gentleman that you heard me
speak in commendation of him, and that I dreamt of him last night? that will be
in your way, Jane, such men will be grateful. And say that I was longing
the other day, for such a jewel or such a toy?


Lucia makes a court'sy. Luc. I hope you shall not find me wanting in any
service to you.


Aur. I believe thee, Jane. To morrow I Will teach thee more: I shall read to you
every day a lesson, til I see you perfect in the science: it is requisite that
you have a little of the Theory first. Go look out the pearl chain in the
Cabinet within; and stay till I come to you. Exit Jane.

The wench I see is docile, and will learn; but alas she must have time; she
has a little to much City breeding, I see, by Court'sies and forsooths.


Act 4. Scaen. 7.
Aurelia, Blade. Bla. How now? all alone, Aurelia? you're eating soap and ashes
here, I warrant you, without so much as saying grace for 'um.


Aur. I Would rather repent in ashes, Sir, then eat 'um


Bla. What would you think if I should marry now this very day?


Aur. I should think, Sir, you would repent to morrow for^t.


Bla. And the widow too.


Aur The widow? then you will repent to night, Sir, I believe.


Bla. I wooed her long ago, and now she sees there is an estate fallen to me,
faith she is content; and, to save charges, is willing to be married to day
privately.


Aur. But I hope you are not so, Sir: why we shall have all the silenced
Ministers humming and hawing thrice a week here; not a dish of meat but will be
longer a blessing then a rosting. I shall never hear my Virginals when I play
upon 'um, for her daughter Tabytha's singing of Psalms. The first pious deed
will be, to banish Shakespeare and Ben. Johnson out of the parlour, and to bring
in their rooms Mar-prelate, and Pryns works. You Will never endure 't, Sir You
were wont to have a Sermon once a quarter at a good time; you shall have ten a
day now.


Bla. Let me alone to deal with 'um. If any of her eating talking tribe show
their ears here, I will so use her tribe, that they shall free the Pope, and
call me Antichrist hereafter: and the widow, I^ll warrant you, I Will convert:
I Will carry her to Plays, in stead of Lectures: she shall see them, as well as
the dancing of the ropes, and the Puppet-play of Nineve. But this is not my
business, girl: I have an husband too for you.


Aur. I could wish you would keep him, Sir, if you have him; I know not what to
do with him my self.


Bla. Come, it is a man you will like, I Am sure; I have heard you often commend
him for his parts. It Is young M. Truman.


Au. Truman, Sir? the melancholy cross-arm'd Gentleman that talks to trees and
rivers as he goes by 'um? We should sit all day together like pictures of man
and wife, with our faces toward one another, and never speak I Will undertake,
upon our Marriage-night he will only sigh a little, cry Cruel Fate, and then go
sleep.


Bla. Never fear't. Come, thou shall have him, girl: go quickly and dress your
self; we'll both be married on a day. The humor is good, and it saves charges:
there is the widows humor too.


Aur. You Will give me leave, Sir --


Bla. No, no, no; prithee go dress thy self: by heaven it must be as I say: the
fates have ordained it.


Aur. Be pleased to hear me, Sir.


Bla. I would not hear thee, though thou were an Angel. I Am as resolute as he
that writ the Resolves. Come away, and adorn thy self. Exeunt.


Act. 4. Scaen. 8.
Cutter, Dogrel, and Puny disguised. Pun. Me thinks. I look now like a two-peny
apple pie, I know no^ how.


Dog. John, What Is your name, John? I have forgot your name, John.


Pun. Do you mean the name that was given me at the Font?


Dog. Font? Font? I do not remember that Font. Let me see my scroll. (Reads.)
There Is never a such town in Africa as Font. I do not remember Font.


Pun. Your memory, Sir, 's as short as an Ephemerides.


Dog. Did not I warn you, John, of such strange what-d'ye-call ums? Here Is for
that word. (Strikes.) I have forgot what word 'twas: for the word I mean.


Pun. Pox take you, Dogrel, you strike too hard.


Cut. Thou Would act well, I see: we'll have thee to Golden-lane, and there thou
shall do a King, or else some God in thine own clothes.


Dog. When a dead man from Orcus I retract,
Well may you see that to the life I act.

Pun. Did not I warn you of these what-d'ye-call-ums? 'Faith we'll be even,
Master. St^ikes him.


Cut. Very well, John; those be good Memorandums for your Master.


Dog. I should be angry with thee for it, but that I have quite forgot it.


Cut. Let Us see your scroll. (Reads) Me^morandum for my house: I have a house
in Fleetstreet, with a garden to it. My daughter is called Lucia; a handsome
fair maid with red cheeks, black eyes, and brown hair, and a little dimple in
her chin. My brother's name (to whom I left the charge of my daughter) is
Blade. (A most excellent Note indeed.) What have we here? Memorandums concerning
my estate. What, they are all of this stamp, are they not? Take heed, Dogrel,
the Captain's a shrewd fellow; he will examine you more strictly then the Spanish
Inquisition can.


Dog. Pish, if he pose me in any thing, my memory's weak, he knows; I h' forgot
it quite.


Cut. And then your voice I fear; and then --


Dog. Pox take you, Cutter; a Casuist would not find so many scruples.


Pun. The devil's in it, I shall never do this part; I know not how to speak and
not be witty.


Cut. Well, look to it, gallants; if the Captain find you out, he will abuse you
most unmercifully -- I Am now for Tabytha.


Pun. The Captain abuse me? By this day, I Will jeer with him with my hands bound
behind me. Come away, Master.


Dog. I, John; but which way did we come?


Pun. Why this way, Master.


Dog. Then that way we must go. Is not this my house in Fleet street, John I
thought you had said to had been in Fleet street.


Pun. Yes, so it is, Sir.


Dog. Truly I thought you said so. Come away, John. Exeunt.


Finis Actus quarti.
Act. 5.
Scaen. 1.
Cutter, Tabytha. Cut. And the vision told me, sister Tabytha, that this same
day, the twelfth of March, in the year of grace 1641, at this same holy place,
by a holy man, we two, who are both holy vessels, should be joined together in
the holy band of Matrimony.


Tab. My mother will be angry, I Am affeard.


Cut. Your mother will rejoice. I would not for a world that you should do it,
but that we were commanded from above; yea, I may say commanded: for, to do
things without a divine warrant, is like unto the building of a fire without a
bottom cake.


Tab. I (God knows) that it is.


Cut. Very well, sister. Now when my eyes were opened in the morning, I awoke:
for it was morning-tide, and my eyes were opened; and I looked into my pockets;
for my breeches lay upon a joined stool not far from the beds side: and in my
pockets, even made with leather, I looked (I say) and found; What did I find?
marry a License written with ink and pen: Where did I find it? in no other
place, but even in a godly Catechism which I had wrapped and folded up long-ways,
even in that very pocket.


Tab. I would my mother knew it. But I Will not resist, God willing.


Cut. There is a godly Teacher within, that never was defiled with the Cap and
Surplice, never wore that gambol called the Hood; even he shall join our hands.
Shall we enter, sister?


Tab. Brother, I Will not resist.


Exeunt. Act. 5. Scaen. 2.
Truman filius, Aurelia. True. And must we marry then?

Aur. It appears so by the story.

True. Why will you marry me? What is there in me
That may deserve your liking? I shall be
The most ill-favored malancholy Bridegroom
That ever took a melting maid to his bed:
The faculties of my Soul are all untuned,
And every glory of my spreading youth
Is turned into a strange and sudden winter.
You cannot love me sure.

Aur. No by my troth, Sir.

True. No, nor I you. Why should we marry then?
'Twere a mere folly, were it not Aurelia?

Aur. Nay, ask our Parents why. But, Sir, they say
It Is the best marriage where like is joined to like;
Now we two are a very even match;
For neither I love, you nor you love me;
And it is ten to one but we shall beget
Children that will love neither of us.

True. Nay, by my Soul I love you, but alas,
Not in that way that husbands love their wives;
I cannot play, nor toy, nor kiss, nor do
I know not what: And yet I was a lover,
As true a lover --

Aur. A lack a day, Sir.

True. 'Twas then me-thought the greatest happiness
To sit and talk, and look upon my Mistress,
Or (if she was not by) to think upon her.
Then every morning next to my devotion,
And sometimes too (forgive me Heaven) before it,
She slipped into my fancy, and I took it
As a good omen for the following day.
It was a pretty foolish kind of life,
An honest harmless vanity: But now
The fairest face moves me no more then Snow
Or Lillies when I see 'um and pass by.
And I as soon shall deeply fall in love
With the fresh scarlet of an Eastern cloud,
As the red lips and cheek^ of any woman.
I do confess, Aurelia, thou art fair
And very lovely, and (I think) good natured.

Aur. Faith, Sir, I would not willingly be a man, if they be all like you.


True. And prithee now, Aurelia, tell me truly,
Are any women constant in their vows?
Can they continue a whole week? a month?
And never change their faith? O if they could,
They would be excellent things. Nay, never dissemble:
Are not their lusts unruly, insolent,
And as commanding as their beauties are?
Are their tears true and solid when they weep?

Aur. Sure, Mr. Truman, you have not slept of late;
If we be married to night, what will
You do for sleep?

True. Why? Do not married people use to sleep?

Aur. Yes, yes. Alas good innocence!

True. They have a scurvy time often if they do not;
But we'll not be as other people are,
We'll find out some new hansome way of love,
Some kind of way that few shall imitate,
But all admire. For it is a sordid thing
That lust should dare t'insinuate it self
Into the marriage bed. We'll get no children,
The worst of men and women can do that.
Besides too, if our issue should be female,
They would all learn to flatter and dissemble,
They Would all deceive with promises and vows
Some simple man, and then turn false and kill him.
Would they not do it Aurelia?

Aur. Our sex is little beholding to you, Sir; I would your mother were alive
to hear you. But pray, Mr. Truman, what shall we do when we are married?


True. Why we'll live lovingly together:
Sometimes we'll sit and talk of excellent things,
And laugh at all the nonsense of the world:
Sometimes we'll walk together into the fields:
Sometimes we'll pray and read, and sometimes eat,
And sometimes sleep; and then at last we^ll die,
And go to heaven together. 'Twill be dainty*

Aur. We may do this, me thinks, and never marry for the business.


True. It Is true, we might do so:
But since our parents are resolved upon it,
In such a trifle let 'um have their humor.
My father sent me here to complement,
And keep a prating here, and play the fool:
I cann^t do 't. What should I do, Aurelia?
What do they use to say?

Aur. Sure. Sir, you knew, when you were a suitor to my cousin Lucia.


True. I, but those days are past, and I have now
Forgot what manner of man a lover is:
I was one then, I Am sure on it. O that Lucia,
That Lucia was so wonderful a creature --
There was a cheek, a lip, a nose, an eye!
Did you observe her eye, Aurelia?

Aur. Yes, yes, Sir, you were wont to sit all day,
And look upon the pretty babies in it.

True. It was as glorious as the eye of heaven,
Like the souls eye, dispersed through every thing.
And then her hands! her hands of liquid Ivory!
Did she but touch her Lute (the pleasing'st harmony
Then upon earth, when she her self was silent)
The subtle motion of her flying fingers
Taught Music a new art, To take the sight
As well as th'ear.

Aur. I, I, Sir, you had best go look her out, and marry her.

True. Nay prithee be not angry, good Aurelia;
I do not say she is more fair then thou art:
Yet if I did -- No, but I will not say so:
Only I strive to cherish the remembrance
Of one I loved so well. And, now I think on it,
I Will beg a favor of you: you will laugh at me,
I know, when you have heard me: but I Will beg it:
Prithee be veiled as Lucia was of late;
Cast such a silken cloud upon thy beauty
For this one day: I Would fain marry you so.
It Is an odd foolish humor, I confess:
But love and grief may be allowed sometimes
A little innocent folly.

Aur. Well, I Will obey your humor; pray walk in there;
I Will only dress my self, and wait upon you.

True. And we'll be married very privately.
None but our selves, it will be best, Aurelia.

Exit. Aur. Why here is a husband for a wench of clouts! May I never laugh
again, if his company has not made me duller then Ale and buttered cakes would
have done. I marry him? the old men must excuse me. I Will sooner choose a fellow
that lies bedridden, and can do nothing a-nights but cough. Well, if I don't
teach 'um what it is to force a wench that has wit, may my husband beat me when
I have one, and I sit still and cry. I like this very well -- It shall be so.
Jane, come hither, Jane.


Act. 5. Scaen. 3.
Aurelia, Lucia. Aur. O Jane, that is well; little think you what good's toward
you; it is that you have wished for, I dare say, th^se five years; a good
handsome husband. What think you of young Truman?


Luc. I think every thing
That makes a man complete, and his wife happy,
The richest glories of a mind and body,
And their not ill companion, Fortune too,
Are reconciled and married all in him:
And I commend the wisdom of your stars,
That join you two together.

Aur. Nay says thou shall even have him thy self for better or worse. He Is too
hansome indeed, unless he could make better use of his beauty; for by my troth,
wench, I Am afraid thou wilt find thy pillow as good a bedfellow.


Luc. I pray do not mock your servant.


Aur. Thou shall see, Jane, I do not; come in, wench, and I Will tell thee all my
plot. Exeunt.


Act. 5. Scaen. 4.
Blade, Servant. Bla. Well, Sir, is the Cook doing according to my directions?


Serve. Yes, Sir, he is very hard at his business in the kitchen: h' has been a
swearing and cursing at the scullions at least this hour, Sir.


Bla. It Is such an over-wasted Coxcomb; an other wedding dinner would make him
a S. Lau^ence: bid him be sure the Venison be well seasoned


Serve. Troth, Sir, I dare not speak to him now, unless I put on the armor in
the hall: he had like to have spitted me next to a goose, for saying that he
looked like an ox that was roasted whole at S. Iame's fair.


Bla. You have invited a^l the guests to dinner you talk^d of?


Serve. Yes, Sir.


Bla. And the widows round-headed kindred?


Serve. Yes, Sir.


Bla. They Will come i'their guarded petticoats, will they not? You should have bid
'um eat no por^ige at home, to seem more mannerly here at dinner. The widow
will be angry at their charges, but I Will please her at night. Go bid the Butler
look to his plate, and not be drunk till he sees it all in again. Whose at the
door there?


Act. 5 Scaen. 5.
Blade, Dogrel, and Puny disguised. Serve. Faith, Sir, you know as well as I;
some charitable beast come to be dressed here. Shall I call the Cook, Sir?


Dog. Why this is my house here, John: ha! ha! little thought I to have seen my
house in Fleet Street again. Where Is my brother Blade?


Bla. They call me Captain Blade.


Dog. Is this he John? Let me see ( reads) A proper burly man, with a whitei^h
beard, a quick eye, and a nose inclining to red, it is true Save you good
brother, you did not expect me here; did you brother? Stay let me see how many
years ago is it since we went from home?


Pun. It Is now just seven, Sir.


Dog. Seven! me think's I was here but yesterday: How the what-d'ye-call-'um
runs? What do ye call it?


Pun. Time, Sir.


Dog. I, I, Time. What was it I was saying? O, I was telling you brother, that I
had quite forgot you: was I not telling him so John?


Bla. By my troth, Sir, we are both quits then; for I have forgot you too. Why,
you were dead five years ago.


Dog. Was I so? I have quite forgot it. John, was I dead five years ago? My
memo^ry fails me very much of late*


Pun. We were worse then dead I Am sure; we were taken by a barbarous kind of
Nation, and there made slaves these five years. John quoth he! I was poor John
indeed: I Am sure they fed us three whole years with nothing but Acorns and
water: we looked like wicker-bottles.


Dog. How, Sirrah? Did your Master look like a wicked boat-man? ( strikes him)
Nay I remember what you said we looked like Did we look like what-d'ye-call-ums?


Bla. Where did they take you prisoners?


Dog. Nay ask John, he can tell you I warrant you. 'Twas in -- tell him, John,
where it was.


Pun. In Guiny, Sir.


Bla. By what Countrymen were you taken?


Dog. Why they were called -- I know not what they called 'um 'twas an odd
kind of name; but John can tell you.


Pun. 'Slife, who I Sir? do you think I can remember all things?


Dog. It Is in my book here; I remember well the name of any Country under the
Sun.


Pun. I know their names, Sir, well enough; but I only tried my Masters
memory. They 're called Tartarians.


Dog. How say you? what were they?


Pun. Tartarians, Sir.


Dog. I, I, these were the men


Bla. How, John! why all the world, man, lies between 'um: they live up in the
North.


Pun. The North?


Bla. I, the very North, John.


Pun. That Is true indeed: but these were another nation of the Tartarians that
lived by us.


Bla. Well, how escaped you, John, at last?


Pun. Why 'faith, Sir, to tell you the truth, for I love not to tell a lie, the
Kings daughter fell in love with me, and for my sake there set us free. My
master has it all in his book; it is a fine story.


Bla. Strange! In what ship did you come back?


Dog. What ship? why 'twas called -- a thing that swims -- How do you call it?


Bla. What? the Mermaid?


Dog. No, no, no, let me see --


Bla. What? was it the Triton?


Dog. No, no -- it swims, I tell you.


Bla. The Dolphin?


Dog. No, no -- I have forgot what 'twas.


Bla. What say you, John?


Pun. (Pox take him.) I, Sir? O God, my Master, Sir, can tell as well as I.


Bla. He says he has forgot.


Pun. It Is his pleasure to say so, Sir: he may say what he pleases. (A plague
upon him.) You cannot conceive the misery we have past, Sir.


Bla. Well, brother, I Will make bold to ask one question more of you. Where did
you leave your Will when you went away?


Pun. 'Slife, now he is posed again.


Dog. I Will tell you presently, brother; let me see. (Reads.) Memorandum for my
Will: Left to my brother Blade the whole charge of my estate -- hum -- What did
you ask me brother?


Bla. In what place you left your Will?


Dog* I, that was it indeed; you're in the right; 'twas the very thing you asked
me; and yet see how quickly I forgot it. My memory's short, alas, God help me.


Bla. This is no answer to my question, yet.


Dog. It Is true indeed. What was your question, pray?


Bla. Where you left your Will.


Dog. Good lord I had forgot you asked me this; I had forgot, i'faithlaw, that
I had: you will pardon my infirmity, I hope, brother; for alas -- alas -- I have
forgot what I was going to say to you; but I was a saying something, I am sure.


Pun. Did not you know us, Will? prithee tell's true.


Serve. No, by this light: why, you're grown as black as the chimney-stock.


Pun. That Is the nature of the Country where we lived. O the stories that I
shall tell you! And how does Nell, and little bonny Bess? are they as merry
grigs as ever they were?


Serve. No; Bess, poor wench, is married to a Chandler; but she is true blue
still, as right as my leg, I Will warrant you.


Dog. What is it, John? what was I going to say, John, to my brother?


Pun. I know not, Sir; was it not about your daughter?


Dog. I, I, my daughter -- What do you call her?


Pun. Lucia, Sir.


Dog. It Is true indeed; my daughter Lucia, brother.


Bla. Pray walk into the parlour; I Will come to you presently, and tell you all.


Dog. Well, John, put me in mind of my daughter Lucia. (A plague of your
Tartarians.)


Pun. (And of your what-d'ye-call ums.)


Dog. ('Slife, Tartarians.) Exeunt Dog. Pun.


Bla. If these be rogues, they are as impudent as Mountebanks and Juglers: and
if I find 'um to be rogues, (as I see nothing yet to the contrary) how I will
exercise my rogues! The tyranny of a new Beadle over a beggar, shall be nothing
to mine. Come hither, Will, what think you of these two fellows?


Serve. 'Faith, Sir, I know not: but if you think it be not my old Master, I Will
beat 'um worse then the Tartarians did.


Bla. No, no, let us try um first. Thou wast wont to be a very precious knave,
and a great acter too, a very Roscius. Did not thou once act the Clown in
Musidorus?


Serve. No, Sir; but I played the Bear there.


Bla. The Bear? why that is a good part; thou art an acter then, I Will warrant
thee. The Bear's a well penned part. And you remember my brothers humor, don't
you? They have almost hit it.


Serve. Yes, Sir, I know the shortness of my Masters memory; he would forget
sometimes to pay me my wages till he was put in mind on it.


Bla. Well said. I Will dress thee within in his own chamber; and all the
servants shall acknowledge you. But who shall do trusty John?


Serve. O, Ralph the Butler, Sir; he is an old actor, Sir, h'has played a King he
says. I have heard him speak a Play ex tempore in the Buttry, Sir.


Bla. O Ralph, excellent Ralph, incomparable Ralph, Ralph against the world!
Come away, William; I Will give you instructions within. It must be done in the
twinkling of an eye. Exeunt.


Act. 5. Scaen. 6.
Cutter, Tabytha, Boy. Cut. Now, Mistress Tabytha Cutter, let me kiss thee.


Tab. Pray God my mother be not angry.


Cut. Think not of thy mother, Spouse; I tell thee, Spouse, thou shall be a
mother thy self, within these nine months.

Come to my bed, my dear; my dear come to my bed:
For the pleasant pain,
And the loss with gain,
Is the loss of a maidenhead.

Tab. Is that a Psalm, brother husband, that you sing?


Cut. No, no, a short ejaculatory. Sirrah boy, are the things within that I
spoke for?


Boy. Yes, Sir.


Cut. Go fetch 'um in. Exit Boy. Come, Tabytha, let us be merry: Can thou sing
a catch, wench? O well said, Boy!


Enter boy with a hat and a feather, a broad band, a sword and a belt, and a
periwig. Tab What do you mean, brother husband?
I hope you will not turn roarer.

Cut. What? do these clothes befit Queen Tabytha*s husband? this hat with a
chimny-crown, and brims no broader then a moderate hat-band? Give me the
Periwig, boy. What? shall Empress Tabytha's husband go as if his head were
scalded? or with the seam of a shirt for a band? Shall I walk without a sword,
and not dare to quarrel in the streets, and thrust men from the wall? Will the
Fiddlers be here presently, boy?


Boy. Yes, Sir.


Tab. Pish, I cannot abide these doings. Are you mad? O lord! what will my
mother say? There shall come no Fiddlers here.


Cut. Be peaceable, gentle Tabytha; they will not bring the Organs with 'um. I
say be peaceable; he vision bid me do thus. Will thou resist the vision?


Tab. An' these be your visions -- Little did I think 'twere -- Is this your
religion and praying? Which of all the Prophets wore such a map about his head,
or such a sheet about his neck? What shall I do? I am undone.


Cut. What shall thou do? Why, thou shall dance, and sing, and drink, and
laugh; thou shall go with thy breasts open, and thy hair braided; thou shall put
fine black stars upon thy face, and have great bobs for thy ears. Nay, if thou
do begin to look rustily, I Will have thee paint thy face like the whore of
B^bylon.


Tab. O that ever I was born to see this day!


Cut. What? do thou weep, Queen Did^? Thou shall have Sack to drive away thy
sorrow. Come hither, boy, fetch me a quart of Canary. (Exit boy.) Thou shall
see I Will be a loving husband to thee. The vision, Tabytha, bid me give you
drink: we must obey these visions. Sing, Tabytha: Cry on your wedding day? it is
ominous.

Come to my bed, my dear;
Come to my bed:
For the pleasant pain -- Enter boy with wine.
O art thou come, boy -- Well said, fill a brimmer; nay fuller yet, yet a
little fuller. So. Here Is to the Lady-Spouse; to our good sport to night.


Tab. Drink it your self, if you will; I Will not touch it.


Cut. By this hand, thou shall pledge me, seeing the vision said so. Drink, or
I Will take a Coach and carry thee to a Play immediately.


Tab. I cannot abide -- ( She drinks.)


Cut. Why, this will clear thy heart, wench: Sack, and an husband, wench, are
both comfortable things. Have at you again.


Tab. I Will pledge you no more. not I.


Cut. Here, take this glass, and take it off too, or else I Will swear an hundred
oaths in a breathing-time. Here --


Tab. Well, you're the strangest man --


Cut. Why this is right now. Nay off with it. So. But the vision said that
whatsoever we left of this same wine, would turn to poison straight. There,
here is to you, Tabytha, once again: it is the visions will.


Tab. What? must I drink again, then? Well, I Will not resist. You're such
another brother-husband. (Drinks.) There Is a whole one now --

Come to my bed, my dear;
Come to my bed --
How was it? It Was a pretty one.


Cut. O divine Tabytha! Here come the Fiddlers too. Strike up, you rogues.


Tab. What? must we dance now? is not that the fashion? I could have danced the
Coranto when I was a girl. The Coranto's a curious dance.


Cut. We'll dance out the disease of the Tarantula: but first we'll have a
health to my pretty Tabytha.


Tab. I Will begin't my self. Here, Duck, here is to all that love us.


Cut. A health, you eternal scrapers sound a health. Bravely done, Tabytha:
what think thou now of thy mother?


Tab. A fig for my mother; I Will be a mother my self. Come, Duckling, shall we
go home?


Cut. Go home? the Bride and the Bridegroom go? We'll dance home. Before us,
squeakers: that way, and be hanged. So. O brave Queen Tabytha! excellent
Empress Tabytha! On, you rogues They go out dancing, with the music before 'um.


Act. 5. Scaen. 7.
Blade, Dogrel, Puny. Dog. I must not be fob'd off thus about my daughter: I
remember not your excuse; but John can tell well enough, I warrant you.


Bla. I have told you the plain truth: you will not be angry, I hope.


Dog. I shall have cause to be angry, I fear: Did not I leave her to his
charge, John? Brother, I tell you --


Bla. I must not answer, brother --


Dog. I know you put me out, that I might forget what I said to you before:
remember, John: I Will be as cunning as you're crafty: remember, John. How now?
what is the matter? Enter servant.


Serve. Ho, my old Master's come; he is lighted now at the door with his man
John: he is asking for you; he longs to see you: my Master, my old Master.


Bla. This fellow's mad.


Serve. If you wo'n't believe me, go in and see, Sir: he is not so much altered,
but you will quickly know him. I knew him as soon as I saw him. Pray, Sir, go in.
Exeunt Blade and servant.


Bla. Why this is strange.


Pun. If this be true, what course shall we take, Dogrel? I begin to shake like
a plum-tree-leaf.


Dog. We'll shift some way or other, I warrant you.


Pun. How, Dogrel? prithee how?


Dog. Let the worst come, we can be but whipped, or burnt in the hand, a^ the
most.


Pun. Ho, our best way will be to hang our selves -- 'Slife, here is John.


Act. 5. Scaen 8.
Dogrel, Puny, John, two or three servants. 1 Serve. Give me thy hand in faith,
boy: is it possible that thou should be alive still?


2 Serve. Ha rogue! art thou come in faith? I have a pottle of Sack to welcome
thee.


3 Se^v. Why you will not look upon your poor friends, John Give me thy golls,
John. How have thou done this great while?


John. I thank you all heartily for your love; thank you with all my heart-law.
What? my old bedfellow Robin? how do do? when shall we steal Apricocks
ag^in? do you remember, Robin?


2 Serve. A murrain take you; you will never forget your roguery.


Pun. A murrain take you all: this was your plot, and be hanged* Would I were
Puny the Wit again.


Dog. Accursed Fate --


3 Serve. Come, John, let us go to the Buttry and be merry: Ralph longs to see
you, I Am sure.


John. And how does Ralph? good honest Ralph? That Ralp's as honest a fellow,
though I say it my self; I love him with all my heart-law, that I do; and
there is no love lost, I dare say for him.


2 Serve. Come, my masters, will you go in? I Will prevail with the Cook for a
slice or two of Beef; and we'll have a cup of Stingo, the best in the ce^lar.


John. Well said, steel to the back still; that was your word, you know. My
master^s coming in: go. I Will follow you straight.


1 Serve. Make haste, good John, for I cannot stay. Exeunt Servants.


John. Here Is a company of as honest fellows a^sa man would with to live in the
house withal; all, no man excepted*


Dog. Would I were out of the house, as honest as they are. Here they come,
John.


Pun. John, quoth he, with a pox.


Act. 5. Scaen. 9.
Dogrel, Puny, John, Blade, William. Bla. Me thinks you're not returned, Sir,
But born to us anew, and I could wish
My tongue were not more niggardly then my heart
In giving you a welcome.

Will Thank you good brother. Truly we have past through many dangers; my man
shall tell you all, I Am old and crasy, and forget these things. Enter Widow.


Bla. Pox on it, the Widow's come already; keep 'um here John, till I come back.
O are you here sweetheart?


Wid. Who have you yonder, I pray?


Bla. O you should not have seen 'um yet, they are Maskers.


Wid. Not vagrant players, I hope?


Bla. No, no, they can only tumble, and dance upon the rope, you shall see 'um
after dinner. Let^s away sweetheart, the Parson stays for us, he has blown his
fingers this hour. Exeunt Blade and the Widow.


Dog. I Am glad the Captain's gone, now will I sneak away, like one that has
stolen a silver-spoone.


Pun. I Will be your man and follow you.


Will. Who are these John? By your leave, Sir; would you speak with any here?


Dog The Captain, Sir. But I Will take some other time to wait on him, my
occasions call me now.


Will. Nay, pray, Sir, stay. Whom did you say you would speak withal?


Dog. The Captain, Sir. But another time will serve. I have some haste of
business.


Will. Whom would he speak with, John? I forget still.


Ioh. The Captain Sir.


Will. Captain? What Captain Sir?


Dog. Your brother I suppose he is.


Will. 'Ti, true indeed, I had forgot that my brother was a Captain. I cry you
mercy, Sir, he will be here presently. Are you an Englishman, Sir?


Dog. Yes, Sir.


Will. Where were you born I pray?


Dog. In London, Sir. I must leave you --


Will. In London? you are an Englishman then I see, Sir. Would you have spoke
with me Sir?


Dog. No, with your brother, but my business with him requires not haste, and
therefore --


Will. You're not in haste you say; pray sit down then: may I crave your name,
Sir?


Dog. My name's not worth your knowlede, Sir; but my man's name's John.


Pun. (If I be John any more I Will be hanged) No my name's Timothy, Sir.


Will. Mr. John Timothy? Very well, Sir. You seem to Be a Travellor.


Dog. We Are newly come out of Afric, and therefore have some business that
requires us


Will. Of Afric? Law you there now. What Country pray?


Dog. Prester John's Country. Fare you well, Sir. now.


Will. Marry God forbid. What come from Prester John, and we not drink a cup of
Sack together?


Dog. (What shall I do?) Friend, shall I trouble you to show me where your
house of office is?


Will. You Will stay here Mr. -- what is your name, pray?


Pun. Timothy, Sir.


Will. Gods me, it is true indeed Mr. John Timothy.


Pun. Ill only make water, and come to you.


Joh. The door, Sir, is locked; the Captain has locked us all in here, if you^ll
be pleased to stay, Sir, till he comes --


Dog. (I Would as live stay to meet the Devil, or a Sargeant.)


Pun. (Would I were hid like maggot in a pescod; we shall be abused I see, oh,
oh, oh,)


Joh. What makes you quake so, Sir?


Pun. Nothing, only I have an extreme list to make water: It Is nothing else by
this light.


Will. My brother would not have you gone it seems. Your names Mr. John
Timothy, is it?


Dog. No, that is my man's name.


Will. O, your man's name; it is true, it is very true indeed, that is your man's
name. You Will pardon me, Sir?


Ioh. Pray, friend, do you know the great City called Astervadil, where my
namesake Prester-Iohn keeps his Court?


Pun. Know It? I, very well; I have lived there a great while, I have cause to
know it.


Ioh. There Is a brave Castle of three miles long.


Pun. I, and many stately building too.


Ioh. The noble men's houses are all built of Marble.


Pun. They make indeed a glorious show. I have seen 'um.


Ioh. It may be so. But to my knowledge, friend, there is no such City there.


Pun. It may be the names are altered since I was there. (Here Is the Captain,
I Will sneak behind the hangings.)


Act. 5. Scaen. 10.
Dogrel, Puny, William, John, Blade, VVidow. Bla. I like this Person well, h'
has made short work on it, he had appointed sure some meetting at an Alehouse.
Welcome wife, welcome home now. But I have two brethren which you must know.


Wid. Marry, Heavens for^sheild, Sir.


Bla. Brethren in God sweetheart, no otherwise. Come hither Guiny brother;
what say you?


Will. This Gentleman, Brother, has stayed for you here; pray use him kindly,
he is a Traveller: where did you say you traveled Sir?


Bla. O yes! How do you, brother?


Dog. I your brother? what do you mean?


Bla. Why, are not you my brother Blade that was taken captive by the Tartars?
Ha!


Dog. You're merrily disposed, Sir: I your brother! I taken captive by the
Tartars! Ha, ha, ha! I understand not your meaning, Sir.


Bla. What an impudent slave's this! Sirrah monster, did not thou come with
thy man John?


Dog. I, my man John? here is no such fellow here, you see: how you're mistaken,
Sir! you mean some other man. This is the strangest humor.


Bla. Sirrah, do thou see this fist? do thou see this foot? I Will wear these
out upon thee --


Dog. Hold, pray Sir, hold. I remember now indeed that I was Blade the
Merchant; but I had quite forgot it. You must pardon me; my memory's very weak.


Bla. I like the humor. But I must know, Sir, who you are, now you have left
being my brother.


Dog. Who, I? don't you know me? I Am Dogrel the Poet, and Puny was my man John.
Lord that you should not know* me all this while! not know Poet Dogrel!

Why I intended here this merry play,
To solemnize your nuptial-day.

Wid. O thank you, M. Dogrel; Can you dance upon the ropes, and tumble? Truly
I never knew it before, not I.


Bla. Where Is that fool, Puny? Is he slipped away?


Pun. (He was wise enough to do so, I Will warrant you.)


Bla. I will beat him so, that he shall not find a similitude for himself. As
for you, Dogrel, because you came off pretty handsomely, with the best at the
last, like an Epigram, I may chance to pardon you; but upon this condition,
that you make no Epithalamiums upon my marriage.

Well said, Will; bravely done, He pulls off his men's d^sguises. Will: in faith
thou shall have two laces more to thy Livery, for doing this so well. I told
thee, Will, what 'twas to have acted the Bear in Musidorus. And Ralph was a
brave John too --


Dog. How Is this? I plainly see I Am an Ass then: 'twas this damned Puny's
fearfulness spoiled all.


Pun. (A pox of this coward Dogrel: I thought they were not the right ones.)


Bla. I see my Players had more wit then my Poet. Here Is something for you to
drink. Go in now: this is your Cue of Exit; and see all things there in a
readiness.


Will. Nay, let the Master go first. Follow me, John. Exeunt Will. and Ralph.


Wid. What, husband? Have you given 'um any thing? Indeed, Love, you're too
lavish.


Dog. 'Twas very wittily put off of me, howsoever.


Act. 5. Scaen. 11.
Blade, Widow, Dogrel, Puny, Cutter, and Tabytha, with Fiddlers before 'um. Bla.
How now? what have we here? another Puppet-play? Any thing now but brothers, and
I Am for 'um. Who? Cutter? What Is the matter, Poet? Come, what device is this?
like one of yours?


Cut. Stay at the door, ye sempiternal squeakers. Come, Queen of fame.


Tab. Lord, I Am so weary with dancing as passes. Yonder Is my mother. Oh mother!
what do you think I have been doing to day?


Wid. Why what, child?


Tab. Nay nothing: I have only been married a little; and my husband and I have
so danced it since!


Cut. Brave Tabytha still! Never be angry, Widow; you know where Marriages are
made. How now, Captain? If I turn Tapster now, 'twill be happy for you: for I
shall be rich enough to trust you, Captain.


Wid. 'Twas Gods will, I see, and therefore there is no resisting. But what do you
mean, son? I hope you will not turn swaggerer?


Cut. It Is for special reasons, gentle mother. Why how now, Dogrel? M. Blade
the Merchant looks as if he were broke: he has turned away his servant too.


Tab. Who Is that? M. Dogrel in these Players clothes? Can M. Dogrel dance too,
husband?


Bla. Prithee, Cutter, what has exalted Tabytha thus?


Cut. What? this good fortune she has got by me: You know what a dull creature
she was before; her soul was in her body, like butter in a hot cake; now she is
as full of Spirits as Hell it self. My counsel and two cups of Sack, have
wrought this miracle.


Act. 5. Scaen. 12.
To these, Truman Pater, Truman Filius, Lucia veiled. True. p. Well said! You
are joined then now, my blessing on you both; come in to your father Blade.
Nay, daughter Aurelia, off with your veil now. Ha! Whom have you married here?


True. f. I know not, Sir. She was Aurelia when we went to Church.


Bla. This is my daughters maid. Where Is the wench? Ho! Aurelia?


Act. 5. Scaen. 13.
To them, Aurelia. Aur. Here, Sir.


Bla. Here, Sir? Why do you make your husband lead your maid in thus?


Aur. My husband, Sir? what is that?


Bla. Why, huswife is not Mr. Truman your husband?


Aur. No, by my troth, Sir, I thank God.


True. p. These are fine tricks; delicate, dainty tricks. Sirrah, how durst you
Sirrah? -- and for your minion -- marry come up, marry a Chambermaid? Well,
Captain, this was your plotting. You said indeed you would make a Iethron of me: y'
have don't indeed; I thank you, Captain Blade, it is well. Out of my sight, Sir,
with your minion there, I say out of my sight. Ha! am I fooled thus? I shall
make some repent it, I hold a groate on it.


Bla. Do You hear, Mr. Truman --


True. p. Yes, Sir, I do hear; and I will not hear if it please me, Sir; but
some body shall hear of this Captain. But, Captain, you're deceived, this is
not a lawful marriage.


Luc. Pray, hear me all; for I shall tell those things
That will appease your wrath, and move your wonder.
I Have married Truman, and I will enjoy him,
And he will love me, I am sure he will;
For I am Lucia, the much injure'd Lucia.

Omn. Ha!


Luc. The habit of a servant I put on,
That I might find who 'twas I ought to pardon,
For all the wrongs done to me. I have found it,
Cosen, you know I have, and I forgive 'um.

Aur. Then all my plots are spoiled. Pardon me, Cousin:
And, Mr. Truman, know you have a wife
That is as pure and innocent as the thoughts
Of dying Saints? 'Twas I that with the veil
Deceived you in the Prison; it was I,
Who in that veil contracted my self to Puny.
Forgive me both; I do confess I Have wronged you,
But Heaven has seen you righted.

True. f. O this blessed hour!
What shall I say? I know thou art all goodness,
But can thou pardon, Lucia, that great sin,
That high and mighty sin which I have done
In doubting of thy faith? I fear thou can not.

Luc. I do desire no more then that I may,
Deserve your better opinion, Sir, hereafter.
And uncle for your poison --

Bla. Speak no more of it,
I do confess it, Niece; and shall most willingly
Surrender up the charge of your Estate.
It has pleased Heaven to restore me mine own
By marriage with this Widow.

True. p. Ha, ha, ha! To see how things are come about! I thought Dick would not
be such a fool as to marry one that he knew not. He knew her well enough, I Will
warrant you. How do you, Captain? I was somewhat rash: I Am an old man, alas.


Bla. Cutter, and M. Dogrel, you that sneak there;
You're precious witnesses. But no more of that.
You have been to blame, Aurelia. But it is past.
We want your husband here: Where Is Puny?

Pun. (I Will venture out amongst 'um.) Enter Puny. Nay never laugh at me; I know
I look like a door without hinges. A pox upon you, Dogrel; are you there?


Bla. What? my son John? do you know this Gentlewoman?


Aur. Do You know this piece of gold, Sir, which you broke?


Pun. Hum? Yes 'faith, it is the same: thou art my Cynthia, wench, my Endymion:
we'll be married presently. O for a witty Parson to marry us two Wi^s!


Dog. Slife, one, two, three, in faith four matches here at one time! What
accursed fortune^s this! there is three feasts lost: they will dine all together.


Pun I will not kiss thee, my little magazine, till I have washed my face Ha, M.
Dogrel, have thou got no Spouse too?


Dog. The thrice three Sisters are my wives.


Pun. Well, because thou art a Poet, and my Jews-trump and I are Wits, thou
shall eat and drink at my pavilion always.


Aur. You shall have wine and serge. Do You remember, Dogrel?


Dog. Thank you: but I Will never lie for you again.


Bla. Come, let us all in to dinner.


The Epilogue.
THe Play is done, great Prince, which needs must fear,
Though you brought all your fathers mercies here,
It may offend your Highness, and we have now
Three hours done treason here, for ought we know.
But power your Grace can above Nature give;
It can give power to make abortives live.
In which if our bold wishes should be crossed,
It Is but the life of one poor week that is lost.
Though it should fall beneath your present scorn,
It could not die sooner then it was born.
FINIS.

