Acteon and Diana; WITH A Pastoral Story of the Nymph OENONE: FOLLOWED By the
several Conceited Humors Of Bumpkin the Huntsman. Hobbinal the Shepherd.
Singing Simpkin, and John Swabber the Seaman.


By ROB. COX.

Acted at the Red Bull with great applause.

The second Edition, with the Addition of Simpleton the Smith, not before
extant.

LONDON, Printed for Edward Archer, at the Adam and Eve, in Little Britain,
1656.

To all the Worthy-minded GENTRY.
Gentlemen, and Ladies!
IF your serious occasions will permit me so much honor, that this slight
Book may be accepted and perused, I shall justly acknowledge the favor to be
far above either my hopes or merit. And if you ever vouchsafed your Presence
when it was presented on the Stage, I am confident, your (no-way erring-)
Judgments will now allow it, as it then was intended, which was, rather to
provoke a laughter, then occasion a contemplation. It will likewise engage my
grateful service, if I be not (in your worthy opinions) taxt of Arrogance, to
present my unpolished lines, when daily those of excellence are offered to your
Eyes and Ears: But in the confidence of your clemency, I submit to the verdict
of my grand Jury. And how soever you are pleased to censure, will remain (as I
ought) the humblest of your servants,

ROBERT COX.

Simpleton the Smith.
Enter Old Simpleton solus. Sim. IF ever Dog was weary of a day, then have I
cause to be weary of my life; I am a Blacksmith by my Trade, and (though I say
it) I have bin accounted a good Workman, but I could never yet forge, or hammer
out means enough to satisfy the insatiate gut of my son Simpleton. He will not
work, and yet no sooner is his nose out of the Alehouse, but his head is in the
Cupboard: His insatiate stomach may well defy a Giant, or the great Eater of
Kent; but I have thought upon a way which he shall either take in hand, or
graze with Hobb my horse; Sirrah Simpleton, where are you?


Young Simp. Within. Here, here, Father.


Old Simp. Where, where, Sirrah?


Y. Sim. At the Cupboard Father, at the Cupboard.


O. Sim. I thought as much; but come you hither sirrah, or I shall make your
ears sing prick song for you.


Enter Young Simpleton with a great piece of bread and butter. Y. Sim. It Is a
miserable condition that a man cannot eat a little bit for his afternoons
Lunchins, but he must be disturbed in the best of his stomach.


O. Sim. A bit do thou call it, O my conscience this devouring rascal, old
as I am, would eat me if he found me in the Cupboard.


Y. Sim. I do not think there is such a genteel Smith in the town, that has
such an old niggardly Coxcombe to his father as I, he knows I have no better a
stomach then a young green-sicknesse girl, and yet he grutches me every bit I
eat.


O. Sim. Leave off your muttering, and lend me an ear a while.


Y. Sim. Truly I cannot spare one father; yet now I think on it, you have great
occasion for one ever since the last pillory day, but since you are my father,
I will vouchsafe to listen a while.


O. Sim. You know that I am old.


Y. Sim. The More's the pity, that you were not hanged while you were young.


O. Sim. Thou have drunk most of my means away.


Y. Sim. I Will eat out the rest.


O. Sim. Leave your ill breeding, and give me sensibly a reason why you will
not work?


Y. Sim. Because I am lazy father.


O. Sim. Nay that is true.


Y. Sim. True; why do you think I would be so unmannerly, to tell you a lie
father.


O. Sim. How I shall maintein that coming stomach of yours, unless your self
endeavor for it: I know not, but if thou will be ruled, I Will make thee a man.


Y. Sim. A man! why what am I now, a mouse what would you make of me?


O. Sim. An Ass, an Ass, a gross Ass.


Y. Sim. You may well make me a gross Ass, you have so good a pattern.


O. Sim. Listen to me; you know the widows daughter at the corner, sweet
Mistress Dorothy, she is both young and handsome, and has money too.


Y. Sim. I, and that will help to buy victuals.


O. Sim. Go and woo her, and I dare lay my life thou carriest her.


Y. Sim. I carry her, father; alas, I have but a weak back, and besides I am
somewhat lazily given, as you say, it were a great deal better that she would
carry me.


O. Sim. Thou have no more wit then my hammer head has, and no more brains then
an Anvil, which every one may strike on, but never move it; go take your Fidle,
at that they say you are excellent, and when she thanks thee from her Chamber
window, say thou art my son, and that I sent thee about the thing she wotes of.


Y. Sim. O must I bumfiddle her under her Chamber window; well, I will go wash
my hands, and starch my face, because I may be sure to go cleanly about my
business.


Exeunt. Enter the first Gentleman. 1. Gent. A pox of fortune, she was never my
friend yet; the money that I got with so much trouble, I lost with one unlucky
chance at dice. I have no means nor hopes left to supply me, but what my
sweetheart Dorothy affords me, she has and must again take pity of me, this is
her window, I hope her mother will not hear.


Hem Doll. Doll. above. Who Is that calls so boldly; speak, what are you?


1. Gent. Oh Doll thou know my fortunes, and my love last night has broke
me, and by thee my fortunes must be splintered; one half piece does the
business.


Doll. How often have I peec'd you, and still you break; and I shall do the
same if you continue thus; you know my mother keep's a look over my will, yet
once again I Will venture, come in the morning about five of the clock, and I Will be
ready for thee.


1. Gent. Oh my sweet Doll, thou never did deceive me.

Exit
Enter Yo. Sim. with a Violl. Y. Sim. Now must I go play an Alampadoe. under
Mistress Dorothy's Chamber window, and all that time perhaps she is a snorting,
for to say the truth my music will hardly have the virtue to waken her, and if
she should wake, I could not tell what to say to her unless it were to desire
her to go to bed again. And because I will be sure to be acceptable to her, I
will join my nightingale voice thereunto.


Enter the first Gent. 1. Gent. What slave is this presumes to court my
Mistress, could I but see him, I would satisfy my anger with the ruin of his
limbs, but he is gone, and I loose time in seeking Exit.


Y. Sim. That was a roaring Rogue, he has made my heart jumpe upright into my
mouth, and if I had not held it fast with my teeth, without doubt it had
forsaken my body; but he is gone, and now I will venture forward.


Enter the second Gent. 2. Gent. I heard some music at my sweet-hearts window,
could I but find him, I would cut him, and flash him til his whole body were
anoatmized; but he is gone, and it was his wisest course.

Exit.
Y. Sim. That Roaring Rouge was far worse then the the other, he has almost
frighted my song out of my head. Oh! we true and faithful lovers, what perils
and dangers must we undergo, to gain the wills and affections of our dearest
deares; but now to my music, and because she shall take a great pleasure to
think on it, I will sing a song of a young wench that had a great mind to be
married before her time.

Sings. Oh! mother let me have a husband kind,
with toitre loytre loitre.
That day and night I may comfort find
of a toitre, etc.
I care not whether honest man or knave,
so that he keep me sine and brave,
And that none else but I may have
his toitre etc.
Oh daughter you are not old enough
for a toitre etc.
And husbands often prove rough
with a toitre etc.
Your tender heart no grief can carry
as they must do sometimes that marry
You yet may well a twelvemonth tarry
for a toitre etc.
Oh! mother I am in my teens
for a toytre etc.
And younger wifes are often seen
with a toitre etc.
I pray let not me so Idle stand,
for I can do as well as any can.
I have had a proof with John our man
of his toitre etc.
Well if she does not run mad for me now, it is pity she should have music
under her window, as long as she lives again.


Mistress Dorothy above. Doll. What owl is that shreikes so at my window, if he
meant music sure he was mistaken, I was about to have eaten my breake-fast,
but this fool has turned my stomach. What art thou that art so troublesome.


Y. Sim. Good Mistress Dorothy, it is I, your none sweet-swotterkin, and if you
please to throw your eyes out of the window upon me, you shall behold one of
the faithfullest lovers that ever took hammer in hand. I love you better and
dear, then a Bear does honey, and I hope you will affect me as much as a Sow
does a bunch of Carrots.


Doll. Oh is it you? I thought none but a puppy like your self, would have
disturbed the neighbors with your gridiron-musick, a Saw were far mor pleasing.


Y. Sim. Forsooth I am very sorry that you have no better skill in music, in
my opinion I sung most melodiously, but if you will be pleased to look with
eyes of judgment upon me, you will express your love in a better manner to me.


Doll. I shall express my love if you continue here, in a far Worser manner
then you think for; do you see this chamber-pott, it longs to be acquainted
with that trainless head of yours; therefore be gone, and save your self a
washing.


Y. Sim. If you should wash me, I think it would be but labor in vain; yet if
you please to distill any of your sweet water upon me, I shall desire to be
smelt out by you.


Doll. You ass, you puppy; must you needs force a drowning.

Exit
Y. Sim. Is this the beginning of love? it is almost as bad as the proverb to
me: stay, it may be it is rosewater. Voh, it is as rank urine as ever any
Doctor cast. I Will call this same old Simpleton my father, that set me about
this business. Oh! Father Simpleton, where are you.


O. Sim. Oh mine Son, how have thou sped boy?


Y. Sim. O! I have sped most abominably, father,
I got a great deal more then I expected.

O. Sim. Oh my own natural boy!


Y. Sim. I natural, to be sure; I had nere come here else.


O. Sim. But how did she relish thee.


Y. Sim. Why she relished me with a whole chamber pot full of water.


O. Sim. Why thou ass, thou puppy, thou fool, thou coxcombe.


Y. Sim. Why? how can I help it* why you (...) me so like a fool*


O. Sim. Come show me to her, and you shall see how I will handle her.


Y. Sim. Nay father, I should be loath to marry her, after you have had the
handling of her.


O. Sim. This is her Chamber, is it not?


Y. Sim. Yes* I know it by a good token, for here she opened the sluice, and let
the floodgates out upon me.


O. Sim. Mistress Dorothy, Mistress Dorothy, pray come to the window.


Y. Sim. Sirrah, hold your tongue.


Doll. What again? sure this whole morning is nothing but my trouble* what
wise-aker^ is that now?


Y. Sim. She calls you wise-aker^* speak now.


O. Sim. I am your neighbor, Old Simpleton the Smith.


Y. Sim. And I young Simpleton the Smith.


Doll. Oh neighbor is it you* here was your son but now, and he kept a worse
noise then a Bearbaiting* but you are civil, I will come down to you.


O. Sim. Look you there sirrah, she will come down tome, she says.


Y. Sim. I by that time I have been a courtier as long as you have been, one
woman or other may come down to me too.


Enter Doll. Doll. Good morrow nieghbour, what is your business pray.


O. Sim. Why it is this: this is my son. Nay it is my son, I Will assure you.


Y. Sim. Yes forsooth, he is sure I am his son; my mother told him so.


Doll. Now I look better on him, he seems to me more handsome then before*
your company seasons him with discretion* but what is your business pray Sir*


O. Sim. Why, if you please forsooth, I would fain Join you two together in the
way of Matrimony.


Y. Sim. Yes forsooth, to mock a marriage*


Doll. But hold Sir, two words to a bargain* what profession is your son of.


Y. Sim. Forsooth I am a Blacksmith, and though I say it, I have as good
working gear as any smith in the parish* all my neighbors wives shall be my
witness.


O. Sim. Sirrah, hold your tongue.


Y. Sim. Why, shall I come a wooing, and say nothing for my self*


Doll. But what estate I pray has your son in posse^


Y. Sim. Father, what estate have I in a posset.


O Sim. Forsooth, two Cowes you shall have with him.


Y. Sim. With a calfe to my knowledge.


O. Sim. Four ewes and lambs, and a horse to ride to market on.


Y. Sim. Yes, and a ^ no, now I think on it, you may keep your ass your self.


O. Sim. Four mark in money.


Y. Sim. Do you mark that.


O. Sim. With a bed and blankets.


Y. Sim. And then we may dance the shaking of the sheets when we can.


Doll. These promises are fair, and if performed, I hope I shall not need
repent my bargain.


Y. Sim. Nor I neither, come let us to bed presently, and afterward we will talk
on it.


Doll. No, no, first to Church, and then to bed.


Y. Sim. Oh then you will not follow the fashion of our country, we commonly go
to bed first, and to Church when we can, but come I am contented.


Exeu^t Music. Enter the First Gent. and second, meeting. 1. Gent. How now
friend, what make you hereabouts?


2. Gent. My business is the same, I think, with yours; is it not for Dorothy?


2. Gent. I do confess it, and have known what love you long have born her;
let us go together.


Enter Old Sim. Young Sim. and Doll. 1. Gent. Stand close, what means this?
Here comes the bride and bridegroom on so stately,
That were but maid and batchelour so lately.
And now let all the Blacksmithes be invited,
Cause Vulcan and his Venus are united.

1. Gent. What should this mean, Doll has a hat on?
She did not use to wear one.

Enter Doll. Doll. Oh gentlemen! though I desire your company, yet now I
heartily could wish your absence.


1. Gent. Why, what is the matter Doll?


Doll. I am married.


2. Gent. To whom?


Doll. Do you not know him? Young Simpleton the Smith.


1. Gent. That fool, that Coxcombe; I Will break his hammer with his own
jolt-head.


Doll. Stand close, I hear him coming.


Enter Young Simpleton. Y. Sim. Sweetheart now we are married, things ought to
be well carried.

And the first thing we should take care for, is how to get victuals, what is
that?


They whistle. Doll. Nothing but the Rats and Mice.


Y. Sim. As sure as I live, I Will lay a trap for those Rats. But what is the
matter now?


They hem. Doll. Nothing but the Neighbors Dogs.


Y. Sim. It Is a thousand pities but such Currs were hanged up presently.

Exit Sim.
Doll. Oh Gentlemen! I would you were out of the house, for I am afraid he
will return again ere I can handsomely shut the door.


Y. Sim: within. Why Doll, Doll.


Doll. Come ye behind me presently, I pray dispatch.


Enter Young Simpleton. Y. Sim. Doll: I have considered, that to set up my
trade is the way to get victuals, and I wont nothing of my tools but only a
pair of Bellows.


Doll. Fear not husband, I have a little money that you know not of, and if I
can but hear of a good bargain, I will not fail to buy a pair of Bellows.


Y. Sim. Oh thou pretty loving kind pigsnie, but what makes thee wear thy
coats of She spreads her coats. that fashion.


Doll. Do not you know husband, it is the fashion for new-married wives.


Y. Sim. Is it so? it is an excellent fashion in the Summer time; but I Will go
out and return presently.

Exit Y. Sim.
Doll. What will you do? it is ten to one he spies you, and then my reputation
runs a hazard.


1. Gent. Appoint what way you will, we are contented.


Doll. I see him coming back; and truth to say, the course I shall advise will
seem a strange one, yet it must be: you know he did appoint that I should buie
for him a pair of Bellows; now if you two can bear it lustily, and blow it
strongly, this visit may be kept off from his knowledge.


1. Gent. Nay any thing good Doll, we cannot now be choosers.


Doll. So, lie down: I Will fetch a Chafingdish of Charcoal hither, and practice
you a while before he come.

Exit Doll.
1. Gent. I have played many a mad prank in my life, yet never till now acted a
pair of Bellows.


Enter Doll. She practices them. Doll. So, so, blow lustily and fear not.


Enter Young Simpl. Y. Sim. Wife: I have considered with my self, that if we
lay out all the money in a pair of Bellows, we should have little or nothing
left to buy victuals.


Doll. Oh husband! you are deceived; for I have bought you a pair of Bellows,
the whole town shows not a neater.


Y. Sim. Is this a pair of Bellows, let me see? this is an alamoda pair of
Bellows, but look you Doll; when the Bellows-mender comes by, let him stop this
hole here, for the wind comes out abominably. I Will call my Father Simpleton to
see this pair of Bellows. Father, father, come hither.


Enter Old Simpl. Y. Sim. Did you ever see such a pair of Bellows as my wife
has bought.


O. Sim. A pair of Bellows, Son! me thinks this would serve better for an
Anvill: Let Us try how it will bear our strokes.


Y. Sim. Well, a match.


FINIS.
ACTAEON AND DIANA* WITH A Pastoral Story of the Nymph OENONE; Followed By the
several conceited humors Of Bumpkin, the Huntsman. Hobbinall, the Shepherd.
Singing Simpkin. And John Swabber, the Seaman.


Printed at London by T. Newcomb, for the use of the Author ROBERT COX.

To all the Worthy-minded GENTRY.
Gentlemen, and Ladies,
IF your serious occasions will permit me so much honor, that this slight Book
may be accepted and perused, I shall justly acknowledge the favor to be far
above either my hopes or merit. And if you ever vouchsafed your Presence when
it was presented on the Stage, I am confident, your (no way erring) judgments
will now allow it as it then was intended, which was, rather to provoke a
laughter, then occasion a contemplation. It will likewise engage my grateful
service if I be not (in your worthy opinions) taxt of Arrogance to present my
unpolished lines, when daily those of excellence are offered to your Eyes and
Ears: But in the confidence of your clemency, I submit to the verdict of my
grand Jury. And howsoever you are pleased to censure, will remain (as I ought)
the humblest of your servants,

ROBERT COX*

ACTAEON and DIANA.
The names of the Persons.
Actaeon. Three Huntsmen. Bumpkin, an inferior. Diana. Five Nymphs. Three
Country Wenches.
ACTEON and DIANA.
Enter the first Huntsman, and Bumpkin very Melancholy. 1. Hunt. BUt tell me
fellow Bumpkin, what is the matter?
Thou that have formerly been heard to sing
As merrily and sweetly as the Cuckowe,
But by the posture thou do now appear in,
Strangers will sooner take thee for an Ass,
Then for a man of mettle.

Bumpkin. It may be so.
And for my own part, I am not such a fool, to think the contrary; nay, I
would change condition with an Ass, and thank him too: never was any man (of
parts) so tumbled, Jumbled and Rumbled, as poor Bumpkin is.


1. Hunt. Why what is the matter?


Bumpkin. Nay, I know not, but every day my great guts and my small guts makes
such a combustion in my belly as passes, and my puddings (like Lances) runs a
tilt at my heart, and makes me as queasie stomackt as a young Green Sickness
girl newly come to a big belly.


1. Hunt. Can thou not guess the reason of this trouble.


Bump. Yes, I think I can, and I Will be judged by thee, if my case be not
desperate: I have a horrible mind to be in Love.


1. Hunt. With whom.


Bump. With any body, but I cannot find out the way how to be in Love.


1. Hunt. Why? I Will instruct thee: can thou be Melancholy?


Bump. Yes, as a dog, or a hoglouse, I could even find in my heart, to cry
presently.


1. Hunt. Can thou sleep well?


Bump. I cannot tell, I never saw my self sleep.


1. Hunt. Is It possible, that thou who have so long
Been an attendant on my Lord Acteon.
Should be to learn the way to be in Love.

Bump. I would it were not possible, on the condition thou were hanged and
quartered.


1. Hunt. I thank you Sir, but Bumpkin list to me,
This day thou know the maids and youngmen meet
To sport, and revell it about the May Pole;
Present thy self there, tell thy cause of grief,
And I dare warrant thee a sweetheart presently.

Hump. If thou can do that, I Will marry her first, and learn to love her
afterward.


1. Hunt. Have thither Bumpkin, I Will go on before.

Exit.
Bump. And I will follow there a dog trot.
Is it not pity, that a man of Authority as I am, having been chief dog-keeper
to my Lord Acteon this five years, being a man so comely of person, and having
such a pure complexion, that all fair Ladies may be ashamed to look on me, and
that I should be distressed for a sweetheart:

Maypole I com, and if the wenches there increas my pains
And scorn to Love, I Will beat out all their brains.
Exit.
Enter the Huntsmen, with three Country Wenches, as they come in, they sing
this song. SONG.
1. Country Wench. COme you youngmen, come along.
With your Music, dance and song;
Bring your Lasses in your hands,
For it is that which Love commands:
Then to the Maypole come away,
For it is now a Holiday.
It is the choice time of the year,
For the Vi'lets now appear;
Now the Rose receives its birth,
And pretty Primrose decks the earth:
Then to the Maypole come away,
For it is now a Holiday.
Here each Bachelor may choose
One that will not says abuse,
Nor repay with coy disdain,
Love, that should be loved again:
Then to the Maypole, etc.
And when you well reckoned have,
What kisses you your sweethearts gave,
Take them all again, and more,
It will never make them poor:
Then to the Maypole, etc.
When you thus have spent the time,
Till the day be past its prime,
To your beds repair at night,
And dream there of your days delight:
Then to the Maypole come away,
For it is now a Holiday.

2. Co. Wench. It is possible, would Bumpkin be in Love?


1. Hunt. Yes, if he knew but how, and for that sickness
I have undertaken to become his doctor;
For, at the Maypole meeting it is decreed
A sweet heart must be purchased, come what will on it.

3. Co. Wench. Nay, if he be distressed, twenty to one he may find charitable
persons there.


1. Co. Wench. What Less to such a writhled faced companion;
One that by's looks, shows that his fathers orchard
Could yield no fruit, but Crabs or Apple-Johns:
Should he be granted a prevailing suitor,
I should not think it requisite or fitting
Women hereafter should enjoy their eyes;
Their very tongues too should be put to silence,
Only allowed to rail at that vile person,
Who by her choice of him, shamed the whole sex.

2. Co. Nay, I would lay a heavier curse upon her,
She should not sleep without a wanton dream,
And waking find no hopes of what she dreamed.

2. Hunt. That was a heavy curse and well considered,
But could you find our fellow Bumpkins parts.

3. Co. Wench. He can loose none, and who can find them then.


3. Hunt. Do you believe him foolish.


1. Co. Wench. It is a faith that needs no confirmation.


1. Hunt. Laugh at him then, and we will assist you in it; but do it with
Consideration.


2. Co. Wench. So we will, -- hark Lasses.


They whisper. 2. Hunt. Now if they be not hatching Eggs of mischief, let me be
counted addle, what think you sirs?


Country Wenches Laugh, Ha ha ha, 1. Co. Wench. And if he have not love enough,
good Cupid,
Let me want Love when looked for.

2. Co. Wench. In the mean time
Let us not starve our pastimes, pray sirs,
Being the Maypole revels.

3. Hunt. So we will;
Come strike up a farewell to misfortune.

Enter Bumpkin. Bump. That's a dance that I could never hit off, Pray desist a
while and hear my doleful tale.


1. Co. Wench. He Will make us cry sure.


Bump. Be it known unto all men by these presents


2. Co. Wench. An obligation; we will be no witnesses.


Bump. Why then i will hang my self?


3. Co. Wench. We will be witness then.


Bump. What to my hanging? O my conscience! If I should woo my heart out, I
should never be the fatter, for it. -- where is your promise now?


1. Hunt. You have not yet expressed your self, be plain, Tell them your grief, a
remedy will follow.


Bump. If that be all, it is but an easy matter, pray take notice that I am in
Love -- with somebody.


2. Co. Wench. Would I were she!


Bump. Why? so you are, if you have a mind to it


2. Co. Wench. Why then you are my own?


3. Co. W. Pardon me, sister, I They all hang about him. bespake him yesterday.


goes to her Bump Yes marry did she.


1. Co. Wench. But I was she that won him at the Maypole.


2. Co. Wench. Was that the cause you strove so for the Garland.


Bump. What Is that to you?
Goes to her. Would I had any one of them in quietness.

3. Co. Wench. But yet I must have share.


1. Co. Wench. So must I too.


All put him. 2. Co. Wench. I will not part without the better half.


Bump. Then who shall have me whole, what are you mad?


3. Co. Wench. There Is reason for a madness in this case.


1. Co. Wench. I will not lose my right. Let go I say.


2. Co. Wen. He shall be mine, or else he shall be nothing.

Bumpkin. Away you Burrs, why do you stick thus on me?
Now by this hand, if nothing can persuade you
I Will drown my self for spite that you may perish.

(Horn.) 1. Hunt. Hark, hark, my Lord Acteons warning piece,
That Horn gives us intelligence he does intend
To spend this day in hunting, Bumpkin, why stay you?
The hounds will quarrel with you, we will come after.

1. Co. Wench. Will you not stay my Love.


Bump. I Will see you hanged first, and by this hand ere I will be in love again,
I Will feed my hounds with my own proper carcass.

Exit.
2. Co. Wench. Now he is gone, our dancing may go forward.


2. Hunt. My Lord Acteon stays, be quick, I pray.


3. Co. Wench. Quick as you will, the doing of it quick makes it show better.


A Country dance, Then Exeunt. Enter Acteon and Bumpkin. Acteon* ARe all the
hounds uncoupled, let the woods,
Valleys, and hills, be filled with their sweet music:
Till the thick Air pierced by their harmony,
Return a willing Ecchoe; Let your cunning
And care in this days hunting be expressed,
To make the world know that Acteons pleasure,
Is honored and obeyed, be nimble sirrah.

Bump. Nimble? yes, as a Bear that has been lug'd to purpose: if Love be such
a troublesome Companion, I will entreat him to keep out of my company.


Acteon. Where are your fellows? we consume the day
That should be spent in sport, with idleness.
Go find them out, and tell them of my purpose.

Enter the three Huntsmen. Bump. They have saved me a labor.

Acteon. Fie! what mean you?
The glory of this day calls us to action:
The wild inhabitans of these fair woods,
Are to be instructed, they must fear our Javelins,
Our sloth will make them careless.

1. Hunt. Sir, you may please to know, that yesternight
I lodged a Boar within the neighboring Forest.

Bump. Yes Sir, and I lodged a Fox at a house hard by.

Hunt. His foamy tushes did proclaim defiance
To all that would oppose him, his vast length
And breadth of wonder, caused me to believe
These woods nere bred his equal.

Acteon. He Is then a worthy subject for my javelin,
Whose glittering head I Will bath so long within him,
Till I have died it Crimson with his blood;
Nor shall Diana's self, who every day
Honors these woods with her fair train of Nymphs,
Have power to ravish from my resolute arm,
The glory of this conquest: in the mean time,
Let musicks sweet tunes in our breasts create
Desire of Acteon, whilst our active Feet,
Nimbly beguiles our duller thoughts of power
To contradict our pleasures: in the fall
Of this wild Boar, lies honor for us all.

A dance with Acteon and his Huntsmen. Exeunt. A dance of Diana and her Nymphs,
in the later end of which Acteon and his Huntsmen join with them, upon which
Diana says, Diana. This boldness ruins thee.
Exit*
Act. I Will follow though my ruin do attend me,

Exeunt. Enter Diana and her Nymphs. Diana. The unbridled boldness of Acteons
youth,
Merits a punishment to equalize
The nature of his crime; saucy young man,
Too much presuming of thy known deserts,
Be witness you that have vowed chastity,
How much he has endeavored to eclipse
The glory of our purity; for to me
And those that are my Votaries, honors precepts
Must strictly be observed; no Balm can cure
The wound of Reputation when it is made
Upon those bosoms that are vowed to virtue.
Shall she resolve his ruin?

1. Nymph. Gracious Madam,
Mercy with chastity and beauty joined,
Are both with Gods and Men in estimation,
And though his fault beyond expression great,
Cries lowdly on your wrath to execute,
Yet let his youth find pardon.

2. Nymph. It will prove your charity unequalled.

Diana. Your goodness shall
Become example to my willing pity:
Therefore if young Acteon from this time,
Consider his own safety and my honor,
My vengeance shall be silent; but if again
He shall presume to tempt his most sad fate,
Ruin as quick as lightning shall demolish
What Nature did erect in him for wonder,
That so from men this truth may not be hid,
No one must covet what the Gods forbid:
Undress you now, for by this fountain side.
Our garments from our bodies we will divide.

Enter Acteon. Acteon. What wonders do I gaze on? Might I thus
Be feasted at my eyes till time grow old,
I would not wish a satisfaction
Of any other sense: -- Unkind Diana,
To be so much a miser of thy beauties.
Loves laws can not be perfect, till they part
Rebellion from the confines of thy heart.

Diana. We are betrayed! Oh Chastity defend us.

Acteon. It Was but a flattring bliss that did me cherish.
Fly, fly, Acteon, lest thy life do perish.
Exit.
Di. Fool! think thou to escape? Know that my will
Has power to reach, though thou bestrid'st a wind,
And as by hunting thy offense grew high,
So by the hands of Hunters thou shall die.
My will prevails, his head is circled round,
The largest Heart ere beat the Forest ground.
And now forbear this fountain from henceforth,
Let my dishonor dwell upon the Spring,
The waters be corrupted, choakt with mud,
Foul and infectious, like to Lethes flood.

Exeunt. A Dance. Where Acteon comes transformed into the shape of a Heart, his
Huntsmen pursue him, and in the conclusion kill him, and bear him away.

Singing Simpkin.
The Names of the Persons.
Simpkin, a Clown. Bluster, a Roarer. An old Man. His Wife. A Servant.
Enter the wife, Simpking following. Wife. BLind Cupid has made my heart for
to bleed,
Fa la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la.

Simp. But I know a man can help you at need,
With a fa la, la, la, la, fa, la, la, la, la, la.

Wife. My husband he often a hunting goes out, Fa la, la, etc.


Simp. And brings home a great pair of horns there is no doubt; with a fa la,
la, la, etc.


Wife. How is it Monsieur Simkin, why are you so sad? Fa la, la, la, etc.


Simp. I am up to the ears in love, and it makes me stark mad, with a fa la,
la, la, etc. I am vexed, I am tortured, and troubled at heart, Fa la, la, etc.


Wife. But I Will try my skill to take off your smart, With a fa la, la, etc.

And on that condition I give you a kiss, Fa la, la, etc.

Simp. But what says your husband when he hears of this? with a fa la, la, etc.


Wife. You know my affection, and no one knows more,
With a fa la, la, etc.

Knock within. Simp. 'Uds niggers noggers who knocks at the door? with a fa la,
la, etc.


Enter Servant. The tune alters. Serve. There is a Royster at the door, he seems
a Fellow stout.


Sim. I beseech you worthy friend, which is the back way out?


Serve. He swears and tears he will come in,
And nothing shall him hinder.

Exit Servant. Simp. I fear he will strip me out my skin.
And burn it into tinder.

Wife. I have considered of a way, and twill be sure the best.


Simp. What may it be my dearest Dear?


Wife. Creep into this same Chest.
A chest set out. And though he roar, speak you no word,
If you will preserve my favor.

Simp. Shut to the chest, I pray, with speed,
For something has some savor.

Enter Bluster. Blust. I never shall be quiet if she use me in this fashion.


Wife. I am here to bid you welcome; what mean you by this passion?


Blust. With some young sweet-fac'd fellow I thought gone out you were.


Simp. in the chest. No sooth, the sweet-fac'd fellow is kept a prisoner here.


Blust. Where is the fool thy husband? Say, whither is he gone?


Wife. The Wittall is a hunting.


Blust. Then we two are alone: But should he come
And find me here, what might the Cuckold think?
Perhaps he would call the neighbors in,

Simp. And beat you till you stink.


Blust. Yet in the bloody war full often,
My courage I did try.

Wife. I know you have killed many a man.


Simp. You lie, you slut, you lie.


Blust. I never came before a foe,
By night nor yet by day,
But that I stoutly roused my self,

Simp. And nimbly ran away.


Blust. Within this chest I Will hide my self,
If it chance he should come.

Wife. O no my love, that cannot be,


Simp. I have bespoke the room.


Wife. I have a place behind here,
Which yet is known to no man.

Simp. She has a place before too,
But that is all to common.

Old man within. Old man. Wife, wherefore is the door thus barred? what mean you
pray by this?


Wife. Alas! it is my husband.


Sim. I laugh now till I piss.


Blust. Open the chest, I Will into it,
My life else it may cost.

Wife* Alas I cannot open it.


Simp. I believe the key is lost.


Wife. I have bethought my self upon a dainty trick.


Blust. What may it be my dearest love?
I prithee now be quick.

Wife. You must say that your enemy
Into this house is fled,
And that your heart can take no rest,
Until that he be dead.
Draw quickly out your furious blade,
And seem to make a strife.
Swear all th'excuses can be made,
Shall not preserve his life.
Say that the Rogue is fled in here,
That stole away your coin,
And if I Will not deliver him,
You Will have as much of mine.

Blust. Here Is no man but my self,
On whom shall I complain?

Wife. This great fool does not understand,
This thing you must but faign.
My husband thus must be deceived, and afterward we will laugh.

Enter old man. Old man. Wife, since you will not open the door,
I Will break't open with my staff.

Blust. Good woman show me to the slave,
His limbs I strait will tear.

Wife. By all the honestly I have,
There Is no man came in here.

Blust. When I have fought to purchase wealth,
And with my blood did win it,
This Rogue has got my purse by stealth.

Simp. But never a penny in it.


Old man. She Is big with child, therefore take heed you do not fright my wife.


Blust. But know you who the Father is?


Simp. The Roarer on my life.


Old man. She knows not of your enemy, then get you gone you were best.


Wife. Peace husband, peace, I tell you true, I have hid him in the chest.


Old man. I am glad on it at my heart, but do not tell him so.


Wife. I would not for a thousand pound the Roarer should it know.


Blust. When next we meet his life is gone, no other must he hope; I Will kill him
whatsoere comes on it,


Simp. Pray think upon a rope.


Old man. What kind of person is it that in the chest does lie?


Wife. A goodly hansome sweet young man, as ere was seen with eye.


Old man. Then let us both entreat of him -- Pray put us not in fear: we do
beseech you go from hence.


Blust. But to morrow I Will be here.

Exit Blust.
Old man. Wife, run with all the speed you can, and quickly shut the door,

I would not that the roaring man should come in any more. Mean time I will
release the youth, and tell him how we have sped. -- Be comforted my honest
friend.


Simpkin comes forth. Simp. Alas I am almost dead, my heart is tortured in my
breast with sorrow, fear and pain.


Old man. I Will fetch some Aqua vitae, to comfort you again.


Simp. And cause I will requite you,
Whose love does so excel,
I Will graft a pair of horns on your head,
That may defend it well.

Wife. Good husband, let the man stay here,
It Is dangerous in the street.

Old man. I would not for a crown of gold,
The Roarer should him meet.
For should he come by any harm,
They Would say the fault were mine.

Wife to Simpkin. There Is half a crown, pray send him out to fetch a quart of
wine.


Simp. There Is money for you Sir, -- Pray fetch a quart of Sack.


Old man. It Is well, it is well, my honest friend, I Will see you shall not lack.


Wife. But if he should dishonest me,
For there are such slippery men.

Old man. Then he gets not of his half crown
One penny back again.
Exit.
Simp. Thy husband being gone my love,
We Will sing, we will dance, and laugh,
I am sure he is a good fellow,
And takes delight to quaff.

Wife. I Will fold thee in my arms my love,
No matter for his listening.

The Old man and his servant listen. Simp. Gentlemen, some forty weeks hence
You may come to a Christning.

Old man. O sirrah, have I caught you,
Now do the best you can,
Your Schoolmaster nere taught you
To wrong an honest man.

Sim. Good sir, I never went to Schole,
Then why am I abused?
The truth is, I am but a fool,
And like a fool am used.

Old man. Yet sirrah you had wit enough to think to Cuckold me.


Wife. I jested with him, husband, his knavery to see.


Simp. But now you talk of knaverie,
I pray where is my Sack?

Old man. You shall want it in your belly, Sir,
And have it on your back.

They beat him off. Exeunt. Here follow the Rural sports on the Birthday of
the Nymph Oenone.
The Names of the Persons.
Two Shepherds in love with Oenone. Amyntas Dorilas
Two other Shepherds. Strephon Dorus
A Rustic Swain, conceited that Oenone is enamored of him. Hobbinall God Pan.
Satyrs.
Oenonee. Amarillis. Cloris* Phillis.
Enter Dorilas, as coming to the place where Oenones Birthday is to be
celebrated. Dorilas. THis is the place, the way me thought was long,
And my slow pace did my affection wrong.
For who is he that would not wing his have,
When by Oenone's eyes he shall be graced.
Most potent Shepherdess who have power t'enthrall
Not only my poor heart alone, but all.
For every one that reigns here, strives to be
Rather her captive, then at liberty.
Her eyes do perfectly two Suns present,
And yet but one graces the Firmament,
The color of her lips does justly show
Like that of Cheries when they kindly grow
And such a form they have, they may entice
To think such only grew in Paradise.
The Lambs are fatter that by her do feed,
And all her Ewes more frequently do breed
Then any Shepherds, and do yield each year
A larger fleece then any others bear;
As if she brought a miracle to pass,
And fed them with her looks more then the grass.
If then she will (when other Shepherds stand
To beg a favor from her eyes or hand)
Esteem me most, my poor heart then will be
Taught the true sense of a felicity.
But soft, -- me thinks from yonder grove I hear
Voices that are familiar to my ear,
I Will not go to them; for Love says my duty
Is to attend none but Oenone's beauty.
Exit.
A Dialogue sung between Dorus the Shepherd, and Cloris the Shepherdess.
Cloris. YOu have forgot then ( Dorus) your protest.

Dor. No, I have not my Cloris, it is confessed.

Clor. But yet I saw you slide, a Garland neatly tied
Into Uranias' hand; let it suffice,
Though Love be blind, Lovers have many eyes.

Dor. Will you appear so strangely full of passion?

Clor. I have cause to fear dissembled love's in fashion.

Dor. Then why did you, I pray,
With Strephon sport and play?
You kissed and danced, till day was past its prime,
And all the while my heart did beat the time.

Clor. May I not dance, or harmlesly be kissed?

Dor. So I may chance give garlands if I list.

Clor. But when you are so free,
Me thinks you steal from me.
For every Lover will this Text approve,
There Is charity in all things but in love.

Dor. That day the storm fell to be true you swore,

Clo. When the sun shined again, you vowed much more.

Dor. Those faithful vows I made,
were by yourself betrayed:
For I have learned to know it is my due,
To be no constanter in love then you.

Chorus. Then jealousies be gone, and keep my sheep,
Lest that the Wolf should make their number small,
But of my love nothing command shall keep
But Cloris will, and Cloris will is all.

Enter Amyntas and Dorilas. Amint. Shepherd, thy love is most unnatural:
For Nature does command friendships observance,
But by the fond desires thy heart is filled with,
Thou prov'st thy self ungrateful.

Dor. That Character was never coveted,
Nor must I wrong my innocence so much,
Not to demand a reason of this slander.

Amin. I will produce the truth thou would profess,
A witness against thy self: How often have I
With care and industry preserved thy flock?
And when thy tender Lambs have been in danger,
How many times have I opos'd the wolf,
And made my strength defender of their weakness?
And when thy self have followed idle pastimes,
Thy Flocks and mine have still been twined together,
Till by my vigilance I have instructed
The enemies to Shepherds and their Flocks.
They were to fear me, as thy sheep did them.
Nor have I had a thought (except those dear ones
That have been busied by Oenone's virtues)
Which has not still paid tribute to thy friendship.

Dor. You then would have prerogative in love,
And leave no privilege to me but friendship,
If you allow Oenone virtuous.,
And that her eyes have power to pierce all hearts,
Why should the man which you will call a friend,
Be banished from the blessed socitie
Of those who are her servants? 'Twere a crime
Against her beauty to believe she should
Merit but one man's service; he which reigns here,
I know must love, and that necessity
Makes rivals necessary.

Streph. It Is a truth
I must acknowledge, pardon me my friend,
I find the Nymph Oenone is too worthy;
Yet her perfections (were they centupled)
Shall not dissolve, nor in the least diminish
What has bin formerly esteemed a triumph,
Which is, a perfect frindship.

Dor. In that confidence
Thus we unite again -- But who comes here?

Entr Hobbinall with a paper in his hand. Streph. It Is Hobbinall,
One that believes it is but Oenone's duty
Directly to confess her self beholding
To him for his affection: he supposes
That his deserts are greater then her beauties,
And is as confident the fair Nymph loves him,
As we are that she does not; yet his fortune
Is more to be commeded then our fate;
For she is pleased to smile at his rude actions,
The best of our endeavors are not valued.

Dor. What paper's that he ruminates upon?
Let us observe a little.

Hob. It Is a strange thing I find my self out every day more then other, to be
one of the understandingst, sweetest, neatest, and compleatest Shepherds that
ever took hook in hand. The Other day I saw my face in a pail of water, and I had
much ado to forbear drowning of my self: it is no wonder then, that the
beauteous Nymph Oenone makes much of me, and lets all the other Shepherds shake
their ears like Asses; And the truth is, if I can find never a handsomer she
shall serve the turn. This was her birthday, she being born in the year -- one
thousand six hundred, -- nay hold a little; but on this day of the month it
was, Winter or Summer, in the honor of which we all keep holiday; and
therefore for the credit of her beauty, and the honor of my own Poetry, have
made such a Copy of Verses on her, as will make her a thousand times handsomer
then ever she was in her life. --

I will peruse them now with the eyes of understanding.

He reads. OEnone fair, whose Beauty does enrich us,
Tell me the cause why thou do so bewitch us.
On this day thou were born, though not begotten,
This day I Will think on when the art dead and rotten.
And though thy coyness and thy pretty scorn
Makes many wish that thou had nere been born.
Yet for my own part this I Will swear and say,
I wish thy time of Birth were every day.
If she do not run mad for love of me now, it is pity she should have Verses
made on her as long as she lives.


Streph. Let Us interrupt him -- Hobbinall well met.


Hob. It may be so.


Dor. But why so strange man? I hope you will remember we are your fellow
Shepherds.


Hob. You were once, but now I command you to know, I am a Master Shepherd; for
the fair Nymph Oenone, that makes all your mouths run over with water, does
acknowledge me to be both Master and Mistress.


Streph. In part it is true, yet if you well consider, she makes you but her
sport, no otherwise.

If she make me her sport, it is more then ever she can make of thee: for thou
art one of the sowrest looked fellows that ever crept out of a vineger-bottle.


Enter Oenone. Dor. Here comes the fairest Idae ever nourisht.


Hob. I will accost her.


Streph. Forbear a while good Hobbinall.


Oenone. It was my fault.
To be so credulous; but 'twas his sin
To be so lavish of his protestations.
Oh Paris, Paris, thy inconstant nature
Argues the fickleness which Poets fancy
In women, but a Fiction.
I that have formerly acknowledged thee
The only person meriting respect,
Must now produce this thy particular falsehood,
As one to dare example; let no more
The Shepherds be at strife to please Oenone,
Let every Maypole-meeting every feast,
Be honored by a happier Nymph then I,
To be the Mistress of those harmless pastimes.

Dor. Hail to the Nymph that graces Idaes vale,
Accept my service at this days solemnity.

Streph. And if the same from me can be accepted, nothing so pleasing is as to
present it.


Hob. I, you may talk as finely as you will, but when
I come to speak once, I Am sure you will be kicked off.

Oen. What you profess may well claim an acceptance.

Hob. Now will I see who is the most deserving Shepherd in all the vale of Idae
-- little rogue, howdost thou?


Oenone. O Hobbinall, you are welcome, I thought you had forgot me, you are my
sport, and should be ever near me.


Hob. Look you there, I am her sport she says; when will she give any of you
such an honorable title: but Sport, I do not think but thou art a Conjurer, or
a Witch, or a Devil at least; for thou have infused such a combustion of
Poetry in my head, that I fear I shall never be my own man again, nor my Masters
neither. -- There Is a Copy of verses, read 'um; nay, they are my own, as sure
as my name's Hobbinall.


Oenone. I thank you Sport, I Will study a requital.


Enter Amyntas, Dorus, Amarillis, Cloris, and Phillis. Amyntas. Fair one, we
come to celebrate this day
With other Shepherds who admire and joy,
To know so fair acreature as your self
At this time of the year made the world happy.

Phil. And we as bound to honor you (the fairest) that ever graced our sex,
are come to attend upon your recreations.


Oenone. Your expressions,
(As they cause blushes) do exact a thanks.

Dor. Honor me
With your fair hand, Nymph, that I may lead
The way to all those pastimes which will follow.

Oenone. The honor is to me, and I accept it.


Hob. Id'e laugh at that, no Sport, I Will dance with thee my self.


Oenone. Some other time,
By chance I may be at leisure.

Hob. Will you not? well, by this hand then I Will stand out and laugh at every
thing you do, right or wrong. A dance. Pshaw waw, this dancing is like my
mothers Mares trot, Sport, shall I show thee a dance of my own fashion?


Oenone. It cannot but content.


Hob. Nay, I know that, hark hither, Lads.

Ex. Hob. Str.
Oenone. Thus I beguile my passion, shadowing over
With a false vail of mirth, my real sorrows;
For when time takes an end, not all the stories
Which ever did lament forsaken Lovers,
Shall show a parallel to my misfortune.
My griefs shall stay, when all my joys depart,
And nothing but sad thoughts shall fill my heart.

Hobbinall and the Shepherds dance a Morris. Hob. How like you this Sport:

Oenone. Beyond Expression, Sport,
I see your Virtues were concealed too long*

Hob. I so they were, but I mean to show them every day as fast as I can. But
sirrah, Sport, yonder is God Pan, with a company of the bravest Satyrs that ever
wore horns on their heads: come, Shepherds, let us go make them drunk, and saw
off all their horns.

Exit.
Enter Pan. Pan. Hail to that Nymph that graces Idaes Vale,
Whose beauty adds a Luster to all those
That do acknowledge Pan as their chief Patron.
Not any Satyr henceforth for thy sake,
Shall own the nature he was bred withal.
But all their actions shall be like thy beauty,
Smooth and delightful, and when thou commandst,
Sweet Philomel shall quite forget her Rape,
And overcome with joy that thou art present,
Join with the other birds in cheerful notes.
The very trees shall entertain no whisper
From the rude winds, but what shall please thy ear,
And when thou speak the beasts shall dance more nimbly,
Then when the Thracian Orpheus charmed their senses.
And every object that can yield delight,
Shall be Oenones vassal: in the mean time,
I, and those Satyrs that attend my person,
Will move in dance, to let Oenone find,
She can make gentle a rough Satyrs mind.

Oenone. Since my weak fortune knows no retribution,
But my weak thanks, accept them, being presented.

Pan. Approach then Satyrs, and let each one strive
To express the service due unto Oenone.

A dance of Satyrs. Oenone. Now honor me to grace my Bower a while,
Where I will strive to let my Patron prove,
How fain I would be grateful to his love.

Exeunt. Here follows the Humor of John Swabber.
The Names of the Persons:
Two Gentlemen. Francisco, Gerard,
John Swabber, a Seaman. Cutbeard, a Barber. Parnell, John Swabbers wife. Two
or three neighbors wives.
Enter Francisco, Gerard, severally. Ger. FRancisco, well met; whither in such
have?


Fran. I am going to a feast; where, if you please, you shall be welcome too.


Ger. I am willing to believe you, and will wait on you.


Fran. I Will promise you a dish of mirth, that is all, and if my hopes delude me
not, well dressed too, so quaintly relisht, that it will provoke a laughter far
above thy spleen to suffer.


Ger. How can these times afford such entertainment?


Fran. Why, I Will inform you: 'Twas yesterday my luck to be incountred by a
rustic Seaman, (or one at leastwise of as course condition.) This fellow,
like a perfect son of folly, began to rail extremely at his fortune, and needs
would make me Judge of his abuse. -- I have (says he) about some two years
since, married a wife, (woe worth the time I saw her) and in my absence she has
got a trick to make me Cuckold whether I will or no; a barbarous Barber makes a
beast of me, Cutbeard his name, whom I do vow to be the cutthroat of.


Ger. I know the fellow well, he lives close by; but on I pray.


Fran. I finding that his humor might produce something worth laughing at,
encouraged him; he like a bladder that is sweld with blowing, was straight puffed
up into a desperate humor, so that he vowed this day for a revenge: And
hereabout I am to meet this Hercules.


Ger. It cannot choose but produce excellent mirth, which I Will assist with all my
best endeavors.


Enter John Swabber, armed with a sword, a gun, a spit, a pair of tongs, and
other ridiculous weapons. Fran. See, he is come laden with several instruments
of death; he means to play a prize with him, I think, -- Well John, I see you
are prepared for murder; have mercy on the Barber, I say.


Swab. No, I scorn it, I will have no mercy, he has made a whore of a wondrous
honest woman, and a Cuckold of one, that for ought I know, might have been a
Courtier. For which abominable deed I scorn to show my self a Christian; for I
do mean to use him worse then a Jew would.


Fran. Nay, but consider, he is a man how-ere, and you can boast your self to be
no more, although you have the spirit of a Giant; you have brought weapons here
as if you meant to kill him twenty times. Troth it is too much.


Swab. If I bate him an Ace of forty, call me Coxcomb, I will draw his teeth
one by one, with an instrument called a pair of Tongs, then let him blood in
the right vein, and bid the Devil take him at his own peril.


Fran. Let me prevail with thee to calm thy rage, and take acquaintance of this
Gentleman a worthy friend of mine.


Swab. Do you long to be acquainted with me, Sir?


Ger. By any means, Sir.


Swab. It Is granted then; I Will toss a Can or a Pot with you, as soon as I have
dispatched this bawdy Barber; would he were dead that my business might be over.


Ger. What Is your profession Sir? and how may I call you?


Swab. I am a Seaman, Sir, my name's John Swabber -- an Officer of the ship,
sir.


Ger. I cry you mercy, sir.


Swab. Nay, never cry for the matter, -- But I had forgot this Barber all this
while: Barber come forth, or by the beard of my great Grandfather, I swear, I
will so shashado, mashado, pashado, and carbinado thee, that thou shall look
like a gallimafry all the days of thy life. Come forth I say,


Cutbeard within. Why neighbor Swabber, who provokes you thus? what do you
mean? who has offended you?


Swab. Oh slave of all slaves, who has offended me? why thou base, beastly,
boisterous, Babylonian, bawdyfac'd Barber, thou have, thou have made me fit to
chew the cud with oxen, climb the mountains with wild goats, and keep company
with none but Ram-headed people, for which I will tie thee up on the next
sign-post, and there thou shall hang a twelve month and a day alive, for an
example to all such notable shavers; but if thou come and submitst to my
mercy, I will do thee the favor to let thee hang till thou be dead.


Ger. Fransisco hark -- I Will pawn my life this fellow's a rank coward, keep you
his fury up, and I Will persuade the Barber to a greater vein of roaring then ere
was practiced by a suburb blade, I Will make him at the least seem valiant, fear
not.

Exit
Fran. Do if it be possible, I Will hold him in discourse. -- But, Mr Swabber,
what think you if he does compound with you, will you be won to take an arm or
two, or both his legs, and save his other members?


Swab. Pish, tell not me, it is neither his arms nor his legs that I stand upon,
he has caused me to go in danger of my life: for the other day I had an occasion
to pass by a worshipful Gentleman's pack of hounds, they no sooner looked upon
my forehead, but they came at me in full cry; and I for fear left such a sent
behind me, that they came after me as perfectly by it, as if I had been a
Stagg; and if I had not got shelter of a house, without doubt I had been
presented to some great man for Venison, and my hanches had been baked by this
time.


Fran. You were in danger there I must confess.


Swab. And the Butchers Dogs still take me for a Bull, and fetch such courses
at me; and all this the Barber is the cause of.


Fran. I would revenge it, were I as you he should not have a tool left him to
work with.


Swab. No nor to play with neither, I Will have an inch of every tool he has. --
Barber come forth, and let me kill thee upon fair terms, or else I will enter
thy house by force, pitch thee down the stairs, and send thee of an errand
headlong. And if thou do submit to my mercy, I will shave thee to death with
thy own razor, therefore take heed. -- So, now let him come if he dare.


Enter Gerard. Ger. Well, now I see there is no hope to appease him, blood must
ensue, and death will take its course.


Swab. With whom? what is the matter?


Ger. The Barber is preparing for the combat, he has took his pole to serve him
for a lance, and one of his basins for a buckler, and vows to make you the
windmill, whilst he plays Don Quixot against you furiously.


Swab. A windmil! -- I Will begone.


Fran. You will not offer that sure. Who afraid?


Swab. Would it not make any one tremble with the thought on it, first to be
made a Cuckold, then a windmill? No, I Will begone, and come again to kill him when
I can find him in a better humor.


Franc. Consider what you do; he will call you coward, proclaim you Cuckold still
in every Alehouse, and what disgrace will that be?


Swab. I care not, it is better be a Cuckold then a windmil; if he had meant to
make a fool, a puppie, or an ass of me, or any such Christian like creature,
'twere another matter: but to be made a windmill of, and never to be respected
but when the wind blows, is not to be endured, therefore let him make windmils
of my weapons, if he will, for my own part I Will defend my self with my heels.


Throws down his weapons. Ger. Come, I have brought him to a better temper, he
will come armed with nothing but a Razor, with which if he does slit your
wezand-pipe, it will not be amiss to take it patiently.


Swab. Let him not spoil my drinking, and I care not; but hark you, if you
should let him hurt me, I should be as angry as a Tiger.


Enter Cutbeard with a razor. Cut. Where is this slave that has provoked my
rage to his destruction, I will swinge this Boore, then hang him up for Bacon in
my chimney, and send him to be broyled for Pluto's breakfast.


Swab. Why This is wors then to be made a wind mil. Do you hear sir, if ever
you had the fit of an ague upon you, or ever knew the trembling of a man
troubled in conscience, that would be loath to die till he had made even with
all the world, consider me; alas, sir I have my rent to pay yet, and if I
should be sent to hell of an errand, they will like my company so well, I should
never come back again; pray persuade him to send me to Jerusalem, or Ierico, or
any those places nearer hand.


Fran. Why can not thou excuse thy self? where is thy brains?


Swab. Alas, my brains are fallen intomy breeches; but if you will stand between
me and harm, I Will venture to reconcile my self to him, -- Cut -- honest
Cutbeard, did not thou think I was in earnest all this while.


Cut. What ere thou were, thou shall be nothing presently, death waits for
thee, come quickly I command thee.


Swab. Sir, pray persuade Mr Death to have patience for a matter of 40 or 50
years more; for I have a great deal of business to do in this world yet.


Cut. Shall I be dallied with, let me approach him, for all the entreaties of
the world shall not preserve him past six minutes.


Swab. One minut's past already, -- and there is two.


Fran. Nay, prithee Cutbeard, be more merciful.


Swab. Three -- four -- five.


Ger. Will no entreaty serve? Then take your course.


Swab. Six, O now I am gone.


Cut. If he submit he may live, let him know it -- do thou acknowledge thy
own cowardice and my heroic valor?


Cut O mighty Hercules, I confess my self a Pigmy, and I will never think
otherwise while I live; these Gentlemen be my witnesses.


Ger. Why then all is well again. -- Remember Cutbeard,


Cut. I Will spice him fear not -- give me thy hand Jack, Thus do I grasp thy
friendship.


Swab. He grasps my hand divelish hard tho.


Cut. I hear pronounce thy wife to be a Venus.


Swab. O rare! Is my wife a Venus? That Is more then ever I knew before; why
then I will be her husband Cupid.


Fran. No, Cupid was her son.


Swab. It Is no matter for that, he shall be her husband for once, and we two
will get such abundance of young Cupids, that we will make all the world in love
with one another.


Cut. Since we are reconciled, know, honest Swabber, that I will make the whole
world dote on thee, I Will wash thy face, and powder thee to the purpose, and shave
thee if thou will too.


Swab. No, by no means, I dare not venture my throat under thy fingers; but for
washing and powdring, that all the world may be in love with me, I am content.


Cut. Sit down then in this chair, look on this powder, the snow is nothing to
it, 'twill create such a complexion on thee, that no Art did ever set upon the
proudest Lady.


Swab. But hark you Cutbeard, how shall I do to satisfy all the women that
will follow me for kisses, if you make me too beautiful, my lips will be worn
threedbare before I can get home; and then Parnell my own dear wife, will have
the least share of her own sweet husband.


Cut. For that we will take a course, -- wink, wink, good Jack, my Ball will
search your eyes else.


Swab. My eyes are honest, and fear no searching


Changes the powder, and blacks his face all over. Cut. Now I begin to
sprucifie thy phisnomie, -- This powder was extracted from the Phoenix, when
she last burnt her self, and is indeed the quintescence of odors.


Swab. Nay, it is as odious as ever I smelt, that is certain, good Cutbeard let
me have enough I prithee.


Cut. Nay, I Will spare no cost, -- Judge Gentlemen, is he not strangely alterd?


Ger. Past belief; I would not that my Mistress saw him now, my hopes would
soon be cooled then.


Swab. I think so, but I would have you to take notice, I will have nothing to
do but with great personages, for I must not make my self common.


Fran. What this fellow will com to no man knows yet, his fame no doubt will
travel ore all countries, and I am full resolved in my opinion, the Queen of
Mauritania will run mad for him.


Swab. If she run as mad as a March Hare, she gets not a bit; no, Parnell and
my neighbors shall have all.


Cut. Now if the Painters will draw Adonis out, let them come here for copies.
So I have done.


Swab. Prithee Cutbeard lend me a Looking-glass.


Cut. By no means; what did you never hear of one Narcissus how he pined away
for love of his own shadow: No, go home, your house is hard by, let Parnell see
you, and bless her self with wonder.


Swab. Honest Cutbeard, this Gentleman is a worthy friend of mine, prithee
bestow some of the same powder upon his face.


Fran. No, no, you shall be beautiful alone, it is best.


Swab. Parnell I come, and if thou be not stupid, Thou Wilt say Jack Swabber
is a kin to Cupid.

Exit.
Ger. Well Cutbeard, thou have dressed him handsomely, I Would give a Crown that I
were by when first he finds what beauty he is adorned withal.


Cut. This day I am to meet with pretty Parnell, pray Heaven the Fool be absent
when I come, some two hours hence if you will meet me, Gentlemen, I Will tell you
how he takes his transmigration.


Fran. We will not fail. Farewell.


Exeunt. Enter Parnell. Parn. I wonder that my Barber stays thus long, can he
neglect me thus? Well, I will fit him; for if he use me once again thus basely, I
will cashiere him, and bestow my love upon some one more constant: forty to one
but Swabber comes before him, and spoils all.

Enter Swabber very stately. Who Is this in the name of blackness? the clothes
and walk of my dear husband, and I Will lay my life he has got a vizard on. -- Nay
pray now, indeed you will fright me presently, take heed.


Swab. She does not know me that is excellent, -- Parnell believe it, I am flesh
and blood, I would not have thee take me for a Goddess.


Pan. A Goddess quotha, a black one if you be one; what have thou got upon thy
face I prithee?


Swab. Do not look too wistly upon me, Parnell, my beauty will put your eyes out
if you do, and then I must be at the charge of a Dog and a Bell for you.


Pan. A Dog and a fools head; pull off your vizard.


Swab. Do not touch me unless you make forty curtsies first. Come kiss me, and
thou will be out out of thy wits presently.


Parn. Nay, then I see it is a trick put upon him; I Will fetch you a glass, you
shall behold your beauty.

Exit.
Swab. Do, and I will venture to be in love with my self for once. How shall I
requite honest Cutbeard? By this hand he shall have the honor to be Barber to
all my wenches.


Enter Parnell with a glass. Parn. Are you not wondrous fair? Look and admire
your self.


Swab. O Parnell, Parnell, I am gul'd most basely, I have not half so much
beauty as a Chimney-sweeper: I Will kill the Barber the first thing I do.


Parn. Was it the Barber used thee thus?


Swab. I Parnell, 'twas he: I Will go fetch a company of my Fellow-Saylors, drag
him out, and hang him up at the main Yard presently. Parnell farewell: if I be
apprehended for the death of Cutbeard, what ever thou do, send me a clean
shirt; for I shall have need on it.

Exit.
Parn. Well Cutbeard, I commend thee for this project, thou have dressed him
handsomely; would thou were here, I would kiss thee for the jests sake. Enter
Cut. Oh are you come, Sir?


Cutb. I watched the time my Parnell, and have found it; How does the gul become
his feathers? Ha!


Parn. As I would have him: Oh Cutbeard, this kiss, and this, for the device.


Cut. Where is he, Parnell?


Parn. Why gone abroad in his new-fashion'd face, to fetch a gang of Saylors,
who he vows shall hang thee up at the main Yard, and shall use thee worse then
the Prentices a Suburb-Bawd on a Shrove-tuesday.


Cut. And those same water-rats are Divellish things; what a slave was I to use
him so?


Parn. What can thou fear when I am in thy presence? Away you milksop, hence
from me, avaunt.


Cut. Nay, gentle Parnel, by this hand I Will fight with a whole Army, if thou
say the word: prithee be reconciled.


Swab. within. Why Parnell, Parnell, here is thy own sweet husband; open the
door dear wife.


Parn. O me, my husband's come, what shall I do?


Cut. Let me into the well* if thou think good, or hang me in the chimney
stead of Bacon.


Parn. Alas, that is full of hazard. -- No device!


Swab. within. Why huswife, huswise, must I wait half a day?


Parn. My peticotes fallen off, but I come presently -- Oh I have thought, come
hither, put on this biggin, I made it for my child that is at Nurse, and cram
thy self into this cradle here: there is no other way, therefore dispatch.


Cut. O me, thou never think upon my beard, that will betray all presently.


A cradle set forth. Parn. Take you no care, I Will make him to believe you were
born with it; be quick, I say.


Cut. Necessity compels me, send me off of this brunt once, I Will hunt the smock
no more -- Cover me close good Parnell.


Parn. So, keep you close, and when he prattles to you, sneere in his face, and
call him Dad; do you hear?


Parnell lets him in. Enter Swabber. Swab. Why you proud, peevish, petty,
paltry Parnell, why did you make me stay so long?


Parn. I made what have I could, but the child cried so.


Swab. The child! what child? have you got bastards here?


Parn. Bastards? they are your own then: Simon's come home, the boy I had a
twelvemonth since by you, he was born when you were at sea.


Swab. Is he brought home? As I Am an honest man I Am glad on it. Let me see him
Parnell.


Parn. Look here he is, the goodliest boy, and even as like thee John, as if
thou had begot him all thy self.


Swab. Whoop, here is a boy of a twelvemonth old: if he grow but thus much this
next year, he will be able to fight with a Giant presentl. But Parnely, he has got
a great beard too, how comes that?


Parn. Why he was born with it; many children are so, and it is a sign he will be
a man betimes, a wise discreet one too.


Cut. Dad dad, dad.


Swab. Nay, it is a wise child, I perceive that; for he calls me dad at first
sight. Good Parnel fetch me some milk for him, I Will see him eat.


Parn. He had milk but just now; prithee John be patient.


Swab. You are a fool, he has been starved at Nurse, and we must make him fat.
Fetch some, I say.


Par. I will not truly John, you will spoil the child.


Swab. I saw some stand in the next room, I Will fetch it my self so I will.

Exit.
Par. What will you do? You must endure with patience; I mingled batter but just
now for pancakes and that he will bring, as certain as I live.


Cut. I shall be crammed to death; mercy upon me.


Par. He comes, lie close again.


Enter Swabber, with a great bowl of batter and a ladle. Cut. Dad, dad, dad.


Swab. I mine own boy, here is milk for thee, Simon. Throws it in by ladles
full. Look Parnel look, how greedily he eats it.


Par. Now fie upon you John, you will choke the child.


Swab. I mean to make him grow as high as Paul's, and show him for a wonder in
Bartholmew fair. Fetch me some more milk, this is all gone.


Parn. What, do you think I Will murder the poor infant?


Swab. By this hand I Will go to the Milk-woman and fetch him a whole gallon.

Exit,
Parn. Up quickly and be gone; for when he comes he will choke you without fail.


Cut. A pox upon him, never was child fed thus. But what will you do now?


Par. Do not you fear; I Will fetch my own child; it is at a neighbors house, and
say the Fairies have exchanged it.


Cut. Send thee good luck; farewell sweet Parnel.

Ex.
Parnel fetches in a little child, and lays it in the cradle. Parn. So, if
this child will serve him for a Simon, all will be well again. Enter Swabber, with
more milk. He comes, -- Oh John.


Swab. Come, give me Simon on my lap, I Will feed him til his guts crack again.


Parn. Alas, I went but in the next room, and in the mean time the Fairies have
exchanged him; look what a little thing they have left in's place.


Swab. I Will have none on it; go fetch me Simon, and tell the Fairies I Will indite
them at the Sessions for this. Oh Simon, Simon, what is become of thee?


Parn. Nay, prithee take not on so.


Swab. The goodliest boy of his age, that ever man saw. Pshaw, this has ner 'a
beard, I Will have none on it.


Enter Francisco, Gerard, Cutbeard, neighbors wives. Fran. Why how no Jack,
what in a passion? ha! it was that blackt thy face to day for mirth sake, and
thou did think 'twas Cutbeard.


Swab. I care not for my face, Simon is gone, that had a beard as big as
Cutbeards here, the Fairies have exchanged him; and look what a chitty-face
they have left in's room, a thing of nothing for him.


Ger. Come, you must use this they have left with courtesy; for they will whip
Simon every day in the week else. I know the nature of them.


Swab. Will they so? Nay then I must make much on it.


Fran. And now you must be friends with Cutbeard too.


Swab. With all my heart, for I am angry with none but the Fairies now.


Ger. We have brought music, and some neighbors with us, and mean to have a
dance. Come John.


Swab. I can dance nothing but a melancholy dance. For I am in a grievous dump
for Simon still


Ger. I warrant thee. Strike up there.


A Dance. Fra. Why that is well done; no time is counted lost,
Where civil mirth is gained with such small cost?

FINIS.

