Some MISTAKEN SCRIPTVRES Sincerely explained.

In answer to one infected with some Pelagian Errors.

Written by Benjamin Cox when he was first Prisoner in Coventrie. Now
published* by the Author for the clearing of the truth.

1 Cor. 2. 14. The natural man rcceiveth not the things of the spirit of God,
for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned.



Licensed and entered according to Order.



LONDON, Printed by Tho. Pain, living in Red-crosse-Street in Goldsmiths
Alley, over against the Sugar loaf. 1646.

Some mistaken Scriptures sincerely explained, in an Answer to one infected
with some Pelagian Errors.
WHereas you say that some Scriptures seem too hold forth unto you that a man
has free will, I desire you for your better information to take notice of
these two Propositions.

1. Propos. We do not simply deny that a man has any freedom of will: but
only do hold that no natural man, nor any man of himself, has a sufficient
power, or freedom of will, unto the choosing of that way, which is good and
right, and acceptable in the sight of God. To the choosing of evil ways; we
grant that every natural man has freedom enough, if so be this may be termed
by so good a name as Freedom. Consequently, we do not hold that any man is
compelled or enforced by violence to choose the evil, or to refuse the good:
but that through the corruption of nature man unrenewed does willingly and
wilfully refuse the good way, and choose the evil. And whereas the
unregenerate person can do no otherwise, this is not the fruit of any force or
compulsion laid upon him, but only of the obstinate wickedness, or wicked
obstinacy of his own corrupted and depraved will. The truth hereof appears by
these Scriptures, Genesis 8. 21. Eccles. 9. 3. Jerem. 17. 9. Math. 15. 19. Romans 3.
9, 10, 11, etc. Romans 8. 6, 7, 8. James 1. 13 14, 15. Joh. 8. 44.

2. Propos. The elect do indeed with unfeigned willingness obey the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, and choose the Lord to be their God: but this they do when they
are effectually called, and not before: and this they do, not of themselves,
nor only by the well using of an ability or power given to all men; but by the
special grace of God to them afforded, who works in them both to will and to
do, and this according to the good pleasure of his own will concerning them
from all eternity. The truth of this appears in these places; Isai. 54. 13.
compared with Joh 6 44, 45. 64, 65. Ezekiel 36. 26, 27. Romans 8. 28, 29, 30. Ephesians.
1. 4, 5, 11. Philip. 1 29. Philip. 2. 13. James 1. 18.

These Propositions being thus laid down and cleared, I come now to consider
those Scriptures which you name to prove that a man has free will, or free
choice; viz. Deuteronomy. 30. 19. Josh. 24. 15. 22. Judge. 10. 14. Isaiah 65. 12. and
66. ^3. 1 King. 3. 5-11. Psalm. 119. 30. Luke 10. 42.

Deuteronomy. 30. 19 I call heaven and earth to record this day against you, that I
have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing: therefore choose
life, etc.

This place shows what was the duty of the Israelites to do: but does not
prove that they had any abillity of themselves to do it; or that God gives
any such abillity to all men. Compare this place with 2 Cor. 3. 5. and Deuteronomy.
29. 4.

Josh. 24. 15. And if it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose you this
day whom you will serve, etc.

Here I somewhat question what part of the verse you would have especially to
be opened: whether this: Choose you this day whom you will serve, etc. Or this;
But as for me and my house, we will serve the Lord. The first implies that
Idolaters do freely choose those Idols, with which they commit spiritual
whoredom. Freely, that is to say, not being enforced or compelled thereunto by
any violence constraining them to this motion of their will. This is not
denied, but acknowledged and held by us, as you may see in the first
proposition. The l^st part of the verse holds forth the free and constant
resolution of the Saints to serve the Lord. This also is taught in my second
proposition* But there you must likewise remember, that this is the fruit of
the special grace of God afforded to the Elect, who works in them both to
will and to do; Philip. 2. 13. And this work is wrought by the infinite power
of God. Ephesians. 1. 19. and 3. 20.

Josh. 24. 22. Ye are witnesses against your selves, that you have Chosen you
the Lord, to serve him.

This is meant directly and only of that which went before in verse. 21. The
people said unto Joshua, Nay, but we will serve the Lord. They that were
Israelites indeed, did in truth and sincerity make this promise and choice; but
this they did not of themselves, but through the special grace of God, as has
been already proved.

Judge. 10. 14. Go and cry unto the Gods which ye have chosen.

Isaiah 65. 12. When I speak, ye did not hear, but did evil before mine
eyes, and did choose that wherein I delighted not.

Jsaiah 66. 3. They have chosen their own ways, and their soul delights in
their abominations.

These three places imply no more then what we clearly hold; as you may see in
my first proposition.

1 King 3. 5. 6. 9. 10. God said, ask what J shall give thee. And Solomon
said, Give thy servant an understanding heart, etc. And the speech pleased the
Lord, that Solomon had asked this thing.

This place seems to you to import, that Solomon did freely make choice to
ask of God understanding to hear judgment. This we deny not. But consider
also that this choice and petition was the fruit of the wisdom and grace
which God had already given him. Compare this place with Zechar. 12. 10. J will
pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the
spirit of grace, and of supplications. See also Romans 8. 26.

Psalm. 119. 30. J have chosen the way of truth.

Luke 10. 42. Mary has chosen that good part.

True, but it was the special grace of God; the special, gracious and
powerful work of Gods spirit, which caused David and Mary to make that good
choice: as also has been already prooved. And thus have I done with your first
catalogue of texts of Scripture.

Your second catalogue contains certain places, in which (as you conceive)
the promises of God do depend upon our doing of his commands. Hereto I answer
first more generally.

The Scripture promises eternal life to those that obey the Gospel of Christ:
Heb. 5. 9. and threatens eternal destruction to the disobedient, Io. 3. 36. 2
These. 1. 8. This we acknowledge, and thus we teach But consider that which I
have also already proved, that the elect of God perform this obedience through
Gods special Grace; and that this special grace is freely given to them of
God according to this own purpose concerning them from all eternity; and that
God has freely promised this grace to his elect. All this appears by places
of Scripture already aleadged for the confirmation of my second proposition.

Thus I descend to consider more particularly the places of Scripture that you
here present unto me. viz. Levit. 26. 3. and Isaiah 1. 19. Prove. 1 23. Jer. 7.
13. Mat. 19. 17. Mat. 11. 28. Mat. 11. 21. Mat. 23. 37. Luke 16. 16. Ier. 3. 22.

Levit. 26. 3. etc. If ye walk in my statutes, and keep my commandments, and
do them, then I will give you, etc.

Here we must remember; 1. That since Adams fall no mere man either did or
could keep Gods commandments, and do them, ^^^ording to the rigor and
strictness of the Law. Eccles. 7. 20. 2. That whereas the Elect among the
Israelites did truly believe in the promised Messiah, and did show the truth of
their faith by the sincerity of their obedience to Gods revealed will in every
thing; this was the fruit of Gods special grace to them afforded. Numb. 14 24.
Psalm. 119 32. 36. These clear truths may also free you from your doubts that
seems to arise from the next place by you mentioned, viz. Isaiah. 1. 19.

Prove. 1. 23. Turn you at my reproof, behold, I will pour out my spirit unto
you, I will make known my words unto you.

The former part of this verse is an exhortation. It is the conceit of some
that such exhortations do always imply that the persons exhorted have a
sufficient ability in them to obey the exhortation directed unto them. But this
conceit is a mere presumption, not only without ground, but also against the
Scripture, as appears in John 6. 65. and other places. It is demanded, why
then are such exhortations used? I answer, 1. To mind the persons exhorted of
their duty, and to leave them the more inexcusable in their wilful
disobedience. 2. Because the Lord is pleased to work powerfully upon the Elect
by such exhortations

The latter part of this verse contains a promise. You (as it seems) conceive
the promise to be here made only unto those that obey the exhortation before
going. Be it so. Only remember then, that they which obey the exhortation, do
obey the same through Gods special grace; and that the promise serves to
assure them of the continuance and increase of grace.

Jer. 7. 13. And now because ye have done all these works, says the Lord* and
I spoke unto you, rising up early, and speaking, but ye heard not; and I called
you, but you answered not.

If you consider this verse only, and read no further, it only hold forth the
goodness and patience of God, in admonishing and exhorting the stubborn
Jews; and their wilful and obstinate disobedienc^ to Gods word. If ye read
the verses following also, this Scripture minds you that the disobedience and
obstinacy of the Jews was the cause of their destruction. All these things we
readily acknowledge neither do they make any thing at all against us.

Mat. 19. 17. If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments.

Here you must consider to whom our Savior sp^ake this, viz. one that sought
to establish his own righteousness, and to get Heaven by his own doing of the
good works which the Law required, who accordingly had propounded this question?
What good thing shall I do that I may have eternal life? The meaning of our
Saviors answer is this; If thou will think to get eternal life this way thou
must keep the commandments; that is, thou must be found a person not any way
guilty of any transgression against Gods commandments. This was a thing of
mere and utter impossibillity, and our Saviors scope in returning to him this
answer, was to discover unto him the vanity and madness of his proud and
foolish imagination. Thus this place rightly understood has not in it the
least show of opposition against our doctrine.

Mat. 11. 28. Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I
will give you rest.

Here Christ promises to give rest, not to all Persons whatsoever, but only to
those laboring and heavy laden ones which come to him, namely by a true faith
in him. This makes nothing against us, it still remaining true, that they, and
they only, do thus come unto Christ, in whose hearts God works lively faith.
And this God works in his Elect, and only in them.

Mat. 11. 21. Woe unto thee Chorazin, woe unto thee, Bethsaida: for if the
mighty works which were done in you, had been done in Tire and Sidon, etc.

The manifest scope of our Savior in this place, is to show the open in
excusablenesse of the impenitency and unbelief of Chorazin and Bethsaida. The
last words of the verse, from which your doubt arises, may be understood to be
a figurative speech, like unto that in Luke 19. 40. If these should hold their
peace, the stones would immediately cry out. Otherwise the words may be thus
rendered. They had possibly repented; or, They would possibly have repented.
This translation would be found well to agree to the signification of the
potentiall particle which is here used in the Greek. And then this will be the
true and easy interpretation of this passage: viz. A man would think they
should have repented. Beyond this, this place must not be stretched. For no
interpretation must be given of any place of Scripture, which shall indeed make
it to contradict the Scripture it self in other places.

Mat. 23. 37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thy
children together, even as a Hen gathers her chickins under her wings and ye
would not.

The meaning is this; How often have I graciously afforded unto the people of
Jerusalem excellent means of salvation? but the stubborn people of Jerusalem
have wilfully refused to accept of those means of salvation, and to profit by
the same. This is all that this place does import: and this makes nothing at
all against us.

Luke 16. 16. The law and the Prophets were until John: since that time the
kingdom of God is preached and every man, etc.

The words in this verse which you would have to be opened are thus commonly
rendered: The kingdom of God is preached, and every man presses into it.
Suppose this translation to be right and the meaning to be the same that our
common expositors have held forth in this ensuing interpretation; Every man,
that is to say, many men or every order and degree of men presses into it;
that is, with willingness and forwardness receives the doctrine of the
kingdom; and so enters into the kingdom of God. Suppose I say that this were
indeed the meaning of this place; yet it would be found to make nothing at all
against us. For still it will remain true, that the Elect do this through
Gods special grace. But the truth is, that this interpretation does not reach
our Saviors meaning in this place. The words should thus be rendered; every
man offers violence unto it. The meaning is this; every man; that is, the
whole world of ungodly men. Offers viollence unto it, that is, makes a
violent opposition against the kingdom of God and the preaching thereof. See
Mat. 11. 12. compared with verse. 16. 17, 18. etc.

Jer. 3. 22. Return ye backslding children, etc. In this verse is contained.

1. An exhortation. Return ye back sl^^^^g children.

2. A promise. I will heal your back slidings. This promise you understand to
belong only unto those that obey the aforesaid exhortation. Even so this makes
nothing against us, but perfectly agrees with our doctrine. But let me here
mind you that this promise may be understood not only to be a promise of pardon
to them that repent, but also a promise of the gift of repentance to the Elect.
See Jer. 31. 33. 34. and Acts 5. 31. The particle and here inserted, seems to
make against this. But this need not trouble us, ^th it is only a supplement or
addition of the translators, and is not in the text.

3. A profession of repentance and faith, Behold, we come unto thee, for thou
are the Lord our God. You must understand this to be the speech of the Elect
endued with Gods special grace. See Ier. 31. 18, 19.

Thus according to your request, according to the ability which God has given
me, I have opened the Scriptures that you have mentioned. The Lord open your
understanding, that you may discern the truth and ackowledge the same to the
glory of God.

FINIS.

